DIGITVS DEI. OR GOOD NEWS FROM HOLLAND.

Sent to the worcester.ll JOHN TREFFRY. AND JOHN TREFVSIS. ESQVIRES:

As also to all that have shot arrows against Babels Brats, and wish well to
Sion wheresouer.

printer's or publisher's device NON NOBIS DOMINE


Printed By Abraham Neringh, Printer in Rotterdam, by the old Head.

ANNO. 1631.

SRS
SInce my condition and lot fell in these parts of the world which for a long
time have been Seeds belli: I have not bin altogether negligent in taking up
such observations as might either draw me to a more serious consideration of
Gods providence, dispensing it self into many particulars, some more secret,
and some open to every eye: or such as might by their presentment unto me of
the worlds vanity and turnings, make me see the glassie brittlenesse and
shiftlesnesse of the creature, and so persuade to a stronger dependence upon
the creator, a Being that has happiness in it self. Not has it bin the
least of my care to cast an especial eye upon the several victories, and
unparalleled deliverances (if we take up all circumstances) which this state
has bin honored with. In the compass of three years or there about, I have
seen strange turnings and returnings of providence, ebbs of State that left us
(at least the wise-hearted) hopeless of a flood: and then again high waters,
that have left many thoughtesse yea careless, of an ebb: here have I seen an
enemy slighted at a great distance, and too much feared nearer hand, many
mountainous designs which have proved mole hills in execution, here have we
seen men looking one way and the Lord bringing the thing about another,
sometimes God destraining for his glory where men would not give it him other
ways: In a word here has bin imploiments for all kinds of spirits, all kinds
of men, here the sad heart has had matter to feed those black vapors that
cherish melancholy, and here the freer spirit might have a time to lavish it
self out in warrantble joys and refreshments, here the magistrate has had
work enough to advise, and the people to bring in their assistances, the
soldier has had enough how to devise and how to execute to his greater
advantage, and those that wait upon the tabernacle have had no reason to be
idle, where days of atonement, as well as the daily sacrifice were to be
attended on: sometime we have bin slipping with David beside our selves and
our comforts, while we fretted at the foolish, and saw the prosperity of the
wicked, sometimes with the same good man we were as those that dreamed, to see
the downe-fall of the ungodly, and what chaff they were before the wind. Truly
(Srs) we have seen much of Gods faythfulnesse and sufficiency, and we ar to
be blamed if we have not also seen our own inability and nothingnesse.

But whiles I have let my meditations travel from one place to another they
have lodged longer in these two, viz: first in the consideration of our selves
2o of the enemy: in the former whereof we may take up matter of wonder, that
the Lord continues us instruments of his glory, and the subject of his
goodness and bounty, who may justly take shame to our selves that we ar no
more sanctified in our drawing near unto him, or do sanctify him so little:
alas (Srs) strangers that look upon us may think that we are his only
jewel, since we are kept so safely: but the truth is our beauty is but
blackness, our deformities are the speech of neighbor nations, and by the
openesse of our folly we make the daughters of the Philistims rejoice. Nor
have we less work in the contemplation of the enemy, being the center to
which subtilty, cruelty, diligence in evil, with many other the like, as so
many lines have their confluxe. What great cost have they been at in the not yet
subduing a handful of people nay (which is admirable) that which has bin the
co^ mon breake-back to other states and countries, has bin the supplying of
their treasures here, and filling of their Magazins, I mean their Army. They
have had here many plowers plowing upon their back, and yet there remains
noe sign of a furrow, I wish we saw noe steps of their sin. I will not here
discuss in what coin the Lord has bin paid for his kindness, nor what
proc^ede they have returned of their talents concredited to them. I have
inioyed this common air with them, and have had my share in their particular
merties, I cannot be silent. What a hand we saw out of heaven by the surprise
of Wesel, and the Bosch following that, as if the former mertie had not bin
enough for the^? Here I will not treat, I have formerly advertisd about them:
what mertie the Lord has sent them from the sea, and what silver trophies from
the enemy has bin brought, is not now my purpose to speak: But since the Lord
by an especial hand led me to look upon the beginning and end of this late
deliverance, I shall advertise therein according to truth, in which I may not
seem (it may be) so particular as some may expect, because I dare not call
Opinion, Faith: nor so exact in terms, because a stranger to the Language
though a friend to Soldiery: but this I shall do, I will labor to show truth
in her nakedness, or at least in her own apparel; and the order I shall
propose will be this; First I shall present the bare history 2,ly some
observations from it, 3ly I shall add some uses we may make of it: and first
for the history.

Whilst the Illustrious Prince of Orange after a triple victory, viz: Groll,
Wesell, and the Bosch, had sat down the last summer to refresh himself even
la den with honor; Sanballat and Tobiah, I mean they of Spain and Flaunders
rose early, and went to bed late, eating the bread of carfulness, in
co^plottiug the raising their honor out of the dust, where He had buried it,
as an instrument in Gods hand the years before: and surely if strength had
answered their reuengefull spirits, the mischeife had had wings, before we
should have known it was hatchd; For herein they far outstrip their enemies,
that their waters run deeply and silently. Now that you may understand what
they had in their eye, that should exhaust so much of their treasure this
year, and persuade with their clergy like the neighboring channels so
f^eely to empty themselves into the common sea; I shall acquaint you with
Marquis Spinolaes last will and testament left in the hands of the Infanta at
his departur out of these wars. Two things he advised out of his long
experience and best observations, that might infest the States, whereof the
first was, that the current of their commerce with foreign parts might be
stoppd, or at least lessened, and therefore would that from Dunkerk, Osten, and
other parts ships should be set forth for the intercepting them in the narrow
seas, which counsel the world observes has bin taken, and that with noe
ordinary success: that to this day Dunkerk a mean Dunghill haven, dare write
her self a Mrs. The 2o was this, that they should not spend themselves thus
year after year, in the beseiging, beleaguring, and taking in of any one
town, which did spend them much treasure, and could not much disadvantage the
enemy* but that they should (though with double cost) attempt the dividing of
the Provinces, especially Holland and Zeeland, which he demonstrated to be
feasible. And for the better understanding the way, may it please you to take
notice that about two or three hours sailing from Dort, there lies a village
called the Plate, with a convenient haven able to receive many small vessels:
this village with the whole Island upon which it stands is all together
unfortified, and so are all places about it: this haven looks right against
Princeland a place of the same strenght with the Plate, betwixt these two pass
all our ships to Zeland, Bergen, Ter Goose, Tertoll, Zeerikze^: ect.

This year about the time of this attempt their army entered Princeland*
nothing remained but that they might make themselves Mr of the Plate, and so
(...) once cut of the passage to Zeland, and the parts above said, and soon
put Dort and Roterdam the Heart of the land in fear, from whence likewise they
might have an easy way to Dunkerk, and they recourse to them again. This with
the consequences being understood I shall labor to show you what faithful
overseers the Marquese had to his will, and how tender they are on the other
side to follow the mind of the dead. After the Prince of Orange had retreated
out of fflaunders, and (whether through the foreslowing of time, or too many
loope holes made in their counsails or unfaithfulness in men betrusted, or
correspondence by any false heart with the enemy) he had lost his design, and
inquartered himself at Drunen, near Huisden, little other tidings came to us,
but the constant and extraordinary provisions of the enemy by land and water,
especially concerning certain sloopes, and flat bottomed boats, and an
engeneering Priest, who should have spent much oil and candle in the advancing
of a strange design. The tidings whereof coming thicker, and the child being
near the birth the town of Bergen petition the aid, who with that part of
his army that lay at Drunen, being about 12 or 14000. foot beside horse, set
forward for Bergen the 25. of August, and within 3. or 4, days was inquartered
on the North-side of the town, Sargeant Mayor Carry being sent before with
diverse companies for a safeguard to those parts by which these shalloopes might
pass, as also 15. or 17. men of war, that usually wait upon the Inland
waters.

Upon the 11. of Septem: being thursday at 4. or 5' of the clock at night we
heard shooting from Falconesse, and the Doel, and there-abous, and saw
shipping, but did generally conceive that the enemy had made an attempt to come
forth and was beaten back by our men, when as it appeared otherwise the next
day for the next morning being friday we discerned upon the walls of Bergen a
fleet of 80. sail or more coming toward the town, and farther off some
greater ships in an other fleet: It is strange to see and hear how hardly
men were drawn to believe that the enemy was so near, nor was there much
credit given to it till they were before the very town of Bergen: where
my-selfe being a spectator amongst the rest, could tell above 80. sail, who as
it seems came the day before from Antwerpe, and so past by our shipping (as
we saw over night) and only changd a few shot without farther Danger,
Sargeant Mayor Carry carefully attending upon the chardge committed to him,
they bent their course toward Tertoll land, and about 8. or 9. in morning 22.
sail of their Reregard coming on ground, the rest stayed for them betwixt
Rommers-wali and Tertoll, till the returning of the next tide, which was at 3.
in the afternoon: and thus they lay this whole day in the sight not only, of
Berghen, but of the Princes whole army: me thought this time was allotted us
from heaven, as if a voice had cried and bid us yet try what prayer will do:
and if I should be playner with you, and open you a window into my own heart,
me thought this stopp was the time wherein Justice and Mercy compeered before
the great God of heaven and earth (as indeed it was a time for our saddest
thoughts) Take Vengeance cries Justice Oh spare says Mercy: Kill cries the
one, Save the other: There are no sins like theirs, cries Justice: No God like
theirs says Mercy: Give success to this design cries the One, Lord they are
Thy enemies says the Other: Holland is p^oud and secure says Justice, But
they may amend by this diliuerance: They have not improoued former kindnesses,
But they may be tried by one more: Revenge thy Sabbaths and let them have noe
rest that neglect this day of rest, here Mercy paused, at lentgh charging
their teachers with this and excusing the poor people that knew noe better.
You shall see what followed, and which prevailed

The Prince perceiving that it was now no time to ask, what shall we do, ^ut
to be doing, under command of General Morgan sent 3. Regements (...)oll, to
guard those parts from the incursion, and landing of the enemy, who went to
their work with no ordinary resolution, and came close by those parts where
the enemy lay, and only gave them notice by some shot that they there attended
them, with which troops the Prince went in person: In the mean time Count
Ernest advised for the cutting off the Reregard, that lay on ground, and to
that purpose commanded such warlike shipping as lay at Bergen to be made ready,
and 12* musketteres out of every company of the army, to be employed in the
design, which came to 1200 or there abouts, the commander in chief of our
nation, was the noble and valiant Earl of Oxford Lieutenant Colonel to my
Lord General Vere, to who^e were added Sergeant Mayor Hollis. Captain. Dudly,
Captain Skippon, Sr Thomas Colpeper, Captain Iackson, with some other
officers: and this I must say, my heart wittnesseth I flatter not I never saw
men hugg an enterprise so, the common soldier even beseeching their captains
with tears that they might be preferred to it* nor were they without the
company of diverse Noble volunteers amongst whom that Noble Gentleman my Lord
Crauen, (who has much honored his nation abroad) must not be forgotten, who
with the first presented him-felfe with his musket, ready to share in the
common condition, whether good or bad. But as great bodies move slowely, so
these, tfor they set not forth till the enemy floated, who with the coming of
the tide were soon at work, and as before having a small boat with them,
sounding the way over the many sands they were to pass, made toward Zerickzea
having gotten their whole fleet together; about 4. of the clock ours followd
them, and had the Princes owneship to lead them the way, about 4, came some of
our fleet that lay by Falconesse, and followed them and made in all about 25.
sail, they passed between Tertol and Tergoose, on the one side whereof a
godly minister before General Morgan came had wi^h much and earnest persuasions
drawn this neighbors into a reasonable order for their own defense, on the
other side not only 20, companies of the Princes awaited them, but also the
Boores or country people were in great readiness being generally men of very
good abilities in point of souldierie;

But it seems that was not the white they shot at, wherefore they past on
beyoud Zereikzea, before our ships could come near shot of them: about 9' of
the clock at might the friday aforesaid, the Princes ship shot by a village
called Old Kerke, and in short time brought her pieces to bear upon them, in
so much as we have it by credible testtimony, that with one broad side she
killd 23. men, other ships of ours came up with them like wise, and gave and
received such rough intertainement as passes among men at such times: a ship
of Zeland had by one shot from the enemy 4* men slain, and 4. hurt: our
musketeres came not up to do much service, for these reasons, 1 in such a
hurry of business, and upon the water command could not so easily pass, and
besides that command they had, was to second the ships that were provided to
fight at length, and moreover the work continued not so loug as to make use of
all our men: The Princes ship received shot: 2. in the sails and 1, in the
midship, and quitted herself well, some 5. or 6. more did the like: but it
plainly appeared the enemy seemed not much to regard fighting, rather longing
and striving to be Mr of his design, and therefore continually steered of
their course, till toward morning the whole night being exceeding fair for
one hours space and noe more the Lord east a mist upon them, by which (they
themselves confessing it) they were much distracted, lost their way, diverse of
them came on ground, and the most of them at Muschle-creeke not far from
Steenbergen, the vangard being at this time, within one hours time, or two at
the most, of the place they aimed at: diverse of them blame Fortune and their
pilots, but in truth (as some of them accknowledgd to myself) the blow was
from heaven. and to proceed, this confusion taught us who was their General,
viz: Count John of Nassau, who would rather venture the Infantaes displeasure,
then pay so dear for his entertainment here again, as he had lately done
at Wesell: Insomuch that he with Prince Brabenson and some other cheifes left
the fleet, and here I must remember a complement was put upon Count John at
his departure from Antwerp, and embarquing, after many benedictions from the
Infanta, and (questionless) much water sprinkled upon him and his company,
to praeserue him from the displesure of Sr Neptune etc. The Liuetenant General
of the horse had a cringe with him to this purpose, St (quoth he) the design
you are engaged in, is weighty, the cost has bin great for the advancing of
it, and it will require a whole man, but I must tell you I conceive not Count
John to be That Man, and so they parted. And since we have spoken of
Muschlecreeke, I must tell you of a passage that concerns the said General of
theirs, where by I may put you in mind how fools oracles may prove wise-mens
truths: not long before this attempt Count John sending a Trumpet to our army,
wished him if the Prince should ask what became of their shallopes, to answer
that they meant shortly to come eat some Muscles: he came to y^ place indead,
but I suppose he had not time to fill his belly, or if he tasted them I
think he has not yet disgested them, that he cannot much rejoice at his
banquet. Some other sloopes followed their General to Prince-land, and fired
them at landing, so that between Willemstadt and Musclecreeke I saw diverse of
the hulls of them lying by the shore; the rest quirred their boats with what
speed they could, fear giving them wings, and confusion and distraction
taking away their wits: the reason they give for making this great haste to the
land is, because on these inland waters they could expect noe quarter, and
every worm will read us a lecture of the sweetness of life, 1400. seeing a
horseman upon a dike gave themselves to him: a great conquest for one man!
Diverse in landing were drowned, many stripped them selves to swim and so came
naked to our army, most of their ships by the morning light were found in new
Fosse-mere where they lay that day with our ships by them. We shall not need
to write what they returned the Priests for their benedictions, but certainly
many Tuns of devils, and especially to the Priest who had the chief hand in
the plot, and did boaste great of carriing ships under water and promising to
bring their soldiers into Berghen, which he did truly perform: You must
conceive what a suddayne change here was, when our men came to take possession
of their vessels, and they scrambled away in the mud, which mynds me of a merry
answer of the Prince to one that told him the Priest would bring their men
under the water, he said he then must send to Zeland for some fishermen to
prick them up upon their Eel-speares. By 8. in the morning news came to the
Prince of their forfaking their boats, whereupon he commanded diverse companies
to march toward Steen-berghen to enconter them supposing they might make head,
but before our men were upon their march, tidings came that most of them had
given them selves prisoners; and by 11. of the clock the first sight of them
we saw was 4, or 5. Captains with 2* Capuchins presented to the Prince, with
whom he enterayned near an hours talk, who all blamed Count John for his
starting at a pinch: The Capucians were presently begd by the Duke of vensdome,
into whose tuition and favor they were soon returned: the next sight that was
presented to us was a fat trumpetter of Count John's in a carr there followed
him the Captain of the Princes ship on horseback behind a Gentleman, with
the colors of the Admiral of their fleet, being a Burgoignian cross which
he presented to the Prince; after him followed in two diuifions the prisoners,
guarded by a troop of the Duke of Bullen, which were between 2. and 3000.
before the last division was a wagon laden with their Officers; and this was
obseruable, that among all these, and 900. more which lay at Steen-bergen there
was no English at all, but they were all Dutch, and Wallons; these were sent to
such places, as the town of Berghen had to entertain them in, especially an
old piece of a Church received most. Thus the saturday was cheerfully spent in
veiwing these lively tokens of Gods favor, on the day following command was
given that public thanksgiving should be rendered both in the town and army
in which (I bless God) I had a share: and on Munday-night (with 3. volleyes
after the manner here) it was made known very clearly to Antwerpe, and the
enemies army (some of our cannon having very wide mouths) upon the sabbath
was brought in Dulken the once Governor of Grol, and a Jesuit with him and so
daily diverse prisoners who had come on shore on diverse parts. Nor did we at
this time think our labor ill bestowed to ride from place to place to look on
either their Punts and sloopes, or our men bringing in the spoil, some telling
their friends how hardly they had escaped, and showing their chain and gnawne
bullets, some with rapiers, some scarfes, one with Count John's leading stasse,
another with a buffcoate, and most laden with Antwerpes beer: Amongst diverse
other things there came to my hand a knife of the keur lings who are some of
their company about Bridges, that ne^her give nor take quarter, upon which was
engraven in Dutch Rithme.

Make have from Bridges Prince of Aurania:
Honor your Mr the king of Hispania:
Let our flaunders alone, come not here to pillage:
For we have for you, nor city, nor village.
under which was pictured the town of Bridges, and the Prince running from it
on horseback, -Surely as the deliverance was great, so the purchase especially
of ammunition was not a little, as we shall show by the particulars following:
And now me thinks by this time I saw the mother of Sisera looking out of a
window, and crying through the lattesse, why stay his chariotwheeles so long?
Judge: 5. 28. etc. surely she is much deceived if she think they are dividing
the spoil: Thus the Lord overthrew Pharow and his host in the red sea, for his
mercy indureth for ever. The week following the Prince commanded most of the
prisoners to be set upon ships without fail or rudder, by the head at
Berghen, till order should be taken for ransom: the poor women at Antwerpe
who had their husbands in the Service, with their heavy complaynts at Bergen
gates made us know how welcome those tidings were at Antwerpe: the last week
the Drossart of Breda treated for their delivery, and so they are departing
home, you may judge with what joy they shall be entertained; and presently
upon the miscarriage of the enterprise their army marches both from
Prince-land, and Rosendale, whereof 32. companies of foot are gone for Breda,
and 10. of horse.

Upon Thurs-day we had general thanksgiving in our churches and expressing
our joy by fires, guns etc.

The sum of the officers taken by us.
Colonels, Lieuten: Col: Sargeant Majors, and men of great note. -- 19.
Captains. -- 26. Lieutenants. -- 10. Ensigns. -- 28. Sargeants. -- 23.
Officers about the Canon. -- 6. Some other officers, and Church men. -- 11. Land
soldiers. -- 3151.

Sea men.
Captains. -- 12. Lieutenants. -- 15. Quarter Masters. -- 7. Shippers. -- 1.
Sailors. -- 820. Coming out of Antwerpe in all they were mustered above. --
6000.

The number of the shipping come to our hands.
Shalloopes whose provision generally was 6. brass Pieces, 8. Murderers, 4.
Dunder busses, besides Lether Pieces. -- 36. Punts with one half Canon and two
three quarter Canon. -- 10. Pleyts whose lading was Lope-staues, Nayls,
Ice-spurs. 10 Horses, Hardles, Beesbridges etc. -- -- -- 9. Other Ammunition
ships whose lading was Powder, Beer, Deals -- 7.

That which I offer by way of observation cannot be much: Time will not afford
it: Yet these things briefly take notice of.

1 That Revenge is no Sluggard, Malice is vnwearyed: For we understand this
work and practice have bin under hand these 6 years.

2. Reuolters from Religion prove her sharpest enemies: witness (besides
Julian) Count John, who will be the Ringleader in any design that may make
nothing of what he formerly professed.

3 To expect better then Stratagems tending to ruin from a popish enemy, does
argue either ignorance of their courses, or groundles Confidence,

4 Security (having lost the use of reason) will deny the Conclusion, rather
then believe the danger. As we saw when our people could hardly believe the
enemy to be the enemy, though he lay before the Ports.

5. High men are Vanity, and Low men are a Lie: which was plain when we saw
neither the great Commander, nor the common soldier could help us, the enemy
out-brauing us the whole day.

6. The Creature cannot be sufficient for our succor, for he is not always a
present help in trouble: we could neither command wind nor tide, where as
either of them might have done us much good.

7. The Lord often lays the reine on the neck of his enemies, they go long
uncontrolled: these went all day in the face of our Army untouched.

8. Sudden Prosperity is no sign of lasting Happiness: These Spiders had no
sooner framed their web, but it was swept down.

9. The Lord brings his greatest works about by Accident, the tide not servng,
which we longd for, our ships could not come up with them by day, and so
escapt a scowring. Their Admiral putting out a light when he was on ground,
brought the rest into the same net: they seeking a nearer way by the
Fosse-mere, lost their way. with many such like.

10. A poor creature is many times made the Lords great host, as Pharaohs Lice
against him, and a hand full of mist thrown amongst these.

11. Fear vnfits a man to know what he should do, and disinables him to do
what he knows* otherwise they might have made head upon the water or the
shore, and gotten good quarter, for ought we perceive.

12. Cruel men have often their punishments given them out in proportion they
devising new boats, they shall perish in their boats, they will bring haltars
for others which may serve them selves, the gallows set up for Mordecay serves
Haman.

13. The Lord answers his servants some times in the very thing they ask, in
our fast before the Prince went into the field we made use of that text and
that petition of David's Psalm: 83. 15. So persecute them with they tempest and
make them afraid with thy storm: and behold we have our answer.

14. Outward strength and humane policyes are no sufficient Bull warks against
Battryes from heaven: it was easily seen here was no want of skill in this
design the preparations were not ordinary, but what are Tifney-walls to a
Canon-shot? or their plots to Gods mist?

15. Fear is an ill guide though a quick post, many hundreds of them leaving
their own strength and betaking them selves to the mercy of an enemy.

16. God like an Indulgent Father strives to reform by showing a rod: David
had the same measure when he Confesses, Lord thou have shown me affliction.
we saw what might have bin our portion; we felt not what the enemy intended,
and we deserved.

17. Divine Providence (which fools call Foutune) will serve it self upon Let
us sleep and the enemy wake, let them attempt, and let us study to prevent,
let them be strong and many, we weak and few, let them go on, and we look
on, let them divide the spoil to every one a damsel, an office before they
come where they are; yet Providence will serve it self upon all this.

18. It is remarkable that the Lord does sadly make the servants of Idols to
know that there Masters or Gods are nothing. In this attempt they will set
forth upon Saint Crosses day (it being by their Almanac the elevation of the
holy Cross) their General of all their Army being called by that name, and
Count John the Leader of the Nauall troops being free of that Company, Such
Crosses let the enemies of God ever carry with them. he had one he wore on his
breast before, he has now another for his back: I wish i may do him good at
his heart,

19, The Lord does not bind himsele to any particular means that we many
times use and to often trust unto, either for our deliverance, or the confusion
of our enemies: we judged of one mean, he used another in this great work, as
was plain to be seen.

20. It is admirable to see what a man or people may receive in point of Honor
and do like wise in matter of Action, if the Lord go out with them; as this
is notable, this Prince of Orange never yet (since he had the command) went
out, but he returued triumphing. the Lord ever make him triumphing and
victorious in his cause.

The Uses we may make in a word are these

1. Let us ever hereafter learn to know the creature by their own names, and
not to call a horse or a man a God, or a water or fort a Savior: we may take
up ^he words of the repenting church Hos 14. The more fatherles the more merry,
or the less we Idolize upon our selves the greater succor we may look for
from heaven.

2. Since the Lord can rule and guide, dispatch and overcome works of this
nature so well; since he has thus graciously appeared in 31. as formerly in
88. let both England and Holland be willing to give him the helm into his
own hands for ever. I wish his quarrel against us all be not that we have
used him too much like a Comon-man. we see (though we had never received his
word) that his place is at the stern, let not Religion lackquey to Policy:
Kiss the son least he be angry. Psalm 2.

3. Give him (who has done all, and deserves all) all the glory: Joseph may
have any thing in Potiphars house but his wife, and in Pharaohs but his throne:
as tender is the Lord of his honor and glory as they of either. Shall we even
greiue his good spirit more. shall we ever slight his sabbaths? can it be?

4. See that prosperity s^ay not our foolish hearts: the skill will be how to
improoue the mercy. Sisera is then undone when he his careless in Iaels tent,
who was a Neutrall: and such is outward prosperity, good and bad may share in
it, the wisdom is how to use it; he need walk warily that goes on a glassy
sea with iron shoes. But the wind is fair, the seamen call, the Dutch
printer is weary he craves pardon for his faults, I must end before I am half
way the main. This at least may save the writing many letters: You may trust
the Intelligence for the Truth: and to the God of Truth I commend You.

In whom I am your lo. kinsman. H. P.


