An Epitaphe on the death of the right noble and most virtuous Lady Margarit
Duglasis good grace, Countisse of Liuinox (and Daughter to the renowned and
most excellent Lady Margarit Queen, Sister to the magnificent and most mighty
Prince Henry the eight of England, France and Ireland, King, and by Gods
permission Queen of Scotland,) who disceased this life the ninth day of March.
Anno. 1577. at her mannoure in Hackny in the countye of Midelsex and lies
enterred the.3. day of April at Westminster in the Chaple of King Henry the
seventh, her worthy Grandfather of England, France and Ireland King etc. The
year of our Lord God. 1578, and in the.20. year of our sovereign Lady
Queen, Elizabeth by the grace of God of England, France and Irelande,
Queen, defendour of the faith. etc.
Report run on, ringe forth thy doleful Bell,
That worldly wightes, may wail our great anoye:
In Court and Town, our cause of woe do tell,
That stand distressed bereft of al our joy.
With care see that, thy skyl thou do imploye,
To blase our luckles hap throughout each land:
That mortal wightes, our gretes may understand.
And as we wail, so let constraint of pain,
Lady Margarits grace Daughter to the eldest Daughter of Henrye the.7. now
disceased, borne at Harbotell three years before ill May day.
Enforce them weep, to think upon our loss:
In woeful wise, with us, let them complain,
That yield of care, to bear the bitter cross.
Let waves of woe, their minds in anguish toss,
Let floods of flowing tears, each where be seen:
To wail this Dame, the Daughter of a Queen.
In princely place, let Prince and Peers lament,
Let Noble Lords, and Ladies yield to wail:
For from the Court a Iwel rich is hent,
And such a one as to her great avail,
Deserves fame, though Death her life do quail,
Where she might help, she would no harm procure:
You all can tell, her freindship was most pure.
A foe to vice and such as vicious were,
This noble dame continually did rest:
A freendly heart she did to virtue bear,
The fruits whereof did flourish in her breast.
To ritche and poor true friendship she professed,
Her words with deeds confirmed were each hour:
Then nobles al lament this fragrant flower.
Cast of your silks, your coastly robes forbear,
Abandon Joy, let mirth an exile be:
Uouchsafe a while your mourning weeds to wear,
Beweepe this dame borne of so hye degree.
A royal prince, Henry the seventh even he,
Of England, France, and Ireland, famous king,
Her Gran-syre was consider you this thing.
Her Lady mothers grace, that Margarit hight,
Of Scotland was, whilom the crowned queen:
And sister to, the eigth Henry by right,
Whole flowring fame in England shines green.
Al^ed by birth this gem was to our queen,
Then noble states, mind you her blood and birth:
And help with tears to bring her to the earth.
Send forth your sobes, let floudes fall from your eyes,
This gracious gem, this pearl of prize beweepe:
And in your hearts, of Liuinox that Countess wise,
For virtue vouch, a true record to keep.
And though her corpse in earth lie cloased deep,
Consent to make memorial of her name:
That conquereth death by force of worthy fame.
Her love to God was always faithful found,
Her life she led in loyalty and awe:
On truth she staid, to prince her troth was sound,
And stood in dread for to transgress the law.
Infortune fell could not her heart with draw,
From God nor prince, her thought could never change,
Ne was her love to country shown as strange.
Then Britains kind that sytte in honors stal,
Forget not you, to bid this dame adieu:
And you in court, that meanest are of al,
With tears prepare, your loving freende to rue.
Whilst life she ioyed she was a freende to you,
Her heart was meek and humble to the end:
Just cause you have to weep so good a freende.
You suitors poor, have lost a Margarit dear,
A precious pearl, the pillar of your trust:
Who willing was, your due demaundes to hear,
And to the prince to further causes just.
Think on this Phoenix rare of right you must,
Whose want, with woe vouchsafe a time to wail,
Her shrine remains, her presence you do fail.
In wedlockes right, whilst she posessed life,
This perelesse dame most dutiful was found:
Unto her worthy spowse she was a constant wife,
Faith knit loves knot, truth was her trusty ground
Two sons she had most fyt to be renowmd
Henrye King of Scots. her eldest son.
The one of Scots the diadem did wear:
Whose fatal syne is known to every ^are.
Whilst he as prince did bear the royal sway,
The commons hearts most curtuously he won:
But treason false in cancred hearts did stay,
And traitors fearce to work his spoil begone.
Yet weldeth now the scepter (there) his son,
Whose death did nyp this Countess to the gall:
Yet did she joy, his seed was safe from thrall.
Her other son Lord Charles that worthy wight,
Espousd she see, whose seed she did embrace:
Yet death in time bereft him from her sight,
Whose want in her a double dole did place.
Twixt these extremes yet did this Ladies grace,
Use patience sweet to salve her inward grief:
And praised God that was her comfort chief.
But as their race the course of time ware out,
And they to death constrained were to bend:
So to her state (Time) his compass courst about,
And touched her corpse with sickness sharp in end.
In which by faith on Christ she did depend,
Whose only blood she did affye and trust:
By faith should purge, her sin and make her just.
Lord Charles her son, Earl of Liuinox buried at hackney
Her hope was heaven, this world she did detest,
And when that death began to draw full nigh:
To bear his stroke she patience pure possessed,
And unto heaven for sauegarde sweet did fly.
She unto God with heart and mind did cry,
Preserve our queen and bless this little land:
Her foes confound with thy out stretched hand.
This done she bids the noble Pears adieu,
She takes her leave of friends and servants all:
My time is come, I take my leave of you,
The fruit that's ripe, is sonest apt to fall.
And though to death my body now be thrall,
I dye, to live in heaven with Christ my love:
And hope to rest with his elect above.
This said, her breath forthwith began to fail,
And fading life, inclines to draw to end:
She leaves this world unto her great avail,
For Jesus Christ is found her surest friend.
From danger great, her soul he does defend,
Sin is defaste by virtue of his blood:
And he alone has done this Countess good.
Wife and Lady to the lord Charles Earl of Liuinox
Her Daughter dear that louinge Lady kind,
Her Gracesse death to mourn is reddy pressed:
The Lady young that nature has asynde,
As yet for food to claim the Nourses breast.
Even as it can with sorrow is possessed,
And Scotlands King, his Gran-dames death does moan:
Charles King of Scotland*
In Court and Town a cause of care is shown.
Her servants all beweepe her noble grace,
The poor each where, her loss with tears lament
From whom no time she once would turn her face
Her heart and hand they say, each hour was bent.
Their need to help, and Hackney does assent,
with wringing hands to wail this worthies wrack
That gave them food and clad the naked back.
But what can tears or pearcing plaints prevail,
Her time was come, and death has cut her down:
Three score, three years she lived til death did quail,
The life of her most worthy high renown.
And now her head of life has got the Crown,
Her blessed soul before the heavenly king:
Does hymes of Joy with saints and Angels sing.
Viuit post funera virtus.
Finis.
I. Phillips

Imprinted at London for Edward White and are to be sold at the little North
door of Paul's at the Sign of the (...)^


