THE Brideling, Sadling and Ryding, of a rich Churl in Hampshire, by the
subtle practice of one Iudeth Philips, a professed cunning woman, or Fortune
teller.

With a true discourse of her unwomanly using of a Trype wife, a widow, lately
dwelling on the back side of S. Nicholas shambles in London, whom she with her
conferates, likewise cosoned:

For which fact, she was at the Sessions house without Newgate arraigned,
where she confessed the same, and had judgment for her offense, to be whipped
through the City, the 14. of February, 1594.



Printed at London by T.C. and are to be sold by William Barley, at his shop
in Newgate Market, near Christ-Church. 1595.

A true discovery of diverse notable villainies practiced by one Iudeth Philips
the wife of John Philips, of Crown Alley in Bishops gate street, the like was
never in any age committed by a woman.
OF all the seven deadly sins, there is none so common in this flourishing
Realm of England, as is the grievous sin of Covetousness, for it is the root
of all iniquity, the puddle of perdition, and the alluring bayt of hell, and
that mind which is once drowned in the depth of that sin, is sold to eternal
damnation, unless the mercy of God raise him up from that filthy and
devouring gulphe: for there is no sin committed under the cope of heaven, but
one branch of Covetousness is therein comprehended. As Usury, what is it but
the desire of gold, and hurding up of wealth? What is Whoredom and Lechery,
but lust and desire of the flesh? What is Drunkenness but Covetousness of
wine? And what is Pride, Envy, Fury, Theft, Murder, but the desires of the
wicked mind? yea every vice is cloaked under the wings of Covetousness. The
thief and robber both by sea and land, ventureth the hazarding of his life for
covetousness of wealth: yea all creatures which bear life, in some sort count
after unlawful things. Lucifer that once was an Angel of brightness, through
his pride coueted to sit in the bright celestial throne of God, for which he
was cast from heaven, and made an Angel of darkness. We may read how
Iezabell for coveting poor Nabothes Vineyard, for the which, by the just
judgments of God she was devoured of filthy Dogs. Therefore the sin of
Covetousness is so ha^nous before the face of heaven, that God in his tenth
commandment strickly does charge us to forsake all unlawful covetousness,
by these words; Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet
thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
nor any thing that is his. Which precept, if men would advisedly and
carefully look into, and with their true endeuoures seek to follow it, we
should not have in this our Realm of England, and especially in this famous
City of London, so many badde and notorious members yearly cut off by the
Queens majesty's Laws as we continually have. Which spectacle, we have once
every month to see and behold, to the great hearts grief of all her
majesty's loving subjects: but yet men are graceless and wilfully minded, and
will not be warned, nor take example by the downfall of others: some are so
idly brought up, that they can nor will endure no labor; and some are so
haughty and proud minded, that they scorn to bend their necks to the yoke
of others, and live honestly, in taking pains for their livings, but study
and devise night and day how they may frawdulently and deceitfully better their
estates by the sweat of other men's brows, for now a days, theft, cosonage,
robberies, and unlawful practices are so common, that not only men, but women
and children, strive with studying and busy brains, how to compass and bring
to pass many cunning sleites and policies, to deceive the world. As by an
example here following, is truly described by a woman, the mirror and map of
all cosonage and deceit, whereat all modest women may blush, and every true
meaning man may smile at the folly of the world.

Pardon my pen, you modest Dames and grave Matrons, it shall no way impair
your honorable Sex, but truly imblazen to the world, the cousoning devises
of a shameless woman, whose name and conversation hereafter follows.

This is to let you understand, that in the month of January last past, in the
famous City of London, one Iudeth Philips the wife of John Philips, by
occupation a Cun-maker, now dwelling in Crown Alley in Bishops gate street, was
brought before her Matesties Justices of peace at the Sessions house in old
Baily, and there was indicted upon cosonage, where she confessed the truth of
all her practices, before the honorable Lords of the bench. But know gentle
Reader, before I undertake to explain the truth of all her practices done here
in London, I will first in most ample manner, set forth to the view of the
world, a notable villainy committed by this cunning and fine witted woman, in
the village of Vpsborne in Hampshire, in distaunce seven miles or thereaboutes
from Winchester.

This Iudeth Philips before times having another husband named Pope, being an
honest poor man of a good conversation and well beloved amongst his
neighbors, but this his wife not contented with his poor estate of living,
upon a certain time took an occasion to go away from him, and purposed to
seek some other course for maintenance of her living, so traveling along the
West parts of England, it was her chance to remain for a certain space in
the parish of Vpsbrne, a Town seituate and being in Hampeshire, and there
practiced many cousoning sleites and devises to deceive the simpler sort of
people in the Country: Only she betook her self to the profession of a
cunning woman, a Fortune teller, and those which she knew did abound in
wealth, she daily sought means to bring into a fools paradise, and by one
device or other, cozen them of some store of Crowns. Not far from this Town,
there was dwelling a wealthy churl, (whose name I here omit) that was somewhat
fantastical and given to believe every tale he heard, which Churles wealth
whetted so the desire of this woman, that she devised a subtle practice to
have a share out of his Cofers. First to bring her purpose to effect, she
enquired secretly of his neighbors of what condition and conversation this
myzer and his wife were of, and in what state the manner of his living lay,
likewise she understood, that this Churl was in suit of law about a piece of
ground, with one sir William Kingsman, a worshipful Knight in Hamshire, which
being done, this Iudeth Philips one evening very late went into the back side
of this man's house, where under a hollow holly free she buried an angel of
gold, and six pence in white money, and then returned home to her lodging
again for ye night: But the next day after, she walked by the Churles house,
and it fortuned that his wife sat at her door to take the fresh air, and so
when this cunning witted woman saw her time, stood still, and looked very
wishly upon her, which made the Churles wife to marvel much, that a strange
woman whom she never saw before, should look upon her so steadfastly, which
caused her to demand wherefore she looked so earnestly in her face? O mistress
said this Iudeth Philips, you are the fortunates woman I saw this many a day,
for in your brows I see good fortune sit, have you not (said she) a hollow
holly tree standing near unto your house, with certain weeds growing about
the root? we have (answered the mizers wife) and what of that? O mistress
said this woman then, if I might speak with your husband, and if he be like
you in the face, you will come to be exceeding rich, for under that hollow tree
there is great store of treasure hid, come in (then said she) and thou shall
see my husband: but when this woman came into the place where her husband was,
she likewise looked him strangely in the face, and told him that she knew by
certain signs in his forehead, that he was in suit of law with some great
man of that country, and how he should prevail in his suit. Also she told him,
if he would be at some charge, she would bring him to great sums of gold and
silver, that was hidden about his grounds, to whom the man being some what
covetous said; If I might first see something of thy skill, I will be at any
charge thou will, but first tell me what thou art, and from whence thou
cammest? I am said this Iudeth, an English woman borne, but come new from the
Pope, and know more of his mind then any woman in the world: to confirm her
words for truth, she took her oath upon the Bible how that she came from the
Pope: which was true, for her husbands name as then was Pope, which being done,
she tooks him by the hand and led him to the root of the hollow tree, where
she caused him to dig till he found some gold, which was the angel and the
six pence, which the night before she closely hid, this brought the covetous
Churl into such a conceit, that he promised to give her whatsoever she
desired, so that her promise might be performed: then she demanded of him for
her pains, fourteen pounds, whereat he grumbled to lose so great a gub at
one time, yet at last the hope of the treasure hidden under the tree made him
to consent, and so with speed gave this woman fourteen pounds in ready gold
and silver. Then said this woman, now must I have the largest chamber in your
house behu^g with the finest linen you can get, so that nothing about your
chamber but white linen cloth be seen, then must you set five candelsticks in
five several places in your Chamber, and under every candelsticke you must put
an angel of gold, all which was done as she required: and likewise said she,
you must also get a saddle and a bridle with two new girths thereunto; all
which the covetous churl performed in hope to attain to great wealth: then
this Iudeth caused him and his wife to go into the yard, where she set the
saddle on his back, and thereon girteth it fast with two new girths, and also
put a bridle upon his head, all which being done, she gat upon his back in
the saddle, and so rid him three times betwixt the chamber and the holly tree,
then said this cosoning queen, you must lie three hours one by an other
groueling on your bellies under this tree, and stir not I charge you, until I
come back again, for I must go into the Chamber to meet the Queen of
Fairies and welcome her to that holy and unspotted place, so this churl and
his wife were left quaking in the cold, casting many a long look for the
coming of this woman, but she in the mean time took down all the fine
linen clothes from the walls of the chamber and wrapped them up close in a
bundle, and all the gold from under the candelsticks, and put them into her
purse, then putting her self into a fair white smock, somewhat disguised,
with a thing on her head all white, and a stick in her hand, she appeared unto
him and his wife, using some valliance, as old wives say, spirits with night
spelles do, she vanished away, and again entered the chamber where her pack
lay ready, and so roundly went away, leaving the churl and his wife in their
cold lodging, but when the poor fool saw the time expired, and his exspected
woman did not return, he got him up and cast off his saddle and bridle, being
half dead with cold, retired into the chamber where he supposed to have found
this cunning woman talking with the Queen of Fairies, but when he entered his
chamber, and saw both his linen and his gold conuaide away, fell into such a
perplexity of mind, as though he had bin distraight of his wits: one while
greeuing for the loss of his fourteen pounds, another while, for the abuse
of his good name, likewise for the penance and disgrace she put him and his
wife unto, the base and rediculous manner of his sadling, his cold lodging and
weary time spent under the tree, to his utter infamy and shame. And lastly, the
loss of his pure and fine linen, but yet he dissembled his grief in such
order, that his neighbors had no suspicion thereof, so in all haste, he take
horse, and road to Winchester, being in distance seven miles from the town
where he dwelt, and there certified a kinsman of his, of all the actions before
happened: to betwixt this Churl and his kinsman, they made hew and try after
her, by which this deceitful woman was taken, and conveyed to prison, where
she remained until the great Assizes came: and for the same was arraigned
before the right honorable my Lord Anderson, the Lord chief Justice of the
Common place under her Majesty by his Office, before whom, she confessed her
self guilty of all these aforesaid practices, and there received such
deserved punishment as the law would permit. But this shameless
woman-regarding neither her public disgrace, nor the punishments of heaven
inflicted upon all such graceless livers, putting off the garment of
shamefastness, and forgetting her self to have done any such thing, drownde
her self in the sea of all vices, and the gulphe of all outrageous mischiefs:
for she after this, growing careless of her good name, fell into company of
two certain bad minded men, of the same condition and quallitie she was on,
whose names I here omit: but the one of them was in his former time, by trade a
silkweauer, but leaving that ^o^^st course of living, betook himself to a
very wicked disposition, as to build the state of his living upon cosonage, and
to blind the eyes of the world, goes in the habit of a Lawier all in black,
like a civil Gentleman. The other fine witted companion, in the attire of a
Country Gentleman, I will not say, he dwells at Borden in Kent, nor his wife is
the owner of a few Chery-trees, the only stay and maintenance of both their
livings, but to be plain, these two Caterpillars P. and V. like Wolves in
sheep clothing, feeds upon the bloods of many innocent lambs, who knowing
a woman, her husband being dead, and she left a rich widow, and in the way of
marriage, would never cease pondering in their crafty brains, till they were
thoroughly acquainted with her, and so by one sly devise or other, ouerreach her
for some part of her substance, they made her believe, they could help her to a
husband of mighty renenewes and great wealth, where at last she found them but
Caterpillars to live upon her labors. As for example, the notable piece of
villainy committed betwixt these two counterfeit gentlemen P. and V. and this
cosoning woman Judith Philips, of a Trype wife, lately dwelling on the back
side of S. Nicholas shambles in London, as it was truly noted at the
arraignment of the said Judith Philips, the 14. of February last past, 1594. at
the Se^ions house in the old Baily, before my Lord Anderson, and others of her
Majesty's Justices, and likewise word by word, as the said Judith confessed it
her self in the prison of Newgate, where she now remains.

A discovery of the Cosoning and ill hardling of the Trype wife, by Iudeth
Philips and her confederates.


THere was of late dwelling in London on the back side of the shambles, a very
rich and wealthy man of good conversation, who dying, left his w^fe in such
good estate of living, as few of the trade of selling Trypes, might well
compate with her. This woman as it was well known amongst her neighbors, had
many su^ors in the way of marriage, and many of sufficient livings, which
woman's name for her wealth, was bruted through every part of the city, so that
it came ^t ^^st to the ears of these two cosoning companions, P. and V. who
studied day and night how they might come acquainted with this rich trype wife,
so that at last, this practice they devised.

This P. being a very comely man of personage, and of a Gentleman like
quality, went as a suter among the rest, unto this widow, whereby he learned
the condition and quality of the woman; and what large proffers she had in the
way of marriage, likewise he understood how that a wealthy Citizen dwelling
upon London Bridge, had received from her in pledge of love, a Ring with five
Diamonds in it, being in value worth five pounds, which Ring upon some
disagreement, she received again: also this P. understood, that one master
Grace a gentleman, dwelling in Essex, was her dear friend, and one that was
her councellor in all her actions, and how that she would not do any thing
without his consent, and how that sometimes he ledged in the widows house,
which things being well considered off betwixt these two fine witted fellows,
whose heads being never barraine, devised a present policy to deceive this
covetous Trype wife. First they made privy to their practices this Iudeth
Philips before named, and told her the state, condition, and quality of this
widow, and made her the Instrument of their intended drist, who was as sub^^ in
performance thereof, as they were crafty in devising, then they made a
counterfeit Letter from master Grace, being as then in Essex, and sent as it
were from him to this widow of London, by this Iudeth Philips, wherein was
contained, how that she was a wise woman, and could tell fortunes, and requested
her to welcome her to her house, and to make much of her, for she might stand
her in great stead, which Letter being in good manner contrived, as best
befitting their purposes, caused this Iudeth Philippes to be attired in a
ruslet gown like a country woman, and to bear this Letter home to the widows
house behind the shambles, where she was no sooner come, and the Letter read,
but was bid welcome for M Graces sake, but especially for the secret quallities
the which her friend did commend her in: but now when this dissembling minion
espied her time, she requested to see the widows hand, which she vouchsafe to
do; O mistress (then said this woman) I see by the Art of Palmistrie in your
hand, and by mine own skill, that you are borne to good fortune, likewise I
know you have had many rich proffers in the way of marriage: I have had said
the widow indeed, Knights fellows come unto me. Then said this deceifull woman
again, a Citizen dwelling upon London Bridge, has bin an earnest suter unto
you, and has received a ring with five Diamonds in pledge of love, but the
Ring you have again. And so there was another Gentleman loved you well, which
once would have kissed you, and used you harshly, by that token in striving
with him, your hatsell into the Sowse Tub. At which words, said the Trype wife,
I think you know all things. I know some what replied this woman again, have
you not mistress about your house a great rumbling when you are in bed?
Sometimes said the widow we have: By that said this woman again, your husband
in his life hid about your house great store of treasure, for which cause there
are sprites now that haunt your house: when indeed the noise which she heard,
was no other but this P. and V. that late in the nights would lember against
her doore^, and likewise in the mornings. But mistress if you will be^^t some
charge, I will show you where this gold and filt^^r is hid. I will good woman,
be at any charge thou will with reason, so I may gain thereby. Then said this
cos^ning D^nie, you must set five Candelstickes, and five candels burning in
them, in five corners of your house, then must you car^^stly pray in every
cerner a certain space, which was performed with all all speed. Thus is Gods
word made a cloak for all such diuilish practices, only to blind the eyes of
the simple and well meaning people. But God surely in diverse places of the
scriptures says; That whosoever believes in Witches and Sorcerers, believe in
the Devil: but yet God does suffer the Devil and his Angels to spread abroad
the world, to tempt those that be weak in faith, and like Wolves in sheep
clothing, seek to devour us.

But now to our purpose again: This crafty creature calling the Trype wife
from her prayers, asked her what she saw, and what she heard? to whom she
answered, that she heard nothing. Then said this minion again, you must fetch
as much Cold, Rings, Jewels, and Chains, to the value of one hundredth pounds,
and put them into a purse, all which was done: then she took the purse with
the gold and wound about it a bottom of woollen yarne, which being done, she
requested the widow to go a while from her, so in the mean space, like a
crafty queen she conveyed the gold into her pocket, and took another bottom
of yarne with two stones in it, in the same likeness the either was off, and
gave it the woman again, as though it had bin the very same: to whom she said,
I pray you mistress lock this up very sure, and look not into it until I
come again, for I must go and converse with a wise man that is acquainted
with the Queen of Fairies, but I request you, that you will send him by me, a
fat Turkey, and a couple of Capons, only to get his friendship in the matter,
and no doubt but we shall find the hid treasure very shortly: which woman,
through covetousness of this money, went presently and bought a Turkey, and two
fat Capons, and sent them with this cosoning cheater by her maid servant, into
Holb^rn, but being come near unto the place whither she intended to go, took
them from the maid, and so sent her back again. Thus this dainty witted Dame,
having cosoned the trype wife, of all her gold, Jewels, and Chains, returned
joyfully unto the lodgings of her two schoolemaisters, P. and V. who seeing her
come, asked her presently if she had sped? I have answered she, in some sort for
here is a hundred pound to make us merry with, the which they divided into
sour parts: she received two for her pains, and they betwixt them the other
two, and afterward made merry with the widows Turkey, and her couple of
Capons, and so went with fifty pounds home to her husband Iohu Philips,
dwelling in Crown Alley in Bishops gate street: who noting her long
absence, and diverse starts she made from him, asked where she had been, and how
she came by that money? to whom she gave many hard words and bad answers,
insomuch that in his anger he struck her, but yet by no means he could do, the
crafty queen would reveal where she had it. But now to return to the widows
maid again, who coming out of Holborne home so her mistress, told her that
she suspected the queen had cosoned her, with that she went presently and
vnwound the bottom of yarne, wherein she found nothing but two stones: the
which being done, she went to one of her neighbors and discourst to him all
the manner of her cosoning, but he like a wise man, counseled her not to make
hue and cry, but watch a time until she came again, and then to apprehend
her. Not many days after this, these three aforesaid cosoning companions, met
again together, and consulted how they might get a another booty of this
trype wife, which was platted down in this manner. First this Iudeth Philips
should repair unto the widow again, and tell her that she came from the
Queen of Fairits, and how that she gave her in charge (if she would attain
the hidden treasure) to set twelve Candelstickes in diverse places of her
house, and under every Candelsticke both gold and silver, and to set all her
plate round about the Candles, whereby this subtle headed woman might the
easier deceive her of it: but coming to the widows house again, she was
bidden welcome as before, and requested to come in, but in the mean time, thy
Constable was sent for, and she apprehended and so carried to Newgate.
Likewise for the same fact, her husband was arraigned before the be^ch but
found not guilty, and so quit by the Iewrie: but the law finding her guilty
therein, was returned so Newgate, where the did remain till the Sessions
following for judgment: the^ that time being come, her judgment was, to be
whipped through the city. Thus have you heard ye notable practices committed
by this woman and her associates. And ^^o doubt but there are mo such wicked
members in this land. (...) of England (...), then do you show your (...) to
God, (...) unto your Country, and f^ruice unto your ^^^eue: For whose long and
quiet raig^^, let all true subjects daily pray. Amen.

FINIS.

