A brief Chronicle of the four principal Empyres. To wit, of Babylon,
Persia, Grecia, and Rome. Wherein, very compendiously, the whole course of
histories are contained. Made by the famous and godly learned man JOHN SLEIDAN,
and englished by Stephan Wythers.

AFTER DARCKNES LIGHT. POST TENEBRAS LVX printer's device of Rowland Hall

PRINTED AT LONDON by Rouland Hall, dwelling in Gutter Lane, at the sign of
the half Egle and the Keye.

1563.

To the right honorable Lord, the Lord Rushell, Earl of Bedford etc. Stephan
Wythers wishes prosperous health, long life, with increase of godly honor.
CAlling to mind (right honorable) the bond that Nature has laid as it were
upon every man's shulder: to wit, that each man to his power and ability,
should diligently labor to benefit his native country. I thought it
therefore my bounden duty, to gratify your Lordship at this present, and also
(as proceeding from your honor) the residue of my country men, with this my
simple labor. Which though many might have done it better, yet I have done my
good will: being not only incited and encouraged thereunto, by the vulgar
report of your clementie and grateful accepting of diverse other men's labors
in such like enterprises: but also by the worthiness of the work and splendent
fame of the author, whose worthy Chronicle as touching the estate of religion
and the weal public under the Emperor Charles the fifte, for as much as the
custody thereof in our English tongue was exhibited unto your honor, I
thought I could not chose a more fitter Patron for this little book, then him
who had already (by thankful accepting of the foresaid Chronicle) declared
his good will to the Author. To make discourse unto your Lordship concerning
the goodness and excellentnes thereof, and the benefit that may therefrom
redounde unto all such as are studious. I think I should (as the proverb is)
but power water into the sea, for as much as the same is far better described
in the authors own preface, as also the causes that moved him to take in hand
the same, then I should have been able to have penned it. Not withstanding this
much I may well say with Thucidides, that among all other writtyngs histories
is a treasure, which never ought to be out of our hands, to the end that being
aided thereby, we might the better handle such like busynesses and chances in
the commonweals: for albeit that the persons are changed and have given
place to nature, yet the same or the like accidents and chances happen daily.
Yea I may boldly affirm that it much avails them that be in authority, to
mark diligently in the reading of histories, the acts of all ages, to the end
that they having examples laid before their eyes both of good and evil
regiment, and of the blessing of God upon good governors, and of the just
wrath of God diversely powered upon the contrary sort, may learn to follow the
good and eschew the evil. Now briefly to finishe, my humble request is,
first that it would please you to accept in no worse part this my simple and
small offer, then as the present of one that earnestly wishes you all
felicity, who would have given better, if his ability had to his good will
been correspondant: and consequently to pardon my boldness, and to bear with
the rudeness of my style. And in so doing I shall think my self not only
much bound unto your honor, but also be earnestly moved to pray unto God to
maintain you in your estate, to prosper and further all your good purposes, to
increase you in virtue, and keep you in good health and prosperity.

Your honors humble Stephan Wythers.

A Table of the principal things, treated of in this book.
ARtaxerxes longhand the fifte Emperor. Follio. 9 Alexanders victory against
Darius. Fol. 10 Alexander beginner of the third monarchy. Folio. 11. Alexanders
liberality. Idem. Alexanders successors. Folio. 12. Appius Claudius and his
wicked cupiditie. fol. 14 An act worthy of memory. fol. 17 Attilius Regulus,
and his cruel death. idem. Archimides, an excellent Mathematicion. fol. 17
Asdruballes overthrow. fol. 18 Ariminius overthrows the Romans. fol. 34
Augustus victory. idem Ausonius Poet. fol. 49 Albin chief founder of the
university of Paris. fol. 71 Albertus Emperor. fol. 99 Belochus the first
king of Assiria in ye new monarchy. fol. 3 Balthazar the last Emperor of
Babylon. fol. 6 Bishops resist Pope Julius. fol. 47 Belizarius misery in his
old age. fol. 58 Berengarius, and his sedicion in Italy. fol. 74 Cyrus, and
his death. fol. 7 Cambyses the son of Cyrus. idem. Camilius and his virtue.
fol. 14 Cicero treasurer of Sicilia. fol. 18 Cato envious against Scipio. fol.
20 Civil war between Sylla and Marius. fol. 25 Conspiratie of Catilin^. fol.
27 C. Octauius birth. fol. 28 Crassus slain by the Parthians. fol. 29 Civil
war between Pompeius and Caesar. idem. Caesar vanquisheth Pompeius. fol. 30
Caesar slain in the Senate. fol. 31 Cicero slain by Antonius. fol. 33
Corruption of the Latin tongue. fol. 35 Confusion in the Roman Monarchy.
fol. 36 Cyprianus complaint. fol. 40 Constantinus the great. fol. 44
Constantinus, Constantius, and Constans brethren. idem. Clodoueus the first
christian king of Frannce. fol. 56 Constantinople besieged by the Saracenes.
fol. 63 Charlemaine takes the king of the Lumbards. fol. 65 Clarlemain
proclaimed Emperor. idem. Constantinus Monomachus. fol. 66 Constantinople taken
by Mahometh. idem. Charlemains authority above the Pope. fol. 70 Counsels
holden in France. fol. 72 Charles the great. fol. 73 Constantie of Papinianus.
fol. 38 Charles the fourth. fol. 96 Constantinople taken by the Turk. fol. 100
Charles the fifte Emperor. idem. Darius the third king of Persia. fol. 7
Darius overthrown by the Athenians. idem. Darius the Bastard the.vi. Emperor.
fol. 9 Darius superfluities, and his end. fol. 12 Denis the Tirant and his
acts. fol. 15 Destruction of Carthage. fol. 22 Destruction of Corinthus. fol.
33 Decre of marcellus, Bishop of Rome. fol. 43 Decre of Anacletus. fol. 44
Decre of Valentinianus and Valens. fol. 48 Dinelshe ambiton of Bonifacius the
second. fol. 58 Dissipation of the Roman Empire. fol. 100 Daniel alleged by
christ. fol. 105 Eulmerodach, Nabucho^on^zors successor. fol. 6 Excellent
captains of Grecia. fol. 10 Excellent captains of Rome. fol. 14 Excellent
Consulles. Fol. 17 Excessiuenes of Antonius and Cleopatra. Fol. 34 Excellent
Iurisconsulles. Fol. 39 Evil hap of the Emperor and Empire. Fol. 67 Eginardus
Charlemains Secretary. Fol. 70 Fabricius faithfulness. Fol. 16 Flauius Cladius.
Fol. 41 Forcastes of Athila king of the Hunnes. fol. 52 Ferce and terrible
war in Campania. idem Flateries of the Papists. fol. 56 Fine interpretation
of Saint Paul. fol. 64 Falshode in the great decre of Gratianus. fol. 73
Fridericus redbeard. fol. 86 Great authority of the Romans. fol. 20 Gracchus
dream. fol. 24 Great expenses of Octauius. fol. 35 Gordianus. fol 39 Gallus
Hostilianus. fol. 40 Gallienus. fol. 41 Gallus slain for abusing of his
authority. fol. 46 Graves forbidden to be sold. fol. 74 Galeatius the first
duke of Millan. fol. 97 Hanniball poysoneth him self. fol. 21 Heliogabalus.
fol. 38 Hieromes sentence. fol. 49 Heraclius victory. fol. 60 Henry the
second. fol. 77 Henry the third. idem Julius Caesar overthrows the Swicers.
fol. 28 Inconstantie of Cicero. fol. 32 Jesus Christ's birth. fol. 34 Jesus
Christ's death. fol. 36 Iulianus. fol. 47 Iouinianus. idem. Justinius Emperor
of Grecia. fol. 56 John king of France taken of the English men. fol. 97 John
of Bourgony delivered by a strange means. idem. Lysimachus. fol. 12 L.
Luculus against Mithridates. fol. 27 Leges Iuliae. fol. 32 Litorius against the
Goths. fol. 32 Leo Emperor. fol. 54 Lies and falsholde in the Popes
Histories. fol. 56 Long war against the Saxons. fol. 69 Ludouicus the
Maffler. fol. 73 Learning and good letters reestablisshed. fol. 99 Melius
slain for his ambition. fol. 14 M. Antonius the Philosopher. fol. 37 Maximinus
Empe. fol. 38 Martianus Empe. fol. 52 Mauritius Empe. fol. 59 Mahomets
Alchoran, and the beginning of his authority fol. 60 Marriage forbidden to
Priests. fol. 64 Nimrod the first King of Chaldea. fol. 1 Nabuchodonozors
power. fol. 5 Notable Iurisconsulles. fol. 16 Nestorius condemned. fol. 5
Narses the Eunuche. fol. 57 Odoacer subdueth Italy. fol. 54 Ottomanus the first
Emp. of the Turks. fol. 66 Otho first of that name. fol. 75 Otho displaceth
the Pope. idem. Otho the second. fol. 76 Otho taken by Pirates. idem. Otho the
third. idem. Ptolomeus Philadelphus, father of good letters. fol. 12 Papyrius
Cursor. fol. 15 Pyrchus against the Romans. fol. 16 Persta king of the
Macedonians taken prisoner. fol. 21 Probus and the cause of his death. fol. 43
Phocas. fol. 59 Pipine king of France aydeth the Pope. fol. 64 Privileges of
the Emperor. fol. 75 Printing invented. fol. 99 Quintus Fabius a most prudent
captain. fol. 17 Resination of the Empire. fol. 43 Rome taken by the Goths.
fol. 51 Rome taken by the Wandales. fol. 53 Rome taken by Totilas. fol. 57 Rome
robbed by Constans. fol. 61 Robert king of France. fol. 77 Robert Palatine
Emperor. fol. 98 Revelation of Antichrist. fol. 104 Semiramis and her
noblenes. fol. 2 Sardanapalus and his end. fol. 3 Socrates the fountain of
Philosophy. fol. 15 Scipios victory in Affrike. fol. 19 Septimus Seuerus.
fol. 38 Sapor king of Persia. fol. 39 Synod or counsel at Constantinople.
fol. 49 Strife between the Greeks and the Latins. fol. 88 Sigismundus
Emperor. fol. 98 The wynnyng of Jerusalem. fol. 4 The war of the Persians.
fol. 8 The Penoponicall war against the Athenians. fol. 8 The overthrow of
the Athenians in Sicilia. fol. 9 The beginning of the fourth Monarchy. fol. 12
The time in which Rome was buylte. fol. 13 The war of Troy. eodem. The
beginning of the Romans. eodem. The first government at Rome. eodem. The
Fabiens slaughter. eodem. The third mutation of the Romain policy. fol. 14
The first war of Carthage. fol. 16 The second war of Carthage. fol. 17 The
third war of Carthage. fol. 22 The war of Numance. fol. 23 The war of
bondmen and slaves. eodem. The birth of Cicero. fol. 24 The laws of Sylla.
fol. 26 The first pleadyng of Cicero. eodem. The exile of Cicero. fol. 29 The
fourth and last monarchy. fol. 32 The yearly reuenewe of Egypt. fol. 33
Tyrants. fol. 44 The counsel of Nice against Arrius. fol. 45 The Emperor
excommunicated by the Pope. fol. 50 The sixte counsel of Carthage. eodem. The
deceit of the bishop of Rome disclosed. eodem. The treason of Stilico. eodem.
The Wandales enter into Affricke. fol. 51 The Britons driven out by the
English men. fol. 52 The first foundation of Venice. fol. 53 The number of the
dukes of Venice. eodem. The counsel of Calcedon. eodem The West Empire sore
afflicted. fol. 54 The Lumbards enter into Italy. fol. 59 The fourth counsel
of Toletanum. fell. 60 The sixte counsel of Constantinople. fol. 62 The
beginning of the turks. fol. 66 The number of Emperors murdered. fol. 67 The
great Masters of France and their credit. fol. 68 The Empire renewed by
Charlemaine. fol. 70 The seven electours of the Empire instituted. fol. 77 The
son against the father. fol. 85 The counsel of Latran. fol. 88 The euenings
of Sicilia. fol. 93 The overthrow of the templers. fol. 94 Two Emperors
crowned. fol. 95 The first tenthes. eodem. The golden Bull. fol. 96 The king of
Hungary defeited by the turk. fol. 97 The Popes court transferred into
France. fol. 98 The Papacy as Cerberus has three heads. fol. 99 The counsel
of Constance. eodem The prophecy of Daniel expounded. fol. 101 The four
beasts. eodem. The ten horns. fol. 102 The wicked doctrine of Mahomet.
eodem. The Ram and the Goat. eodem. The Pope and the Turks enemies of them
pyre. fol. 103 There shall be no fifte monarchy. eodem. The three horns of the
turks. fol. 104 The fury of Satan at the end. eodem. Victory of Pompeius
against Mithridates. fol. 27 Victory of Caesar in Affricke. fol. 31 Vlpianus
Iurisconsull. fol. 38 Valerianus. fol. 40 Vitigis king of the Goths taken
prisoner. fol. 57 Usurpation of the Popes over the Empire. fol. 63 Vitories of
Charles the fifte in Affricke. fol. 100 Vnstabilitie of the Lords of Millan.
fol. 101 Victories of Alexander. fol. 102 War against Philippe of Macedonia.
fol. 19 War against Antiochus king of Siria. eodem. War against Iugurtha.
fol. 24 War against Mithridates. fol. 25 War against the Pirates. fol. 27
War in Alexandria against Caesar. fol. 30 War of the Romans in Dutchland.
fol. 34 War between the Frenchmen and the Englishmen. fol. 96 Xerxes the
fourth Emperor. fol. 8 Xerxes overthrown by the Grecians. eodem. Zenobia the
valiant wife of Odenatus. fol. 4^ Zeno Isauricus. fol. 54
FINIS.
To the Reader.
Since no man's doings, can avoid,
Reproach at Momus hand:
I judge it nedeles to crave aid,
The same for to gain stand.
Wherefore I will contented be,
The same to ouerronne:
With silence and simplicity,
As many more have done.
Trusting that such as be of skill,
Hereat will not disdain:
But it in gre, they accept will,
To recompense my pain.
Faults escaped in the prynting. Note that. a. signifies the first side of
the page, and. b. the second.
Follio. 1. b. line 17 Africa, read Asia. fol. 2. a. line 15 brought out, read
were brought out. fol. 6. a. line, 12. have these two, read, leave these two
fol. 14 b. line, 7. surmounte read, surmounted. fol. 14. b. line. 8. was
bannished, read, he was bannished. fol. 15. a. line. 22. it has been, read,
as it has been. fol. 19. b. line. 1. to be, read is to be. fol. 23. b. line.
3. sure, read, severe. fol. 28. a. line. 23. add next to this word graven,
were, molten. fol. 28. a. line. 24. the molten image, read the image, fol. 39.
b. line. 5. Persians held, read the Persians held. fol. 43. a. line. 4. short
stand, read shortly stand. fol. 50. a. line 9. Priests, read bishop. fol. 90.
a. line. 17. can be, read can not be.

To the most excellent prince, Eberard, Duke of Wirtemberg and of Teke, countye
of Mount beliard etc. John Sleidon. S.
Seeing, Duke Eberard, that all knowledge of letters, how base so ever it be,
does greatly adourne and set forth your estate and dignity, then truly that
knowledge which comprehends in it self the Histories of al times and ages is
most peculier and proper unto you. The knowledge of Histories is necessary.
And amongst us, who make profession of the name of Christ, the Bible
obtains the first place amongst such kinds of writtinges, the which in
deducting the original beginning of man kind, does both declare unto us the
will of god, and also give unto us many examples as well of the mercy as of the
ire and wrath of God. After the Bible it consequently behooves to know all that
which is written of other nations. Nothing comineth to pass, which is not
found prefigured in the histories,
For nothing almost ca^ come to pass but thereof is, and a great while agone
has been, set out some resemblaunce. Wherein the governors of commonweals
have great aid and succor, provided that they be not careless in this kind of
instruction. Now the way, whereby ye whole course of ye world is divided into
four Empires, is most to the purpose. As for the first Empire, we are
destitute of necessary books, and saving the holy Scriptures we have almost
nothing worthy to be credited, or whereupon we may ground our selves. That age
no doubt was altogether heroical, and most notable in excellent things and
worthy of Memory: but how much thereof is come to our knowledge? Semiramis is
greatly renoumed, and Babylon, and Sardanapalus: and what? That is almost all.
But who is he that makes mention of that horrible spectacle, and so terrible
and monsterous as ever happened unto man, which Nabuchodonosor (according as it
is written in Daniel) recites of himself? Nabuchodonosor a terrible spectacle,
To wit that so mighty a king and Monarche became mad was cast out of his
kingdom, bannished the throne of his ancesters, driven from and excluded the
company of men, and so to alter nature that he fed with wild beasts, and
was tranfourmed into their lykenes? The things are there but simply mentioned:
but how greatly think we were they astonished, that did see this so pitiful
an example of the majesty and wrath of God? The Empire therefore of Assiria,
or of Babylon, is briefly discribed, because it is requised to keep within
the bands of the holy scriptures. The three others following, chiefly that of
Grecia and of Rome, are greatly illuminated by the writtinges of Herodotus,
Greek historiographers.
Thucidides, Xenophon, and Polibius. For Pherecides, Hellanicus, Accusilas,
Phillistus, Agathocles, Theopompus, Ephorus, Calisthenes, Timeus, Clitarchus,
Silenus, of who^ Cicero makes mention are perished. The Latins also that did
writ the ancient Romain History, and who are named by Cicero, are not to be
found: as are the Annals Pontificum, Fabius Pictor, M. Portius Cato, Latin
Historiographers.
Lucius Piso, Celius Antipater, Caius Fannius, Vennonius, Clodius, Asilo,
Accius, Lucius Sisenna. These are they out of whom T. Liuius, for the most part
mutilate, and Salustius more ancient, also imperfect, have collected their
Historye. Cicero truly did never write History, albeit that he diligently
labored therein, according as his books do testify, out of the which we
may aptely gather all that has been aunciently done: yea, he has been
marvelous curious to observe the time, so yt we may orderly gather out of him,
both the time of things and persons, without the which all that is written is
obscure. And for because that the said Cicero was wont to say, yt it specially
appertained to an Orator to write an History, chiefly according to the manner
of ye Greeks, Pomponius Atticus exhorted him thereunto, Cicero solicited to write Histories.
saying in manner of a complainte, yt it was yet wanting unto the Latins, and
that it lay in Cicero to bring to pass that in such style Rome should not be
inferior unto Grecia. It is certain that he composed in Greek the History
abridged of his consulshyp, and began it in Latin, as he says. For he
greatly desired that that his year should be renoumed by the writings of
others: in such sort that he said that if others would not put to their hands,
he would not fail, and would write of himself. C. Caesar treats only of his
own acts, Julius Caesar, did writ his acts.
not borowing any thing of the above said ancient writers. Then also was
Diodorus Siculus, and shortly after, Dionisius Halicarnasseus, afterward
Plutarcus Sutonius, Cornelius Tacitus, Appianus, Herodianus, Trogus Pompeius,
Alianus, Q. Cursius: but amongst them some are utterly lost, other some are
for the most part. Since these, diverse others have written the History of
their time, or of their nation, and reach even unto this our age. The vtilius
of Histories
These truly ought to be read, or at the least the most part of them, to get
by them the knowledge which is requised and necessary. It behooves to know
some for the thing it self, other some for the thing and for the style:
amongst whom C. Julius Caesar.
Caesar may almost only have to himself the first place of the latins, yea and
that rightlye. For there is nothing more pure nor more eloquent then he: so
that not only he has surmounted them who shortly after followed him, in
pleasantnes of speech, but also all the^ of his time. Besides the above
specified, The ecclesiastical Histories.
it behooves also to read over the ecclesiastical Histories, which do writ
the mutation of religion, or afflictions of good men, or the laws and decrees
of counsels and Bishops, And because that the kingdom of the papacy is
also foreshewed in ye holy scripture it behooves diligently to search out the
beginning, advancing and increasing thereof, to the end to confer the same
with the marks and signs that the scripture gives. But because this whole
argument, whereof we have spoken is diverse and hard, and that ye field is very
great and large, so that it is not possible to compass the same in short
space: Why the author did take in hand this work.
It is needful to help the studies of young men by some certain abrigement,
to the end that, when they become great, they might freely of them selves make
a discourse by all sorts of Authors. This is yt which moved me to take in
hand this work, to the end that that age might have a patro^ and note of
those things that are to be learned, the which it may follow as a threde,
whilst by little and little it takes increase in learning, This work (...)
chiefly ^ritten for ^outh.
and profits in such sort, that it may lay a side and set nothing by such
writing. For I have not written this to the intent that they should be satisfied
therewith, or should keep themselves shut within these limits, but for to give
them the taste of that, which they shall read afterward: to the end ye being
allured, or enticed, by the diversity of things, they might be stirred up
sometimes diligently to search the Authors and the books, out of whom these
things are gathered. But seeing that this kind of study does properly
appertain (as it has been said in the beginning) unto them who ought to have
the government of the people, I thought I should do according to your age and
estate, Duke Eberard, if I did make you partaker of this my little labor: to
the end that (if it be possible) other young men might take some profit by
your means, and as it were by your hands. For albeit that John Sigismond, and
Sebastian Coccius, your most honozable masters, do with all diligence employe
themselves to instruct and teach you. Yet notwithstanding, as our accustomed
manner is, when a garden is to be dressed, which we desire to be exquisite and
decked with sundry flowers, not to despise the litles plants and herbs
brought unto us from other places: so likewise I hope that the little present
which I offer unto you to garnishe ye ground of your wit, shall be very
acceptable un to you. And truly I present it only until such time as having
gotten more strength (as it has been said) you might rightlye walk through
the wide fields and grene places. Which to do you have an example of your
own kindred, to wit ye virtue of your father, a prince of most worthy praise,
who has greatly augmented and decked the noblenes of his race by an eloquent
doctrine: and which is the chiefest he has brought this knowledge to her right
end: The true scope of all sciences.
that is to say, that the name of of god might be sainctified: that the
Churches and schools might be well ordered: that good teachers and scholars
might be nourished and interteined. This is the duty that god requires
chiefly of them of your estate: and as he auengeth the neglecting thereof with
great plagues, so likewise he does reward them with great gifts, that behave
themselves therein as faithful stuardes. Diverse lessons might be recited of ye
godliness, constancy, and valiantnes, of your most noble father: but you shall
hereafter read them handled more at large, and shall know the ornaments of
your noblenes. For how can it be, ye he who so much favors good wits,
should not finally receive of them such fruit of their thankfulness, as he
deserves and should not be renoumed in the time to come? Seeing then that he
understands the worthiness of his estate, and the charge that god has
committed unto him, his chief care has been ye your mind should be instructed
in godliness and in learning from your youth: neither can any thing happen more
pleasant unto him (such is the affection and motion of his fatherly love) then
to see his expectation inferior to your diligence. The office of a true father.
I doubt not but you are thereto inclined of your own accord, as much as
this age may suffer, and that your instructours do their whole endeavors.
Wherefore go forewarde in good time, Prince Eberard: and seeing that you are
borne to minister the publyke weal, get you such help and aid as is
perpetual, Aids which serve unto the gouerneme^tes of public weals,
and as gives certain and sure succor: yea, such that not only lighten the
labor which you must hereafter bear, when you shall come to govern the
country of your ancesters, but also make it pleasant and easy. fare well.

The first book of the four soueraygne empyres.
BEfore that I begin to speak of the four soueraygne and principal
Empyres, to wit, of Babylon, Persia, Grecia, and Rome: I must briefly say,
Discord in numbryng of the years.
that there is great discord in the numbering of years, since the creation of
the world for both the Hebrews, Eusebius, Augustinus, Alphonsus and Mirandula,
do greatlyvary among them selves. Notwithstanding, because that almost all the
learned men of our time, do herein frame themselves according to the numbrynge
of the Hebrews, I will follow them step by step when need shall require.
The Hebrews are to be followed in countyng the years.
And first of all to come to my purpose, to wit, unto the first Empire,
omitting that which came to pass in the first age, omitting also to speak
of the universal flood (for as much as all these things are comprehended in
the holy scriptures, neither is it possible better to describe them) I will
begin from that time, in the which after that the abundaunce of waters were
retired and the earth dried, mankind then being brought to a very small
number, began again to multiply.

The universal flood is referred to the.M. CCCCCC. LU I. year after the
creation of the world. The year the flood
Methusalah the seventh from Adam died in that time, at the age of nine hundred
and sixty nine years. Noah the nephew of Methusalah by Lameth his son, lived
then being six hundred year old, he with his family was preserved by the
singular grace of God. And after that the number of men began by little and
little to increase, he persuaded his children and others of his posterity to
scatter them selves in diverse countries to fill the earth, and to buyld cities
and towns: and to that end, he appointed unto every one by lot his Province,
about an hundredth years after the flood.

At that time Nimrod son to Noah's nephew abode with his people in the land of
ye Chaldees. And finally as diverse through the great multitude of persons, were
forced to depart, and to seek diverse habitations: they would before their
departure leave behind them a perpetual sign of their memory, Men covet to
build in their perpetual memory.
and having Nimrod to be their captain, they began to buyld a city, and
therein a tower of a wonderful hight: And forgettyng the wrath of God (which
had but even a little before swallowed up the whole world, and whereof there is
no doubt, but Noah did diligently and often times put them in memory) they
thought to get them a perpetual name by sumptuous and proud works. Wherewith
the lord being angry, did bring their enterprise to naught by confusion of
language, God resists the proud.
the which before was but one kind of speech used of al men. Wherefore being
constrained to leave of their work, they did scatter themselves into diverse
parts of the world. The town took her name of this confusion of tongues, for
it was called Babell. And from that time (to wit, an hundredth and one and
thyrtye years after the flood) is gathered the beginning of the raygne of
Chaldea and of Babylon. Now the first king was the aforesaid Nimrod, Nimrod
the first king of Chaldea.
who (as it is said) raygned six and fifty years. The holy scripture
calls him a mighty hunter, and does attribute unto him power and violence:
others call him Saturn, and they say that in the five and fourtye year of his
Empire he sent Assure, Mede, Magog, and Moscus, for to guide the bands of men
which he sent to inhabit here and there, and for to ground and establish
kingdoms of their names, to wit, of Assiria, of Mede, of Magog, and of
Moscus: whereof the two first apperteyne unto Asia: the other two last
appertain unto Africa, and unto Europa.

The holy scipture also makes mention of that Assure, Assure.
and says that the city of Nineue was builded by him.

Jupiter Belus succeeded his father Nimrod, who some say did, Jupiter Belus.
occupy all the West parts even unto Samaria on Europe, and after that he had
made war against Sabatius king of Sagnos, whom he could not altogether
discomfite, because he was prevented by death: but Ninus his son utterly
vanquished him, Ninus.
and having spread his dominion far abroad, he first of all got the
Monarcke. Three.C. and fifty years after the flood Noah dyed: And about eyghtene
years after, Abraham the tenth after Noah left his country by the
commandment of God, being three score and fyftene years old.

Four and twentye years after God made a Covenant with him by the
Circumcision, Circumcision instituted.
which he instituted. In the hundredth year of his age Isaac his son was borne
unto him, and he lived after that time, three score and fiftene years: for the
life of man was even already greatly shortened.

The holy scriptures teach us how, and for what cause Jacob his nephewe came
into Egypt where he dyed: and how those of his lynage dwelt there for certain
hundredes of years, and being oppressed with most cruel bondage, brought
out, and delivered by the grace of God, under the government of Moses. Now
this going forth of Israel out of the land of Egypt, The going out of egypt.
is counted to be the.MM.CCCC.LIIII. year after the creation of the
world.CCCC.XXX. years after the promise was made unto Abraham, as says Paul
the Apostle. After Moses the people of Israel had Judges until Saull: whom
David succeeded, being the second king of that people.

Let us return unto the Empire of Babylon. After the death of Ninus,
Semiramis the widow of Ninus.
Semiramis his wife reigned, who was as noble in riches, victories, and
triumphs, as ever was any. She enlarged the town of Babylon, The noblenes of
Semiramie.
and made it of an indifferent bigness: also she decked it with diverse fair
buildings, and did compass it with walls. She vanquished the country of
Ethiopia, and also made war against the country of India. Zameis her son,
the fifte king, did nothing worthy of memory: Zameis.
But Arius that reigned next after him, Arius.
joined to his empire the Bactrians and Caspians. Aralius his succcessour was
(as it is reported) borne to war: Aralius.
and yet not withstandyng, we find none of his acts in writing. Baleus that
followed him, did subject diverse people under him, Baleus yt was surnamed Xerxes.
and did spread his dominion even unto the country of Indea: and therefore he
was surnamed Xerxes, that is to say, victorious, a triumpher, and a man of
war. The nynth called Armatrites, Armatrites
was altogether addicted unto voluptuousnes, and ydlenes. There is nothing
found of Belochus the tenth, Belochus.
but that he set his mind upon prognostications and diuinations. Baleus.
Baleus the eleventh is counted to be (next after Semiramis) the most
industrious and valiant man of war: and it is said that he was greatly
renoumed and praised by the wrytyngs of learned men.

Altadas the twelve, loved to be at rest, and to live a quiet and peaceable
life (as the report goth) estemyng it to be a great folly, Altadas.
to be tormented and vexed with diverse labors and cares, for to increase his
kingdom: for as much as it did not appertain to the health or commodity of
men, but rather to their damage and bondage. The.xiii. that followed him,
Mamitus.
named Mamitus, did again stir up and awake his men to warfare, in such sort
that his power was suspected and feared of ye Sirians and Egiptians. Manchale^.
There is nothing to be said of Manchaleus, Spherus.
who is ye.xiiii. Spherus ye xv. was (as it is reported) a man of great virtue
and wisdom.

There is no act mentioned of Mamelus, Mamelus.
who was ye.xvi. Merueylous things are found to have happened in all places
under Sparetus the.xvii. Ascarades who was ye.xviii. did subject all Siria
under his obedience. Sparetus.
And here ends Berosus, Ascarades.
which is read at this day: of the which book diverse do greatly doubt, and do
judge it to be false: and not withstanding, they observe this order, because
that herein all other writings fail us.

Other do count.xx. kings unto Sardanapalus, Sardanapalus.
who was the.xxxviii. king of Assiria. He was the most effeminate that ever was
borne: in such sort that he was always conversant among women, handling the
distafe and spindle, and he was so overwhelmed in pleasures and voluptuousnes
yt he scarsly did at any time show him self abroad. These doings of his were ye
cause that two of his lieutenants, Belochus of Babylon, Belochus. Arbaces.
and Arbaces of Medea did conspire against him, and after that they had openly
declared his filthiness and dilicatenes, they made war against him. He finally
presented himself in camp unwillingly with his effeminat company: but having
ye worst hand, he hastily retired into his palace, where after that he had
gathered a great heap of wood, The end of Sardanapalus.
he brunt him self with all his riches: whereby only (as one writes) he
declared him self a man.

These two Lieutenantes did afterward divide the Monarchy between them.
Belochus was king of Babylon, and Arbaces of the Medes and Persians.
Sardanapalus then was the last king of the Assirians according to the order
above mentioned, after that this Monarchy had continued M.CCC. years: for the
most part of the kings did live a very long time. Belochus, the.xxxix. or
else if it seem better the first king of Assiria in the new Monarchy,
Belochus the first king of Assiria in the new Monarche.
made Manahem king of Israel become tributarie unto him. The holy scriptures
does not call him Belochus, but Phul. His successor was Phull Assure, surnamed
Tiglath Pillesser: who wanne certayue towns of Judea and led the people
captive into Assiria. It is that Tiglath, whom Achas king of Judea (under
whom Esaias lived) prayed to succor him against the king of Siria, and unto
whom he sent presents.

Salmanasar succeeded him, Salmanasor.
who wanne the town of Samaria, after he had beseged it three years, and led
Hosea king of Israel, with the people, captive, and gave them a dwelling
place in his country, even in Medea, as ye holy scripture says: whereof some
have opinion that he reigned also over the Medes. Sennacherib followed after
him, Sennatherib.
who kept his dwelling in Nineue. He condemned king Ezechias in a great sum
of money: afterward he came and befeged Jerusalem with a mighty army, and by
the Ambassadors that he did send, he exhorted the people to yield and guye
over, and rayled on the kung, who hoped for succor at the hand of God. But he
remained not unpunished: for even in one night he lost an hundred four scour
and fine thousand men, that were killed by the Angel: the which God even a
little before had fyrmely promised by Esaias, unto Ezechias the king. And being
returned home from thence, he was murdered even of his own children,

Hitherto the Babilonians were subject to the Assirians, after the overthrow
of Sardanapalus: but after that Sennacherib (as it is said) was so evil
handled nere unto Jerusalem, and shortly slain of his children, things were
greatly changed, and the kingdom was divided. For the two brethren that had
done the murder Adramelech and Sarasar did fly, and yet not wythstandynge,
did put them selves in arms, Assaradon.
and made out their power against Assaradon their brother, who did usurp the
kingdom after the death of his father: for as much as before he did govern
the publyke weal in his fathers absence. Merodach lieutenant of Babylon
fyndyng this occasion fit for his purpose did rebel: Merodach
and after that he had by little and little partly by fair means, and partly by
threats, gotten unto him self the countries there about, he defied Assaradon,
and finally having vanquished him in the twelfth year of his raygne, he joined
the whole Empire of the Assirians unto the Babilonians, and raygned forty
years.

After him certain authors do place Benmerodach and Nabuchodonozor the first
of yt name: Benmerodach. Nabuchodonozor.
but for as much as ye holy scriptures make no mention of him, and seeing also we
ought not rashly to believe other writings, we will here place that
Nabuchodonozor (of whom the holy scripture so largely speaks) next after
Merodach. He then shortly after the beginning of his reign, made war against
the Egiptians, and took from them ye whole country which is from Euphrates
unto Pellusiu^. He laid tribute upon Ioachim king of Judea: and the.viii. year
of his reign he brought his son king Ieconias captive into Babylon, with the
chief lords and artificers not only of the city of Jerusalem, but also of the
whole country. The.xviii. year of his reign, after yt he had laid siege for
the space of two years before the city of Jerusalem, he took it, The wynning
of Jerusalem.
spoiled it and brunt it, he brake down the walls, and he led the most part of
the people away captive: he put out the eyes of king Zedechias, and slew his
children, with the princes. Jeremy did foreshew this misery, in the first year
of the reign of Nabuchodonozor, and from that time, is to be rekened the.lxx.
years of the captivity in Babylon.

About the.xxiiii. year of his Empire, after that Nabuchodonozor had vanquished
the kings of the Amonites and Moabites, he led his army into Egypt: and having
gotten the whole country, he afterward began his Monarche. The second year of
his said Monarche, as the learned men of our time do reckon, he saw in his
dream a merueylous great Image, whose head was of gold, his breast and arms
of silver, Nabuchodonozor saw a monstrous great image
his belly and thyghes were of brass, his legs were of iron, his fete partly
of iron, and partly of clay. Vho after he was awaked, because he had forgotten
his dream, and yet not withstandyng was greatly astonished therewith, he called
together all the sothsayers, and charmers, whom he commanded to declare unto
him what his dream was: the which if they did not, he threatened to put the^
to death. Daniel.
young Daniel (who was thither led captive with the residue from Jerusalem)
knowing this, he gave to understand that he could satisfy the kings desire:
who being presented, he first of all showed what the king had dreamed: then
afterward he declared what the dream did signify, saying that the image did
signify the four principal Empyres of the world, which should orderly follow
one after another. Herevppon he spoke on this manner unto the king, saying. Thou
truly art yt head of gold: thou (I say) whom God has endued with power and
majesty, unto whom he has given domination over all men, over all beasts of
the field, and over the fowls of the air. After thee shall arise another
kingdom of silver: that is to say, worse than this of thine. The third shall
be of Brass, which shall have domination far abroad. The fourth shall be
of Iron, for even as Iron bruseth and breaks all things: so shall that
fourth and last kingdom, beat down all the others, and shall make them
subject unto it. Behold then the first prophecy and never hard of before,
touching the four Empyres, the which God has reueyled unto us by Daniell: a
thing worthy to be perfectly prynted in memory, for as much as in few words
it comprehends the history of all times, even unto the end of the world, as I
will hereafter declare. It suffiseth for this time to know how that God only
from that time did declare unto us the order and mutations of kingdoms.

Nabuchodonozors power.
Now great Nabuchodonozars power was, it is more manifest out of that place of
Daniel, where the scripture compares him to a tree, whose heyght reaches unto
heaven, covering with his shadow the whole vniursall world, whose leaves are
excedyng fair, and fruit so pleasant that it was meat for all beasts, in
whose bows and branches all sorts of birds buylte their nestes and took
their rest. This then is the first Monarche, the which under this king was
greatly angmented and lyfted up in soueraygne dignity, on the contrary part
it took an end, and was altogether brought to ruin in his childrens
childrens time, as God had before showed by Daniell, and by other prophets,
Nabuchodogozor reigned.xliii. years. It is nedeful yt al men (but specially the
kings and princes) should attentively read and consider with what horrible and
monstrous example god punished his pride (as says Daniel) to the end that
they may have the majesty of god in reverence, and do their duty toward
the people committed unto their charge.

Euilmerodach Nabuchodonosors successor.
Euilinerodach his son followed after him, who reigned thirty years, and had
Assure for his successor, who reigned but three years: Labassarbach followed
after him, who kept the kingdom seven years. He being dead, Balthazar did
enjoy the Empire for five years. Certain do count them after this sort: but
the learned men of our time have these two, and place, next after
Euilmerodach, Balthazar his son: and they hold that he reigned fourtene
years. The which truly is necessary that it should so be, for to furnishe the
number of three score and ten years, during the which ye people of Judea were
captives amongst the Babilonians: especially seeing that the beginning of this
captinitie is counted from the nyntenth year of Nabuchodonosors reign. They
yt follow this order of reckning, and let pass those two kings before
mentioned, do cleave unto the holy scripture, but chiefly unto the testimonye
of Jeremy, who did prophecy, that ye Jews should serve the king of Babylon,
his son, and his sons son. But it is fre for every man to judge herein,
as they shall think good. Notwithstanding so it is, that Balthazar, according
to ye holy scripture, was the last Emperor of Babylon, Balthazar the last
Emperor of Babilo^.
and every one do agree therein. Diverse do write after what fort Babylon was
taken: but Daniel makes mention, how yt god did foreshewe unto the king ye
calamity which did not only threaten him, but eue^ already did assalt him:
and says yt the principal part of ye Empire was transterred to Daryus of
Medea, Darius.
being then. LXII. years old. The Historiographers do call this Daryus,
Cyaxares, and he was the son of Astiages, ye eight king of the Medes, whom
Daniell does call Assuerus who having never a son, Assuerus.
gave his daughter un to Cyrus of Persia, his systers son: and being
afterward assaulted by the king of the Assyrians, Cyrus.
he required Cyrus to succor him. Who after yt he was arrived with his army,
and chosen chief Captain of the host, he prosperously behaved himself in his
charge: for he wanne the most mighty City of Babylon. After this victory
Darius is not found to have lived passing one year: and yet then when Daryus
lived, after the taking of the City, and yt the people of Israel had been
almost. LXX. years Captive in Babylon, God reueiled to Daniel things of much
more importance as he prayed and red with diligence the prophecye of Ieremye,
the foreshewer of that Captiuitye. For he did not only assure him of the
delyuerance which was at hand, but also did show unto him in what time the
Messyas (who should make satysfaction for the fynnes of the world) should
come. Daryus veynge dead, the Empire came into the hands of Cyrus: and this
is the beginning of an other Monarchye. For Cyrus only did enjoy the
countries of Assyria, Media, and of Persya, even unto the sea of Ionia, as
Thucydides says: moreover also before the taking of Babylon he did take
Cresus prisoner in battle, the most mighty King of Lidia. The second
Monarchy of Persia.
Cyrus then is the first King of Persya, and the begynner of the second
Monarchye having vainquyshed the Babilonians, he made war against the
Scithians, and went even himself with his army to meet them: where he, a
most worthy prince, The death of Cyrus.
was cyrcumuented by layinge of wait, and being taken was killed. In the
beginning of his reygne after he had taken Babylon, he perinytted the people of
Judea which were Captives, to return into their country, and there to build
again the temple and the City of Jerusalem: for the accomplishing whereof he
commanded to give liberally toward the expenses. God had exprestye
foreshewed these things namely by Esaye, certain hundred years, before yt
ever he was borne. Xenophon does allege the same in disputing, before his
death in the presence of his children, of ye immortality of the soul, as it
is recitited in Cicero, who has eloquently translated yt place, as also al
others. Cyrus lived unto the age of three score and ten years, he reigned
thyrtye years, for he was fortye when he came to the crown. Cambyses the
son of Cyrus.
He had a son named Cambyses, who^ he made governor of ye kingdom, when he
took his journey for to go and make war against the Scithians. He in the
absence of his father (who was greatly incombered) conquired Egipte: being
truly an expert warriar, but otherwise vicious, and retayning none of his
fathers virtues. Amongst al other his dishonest, shameless, and cruel acts, he
caused his brother traitorously to be slain. Plato says in the books which
he writ concerning laws, The sons of Cyrus were ill instructed.
that Cyrus erred greatly, in that that he made his children to be delicatly
brought up amongst women: whereof came to pass that they being waxed great,
and being corrupted by flatterers (forasmuch) as diverse did seek nothing else
but to please them) they sought to slaye one an other after their fathers
decease, Darius the third king of Persia.
Darius the son of Histaspos succeeded Cambises the second king of Persia,
who had reigned but a while after his father. And for because after the death
of Cyrus, and after that his army was so greatly overthrown, certain people,
and amongst them the Bavilonians, did refuse to be subject to the Persians as soon as he came to the crown he put himself in arms, and did again bring
them under his Empire, having (after long seige) taken Babylon, by the means
of Zopirus. After that, he took upon him to make war against ye Athenians: who
not waiting for ye help of ye Lacedaemonians, did out of hand gather an host
of men to the number of ten thousand: by the which host of men under the
conduction of Miltiades they did overthrow that his great army in the place
called Marathon. Darius overthrown by the Athenians


Darius thought to renew again his army: Xerres the fourth Emperor.
but he died in that enterprise: and Xerxes his son was his successor:
who.x. years after the said iournye of Marathon (as Thucidides writes) went
into Grecia with an innumerable army, to bring it under his subjection.
Wherefore with one common consent the government and principal charge was
given unto the Lacedaemonians, who were then the most mightiest of all Grecia.
But the Athenians following the counsel of Themistocles, did leave their City,
and having carried their wives and children hither and thither, they took
shipping, and they did overcome the enemy nere the I Will of Salamis. Xerxes
overthrown by the Grecians.
This victory did save the country of Grecia: for Xerxes being also
discomfited by land, he did fly vilanously and vnprosperously homewardes. The
Grecians also did return after his departure, except the Athenians: for having
in army about a. C.C.C.C. vessels, they sailed further, and gyuing the
assault wo^ne the town of Sestes in Hellespontus, which the Persians did
before keep: and after that they had wintered there, tourninge homeward unto
their country, they gathered together their wives and children, and did build
again ye walls of their City which was taken and brunt by the enemy, and
they did fortify ye port. Cicero writes that this war of the Persians, The
war of the Persians.
or as Thucidides calls it, of the Medes, fell almost in the self same time
that that of ye Volsciens did: wherein was Coriolanus, that was bannished from
Rome.

This fell in the year of the foundation of Rome. CCLXVI. Herodotus which was
before Thucidides did discribe this war of the Persyans. Cicero does call him
the father of Historyes but he says that he was filled with innumerable
fables. The Lacedaemonians being displeased with this fortifycation of their
City, they (for because they cold do nothing else) did only grudge there
against. Since that time, both they and the other Grecians, with the Athenians
ioynynge together their power, took Cypria and the town of Bizance, which
before the Persyans did keep. There was then amongst the other Dukes of the
Lacedaemonians, Pausanias, who being convicted of treason, after his return
homeward, and being fled to a certain place of Freedom, he was there
constrained to dye for hunger, Themistoles being accused of the like crime, did
fly. From that time after the Grecians were tourmented with sundry and diverse
wars and dissentions, partly cyuill, and partlye foreign, the which
Thucydides does lyghtlye touch. But fynallye fyftye years after the departure
of Xerxes out of Grecya Cicero (according to Thucydides) says that, that
war was greatly enflamed, The Peloponnicall War against the Athenians.
at such time as the whole country of the Peloponesyans did conspyre against
the Athenyans: of whom Perycles, the Discyple of Anaxagoras the Philosopher,
was principal Captain in that war. Aristophanes speaks of him, saying,
that he in making his oration, did kyndell, set a fire, and bourne, Pericles.
the whole country of Grecia. For then they were both masters of virtues and
of Eloquence. On the other side Archydamus, the King of the Lacedaemonians, had
the pryncipall government. Thucydides was the compaynion of Pericles, and he
sought narrowlye to follow his doings: whoo also did put this war in
writting: Pericles being chosen pretour had for his Adherante Sophocles a
Tragian poet, as Cicero does declare.

Let us now return unto Xerxes. He having so ill handled his affairs, fell
into such a contempt, Artaxerxes longhand the 5. Emperor. Darius the
bastrard the syxte.
that he was slain of his own men. His son Artaxarxes long hand succeeded
him, toward whom Themistocles (of who^ we have spoken a little before) being
bannished did return, and there finished his life, and was buried in Magnesie.
Darius the Bastard reigned after longhand, whose sister he had in marriage. The
a boue said war of the Peloponesians fell during his raygne, and albeit that
the Athenians had already enough to do: yet nevertheless the fourth year of
this war they sent an army by Sea unto Sycilia, faynynge to help the
Leontins against the Saragossens: but of truth, it was for nothing else then to
assubiecte that I Will under them: the which if they did, they might the better
vainquishe all Grecia.

But as they did often times come and skermishe against them, Hermocrates
Siracusanus, counceiled the Sicilians to agree amongst themselves, and to
forget all ill will and inimites, consydering that the Athenians sought to
bring them al to subjection: so then he persuaded them in the seventh year of
this war. Three years after the Athenians and the Peloponesiens made peace
for fifty years: but it lasted not seven whole years. For they began to make
diverse manful skermishes. And albeit that ye treatise of peace was not
altogether broken, and that often times the offenses were appaised by Truce:
nevertheless in ye tenth year they did put themselves in arms again and fought
outrageously with all their strength and power: and this other war lasted
seue^tene years. Then the Athenians did again send a navy very well
appointed unto Sicilia. The chief captains amongst the residue, were
Alcibiades and Nicias: Alcibiades. Nicias.
of whom the last (to wite Nicias) did by certain orations greatly dissuade ye
people, from that sailing, against the will of Alcibiades. The Peloponesians
did give succor to the Sicilians: at length the Athenians joined battle with
the enemies in the heaven of Sarrogosa: The overthrow of ye Athenians in
Sicilia
but after diverse varieties, and sondrie changes of fortune, they were al
overthrown and slain. As this was doing the Lacedaemonians with their
Confederats did join themselves in league with Darius the King of the
Persians, against the Athenians. Tissaphernes was the Ambassador of Darius.
Moreover, after Codrus, Polydore the Lacedemonian, and Aristomenes of Messene,
these that follow of whom some of them did diverse notable acts in the defense
of the whole country of Grecia, other some also in the defense of their own
native country are commonly numbered amongst the principal and most notable
Captains of the Grecians.

The excellent captens of Grecia.
To wit, Miltiades, Leonidas, Themistocles, Pericles, Aristides, Pausanias,
Xantippus, Leotychidas, Cimon, Conon, Epaminondas, Leosthenes, Aratus of
Clarentia, Philopemen. Diverse of these were exiled and banished. Cicero does
describe the haven of Sarrogosa, and he says that it was never heard of that
ever any navy by sea did enter therein by force of arms, except that of the
Athenians, which was to the number of three hundred ships, and was destroyed
in the same haven, by the nature of the same place and haven: which was the
cause that even then first of all the strength and power of the town were
overthrown and broken down, so that their nobleness, empire, and glory
peryshed in the sea. Thucydides says that Sicilia is in compass as much as a
great ship can sail round about in.viii. days, and that it is twenty
furlonges distant from sure and firm ground.

Artaxarxes the. 7.
Darius had two sons, Artaxerxes Mnemon, and Cyrus: of whom the first
succeeded his father after his death: Cyrus had to his dominion and government,
Ionia and Lydia.

But he not content with that which he kept, he made war against the king his
brother, wherein he had the overthrow and was slain. Marcus Portius Cato, does
call this latter Cyrus king of Persia, and (as it is written in Cicero)
excellent both in wit and in noblenes of Empire, and following also Xenophons
writing, he praises him for the care and diligence that he took in husbandrye.
For Xenophon put himself in arms for him, and he was his very familier: which
was cause that afterward the Athenia^s, whose friend Mnemon was, did banyshe
him the country. Ochus reigned after Mnemon: who was the last of Darius three
sons. Ochus. 8. Darius. 9. and ye last.
Darius the last followed him: against whom Alexander the son of Philippe
king of the Macedonians made war, and being come by force of arms into
Asia, after he had taken the town of Thebes, and pacified Grecia. He wanne
three battayles of Darius, in such sort that he drew so nere, that he took his
mother and his wife, and his children. Darius truly did offer him fair
offers, yea a part of his Empire, even unto the river of Euphrates: But
alexander did reject them and cessed not till he had altogether vanquished him.
The victories of Alexander against Darius.
For Darius seeing that it was not possible for him to obtain peace under these
conditions, he did gather a most mighty army for to offer the third battle,
in the which he was clean overthrown and murdered of his own Souldyours in
flyinge: and strayghte ways after him the kingdom of Persia, which had
endured two hundred years and upwards, was plucked up by the roots. By these
noble victories, Alexander brought under his obedience almost all the East
country, and did tranferre the dignity of the Empire of Asia into Europa, so
that he did constitute the third Monarche. Alexander ye beginner of the third
Monarchye.
After that also he made war against the Indians, but he could not
moderatelye bear so great advancement and clemencye of Fortune (such is the
infirmitye of men:) And therefore as he did many things insolently, and would
almost be worshypped as a GOD: he being arrived at Babylon dyed of an ague, or
as others say, of poison when he was thyrty years old, and had raygned twelve
years. Calanus Indus (as Cicero says) did foreshew him the end of his life.
For even as he was ready to cast him self into a burning fire, and that
Alexander did ask him if he had any thing to say. All goes very well
(says he) I shall see thee shortelye.

And shortly after Alexander dyed. His discease is referred to the hundredth
and fourtene Olympiades: and to the four hundredth and nine and twentye year of
the foundation of Rome: Three hundredth and two and twenty year before the
nativity of Christ. He was a fervent great lover of good letters, Alexander a
lover of good letters.
and very liberal toward the learned men: For the cause whereof, he has
been greatly praised of diverse.

He had the poesy of Homere in great dilectation: In such sort, that albeit
that he had with him (as it is said) diverse that did write his acts, not
withandynge when he came into Sigia, standing by Achiles tomb, O thou happy
young man (says he) that have found Homere for to write and magnify thy
virtue. For even as he would chiefly be painted by Apelles, and his Image to
be graven by Lisippus, so in like manner he would be praised and commended to
the remembrance of his posterity by them, who in praysyng him might obtain
honor and fame for the excellentnes of their spirit. He gave Aristotle his
master charge, to put in wryfyng the nature of all beasts. And to this end he
appointed certain thousands of men throughout all Grecia and Asia: to wit,
unto Heard kepers, Hunters, Fishers, Marchaunts of fish, Byrdcatchers and such
like, who should plainly inform him of all things. It is said moreover that
he gave the said Aristotle in recompense of his pain eight hundred talents,
which amount according to ye reckenyng of the learned men of our time, The
liberality of Alexander toward learned men.
to CCCC. LXXX. thousand crowns courrant. He sent to Xenocrates the
Philosopher by his Ambassadors fifty talentes, which amounts to xxx.
thousand crowns: but he refusing them said that he had no need of so great a
sum, the Ambassadors being returned, what (said Alexder) has he no friends
for to do him pleasure? Cicero says that in his youth, when he was the
disciple of Aristotle, he declared him self to be of a very good spirit, and
to be greatly modest: but after he was made king, he behaved himself proudly,
cruelly, and altogether vnmoderatly.

The Historiographers do mention merueylous things of the magnificence,
dilicatnes and superfluity of Darius. The superfluity of Darius.
For to ye end yt his body should want no voluptousnes, he had in his camp
expert Cokes yt could dress all manner of meats, and make all manner of
dilicates, with makers of oyntmentes. Diverse also have described how great the
magnificence and preparations of the kings of Persia was, in their ordinary
eating and drynkyng. Their custom was (as Cicero says) to have many wives,
unto whom they did bequeth certain cities, to the end that the one might
furnyshe their head tyer, others such and such an ornament. Such therefore, as
I have said, was Darius end: and in flying, when he had drunk troubled water,
and which was infected with dead men's bodies, he affirmed that in his life time
he never drank more sweter drink, Darius end
for he did never absteyne so long from drink that he could be dry.

After the death of Alexander, this great Empire was divided amongst his
chyefe Lords: To wit, Ptolomeus, Laomedon, Antigonus, Cassander, Leonatus,
Eumene, Python, The successors of Alexander.
Lysimachus, Antipater, Meleager, and Seleucus. Amongst them, the pryncipall
was Seleucus king of Assiria, Ptolomeus of Egypt, Antigonus of Asia the less,
Cassander after ye he had oppressed all Alexanders kynsfolkes, was since made
king of Macedonia and of Grecia.

Lysimachus is he with whom Alexander being on a certain time angrye,
Lysimacus.
did cause him to be shut up with a Lion: But understanding that he had
killed the said Beast, he had him afterward in great honor and estimation.
Furthermore, great wars were moved as well amongst the said successors (the
which does commonly happen) as also amongst their sons, and their sons
sons, for as much as these outrageous Spirits, could not for ambition,
keep them selves in Peace, but did seek to increase their powers in doing
others wrong.

By these wars, which remained a long while, The beginning of the fourth
Monarchy.
all these countries were greatly spoiled, so that by little and little, they
fell into the Romans hands: who enlarged so their dominion, that they
established the fourth and last Monarche: Of the which at this present it is
requisitte we should entreat of.

Now, amongst the Kings of Egypt, Alexanders successors, Ptolomeus
Philadelphus the father of good letters.
Ptolomeus Philadelphus, a Prince of great name is also numbered. For he loved
peace as much as was possible for him, and he did stir up and awaken the
liberal Arts, and instituted rewards and gifts for the same, and caused a
large and a great Librarye to be made: so that also he caused the Books of
Moses and of the Prophets, to be translated into the Greek tongue.

The beginning of Rome was at that time as the King Salmanasar (of whom it
has been spoken) did raygne over the Assyrians. The time in which Rome was
builte.
To wit, in the first year of the seventh Olympiades, according to
Plutarchus: the three thousand, two hundredth and twelve year, about four
hundredth years after that Eneas had begone to raygne over the Romans, after
the war of Troy, which Homere did describe: of the age of whom, The war
of Troy.
no moore then of the Country, we find nothing mentioned of any certentye,
except that Cicero says, The age of Homer uncertain.
that he was long time before the foundation of Rome, and before Romulus. How
be it, so it is, that there remains no profane Writer moore ancient then
his Poesy: For as Horatius says:

Before the time of strong Agamemnon
Many were of virtues and of renown:
But all vnwaylde were shut up in the night,
For want of a Poet for their light.
The beginning of the Romans.
Cicero is of the same opinion, and says that no mention is found of any
Orator before Homere. The original of the Romayne people was small and
contemptible: But for because that GOD had so ordained it (as it shall
hereafter be declared) it became merueilous great.

In the beginning seven kings did ragyne there for the space of two hundred
fourtye and four years. The first government at Rome.
Cicero writes that Solon and Pisistratus, lived in Athens in the time of
Seruius Tullus the sixte king: and that Pythagoras flourished in Italy at such
time as Tarquin the proud was put to flight. He says moreover yt in the
raygne of Seruius Tullus the city of Athens had endured already seven hundred
years. The kings being put down, the government was given unto two
Consulles, Two Consuls govern
whose office did last but one year. L. Iunius Brutus the chief Consul, was
as vigilant and constant to keep and preserve the liberty being gotten, as
ever he was desirous and prompte to put down the kings and to establish ye
redom. For when his two sons Titus and Tiberius did consult wit other young
Roman gentlemen, for to reestablishe the Tarquins, their enterprise being
disclosed by some counsel breaker, he caused them openly to be beheaded. He
displaced Tarquiin Coleatin his fellow in office: who also was companion in
putting down the kings, and to the bryngyng of the enterprises to pass.
Cicero does defend this act as just, and affirms yt it was both for the
utility and honesty of the country that the name of the Terquins should be
abolyshed and the memory of the kingdom wyped out.

The Fabiens slauter.
Now, amongst the sundry fortunes of the Roman people, when the whole
Tuscane had conspired, three hundred of the house of the Fabiens being gone
furthe of Rome against the enemy, were al slain and cut in pieses, none
remaining, save one little child, who since renewed the familye. This came to
pass three and thirtye years after the kings were put down. Three hundredth
years after the foundation of the City, because of the tumultes and
conspiraties that were in the public weal, ambassadors were sent into
Grecia, for to bring laws from thence, which the City should use from thence
forth. At whose return the state of the public weal was changed and ten
men were chosen to have the supreme government: Ten me^ elected to be
supreme governors.
but this estate endured not fullye three years. For Appius Claudius, the one of
these ten, coveting wickedly to rauishe a young damsel 01 the daughter of L.
Virginius citezen of Rome he gave the people occasyon to abolishe the whole
order of them. The wicked cupiditie of Appius Claudius.
Wherefore the government came again to consuls: but this also lasted but a
little time, for they did creat Tribunes of soldiers giving them such power
as the Consuls had, The third mutatio^ of ye Romain Policy.
but these were displaced at the years end, and did again give place to the
Consuls.

In that time which was the three hundredth and fyften year of the age of the
City, L. Quintus Cincinatus, caused Spurius Melius, Melius slain for his
ambition.
to be slain of C. Seruilius Hala ye master of Horses, because that he by the
means of distributing of certain corn, did seek to make him self king in
the City his house also was rooted up. Two years after the government
returned to the Tribnus of soldiers, who since were no more elected two, but
diverse together, according as it pleased the people, and as the state of the
public weal did require. This government did enduer nere hand three score
and ten years: and amongst the resydue, M. Furius Camillus was excellent in
this estate, Camillus surmunted all other in virtue.
and surmounte all others in virtue. After he had done good service to the
common wealth, was va^nished through the ingratitude of the Citezens, having
been already four times Tribun. But shortly after he was reestablished in his
dignitye, for delivering the City of Rome being taken from the French
Senoniens, whom he put to flyghte two years after, being made Dictator, few
years after, M. Manlius, who did defend the Capitell, from the French men, was
exhibited the dominion of the rock called Tarpeius, for suspicion that he
would get the kingdom to himself: and hereupon a decree was made, that from
thence forth after no noble man of the house of the Manlius should be called
Marcus. Camillus was sense chosen for ye seventh time Tribune of soldiers:
and he dyed of a very great age, three hundredth four score and nine years
after the foundation of the City, and one year before the government and
care of the publyke weal was taken from the Tribunes and restored to the
Consuls: of whom then only one was of the common sort. The excellent
captains of Rome.


That age had syngular notable Captains in the City of Rome: To wit M.
Valerius Coruinus, T. Manlius Torquatus, C. Martius Rutilius, P. Decius Mus,
Papyrius Cursor, Publius Philo, L. Voluminous, and others. Amongst these here
named T. Manlius Torquatus Consul caused his sons head (albeit he had gotten
the victory) to be stricken of, because he had, against the law and out of
his order, foghten hand to hand against ye enemy, P. Decius Mus, in the
battle against the Latins, vowed himself to dye for the army of the Roman
people: and passing through the thickest of the enemies, he was slain:
wherewith the Romans being already enflamed did again encourage themselves,
and got the vpperhand. His son who bare the self same name, and was also
Consul, did even the like four and fortye years after: in the battle which
the Romans had against the French Senoniens. In the time above said,
which was four hundredth and twenty years after the foundatyon of Rome,
Alexander the great, the beginner of the third Monarchye, did floryshe and
went a warrefare, Papyrius Cursor.
it has been said. Titus Liuius compares L. Papyrius Cursor with him and
making a certain traityes for to recreate as well his spyrite as the readers,
he showed that amongst others he could resyste Alexander, if paraduenture
after he had assubiected the country of Asya he would pass through Europa
with his army for to make war against the Romans.

The said Papyrius was a man greatly virtuous for (ouermitting his other acts)
when T. Verturius Caluinus, and Spurius Posthumous Albinus, Consuls, wear,
with the whole army put under subjection by the Samnites in the straightes
of Candines, A place in Italy so called.
and had vnhonnestly agreed with the enemy, he being made Consul, he put them
to flight and wanne ye victory. Sense being Dictator, he declared upon the
master of his Horses, how narrowly the discipline of warfaire ought to be kept
and executed. Socrates ye fountain of Philosophi.
This age and the former did bring forth in Grecia most learned men. For
Socrates did then florishe. Of whom, as out of a fountain, proceeded
Aristippus, Plato Antisthenes, Speusippus, Aristotels, Dicearchus, Xenocrates,
Heraclides, Thophrastus, Polemo, and Strato, who were all physicians, and
according to the saying of Cicero, contemplators and searchers out of nature.
There was also orators of great fame, as Gorgias, Protagoras, Prodicus,
Hippias, Isocrates, Lisias, Demosthenes, Hiperides, Aeschines, Phalereus,
Demetrius, Demochares. But of the Historiographers, Xenophon whom Cicero does
call Socraticus, and Calisthenes the compaynion of Alexander ye great, were the
chiefest. Denis the tyrante of Saragosse lived at that time: unto whom Plato
being come, and having freely spoken of the duty of a prince, he was in very
great danger of his life as Cicero recites. The acts of Denis ye Tirante.
This is he who did not commit the sauegard of his body to his kinsfolks,
but unto cruel and barbarous men gathered here and there: who taught his
daughtours to shave for fear of putting his neck in ye barbers hands: who
took from them the handling of Iron, and steelle when they were come to age,
and taught the^ to bourne away his bearde and his hear with nuttes shells:
who came not in the night to his women, before that he had sought and searched
through out: who forasmuch as he durst not propound his oration in the
ordinary feats and skaffoldes, he did the same from out of a tower: who
declared unto Damocles the flatterer, what was his felicity, which he did
esteem so greatly when he caused him to sytte at his table, where wanted no
manner of delicates, and where was excessive abondance of all things, and yet
in the mean time he caused a sword to desce^d from out of a planke, or beam,
right over his head holding only but by the hear of an horses tail.

Pyrrhus against the Romans.
About two and forty years after the death of Alexander, Pyrrhus King of the
Epirotes made war against ye Romans, and went into Italy. The second year
of the war, he solicited ye Senate to enter into a certain traities of peace
and alliance: but Appius Claudius, being of a very great age and blind, who
before seuentene years was twice Consul (as Cicero says) he came in
Parliament, and did dissuade the Senate (other wise inclyned thereto) to agree or
make peace with him, for he was of so great a courage, that for his misfortune
he did not leave of from doing all endeavor both privately and publicly. The
oration that he made concerning Pirrhus, for to hinder the peace, was found yet
in Ciceros time, as 1 he himself witnesses C. Fabricius Luscinus did good
service then to ye public weal. The faythfullnes of Fabricius.
Who being solicited of Pyrrhus for to rebel, did nothing regard his great
presents nor promises. Moreover he sent again unto him prisoner a certain
Fugitive, who did assure him to poiso^ the king. Cicero does compare him to
Aristides of Athens. Manius Curious Dentatus did altogether overthrow Pirrhus
at his second return into Italye, and triumphed over him. Pirrhus was the
first ye did ever bring Elephantes into Lucania. The Romans hitherto, almost
for five hundredth years space did only make war with ye people of Italy
amongst whom the Latins, Veientes, Eques, Falisques, Samnites and the Toscanes
did stoutly resyst, and did often times rebel: being sometimes vanquished, and
sometimes getting the victory: who finally being overcome and pacifyed, there
brust forth a long and great war against the Carthagians, whose City was
much more ancient then Rome, The first war of Carthage.
as it is most evident.

This war began amongst them in the year of Rome four hundred four
score and five in the which the fortune of M. Attilius Regulus is worthy of
Memory. For he being taken of the Carthagians, and sent to Rome for to treat
for peace and for the change of prisoners, upon charge and condition, that if
he did obtain nothing he should render himself again prisoner: after he was
thither arrived, An act worthy of Memory.
he gave clean contrary counsel to the Senate, and declared that it was not
for the prosite of the publyke weal so to do. Afterward following his
opinion, that faith ought to be kept even unto the enemy, The cruel death of
Attilius Regulus.
he returned unto Carthage, where he was put to death after the most
cruellest manner in the world: for they did cut of his eye liddes: and being
bound to an ingine, he was killed with ouerwakyng. During this war the
Romans at the first did fight luckelye by sea in Sicilia against Hanno,
under the conduction of Plubius Duillius, Consul.

This Duillius, and Manius Curious, Excellent consulls.
C. Fabricius Attilius Calatinus, Cuee and publius Scipiones, Aphricanus, with
Marcellus and Fabius are named of Cicero amongst the excellent Captains of
Rome. The year following, L. Cornelius Scipio did take the Illes of Corsica, and
of Sardinia. This war of Affricke (which had endured twenty and three years)
was pacifyed under Quintus Luctatius, Catule Circus and Auleus Manlius,
Consulls. Two years after Ennius was borne, whoo was five years elder then
Marcus Portius Cato, whom he did call his familier friend. The Romaius wear
then again occupied with neewe wars against the Faliscyans, Geneneens,
Sclauoniens, French men, them of Bauiers, and the Lombardes.

The second war of Carthage.
Who being vaynquished, there bruste forth another war of the Carthagiens,
four and twenty years after ye peace was made, under P. Scipio and Titus
Sempronius Longus Consuls. Haniball was the head captain, who assaulted the
town of Sagonte: and passing through Spain into France, and from thence into
Italy, he wanne three battles one after another against the Romans. The
first at Ticinum, A City in lumbardy called now Pauia. Quintus Fabius a most
prudent Captain.
the other at the floode of Trebia, the third at the lake Trasimenus. But
Quintus Fabius being made dictator, and going to mete the enemy, he by his
lingering did stop and break his violence and inuasyon. It is he in the
praise of whom Ennius writes.

One man by his slackinge only
Restorde us the thing intierly.
Cicero does Judge him to be of a very subtle mind, and that he could easily
concele, hold his peace, disemble, spy out and prevent the enterprises of
enemies. Since, the Romain people did receive a great overthrow in the place
called Cannes: the which gave such occasion of fear to the City, that diverse
of the chiefest were minded to forsake it and to fly away. But they were
comforted and kept back by P. Cornelius Scipio, the son of Publius,
Archimedes excellent in Algorisme music, and Geometry, and Astro nomie.
a very hardye and manfull young man, who was then but going into xxv. years.
Four years after M. Marcellus did win the town of Saragosse, after long
seyge. Archimedes, an excellent Mathematicion, was killed in ye assaulting of
the town: who making certain fygures in the dust, did nothing doubt of the
taking of the country. Marcellus was greatly wrath at his death, when he
understood it: and commanded to bury him. As concerning the town, he did not
only leave it whole and sound (as Cicero says) but also in such sort
decked, that it might have been a perpetual monument of his victory,
gentleness and clemency. And likewise he says, that in the victory of
Marcellus there was not so many men slain, as there were gooddes spoiled at
the coming of Verres Praetor into the said Cyty. But Titus Liuius says yt it
was a very pituous thing to see the villainies that were there committed by
anger, envy, and covetousness. A hundred, thyrtie and seven years after, Cicero
being Treasurour of Sicilia, Cicero treasurour of Sicilia.
did show Archimedes sepulcher unto the Senate of Saragosse, the which he
knew by a certain description, all be it, that it was altogether ruinated and
so covered with Briers and Thorns, that even they of the City knew not where
it was. The said Cicero says, that the town of Sarragosse is the greatest
and fairest of all the towns of Grecia, and is compacte and made of four
great towns: of the I Will, where the fountain of Arethusia is full of fish: of
Acradina; where is the market place, and the covered Galleries, with the
Palaice or Parliament house: of Tyche, where the temple of Fortune is: of the
new town, which was last of all buylte, and it has a very large Theater.

Now amongst all other nations the country of Sicilia did first of all
incline unto the amity and loyalty of the Romans: Sicilia the first
province.
and was the first that was named a Province, as witnesses the said Cicero.
After the victory of Cannes, Hanniball took all Campania, which yielded unto
him. His army also wyntered at Capua, where it was effe minated and corrupted
through the abundance and superfluity of all things. Superfluity and
wantonness unprofitable in an army.
Three years after the taking of Sarrogosse, Capua was given to the Romans by
composition. There was great and long deliberation, for to know whether the
town should be rased: but finally, it was concluded that it should be kept.
Not withstanding for to take from them all means for ever of rebellion, their
territory was taken from them, and al office and Senate with the publyke
counsel.

To be short they had no form of a publyke weal left them: but it was
ordained that the town should serve as a berne, and place for to hold and
house the fruit of the whole territory there about, and for to lodge the
laborers. Two years after, The overthrow of Asdruball.
Asdruball brought fresh soldiers into Italy to the succor of Hanniball,
but he was overthrown near the flood called Metaurus, by the consulles M.
Liuius Salinator, and C. Claudius Nero. In the mean time, P. Cornelius Scipio,
of whom mention has been made, prospered luckely in Spaygne, albeit that his
father and his uncle had been there slain. And after that he had recovered the
whole Province, returned to Rome, where he was chosen consul. He required
that the country of Affricke might be assigned him for to make war there.

But Q. Fabius Maximus, being of a great age did sharply withstand him, and
was of opinion that it behooved not to go into Affricke, but that it was mete
and convenient to make war with Hanniball. Scipio was of a contrary opinion,
because that if they did make war against the Carthagians in their country,
they should be forced to call again Hanniball from Italy, as he upon whom
lay all their help and succor.

After long strife the Senate assigned Sicilia unto Scipio, and did permit
him to take the spoil of Affricke, if it were for the commodity of the
publyke weal.

He then took his journey from Sicilia unto Affricke: and did prove by effect
that which he had before forshewed unto the Senate. For the Carthagians having
lost certain battayls against him, and being greatly endomaged, The victory of
Scipio (...) Affricke.
did call again Hanniball. So that by this means, he who for sixtene years
space, had not ceased to hunt through Italy, who also had encamped his army
nere the walls of the city of Rome, was constrained (albeit, it was soore
against his will) to retire homewarde to his country. Finallye, Scipio wan a
great battle of him: who afterward by the will of the Senate, made peace
with the enemy: herevppon the surname of Affricus was given unto him.

But here to be considered, from how great troubles the Romans were
delivered: for even already by the space of certain years, all their fortune
hunge by a very small threde: but it was before predestined that they should
come to an end of all violence and calamity, and should be Lords of the
world. The which (as some say) Hanniball did foresee, when his brother
Asdruball was vanquished. Horatius recites his very words which he then
said, in the verse by the which he prayseth Drusus and his family. And for
because that the said Verse is most learned and elegant, it does well deserve
that the youth should learn the same by heart. The peace being concluded with
the Carthagiens, besides the other wars wherewith the Romans were incombred
to wit, in Italy, Istria, and Portingale, they made another great war also
against Philippus king of Macedonia, War against Philip of Macedonia.
who had afflicted and oppressed the country of Grecia. Titus Quintus
Flaminius was the chief captain of this war: who after the overthrow of the
enemy, reestablished the country of Grecia in her liberty, by the
consentinge of the Senate. And amongst all other articles, he charged king
Philip, not to go a warfare without the limits of Macedonia, unless he had
permission of the Senate. This war ended, Another war against Antiochus king
of Syria.
another followed it, against Antiochus king of Siria: Who being passed into
Europa, was overcome by M. Galabrio, and driuer out of Grecia. For the
accomplishing whereof, the above said Philip king of Macedonia did give succor
to the Romans. These kings of Asia, of Syria, and of Macedonia, did descend
of them who after the death of Alexander the great did divide amongst them the
Provinces, as it has been said. For after that Carthage was pacified and, all
Italye brought under the subjection of the Romans, The great authority of the
romain^
and that they had also conquered the other countries of Europa more nearer,
both by Sea and by land: they were grown to such power, that even the Kings
and the peoples far of did crave succor and help of them: Which amongst
others, the Egiptians did. For because that their King Ptolemeus Epiphanes,
being then but of few years, was not apt to the government of the publyke
weal, and for that they stood in great fear of Antiochus: they sent
Ambassadors to Rome, by whom they did desyer the Senate to take the little
king into their safeguard. This being agreed upon, the Senate did will Antiochus
not to meddle or make with Egypt. Whereat he being displeased (especially
because that Hanniball the fugitive, did incite him as much as was possible,
Antiochus vanquished and spoiled.
to make war) he sailed into Grecia with his army: where he was overthrown
as we have before said. After that, the Romans made a new army by Sea, for
to follow and pursue him: and being sailed into Asia, they did vanquishe and
get a great Battle of him and did put him to flight from beyond the
mount of Taurus.

After his overthrow he was wont to say (as Cicero recites) that the Roman
people had done him a great pleasure, in easynge him from over great charge,
and in leaving him so straight limittes of his country. L. Cornelius Scipio
the brother of P. Scipio Affricanus did conduct this war: who for this cause
was surnamed Asiaticus. Shortly after M. Fuluius, surnamed Nobilior, did subdue
the Etolians, and triumphed over them. And when P. Scipio Affricanus (who in
that war had been lieutenant for his brother) was returned to Rome, the
Tribunes of the people began to trouble and torment him. Wherefore he
departed from thence and went into Laterne to his Town: and there as certain
say this noble man dyed, being nine and forty years old, The death of Pub.
Scipio.
no younger nor elder then M. Portius Cato. Cicero in the Dialogue which he
wrote of old age, does introduct Cato, and speaks louyngly and honorablye of
the age of them both, and of their studyes. But above all he magnifieth the
greatness of courage that was in Scipio. Titus Liuius says that Cato did bear
him envy, and that he used to take this his fortune and prosperity in evil
part. Cato envious against Scipio.
Cicero affirms that he was prompt and quick in all his affairs. In that
time floryshed Ennius Plautus, and Nenius, Poets.

Antiochus being overthrown, Hanniball did fly unto Prusias king of
Bithinia. And for because that the Romans did require that he should be
rendered unto them, Hanniball poysoneth him self.
he droncke poison, and so killed him self.

Antiochus the noble succeaded this Antiochus: He also did deliberate to get
the kingdom of Egypt, for as much as he was the Uncle of Ptolomeus
Philometor, King of Egypt: who being yet but a child, had succeaded his
father deceassed. Wherefore he declared him self to be his Protector,
minding by this means to oppress him, and to take to him self the chyefe
dignity. But his enterpryses being known, the Romans (whom the Egyptians
had again solicited to succor them) did hasten to send C. Popilius Lenas in
Embassage. Who being comme to speak face to face with Antiochus, he wylled
him in the name of the Roman people, to depart from Alexandria which he
kept beseiged: but as Antiochus did ask respit to advise therevppon, Popillius
made a round circle before him with the rod that he held, and did command
him to declare what he minded to do, before he departed from thence. By this
means he, who was not ignorant of the power of the Romans, was so affrayed
that he promised to leave all things in peace. Popilius makes Antiochus
affrayed.
These things are recited to the end to declare how by little and little the
Romans are waxed great of small beginninges, and how they did so advance
them selves, that they assubiected almost all countries.

For even already, their valiantness was passed through Italy, and had
invaded diverse parts of the world. Not withstanding, there was yet many lettes,
and inconveniences, in such sort, that they had no little a do for to establyshe
this so great an Empire, which should comprehend and compass the principal
part of the world, as I will here after orderly and briefly declare. Philip
king of Macedonia, of whom mention has been made, being very wroth, for that
he was so enclosed by the Romans, purposed to begin to make war again.
But he was prevented by death, and Persea his son succeaded him, who of long
time was so eneduraged against the Romans in such sort, that he took in hand
as it were the heritage of making war.

But L. Emylius Paulus (who had been twyse Consul) finally did give him the
overthrow in plain battaylle, Persea king of the Macedonians taken prisoner
and took him Prisoner, with his Wife, his Mother, and his Children, whom
also he led away in triumph.

And for this victory he was surnamed Macedonicus. From that time also
Macedonia was made a Province of the Romans. In the former last year,
Ennius being three score and ten years old (according to the saying of
Cirero) departed out of this life. Few years after, P. Cornelius Nasica, did
assubiect the Dalmatians.

The third war of Carthage.
And incontinently after ye third war of Affrike began to brust forth. For
because that the Carthagiens, who could not live in rest, did move war and
oppress their neighbors, but chiefly Massinisse king of Numidie, the
compainion and friend of the Romans: the Romans being required to succor
them, purpossed to put themselves in arms, about the six hundredth and four
year after the foundation of Rome. Diverse judgments as touching the
preservation, or distructio^ of Carthage.
But their opinions were diverse, to wit, whether it were more convenient to
break down and destroy the City, then to preserve it. The saying of them who
were of opinion that it was not convenient that it should be destroyed, was,
that if Carthage were once taken away, they would afterward even amongst
themselves, make hurliburlies by seditions and civil wars. But M. Portius
Cato did counsel the contrary, declaring the great danger which did threate^
the public weal of Rome, if this City were not utterly rooted up and
destroyed. His opinion got the victory, albeit that he disceased in this
deliberation, The death of P. Cato.
having lived four score and five years. Cicero does name him amongst the
ancient orators, and does place him next unto Marcus Cornelius Cethegus, who
he says was renoumed of Ennius. He says moreover, that an hundredth and fyftie
of Catos orations were found, full of learned words and notable matters: and
rebukes ye nicenes of his time, because they did not regard to read them
diligently over. He compares him to Lysias the Scriuener of Athenes, P. Scipio
Aemilianus ye son of Paulus Macedonicus, and the nephew by adoption of P.
Scipio Aphricanus, had the charge and government of the third war of
Carthage. And four years after yt certain others had begone the war, he came
and assaulted Carthage with such force, that having constrained them to yield,
he spoiled it, brunte it, and beat it down to the ground. The destruction of
Carthage.
By reason whereof he was also surnamed Aphricus, as well as he who did vanquishe
Hanniball, as it has been said. And behold here ye end of a most myghtie
City whose foundation was more ancient then that of ye City of Rome: and being
nothing inferrior in excellency of captains, did greatly enlarge her
dominion. Cicero writes that P. Scipio after the taking of Carthage, did
render unto ye Sicilians the Images and ornaments yt the Carthagians had take
from them aforetime: and did render under the Agrigentins that renoumed bull
which is said to have been within the tyrante Phalaris den, wherein he used to
shut up live men, for to bourne them with fire which he did kindell in the
top thereof. This Phalaris was not killed by craftye snares or intrapmentes,
as diverse other tyrants were, but all the Agrigentins on a heap did cast
themselves upon him to slay him. Cicero names the country of Affrike, The
war of the Romans against the Acheans.
the bulwark and fortress of all the provinces.

About that time the Romans stirred up war against the Acheans, a certain
people of Grecia, because that they had violated and outraged their
Ambassadors. The head of this army was the Consul L. Mummius, who also wa^ne
the victory in such sort, that al Achaia did yield unto him. The destruction of
Corinthius.
And by the will of the Senate he brunte Corinthus the principal and chiefest
City of all Grecia as says Cicero: and he did utterly beat it down to the
ground, to take away all fear of ever buylding or reestablishing it again.
Mummius was for the getting of this vyctorye surnamed Achaicus.

War a against Viriatus.
In yt time also one named Viriatus, did usurp the kingdom of Portingall, who
from a shepharde was become a hunter, from a hunter to a theyfe, and finally a
conductour of a mighty army. He did fight for the space of certain years
against the Romans, and often times to his own advantage. But at the last he
was slain by treason. By this means the Consul Decius Iunius Brutus did
vanquishe all portingall even unto the Ocean sea.

The war of Numance.
In the mean time during these troubles, the Romans had received a great
overthrow of the^ of Numance in Spain. And therefore because other wise it
should be greatly ignominius unto the^ they minded not to keep the traitye of
peace, which was made by Mancinus Consul, but did again elect, out of
order, Publius Scipio Aemylianus Aphricanus, to be Consul, and gave unto him
the charge and conductyon of the war.

He went forth with an army, and finding there ye soldiers very nice and
impatient of labor, he accustomed them unto a more sure discipline, and even
straight out of hand he beseiged the City round about. And finally he took it
and destroyed it, fourtene years after the destruction of Carthage and in the
DCXXII. year of the foundation of Rome. Cicero does call Carthage and Numance
the two terrors of the Romain Empire. In that time rose the tumult of bondmen
in Sicilia: The war of bondme^ and slaves,
who finally could scarce be vanquished by the Consul C. Fuluius, yea, albeit
that he had raised up a great army.

Shortly after the Romans had war in Asya against Aristonicus. For Attalus
king of Pergame, had appointed and ordained, by his testament, the Romans for
his inheritour. But Aristonicus his kinsman, possessing that part of Asia, did
beguile the Romans of the will of the testament. The Consul M. Perpenna did
defye him, and took him captive. The year following, which was the six hundredth
twenty and fyftye years of the age of the City, P. Scipio Aphricanus, lying in
his house, The death of P. Scipio. Aphricanus.
was smothered in the night even of his nerest kinsfolks, as it is thought.
Cicero does praise him for his singular eloquence, loyalty, and wisdom. He
writes that there was no information at all made of his death, albeit that ye
whole City was greatly sorry therefore: and says moreover that the very same
year the sun did show her self double. So by this means he who was most
noblest and excellenst of the captains of war died at the age of six and
fifty years. Cicero faineth in a certain little Book, yt Aphricanus the first
of that name, did foreshewe him this mishape. In this time lived Lucilius,
Terentius, Pacunius, Accius, Licinius, Cecilius, and Afranius, C. Lelius the
very well-beloved of Aphricanus, does call Pacunius his friend, and Terence his
familier.

These things being ended, Fabius Maximus Consul wanne a great battle
against the Sauoisiens, Auuergnats, and them of Rhodez, who are all Gaulles.
The two Grackes.
In ye same time also C. Gracchus Tribune of the people, an eloquent man, and
defender of the law appertaining to the dividing of lands, was killed at Rome
twelve years after yt Tiberius Graccus his brother had been slain for the self
same matter. Cicero does praise the^ both for their eloquence. But as for
Tiberius orations he judges them not to be greatly fine in words, but
sufficientlye subtle, and full of wisdom. As concerning his brother Caius,
he is of opinion yt his doings ought to be read, but especially of the youth:
for because that he cannot only sharppen, but also nourishe and increase the
wit: and for this cause, he calls him the most ingenious and eloquenest
amongst the Romans. Gracchus dream.
Gracchus had before dreamed that his brother Tiberius did advertise him that he
should dye the same death that he dyed: and Cicero says that before that he
was chosen Tribune of the people, he declared this unto diverse. Their laws are
yet found as of wheat, of bringynge certain citizens out of Rome to place
them else where, of ye profit of soldiers, of the administration of
provinces, of the voice of the people, of letting out to hire the lands of
Attalus and of Asia. The war of the Romans against Iugurtha king of Numidie
followed these perturbations of Tribunes. This war was enterprised by L.
Calphurnius Bestia, The war against Iugurtha.
Consul, after wards continued by P. Cecilius Metellus, and finally brought to
an end by the Consul C. Marius, who before time had been a warrefare under P.
Scipio Bacchus, king of Mauritanie, compainion of Iugurtha, was causor of the
fynishing of this war. For he seeing himself overthrown in battle, and
minding not to hazard himself any more, he delivered Iugurtha prisonner unto
Silla, who for that purpose was sent of Marius. At that time, to wit, six
hundredth eight and fourtye years of the age of the City, M. Tullius Cicero
was borne, The birth of Cicero.
which was eyghte years after the birth of Q. Hortensius, a notable Orator.
During the war of Iugurtha an Infynite number of high and low Almains did
enter by violence partlye into Italye, and partly into Gallia, who after that
they had made a great slaughter of the Romans, and had overthrown in field
sometimes Proconsulls, other times lieutena^tes, finally they were al vanquished
and overcome by C. Marius, Te^tones and Chimbres overthrown by Marius.
who was four times Co^sul. The high Almains were overthrown at Aix in
province: and the low, at the inner borders of Lombardie. This luck was
followed with a new trouble. For certain countries of Italy were revolted from
the Romans, to wit the Samnites, the Pelignians, Marsians, Vestinians,
Marrucinians, Vmbres, Picentes, and Lucains, They were foughten with all
diuersely, and could scarcelye be brought again to subjection.

The war against Mithridates.
Shortly after befell an other mishap very hurtful to the public weal: for
Mithridates king of Pont had driven Ariobarzanes King of Cappadoce, and
Nicomedes King of Bithinia (the compainions and friends of the Romans) out
of their kingdoms. And herewyth not being content, he had also usurped
Phrygia, a Prouynce of the Romans, being entered within the country of Asia.
Wherefore ye Senate concluded to make war with him. Whereupon was moved dissension
because yt certain would have L. Silla, who was of a noble stock, and other
some would have C. Marius for to be general captain. P. Sulpitius tribune of ye
people held on Marius side. But Silla had his army, by the aid whereof he
constrained Marius to avoid out of Rome. Who afterward was in great danger of
his life, Civil war between Sylla and Marius.
and hyde himself in a fenne, or marishe, about Minturnes, and went in a small
ship after this sort bannished into Afrike. But through occasion of ye
absence of Silla, who was a warfaire in Asia L. Cornelius Cinna, Consul, began
to make hurliburlies and to raise up new dissentions: but he was put out and
bannished ye City by Cn. Octauius his fellow in office. Who when he was
bannished, renewed again his power, and accompained with him C. Marius, who upon
this occasion was returned from Afrike. Wherefore these two having coupled
together their soldiers, they beseiged Rome on yt side of ye gate called
Ianiculu^. And as diverse things were done in the City not only by
negligence, but also by treason and unfaithfulness: and that it was not possible
for these any longer to resyste them, place of entrance was given them. They
as soon as they were permitted to enter, did fill the whole City with
slaughters and spoils: and straight ways did elect themselves Consulls: unto
the which estate and office they did diverse things cruelly. For Sinna caused
the most excellent Orator Mercus Antonius to be slain: and Marius, Q.
Catulus. These things being known L. Sylla, whoo by strength of arms had
recovered the greatest part of the losses, and was entered in peace with
Mithridates, returned back again into Italy. But Marius (who was then for
the seventh time Consul) was already disceased out of this life.
Notwythstandynge L. Cinna had Cn. Payrius Carbo, to take his part. And
although they prepared themselus with the son of Marius to resyste and arm
themselves against Sylla, nevertheless they were vanquished and overthrown.
Sylla victorious.
In such sort that Sylla remaining victorious, did sharppely pursewe his
enemies, yea even so narrowly that he propunded unto them the table of
proscriptio^, and did sell all the goods of the rebels and such as were
bannyshed, and took from their children all title and right of ever coming to
the honors of the common weal. There upon he was made Dictatour: and then he
began to rule and ordeyne al things according to his fantasy: and did abolyshe
the strength and power of the Tribunes of the people. Moreover, when he sold
the goods of the Citezens of Rome, he declared unto the whole company that he
sold his pray. Briefly, it was not possible for any man to enjoy his goods or
the country, yea or his life, unless it pleased him. He was so enflamed with
anger against Marius, that he caused that which remained of his dead body, to
be thrown into the river of Anio. But he first of all the nobles of the house
of Cornelius, would have his body burned to ashes after his death, searyng of
lykelyhode, that he should be so done to, as he did unto Marius. Cicero says
that Marius was strong and virtuous, and perseuerous in anger: and that Sylla
was vehement. L. Cinna he says was cruel. He calls also Marius the terror
of the enemies, The laws of Sylla.
the hope and succor of the country. Sylla publyshed four new laws: Of
falsholde, of Parent kyllers, of Ruffians or Murderers, and of injuries.

The first pleading of Cicero.
He being Dictatour, Cicero at the age of six and twentye years, proceaded to
plead causes, and did plead openly the cause of S. Roscius.

There were before him certain excellent Orators, to wit: Q. Catulus, C.
Julius, Marcus Antonius, and L. Crassus, in whose time the Latyne tongue
begannne to wax ripe, as Cicero says. This age surely was the most learned
of all the others. For let me omit to speak of so many and notable Orators:
Excellent and notable Iurisconsuls.
there was notwithstanding excellent Iurisconsuls, and amongst them C.
Aquilius Gallus, L. Lucilius Balbus, C. Iuuentius, Sex. Papyrius the disciple
of Q. Mutius Sceuola Pontifex, under whom also Cicero did study in his youth.
P. Seruius Sulpitius was almost of the age of Cicero: who having heard the
above named, had to his disciples, A. Offilius, P. Alphenius Varus, C. Titus
Decius, the two Ausides, C. Atteius Pacunius, Flauius Priscus, Cinna, P.
Cecilius. C. Trebata flourished also with Sulpitius, whose disciple was
Antistius Labeo. Cicero praysyng honorably this Sulpitius after his discease,
says on this manner: If all they that ever had in this town understanding of
judgment and right, wear heaped together, yet could they not in any wise be
compared with Seruius Sulpitius. For he was no less instructed and
experimented in equity then in right.

War raised in Portingale by Sertorius.
Quintus Sertorius did remain of the number of the bannyshed, a man of great
stomach and expert in the feate of war. He did move and stir up a terrible
great war in Portingale: and having vanquished and ouerthrowed certain
captayns of the Romans, subdued diverse towns. Wherefore the charge and
conduction of the war on the Romans side, was at the last given unto
Pompeius. And after diverse and sundry combats, finaly Sertorius was slain by
treason. And ten years after the beginning of this war, Pompeius did recover
the Spaniards. At that time Nicomedes king of Bithinia dying, had ordained the
Romans to be his inheritour: but Mithridates king of Pont, who was entered in
alliance with Sertorius, had usurped and gotten Bythinia during the divisions
and discordes of Marius and Silla: and began again to make war with all his
strength and power. L. Luculus against Mithridrates.
L. Luculus consul was sent against him, who wanne certain battayles by
cheualry: and after being Proconsull, he in such sort slew and cut in sunder
his army, that having displaced him out of Bithinia, he constrained him to
retire to the country of Pont. Where having lost a great battle, he fled
toward Tigranes king of Armenia. Lucullus pursued him so near that in certain
conflictes he ouerthrewe the hoostes both of the one and of the other. And it
rested but only upon the sedicions and conspiraties of the Soldiers (which
certain did craftily move) that he came not to the end of the war and to have
carried away the glory and triumph of the victory. For shortly after he was
called back again, and this commission was given unto Cn. Pompeius. Of the
doing whereof Cicero was also one of the perswaders, who had made the people
wyllyng hereunto, by a certain excellent oration which he made in ye praise of
Pompeius. Luculus being called home again, he let therefore not to triumph,
The sumptuousnes of L. Luculus
and made the Romans a notable and sumptuous great feast. Since that time he
would no moore entermeddle or be occupied with publyke affairs, but did lead
his life at home in the study of Philosophy, being not withstandyng very
sumptuous in his ordinary living, as he was always. He garnished a most ample
and magnificall library, of the which Cicero makes mention: The victory of
Pompeius against Mithridates
and says that he went thither often times to fetch certain books.
Pompeius gave Mithridates a clean overthrow, and drove him far of: and
received Tigranes who did yield and render himself unto his devotion and
clemency. Cicero recites that Pompeius seeing in his camp this king
prostratinge himself and demanding pardon, he lifted him up, and put again
the crown upon his head, which he had cast of. Afterward chargyng him with
certain things, he commanded him to hold and keep always his kingdom.
Mithridates finally being beseiged of his son Pharnaces did slay him self.
The war against the pirates.
Cn. Pompeius had gotten great credit and estimation, for the war which he
made against the pirates, before that he went against Mythridates.

The conspiratie of Catilina.
This war being ended, suddenly another fire began to kindle: for L. Catilina had
conspired with diverse others, to destroy the publyke weal. But his wickedness
being disclosed by the dexterity and industry of Cicero, who was then
consul, he was bannished the city: and having gathered an army and band of
desperate Villens in the country of Toscane, he remained slain in the field,
being vanquished by C. Antonius consul and fellow in office with Cicero. Who
through out all his writings does praise and magnify the pain and labor that
he took for the publyke weal. and says that than not only appeared in the
night flames of fire, with burnyngs in the Element, thundrings and earthquakes:
But also he applies and makes serve to this purpose, the strange and
unaccustomed Signs, that came to pass and befell twelve years before that he
was Consul, at such time as L. Cotta and Torquatus were in that office: In the
which time vehement flames of lightning fell upon diverse towers in the palaice
of the city of Rome, diverse Images of gods were displaced, diverse pictures of
men of old time thrown down: The tables of brass wherein the laws were
graven, the molten Image also of Romulus founder of Rome (which was as it wear
sucking, and hanging over the Wolfes dugges) was stricken with thunder. Cicero
describing the spirit and nature of Catilina, says that there was never the
like monster in the world, that was compact and mixed with such covetousness,
and so many contrary and sundry co^plexio^s repugning one against another. The
same year that Cicero was consul, C. Octauius was borne, The birth of C.
Octauius.
and the country of Judea was made tributary to the Romans, after that
Jerusalem had been assaulted and won by Cn. Pompeius.

Five years after, at such time as Piso and A. Gabinius were consuls, the
Swicers did change their dwelling place, and did purpose to pass by province,
for to enter and perce through the residue of France, and there to make their
habitation, because of the goodness and fertility of the country. This being
known and disclosed, C. Julius Caesar, younger then Cicero by six years, did
raise up his army, for as much as the Senate had assigned him that Province:
and went to mete the enemy, The Swicers overthrown by Julius Caesar.
whom he overthrew in plain battle. And shortly after he did the like unto
Arionistus king of the Germans, who had oppressed the countries of Lions in
France, but especially the Burgonions the friends and companions of the
Romans: for he overthrew him near unto the river called Rhyne, being departed
from Bessanson a town of Burgonie. Which being done, he brought the whole
country of Gallia under the subjection of the Romans. Afterward sailing into
Britan, he assubiected the I Will. Cicero recites that Caesar did write to him out
of Britan the first of September, and that he received the letters the.xxviii.
day of the said month. About the time that Caesar was departed into Gallia,
Cicero was so vexed and troubled of P. Claudius Tribune of the people, The
exile of Cicero.
that he flede and went in exile, after that he had made an oration unto the
people and horsemen, by the which he commended unto them his children and
familye? Certain months after he was, to the great joy and gladness of the
people, called home again. And then he made another oration unto the Romans,
by the which he gave thanks unto his friends. Since he laid ye cause of his
bannishement upon L. Piso and A. Gabinius being then Consulls, and proved by
the orations which he pronounced against them both, that he was betrayed by
them. In one of the said orations, he counsels the Senate to take from them
the Provinces of Syria and of Macedonia, and not to call back again C. Caesar,
who prospered in the wars that he had in Gallia: but rather that they should
continue him in this government, to the intent yt he might bring the war to
an end.

Ptolomeus Auletus.
During these enterprises: Ptolomeus Auletus king of Egypt: being driven out of
his kingdom for his cowardnes and cruelty, he fled and retired unto Rome: The
king of Egypt reestablished by the Romans.
where the Senate through the persuasion of Cn. Pompeius did reestablishe him
by A. Gabinius, in puttyng down Archelaus who reigned by the consent of the
people. Gabinus was afterward condemned to pay unto the publyke treasour
ten.M. talents, or according to ye reckning of certain of our time.vi. millions
of gold, for because he had received as much of Ptolomeus.M. Crassus, unto whom
the commission of the war of Parthia had been given, was also vanquished beyond
Euphrates and slain (contrary to the law of arms) as he communed and reasoned
of matters. Crassus slain by the Parthians.
This is he who used to say that none was rich, if he could not maintain an
army with his own reuenew. In the selfsame time P. Clodius was killed of T.
Annius Milo. And albeit, that Cicero did defend the cause of Milo (Pompeius
being for the third time Consul, yea him self alone) not withstanding he was
bannished. The French war being once ended, which was about ye viii. year,
civil war was raised between C. Caesar and Cn. Pompeius, his kinsman. The cause
and beginning hereof was, that Caesar should be put out of his Consulship, Civil
war between Pompeius and Caesar.
if he did not out of hand discharge his army and give over ye province. But
he was persuadid in himself yt he could not be in safety if he did dismiss
his souldiars. Notwithstanding he made this offer, yt both he and Pompeius
should yield up their souldious: and for as much as this was not accepted, he took
his journey: and with an incredible swiftnes he came out of France into Italy
with his host, and entered into Flaminia, where he took diverse towns.

Which being known Pompeius and the two consuls (to wit C. Marcellus and L.
Lentulus) did fly from Rome and went to Ranusiu^ of the country of Puell,
bordering on the sea. Caesar came thither also: but ye co^suls had already passed
ye sea, and were arrived at Durazo, whether also shortly after Pmopeius fled. And
for because yt Caesar being excluded by ye time, and destititute of vessels of
war could not follow or pursewe them, he returned unto Rome: where he holding
a court, made a complainte of the injuries done against him, and did propound
certain conditions of peace. But because that the Senate did show themselves
slack and cold herein, he went unto Massilia where the gates were shute
against him. Wherefore he having prepared an army by sea, he beseiged the town
both by Sea and by Land: The Captains of Pompeius yield unto Caesar.
and leaving there his lieutenauntes, he took his journey toward Spain,
where finally Petreius and Afranius the captains of Pompeius did yield unto
him with all their army. Which being done, he returned back again unto
Massilia: the which then being void of all hope did yield unto his devotion.
Straight ways after this he returned unto Rome, having in his absence been
made dictatour by M. Lepidus Praetor: where he made an assembly of ye people,
and was chosen Consul with P. Seruilius Isaurico. Afterward, having left
and given good order of his affairs, he went into Grecia: and to conclud he
overthrew Po^peius in a great battle in ye contry of Thessalia and wanne his
camp yea, albeit his army was much greater. Pompeius vanquished by Caesar.
Po^peius flying away went into the country of Egipte, at which time raygned
Ptolomeus Dionisius, the son of Ptolomeus Auleta, whom (as we have said)
Pompeius being Consul did, by A. Gabinius reestablyshe in his Kingdom
whereof he was depryued. Pompeius hoped that, in party recompense of his good
deed, he should find some help and succor in that country. But ye king was
then but a child: Wherthrough it befell that his famillier friends dispisynge
the present state of Pompeius, or at the least fearing certain motions and
vprores, The death of Pompeius.
did slaye him by treason. Caesar pursewing him, arrived at Alexandria,
accompained with three thousand and two hundredth men, where he was first of al
advertised of the death of the said Pompeius. Cicero giving his Judgment of
them both, says on this wise: If so be that Pompeius had demissed somewhat of
his great gravity, and that Caesar had greatly refrained from his covetousness,
we might have had some certain assured peace and some public weal. The king
of Egipte was then in arms against his sister Cleopatra. Caesar being in
Alexandria would that they should plead their controuersyes rather by right,
before him, then by arms: seeing yt he was Consul of the Romans, and that
certain years before amity was contracted by law and consent of the Senate
with Ptolomeus the kings father. The governors took this thing very
grievously, and complained that the royal majesty was greatly empeched and
lesned in that they were caused to appear and plead their cause. War in
Alexandria against Caesar.
Their hearts then were so enflamed with wrath, that they put themselves in
arms against Caesar: who after great and sundry dangers reinained victorious.
Notwithstanding ye king being dead he ordained not, neither made the kingedome
of Egipte in manner of a province: but left ye kingdom unto Cleopatra and to
his younger brother. From thence he took his iournye into Syria, and afterward
into Pont, where he defied the king Pharnaces the son of Mithridates: and did
pacifye Cappadocia, Armenia, Gallograecia, Pont, and Bithynia. This being done
he came again into Italye and after that into Rome. And in the midst of the
winter, yea, in the shortest days thereof he took ship in Sicilia for to
sail into Affrike, albeit that ye pryncipalest and chiefest diuinor had
advertised him not to take his journey till winter were past. After the journey
of Pharsalica Scipio and Cato, sons of ye Nephews of A. Portius Cato, were
retired in to the said country of Affrike, and having raised a great band of
men of war, they had assubiected and brought the king Iuba under their
gyrdell, Caesar then arrived there, and beseyged and over threw them both.

Caesar victorious in Afrike.
But as concerning Cato he slew himself at Vtica, for fear of falling into the
hands of Caesar. The which Cicero approves being of opinion yt considering the
incredible gravity that he naturallye had, it behooved him rather to dye such
a death, then to behold the face of the Tirante. Cato was of the Stoical sect,
and sometimes he did defend in the open Senate certain brutishe and horrible
sentenses: as if he had been in ye politic governance of Plato (according to
the saying of Cicero) and not in the affairs of Rome, Ceser was returned unto
Rome: and having triumphed over the Galls, Egiptians, those of Pont, and of
Affrike, he stirred up war against Sext. Pompeius in Spain, where he also
gave him ye overthrow. So therefore all his enemies being vanquished, and the
people being pacifyed in all parties, he returned to Rome.v. years after the
beginning of ye civil war. And after that he had triumphed over Spain, he
fell out of favor and was hated of diverse, forbecause that he had always kept
and retained to himself ye name and power of Dictatour, which was offered him,
for yt also he did elect such Senators as seemed good to his fantasye and
almost only did confer the honors and offices of the weal public unto
whom it pleased him After then that ye estate of the public weal was changed
and yt the government thereof was reducted under ye power and auctority of one
only, ye co^spiraties which were made against him were so enflamed, yt v,
months after his return unto Rome, Caesar slain in the Senate.
the xv. of March he was murdered in ye court of Poinpeius, where ye parliment
was kept even by the^ who were greatly bound un to him for his clemencye and
gentilnes lately before showed unto the^. For he had pardoned the^ their
putting on of arms against him in ye war of Pompeius. The muderers were M. and
D. Brutus, C. Cassius, Cn. Domitius, C, Trebonius, Q. Tullius Cimber, ye two
Seruilians, Casca, Hala, and diverse others. M. Antonius, Consul and fellow in
office with Caesar does charg Cicero also before the Senate, as consenting
thereto, forasmuch as inco^tinently after Caesar was slain, M. Brutus holding up
the bloody sword cried out naming him and was thankful unto him for ye liberty
recovered. Some there be yt say that Caesar spoke in Greek to M. Brutus even in
the very instant yt he fell upon him to slay him: and yt he called him son. I
cannot well tell how they understand the same. Notwithstanding so it is yt it is
manifest by Cicero, yt Brutus was but fiften years younger then Caesar. The said
Caesar had made certain laws, partly in his consul ship and partly when he was
Dictatour, Leges Iulae
the which in his respect are called Iulia^ laws. They are as concerning
feildes, judgments, violence requiring again of ye polings and extorsions of
governors, of benifites and of usury. There are certain other of the same
name: but they were made by Octauius. Every one does confess yt Caesar was very
clement and merciful. Cicero moreover does praise him for his spirit, for his
subtilitie, reason, memory, instruction, ripe thoughts and diligence. yet
never theles he was greatly grieved and wroth yt he did reign and bear rule,
albeit yt he cou^terfeted the contrary. He writes in a certain epistle to
Atticus. Thou shall understand yt this reign cannot endure above half a year.
Now in all these doings Cicero was greatly variable and inco^stant. For in ye
war he joined himself to ye camp of Po^peius and took his part albeit yt he
did reprehend his faint heart and his negligence. Moreover besides this, The
inconstancye of Cicero.
in ye epistles to his friends he called Caesar, during ye war, tirant, and
monster. But after yt Po^peius was dispatched, and yt Caesar pardoned diverse, he
changed his time and note: and in three orations which he made, he exalted him
even to the very heaven, so greatly did he praise and magynifye him.

And sense that Ceser had been advertised that he was conspired against, and
that oftentimes he brast forth in these words, that he had lived long enough:
Cicero prayed and besoughte him to put away yt fantasye. For although yt he
had gotten as much glory as was possible, and that in respect hereof he had
lived long enough for himself: notwithstanding he had lived to little a while
for the public weal, the which could not well want or be destitute of his
succor and defense. Moreover (says he) thou have no occasion to fear any
danger at all: for all as many as we are of us do promise the not only to
make good watch for to keep ye, but also to present and put our own persons
in readiness before thee. After yt Ceser was slain he triumphed for joy: and
said yt the mourderers had obtained so great glory, that the very heaven could
not comprehend ye same. This then is ye fourth and last Monarchy. The fourth
and last Monarchye.
Wherein we must note, how of small beginninges yt City has increased and
mounted by little and little to souerain power. For being buylt by shypheards
fynallye it became Maisteris of the whole world. Hereafter following I will
declare as briefly as shall be possible, low she is sense decayed and fallen
day by day from that hyghnes and great domination and has been ruined.

The second book.
Octauius Antonius. and Lipidus.
C. Caesar being slain, C. Octauius, his Nephewe by his Systers side, drew the
legions unto him, and pursewed most sharply the mourderers. At the beginning
it seemed that he put himself in arms against Marcus Antonyus in favor of
the public weal: but finally he having parted the Empire between him and M.
Lepidus, he established the dominion of three, Triumuiri.
named Triumuiri: Cicero slain by Antonius.
under whom M. Cicero who had made vehement war against Antonius was slain
by his commandment, being then three score and three years old, eight years
after the decease of Q. Hortentius who was eyghte years elder then he, as it
has been said here before. It is certain that Cicero was foully deceived in his
enterprises. For because that after ye death of Caesar, Antonius did trouble the
public weal he commanded unto the Senate C. Octauius Cesars kinsman, being
then a young man of the age of twenty years, whom he meruelously exalted to
the Senate, And not content herewyth he put in their heads to create him
Consul, having no respect to his age: alleging to ye perswation thereof,
diverse ancient examples, by the which he would prove that the thing were
lawefull.

Moreover he confuted the arguments by the which, certain causes of fear and
danger might be alleged: and swore unto the Senate by his faith, that Octauius
should always remain such a citezin as he was at that time, and said that
they ought both to wish him and desire him.

Sense that, Octauius did resyste and withstand him, and committed him into the
hands of Antonius. M. Brutus also does gravely rebucke him for that he
flattered Octauius. Now as it oftentimes comes to pass, ye gredy desire of
bearing rule and authority, did engender and raise up dyssentions amongst
the^, War botwene the
in such sort that Lipidus being deposed from ye office of the Triumuiri: and
being bannished, Triumuiri:
for having conspired against Octauius, he sought to revenge himself upon
Antonius, who was his other compaynion and fellow in office. And after the
victory of Actiaca^, he ouerthrewe him with Cleopatra (of whom mention has been made herebefore) nere unto Alexandria, and constrained them to kill
themselves. Afterward he made Egypt a province of ye Romans. The
Historiographers say that in the reign of Ptolomeius Auletes the yearly
revenue of Egypt did mount to twelve thousand and five hundredth talentes: The
yearly reuenew of Egypt.
the which sum, according to yt count of the learned men of our time, does
amounte unto three score and fyuetene hundredth thousand crowns courrante.
Sense that the said country was under the authority of the Romans, it is
esteemed and Judged to have been of far much greater revenue, by reason of
the trafike of India and Ethiopia. After the death of Antonius, Octauius kept
alone the Empire fortye four years. And the twenty ninthe of his Empire, the
year of the creation of the world three thousand nine hundredth fiftye and
four (as diverse count) our Savior Jesus Christ was borne, The birth of
Jesus Christ.
seven years after that Herodes, surnamed the Great, had sumptuously reedifyed
the temple of Jerusalem, altogether ruinated. M. Antonius had married Octauius
Sister: but falling in love with Cleopatra at such time as he visited the
country of Asia, he forso^e his said wife, and took Cleopatra. The which gave
partly occasion of the war

The excesciuenes of Antonius and Cleopatra.
Both of them were excessyue in all manner of sumptuousnes: and the Authors
have written things almost incredible of their feasts, delicacies pleasures,
and pastymes. And notwythstandyng they ended their lives in the manner before
said. Marcus Antonius was the Nephewe, of Marcus Antonius the most renoumed
orator, of whom mention has been made. War of ye Romans in Duchelande.
During the reign of C. Octauius ye Roman host made first of all war
against the Germans yea, even in their country. Truth it is that Julius
Caesar had twice overthrown the Germains, but that was in France. To wit
Ariouistus at Lions in France, and after that at the place where the river
called the Maze and the Rheyne met together. That iourny being wo^ne, he made
a bridge whereon he passed over ye Rheyne: but remaining not long there, he
incontinently brought again his army into France, and brake down the bridge:
The expedition of Caesar in Germany.
Two years after he passed over ye Rheyne again upon a bridge, a little above
that place where he had before conducted over his army: and then he purposed to
march into Swane. But being well instructed and certified of al things by the
spies, and fearing the danger and difficulty, yea even the want of munitions,
he retired into France, and brake down one part of the bridge and on ye other
part he built a tower with a little bulwark, where he left good garnison, for
to keep his enemies always in fear of his return. Julius Caesar did no other
thing unto ye Germains, even as he himself says. But Octauius did war against
the Grisons and the^ of Ausburgh by Tiberius and Drusus brethren: and from out
of ye country of Colaine, Tiberius and Drusus.
which was in leage with the Romans, he invaded and assalted yt part of
Duchland which is called Westphalia, by his captain Quintilius Varus. But
Ariminius the conductor of ye Chiruscorans, did put them almost al to ye sword,
between the rivers Amisia and Luppia. Horatius comfort Vergill in a most
eloquent song, Ariminius overthrows the Romans.
because yt he was very sore grieved with the death of Varus. Drusus died in
Ducheland leaving behind him two sons of whom one was named Germanicus, and
was a man of singular virtue: and the other Claudius. Horatius prayseth Drusus
in a most learned verse (as it has been said) and does refer his original and
offspring to Claudius Nero, who being for the second time consul with Marcus
Liuius Salitor, saccaged Asdruball ye brother of Hannibal, The victories of
Augustus.
who conducted a new army, near the floode Metaurus. Augustus did assubiect
moreover the Gascons, the Calmates, the Sclauonyans, with the Salassyans, who
dwell in the Alps. It is said that he was diverse times minded to discharge
himself of the bourden of the Empire. But considering on the other side that if
he did return again to his own private estate he should not be in safetye:
forasmuch as he saw it would be very dangerous to put the pub-weale into so
many men's hands, he changed his mind and opinyon. The death of Herodes king of
Judea.
The three and thirtye year of his raygne, Herodes surnamed the great, whom he
and Marcus Antonius had established king of Judea, in the third year of their
triumuiriship, departed out of this life: and three years after also his son
and successor Archelaus deceassed, who was sent in exill to Vienna in
Dolphenye there for to end his life. It is found in writing yt for the
garrisons of the provinces of the Empire Octauius did keep and maintain forty
four legyons: and three in Egypt, as many in Spain, and eight in Duchland.
Certain have cast the some of the yearly expenses which was necessary for
the payment of so many Souldyours, The great expenses of Octauius.
and they bring the total to six score hundredth thousand crowns couraunte:
so that for every Legyon they assygne two hundrethe three scoore and twelve
thousand Crowns. Now they count every Legion to be six thousand footmen,
and five hundredth horsemen.

Octauius is greatly praised for the good affection and liberality which he
showed toward the learned. The Poets of fame were at that time, Varius,
Virgile, Plotius, Galgius, Fuscus the two Gisques, Pollio, Messala, ye Bibules,
Seruius, Furnius, and Horatius: who desires that his Verses might be approved
of the above named, caringe little or nothing for the Judgment of others.
Truly from Portius Cato and Aphricanus the first, there was always at Rome
hitherto a continual succession of excellent spirits. But that time of
Augustus is almost the last that ever held the natural savor, substance and
color of the Latin tongue, Corruption of the Latin tongue.
without any corruption. For afterward by succession of time ye tongue waxed
more and more corrupt, even till such time as it be came altogether barbarous,
as it has continued even unto our age. Cicero says that the native Poets of
Corduba, spoke somewhat grosely and strangely: but what would he have said or
judged of them yt lived an hundredth years after? I mean not only of them who
were borne and nourished at Corduba, but even of Rome it self. After Augustus
Tiberius his son in law took the charge of the Empire: The Emperor Tiberius.
3.
but sore against his will, as he seemed: and after that in the end he was
overcome and persuaded by the supplications and requests of the Senate. At the
first he would enterprise nothing himself alone, but did consulte with the
Senate of al things that were of any importance. Nevertheless shortly after he
laid clean a side the care and respect of the public weal, and gave himself
over unto all manner of voluptuousnes. In his reign the Parthians did usurp
the country of Armenia, ye Dacians and Sarmatians spoiled the country of Masia,
and the Germains ye country of Faunce: but he being careless, was nothing moved
therewith. Certain, yea even of them that are of great reputation in Theology,
The year of the death of Christ.
do hold that our savior Christ was crucified the fyuetene of his raygne:
notwithstanding Luke writes that he was baptized of Ihon the self same, and
year. M. Cocceius Nerua flourished then, the father and the son, and Cassius
Longinus Iurisconsulls. Tiberius was the son of Tiberius Nero, who fought in
battle for Julius Caesar in the war of Alexandria. C. Caesar Caligula a most
wicked and monstrous son (of a very good father named Germanicus) succeeded
him. Duri^g ye three and twentye years that Tiberius had the government of the
Empire, it is said that he had heaped and gathered an infinite number of gold,
al ye which Caligula spent even in one year. About the second year of his
reign, Herodes Antipa, Herodes Antipa. Herodes Agrippa. Claudius. Caesar.
son of Herodes the Great, and murderer of Ihon Baptize, was sent in exyll to
Lions: and had to his successor Herodes Agripa, who beheaded James the
Apostle. After that Caligula was slain, Claudius his Uncle was placed in his
room. Who marched in to England, because that the I Will was revolted: and having
recovered a certain part thereof which yealded unto him, he returned to Rome in
his reign there was a great famaine in all places, the which (as witnesses
saint Luke the Evangelist) Agabus had before prophesied.

Nero Claudius the successor of Claudius, gave manifestly to understand yt he
would once utterly break the order of ye Senators. Nero. 6.
In his time England had a great overthrow and discomffiture: for yt they
oppressed and robbed in ye said I Will ye citezens and aliaunts of the romans.
The legions also that were in Armenia were brought under subjection and with
great dificulty could Siria be kept and maintained. Moreover France did rebel
through the perswasyon and counsel of Julius Vindix governor of the country:
and afterward Spain by the motion and conduction of Sergius Galba. Julius
Vindix. Sargius Galba.
And as he minded to recover his losses, and purpossed to take his Iourny into
France, the other armies which he had hear and there through out the
provinces, did rebel. It is manifest by the Historyes what a cruel and wild
beast he was. Whereof being Judged of the Senate to be an enemy of the weal
publyke he slew him self by the help of a certain Lackey. At that time
floryshed over and besides Seneca, Lucanus, Persyus, Silius Italycus, Poets,
of whom the last was Consul in the last year of Neros raygne.

Confusion in the Romayne Monarchy.
The state of the publyke weal was then brought to such dysorder, that it was
in the power and pleasure of the armies, and Legions to elect and create the
Emperor. Vespasianus became Emperor by such means. Vespasianus. 7.
For the armies which were in Masia and Hungarye in Indea and Syria, did
reuolte from Aullus Vitellius, and made their oath unto Vespasianus, promysing
him fidellitie and obedience. He put, Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, Byzantia, Samos,
Thracia, Sicilia, and Comagena into provinces, under the Romans: and he quite
and clean rooted up the City of Jerusalem, Titus his son guyding and
conducting the war. Domitianus. 8.
Flauius Domitianus did oftentimes skermyshe and make war with them of Hell,
with the Dacians and Sarmatians, over whom at last he triumphed. Statius,
Inuenalis, and Martialis Poets, lived at yt time. Traianus. 9.
Vlpius Traianus was adopted of Nerua Coccius, and afterward made Emperor:
who twyse saccaged the Dacians, that rebelled, and made them subject the
Romans. He brought thither also new inhabitauntes.

Afterward he Marched with his Host into Armenia and Parthya: whom he
subdewed easelye and wyllyngelye, in such sort that they yealded unto him, and
after that, he was surnamed Parthycus.

Notwythstandinge diverse people in the end did rebel against them,
especially they of Armenya and Mesopotamya. The Parthyans also would not
accept the King that he had assygned them, Adrianus 10.
as soon as his back was turned for to return into Italye. Elius Adrianus
did assubiecte the country of Judea which had rebelled. The cause of the war
was that he had buylt a Temple unto Jupiter Olimpius in Jerusalem, ye which he
had permitted to be again inhabited. The Jews were greatly wroth and
displeased with that Temple. He visited also France, Duchland, England and
Spain: and from thence to ye country of Mauritania, Parthia, Asia and Grecia,
and he returned by Sicilia, unto Rome. For the second time he went into Aphrica
and returned to Rome, from whence yet again he took his voyage into Grecia and
Asia, and from thence he drew into Arabia, and afterward into Egypt. He held
a parliment and commended unto the Senators Antonius Pius, who after him did
enforce himself to keep ye things in peace: Antonius Pius. 11.
and studiyng to do good unto eueryone, he maintained the farreyn kings in
their obedience by letters and humanitye. In his time there were excellent
Iuriconsulls, as, Alburnius Valeus, Tuscianus, Vindius, Verus, Vlpius,
Marcellus, Arrianus, Tertullianus, Saluius, Iulianus, L. Volusius, Metianus.
After Antoninus Pius his Son Marcus Antonius surnamed the Philosopher, M.
Antoninus ye Philosopher.
succeeded him, who took L. Aurelius Verus his brother for to be conioyner to
the Empire. By whose means he had happy success of the war of Parthya,
whileste that he gave order to the publyke weal in his Palayes and in the
City.

After the death of Verus, he governed him self alone the affairs of the
Empire, and had good success against the Germans.

He saccaged also the Marcomes, Sarmatians, Vandalians, and Boemians, who had
oppressed the country of Hungaria. For then the most part of the people, from
Sclauonia unto France, had conspyred against the Romans.

Commodus Antonius, a most wicked son of this most excellent Prince,
Co^modus Antonius 13.
did vanquishe the Mauritains, and Dacians, by his Lieutenauntes. He pacified
the the country of Hungaria, Germanye, and England, countries which would
not be under his subjection. He in the mean while spent his time in all manner
of sylthynes and crueltye.

Septimus Seuerus, did make civil war with Niger, Septimus Seuerus.
who did procure and entise the country of Asia to rebel, and also with
Albinus, who had done the like practyse in France. He fought luckely
against the Parthians. He subdued the Jews that were in Syria. He assubiected
Agabatus king of the Persians: He received the Arabians who yealded unto him.
He fortified England, causynge a wall to be made overthwart the I Will, even
unto the Ocean Sea, from one side to another. And having subdued the people of
England, who were very fearce enemies, he deceased at york.

Antonius Bassianus Caracalla, did stir up war against the Parthians, and
against the Armenians.

This is he who caused Papinianus, Iurisconsul to be murdered, The consta^tie
of Papianus.
for that he would not defend nor approve the murder of his own natural
brother, which he had committed. At that time flourished diverse Iurisconsulls,
almost every one of them ye scholars of Papinianus: Excellent Iurisco^suls.
to wit, Tarruntius, Paternus, Macer, Terentius, Clemeus, Menander, Archadius,
Ruffinus, Papyrius Fronto, Anthius, Maximus, Hermogenianus, Africanus,
Florentinus, Tryphoninus, Iustus, Calistratus, and Venuleius Celsus. After yt
Caracalla was slain, Macrinus.
Macrinus succeeded him, who had but unhappy luck in battle against Artabanus
king of the Parthians. Heliogabalus. Alexander Seuerus.
And understanding that the soldiers were affectioned unto Heliogabalus
Bassianus, he concluded peace. Alexander Seuerus successor of that most wicked
and filthy man Heliogabalus, was a valiant man. He wanne a great battle
against Artaxerxes king of the Persians: He recovered Mesopotamia which was
lost under Heliogabalus. He had very good fortune of the wars which he
conducted by his Lieutenantes, in Mauritania, Sclauonia, and Armenia.
Afterward going against the Germains, who spoiled and oppressed France, he
was slain by certain of his soldiers. Vlpianus Iurisconsul.
Vlpianus Iuriscousull, who was Papinianus disciple was his familier friend. At
that time also lived Paulus Pomponius, and Modestinus.

Maximinus Emperor.
Maximinus was Emperor after Alexander, who employed his whole force and power
against the Germains: and did not only aid himself with the Romain
soldiers, but also with the Mauritans, Odronians, and Parthians, who had been
before time in the wages of Alexander. He brunt diverse Villages of the Germains,
and slew diverse, and besides this he took many prisoners. Wherefore he
brought back again his soldiers laden with the spoil. When Germany was
pacified, he went to Syrme, purposynge to make war with the Sarmatians: and not
content herewith he forecaste to assubiect under the romain Empire all the
countries which are under the Septentrion coast, even unto the ocean sea. But
the army being offended with him for his cruelty, did elect Gordianus
Emperor: Gordianus.
the which the Senate (who also bare Maximinus ill will) ratified, and
pronounced Maximinus enemy of the publyke weal. He myndyng to aduenge him
self of this injury, made an oration to his enemy, and drew toward Rome.
Which being known the Senate did declare and create Pupienus and Balbinus
Emperors, gyuinge unto Pupienus ye conduction of the war against Maximinus,
who had laid siege before Aquileia. Pupienus and Balbinus.
Where he at such time as he took his rest in his tent was slain with his
son, by his soldiers.

This being brought to pass, Pupienus and Balbinus remained not long after
unslain by sedicion of soldiers: after they had reigned two years, the
Empire fell into the hands of Gordianus being very young. Gordianus.
The fourth year of his reign he iournyed through Mesia and Thracia, for to go
against the Parthians, and there he defeited the enemies of the Romans. From
thence he took his way by Syria for to go unto Antioche, which at that time
Persians held. He made often times battayll against them, Sapor king of Persia.
and put Sapor their king to flight: in such sort that the Persians, who then
did affraye and trouble Italy. were enforced to retire into their own
country, Finally, the sixth year of his Empire, he was betrayed and slain by
Philippus his chief governor, who had moved and incited the soldiers to
sedicion. Philippus was recompensed with the like end who had sent certain
bands of men against the Scichians, Philippus.
which did molest with force of arms the confederates and friends of the
Romans. He had Decius to his successor, Decius.
who was chosen Emperor by the Legions which were in Sclauonia, and
afterward approved by the Senate. He first of all appeased the conspiraties
and rebellions of France. Furthermore, having commended the publyke weal unto
the Senate, he forthwith took his journey against the Scithians being
accompanied with his son, who was conjoined with him in the Imperial
dignity. For the said Scithians did oppress and molest the country of
Thracia and other countries of the Empire both by sea and by land. Decius was
victorious over them in certain battails, and might have been altogether (seeing
he had already enclosed them in a narow straight) had it not been that Gallus
Hostilianus governor of the latter Mesia, Gallus Hostillianus.
did bewray his enterprise to the enemy: Whereof it befell that the father and
the son were circumuented and slain by treason. Gallus was made Emperor by a
Legion and the residue of the soldiers, who made peace with the Scithians,
but to the great dishonor and shame of the Romans, in that he promised to
pay tribute unto them: a thing never hard of before, and alltogeather
indecent and unworthy of ye majesty of so great a name. The Scythiens waxced
more fearce, and breaking the treaties of peace, they spoiled and wasted
Dardania, Thracia, Thessalia, and Macedonia yea esteming this as nothing, they
cast them selves by force upon Asia, spoiling and destroying diverse towns. By
their example diverse did declare them selves enemies of the Romans, and many
did rebel. The Parthians did violently enter into Asia, and did subdue
Armenia, putting the king Thyridates to flight. The Scithians in ye mean while
were so outrageous that they threatened Italy. And it seemed yt they should have
utterly destroyed it, had it not been yt Amilianus governor of Mesia toward ye
side of Polonia, Amilianus.
did stir up and encourage his soldiers by promysyng and putting them in
hope of good rewards, by which means he put the Scithians to flight, and
manfully pursuyng them, he entered by force into their country and subdued it.
Upon which occasion, he was chosen and created Emperor by the sold yours.

Whereof Gaulus being certified, he went forth to resist and withstand him: But
he with Volusianus his son, and fellow of the Empire was overthrown and
slain. At this time Cyprianus bishop of Carthage flourished: Cyprian.
of whom amongst many other things are found certain Epistles written to
Lucius bishop of Rome who^ he calls his brother and fellow in administration.
He writ moreover diverse Epistles unto Cornelius, where he complains
amongst all other things of them who being condemned for their demerites by
the bishops of Affricke, The complaynt of Cyprian.
and deprived of their priesthood, had recourse unto Rome for more ample
knowledge in ye matter. For (says he) reason requires that the cause should be
there pleaded where the fault has been committed: seeing that to every pastor
is committed a certain portion of the flock, of whom they shall render an
account unto the Lord. Wherefore the unity of the bishops ought not to be
broken, neither ought the judgment of them of Affrike to be neglected or
despised, who had already given absolute and diffinitiue sentence of the matter
and cause. In the mean time another army which was in the Alps, Valerianus
did place Valerianus in the Imperial dignity, who was of a noble house. This
being known, the soldiers of Emilianus, who feared to comme in trouble, slew
their Emperor, and took Valerianus part. As soon as Emelianus was declared
Emperor, he wrote unto the Senate, promisyng to deliver Thracia and Mesopotamia
from the enemies, and to recover Armenia, and to drive from all places the
enemies of the romain Empire. Valerianus being arrived in Persia for to offer
battaill, was taken by Sapor king of the Persians: Sapor.
who would never vulose or let him go, albeit that the princes and people there
about, did admonish him so to do, declaryng and alledgyng unto him the
desteny of the Romans, which was that being vanquished they did resist moore
stoutly and courageously. Valerianus being captive, Gallienus.
Gallienus his son succeaded him. He gave him self wholly unto all manner of
pleasures and dilicaties, laying a side and neglectyng the affairs of the
public weal, in such sort that the soldiers which were in diverse places
throughout the provinces did elect and chose them new Emperors, as in France,
Spaigne, Hungary, Sclauonia, Egypt, Affricke, and other places: which every one
of them were oppressed partly by him, and partly by ye dissentions and civil
conflictes that were amongst them them selves. In this time the Goths held
and possessed Thracia, oppressed Macedonia, and beseiged Thessalonica. The
Scythians did invade Capadocia and Asia, and being embarked on the sea Euxinus,
they entered into the river Ister, and saylyng upwards they did great violence
upon the confederates and aliauntes of the Romans. The mean while Gallienus
was so negligent and void of all care, that having word and news brought him
of the provinces which did rebel, and of the publyke miseries, he made but a
laughyng stock thereat, and contemptuously answered, as if (notwithstanding
these accidents) the publyke weal did remain firm and stable, and
entertained in her dignity, her state and condition being nothing lessoned or
diminished. Wherethrough he grew into contempt as well of his own country,
as of strangers, for his fylthy living: In such sort that diverse enemies did
rise up against the publyke weal. At that time the Goths and Scithians were
in arms, with diverse other people mingled amongst them, who had all conspired
against the Romans, and they were about three hundred and twenty thousand
men.

Flauius Claudius.
But Flauius Claudins (Gallienus successor who was slain) put them all to the
edge of the sword, as he was a man of great virtue and worthy of longer life.
After him Aurelianus reigned, forbecause that his virtue was known and
manifest. Aurelianus
For in the time of Claudius reign he had showed a proof and trial thereof
against the enemy in diverse places. He had sundry wars in Lumbardy, and
fought against the Marcomanes dangerously and doubtfully at the beginning: but
luckely and fortunatly, after that at his request, the Senate had made the
books of Silla to be searched, and had done the things requisite for to
pacify the Gods. From thence he macched to Rome, where he caused certain
rebels, who had conspired in his absence to be punyshed.

Which being done, he took in hand for to recover again the Provinces that
are in the East and in Syria, Zenobia y^ valiant wife of Odenatus.
the which Zenobia a valiant and courageous woman, murderer of her own
children, did possess, who were left unto her by her own husband Odenatus,
who in Gallienus time had made diverse skermishes and assaults in his
dominions. In every coast as the said Aurelianus passed through, he saccaged
the enemies of the Romans, as in Sclauonia, Thracia, and other places: and
finally, being entered into the enemies country, after doubtful and dangerous
fight, he remained Victour, in such sort that he took the Queen prisoner:
who trusting and hopyng upon the succor of the Persians and Medians had
stoutly and manfully resisted him. The principal city of the country which
he had subdued was Palmyra: whose inhabitants did rebel, at such time as ye
Emperor passed from Asia into Europa, and slew the garrison with their
captayn. He then returned again thither, and after he had taken ye city, he
destroyed and spoiled it puttyng them all in such sort to ye edge of ye sword
yt he pardoned neither man, woman, nor child. Afterward he conquered again
Egypt, which was revolted from the subjection of the Romans. This done, he
triumphed at Rome, and from thence passing through Sclauonia, he defied the
Persians: But he was murdered in the way, by his familier friends. After his
death, the Empire was vacant for a certain space: a thing which never befell
before, since Romulus time. At length Tacitus succeeded, Tacitus.
who reigned a few months, in the which he did nothing worthy of memory. The
Senate had made request unto him, that at his disceasse he would not leave the
charge and government of the Empire to his children, but that he would chose
some valiant and god man, whose virtue should be unto them well known.

By this means Probus was elected, Probus.
who being confirmed both of the hooste and of the Senate, he recovered
France, and vanquished the French Almains in diverse conflictes. In Sclauonia
he slew and cut in pieces the Sarmatians, and other nations. Afterward, having
made passage through Thracia, he subdued the barbarous people and made them by
fear of the name of the Romans, and by his great valiauntnes become obedient
unto him. He pacified Asia, and moved the king of the Parthians, only through
his fame and renoume, to demand and defier peace of him. He made agreement with
the Persians, and forthwith returned into Thracia, and transported certain
strange people (vanquished by him) into the country of the Romans: of whom
some remained faithful, other sone unfaithful and rebellious. Whom he
afterward suppressed for ye most part. After having pacified the sedicions
styrred up in France, Spaigne, and England, he marched by Sclauonia, for to go
and invade the Persians: but he was circu^uented and slain of his me^ by
treason. The publyke weal then flourished, because that the nations round about
were every where peaceable and quiet: in such sort, that on a certain time
Probus brast forth in these words, saying: we shall short stand in no need of
Legions and garrisons. The cause of Probus death.
The soldiers being offended with these words, consulted for to hinder the
peace Carus was placed in his room, who saccaged the Sarmatians, Carus.
which were become more arrogant and presumptuous through the death of Probus,
and they threatened Italy. Afterward in the journey against the Persians, he
took Mesopotamia, and proceading further, he was apprehended by death. His
younger son named Numerianus followed the battaill straight after him: for he
had left Carinus in France for to be governor of ye country. Numerianus was
slain by his father in law. Diocletianus took his room: Diocletianus.
with who^ Carinus made battaill on a certain time for the Empire, but being
vanquished he dyed. Diocletianus seeing the troubles and tumultes, which rose up
in sundry places, took Maximianus for his adherent. He pacified France,
Maximianus.
which was unquiet, and Affricke likewise: Diocletianus for his part did
pacify Egypt, puttyng to death the authors of the tumultes and conspiraties.
He conquered also England ten years after their reuoltyng. And to the end that
the state of the publyke weal might be moore stable, and that no moore
tumultes might be raised as touching the succession, Galerius a Consta^tius
he adopted Galerius and Maximianus Constantius Chlorus.

Galerius being sent by Diocletianus, against Marses king of the Persians,
had unhappy luck in battaill: for he lost the most part of his army. But
having commandment to renew again the fight, he overthrew the enemies in a
great battle: and entered further into those parties then ever did any Emperor
(except Traianus.) For he took the town of Othesiphon, and subdued all
Assiria. Moreover, he put under his subjection five Provinces beyond the flood
Tiger, which were revolted in the time of the Emperor Traianus. All things
being well ordered in Asia, Diocletianus returned into Europa: where at that
time the Scythians, Sarmatians, Alains, Bastarnes, Carpians and they of Hesse,
and of Franconia, were peaceable, and kept them selves quiet. A resignation of
the Empire.
And shortly after he and Maximianus did renounce the Empire, assigning it into
the hands of their companions and fellow helpers. Constantius had the dominion
of France, England, Spaigne, Italy, and Afric: and Galerius of Sclauonia,
Grecia, and Asia. At this time Marcellus was Bishop of Rome: The degree of
Marcellus bishop of Rome.
of whom a certain decre is found, that it is not lawful for the bishops to
assemble a Synod, or general counsel, without the authority of the roman
Sea: nor any bishop to condemn any what soever he be, if he appeal unto Rome.
This man was poor as his predecessors were, and lived in great affliction,
because that Maxentius ye Emperor did persecut him. Wherefore it is easy to be
judged whether that he being so vexed and troubled, was so arroga^t and
presumptuous to make such decrees. Constantius being disceased at york,
Seuerus. Marimianus. Maxentius.
Galerius adapted Seuerus and Maximianus. In the mean time ye nobles and other
soldiers of ye guard which were at Rome, did elect Maxentius for to be Emperor
after yt Seuerns was slain, Maximianus took Lucinius to be his companion.
Lucinius.
Great trouble was raised between these: by reason whereof the nobility of
Rome called Constantine the son of Constantius (who had his abiding in
France) for to deliver the city from the tyrany of Maxentius. Co^stantinus
drew into Italy with a part of his soldiers, and wan the first battle, and
finaliy slew and cut a sunder the hooste of Maxentius near unto Rome.
Constantinus ye great
He had also war against Lucinius, who was vanquished inbattaill, and at the
last was slain of his own Soldiers. Certain hold that the cause of the
war was, because that Lucinius did sharply persecute the Christians, not
withstanding that Constantine had admonyshed and prayed him to restrain
therefrom. For from the resurrection of Christ until this time (almost for the
space of CCC years) they which made profession of Christ were afflicted and
tormented diverse ways. For let me omit to speak of yt, which ye holy
scripture recites of Stephen, of James, the brother of John, of Peter
prisoner, but diliuered by ye angel: yea let me omit Paul a great persecuter
of the church of god, who after he was converted, did suffer infinite dangers
for ye profession of Christ: The romain Emperors have raised up horrible and
most cruel sorts of torments. This did Nero, Tyrants.
Domitianus, Traianus, Septimus Seuerus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerianus,
Aurelianus, Diocletianus, Co^stantyne does embrace the doctrine of Christ.
Maximianus. Constantinus remaining victorious embrased the true religion, and
served as a port and refuge unto the Christians. And then first of all the
bishops of Rome began to be in safety. For hitherto almost al of them were
martyred. The number of the bishops since Peter (whom they would have to be the
first) unto this time, do amount to.xxxiii. Their decrees are enclosed in the
books of the counsels: but the most part of them are so vain and folyshe, yea
and so contrary unto the holy scriptures, that it is to be presupposed yt long
time after some others have invented and counterfeited them. But if they be
verily of them, and proceeded of their forge, it seems yt the same which S.
Paul prophesied might be rightly applied then this respect. To wit, yt even in
ye son of perdition, and man of sin, began to work the mystery of
iniquity. The decree of Anacletus.
There is found a certain decre which is attributed unto Anacletus whom certain
do place the fourth after Peter: by the which he affirms the church of Rome
to be the head of all others by the commandment and institution of Christ.
Another decre is under the title of Alexander his successor, whereby he
commands to consecrate water with salt, for to purify the people, and to
mollify the assaults and subteltie of the devil. I beseech you what agreement
or likeness is there between these things and the majesty of the Apostles, or
the writings of John the Evangelist, who almost lived even to this age? I have
only specified these two, to the end that the readers might judge of the
residue, who are of such like quality, and endued with such ambitious and
covetous mynds: and even as the language is barbarous, so likewise the sentence
has no salt, which Paul requires in the ministers of the church. The
donation of Constantine is a lie forged of the papists
The bequethment or dontion of Constantine is of the like style: the which they
have not forgotten in their books, as the foundation and forti^ication of
their power. For the cause and occasion of his excessive liberality may be
reprehended by the histories and convicted of falsholde. And put the case that
this Emperor had been so prodigal, yet could he not diminyshe his right
herein, but only from himself, and not from his successors, who had like power
and authority, and were defenders of the weal publyke. For he can not be
named father of a country yt does lessen ye right and revenue of the Empire,
nether can he prescribe a law to the prejudice of his companion and like in
authority. At the commaundment of Constantine, there was publyshed and held a
counsel at Nice in Bithinia, whereat a great multitude was present. In the
said counsel the opinin of Arius was condemned, The counsel of Nice against
Arius.
who denied Christ to be of equal substance with the father. It is found in
writing, yt not only the bishops of Europa and Asia were there assista^t, but
also those of Egypt and Libia. Amongst other things, it was ordained and
decreed, that the ancient custom should be observed in Egypt, Libia, and
Pentapoli: to wit, that they all should be subject unto the bishop of
Alexandria: albeit the bishop of Rome usurped and kept back this custom.
Moreover, that the privileges should remain undiminished at Antioche and in
other Provinces and churches. After this counsel, a certain man called
Eustathius spread abroad diverse wicked opinions, Eustathius author of ye
monkish superstition.
as to fly from marriage, to use new and unaccustomed manner of garments, to
abstain from eating of flesh, and to forsake their possessions. Now, for
as much as diverse married men did separate themselves for their wives, and
diverse bondmen did forsake their masters, and went and took this new and
religious garment (as they call it) women also did the like, forsakyng their
husbands: And because that they that did eat flesh, were despised, and
esteemed as defiled, and offendynge God, as also the ministers of the church
that were married: Upon this occasion a Counsel was holden at Gangre, a city
of Paphlagonie, wherein were condemned they who taught on this manner, with them
that believed the same. Eustathius opinion condemned.
After that Constantinus had been honorably saluted and gratified by the
Senate and the romain people, because of the peace restored unto the publyke
weal, he set his whole mind upon forreyn wars, and vanquished in diverse
conflicts the Goths, and Sarmatians, who oppressed Thracia. In his old age he
defied the Persians, who spoiled the country of Mesopotamia. And being arrived
at Asia, and having taken phisycke for to recover his health, he dyed, not
without suspicion of impoisonment. This is he who is surnamed ye great who
called Bizantius, a City of Thracia, by his name, where he placed the seat of
the Empire. Constantinople.
He begane to reign about.CCCXII. years after ye nativity of Christ. A
blaising star of strange and wonderful greatness preceaded his death.
Constantinus, Constantius and Constans brethren.
He left behind him three sons, to wet Constantinus, Co^stantius and Constans,
unto Constantinus befell ye regiment of the Alps, France, Spain, Englad, the
Isles called Orchades, Ireland, and Thile. Unto Co^stans, Italy, Afrike with ye
Isles, Sclauony Macedonia, Achaia, Now called Morea.
Peloponesus, and Grecia: unto Constantius, the country of Asia, and of
Thracia. Constantinus not well content with this particio^ stirred up war
against his brother Constans: and was eue^ already come to Aquileia, where he
gave the on set against his brothers army. But having lost his army, he was
slain. After this victory Co^stans who in the mean while made war with ye
Getes and Sarmatians in A cou^trye beyond Hu^garie called now Transilianiam.
Dacia, came into Italy: and having passed the mountains, he entered by force
into France: in such sort that by the space of two years he enjoyed all the
dominions of his brother disceassed.

But shortelye after he was murdered by the Ambusches and conspyratyes of
Magnentius: who was chosen Emperor by the Soldiers: (...) he oftentimes
repeteth, that it appertains to him only, who is Bishop (as he says) of the
chief seat, to assemble the general cou^sells: a thing committed unto him by
synguler pryueledge and by deuyne Commandment.

A man might meruyll how he could for shame write this, or the residue boste
themselves thereof, seeing that before his time Constantinus had assembled that
of Nice, and more then an hundredth year after him the Emperor Martianus yt of
Chalcedon. He says Moreover yt it appertains to him onley, as being Bishop
of Rome, to have knowledge of Bishops causes and other like affairs. The other
Bishops could not suffer this his arrogancy and presumption, The Bishops
resist Julius.
and therefore being assembled at Antioch they virtuously answered him that it
appertained not unto him to retract the sentence by the^ pronounced, seeing that
they were in like degree of dignity with him: and that the doctrine of Christ
was proceeded out of their country, and finally came to Rome by the means and
travail of the Apostles. Moreover if that he did continue in his opinyon, and
making of new decrees, they would not only not obey, but they would also
neither make nor meddell with him, and they would consulte to give order herein
according to the wayttynesse of the matter.

In an other Synod holden in the self same Town, where they were assembled in
greatter number, they ordained amongeste other things, what was the office of
the Bishop and that of the Metropolytan, if any Process should happen as
touching things of great importance. For if it chance that the Bishops do
not accord, they command that the Metropolytan take certain of the next
province for Judges, and to give absolute and diffinityue sentence. If that
any Bishop, for his offense or crime be condemned by the common consent of
the other Bishops, they will that the sentence remain ferme and stable, and
not to be retracted by any other. They ordain moreover yt the Bishop employe
faithfully the goods of the Church given to the use of the poor: and if need
require, that he take thereof as much as shall be needful for his necessity,
forasmuch as saint Paulle says that we ought to be content with meat and
clothing. And if it so happen that the Bishop employe these gooddes to his
own particular profit or of his, gyuing ye use thereof to his kynsfolkes, they
will that he be reprehended by the Synod.

Iouinianus having the enemy at his elbowe, he made a treaityes of Peace very
ignominius unto the publyke weal: for he restored the five prouynces which
Galeryus had conquered beyond Tiger, as it has been said with a certain
part of Mesopotamya. Moreover he promised in the treatyes of Peace, that the
Romans should not succor nor help the King of Armenia, although he were
their friend and compaynyon.

This done, going on with his army to retire homewards, he died in the
confynes of Bithinia. The army inco^tinently after elected Valentinianus to be
Emperor: Valentinianus.
who being arrived at Constantinople took Valeus his brother to be his
compaynion in the regiment of the Empire: and committing unto him those
countries there, he went into Germanye, where he subdued ye Saxons, borderers
of the Ocean sea. This brought to pass, he drew into France, where some say
he died for anger. At this time his brother Valeus the other Emperor, Valeus.
was in Asia, for to repress and withstand the fury of ye Parthians who
forraged in Armenia, and the king of the Persians who stirred up war
contrary to the couenantes. But being advertised that the Hu^nes, or Tartarians
and Scithians, did spoil the country of Hungary, Albanie and Thessalie, he
retired into Europa: and being vainquished in the assault, he was brought into
a little house very sore hurt, where ye enemies setting the same a fire brunt
him. There is found a certain act, or law, made by the Emperors,
Valentinianus and Valeus, The decree of Valentinianus and Valeus.
by the which it is commanded that they that follow the deserte and
monastical life, avoiding by this means the public charges and going a
warfare, should be plucked out of their de^nes, and should be constrained either
to serve the country, or to be frustrated of all other commodities: the which
should be transferred to them, who did sustain dangers and trauills for the
public weal. The enemies forth with encamped before Constantinople: but being
pacified by the gifts and presents of the Emperor, they raised their camp
and departed. When the country of Saxonia was pacifyed the Emperor
Valentinianus did adopte Gratianus his son to be compainion of the Empire.
Now the father and the Uncle being dead, Gratianus.
Gratianus succeeded them both: and for as much as the publyke weal was
incombered with diverse troubles, he elected Theodosius, an excellent Captain,
Theodosius.
and sent him toward the East country. He overthrew and defeicted the Hu^nes
and Goths about Constantinople, and drove the^ out of ye country of Thracia.
Shortly after Gratianus was traitrously slain in France, by a certain
Captain of his named Maximus, who coueted the Empire. Ansonius, Poet.
Ausonius of Bourdeaux was his schole master: of whom is found a certain
Poesy, who also was exalted by the Emperor even to the dignye of Consul of
Rome. His sone Valentinianus dyed almost after the said sort, through the
deceipte of Abrogastus his famillier friend. But the mourderers remained not
long unpunished. For both of them were slain afterward by the Emperor
Theodosius. Maximus was taken and slain in Aquileia: the other slew himself.
The tirantes being oppressed. Theodosius remained only Master, and ordained
his sons Honorius and Arcadius for to be compainions of the Empire. And in
as much as they were but of tender age, he assigned them for their guides and as
it were for their governors, Rufinus, and Stilico, Rufinus unto Archadius, and
Stilico unto Honorius. Which done he dyed also shortly after. A Synod or,
counsel at Constantinople.
By his commandment a counsel was holden at Constantinople, in whoch the
opinion of Macedonius was condemned, who denied the divinity of the holy
Ghost. The fathers, which were found there assistaunt to ye number of an
hundredth and fyfty, did institute Bishops both there and at Antioche, which
they call the most auncienst and true catholyke Church: and in Jerusalem also,
which they call mother of all Churches. And they sent these their acts unto
Damasus Bishop of Rome, who sought by all means to call them to Rome. Iherome
being but yet young was ye familier friend of Damasus. It is he of who^ we have
this notable sentence, yt in what place so ever the bishop be, be it at Rome or
at Eugubia, at Constantinople, Hieromes sentence.
or at Rhezo, or in Alexandria, he is of like merit and Priesthode. It is said
that Theodosius was very religious, in such sort that being on a certain time
rebucked of Ambrosuus Bishop of Mila^, Theodosius patience,
and excommunicated the Temple, he took it patientlye, Arcadius ruled in the
East, making his habitatyon in Constantinople. Honoryus raygned at Rome.

But Rufynus, minding to transfer the Empire to him self, did entyse and
incitate the King of the Goths to put him self in arms against Arcadyus.
But his wickedness being known he was slain by the soldiers. Innocentius
Bishowe of Rome the first of that name, excommunicated the Emperor Arcadius
because he had consented that Ihon Chrysostom should be put out of his Church,
The Emperor excommunicated by the Pope.
as it is said in ye right Canon. Then flourished Angustine Bishop of Hipponen,
who was assistau^t at the third counsel holden at Carthage, and afterward at
ye fourth in which amongst other things it was ordained that the Pryestes
should have a little lodge, or house near the Temple, furnished with simple
household stuff, and should live basly.

And as concerning authority, he should obtain the same by faith and
integrity of living: and that he should use the goods of the Church as
committed unto him, and not as his own. The aforesaid Innocentius write unto
Augustine and to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, exhorting them to pray one for
an other, calling them Priests and fellow brethren.

After Innocentius the first Zozimus succeeded, who praisyng the decrees of the
Fathers and of antiquity, says that it is not lawful even to ye Romain sea
(so they call it) to alter any thing in them or do to ye contrary. He rebukes
also and corrects the custom of his time, for that certain unlearned,
sought to attain to the order of priesthood. Bonifacius the first succeeded
Zozimus: and then, The sixte counsel of Carthage was holden, whereat were a
great number of Bishops, and amongst them Augustine. The syxte Counsel of
Carthage.


Bonifacius sent his ambassadors thither giving them to understand that the
counsel of Nice had given this privilege to the Romain sea, The falls
allegation of Bonifacius.
that the general cou^sells should be holde^ there, he required then the
fathers, yt they would confirm and ratifye the same. They made answer, that
no such thing was decreed at Nice, as far as they knew: notwithstanding to be
certifyed of the veritye, they would advise to send unto the Churches of
Alexandria and of Constantinople, for to have the true and perfect copy of the
Sinode. That being brought thither, the statute was found clean contrary: for
it contained that every province should plead and take knowledge of their
affairs, and yt the Bishops should be called unto the Synod provincial, or
general, the deceipte of ye bishop of Rome disclosed.
as they call it. Cirillus was then Bishop of Alexandria. Before that the coppye
was come Bonifacius was disceased. And forasmuch as Celestinus his successor
did make the like demand he had answer made him according to the tenor of
the decree. Arcadius being dead. His son Theodosius the second succeaded
him: In whose time and at whose commandment the Counsel of Ephesus was
assembled: and Nestorius there condemned, Nestorius condemned.
who denied that Christ, as being God, was borne of the Virgin Marye. Augustyne
dyed about that time.

The treason of Stilico.
On the other side Stilico, Honorius tutour did behave himself as vnfaythfullye
as Rufynus. For having given habytatyon unto the Goths in France, he incited
them to come into Italye under the conductyon of Alarycus and so to take Rome:
the which came to pass in the year of the foundatyon of the Cyty a thousand
one hundredth three score and three, four hundredth and twelve years after the
natyuity of Christ. Rome taken by the Goths.
The Goths abode not long at Rome, but went from thence robbyng and proying to
Rhezo and from thence saylyng into Sicilia, they were drowned with their King.
In the mean whylle as Stilicus ceased not to imagyne new enterpryses and
conspyraties, for to make the Empire fall into the hands of his son
Eucheryus, the treason being known he was taken and executed at the
commandment of Honoryus. Alarycus the King being dead, the Goths took
Adolphus his kynsman to be their King, and under his conductyon they returned
to Rome, where they consumed and proyed all that was left.

He was mourdered, and Gensericus raygned after him: and he being dead, Wallys
held the kingdom, with whom Constantinus, Honoryus Lyeutenaunt in France,
also his brother in law, and afterward compaynion of the Empire, did
contracte alliance and amitye: grauntyng him the country of Aquitania, which
is a part of France, for to dwell in. The Scots and they were the ancient
inhabitauntes of England. Who, as Ceser says, used to paint them selves with
woad to seem more terrible unto their enemies.
Pictes, did vex and trouble England, but they were defeycted by the succor
that the Emperor Honoryus sent thither. The Wandales also and Albanois
forraged in Spain under the conduct of Gensericus.

After that Honorius was disceassed in the City of Rome, Valentinianus his
sisters son succeeded him only in the said Town and toward the Weast
parties, forasmuch as at that time, Theodosius the son of Arcadius governed
in Constantinople, the other part of the world, as it has been said. About
this time the Wandales being moved and incited through the strifes and
seditions of the Roman Captains, which were in Afrike, they lanced out of
Spain into Affrike, and put the whole country to fire and sword. Sense this
spoil, The Wandales enter into Affrik
a certain part of Affrike was assigned the^ to dwell in. The Goths, who by
the good will and permissio^ of the Emperor Honorius did possess Aquitania in
France (as we have said) not being content with their limits, they did wrong
and violence unto their neighbors, and kept Narbona straightly beseiged. But
Litorius being sent thither with an army he made the seige to be raised,
Litorius against the Goths.
and vittelled the town. He was also prosperous in the first battle. But
afterward he was taken and almost all his army put to the sword. The over
throw was so great, that the Romans were constrained to dema^d peace. On the
other side Gensericus king of the Wandales, violating the peace which he had
(as we have said) made in Affrike with the Romans, he took Carthage suddenly
being unlooked for, wherein he did diverse and sundry cruelties. This City had
been under ye Romans for the space of five hundredth and four score years.
After he had gotten Carthage, he passed into Sicilia, where he did exceeding
much hurt. Where through, Theodosius did then prepare and furnishe his nauye,
for to go and war against the Wandales. But forasmuch as at the same instant
the Hu^nes did spoil and oppress Thracia and Sclauonie, ye army was called
from Sicilia, for ye tuition and defense of those countries. At yt time the
Scotts and Pictes did enter and Perce into great Britaignie: and forasmuch as
the inhabitants did despair of the Romain help and succor, they demanded
aid of the English me^, a people of Saxonia. But they did so affectionate the
plentifullnes and fearnes of the country, that by little and little landyng new
soldiers and increasyng their army: The Britons dryue^ out by the
Englyshemen.
they at the last did assubiecte the most part of the I Will, after they had
defeicted the Britons.

Shortly after Theodosius the second dyed at Constantinople. In his reign the
su^ne was obscured or darkened (as certain say) and almost from the fyfetenth
of July unto the month of September appeared a blaysing star. Martianus
Emperor.
Martianus succeeded Theodosius in the regiment of ye East parts. We have
herebefore spoken of Gensericus king of the Wandales. Valentinianus entered in
leadge with him, and did divide and part Affrike between them. The forcastes of
Athila king of ye hunes.
About this time Athila king of ye Hu^nes (who having violenly possessed Dacia,
and Hungary, most cruelly assaulted the next countries there about, to wit
Macedonia, Mysia, and Thracia) purposed to bring under his subjection that part
of the Roman Empire which lies toward ye Weast. But because he perceived
that this war should be very difficil, if the Goths, who were in peace with
the Romans, and did inhabit a part of France (as it has been said) should
aid and succor them, he hastened out an ambassador toward them, for to
require them to be his friend and aliaunte but Atius the Lieutenant of
Valentinianus the Emperor prevented him (by first ariuing thither) and having
confyrmed the allyaunce with Theodoricus king of the Goths, he prepared
himself to the battle with all his power. Athila nevertheless pursewed that
which he had taken in hand: and they fyersly ioygned in battle in the plain
of Chalons in Campania, which is at this day so named through the great
slaughter that was there committed. Terrible war in Ca^pania.
It is said ye there remained slain in that battle almost four score
thousand men: and amongst others Theodoricus king of the Goths. Athila seeing
himself van quished thought to slay himself, fearing to fall a live into his
enemies hands.

But as king Theodoricus son, following the counsel of Etius, did retire
homewards with his army, for to succeed his father disceassed, Athila had
leisure to take again his breath and to return into Hungaria, where having
gathered a new army, he entered very furiously, into Italy, and beseiged long
time Aquileia, which finally he subdued, spoiled, and brunt.

At one voyage he took Concordia, Padua, Vicentia, Verona, Brixia, Bergome,
Myllane, and Pauye. From thence spoiling all through out Flaminia, he finally
encamped over against the floode Mincius and that of Apia. In the which place
as he consulted whether he wear best go to Rome with his army, the Bishop of
Rome Leo, the first of that name, came unto him, leo pacifieth Athila.
and so handled the matter that he not only with drew himself from going to
Rome, but also leaving the country of Italy he returned into Hungarye, where
shortly after he dyed.

This is that Leo of whom diverse Epistles, are yet found written unto Theodosius
the second and unto Martianus Emperors: wherein he partly excuses himself
for that he could not be assystaunte at the Counsels by them published
desyryng them not to be offended in that he sends thither Ambassadors: and
partly he requires and prays them to assygne the place of the Counsel
rather in Italye, then in Asia. But he obtained nothing. The first foundation
of Venise.


At such time as Athila did in such fort vex and trouble Italye. The town of
Venise was built because that diverse Rich and noble men of the country there
aboutes, did retire as into a place of resuge, into that arm of the Sea, Isles,
and hylly places.

The beginning then of this town was pitiful, poor and almost in dyspayre,
and at this present it is grown to such greatness as we see it.

The number of the Dukes of Venise.
The number of their Dukes are hitherto counted to be four score and five: of
whom Paulus Anazatus was the first, in the year of salvation seven hundredth and
six, two hundredth fyfty and two years after the foundation of the town.
Valentinianus was afterward slain: and Gensericus King of the Wandales passed
forth from Affrike into Italy with a most mighty army: and being aided of the
Maures he went to Rome, and took the town, being destitute and abandoned
almost of all her inhabitants. Rome taken by ye Wandales.
Notwithstanding he being entreated by the Bishop Leo (who had also pacifyed
Athila, as it has been said) did not put ye town to fire and sword. Howbeit
he proied it and carried a great number captive into Carthage. Afterward the
enemies did much cruelty to the country of Lauor, and did ruinate Capua, Nola,
Naples, and other Towns byndyng them in cheynes whom they left a live. That is
great Campania.
And being laden with the proy of Italy, they returned into Affrike. Martianus
who was Emperor in the East, did keep him self in peace, according to his
quiet and peaceable nature. He used to say, that it was not decent nor honest
for a Prince to put himself in arms, A notable sentence.
as long as he might live in peace. In his raygne a very great Counsel was
assigned at Chalcedon by his commandment, The counsel at Calcedo^.
where Eutiches, who confounded the two natures in Christ, was condemned. There
amongst other things it was ordained, that no clerk (as they call them)
should be received into two Churches. The plurality of benefices were then
unknown, the which at this day is so common as nothing more: yea almost
even in our memory, amongst ye other spots of the Church, this also has
been introducted, that the Pope has made no dificultie to grant two
bishoprikes unto one man. If he did again establishe the coustoume lately
observed herein, he should do his dewtie. But in as much as he can not abide
that, do we think that he will ever suffer yt the things should be reformed
according to the holy scriptures, decrees of the Apostles, and of the primative
church? No doubt they labor in vayn, who seek to rule and frame the Popes
doings according to the manner of the ancient religion.

Martianus dyed the seventh year of his reign and Leo succeeded him. Leo Emp.
As touching, Rome and the West parties, after the taking of the said city by
Gensericus, and his return into Affrike, Auitus succeeded Valentinianus, after
him Maiorianus, and after him Seuerus, after him also Authemius: and
consequently others of small name, who slew one another by treason and
ambushments, The Wes^ empire sore afflicted.
so that none of them raygned long: wherthrough that part of the Empire toward
the West was very soore afflicted and vexed.

There is found nothing written of the Emperor Leo, which is worthy of memory,
but that he made an atonement and league with the Goths, who forraged in
Sclauonia. There are yet found one or two Epistles of Leo bishop of Rome which
are directed unto him. The said Emperor had Zeno Isauricus to his successor.
Zeno Isauricus.
Amongst them who after the death of Valentinianus had the domination of Rome,
there was one also named Augustulus. At this time Odoacer bring accompanied
with a great army of Herulois and Scyrois, passed from Hungaria into Italy by
force of arms. He stewe Orestus a gentle man of the chief blood of Rome, whom
he had taken in Pauie, where he was retired with his soldiers, not content
therewith he proyed and brunte the town: and procedyng onwards, he subdued the
whole country even unto Rome. Augustulus seeing these things his courage failed
him, and willingly, and even of his own accord, he deprived him self of the
Empire. Odoacer subdueth Italye.
Odoacer made his entrye into Rome, and after he had obtained the domination of
Italy, he enjoyed it and reigned peaceably over the same, for the space of
xiiii. years. That time passed, the Emperor Zeno did send Theodoricus king of
the Ostrogothes, from Constantinople. In his way he vanquished Gepides and
Bulgares who did resist him. Theodoricus king of the Ostrogothes.


Afterward passing by Mysia and Hungaria, he entered into Italy: and encamped
before Aquileia, where Odoacer went to mete him, and they fought earnestly
together with all their might and power. Odoacer had the worst, and was put to
flight. But he renewed his army, and presented again the battayll about
Uerona: Where he being also the second time ouertorowen and put to flight, he
hastened toward Rome, leaving the greatest number of his men behind him,
partly slain in the field, and partly drowned in the river of Athese. He being
excluded from Rome spoy led the fields and meadows there abouts, and retired to
Rauenna: where he was beseiged almost three years, and finally having yielded
himself was slain. He being dispatched, Theodoricus remained master of Italy,
and made his entrye into Rome where he held two cousells of bishops whom he
had made to come thither out of diverse Provinces of Italy, for to judge upon
the cause of Symnachus bishop of Rome, whom many did reject as unworthy and
evil elected.

This Theodoricus was an Arrian, as the books of the Papists report. It is he
who was surnamed Veronensis, and was kinsman to that Theodoricus who (as it
has been said) was slain in the battle against Athila. Odoacer was a Rugien
which is a certain people of Germany toward the sea of It is the ocesian sea,
toward y^ country of Prusse.
Balthicus. Theodoricus seking to fortify him self, did ioygne the kings of
the Wandales, Visigots, and of Bourgony, in affinity and league with him.
Whilst these things were a doing in Italy, great tumults were raised in
Thracia, Affricke, and England: in which finally the Saxons were masters.

Anastasius succeaded Zeno, who was disceassed at Constantinople. He mainteyned
certain, Anastasius,
who held the opinion of Eutyches.

Whereof sprung great dissension between him and Gelasius bishop of Rome, who
according to their books, did admonysh him by large and long letters not to
maintayn or defend such men. For there are two principal things which are
concurrant in the regiment of this world, the sacred authority of bishops and
the regal power. As touching the bishops they have the greater charge, in as
much as they must once render an account for the residue. Truth it is that he
presedeth in civil policy: but not withstandyng he is subject to the
ministers of sacred things, and depends upon their judgment. And seeing that
the Priests do obey the polityke laws, it is mete that he for his part do not
refuse that which the Dispensatours and Presidents of sacred things do decerne.
Also for as much as this honor undoubtedly ought to be referred to all the
ministers of the Church: How much more then unto him whom God first of all by
his voice, and after by the consent of the church, The aroga^cie of the bishop
of rome
would have to be above all order of Priesthode? Let him therefore refrain and
hear him rather as an intreatour in this life then as an accusour in the
other. His decre as touching the holy Bible is ioygned next after: Wherein he
attributes chief authority unto the Romain sea (so they name it) secondly
unto Alexandria, and thyrdly unto Antioche. In Anastasius reign great
seditions and motions of war were styrred up in Cilicia: the which were
assuaged and pacified after that the author was dispatched. The Hunnes did then
also spoil Armenia and Capadocia: The Getes Macedonia, Thessalia, and Albania,
in such sort that the Emperor was constrained to pacify each of them with
gifts and great losses. About this time, to wit, the year of salvation, CCCCC,
Clodoueus king of France received first of all the religion of Christ, after
he had been long time solicited by his wife (who was of the house of Bourgony)
to forsake the Idols and superstitions. Clodoueus the first christen king of
France.
There remains yet a counsel of Orleans holden in his reign by.xxxiii.
French bishops: by the which amongst other things, it is ordained that if any
having rauyshed a maid, fly and take Sanctuary in the temple, yea albeit, he
have enforced her, that he should not dye: but that he should either be as a
bondsman, or else redeem him self by her. The right Canon says, that Anastasius
braste a sunder, and so dyed, others say that he was stricken with lyghtnyng.
Justinius followed him, who was of a base birth, Justinius Emperor of Grecia,
and as it is written of a Swyne keeper he was made a souldyour.

He was at variaunce with Theodoricus king of the Goths, and lord of Italy,
through the diversity of religion: but not wythstandyng they did not put them
selves in arms. After the disceasse of Theodoricus, Alaricus his Nephew
succeaded him, to the great contentation, fervent desire and joy of the Goths.
John the first of that name was then Bishop of Rome: who was sent to
Constantinople by the king Theodoricus, where he was received (as their books
declare) very honorably, Flatteries of ye Papists
not only of the people, but also of the Emperor. For they say, that they
triumphed for for joy, in that then the country of Grecia had obtained so
great felicity, as to see and receive ye Vicar of S. Peter (such is their
style) a thing which had not been since Constantine the great, and since
Siluester. It is merueyll why they say that of Siluester, seeing that he never
entered into Grecia, as it is most certain: for even then when he ought
chiefly to have removed, and when great need did require, to wit, to the
counsel of Nice, he stirred not forth: but sent Victor and Vincentius his
ambassadors thither. Afterward, Lies and falshode in histories of popes
he held another counsel at Rome (as they say) by the which he confirmed that
which the counsel of Nice had decreed. There remains yet an epistle of John
the first, directed unto the bishops of Italy for to comfort them, wherein he
admonishes them to persevere in their purpose, and to remain fervent, albeit,
that ye king Theodoricus, infected with the heresy of the Arians, do threaten
to destroy them and all Italy. Iustinianus
After Justinius, Iustinianus, Justinius sisters son was made Emperor. He
employed himself to put in order and establysh ye publyke weal, and in the
beginning committed the charge to Belisarius: who wan the great battayls
against the Persians, Belisarius.
which were issued out of their country, and did molest the subjects of the
Romans. Herecouered Sclauonia, spoiled and destroyed by the Gepides and
Bulgaria^s. He made a league with the Parthians, who were in arms. He defeited
a great army of Wandales in Affricke, took their king, and reconquered
Carthage. From thence he went into Sicilia, whence shortly after he returned
into Afric, being certified of the rebellion in that country. He handled his
affairs there very prosperously. Finally, being again arrived in Italy, he
vanquished the town of Naples, and sacked it and defeited the Goths of whom
Theodatus was than king.

Afterward he went to Rome, where he was lovingly and honorably received of
al. Being departed thence, he subdued towns and strong holds in diverse places
and amongst others the town of Perouse. This done he laid seige before
Rauenna, where Vitigis king of the Goths fought against him. But having lost
his army; Vitigis Kig of the Goths taken prisoner.
he was taken and led captive into Constantinople by the said Belisarius. The
Goths did renew their power, and in the region beyond Papia, did elect
Hildebrand to be their king. Two others succeaded him and finally Totilas (who
in the absence of Belisarius forraged all Italy) beseiged Rome, Rome taken by
Totylas.
the which he subdued, sacked, and brunt. Wherefore Belisarius having made an
end of the war, which he had with the Parthians, who had again
oppressed Syria: He returned into Italye, and did reestablyshe the City of
Rome, which was almost desarte. Which done, he went to encounter the enymye,
against he whom he had good success.

And as he sailed into Sicilia for to give order as touching the munitions, he
was called home by Iustinianus: through which occasion, Totilas renewed his
power and returned to Rome. Afterward, Narses the Eunuche.
the Emperor gave the conduction of the Italian war unto Narses the Eunuche:
who drove the Goths out of all Italy: Which he did the easiyer, for that they
had lost Totilas their king, who dyed with a wound that he had received. This
war against the Goths lasted ten years. Iustinianus having recovered Italy
and Affryke, and having taken Justinius his daughters son to be companion of
the Empire he shortly after dyed. Some are of opinion that he was a man of a
faynte heart, and that he was subject to Theodora his wife. Tribonianus
collected the Pandects.
Tribonianus Iurisconsull was in his great favor: who having abolyshed the
wrytynges and disputations of the auncetours, did collect out of them certain
works of diverse fragmentes of verses, which are now called Pandects, the
which only remain unto us. He was helped by certain to finishe this work, who
are here and there named. Afterward he did the like unto the letters and
laws of Princes, which before were contained in three books, to wit in the
books called Gregorianus Hermogenianus, and Theodosianus: All the which he
comprehended in one volume, and called it Iustinianus book, being aided by
other men's help, whom the Emperor names in the Preface of the said book.
Certain Authors say that Trebonianus was a covetous man, and that for money
he established laws, and eftsoon disalowed them, as Virgill says. In the
aforesaid books are found diverse laws, In the 6. of Encidos,
ye which do minishe and derogate from those in times past. They added moreover
a particular book of new ordinances: the which altogether bears the name
and title of Justinian. The Emperor dealt very cruelly with Belisarius, under
whose conduct he had wo^ne so many glorious and notable victories. The misery
of Belisarius in his old age.
For he caused his eyes to be put out at such time as he crouched for age. In
Justinians reign diverse Sinodes were holden at Constantinople at the which
Me^na patriarche of the town preceded, who is called most holy, most blessed
and universal, as their books report. In the beginning of the book there is
an Epistle of the Emperor directed unto John Archbishop of Rome, wherein he
names him head of all Churches and assubiecteth all under him. Now albeit that
the learned men do Judge it to be cou^terfaited, notwithstanding put the case
it were true, yet it is certain yt this quarrel did remayn many years after,
until such time as the Bishops of Rome being waxen rych, The means whereby the
Romish church was buylte.
got the vpperhand and buylt the^ a strong hold in the possession of the
Church. The which being buylt by the hands and favor of me^, is at this day in
reputation as if God had established it. We have before declared, how that in
Augustins time the syxt Counsel of Carthage was holden: The disc^^^ of ye
Popes surpr^^sed.
wherein the deceit of Pope Bonifacius the first and of Celestinus was
disclosed. For they affyrmed that it was ordained at Nice yt they should be
appeald unto from al places. The denilyshe ambition of Bonifactus the second.
In Iustinianus time, Bonifacius ye second was bishop of Rome. There remains
a certain Epistle of him, wherein he sharply rebukes and taxes Aurelius, who
at ye foresaid counsel was bishop of Carthage, and says that by the motion
and instigation of ye devil, he with his fellow Bishops, straue against ye
church of Rome. Also he gives god thanks, ye Eulatius, Aurelius successor,
and then Bishop of ye said place, was reconciled with ye Church of Rome.
Moreover he recites a certain writting of Eulatius, by ye which he protests
yt he condemns as well his elders as his successors, who have gone or shall go
about to subvert and deminyshe the priueleges of the holy and apostolic
church. Agapetus successor of Bonifacius ye second did dysplace Authemius
patriarch of Constantinople, who denied two natures in Christ. Theodora the
Emperors wife was sore displeased therewyth: and by Belisarius, warned
Syluerius, Agapetus successor, to reestablyshe him. And because that the said
Agapetus was accused of certain other matters. Belisarius dysplaced him, and
put Vigilius in his town. But because that he being called to
Constantinople, The Bysshoppes of come were in the Emperors power.
would not restore Authemius to his office, he was served with the like.
Whereby it is euydent enough that then the Bishops of Rome wear in the
Emperors power. In the reign of Justinius the second, the Parsian war was
renewed. And because that it went ill and vnfortunallye on the Emperors part,
Auchelaus his Lieutenant did again make peace. Narses the other Lieutenant of
the Emperor, did enjoy Italy for.xvi. years space: after he had driven out
the Goths, and that Totilas was disceassed. Afterward he being called from
thence, by the Emperor, and having received unpleasant letters, and
conceauing great ingratitude in them: he not only not returned, but also to
avenge himself he sent Ambassadors for to entyse and draw the Lombardes into
Italye, in propoundyng unto them great profytes and commodities, and declaryng
unto them that Italy exselled all other counttryes in beauty and fertility.
The Lomberds enter into Italy.
They had at that time taken their inhabytation in Hungaria. At such time as
they were thither arrived, they did possess that part of Italy which bears
their name, even to this day. The Hystoriographers writ that this Justinius,
did instytute a Magystrate in Italye, named That is to say lord or governor.
Exarche, who was as the Vicemperour. He remained for the most part at
Rauenna, not passing for Rome, and placed in every City and Town a governor.

The Italyen wrytters said that this new institution was cause of the ruin of
Italye and of Rome. Narses afterward dyed at Rome. Tiberius Emperor.
Tyberius, who had allreadye been made compaynyon of the Empire, succeaded
Iustynus. He ouerthrewe the Parsyans in two battayls. He made peace with ye
Lombardes: who reigned from the A country in Italy called now Aprucium.
Samnites eue^ to the Alps, ye City of Rome excepted: the which they had
straightly beseiged for a certain time, but finally were constrained to raise
their camp, through the greatness of te^pests, unseasonable weathers, and great
raynes.

Mauritius, Mauritius.
Tiberius son in law was Emperor: and in certain battayles vanquished the
Parsians by his Lieutenants, and finally he made peace with them. Afterward
having called back again his army, he drove ye Scythes from Misia. He kept ye
Lombards under by force in Italy: and displaced the Hu^nes out of Hungaria. He
grew in hatred of his soldiers, because of his covetousness. Wherefore he was
constrained (for to avoid the sedition bego^ne) to fly to Chalcedon: where
finally he was slain with his wife and children, and all his race, by a
certain centurion named Phocas: who afterward was chose^ Emperor by sedi^io^.
Phocas.
In Mauritius reign there appeared a blaysyng star for six Months space.
And as certain writings do mention, Mahomet was then borne, of whom we will
shortly hereafter speak. At that time John Bishop of Constantinople did name
himself ye universal Patriarch. Quarells for the supremacy. Gregory the
first against the ambition of the Pope.
Whom the Bishop of Rome, Pelagius ye second, did strongly and stoutly
withstand, and pronounced his decrees to be of no vallewe. Gregorius ye first
his successor, does sharply reprehend that in him, and says yt this title and
honor was attributed to his ancestors at ye counsel of Carthage: howbeit
never any of them would ever use it. He writing also unto Mauritius the
Emperor, he exhorts him to restrain and keep him under, inas much as it
lies in his authority, the which is sore minished by the power that the
other usurps. It is said that Bonifacius the third, who followed Gregorye did
obtain the supremacye of Phocas. Whereof he published patents and laws. The
entry of ye popes.
In Phocas raygne ye Persians did greatly endomage the public weal. For they
possessed Mesopotamia and Assyria, and passed even into Asia the lesser: so
great was the negligence of the Prince. Moreover Germany, France, Spain, and
the most part of Italy did reuolte. The Saracenes spoiled and proyed Egypt.
Whereof it befell that he was slain for his cruelty, and for neglecting the
public weal. In Heraclius time, his successor, Heraclius.
the Parsians made great roades. From Egypt they marched into Affrike: the
which they subjected unto them. The Scithes did dismember and rent Europa in
pieces diverse and sundry wise. Heraclius finally took journey into Asia: and
seeing that he could not obtain peace, no not in offering means finally
r^dou^ding to the Romans honor, Heraclius. victory.
he entered, eue^ almost by constraint, into plain battle against the said
Persians who then spoiled and oppressed Judea, and overthrew them in two
battles. From thence forthwith passed the floode Tiger, and spoiled ye whole
country of Persia, until such time as he made aliaunce with Sirochus the king
of Persyans son, who having killed his father, had made himself king. By this
means ye country of Affrike, Egypt, and all that the Parsians had subdued, was
rendered: and it was agreed yt the flood Tiger should separate the Parsians
dominion from that of ye Romans, About yt time a great multitude of Saracenes,
who were at the wags of Heraclius, did revolt because they were defrauded of
their payment and robbing and proiyng in Siria under ye conduct of Mahomet they
possessed Damascus, proied Egypt, subdued Arabia, and fought luckly against the
Parsians. The beginning of Mahometes authority.
Mahomet proceeded from out of a poor town and family: notwithstanding he was
subtle and audacious, and afterward was enriched by his mariges: and being
had in estimation for ye pro^ptnes and dexterity of his spirit, The Alchoran of
Mahomete.
he propounded a new doctrine, very pleasant to human reason, but worthy to
be mocked and laughed at, and also wicked for ye most part: to the end yt
thereby he might more and more allure men's minds unto him, and fortifye his
kingdom. And albeit that at the first it was very easy to have extinguished
this fire: notwythstandyng because it was neglected and let slyppe, with in a
short time it waxed almost vnquinshable. For then the dignytye and Empire of
the Romans toward the East was aueanted and buried. In Heraclius raygne,
The fourth counsel of Toletanu^.
the fourth Counsel of Toletanum was holden. And because that in Spain diverse
Priests did not daily, but on the Sunday only, recite the Lords prayer, it
was ordained amongst other things that yt should be remedyed, Item that ye
Apocalipse of saint John the Euangelyst (as they say) should be taught in the
temples from Easter unto whitsonday.

The Goths raygned then in Spain: and as the Spayniards being anoyed with
strange domination (a thing not uncommon) did stir up certain dyssentions
and conspiraties, ye Synod ordained upon great pain that no coniuration
should be made against the king or the nation of the Goths: and that at such
time as ye king should be dead, the chief and heads of ye people with the
priests should elect a successor by common advise. This same was repeted by
them in certain other assemblies. Why Halleluia it not sounge in Lent. Constans.
It was also forbidden that in the time of lent (so they call it) Halleluya
should not be soung in the Churches: because that that is ordained to be a time
of sorrow and not of Joy. Constans Constantinus Son, who was the son of
Heraclius, succeaded him: who fought vnprosperouslye by sea against the
Saracenes. They being victorious took Rhodes, and had entered further into the
country, if the dyssentyons which arose amongst them had not given Trewes
for two years to the Romans. That gave them time of respyte: and then the
Emperor marched into Italye for to defend it from the enemy, as he said.
Being arrived at Tarento, he forced and destroyed Luceria, and other places in
the Apart of Italy, Bordering on ye sea Adriatticum.
Puell, of the Lombardes domynyons.

On the way as he went toward Naples, his ri^rband was defeicted by the
Lombardes. Constans robs Rome.
He entered afterward into Rome very peaceable, but at length he robbed and
proyed the ornaments thereof: and after short abode there, he marched in to
Sicilia, where he was slain with in ye bayne. And because that after his death
strife and dissentyo^ was raised for ye succession, the Saracenes finding this
occasion, entered into Sicilia with a mighty army by sea, and did great
slaughter. They took Sarrogosa, and carried away with them the proy that
Constans had taken out of Rome.

Constantitinus the bearded.
Constantinus ye fourth succeeded Co^stans, who was commonly called ye bearded,
He fought for certain years space against ye Saracenes, who^ finally he
defeicted, in such sort yt they were constrained to require peace and trues for
xxx. years, on condition to pay yearly tribute. The enemies of the Romans,
which were toward ye West, being moved therewith, did also demand peace. But
the Bulgares passing out of the Limits, destroyed the country of Thracia. At
length agreement was made with them, and the two Mysyes were granted them to
dwell in. Notwythstandynge perceiving shortly after the cowardnes and
lythernes of the Romans, they brake peace, and did weaken and dymynyshe the
fortes of the Empire. Constantinus gives the election to the Romans.
This Emperor did first of all ordain, that he should have all power at
Rome, that should be chosen Bishop by the Clergy, the people and the
soldiers. For even hitherto the dignity of the bishope of Rome did depend
upon the confirmation of the Emperor, or of his Lieutenante in Italy. There is
yeat sound a long epistile of pope Leo the second, written unto
Constantinus, by the which he condemnethe all sorts of Heritykes, and does
highly praise him for the care he took of religion and the de^ence thereof, also
for his lyberalitie and good deeds. He sayethe that ye Church triumphethe for
having found such a defender in his raygne, The syxth Counsel of
Constantinople.
the sixth council of Constantinople was holden, by an hundredth and fifty
bishops. In the Acts of that Sinode about the end mention is made of ye
Canons, which are entitled of the apostles: but diffusedly and in obscure
terms. Gratianus recites contrary opinions: saying that some are of opinion
yt they were written by heretics, and rejected by the ancient Church, and
counted amongst ye apocriphes. But it is said that Zepherinus the xvi. Bishop
of rome approved the^ and after him, yt foresaid counsel which is said to have
been ended in ye time of Iustinianus the second, who was ye son of
Constantinus ye fourth. Briefly there is nothing grounded on certain reason:
neither is there any accord as concerning ye number of ye canons. For some
count L. other some sixty, and other eighty four: in which number they remain
at this day. Whereof it is easy to be gathered, yt by little and little diverse
were added unto them, and yt they have passed through one title, albeit that
they wear invented and made of diverse.

Then also the archbishop of Rauenna, was under the bishop of Rome: albeit that
before time, chiefly when the exarcheship was thither transferred, he esteemed
him self nothing inferior to ye bishop of Rome. Iustinianus succeaded
Constantinus his father. Iustimanus
He for want of age and experience, governed the public weal indiscreetly: and
having broken the treatise of peace which his father had made with the
Saracenes and Bulgares, finally he fell into such extremity, that he was
constrained to demand peace of them both. At length he was banyshed for his
cruelty, and confined in a certain place, after that his nostrels were cut.

Leontius was his successor, Leontius.
who had been prisoner two years, for suspicion to have coueted the Empire.
During these troubles, the Saracenes did assault Affrik. But two years after
they were put to flight, after that the battle was given.

The romain soldiers who were in garrison in the country of Afric, seeing
the Emperor handle the affairs very slowly and fayntly, fearyng also the
Saracenes power, which was than merueylous great, and fearyng also to be driven
out again by them: they elected a certain man named Tiberius to be emperor.
He marching with his army unto Constantinople, Tiberius chosen emp.
and possessing ye town, took Leontius, cut of his nose, and put him in prison,
and made a new Exarch in Italy. But as all these things were a doing (not
without great troubles) the Saracenes favored with the opportunity of the
time, and marchyng from Egypt with a great army, took again possession of
Afric with Lybia and almost all Spaygn. The above said Iustinianus displaced,
and sent in exile by Leontius, was succored by Trebellius king of the
Bulgares, and entered by strength and force in to Constantinople, where he
killed Leontius and Tiberius: and for.vi. years after he reigned cruelly, and
also was ingrate toward the king Trebellius. Finally he died with Teberius his
son in a battaill against Philippicus Bardanes, toward whom the army was
revolted. Usurpation of the popes over the emperors.
Pope Constantinus pronounced Philippicus to be a scismatick for the diversity
of religion. At length Philippicus had his eyes put out by his men, and had to
his successor Anastasius the second. He sent a triumphant army by sea to
Rhodes, for to war against the Saracenes: and ordained head of that army one of
the ecclesiastical order. And because yt the soldiers would not obey him,
sedicion was raised, and a certain man of no reputation named Theodosius was
elected Emperor: who retournyng the nauye, he came to Constantinople, which he
wan, and having vanquished Anastasius he made him a priest. He shortly after
was displaced by Leo general lieutenant of the army, and became a monk. At
that time, which was the year of salvation, D.CC. xvii. the Mauritanes rushed
into Affricke with all their power, and brought it under their subjection, at
such time as Rhodoricus, elected by the Goths, was king of Spain. In the
raygne of Leo, the Saracenes having wasted Thracia, beseiged Constantinople by
sea and by land, for three years space, Constantinople beseiged by ye Saracenes.
Finally the plague and pestilence consumed them almost all, and constrained
the residue to retire into their country. Leo was greatly animated against ye
bishop of Rome Gregory the second: and had commanded his Lieutena^t or
Exarch, to find means to avoid ye peace. The Lo^bards, defended ye pope, not
for any love they bare to him but for to fyshe in troubled water, and in the
mean time to enlarge their dominions by such strife and debate. The which they
did. For by this means they possessed many towns belonging to ye Ex: arch.
Certain Epistles of the said Gregory are yet found, written unto ye clergy and
people of Thuring, whereby he admonishes theyin to profit more and more in the
knowledge of god. The others are directed unto ye Saxons: wherein he gravely
conuerteth them from idolatry. Bonifacius sent into Duchland.
He used, in these affairs ye aid of one Bonifacius, who^ he had sent into
Germany. Leo beat down ye images and figures of ye saits and cast the^ out of
ye Churches, and willed ye pope to do the lik. But so far of was it that he
did any thing, that on the contrary he threatened him with great plagues if he
did pursewe in his enterprise Constantinus the fifth of ye name, surnamed
Copronyme, succeaded Leo, who held the same relygion that his father did. He
embarcked himself with a great army for to go against ye Saracenes, to the
end to recover Alexandria in Egypt. but having received news of the sedition
that was raised at home. and that Artabastus was elected Emperor in his
rouine, he returned to Constantinople, took the town by force, and put out
Artabastus eyes. This Constantinus had great quarrel with Gregory ye third,
as well as his father: For Gregory sent diverse messanges for to excommunicate
him. But because that his messangers did possess the prison, he assembled a
Sinode, where he ordained, that all they who from thense forth should beat
down the Images of the saints, or dishonor them, should be altogether rejected
from the compaynye of the Church. The Pope protector of Idols.
Not content herewyth, he with great dyligence, set up great store of Images
in diverse Temples: and decked them sumptuouslye. After Gregorye the third
came Zacharias. There remains a certain Epistle of him, written unto one
Bonifacius Bishop, who was in Ducheland, eue^ to him (as it appears) whose
aid Gregory the second used, as we have said a little before. Zacharias
answers to his demaundes, and permytteth him that there should be Bishops
at Mersebourg, at Bomberge and at Erphord. He granted him moreover that it was
lawful for him to go to Carlomanus, the son of Charles Martel, who demanded
yt a Synod should be holden in a certain Town in the kingdom of France,
and that the manners of the Church should be dylygentlye reformed, but chyeflye
that the adulterous Pryestes, and those that have diverse wives, should be
dysplaced from the order of Pryesthoode.

Marriage forbidden unto the Priests.
For seeing that after they be once entered into the sacred ministry, it is not
lawful for them to have one only wife: how much less than is it permitted to
have diverse together? For yt which Paul says, that the bishop be husband of
one wife, ought not to be understood as appertaynyng to this time, Fine
interpretation of S. Paul.
but for the time paste: that is to say, that he that would be received into
the order of priesthood, should have had but one wife and no more. After this
Epistle follows the act of Calomanus, who intituleth him self duke of ye
french men: by the which he ordeyneth that a Synod should be yearly holden in
his presence. He also commands that the whoremongers and adulterous priests
should be displaced. He forbids them hunting and haukyng, and to entertain
any woman at all in their houses. But he says nothing of their wives.
Aistulphus king of the Lumbards.
At that time Aistulphus king of the Lumbards did demand yearly tribute of the
romans, and threatened them soore.

Stephen the.ii. of that name then bishop of rome seeing that he could not
pacify that man by clementie and presents, he demanded succor of
Constantinus the Emperor. But for as much as there arrived no aid from ye side,
Pipine king of France aydeth the Pope.
he besought Pipine new king of France (as we shall an one declare) to give
him aid. Pipine entered into Italy with strong power, and besieged Papia, and
constrained Aistulphus to receive certain conditions of peace. But as soon as
Pipine was retired into France, he became more fierce and proud, and put him
self again in arms. Wherefore Pipine was again solicited to come into Italy.
Than Aistulphus delivered the Exarchship to Pipine: in the which country the
principal towns are, Rauenua, Fauencia, Cesena, Forum Liuii, Forum Populi,
Bononia, Rhegium, Parma, Placentia. It is said that Pipine left all this
country in ye Popes hands, albeit, that the Emperor had before made request
unto him to render it again to him, for as much as it appertayned to the
Empire, and not to the romain sea. Leo the.ii. succeaded Constantinus his
father. Leo the.ij.
He enterprised but one only journey into Syria: but being repulsed he retired
homewards and dyed shortly after, being of one religion with his father, and
leauyng behynd him a son. named Constantinus the.vi. But because that he was
to young to handle the affairs, Irene his mother had the government. Irene
empress.
He being come to age displaced his mother, and began to reign insolently and
cruelly. And because that there through conspiraties were wrought against him
he punyshed amongst others Nicephorus his uncle, and put out his eyes. He at
length was served with the like by the counsel of his mother, and shortly
after dyed for sorrow. By this means the government of the Empire returned to
Irene his mother: Who was driven out four years after, and sent in exile: and
in her room the above said Nicephorus was placed.

About the time of these tumults and troubles of Constantinople, the fame of
Charles king of France was very great. For he having put end to the war of
Spain, came into Italy with his army at the request of Adrianus Bishop of
Rome. And even as Pipine his father had suppressed Aistulphus king of the
Lombards, so likewise he after long seyge took Desiderius the successor of
Aistulphus, The king of the Lombards taken by Charlemayne.
who greatly molested Italy and Adrianus the first of that name. Moreover he
banished Adalgisius his son from the kingdom, and out of al Italy. For since
Constantinus the great ye Romain Emperors were placed very far of, to wit,
in Constantinople: and were not only encumbred with foreign wars, but also
with civil and domestical dissentions tumultes and debats. Wherthrough it
befell that they took no great care of Italy, or that they could not well
defend it: especially after that ye Lombards threaned to enter the country.
Moreover ye most part of them were at great strife with the Bishops of Rome,
and for spyte they bare them, they did not greatly withstand the advancement of
the Lombards. For this cause ye Popes sought foreign aid and succor. And
because that at that time there was no family more noble nor more mighty then
that of the French Kings, the refuge of ye popes unto the kings of France.
Charlemaine proclaimed Emperor.
for the excellentnes of their acts, the said popes had refuge thither as unto
a certain Haven. On this sort, Leo ye third Adrianus successor, having fyerce
and mighty enemies at Rome, demanded aid of Charles ye son of Pipine. He
being, for ye fourth time come to Rome, was saluted Emperor by the pope and all
ye people. The which came to pass at such time as Constantinople was encombred
with hurlye burlies, great storms, and divisions: in such sort that it seemed
that the time and state of ye public weal did offer means and give occasion
unto this mutation. So therefore the Weast Empire fell into the Germayns hands:
for it is not to be doubted, whether Pipyne and Charles wear Germayns. This
fell in the eight hundredth and one year after the nativity of Christ. As
touching the East Emperors it is certain that since Nicephorus they have been
always tormented and troubled with wars. For in the beginning ye Bulgates
had often times battle against them. Afterward the Saracenes being marched
from Affrike, occupied the Isles of Candy and of Sicilia, and destroyed Asia
through out. Which also finally the Turckes did, who wear issued out of
Scithia. Now from Nicephorus unto Consta^tinus Paleologus the last, there are
reckened about fyftye Greek Emperors, and amongst the^ certain women. They
were for the most part me^ of no worthynes. And in the raygne of Constantinus
Monamachus, who is the twentieth from Nicephorus, Constantinus Monomachus.
the Turckes being of a small beginning began to enlarge their dominions by
ly^le and little, and to assault Asia: in such sort that encreassing daily their
power, The beginning of the turckes.
at length they have establyshed a Monarchye, but no new one, or fifth in
order, but engendered of that part of the Romayn Empire which was in the East.
The first of this Monarchye was Ottomanus, Ottomanus ye first Emperor of the
Turckes.
about the year of Christ a thousand three hundredth. Afterward Mahomette the
second of that name, and great grande father unto Solimanus who reigns at
this present, having taken Constantinople, and slain the Emperor Constantinus
Paleologus with all his race, Constantinople taken by Mahomette.
he utterly rooted up in those places the name and succession of the Emperors
of our religion. Now unto this day the Turckes hold and possess Asia, Syria,
Egypt, Mesopotamia, Judea, Rhodes, and all Grecia, Thracia, Bulgaria, Macedon,
Sclauonye, and the two Mysies, and of fresh memory one of the Hungaryes, and
a certain part of Barbarye.

Diuelyshe ambition of the Bisshoppes.
As touching the supremacye, in times past the Churches of Jerusalem, of
Antioch, of Constantinople and of Rome, have been at great strife and
variaunce: especially the two last, as it has been said. But the Turcke took
away the debate and in such sort confounded all things in those three first
places, that at this day there is no apperaunce there of any Church or
Christian assembly. As concerning that which remains, and which triumphs
being freed from the others that bare her envy, the thing it self does show
in what state and disposytion she is. After then that we have declared how that
part of the body of the Romayne Empire which lies toward the East, is
altogether perished and fallen into other men's hands: It rests to declare
how that which lies toward the West is ruinated, being brought under new
governors. It is here needful to consider as in by passing the marvelous
mockyng of fortune, in that, that the Honor and so high dygnytye of the Empire
has been transferred from the ancient Romayne famylyes unto strangers, The
evil hap of ye Emperors and Empire.
yea unto certain vile and shameless persons amongst them. For sum of
them were Spaynyards, others natyue of Hungarye, Pannonia, Dacia, Dardanya,
Dalinatia, France, Thracia, or Cappadocia. Chyefely it is requysyte to
contemplate how greatly the estate of the Emperors has been doubtful and
miserable, for their prosperitye and dygnyty did not consyste in the defense or
power of the Senate or of the people, but of the Legions and soldiers: in
such sort yt it was meruel that ever any would take upon them an office so
dangerous and subject to so many calamytyes, For since Julius Caesar who was
murdered in ye presence of the Senate unto Charlemayne, The number of Emperors
murdered.
there are found about thirtye that were slain and four that slew them
selves with their own hands. There was always somethynge in them that did
mislyke the souldyours, neither could they bear any more with the good then
with the bad, and conspyrynge for the least accasyon in the world, they cut
their throttes whom they had enforced to take upon them that high estate,
as it is manyefest.

It so befell unto Elius Pertinax. The Senate stood in awe of the Emperor:
but he did depend almost upon the will and pleasure of the vile soldiers.
They took upon them this aucthoritye after the death of Julius Caesar,
especyally the old bands and le^yons, whose aid he had used in France,
Spain and Affryke. Cicero lamentyng the same, says, they are valiant: but
for the Memory of things which they have done in favor of the lybertye of
the Romayn people and dignity of ye publyke weal, they are over much arrogant,
and draw all our counsels unto their fellonie and violence.

The end of the second Book.
The third book.
How the Almaines are entered into france.
BEFORE that we begyne to speak of Charlemayne unto whom (according as we have
said) the West Empire was bequethed, it behooves to declare somewhat of the
Germans of whom he proceaded. First of all it is most evident that the
Germayns have oftentimes passed the Rheine and have entered into the French
dominions, to the end there to make their inhabitition, because of the goodness
of the country. For ye Teuthons did pierce into Province, where they were
defeicted by the Consul C. Marius. Since as the Auuergnaes and they of Autun
did strive and cont^nd for the principality, certain bands of Almaynes hired
of the Auuergnaes and t^^y of Sens came thither. By little and little they so
increased, that under the king Ariouistus they possessed the most part of ye
country. Julius Caesar defeicted them, in plain batta^le. And certain years
after as he made war against them of Liege which is a people beyond Brabant, ye
Germains passed again over ye Rheine for to assail ye Romain host. But they
were overthrown where ye Maze and the Rheyne meteth. Many years after they
held themselves within their limits, because that ye Romain Emperors made war
upon the^. But having gotten a certain apt and commodious time, they looked unto
their advantage, and forraged France without cease. So likewise in the
Emperor Gallienus time, a voluptuous man and of no worthiness, they did invade
and oppress it: and by succession of time became so mighty, that the Emperor
Probus the fourth after Gallienus, drove them out with great difficulty.
Iulianus also Lieutenant of the Emperor Constans did join in battle with
them. Since in the Emperor Honorius time, the Goths entered by force of arms
into France: who being encoumbred with diverse w^rres granted them the country
of Aqui^ania to dwell in. On the other side the French Almayns entryng in arms
through the country called Gallia Belgica, suppressed them of Trire, Gilderla^d
and Cleave, with them of Liege, of Terouane, of Turney, of Amiens, of Beauuoys,
and of Soissonois. Which done, they took their habitatio^ in that part of
Gallia, Paris the head City of France.
ye which yet at this day bears the name of France: Whereof Paris is the head
City, nere whereto is the town of S. Denis, ye which was afterward consecrated
to bury the kings, as it is yet at this present. They being so enlarged, and
holding also before a great part of Germany, to wit al ye country about the
river of Mein and of Rheyne: did not only defend themselves if any came to
assail them: but also set upon others. And as ye Romain Empire fell dai by day
into decay in Asia and Afrike, the Lombards also waistig Italy, they
maruelously enlarged their limits in France. Afterward many of their kings
reigned there, until such time as the kingdom fell into ye hands of Pipine and
of Charlemaine his son. Charles Martellus was the father of Pipine who was
not king, but one of the princes and great masters, as they are commonly
called. He vanquished them of Bauiers and of Swain. For according as ye
writters of ye Histories of Acts yearly done
Annals of France do mention, ye time has been yt the kings have had but
only the title and the name: as touching the whole aucthorie, it was in ye
hands of ye great Master. The Great masters of France and their credit.
For they were altogether degenerated from the virtue and manlines of their
ancestors, and being addicted unto pleasures and voluptuousnes, they took no
care of the public weal. Wherefore the Great master had ye administration:
and did increase so much the more his power as the lithernes and carlesnes of
the king did abound. Pipine who was great master in ye reign of Childericus,
came to the crown under such occasion, The kings suffer the pope to displace
them.
ye thing having been debated upon before pope Zachary, as they say. Mention is
made hereof in ye decree, which they intitill, of Gratianus, where it is said
to be lawful unto ye popes to put the kings out of their thrones. But the
title and inscriptio^ of yt place is false. For albeit that there have been two
Emperors named Anastasius, notwithstanding it cannot be attributed neither to
ye one nor to the other: forasmuch as ye first reigned more then two C. years
before ye befell, ye other.xxxvii. Moreover in the last man's days there was
never any pope named Gelasius. I thought it necessary to add this,
Contraritie in the writings of Popes.
for to advertise ye readers to read intentiuely and warly ye writigs of popes.
For we find in diverse places, yt their chief end is to put their laws in
credit and auctority, by falsely giving to understand yt they are very ancient.
Over and besides this that Pipine did suppress ye Lombards in Italy at the
request of ye pope (as is before said) he made war against the Saxons, and
moreover against them of Aquitania, whose Duke being taken, he slew. After
the death of Pipyne they oftentimes rebelled. But Charlemayne his son put
end unto the two wars to wit, that of Saxonye and of Aquitania, but not
with out great travail.

Long war against the Saxons.
He had war with the Saxons for three and thirty years space, and during this
war he was also occupied with others. For he did subdue ye country of Bauier,
the which did rebel under the conduction of the Captain Tassilon: and made two
iournies against the Lombards, and passed even into the land of Lauor: in such
sort that he subjected all Italy, and ordained laws as touching policy. He
constrained also ye cities of Gallia, situated about ye Ocean sea, in times
past named The ancient name of Britain in France.
Armorica, and now comprehended under the name of little Britayne, to do their
duty: Because that they refused to pay the tribute yt was yearly dew unto ye
kings of France. He went also into Spain where he was victorious against the
Saracenes but at his return the Gascons a people of Aquitania did lay wait
for him in the forestes called Mountains, which do divide France from Spain.
Pirenees, and discomfited him. Finally at the eight years end he vainquished
the Hu^nes, who held ye country of Hungaria, and pacified Bohemia by his
Lieutena^ts. His last war was against ye Danois or Normanes, who wasted all
that side of Germanye and of Gallia with their sea army. Through these so
great acts he was surnamed the Great. For before time the French kings did
hold but yt part of Germany, which is between Saxony and Dunowe, between ye
Rhey^e, and the river of Sala, between Swane and Bauieres. But he annexed the
whole country of Saxony, moreover ye two Hungaries, Demnarbe, or the great
Westphaly^, Ireland and ye mediteran cost of Dalmatia. The above said French
kings did possess in Gallia ye part which is between the Rheine and Loire,
between the Ocean sea and Baleaire. But he adjoined all Aquitania and the ridge
of the hills Pirenees unto the river of Ebro, yea, and even all Italy, which
should have been before said, from the Alps unto the uttermost parts of A
cou^tr^ joining to Naples.
Calabria. Finally being gone for the fourth time to Rome he was saluted
Emperor Augustus by Leo the third and by all the people, the xxxiii. year of
his reign. By this means then the Romayne Empire toward the West, the which
was rent and torn sondrywyse, especial since that the Emperors had placed
their chief seat in Constantinople (as it is easy to be seen by the former
discourse) was renewed again by ye Emperor Charlemaine and as a new body took
again his color and beautye, The Empire renewed by Charlemayne.
in that so many and so great countries were assubiected under the power of one
man only. Nicephorus, the other Emperor of the East parts, was greatly wroth
with this election: but Charlemaine did mollify him by his humanity and
modesty, and by presents entertained themselves in amity, and they did
assygne the compass and limits of both the Empyres. Besides the other
assemblyes, Charlemayne caused a counsel to be holden at Reims: at the which
it was ordained amongst many other statutes, that the Bishops should diligently
study ye holy scriptures, and preach the word of god. Another Synod was
assembled at Mense the year before his death, and before another at Tours, at
Caalon upon the Saone, and at Arles, for ye r^formation of Churches, as ye
writers of yt time say. The eight hundredth and fourtenth year after the
nativity of Christ, ye lxx. year of his age he died at Aix in Germany,
Ludouicus the son of Charlemaine 2. Emperor.
after he had appointed Ludouicus his son heritor of his reign and Empire,
xiiii. years after that he had been first declared Emperor of the Almains. At
that time there was only xxi. Metropolitan Cities (as they are called) in
Italy, Germany, and France, to wit, Rome, Rauenna, Millane. A City, or
Country in Italye so called.
Forumiulii, Grade, Colon, Mense, Salisbourg, Trire, Roua^, Sens, Besonzon,
Lions, Reims, Arles. Vienna, Tarentasia, Ebrodunu^, Burdeux, Tours, Bourges.

Pipine his father had taken away ye Exarchship from the Lo^bars, and had left
it in ye custody of the bishop of Rome, as we have said, and as it is found in
writing. But Charlemaine gave it wholly unto him, as some say: whereof
notwithstanding diverse do doubt. Eginardus his secretary and sworn writter,
Eginardus secretarye to Charlemayne.
who was familier with him, wrytteth yt above all he loved ye Church (which
they call) of S. Peter, wherinto he caused much Gold, Silver and precious
stones to be brought. For he studied above all things to reestablyshe the
City of Rome in her first credyte and aucthoritye. and that the Church of
Saynct Peter should not only be in safegarde under his protectyon, but also
that amongst others it should abound in riches. Eginardus says this and no
more not making any mention that he did give so mighty Towns and so many in
number, which did appertayn to the Empire. yea he being made Emperor at the
fourth entrye which he made into Rome, he gave order (according as we find in
writting) not only unto the affairs of ye City of Rome, of the Pope and of
all Italy, but also unto Ecclesiastical and particular things. Also before he
was Emperor, Authority of Charlemaine above the Pope.
at such time as he was but only King of France, after he had discomfyted
Desiderius king of the Lombards (as it has been said) he came to Rome, and
held a counsel: whereat: as their one Books do mentian, the Pope Adrianus the
first, and all the Sinode did give him the right, and power to elect the
Pope, to ordain the Apostolyke Sea, as they term it, and to confyrme the
Bishops.

Eginardus does attrybute unto Charlemaine diverse virtues worthy of a great
Prince: to wit, temperaunce, modestye, sobriety, affectyon toward relygyon,
Learning, Eloquence, with knowledge not only of the Latin tongue, but also
of the Greek. Besides this he reports him to have been very circumspect and
diligent to see his Children taught and instructed in the knoweledge and
experyence of these self same things. Albin the schole Master of
Charlemayne, chief founder of the university of Paris.
He instituted the vniuersytye of Paris as well through his own proper motyon
and Good will, as by the instigatyon and suit of Albin his Master, who was his
instructour in sciences, as says Eginardus. He named the months and twelve
wyndes in the Duch tongue: the which names are yet used. Before time (as says
the same writter) the French men used names partlye Latyne, partelye Barbarous.

Hitherto I having made as it were a preface of Charlemaine and of ye Almains,
from henceforth I will briefly rounne over and declare how yt part of the Romayn
Empire which is toward the West ye which was recollected and reestablyshed by
Charlemaine, is again fallen into decay: and being divided into diverse
Provinces, has been unto diverse who possess those countries neither more nor
less then their own proper Heritage, without considering their offspring: in
such sort yt this venerable and so renoumed hyghnes of Romayn Empire is at this
day no other thing then a little shadow of a great body, since yt of so great a
large compass it has been enclosed in a small part of Europa, to wit in
Germany. Last of all I will in few words declare how Daniell has for showed
these mutations of Empires, and the fall of the Romain monarchy. Ludouicus
then ye son of Charlemaine, the second Germayn Emperor, renewed the amity
with Leo of Armenia Emperor of Grecia. The third year of his reign Pope Leo
disceassed, and his successor Stephan the fourth went into France and
consecrated the Emperor at Reims. Paschal came after to be Pope. And forasmuch
as the authority of ye Emperor was not interposed, he excuses circumspectly
and diligently that fact, declaryng that he against his will was there placed.
The books of the Popes contain that the Emperor Ludouicus ratifyed unto
Paschal and to his successors the possession of goods, and that he permitted
the election freely unto them: so that he should be counted and holden for Pope,
whom all the Romans should have Judged worthy of that estate. I cannot tell
what credit a man should give unto such writtings: for they agree so ill, and
are placed in so ill order, that none can understand that which ought to follow.
Ludouicus had three sons: Lotharius, whom he took to be compaynion of the
Empire and of the kingdom: Charles, who succeaded in Aquitania his brother
Pipine disseased: he made Ludouicus lord of Bauieres. Conspiraty of children
against their father.
His sons did conspire against him, by whom he was taken and deprived of his
kingdom, and was constrained to take a monastical life at Compienue a town of
the people of Frannce.
Soisonois. The writters of the Annals of France say that the ecclesiastical
prelates (whose pride and superfluity he did reprehend) did raise and move this
tempest in an assembly that they made at Aix in Germany: Impiety of ye bishops.
and did pushe forward ye children to enterprise such execrable wyckednes. He
notwithstanding was delivered six months after to the great joy and
contentation of the people, and ye kingdom with all his other goods was
restored unto him. Since that he came to quietness it is chiefly to be noted
that diverse cou^sells were holden in France. Counsels holden in France.
The first next the abouesaid of Aix was holden at Troy in Campania, after at
Reimes, at Clermou^t in Auuergne, at Tours, at Diion, at Paris, Lions, Vienne,
Auignon, Viarron in Berry, Orleans, and truly diverse almost in each of the
said places. For when the estate of things did so require, the kings did
conuocate ye ecclesiastical order and the other lords for to remedy the
public inconveniences. After this sort Ludouicus the.xii. who had great
enimities and debates with Julius the second, held a counsel of his subjects
at Tours and at Lions ye year of salvation a M.D.X. and a. XI. Let us now
return to our purpose. Ludouicus being disseassed and buried at Mets,
Lotharius succeeded who had war with his brethren. New parting of the
kingdom between the brethren.
But finally it was appeased and new particion was made. Where through
Germanye, fell unto Ludouicus lot, with a part of France, From ye Maze to the
Rheine. France befell unto Charles from ye English sea and the hiles Pirenees
unto the Maze. Lotharius over and besides that he was Emperor obtained Italy
and the Province of Narbonne.

The Saracenes repressed.
Ludouicus the second his son succeeded him who did repress the Saracenes that
did rushe in to Italye. In his raygne Adrianus the second was Pope amongst
others, yea with out the Emperors consent, as their books report. And was
created by the nobilitye of Rome, by the Citezins and by them whom they call
the clargye. For albeit the Emperors Ambassadors were in the Town, not
wythstandynge they wear not called to the electyon. And for as much as they
were wroth herewyth, it was answered them that that was not done in contempt
of the Emperor: but for to take heed that hereafter the custom of waiting for
the Emperors Embisadours should not enter in credyte as nessarye.

They say that the Ambassadors were not only pleased with this answer, but
yt also they did humble curtesy unto the Pope. Here a man may perceive in their
writings a marvelous inconstancy and variety. For if according to their saying
Ludouicus ye first did grant unto them fre election (as also we have here
above mentioned) why did his Nephew Ludouicus the second think injury to be
done unto him? But how so ever ye matter goes, the title of the decree which
is in the repertories of Gratianus, is manifestly false. False shode in the
great decre of Gratianus.
For it is attributed unto Gregory ye fourth, albeit that he was dead two and
twenty years before yt Adrianus the second came to be Pope. He being dead
could he writ the Historye of things which besell afterward?

Before Adrianus was Nicolas ye first, of whom is found a long Epistle unto
Michell Emperor of Gretia, where he makes dyscourse of his power over al
churches. For Ignatius was put out of his Bishoprike at Constantinople, and
Photius placed in his room no mention being made there of unto the Bishop of
Rome. yea the Images were beaten down. He cries therefore there against as
much as he could possible.

Diverse of his decrees do yet remayn full of Papal majesty. The above said
Charles king of France made have to go into Italy, albeit that his other
brother Ludouicus king of Germany, who was his elder, did resyst him. There he
was consecrated by the bishop of Rome, John the eygth. He went for the second
time at the Popes request, to resyst the Saracenes who again had enuaded the
country of Campania: Ludouicus ye maffler.
and died at Mantua. His son Ludouicus surnamed the Maffler succeeded him: but
he reigned but two years.

Charles ye Great.
The Empire came from him to Charles the great son of Ludouicus king of
Germany: who after the death of his two brethren possessed all Germany, Italy
and France, and defeicted the Saracenes who troubled Italye. He made war for
a certain space against the Normayns a people of low Germany, who forraged in
Gallia Belgica. Finally he granted them that part of France which bears
their name unto this day.

Arnulphus Emperor
The Emperor Arnulphus his nephew by ye brother side succeaded after him, who
truly was an excellent Prince. He marched into Italy for to deliver the Pope
Formosus from his adversaries and forthwith took the City of Rome, where he
caused the authors of the sedition to be punished.

In his time the Hungares being driven from ye country of Scithia cast
themselves upon Pannonia, and in the time that Ludouicus the third, son of
Arnulphus, was Emperor, they passed into Germany: and having won a
triumphant victory nere the flood of Lech, they filled Bauier, Swane,
Franconie, and Saxony with slaughters robberies and burnings. In the Emperor
Arnulphus time there was a Counsel holden at Tribur, a town sytuated upon the
Mein, at the which were present.xxii. Bishops of Germany, And amongst diverse
things it was ordained yt none should sell the buriyng of ye dead, A decree for
bedding selling of Graves. Berengarius.
and that no layman (as they call them) should be buried with in the church. At
this time a great fire was kindled in Italy. For Berengarius and other great
lords of Lombardie, unto who^ Charles ye Balde had done great benefits,
co^spired against France at such time as Charles the great was Emperor.
Sedition in Italy by Berengarius.
But perceauyng that they could auayll nothing herein, they turned their
enterprisses against Italy, and having skermished a long time amongst
themselves (as commonly it happens) they did very great hurt. Finally
Berengarius remaining victorious, he obtained the kingdom of Italy: and as
writtings do mention, he took and put out the Emperor Ludouicus eyes, who had
thither conducted his army.

At that time also, to the end that no calamity might be wanting, the
Saracenes, Affrikans and Hungares horribly wasted and spoiled Italye. And for
that the estate of Italy, so fair a region was thus miserable and bloody under
the Berengareis, Hugo. Rudolphus, Lotharius, Albertus and certain others, and
that the Emperor Ludouicus was disseassed in these hurlieburlies: ye Almains,
and chiefly the Saxons, offered ye Empire to Otho prince of Saxony and of
Turing. But he being then of great age, persuaded them to elect Conrad Duke of
Franconie. Conrad Duch Emperor.
Who being in the estate did almost all things by the counsel of Otho.
Moreover Otho being dead, and he him self lying sore sick, he called together
the chiefest of the nobility, and desired them to acknowledge Henry Othos
son, for Emperor, who at that time was absent. This is that Henry which is
commonly surnamed the Byrder. So then we see how the splendor and dignitye of
the Empire has been transferred from the Frenchmen and from the house of
Charlemaine unto the house of Saxony. These two Emperors, Conrad and Henry
were not consecrated (as they call it) by the Bishop of Rome: and therefore
diverse omytte them without making any mention. As touching Henry, it is said
that he neglected the ceremony of sacring which the Pope offered him, saying
that the Judgments and voice of honest and good men did suffyce him.

Prudence and clemencye of the Emperor.
On a certain time after Arnulphus the wicked, Duke of Bauieres, sought to make
himself Emperor: in such sort that the two armies being in readynes encamped
nyghe unto Rentzburgh. But the Emperor demanded to speak unto the Duke
perticularly: and declaryng unto him how he was elected Emperor by many
people of Germanye, admonyshyng him also not to put so many thousands of men
in danger, amongst whom diverse were innocent, and ignorant of the cause of
the war: He mollifyed him in such sort that weapon was laid down on both
sides. Burchartus Duke of Swane did also rebel. But being feared by the
Emperors power, he yielded unto him. The Hungares spoiled again the country of
Saxonye. But the taking of their Duke did cause them to promise trewes for
nine years. The Emperor moreover having mustred his people warred upon the
Dalmates, took by assalt the town of Prague and Wenceslaus their Duke, and made
Bohemia become tributorye unto him. He wanne a great vyctorye over the
Hungares, who rushed into Saxonye, the time of trewes expyred: and distributed
unto the poor the tribute that the Saxons paid them. His purpose was for to
go unto Rome: but being let and stopped by sycknesse he declared Otho his
eldest son, successor of the Empire. Otho first of ye name.
He made long time war against the Bohemyans who did rebel. He slew and
put to flyghte the Hungares about Worms: who had passed the Rheyne and were
entered into Franconye there for to oppress the Country of Saxonye. He
subjected Bourgonye. From thence he marched into Italye with a mighty army,
and having defeycted the Berengares he took there another wife named Adelheida.

Where with Luitholdus his son being displeased began to lay wait and
Ambushements to entrappe him, having diverse yt put to their helping hands: and
amongst others Conrad Duke of Swane his brother in law. But being narowly
beseiged at Rentzburgh by his father, he Humbly demanded pardon and obtained
it. After these things, the Hungares having oppressed and waisted France,
rushed into Germany in greater multitude then ever and encamped nygh unto
Ausbourg in the plain which boroweth her name of the flood of Lech. The
Emperor went and encountered them therewith ye Saxons, Francons Swanes, them of
Bauiers and of Bohomia: and after fyerce and doubtful battle he made such
slaughter of the enemies, that there remained very few. He caused also certain
of their Princes to he hanged. He being returned into Saxonye, where he gave
order unto the affairs, he took again his journey into Italy: but before his
departure he declared Otho his son compaynion and adherant of the Empire.

Otho displaceth the Pope.
When he was arrived at Rome he held a counsel, at the which he presided: and
displaced John the xii. for his crimes, in whose place he ordained Leo the
eight of that name. There is found a certain decree of him which is enclosed in
the right Canon, Priueleges of the Emperor.
where by the example of Adrianus ye first he says he does confer unto the
Emperor Otho and to his successors the power to elect ye Pope, to ordain
the Apostolic sea, and to confirm the Bishops. Likewise he ordayneth most
grievous punishment unto them that consecrate the Bishops without the
approbation of the Emperor. Behold here another decree contrary unto certain
of the above specified. After follows the manner of the oath, by the which they
say that the Emperor Otho was bound unto Pope John. But it is not added who
was that John and the how many of that name, nor how many yt Otho was. Truly
it is marvel that so great things and of such importance have been so
negligently put in writing. If it be so that Otho did thus swear his
reprochers have reason. For seeing that in the oath whereof we spoke, he amongst
other things swears that he will not put the Popes life in danger, nor take
from him his honor and dignity: how will this agree with this that he
dysplaced John from his estate, according as we have said, and placed another?
Accord these matters who can. Otho made the third viage into Italy through the
tumultes and dissentions that were there. And having all appeased he took his
way homewards. But he dyed at ye beginning of May and was buried at Magdebourg
the year of saluatyon nine hundredth seuentye four. He is called Great for the
greatness of his arts, and singular virtue.

Otho the second.
Henry Duke of Bauiers was rebellious unto Otho the second: but he was brought
to obedience by force of arms. Lotharius was then king of France: the brother
of whom named Charles the Emperor made Duke of Loraine, on charge and
condition, yt he should be vassal of the Empire. For the Emperor Henry had
obtained this Province of the king of France Charles the simple, as the
Annals mention, and left it unto his successors by Liniall descent. Lotharius
being dyspleased therewith put incontinently his army in the feyld, and came
with all spead to Aix in Duchland, and went not far ere he suppressed the
Emperor, who looked not well to his defense. The Emperor assembled his
fouldiours, fully determined to venge this outrage, and marched eue^ unto Paris
and finally made peace after great hurt and slaughter done on both sides. He
being returned drew to Rome, and made war upon ye Greks, Otho taken by the sea
robbers.
who held Calabria and Puel. But his army was discomfited, and he fled by
sea: where he was taken by Pirates, and afterward delivered for a certain
su^me of monnie, because he was unknown. He returned then to Rome, and
beseiged Beneuentum with the remnant of his army: and finally took it and
brunt it. Shortly after he was hurt with a darte in a certain battle against
the Greeks and Saracenes, whereof he dyed, and was buried at Rome.

Otho the third.
At the consent of the Princes, Otho his son succeaded him, who was Crowned at
Aix in Ducheland. He ordained Bruno to be Pope, who was a Ducheman: and was
named Gregorye the fyft. But Crescentius Consul of Rome styrred him up for
aduersarye John Bishop of Placentia. The Emperor then came to Rome, and
punished Crescentius and his companions with a terrible and shameful
punishment: and put out the eyes of John the seuententh of that name. And for
because that there was always dissension for the succession of the Empire, he
ordained by the popes help, yt from thence forth certain princes of Germany
should have ye right and aucthoritye to elect the Emperors: for fear lest that
any in the time to come should attain to this dignitye, as by inheritance.
The seven electours of the Empire instituted.
This decree was made about a thousand years after the natiuiry of Christ.
Robert was then king of Frannce, a lover of peace and of letters. The Annals
do renoume him for that he buylt diverse Temples, unto the which he gave great
revenues, Robert kig of France.
and that he went a pilgrimage unto Rome. The Emperor Otho did confer the
royal dignity and franches unto Bolellaus Duke of Polonia, as it is in their
Annals. This then is the beginning of that kingdom. Otho died in returninig
from Italy.

Henry the second of that name was Emperor after him, Henrye the second.
who was Duke of Bauieres next kynsemen of Otho the Great, of the Duke of
Saxonye and of the Emperor. He appeased the affairs in Germany, and drew to
his frendshype a part of the enemies by syngular humanitye: the other part was
dyscomfyted by him.

Which done he passed into Italye, and having plucked ye country of Puel from
the hands of the Saracenes, he restored it to the Empire. Afterward he was
crowned by Benedictus the eight: and sending his host into Germany, he took his
way by Bourgony, and communed with Robert King of France, and they confyrmed
their amity together. This Emperor was greatly in ye favor of the Churchmen,
because he was very benificiall unto them. Henry being dead, the Empire was
vacant a certain time, because that the Princes Electours did not agree. At
length Conrad Duke of Franconie was elected. Conrad Emperor.
He brought Stephan king of Hungaria to agreement and conditions of peace. And
having given order unto ye affairs of Germany, he drew into Italy where diverse
were ready to revolt. At the first entrye he assalted Milan: and from thence
passed to Rome where he was consecrated by John the xviii, and was saluted
Augustus by the acclamations of ye people. He appeased Italy after punisheme^t
made of the tumulte raisers. Notwythstandyng being returned into Germany, he
was constrained to make ye second viage in Italy, for ye new troubles that were
brust forth: where he did justice upon ye authors of ye conspiratie (amongst
whom was the archbishop of Milan) and ceased not till he had reducted all
under his obedience. These things finished and being returned, he dyed at
Vtrec, which is a town in the confynes of Holand. His son Henry the third of
that name succeeded him by the consent of the princes. Henry the third.
He subdued ye Bohemiens who rebelled, and made them become tributorie. He
reestablished Peter king of Hungary whom his subjects had on a certain time
bannished: and pacified ye whole country, not without great loss of his men.
At that time great tempests were raised at Rome, by reason that three did
contend who should be pope, Three at strife who should be Pope.
and did aspire there unto by all unlawful means. These were Benedictus ye
nynth, Siluester ye third, and Gregorye the syxt. The Emperor went thither for
to give order: and having laid seige before Rome, ^e took it by force.
Afterward having made assembly of the estates, he ordained Suitgerus Bishop
of Bamberg to be Pope, who changed his name, and was called Clemens the second:
of whom also the Emperor was crowned. Then the Cityzens of Rome did again
swear, that in the election of ye Pope they would do nothing but what should
please the Emperor. Italy being again appeased, and the Emperor returned
into Germany, Pope Cleme^s died, and was buried at Bamberg. This known, the
Emperor ordained Boppo Bishop of Frisingen to be Pope. It is he who was
named Damasus ye second, and lived in the estate but xxiii. days. Wherefore the
Bishop of Tulles Leo the nynth succeaded him by the commandment of the
Emperor. A Pope or little abode.
There is found the remnant of a certain epistle of him, where he says that
it is not lawful for a bishop, priest, nor Deacon, to leave his wife for
religion sake: but yt reason requires he should norishe her, not so
notwithstanding that it is lawful for him to have her compainye, seeing that
saint Paull says that it is lawful for him as well as unto the other
Aposties, to lead a wife hither and thither. The which he enterpreteth in this
sense, yt the Apostles have had always their wives with them, to the end that
they should be norished with their husbands by the^ whom the said husbands did
instruct in ye religion of Christ: and not for to lie together and exercise ye
act of matrimony: and that by reason thereof Paul did use this word of leading
to and fro and not of embrasing. The Emperor presedeth at ye Counsel.
The year. M. L. Leo departed from Rome and came to Mense, where he held a
counsel of xlii. Bishops, at ye which ye Emperor preseded. He being dead three
years after, at ye consent of the Emperor the bishop of Eistet succeaded him.
He was named Victor the.ii. The Emperor went into Italy, and having there set
al thigs in order he returned into Germany. Afterward having co^muned with ye
French king Henry the first of that name, he dyed in Saxonye, and was buried at
Spire. The Pope and diverse princes were assistant at his death. He had a very
young son named Henry, who notwithstanding was already before elected
Emperor wherefore the charge did he upon his mother, and upon the Bishop of
Ausbourg. Shortly after Pope Victor the second dysseased, having preseded a
little above two years. Fridericus of the house of Loraine, named Stephan the
nynth, succeaded him: who a few months after dyed at Florence. And here upon
one Benedictus the tenth of that name did usurp the Popedom, without the
Emperors leave, by the help of his men. The Romans did myslyke this fact,
therefore they sent an Ambassador for to purge them, offering the Emperor to
keep like fidelitye toward him as they did unto his father, praying him that
he would ordain a lawful Pope. This understood ye Emperor displaced this
Benedictus, and appointed the^ Gerardus Bishop of Florence, who was called
Nicolas the second. Benedictus usurps the Popedom and is shortly after
displaced by Henry the Emperor.
The Princes of Germany did take great displeasure that the public weal was
governed by a woman the Emperors mother. Wherefore they consulted to take her
son from her. Which done the administration fell upon ye archbishops of Mense
and of Coloigne before al others. They sometimes used ye aid of Adelbertus the
archbishop of Breme, who was very a greable unto the young Emperor. He being so
far in favor and gouernyng all, he addicted to himself and to his ye church
goods, and chiefly ye abbeys. Notwithstanding to the end he might be ye less
hated, he persuaded the Emperor to bequyeth them also unto other Princes. In
ye mean while Nicolas the second died, unto whom the Emperor substituted the
Bishop of Parme: but forasmuch as he did communycate nothing unto the Romayne
Senate, and that here through great troubles wear like to be raised, the
Bishop of Lucens was elected, and was called Alexander the second. They
strove together earnestly: Two popes fight together*
but finally Alexander had the upper hand by force of arms.

Whilst the Archbishop of Breme governed all about the Emperor, the other
Bishops his companions bare deadly hatred against him who at length drove him
out of the court. And albeit that he was reestablished in his estate,
notwithstanding he lived not long after. The Emperor being constrained by
necessity, because that diverse did complain of the estate of the publyke
weal, prayed Annon Archbishop of Coloigne to take the charge of ye public
weal. But he perceiving that many things were done insolently and wickedly,
excused himself upon his old age, and for that he was sickly: Wherefore he
rendered unto him the charge. Then the young Emperor being at the age of.XXII.
years, and naturally inclined unto vice, Evil government of the Emperor.
began to loss himself the bridle. And because that he bare no affection unto
his wife Bertha, he norished great store of concubines. Afterward making many
strong holds in Saxonye, he thought to bring them of ye country into bondage
In ye mean while he did not repress his officers, who did sundry whoredoms
and insolences. They then of Saxony, as well nobles as Bishops, did consult
together to maintain their liberty, and put themselves in arms, the which
scarsely they would lay down after great intercession made, when that the
Emperor had satisfied their requests. He flying away by night, escaped with
great difficultye. H^dedrand Necromancien and wicked Pope.
After the dyssease of Alexander the second, the Lords of Rome did substitute
Hildebrand without the advice of the Emperor and without his consentment: who
was named Gregory the.vii. of that name. This known the Emperor made
complaint by letters, and forthwith admonished ye Pope to satisfye him as
touching ye said fact. The Pope made answer that against his will and without
his expectation, he was drawn to that office, neither would he have accepted
that estate before yt he and ye other Princes of Germany should have had
approved ye election. By this means he pacifyed the Emperor, and was since
confirmed by his consentment. Afterward he sent certain bishops Ambassadors
into Germanye, by whom he would have held a counsel. But ye Bishops of the
said nation would not consent thereunto, aledging that to be against the custom
and privilege of the country. Wherefore in as much as he could not bring this
his purpose to pass, he held certain counsels in Italy in the which he
forbadde that Priests should have wives, but that they should either demisse
the^, Marriage forbedde^ unto Priests.
or else forgo their places. He sent unto ye Bishops of Germany this his
decre: and charged upon pain that it should be ratifyed and approved. But the
clergy, as they call them, and the whole band of priests did stoutly and
fyrmely withstand ye same calling him Heritike, because he did put forth so
wicked an ordinance: seeing that Christ had said that al were not capable of
this word, Strife for ye Marriage of Priests.
and that ye saying of Paull was, let them marry that cannot abstain. This
man on ye contrary little regarding the word of Christ, and despisyng (say they)
the authority of Paull will constrain men to forsake the use of lawful
marriage and established of God, for to kyndell vile and dishonest flames, and to
run headlong into manifest infamies. On their part they had rather forgo ye
ministry of ye Church then to be deprived of Matrimony. This Pope
notwithstanding ceased not to urge his affairs by messengers and did so
straightly prease on that the archbishop of Mense did mind to obey him. He
first of al gently admonished his subjects. And afterward he held ye counsel
at Erphurd, where he thought to accomplish the commandment. But little wanted
it that he was not slain in the tumult which did arise. Henry Emrour against ye
Saxons.
In the mean while the Emperor mindyng to avenge ye ignominye and shame of
the year past, when the Saxons had so narrowly assalted him that he was
constrained for his sauegard to fly away by night, put himself in arms, and
the treatise of peace of the former year being broken, he gathered as many men
as he could possible. The army being in readynes he went and set upon the
Saxons, who had sent unto him diverse Ambassadors to entreat for peace and
defeicted the^ not without great slaughter of his: for the most part of the
nobilitye remained on the feyld. After the vyctorye he went on further and
proyed their country, requiryng them by herauds to yield them selves, and to
look for all gentylnes and clemencye at his hands. But he obtained nothing,
albeit that certain did obey thereunto. The Bishop of Halberstat, with Bucco
and Otho Duke of Bauieres, who was defeicted of the Emperor, conducted this
war of Saxony. The Archbishop of Mense was in such wife solicited of Gregory
the seventh, that he held another counsel, where again he propounded of ye
singlenes of the clergy, but he was excepted as of late, and was in great
danger of his life: wherefore he purposed to meddle no more therewith.

The Emperor had broken his army, and sent back the Princes that were come to
his succor, after the discomfitour of the Saxons: but under condition that
they should ariue toward him all in arms the.xxiiii. of October. The day come
diverse were there present, and amongst the^ a great many of Bishops, but not in
such number as before. There again ye Saxons being encamped before Northuse,
sent Ambassadors for to obtain peace. Unto who^ ye Emperor answered yt they
could by no means have peace, unless they did yield themselves unto his
devotion. The Saxons albeit they knew what was better to be don then to accord
thereunto, notwithstanding because that many great Lords auaunced of the
Emperor and sent by him, did conduct the affair, and promised them
mountains and wounders, to wit that neither their lybertye nor their Gooddes
should be mynyshed, at length they consented: and there became subject unto
him the Bishops of Magdebourg and of Halberstat, The Saxons yield.
Otho duke of Bauieres, ye great duke of Saxony Fridericus Palatinus, with
diverse gentillmen. The Emperor at the beginning put them in sufficient honest
guard: but afterward breakyng the covenants, he caused them to be led hither
and thither into sundry places. Since, he not only delivered Otho Duke of
Bauieres, but also took him into great familiarity. As touching the resydue he
delivered them not: and besides this he gave their goods in pray to others.
Moreover he buylt new bulwarks and strong holds, in such sort that he held
his foot, as it were, upon the Saxons throts, and had almost utterly
destroyed their liberty. In his absence he gave the whole administration unto
Otho of Bauieres, who was issued out of Saxony. Furthermore he ordained a
Bishop unto them of Bamberg and of Coloigne and an abbot unto them of Fulden.
He had been already accused unto the pope, of this chiefly that he sold the
ecclesiastical jurisdictions. Wherethrough it befell that ye Pope did summon
him by his Ambassadors, The Emperor summoned by the Pope.
that within a certain day he should appear in Rome for to plead his cause. He
on the other side made an assembly of Bishops and Abbates at worms, wherein it
was concluded through consideration of ye wicked practices by yt which
Hildebrand attained to be Pope, that he should be displaced. Which was published
at Rome by Ambassadors. The Pope was nothing astonished therewith: yea so
little that he fained not to excommunicate the Emperor, The Emperor
excommunicated by ye Pope.
with the Bishops of Mense, of Utter, and of Bamberg chiefly: provided that
before he had excommunicated certain of the Emperors familiers through whose
cou^cells he thought him to be incited to enterprise such things. Now it came
to pass that certain Princes of Germany being grievously offended with the
manner and doings of ye Emperor, chiefly for that against his faith he did
pursew the Saxons with so deadly an hatred, conspired against him so much the
more boldly in that he was excommunicated: and under this title let go ye
captyues that were yielded, and of whom the Emperor had given them the custody:
assuring themselves that they were no more bound unto the Emperor for any
former oath. The Princes rebel against the Emperor.
At the same time certain nobles of Saxony having conspyred and drawn the
resydue to take their parts, took the strong holds that had been buylt: whereof
some they took by force and power, other some rendered and yielded up, and let go
the soldiers yt were there in ward whole and safe, after they had taken oath
of them, that from thenceforth they should not bear weapon against ye country
of Saxony. This known, the Emperor by a certain subtilitie, did willingly
demisse the Princes that he held captyue, to the end that they being returned
into Saxony, should faithfully aid him to punish the rebels. For he saw that
there was no better way to attayn to his purpose, then to sow dyssentions
amongst them, and to separate the^ one from another. Subtilitie against
subtilitye.
But fortune failed him, and it befell clean contrary. For they being
refourned home, and knowing his disposition, did delyberate to unite their
powers and courages, to the end to fight for their liberty. Duke Otho did the
like and forsook him. Now the Emperor filled with good hope, passing though
Bohemia, and aided with the souldyours of the country, was entered within the
regyon of Misenum, where having received news of the common accord of the
Saxons, and of the army even then in all readynes, he losing all hope departed
thence. Then the Princes of Germany came together in a very great number on a
certain day that was assigned. Thither also arrived the Popes Ambassador. He
having declared the causes for the which the Emperor was excommunicated,
incited them to elect another: the which they would not have let to have done
of their own accord. An assembly for to displace the Emperor.
For they, remembryng the Emperors life from his chyldhod, called him the
spotte, shame and dishonor of the Empire: and agreed that he ought to be
dysplaced because of the great domages and hurts that he had done to the
Empire. He being in such distress, began to entreat and make requests by his
Ambassadors. But after diverse procedings, these conditions were propounded
unto him: Hard conditions.
he should represent himself in Justice, and should submit himself unto the
judgment of the Pope, whom they would cause to come to Ausbourg about the
first day of February. He should demand and obtain absolution before that the
year of the excommunication be expired. If he do it not, he shall lose wholly
his cause. He should break his army. The mean while he should live pryuatly
at Spyre with small trayn, not medlyng with any publyke affayre. He should not
have his guard, and should not bear any scepter, nor any other mark of the
Empire, until such time as the Process should be void. The Emperor accepted
these conditions: and as he was at Spire, it came in his brain to go into
Italy, for to appease the Pope in Good time. He put himself then in Iourny
with his wife and his little son, in the sharppest of the winter: The
miserable usage of the Emperor.
and passing through Bourgony and Sauoy with great dyfficulty and danger of
his life, at length he came into Italy, where the Prynees and Bysshoppes of the
Country louyngly accepted him, supposyng that he was thither comme in
dyspleasure against the Pope. In the mean while the Pope had taken his Iourny
at the request of the Princes of Germany, and being already gonne on wards a
little way, he was aduertyssed of the Emperors coming.

Therefore he stayed to know the cause. Here upon the Emperor hastened forth a
gorgeous and honorable Embassage, in the which were certain noble women, of
whom one of them (as the common report goes) was a little to much at the
Popes commandment. He prayed that he would voutsaufe to give him absolution.

The Pope at the beginning made the matter very strange, saying that he could do
nothing, unless the accusers were present. But after long process he was won
by supplications, and agreed thereunto. Howbeit before that ever the Emperor
could have entrance unto him, The ignominius homage of the Emperor unto the
Pope.
he remained three whole days in the court and gate of the castle where the
Pope was, clothed very simply, with out any mark or appearaunce of Emperor,
bare foot, and without drinking or eating until night. The fourth day finally
he was admitted, and then the Pope propounded unto him these laws: he should
represent himself to be examined, he should answer unto the accusations of
the Princes. If he were convicted he should for go the Empire and should not
conspire any vengaunce. The mean while he should live as a private man, and
should do nothing in public person He should quite his subjects of their faith
and oath. He should put from him his counselors and famillier friends. If he do
any thing to the contrary, the grace which is now showed unto him shall be of no
vallew: and it shall be in the lybertye of the Princes to substitute
incontinently another.

These laws being approved of the Emperor the Pope made him ready to say
mass: and for to purge himself of the crimes imputed unto him, he swalowed
the unleavened bread, or the cake which they call Corpus Domini, and giving
himself unto a thousand thousand devils if all wear not feigned and invented
by his adversaries, The par^^rie of Hildebrand.
he exhorted the Emperor, that if on his part he thought the accusations of
the Princes to be false and that he had wrong done unto him, that according to
his example he should swallow ye other morsel of the bread consecrated. But as
ye Emperor did excuse himself saying that he could not well so do, the Pope
did no more press upon him: but having made him a feast, he gave him leave
very courtuously. This being known, ye great lords of Italy were greatly
offended for yt the Emperor had so vilely and unhonestly submitted himself
unto him who by wicked practices had usurped ye Papacy, who had filled and
polluted all with murders and adulteries. The Emperor the altar and defense
of laws.
They had put all their hope in him, who is the protector of Justice, the
altar and defense of laws: and had not only contemned ye excommunication, but
also were sore animated against the pope for his sake: now has done an act
for ever dishonest, has fyled and defamed the Empire with aspote that can never
be washed away, being reconciled with the enemy as well of the Church as of the
public weal.

These and such like rumors did run amongst them: and not rumors only, but
also they were minded to elect the Emperors Nephewe and to bring him to Rome
for to displace the Pope.

The Emperor being informed of these things saw no way more expedient for to
appease them, then to break the covenant and to join himself with them.
Which doing he brake the Popes enterpryses, so that he was constrained to leave
of his iourny which he had taken toward Germany. He then not able to do any
other thing, declared unto the Princes of Germanye by Ambassadors that which
had been done and exhorted them to look unto the public weal. Rudolphus
elected against Henry.
This be fell the year a thousand seventy seven. The Princes then elected
Emperor Rudolphus Duke of Swane: who was consecrated by the Bishop of Mense.
Henry returning into Germany gathered soldiers, the which did Rudolphus also:
who trusted chiefly upon ye succor of ye Saxons. But at the third conflicte he
was so sore hurt that he lived not long after. This victory won, Henry
assembled the estates at Brixne, where it was decreed by ye Bishops that there
were, as well Italians as Germains, that Gregory was not lawful Bishop of Rome:
wherefore ye Archbishop of Rauenna was put in his place, Pope Victor against
Hildebra^d.
and named Victor the third. This decre made the Emperor draw to Rome, and
assaulted Gregory: who found means to escape, and fly away. The Emperor
confyrmed Victor the third, and was crowned by him. Gregory being dead, Vrbanus
ye second, who was the next after him, came to Clermount in Auuergne, where
there was an assemblye of diverse great Lords, at such time as Philip ye first
of that name raygned in France. There he persuaded the war against the
Saracenes: The Counsel at Clermount.
whereof afterward Godfrey of Bullon was head, who prospered in diverse
enterpryses, and recovered Iurusalem. Paschall, Vrbanus successor, was also
the Emperors enemy, who myndyng by reason hereof to take voyage into Italye.
He appointed his Son to be his successor. He being pushed of others, and
having forgotte the duty which naturally is ingraffed in us, The son against
the father.
brought his Father into extreme dystreasse, and constrained him to forgo the
Empire, having the Pope and diverse Princes of Germany that set to their
helpyng hands. He was then Emperor the fyfth of that name, whose Father dyed
afterward in great myserye in the Town of Liege. Certain years after he
marched into Italy with a mighty army, for to accord the varyaunce that was
between the publyke weal of the Empire and the Papacye: Henrye the fyfth.
and making himself way be force of arms, finally came to Rome.

The Emperor conferred the benifices,
Now since Constantyne, the Emperors did confer the ecclesiastycall honors
and dignities. The which at length vexed the Popes that were becomme rich. And
for as much as they thought the thing unreasonable, they stirred up diverse
innimities against the Emperors. This Emperor then demanded out of hand his
right and authority: whereof was raised a great tumulte at Rome, in such
sort that the Emperor was awaked by night, for to succor his men
speadelye, who wear slain of the enemies on all sides.

When the sedicious were defeyted, he took Paschal ye second, and did not let
him depart before that he had satisfied him, Pope Phascal taken by the Emperor.
and made alliance and agreed. But as soon as the Emperor was returned into
Germany, the Pope brake the oath which he had made by most holy words, and
excommunicated ye Emperor. Pope Phascal breaks his oath.
This offered occasion of rebellion unto many princes of Germanye, and chiefly
unto him of Mense. The Emperor being returned into Italy sent Ambassadors
unto the Pope for to make peace: but as yt was a doing, the Pope diseassed, and
Gelasius the second succeaded him. The Emperor not content for that no mention
was made unto him of the election, The Pope and ye Emperor are excommunicated
came to Rome, and ordained another. Gelasius being driven out excommunicated
the Emperor and the Pope that he had constituted. And forasmuch as his
Ambassadors solicited them of Germany for to reuolte, the Emperor was
enforced to retire homeward. The mean while Gelasius dyed, in whose place the
Romans elected Calixtus the second. He displaced him whom the Emperor had
created in despyte of Gelasius and by ye means of certain he agreed with ye
Emperor. Lotharius the third of that name succeeded Henry the fyfth, Lotharius
the third.
who was of the house of the Duks of Saxony, Co^rad Duke of Swane made war
upon him, being dyspleased that the Empire was returned unto the Saxons: and
went into Italye for to usurp the Realm whilst Lotharius should possess
Germanye. But being destitute of succor, he returned and made peace with the
Emperor. Innocent the.ii. was then Pope at Rome, who had Anacletus to his
adversary: and for as much as Anacletus was of a great house, Innocent was
constrained to forgo the place. Notwithstanding having required them perours
aid, he was reestablished. The Emperor being returned into Germany, and
having there ordered his affairs, he took again his way into Italy with a
great army, where he sacked certain rebellious towns, and amongst others
Ancone and Spoletum. He drove Roger king of Sicill out of Puel and out of the
land of Lauor: in such sort that since Charlemain there is found no Emperor
that has done more enterprises in Italy. It is said that at that time the
civil law (which we have said to have been gathered together by the
commandment of Justinian, and which since had been put in oblivion through
the tumults of war) was called again into light. The civil law restored
Henry surnamed the proud, was then duke of Bauiers, and duke of Saxony by
contract of marriage, because yt he was ye emperor Lotharius son in law. He
coveting the Empire, and having conspired sundry things against the Emperor,
was bannished, and his possessions parted and given unto others. But Henry
recovered the country of Saxony: and as he drew toward Bauiers, he died,
leauyng a little son, for whose sake the Saxons rebelled against the Emperor.
And moreover, Welpho (ye brother of Henry diseassed) conquered with sword the
country of Bauiers, and drove out Lupoldus whom the Emperor had made lord of
the country. We have a little before said, Roger king of Sicilia.
that the emperor did thrust out Roger king of Sicilia. But he taking
opportunity of this that Germany was so troubled, set upon Sicilia, and
defeited the Emperors lieutenant. Afterward he incited Welpho by means of
great promises to offer always occasions of war unto the said Emperor and so
to keep him occupied. The king of Hungary, who also feared him did the like.
And as the Emperor thought to go into Italy, having all things in readiness, he
died at Bamberg. And Conrad duke of Swane succeeded him, Conrad Emperor.
who went a warfare against the Saracenes: but having lost his army, returned
home where he ended his life. Fridericus redbeard the first of that name,
Fridericus redbeard.
his nephew and duke of Swane, was Emperor after him, a man of noble
industry. He in the beginning of his reign appeased the princes of Germany,
and took away the variaunce that was touching Saxony and Bauiers. Afterward
went into Italy with a great army: where he chastised them of Verone for that
they had contemned him: and for example he caused certain of ye chief to be
hanged. About Placentia he commanded all the princes vassals of the Empire to
make him watch. He besieged Millan, brake down Ast, destroyed Dertone. Being
arrived at Rome, he was crowned of Adriane the fourth. He suppressed the
citizens that did rebel, overthrew Spolet and made great slaughter. He subdued
the Lumbards: and having surmounted the ambushmentes which they of Verone had
laid for him, returned into Germany. He punisshed ignominiously the Prince
Palatine, who in his absence had styrred up troubles and debates. He made the
duke of Bohemia king. The mean while the Millanes did diverse wrongs unto
their neighbors and reestablished Dartone, that the Emperor had destroyed.
Therefore he returned with a great army and vanquished the Millanes by the aid
of them of Cremone, The Millans rebel against the Emperor.
Pauia and of Noaire. The town being taken pardon was granted unto the common
sort at the request of the Princes of Germany, who had been required of them.
All Lumbardie being brought again in to obedience, and the town of Millan
ordered by his policy, he went unto other people thereaboutes. But after his
departure the Millanes rebelled, and contemning the laws that he had made,
destroyed the fortes and bulworkes by him buylt. Again he returned and spoiled
the whole country, putting all to sack that apperteyned unto them. In the
mean time great co^spiraties were kindled against him in Italy: and the pope
Adrianus of whom we have spoken, was a doer herein: who died being fully
minded to excommunicate him. The Emperor came into Italy the third time, The
town of Millan ouerthrowo^
and raised up the foundation of Millan: made the author and of the rebellion
to be beheaded: and sent in exile the rest of the people.

Afterward having laid siege before Rome, he lost the most part of his army
by contagious sickness. Wherefore he raised the siege, and left garrison of men
in Toscane, at Spolet, Ancone and Rauenna, apoynting men at his pleasure who
should govern the publyke weal. This done he took his way into Germany. After
the dissease of pope Adrianus, two did strive for the popedom. These two were
Victor and Alexander the third. The Emperor was more affectioned to Victors:
but Alexander excommunicateth his adversary, Strife for ye popedom.
and after as the quarrel did inflame he did the like unto the Emperor. The
Millanes seeing the opportunity did rebel, and drove the Emperors lieutenants
from diverse places of Italy, of whom they hanged certain. The Emperor being
returned into Italy, fought against them unknowing who had the better. The
Pope companion of arms did fly to Venice. At length there was trewes between
them: and the Emperor took in hand the viage of Asia against the enemies of
the christian religion: where he was drowned by the rudnes of a river, into the
which he cast himself for to swim. Fridericus redbeard drowned.
His son Henry the.vi. of that name succeeded him. He came the second time
into Italy, after the dissease of William king of Sicilia, son of Roger,
where he conquered Puel and Calabria, took also Naples and subdued Sicilia
leaving there great garrison because of the unstableness of the men of that
country. Then he ordened governors at Rauenna and Ancone, in Puel and Toscane.
Afterward at the consent of the princes of Germany, having declared Fridericus
his son, then a child, successor of thempyre, he went into Sicilia where he
ended his life. And because that Fridericus was to young, diverse were of opinion
to have Philip his uncle take the place. But pope Innocent the third stiffly
wythstood it. This division of the Princes styrred up also great tumults, for
that some of the^ did elect Philip, other some Otho duke of Saxony. The great
tempest was chiefly nere the Rhene. But Philip so behaved the matter, partly by
arms, partly by singular humanity, Philip Emperor slain in his chamber. Otho
emp.
that he brought his adversaries to reason: and then made peace with the Pope,
who^ he had tried to be his enemy even to the uttermost. Afterward he was
slain in his chamber, and the abouesayd Otho duke of Saxony succeaded him, who
entered in the Popes displeasure, albeit that before he had been his friend as
much as could be possible. Briefly he was excommunicated by him: and the
princes electours (solicited of the said Pope for to elect another) held their
assembly: and called from Sicilia Fridericus son of Henry the.vi. unto whom
they had sworn when he was yet a child, as we have said herebefore. The
Emperor Otho came with his army to encounter him nere the Rhene, for to stop
him of his way. But he was driven back in such sort, that being returned into
Saxony he died of displeasure, as it is thought. By this means Fridericus
the.ii. of that name was Emperor, unto whom Fridericus (...) The Emperor
lover of peace, sought the same by Ambassadors which at length with great
difficulty he obtained, afterward he returned into Germany. An outrageous
Pope
The Pope who could not change his nature, wasted Viterbe, and again
excommunicated the Emperor. Who being greatly moved therewith returned into
Italy very furiously, and punished all the rebels through Toscane, Vmbrie and
the side of Pauie. By reason whereof the Pope redoubled his excommunication,
and joined in league with the Venetians. The Emperor forragyng through Italy,
and having brought almost all unto his obedience, came and encamped before
Rome: and as these things were a doing Pope Gregory dyed, who a little before
had called them that took his part unto the counsel at Rauenna: whether they
could not arrive, because that the Emperor kept the ways stopped, and that
also he had taken certain. Thauthour of the decretals.
This is that Gregory who collected the Epistles named Decretalls, which is the
greatest part of the right Canon, loded with great store of commentaries.
Wherein a man may greatly meruel, yt there are men, who apply and addict them
selves wholly unto writings evil adapted, unorderly placed, and less
prudently or religiously (let me not say worthy of mockedge and derision) as if
they were oracles from heaven, and employ all their labor and industry to
enterprete and expound them: The folly of the Canonistes.
so that they seem to be hired for to defend by their watches and trauayles
another foolyshnes and error, and for to lose all shame in another
inpudencie. That which they call the decre of Gracianus conteyneth among other
things in diverse places, The impieties of Gratianus decree.
that the rule of the romain church ought to be followed of all, because that it
is the seat of S. Peter: that it is not lawful to hold a counsel without the
popes permissio^ that the laws of the romain church ought to be observed,
fully as much as if they were pronunced by the mouth of S. Peter: the yoke and
bondage which the romain church does put upon any, yea albeit it were not
tolerable, ought to be borne: the ministers of the church ought to vow
chastity, for fear that they marry not: and to be lawful unto him that has
no wife to have a concubine: Whoredom permitted.
that the pope who is slack and careless in his estate, hurts as well him self
as others. But not withstanding he can be judged of any, because that he
judges ye whole world: that the emperor ought to be under the pope and not
above: that al other men are judged of men, but yt the pope S. Peter's
successor is judged only of God: that it is lawful unto the pope to absolve
the people of the faith and oath which they owe unto their Prince.

Amongst other things there is in the epistles decretals of Gregory, in the
Sixtes of Bonifacius, in the Clementines and extrauagantes (as they call them)
that the popes authority is not subject unto the Decrees of the Counsel, that
it appertains unto the said Pope to approve the Emperor elected, or to
reject him if he be not fit or apt: that there are two great lights which
govern the world, to wit the Sun and the Moon, and that the pope is in
place of the Sun, and the Emperor in place of the Moon: that it is lawful
unto bishops to give pardon unto them, that are fallen into adultery or other
crimes, but where question is of the privileges of the romain church, none
other oght to take knowledge thereof but ye pope: that the bones of the
excommunicated, already buried ought to be taken up and cast far of: that it
is in the popes power to put the emperor from besides his estate and dignity:
that the Emperor is bound to promise faith and fide litie by oath unto the
pope: that the church men must be free and discharged from all charges,
troubles and hindrances: that a man may be pronounced an heretic after his
death, and his goods confiscate: that the children of heretics ought not to be
received into any dignity either civil or ecclesiastical: that for to be
saved it necessarily behoneth that all should be subject unto the pope.

There is no man of sound judgment that sees not what these few articles be,
which are taken from out of infinite others. The definition of the law (as most
learned men say) is a singular reason engraffed in nature, Difinitio^ of the
law.
the which commands the things that ought to be done, and forbids the
contrary. Now every law ought to be referred unto the common utility: and
the lawinaker ought to be affectioned toward the publyke weal, as the father
toward his children: but who sees any such like in the things above said?
Now I pray you what folly is this (without speaking any sharplier) not only to
excuse them, The villainy of the popish laws.
but also to deck, adorn and illustrate them with new commentaries, and to be
careless what is said, so that their dignity be not lessned? If pride,
covetousness, desire of authority, and ignorance of letters has caused the^ to
make such decrees: if they be of diverse opinions, and will not be bound the one
to the others laws, because that they are of like power: I pray thee why do
thou torment thy self for to accord ouerthwarte and contrary things? I omit
this sea, or rather filthy pumpe, to wit ye part of ye right Canon which
co^teyneth the traffike and merchaundise of benefices (as they call them) and
other ecclesiastical revenues. Traffike of benefices.
For who can number the deceipts and subtelties therein written? Even they
truly who have a long time thereto employed their study, and are daily
occupied in them, do not understand nor know them all: seeing that day by day
new are invented. But this argument would requier other time and leisure, and
also a whole book. Let us now return to our purpose. The king of France in
Syria.
The king of France Ludouicus the ninth of that name had perced into Syria and
Egypt, as well as the Emperor Fridericus: and afterward dyed at the siege of
Tunes, the year of salvation a thousand, two hundred three score and ten.
In his raygne Wyllyam Bishop of Paris propounded a question of
ecclesiastical benefices.

And after that the matter had been generally disputed upon, the opinion that
it was not lawful for any to have more then one, Against pluralities of
benefices.
had the maisterie. But it suffiseth that such ordinances be only recited and
written. Innocent the fourth succeeded Gregory, who as by right of heritage
entered in possession of the hatred against the Emperor. Wherefore he assigned
a counsel at Lions, whereunto he summoned the Emperor: The Emperor su^moned
by the pope,
and because he appeared not excommunicated him, depriving him of the dignity:
exhorting therewithal the Princes of Germany to proceed to the election of
another. This his decree is prynted with certain others: also there are found
sundry of themperours epistles written unto diverse kings, by the which he
declares at large on the one side the wickedness of ye pope, and on the other
side his own innocence. He was minded to go to Lions, and to hazard himself:
but that again there arose a commotion in Italy, whereagainst he employed all
his force. But because that his affairs prospered ill, being returned into
Puel, he fell sick; and finally dyed. Some say that he was poisoned, other
say that he was strangled by Manfredus his bastard son, who afterward
possessed Italy. Azo Iurisconsul was then in great fame, Azo Iuris. consul.
after whom came this infinite band of writers, who having transgressed the act
of the emperor Justinian, no less grave then severe, have filled the world
with innumerable books. Wherfrom now we must draw that which the ancient
Doctors had most abundantly and most learnedly entreated. For they rob one
another wrytyngs, and there is no end nor measure of their writing: and all is
full of contrary opinions: infinite books of Legistes.
in such sort that the saying of the old man (who had consulted with three
advocates) may be here very properly applied: you have done well, said he, but
I am in far greater doubt then I was before. I omit the cauilations that are
forged daily more and more. Truly here is that accomplished which the Commodie
says by subteltie one evil does engender another. Terrence in the co^modie of
Phorninon.
Cicero complayneth that diverse singular ordinances of laws are corrupted and
depraved by the dispositions of Iurisconsuls. What would he now do if he
lived, and saw these high pyles of books, with our practice? If he saw this
holy temple of laws to be so vilelye poluted and so miserablye profaned?
Howbeit as God has in our age brought again to light all arts, so he has
styrred up diverse (who endued with good letters) have prosperously trauayled
herein, and do yet travail, Learned iurisconsuls.
for to reestablishe in her beauty and equity this most excellent science and
altogether necessary unto the society of men: which deserves rather to be
called an heavenly gift drawn from the midst of the fountains of
Philosophy. For the which enterprise they are not only worthy of publyke
praise, but also of reward. After the death of Fridericus, the Empire remained
vacant almost xxii. years: albeit that now one and then another were elected:
who could not have the government in that so troublesome a time. In the mean
while the kingdom of Naples was plucked from the family of Fridericus, and
put into the French men's hands: and afterward Sicilia also. For then the popes
did strengthen them selves with the succor and power of France: although that
through occasion of these kingdoms great war were raised between the house
of Arragon, and the house of Anion in France. But question is not thereof at
this present. The public weal having a long time wauered in such sort as has
been said, Rudolphus Emperor.
Rudolphus of Habspurg was elected Emperor: who in the beginning of his raygne
appeased the motions that were through Germanye. Afterward having holden
certain counselles or assemblies: he enuaded Ottacharus king of Bohemia, who
did rebel, and constrained him to make peace under conditions, which he
straight ways brake at the persuation of his wife: and coming the second time
to the conflict in Austrich, remained slain in the field. Ladislaus king of
Hungary aided the Emperor. Finally peace was concluded with the Bohemians by
marriage making: and the Emperor gave Austrich to Albertus his son which the
king of Bohemia had possessed many years. The Emperor being let with
sundry affairs in Germany, did never take usage into Italy, neither had he
any great mind thereunto. For it is said that on a certain time in sportyng
he recited the fable of the Fore, The fable of the fore.
who visited not the Lion that fained him self sick in a cave, because that
the trace of other beasts did astonish him, who were gone in thither and
returned not. Notwythstandyng he appointed in Italy a Lieutenaunt and as it
were a vice Emperor. Moreover it is said that he confirmed Flaminia and the
Exarchshyp (whereof we have often times spoken) to the romain Church, because
that no great profit did redounde unto him from those places. For the Emperors
were at length so weryed with the continual hatredes and inimities of Popes,
that by little and little they became nice and of faynte courage. Neither was it
possible for them to have peace with the Popes, until such time as they had
clean forgone all Italy. The popes at length are masters over Emperors.
And for as much as the popes did lean up on the French men, and did many
sedicions by ye the bishops of Germany, whom they allured: they came at length
to thend of that which they had a long time forethought and forecasted. It is
here needful to put in memory ye merueylous change of things come to pass,
when they who had been preserved by the clemency of ye Emperors, and by them
had found ye means to maintain the^ selves in their place and dignity, being
magnified by their liberality and fre gifts, have taken dominion over the^,
and also defrauded the^ of their patrimony. For not being content to have
usurped the most part of Italy, they have straight bound unto them the Kings
of Sicilia and of Naples: in such sort that these Kings pay them yearly
tribute, and dare not accept the Imperial dignity without their license: and
do auowe this by oath amongst other things, when by the popes they are put in
possession of the said kingdoms. The notable overthrow and sackyng of the
Frenchmen in Sicilia befell in Rudolphus time. For then they held this I Will: but
because that according to the disordered manner of soldiers they did many
insolences and whoredoms, they were al suppressed by a secret conspiratie,
which was assigned when they roung unto euenyng service. The Euenings of
Sicilia.
This slaughter is commonly called the Euenings of Sicilia. And it fell in the
year.M.CC.lxxxi. on Easter day.

The Emperor Rudolphus set diverse towns at liberty for money, the which
before did appertain unto the Empire: to wit Boloigne the fat, Florence,
Guenes, Luques, and others. Afterward having assembled the Princes at
Franckford, he could not have his request ratified, which was to elect Albertus
his son to be his successor. He being dead Adolphus of the house Nansau
succeeded him: Adolphus Emperor.
who shortly after had great quarrel with Albertus duke of Austrich. And for as
much as by his doings he fore displeased the princes of Germany, yea eue^ him
of Mense, by whose means he was made Emperor: he was displaced, Albertus.
and Albertus duke of Austriche and son of Rudolphus put in his place. Who
having made a leuye of men, and being aided of the princes, went to encounter
Adolphus. The conflicte between them was about Spyre, where Adolphus was
greuouslye hurt, by Albertus and afterward slain by the residue of the
multitude. After this victory, Albertus minding to assure himself, and fearing
least any should say that the first election was not rightly constituted,
required again to be solemnly elected: the which was done, albeit that Pope
Bonifacius the eight did say there against, and did not approve that which had
been done of other princes. Shortly after as a great quarrel was moved between
him and Philip the fair king of France, he confyrmed him Emperor: and spoke
marvelous things in ye laud and praise of his house. At length Albertus was
murdered of his kinsme^ at such time as being furnished with all things he had
put himself in iourny for to bring ye Bohemians to this point for to receive
Fridericus his son to be their king. bonifacius the eight.
This Bonifacius added unto ye epistles decretalls of Gregory the ix. contained
in v. books, another book named the sixte. Amongst other things he ordained
that it was lawful for the Pope to forgo his estate. For it is said that by
subtle and unlawful means he had persuaded that unto Celestinus the fyfth
his predecessor. After Albertus, Henry the seventh of that name, of the house
of Luxembourg, Henry the seventh.
came to the Empire. He found means to make John his son king of Bohemia,
by marriage making: and drew into Italye, whose estate was then most miserable.
For since the death of the Emperor Fridericus the second, about fyftie five
years space, the Emperors made no count of Italy.

Wherthrough befell that it was meruelously re^t in pieces by the^ that were of
most power, namely by the Gelphes and Gibellins: The Gelphes and Gibellins.
ye which two factions and seditions have many clients in those countries. He
first then set governors through the towns and fredomes of Lumbardie, and
made the inhabitants swear unto him. Afterward having soiourned a certain time
at Millan, he could not with his labor accord ye factions whereof I have
spoken. And forasmuch as Turrianus, went about to take him at unawares: after ye
conspiratie was disclosed and ye adversaries repulsed, he gave the over sight
and government of the town unto ye vicou^t. All the towns of the country did
yield unto his power and devotion: Brixe only rebelled, the which he took after
long seige, and brake down the walls. From thence he passed by Genes and by
Pise for to go to Rome: where he was crowned by certain Cardinals, because
that Pope Clement the v. had left the town, and being retired into France
dwelt in Auignon. The popes in Auigno^.
The Cardinals demanded of him the oath which they said ought to be made unto
the Pope: but he refused it, and would not so make it that thereby he should be
bound unto the Pope. The Pope hearing this, he declared afterward at large
this form of oath, for to increase always his power: and regestred it with
the other decrees which now remain. For he also composed diverse laws which
bear his name, The overthrow of ye templiers.
and are called Clementines. At this time the Templiers were with ye same fury
overthrown in an instant diverse places. Philip ye fair king of France took
the most part of their goods by ye Popes permission: since their name and
memory was condemned and at the counsel of Vienna, which was held in A country
in France so called.
Dauphine, their possessions were given unto them who are called horsemen of the
Rhodes. At this time also ye university of Orleans was erected by the
authority of king Philip and Pope Clement. After yt the Emperor Henry was
dead not without great suspicio^ of poison, and that he was buried at Pise,
sharp contentions were moved in Germany for the election. For Fridericus duke
of Austrich and son of the Emperor Albertus did contend for ye principallitie
with Ludouicus duke of Bauieres. Two Emperors crowned.
The archbishop of Mense crowned Ludouicus at Aix in germany, but ye bishop of
Coloigne, crowned Fridericus at Rome. Herevpo^ pope John the xxii. named the^
both Emperors: howbeit he was more affectioned on Fridericus side. Which was
cause to inflame the hatred, so that they came even to take weapon in hand, and
to give earnest battle nere unto Eling a town of Swane. Nevertheless they
departed from the conflicte almost equal. Afterward they fought yet again
more fierslye in Bauieres: in the which battle Fridericus was taken, and the
most part of his men put to the sword: but he was let go, and retired home,
where certain years after he dyed. Ludouicus then having gotten ye seignorie
marched into Italy with his army, The Emperor Ludouicus,
and that against the Popes will. There he ordained Lieutenantes through the
towns and fredomes: and was crowned at Millan by the archbishop. Which done he
sent Ambassadors into Auignon once or twice, for to be crowned solemnly:
which forasmuch as he could not obtain, he having left order unto the affairs
of Millan, took journey toward Rome. Where being arrived, he wanted no gretings
and honor at his entrance: and was crowned by one or two Cardinals. Hereupon
ye pope did redouble his excommunication: Wherthrough came to pass that by ye
counsel of the princes ye Emperor created another Pope, so by his means
there was a deadly hatred between them: The first tenthes.
and did impute great crimes the one unto the other. The Annals of France
recite yt Charles the fair son of Philip, permitted first of all unto pope
John to levy tenthes upon the ecclesiastical reuennes: and that they should
divide the booty between the^: for the popes purpose was no other, then to have
pence against the Emperor. After ye Emperors return into Germany, ye pope
died: whose successor Benedictus the xii. excommunicated also the Emperor,
and deprived him of his dignity. The Emperor then co^uocated ye princes at
Francfort, Oration of the Emperor against the Pope.
where he made a trime oration, by ye which he complained of the desloiualties
of Popes, declared what was his faith, set forth and desplaed the ancient laws
of the Empire showed yt the popes had nothing to do in the government of ye
Empire, forasmuch as he is lawful Emperor, who is elected by ye consent of
the princes, albeit yt the Pope do not accord thereunto, nor will not consecrate
him. For all this is but a ceremony, the which by little and little has crept in,
and now is over much auctorized to the great dishonor and damage of the
Empire. Clement ye.vi. succeeded Benedictus: Clement the sixth.
who surmou^ted all the residue in violence, and was the most terriblest. He
propounded certain conditions very ignominius: and became more enraged for yt
they were refused. Wherefore he advertised the princes very expressly, that they
should proceed to ye election of another, yea in such sort yt he limited the^
the time. Which if they failed to do, he would give order yt the church should
not be any longer without a protector and patron. The estate of the public
weal being so mutable and variable, Charles king of Bohemia son of John, and
nephew of Henry the.vii. was elected Emperor. A little before this time
occasion of great war did arise between the Frenchmen and the Englishemen.
Charles y^ fourth.
For as Charles the fair king of France, was disceased without men children
(the which befell the year a M. CCC. XXVII. Edward the third of yt name king of
England contended that the kingdom appartained unto him, War between the
Frenchmen and ye Englishemen.
because that he was son of Isabel the sister of Charles. The chief of ye
kingdom, who are named Petes, elected king Philip of Vallois, cousin of king
Charles disceased excluding not only Edward son of the sister, but also the
kings daughter, who was borne after the dyscease of her father. For they said
that the heritage of that kingdom did nothing appartayne unto daughters.

Hereupon sprung a terrible war, the which yet at this day is not well
appeased. The affairs of ye Emperor Charles were very troublesome at the
beginning. Edward king of England was also chosen Emperor: but he would not
accept it, as it is reported, because of the war where in he was occupied
against the Frenchmen. The Emperor Charles having appeased diverse innimities
through Germany, drew into Italy: and at the consent of Pope Innocent the.vi.
who was in France, was crowned at Rome by certain Cardinals, under condition
that he should not soiourne neither at Rome nor in Italy. Institution of the
viccaires of the Empire.
Wherefore he returned to Millan, where he granted to the family of Vicontes
who then were of great power in yt town, that they should be perpetual
Viccaires of ye Emperor through Lomberdie. For the which benefit he received
a great sum of monny of them: and not of them only, but also of other people
unto whom he had given certain privilege. The which did greatly weaken the
powers of ye Empire in that country. After he was returned from Italy, he
assembled the Princes, and made the decree of ye Empire, which is commonly
called the bull of gold. Last of all he declared Wenceslaus his son successor
of the Empire: The golden bull.
ye which he obtained (as the bruit goes) by great sums of money. Shortly
after he disceased. In ye time of his Empire, John king of France son of
Philip of Vallois g^ue battle against the English men who then held ye most
part of Aquitania and the town of Bourdeaux. He was taken in the battle
very nere Poitiers, with Philip the least of his sons, John king of France
taken of ye English men.
who was afterward duke of Bourgony, surnamed ye Hardy. Diverse of the chief
nobility were slain in yt battle. They yt have written the Annals witness yt
the Englisheme^ were no more then vii. thousand: and on ye contrary that yt
Frenchmen were come thither in an infinite number, even about sixty.M.

This came to pass the year a M. CCC. L. VI. ye xx. of September. The king was
led captive into England, where he died.vii. years after. Wenceslaus (as
writtings do mention) was very vicious as well of his nature and bringing up,
Wenceslaus.
as of his manner of living: and took no care of the public weal. He having
received pe^ce of John Galeatius, who was of the house of Vicontes, Galeatius
ye first duke of Millan.
he made him duke of Millan and of Lomberdy, notwithstanding that he was a
covetous and cruel man. In his reign Iagello duke of Lituanie, was elected by
the will and consent of the Princes, king of Polonia after the death of king
Ludouicus. He was then first baptized, and named Vladislaus. He is ye double
great grandfather of Sigismondus the.ii. who now reigns. The king of Hungary
defeicted by the Turcke.
Sigismundus King of Hungary was vainquished nere unto Nicopole by Baiazeth
Emperor of the Turcks, ye last of September. The king of France Charles
the.vi. of yt name, had sent a brave cheuallry unto the succor of the
Hungarians: whereof John son of Philip ye Hardy duke of Burgony had ye
conduction: who was taken in the battle and presented unto the great Turk,
being in extreme danger of his person: not withstanding he escaped after a
strange manner, John of Bourgonie delivered by a strange means.
which recites the Annals of France. Baiazeth had one of his familiares, who
was of them that make profession and bost themselves to know ye dispositions
and natures of me^, in beholding the body, the eyes, the visage, and the
forhead. He having cast his eye sight upon the prisoner, persuaded yt Emperor
to let him go safe, seeing that at his return into his country, it would so
come to pass that he should kindell a fire, wherewith ye most part of Europa or
of Christendom should be enflamed. Baiazeth believed him, and let go the
prisoner with the other gentill men, after he had received their ransom, which
did amount unto CC. M. crowns. John being returned into France, began to
set himself against Ludouicus duke of Orleans, who was the kings brother. For
he seeing the king his brother to be holden with an incurable disease, would
handle the affairs and have government, be cause yt he was his nerest kinsman.
John of Bourgony on the contrary perceauing himself to be the kings cousin, and
greater in age, Philip his father being dead, would go before. Their quarrel
increased daily, in such sort that the duke of Orleans was at length slain at
Paris, as he returned to his lodging after supper. The murderers were hired by
the Duke of Bourgonie, the which he denied not, and likewise approved that
which was done, this befell in the year a M.CCCC. VII. the ninth of December.
Twelve years after, when the said duke of Bourgonie came to ye place appointed
for the parising of the matter, The death of John of Burgonye.
not withstanding ye assurance made unto him, he was dispatched by certain
familiars of ye aforesaid duke of Orleans, who had conspired against him. The
murder was done in the presence of ye Dolphine, who preseded in ye leading of
the matter. This is the original and beginning of the war, which from yt time
has not ceased even unto this day to be renewed from time to time between these
two famalies. Because yt the Emperor Wenceslaus was despised for his
vnmanlines, the princes did put him from besides his estate: and elected in his
place Robert Palatin. Robert Palatin Emperor.
This man forthwith applied his mind to correct that which Wenceslaus had done
amise, and would not ratify the grant yt his predecessor had made unto John
Galeatius: so that he was minded to bring Lo^bardy again in the obedience of
the Empire. But as he forcasted to go into Italy as well for this cause as for
others he was let, yea repulsed by the above said Galeatius. The estate of
Italy was then very troublesome, through the fault chieflye of Charles and
Wenceslaus, who had overmuch licenced and granted unto those people. For
besides Galeatius (who of late was established duke of Millan) the Venitians,
Florentins and Geneuois made war upon their neighbors, in such sort that all
right and equity did consist in arms and power. Moreover by the long absence
of the Popes out of Rome, diverse in nimites very dangerous were engendered.

Galeatius duke of Millan made then war upon the Florentins: who desiring to
avenge themselves called the Emperor into Italy under great promises. He being
arrived at Padua by the will of ye Venitians, who loved smally Galeatius: seeing
yt he had nothing prepared according to the large promises, he returned into
Germany, casting from him all care of Italy: the which afterward was more
subverted by inward tumulis and troubles. Sigismundus, Sigismundus Emperor.
brother of Wenceslaus, King of Hungary and since of Bohemia, succeeded Robert.
At that time were three Popes, John ye xxiii Gregory the xii. and Benedictus the
xiii by whose strifes and practices almost all the provinces of ye world were
divided. For since Innocent the iii (as their books report (about CC years
space there was no general counsel, and the ecclesiastical estate was
extremly corrupted. For such an vnsatiablenes of vices and disseases was
disbordered, in such sort that the evil was almost incurable. Bonifacius
ye.viii. had been before, who attributed unto himself the Papal and imperial
dignity. After him caine Element the v. of Bourdeaux, who at the request of ye
king of France, The popes court transferred into France.
Philip the fair, forsook Rome, and transferred his court into France. After
his death the seat was vacant certain years, because of the variaunce that was
amongst the Cardinals. At length pope John the xxii. of A town in France
Cahors in Querci was elected at Lions. The fyfth after him, who was Gregory
the xi. returned to Rome, after that the court of the Papacy had remained in
France lxxvii. years. He being dead, Vrbanus ye vi. of Naples, and Clement the
vi. of Sauoy, straue for ye pope dome. The first did lean upon the aid of the
Italians, and dwelt at Rome: the second rested upon the Frenchmen, and had his
seat in Auignon. These here being dead, ye three above said put themselves in
their place, who had been elected by diverse opinions: and so hereby the Papacy
had iii heads. The Papacy as cerberius has three heads.
Many learned men as well of Italy as of France lamented then meruelously the
poor estate of ye Church and spoke sufficient sharply against the corruptions
and manners of yt time, as much as they could understand in the darcknes which
then reigned. Amongst the^ Petrarca, called the town of Auignon. The horishe
Babylon, at such time as ye pope and the Cardinals dwelt there. To the end
then to pacify this scisme, The counsel of Consta^ce
a general counsel was assembled at Constance in Germany: by the authority
whereof the three above said were put down, and Martin the v. elected. In this
counsel John Hus and Iherome of Prague were burned, albeit that they were come
thither under the Emperors safe conducte. The Emperor Sigismundus is greatly
praised for yt for the public felicity he went unto diverse Christian kings,
and exhorted them to look unto the public weal. The things appeased in
Germany he came into Italy. The Venitians and Florentins made war then by sea
and by land upon the duke of Millan, Philip Maria son of John Galeatius. From
thence the Emperor drew to Rome, where he was crowned by Pope Eugenius
the.iiii. Which don he returned to Basil, where there was then another
counsel assigned. Albertus duke of Austrich, Albertus Emperor.
king of Hungary and of Bohemia was his successor: who was so occupied in
civil wars and against the Turckes, yt he had no leisure to come into Italy.
About this time learned wits did again awaken, Learning and good letters
reestablisshed.
who began to set up and exercise the arts, languages and good letters. The
Italians aided with the studies of the Greeks began first, and afterward the
Germanyns, Frenchmen and other nations. And by ye means of the art of printing
then inverted ye which brought with it great commodities, Printing invented.
it is incredible, what a prosperous and desirable progression was made. For
since yt time unto this day the studies have had in such sort their course,
that this our age may compare it self with the most learned time that ever
were. And in this namely is it more happy, yt god has illustrated this science
of singular and profitable arts and of tounges, by the true knowledge of his
holy name: where as the ancient learned men how endued soever they were with
good and most eloque^t letters, The knowledge of god renewed in this time
were nevertheless plonged in most deep darkness, and sought in vain the
souerain goodness, whereof they have so much written. Fridericus the iii of yt
name, duke of Austrich succeeded Albertus: who went peasible to Rome, and was
crowned by pope Nicolas the v. Which done he retired home, The king of Hungary
slain in battle.
without attempting any thing in Italy. The iiii. year of his Empire Vladislaus
son of Wadislaus King of Polonia and of Hungarye, having broken the trewes at
ye motion of pope Eugenius the iiii. was vanquished nere unto Varne or
Dionisiopoli, by Amurathes Emperor of the Turks, the ii. of that name, and
slain in the battle the xi. of November. Nine years after, Mahomet son of
Amurathes took Constantinople by assault, Constantinople taken by yt turcke.
the which his Heirs have possessed already an.C. III. years, and have there
placed their court and royal seat. Vladislaus being dead Casimirus his brother
inherited the kingdom of Polonia: and Ladislaus, who was borne after the
discease of the Emperor Albertus the second the kingdom of Hungary.
Maximilianus succeeded Fridericus his father. As Fridericus lay in his death
bead, Ferdinand King of Spain having driven out the Moors, added to his
dominion Betique, commonly named the kingdom of Grenate. Maximilianus amongst
other had war against the Venitians. Charles son of Philip his son and.v. of yt
name. Charles yt v. Emperor.
Followed him, who reigns at this dai and has marvelous power. By the things
yt we have recited. it evidently appears how the romain Empire, which has
surmou^ted all others that have been or shall be, is almost altogether dissipated
and brought to noght. Dissipation of y^ romain Empire.
For in Asia we have not so much as one foot of ground, or ye breadth of an
nail, as says ye proverb. The Turks Tartarians, and other enemies of our
religion possess al. We have lost al Affrike, except that which ye emperor
Charles the v. ye years past conquered, when he took ye kingdom of Tunes from
Anobarbus lieutenant of the Turk: and having obtained a glorious victory,
established there a king tributarie unto him. Victories of Charles the v. in
Affrike.
Fiftene years after he took also by assault the town of Affrike, Portingall,
Spain, England, Denmark, Polonia, Hungary, Sclauonie, and all Grecia are cut
of from the Empire with the countries there abouts, and the Isles of Sicilia,
Sardinia, Corsica, the Isles of Maiorque and Minorque, Demembring of the
dominion of the Romain Empire.
and also Sauoy. For these provinces have their several lords and governors,
who acknowledge none other superior, neither do aid the affairs of the
Empire with as much as a penny. Behold now Italy, ye which has always been the
first and ancient patrimony of ye Romayn Empire. And what has it at this day
common with us? The kings of Spain hold Calabria, Puel, Campania, and the
kingdom of Naples as by succession of their ancesters. The Popes occupy the
City of Rome which was the proper seat and habitatio^ of Emperors: and
besides this A country in Italy otherwise called Marca Anconitana.
Picenum, Flaminia, and a part of Toscane. In the mean while so far is it that
they acknowledge ye Empire, that the Emperors and the governors of the Empire
are holden bound unto them. The strongest Cities of the country either have
their lords, or else rule within themselves. So it is that they hold nothing of
ye Empire. What shall I say of the Venitians who hold not only fair towns and
fredomes, but also singular Provinces? Hereupon they are the most freest of the
world, and as it were separated from the Romain Empire. Truth it is that
Lombardie holds somewhat more of the Empire: but it is little assured, and no
great profit does redound which is well certained. For after yt the Germain
Emperors had there first ordained Vicountes (as has been already said) and
afterward dukes: how has it been rent in pieces? What profit since has
redounded unto Germany? Wars did arise, which caused ye German Emperors
not to esteem it: which as it were offered occasion unto the house of Sforces
to drive out the vicou^tes and to take the dukedom to himself. Vnstability of
the lords of Millan.
Afterward the kings of France to wit Ludouicus the xii. and Francis the i.
did displace the^: of whom the last held ye country almost vi. years, until
such time as the Emperor Charles the v. did recover it. Briefly, of al Italy
there redou^ded no profit unto y^ Empire. For they of the country are not
assistaunt at the Imperial assemblies, neither do contribute unto the public
charges and necessities, unless they do it of their one gentillnes, or for to
gratify the Emperor. There remains but Germany only, the which having
always been adversary and oftentimes rebellious unto the Romain Empire (as it
appears by former discourses) at length was gathered together by Charlemaine:
and reducted into one bodi. And since that the power of electinge the Emperor
was put into the hands of the vii. electors (as we have above declared) Germany
has been the seat and habitation of Emperors. Germanye ^^e ^^at of ye Empyr^
It is here nedfull to consider the difficulty that was to gather together
this body of empire, how little so ever it be, the which has been first co^pact
in Germanye. For is it possible to imagine dissencions and civil wars, yt has
not ben through ye countries? All then yt appertains to the Empire (so
behooves to conclude) contained at this day under the name of ye empire is
enclosed within ye confines of Germany out of whose limitts there is nothing.
The Empire is very straightly enclosed,
And yet within these so straight limits we se how diverse do draw back, and
withdraw as well their own persons as their goods from the subjection of ye
empire: albeit yt I hold my peace of kings nere hand and of others, who
enforce themselves daily as much as lies in the^ violently to pluck from and
diminish this poor little body so defeicted yt there rests but the very
bones, and to put into their hands yt which appertains unto the public
weal. The prophecy of daniel expounded.
But for to make an end let us appropriate in few words Daniell, who
prophicieth of al these things. We have here before spoken of ye image yt
Nabuchodonozor saw in his dream: we will return hither herafter. Now let us se
ye other places in ye vii chap. he discribeth ye iiii. beasts which by dream
he saw come out of the Ocea^ sea: to wit ye Lion ye bear and ye Leoparde. As
touching ye iiii. he says yt it was dreadful and terrible to behold. The four
beasts.
The lio^ signifies ye kingdom of ye Assirians. The two wings that he
attributes unto him, are as ye two members of this Empire: to wit Babylon and
Assiria. By the bear is signified ye ki^gdome of Persia, by ye which yt of
babilo^ was destroyed. The iii ribs which he says to have been between his
other teth, ar ye principal ki^gs of this monarchy, to wit, Cirus, Darius, and
Artaxerxes, Artaxerxes, who have excelled above ye others: and have eaten much
flesh, that is to say, have joined diverse people to their dominion. The Leopard
is the Empire of Alexander the great, or of ye Greeks. The four wings and
heads thereof are ye four kingdoms which issued out of this monarchy after
Alexanders death. The fourth and last beast is ye romain Empire: the ten horns
are his members or parts: as Syria, Egypt, Asia, Grecia, Afrike, The tenn^
horns.
Spain, France, Italy, Germany, and England. For the Romans possessed al
these nations. Between these ten horns sprang up a ly^le horn, which plucked
away three of the other ten: by the which is meant the mahometicall or turkishe
reign, the which being engendered of small beginning in the romain monarchy,
has occupied three parts thereof, to wit, Egypt, Asia, and Grecia. Moreover,
this little horn has eyes, and is presu^ptuous against god. For Mahomet
propounded a new doctrine very pleasant to his, ye which has a certain
apearance of wisdom: these are the eyes, but undoubtedly this doctrine
blasphemeth god. For it altogether abolisheth the writings of the prophets and
apostles, the wicked doctrine of Mahomet.
and does not acknowledge any benifite of Christ. On the contrary it
injuriously slaundereth the whole doctrine of Christ. Furdermore, this little
horn makes battle against the saints, and does vehemently afflict them (as
he says) until that the ancient, who has neither beginning nor ending, shall
come to make his judgment. Whereof it plainly appears that ye course of this
world shall take end in this empire, and none other shall follow: but that all
principalties of the world being abolished, that perpetual kingdom shall
come, whereof Christ shall be the head and conductor. In the.viii. Chap. Daniel
discribeth the Ram and Goat. The Ra^me and the goat
Which afterward thangel interprets evidently, and says that the Ram
with two horns signifies the kings of the Medes and Perses, but the Goat the
Greek empire, and that great horn in his forhead signifies the first king of
this Empire: and yt this horn being broken four other succeeded it, he says
that it signified four kingdoms that should arise and spring out of this
Empire, but that they should not be able to compare neither in strength nor
power with the abouesaid first king. Let us then se how properly Daniel has
painted forth Alexander the great, CC. years and more before that he reigned:
for he says that the Goat should not touch the ground, Victories of Alexander.
that is to say, he should dispatch his wars with great speed, and that none
could save the Ram from his hands. For Alexander reigned but.xii. years: and
in so little a time he subdued almost al Asia, as we have here abouesayde. And
albeit that the power of the Persians and Medes was incredible, not
withstanding Darius was vanquished of him in three battles one after another,
and lost his life and Empire. Certain say that when Alexander came into
Jerusalem, the chief priest recited unto him this place of Daniel, wherewith he
greatly reioysed. As touching that another horn should come out of these four,
ye which at the first was very little, but afterward became merueylous great,
and which should grievously afflict the most holy places: he says that hereby
is signi^ied the horrible persecutions that the Jews should suffer of the
posterity of Alexander ye great, to wit, of the kings of Egypt and Syria,
between yt which countries Judea is situated. Truly the Jews have
experimented this horn sprung out of the four, to wit, Antiochus the noble,
king of Syria, and most cruel destroyer. Here is also to be applied the.xi.
chapter where he sp^aketh again of Alexander and of his successors so
effectualy, that it seems no prophecy, but some history. Finally let us
come to ye image of Nabuchodonozor, The image of Nebuchodonozor.
whereof we have spoken in the first book, because that occasion was offered. I
will not repete thinterpretatio^ touching ye three first empyres: forasmuch as it
is altogether manifest, and approved by ye course of times. I will speak only
somewhat of the fourth, because it touches us who live therein: and is more
seriously discribed by Daniel. He says yt it should be of iro^, and yt it should
beat down and subdue al other Empyres. It needs not many words to show this:
for ye thing it self makes the proof by the histories yt I have recited. The
fete and the toes are partly of iron, and partly of clay. Eue^ as the foot of
ma^s body is cloven into toes, so after yt the romain empire shall be set upon
his legs of iron and have had his dominion through ye hole earth, he shall end
in toes, and this huge body shall be dissolved It is altogether manifest yt this
is come to pass, and it needs no exposition. For is there any thing more
disparsed at this day, then the body of this great Empire. And although it be
so, notwithstanding because that the sole of the foot is of iron (as he says)
it shall remain always stable, the roman empire shall endure unto the end.
and it can not be altogether broken. But the remnant, the name and dignity
shall abide until such time as Christ shall end all humain things by his
coming. We can in no wise doubt, and it is more clear then the nooneday, that
this Empire is brought extremely thin and low. That high tree is fallen
down, nevertheless the root does yet abide and persevere: not with such juice
yt it can spread forth or increase, but it is altogether dry. Howbeit there
shall be no humain power that can pluck up this root or plant of the nature of
iron: but it shall have always root in ye earth until such time as ye
workmanship of this world be destroyed. We have experience thereof. For diuerrs
have employed their powers to root up this little and straight possession of
the Empire: amongst whom have been the popes and the Turks. And albeit that
they have done many enterprises* and forcast to do more: The pope and the
Turks enemies of thempyre.
notwithstanding they shall never come to ye point to compare or make their
power equal (let them do what they will) with the greatness of that of the
Romans: neither shall they overthrow yt little remna^t of ye empire, although it
be dry and without juice. There shall be no fifte monarchy.
For it is not possible to establishe a fifte monarchy. True it is that
Germany only has the title and possession of thempyre: but if she knit
together her powers and courages, it shall be easy for her to repress al
outward violence: a thing proueable by diverse examples. A few years past ye
Turks passed ye straight of Thracia, and proyed and spoyed all over Europa:
and at this present have so enlarged them selves that their dominion bordereth
upon Germanye. Wherethrough she is in great danger as well as Italy, for the
nearenes. Howbeit if we mark Daniel more narowly, it is to be hoped that their
strength and power is come even to the uppermost step. For Daniel attributes
unto them but only three horns (as we have said) the which they now obtain, The
three horns of the Turks
first of al in possessing the dominion of Asia, afterward of Grecia and of
Egypt. The whole country of that regio^ may be comprehended under the name of
Grecia, even almost unto Sclauonia. And albeit that in our time they occupy a
great part of Hungary: and that they possibly, may vex and trouble Germany or
the countries thereabout: not withstanding because their dominion is to be
enclosed within certain limittes, and may not be comparable with the roman
power (as we have already showed) it is very lykely that these Provinces shall
not be assubiected unto the^ as are the other three, Grecia, Egypt and Asia. They
shall make war against the saints, and exercise all manner of cruelty
against the christians: and their fury shall endure even unto the end of the
world as Daniel plainly witnesses. This is the principal cause of his
prophecy: to the end yt being advertised and certified of the calamities and
miseries of the last time we should not be discouraged, but should wait for
deliverance by the coming of Christ, who will come shortly after these
afflictions, as he says, and will carry his into a sure and peasible place,
wyping al tears from their eyes. Certain places of Daniell do properly
appertain unto the Jews, unto whom ye deliverance from the captivity is
promised, and the time that the Messiah promised unto the fathers should come,
is noted and signified. The other prophecies touching the last age of the world
and them yt shall live at such time as the little Horn, Revelation of antichrist
which is the posterity of Mahomet, shall make war upon the saints, and that
that wicked and abominable man of sin, who sytteth in the temple of god,
showing himself as if he were god, shall be reveled and opened. For eue^ Daniel
has forshewed his tirannie, as Paull expressly interprets in his epistles.
The fury of Satan at the end.
Satan, whom Christ himself calls ye prince of this world, shall always
rage, but chiefly in the last age of the world, and shall slack and louse all
bridles of fury, stirring up adversaries unto Christ, who shall not only be
tiranous and cruel by power of arms, but also by false doctrine shall draw men
into deceit and error; in such sort yt ye very elect shall hardly escape their
snares. This truly is the time yt daniel signifies in ye.xii. Chap. which
should be so miserable and desolate, as never has been ye like, nor shall be. For
he promises us not any thing pleasant: but horrible persecutions, when he
says that the calamities whereof he speaks, shall endure until the dispersio^
of ye hand or assembly of holy people be accomplished. The people of God then
shall be vexed through the whole earth. And the godly me^ shall be afflicted in
diverse places, as long as ye world shall endure. The which testimony of the
prophet, or rather of ye Angel, does cut of from us all hope of conjunction
and reco^ciliatio^. For he always speaks of dispersion and dissipation: and
puts the end when ye discords shall be raised for cause of the religion, at
which time Christ shall appear. But for to comfort lift up and sustain them yt
shall then live, he incontinently after these miseries adds ye resurrection
of the dead. And we ought earnestly to pray unto god yt we may prove and feel
it joyful and comfortable. The mean while Christ himself autoriseth daniel:
Daniell alleged by Christ. Math.xxiiii.
who in a certain sermon of his aledgeth a place of him, and puts him in
credit toward ye auditors. Seeing then that these present times are very
troublesome and miserable, this prophet ought diligently to be understood,
who preaches unto us yt are horn in the end of the world. And he ought
studiously to be red and marked, to the end yt in these present evils we might
be fortified as with a trench, or bulwark, and endued with assured consolation
against the storms and tempests which threaten us.

FINIS.

