The Examination and Confession of certain Wytches at Chensforde in the
County of Essex, before the Queen's majesty's Judges, the xxvi. day of July
ANNO. 1566, at the Assise holden there as then, and one of them put to death
for the same offense, as their examination declares more at large.



The Epistle to the Reader.
GOD which of his singular goodness (as the sage philosopher Hermes has
plainly discribed) to each of his creatures has added a reasonable soul,
which is the chief and most excellent treasure that any man can be endued
withal: Let us then consider gods inerplycable benefits always of his own
free will (and not of our deserts) given and bestowed upon us, and since that
the soul of man is of great estimation in his fatherly presence, let us
endeavor our selves to walk, that by continual exercise of virtuous and
wholesome docume^ts, I mean not only by hearing of the sincere verity:
neither yet by much talkyng of the same to hear, and not to bear away is
altogether frivolous: To babble and prate much of Christ and his gospel (as
though we would be counted ghostly gospellers) and to want the chefest thing,
I mean the fruits o^ well governed conversation, and to be clean void of
integrity, and cleanesse of life, in my judgment and as the lacred scripture
verifieth, is nothing but folly: (example) A tree that is altogether barren,
and at the re^^^^^d time desty^^te of fruit having a trim show of leaves,
deserves to be hewed down and made ^^ete for the fire: so we wantinge fruite^
required, but having plenty of leaves be of like effect, and for all the
outward sh^we that we have, we shall in like ^ase be cut down and thrown
into the fire prepared for the devil and his aungelles, from which (gentell
reader) God defend us all, and give us such grace that we may benceforthe
walk in our vocation, that god in all our works may be unfeignedly glorified,
and by thadmonitio^ of this littel book learn in such sort to keep our
souls, by fixed and assured faith in Christ, from the stinking puddle of
filthy p^llution, then shall we escape that hor^^ble place prepared for the
ungodly and wy^ked livers, and as profitable servants be counted apt members to
dwell with our Savior Christ above the clouds in his heavenly kingdom, to the
which god for his me^cies sake bring us all. Amen.

The Preface.
My tremblinge hand for fear does
^y dolor does excede: (quake,
My joys decrese to tender tears
my sportes are turned in deed.
The gredy gu^fs of gry^ly grief,
so gripe my restles heart:
y^ my pore pen can scantly show,
the passions of my sinarte.
Draw nere you patrones with your babes,
come view this haples hap:
In flushing fluddes of ^ominge tears
your tender bewtyes lap.
Ye matrones mild draw nere in haste,
this yrksome act behold:
Then Nature shall ber rufull playnts,
by you her Nymphs unfold.
Each wight in whom the skillful skyll,
of natures art is shown:
Surrender may them selves to me,
this cruel act to moan.
The heaps of grief so hugie are,
that sobb^es must needs abound:
Yea shrilly shrickes to pass the skies,
your v^^ce^ shall redounde.
The dolor now so doutfull is,
that skante my w^rbling pen:
Can forth express the sense thereof,
unto the sons of men.
Again the blub^^^e tears which glide,
from my ^oore pincked eyes:
Besmerde my face that scarce I can,
my inward gr^efes sup^rise.
One while I ^lu^he for shame to show,
these pageantes worthy blame:
Some other time my though^es me let,
these bluddy fact^^^ t^ name.
Thus as I stay in doubt alas,
my dompes are passinge great:
M^ clogged joints benom^ with fear,
have got Dame ^orowes seat
Her massy mace with direful stroke,
has stroke my members all:
But these Periphrases I leave,
and will discourse my thrall.
Which to conceive each reader will,
well way I do not doubt:
Ofiate in Chenceforde town dear friends,
before the noble route.
Of Judges just plast in that seat,
by our most famous Queen:
Judgment to give as justice leads*
as daily well is scene.
The Sess^o^s there by order kept,
offenders to correct:
Thr^ feminine dames attached were,
whom Satan had infect.
With ^elials sprite whose ^orcery did,
the simple so moiest:
That when they would with present death.
they were full sore opp^est.
Here a^^er shall succeed the acts,
that they them selves have wrought:
(...) they them selves confessed have,
to judgment being brought.
Which thing when thou haste viewed well,
good Reader do (...) pray:
(...) the Lord that he from us,
(...) witches take away.
(...) ^apinge thou will,
(...) we^^ accept:
(...) when thou haste heard,
(...)
(...) Prolog.
An exbortacion to all faithful men wyllinge them to set Gods fear before
their eyes and Satan's practices utterly to despise annexed to the same,
profitable for every Christian man to read and to embrace.
BEhold these acts and scan the^ well,
behold their peruers way:
these left y^ lord these did his truth
which should have been their stay*
In them such power satan had,
that Christ they did refuse:
his precious blud ^hed the^ to save
to much they did abuse.
Sin death and hell did spread their flagge,
in them they bare the sway:
His word was yrkesome to their hearts,
they walked ^arre astray.
What tender heart would god renounce,
who would his gospel leave:
What godly one would hate his lord,
and unto Satan cleave.
What wight would gods good benefits,
so lightly now esteem:
Which sent his Christ into the world,
from hell us to redeem.
W^o by his might did vanquishe sin,
and laid Satan wa^^e:
By whose dear death eternal life,
his flock shall surely taste.
His love to us his creatures did,
in a^p^e wise excede:
When by the pains of paynefull death,
to save us he decrede.
What durat heart or selly breast,
could find Christ to repaye:
With such cont^mpte as did these ymphes,
which here behold ye may.
What matrones ^arte would hyde the skyll,
of Nature that meke dame:
And toil by such ungodly arts,
to extmquishe clean the same.
I mean if God should send increase,
and multiply her sede:
Would she frequent it to destroy,
by wicked means in deed.
I think no tender heart could find,
an infantes blood to spill:
Nor yet no spoused wife I think,
her husband dear would kill
Since that by witchcraft witches use,
all euilles to sequest:
Let such as fear the living God,
their practices detest.
Since whoredom in the same I say,
her force does plainly show:
Let every wight ^he same abhor,
and escape infernal woe.
Since this art does such y^l conteyne,
as swearinges manifold:
Let faithful hearts forsake the same,
and fix on Christ their hold.
Since by that practice vile ^ere friends,
man slaughter put in ^re:
Let v^ contemn those godles acts,
and lead a life most pure.
Since Christ the rock of lasting life,
must clean renounsed be:
And Satan as the governor,
must have the dignity.
What cursed state shall they abide*
Which Christ their guide refuse:
And study still the deuilles mind,
by practice still to use.
Did Christ in vain bestow his blood,
to save our souls from hell:
Did Christ in vain prepare the heavens,
for his elect to dwell.
Not so I judge, why should we then,
his law and word contemn:
The scripture does rebellious folk,
everlastingly condemn.
I mean such as his word detest,
his law condemns plain:
To taste with him whom they do serve,
in hell eternal pain.
Such as do in finne delighte.
frequenting mischief still:
Be Satan's own, for Jesus Christ,
for his deny them will.
Since Christ in heaven will them forsake,
which him in earth deny:
Let us henceforth learn so to walk,
his name to magnifye.
Let us that swearers be in deed,
our swearinge clean refrain:
So shall we escape the gredy gulphes,
of hell and burninge pain.
Let whoremongers which whoredom use,
cast clean away the same:
And pardon crave, for Christ is pressed,
for to forgive the blame.
Let such men as delight in sin,
forsake their sinful ways:
And study now that all your acts,
may tend the Lord to praise.
Let filthy swyntsthe dronkardes now,
abhorred in Gods slight:
Leave of their quaffing in excess,
in modesty delight.
Then shall Gods arms be opened wide,
us wr^tches to embrace:
And with his saints in his kingedome,
he will us surely place.
To which kingedome for Christ's sake,
vouchsafe thy ^^ocke to bring:
That we as thy electes dear God,
to thee may praises singe.
Finis.
quod John Phillips

The examination of them with their confession before Doctor Cole and master
Foscue at the same Sise verhatum as nere as could be gathered, and first of
Elizabeth Frauncis who said as here follows.
First the learned this art of witchcraft at the age of.xii. years of her
grandmother whose nam was mother Eve of Hatfyelde Peuerell disseased.

Item when she taught it her, she counseiled her to renounce GOD and his
word, and to give of her bloudde to Satan (as she termed it) which she
delivered her in the likeness of a white spotted Catte, and taught her to
feed the said Catte with bread and milk and she did so, also she taught
her to call it by the name of Satan and to keep it in a basket.

When this mother Eve had given her the Cat Satan, then this Elizabeth desired
first of the said Cat (calling it Satan) that she might be rich and to
have goods, and he promised her she should, askinge her what she would have,
and she said sheep (^or this Cat spoke to her as she confessed in a strange
holowe voice, (but such as she understood by use) and this Cat forthwith
brought sheep into her pasture to the number of.xviii black and white, which
continued with her for a time, but in the end did all wear away she knew
not how.

Item when she had gotten these sheep, she desired to have on Andrew Byles to
her husband, which was a man of some wealth, and the cat did promise she should,
but that he said she must first consent that t^is Andrew should abuse her, and
she so did.

And after when this Andrew had thus abused her he would not mary her, wherefore
she willed Satan to waste his goods, which he forthwith did, and yet not
being contentid with this, she wild him to touch his body, which he forthewith
did whereof he died.

Item that every time that he did any thing for her, she said that he
required a drop of blood, which she gave him by prycking herself, sometime in
one place and then in an other, and where she pricked her self there remained
a red spot, which was still to be seen.

Item when this Andrew was dead, she douting her self with child willed
satan to destroy it, and he bad her take a certain herb and drink it which
she did, and destroyed the child forthwyth.

Item when she desired an other husband, he promised her an other, naminge
this Frauncis whom she now has, but said he is not so rich as the other,
willing her to consent unto that Frauncis in fornycation which she did, and
thereof conceived a daughter that was borne within a quarter of a year after
they were married.

After they were married they lived not so quietly as she desired, being
stirred (as she said) to much unquietness and moved to swearing and cursinge,
wherefore she willed satan her Cat to kill the child, being about the age of
half a year old and he did so, and when she yet found not the quietness that
she desired, she wylled it to lay a la^enes in the leg of this Frauncis her
husband, and it did in this manner. It came in a morninge to this Frauncis
shoe, lying in it like a tode, and when he perceived it puttinge on his shoe,
and had touched it with his foot, he being suddenly amassed asked of her what it
was, and she bad him kill it, and he was forthwith taken with a lamenes whereof
he can not healed.

After all this when she had kept this Cat, by the space of.xv. or xvi. year,
and as some say (though untruly) being weary of it, she came to one mother
Waterhouse her neighbor (a pore woman) when she was going to the oue^, and
desired her to give her a cake, and she would give her a thing that she should
be the better for so long as she lived, and this mother waterhouse gave her a
cake, where upon she brought her this cat in her apron and taught her as she
was in structed before by her grandmother Eve, tellig her that she must call him
Satan and give him of her blood and bread and milk as before, and at this
examination would confess no more.

Mother waterhouse of Nat^ylde peuerell of the age of.lxii^^. years being
examined the same day confessed as follows, and the xxix. day suffered.
First she received this cat of this frances wife in y^ order as is before
said, who wild her to call him satan, and told her that if she made much of
him he would do for her what she would have him to do.

Then when she had received him the (to try him what he could do) wyld him to
kill a hog of her own which he did, and she gave him for his labor a chicken,
which he first required of her and a drop of her blod. And this she gave him
at all times when he did any thing for her, by prick^ng her hand or face and
puttinge the blood to his mouth which he sucked, and forthwith would lie down
in his ^ot again, wherein she kept him, the spots of all the which pr^ks are
yet to be seen in her skin.

Also she says that another time being offended with one father Kersye she
took her catte Satan in her lap and put him in the wood before her door, and
willed him to kill three of this father Kersyes hogs, which he did, and
retourning again told her so, and she rewarded him as before, with a chicken
and a drop of her blood, which chicken he eat up clean as he did all the
rest, and she cold find remaining neither bones nor feathers.

Also she confessed that falling out with one widow Gooday she wylled Satan
to drown her cow and he did so, and she rewardid him as before.

Also she falling out with another of her neyboures, she killed her three geese
in the same manner.

Item, she confessed that because she could have no ^est (which she required)
she caused satan to destroy the brewing at that time.

Also being denied butter of an other, she caused her to lose the curdes ii.
or.iii. days after.

Item fallinge out with an other of her neybours and his wife, she wylled
satan to kill him with a bluddye ^i^e, whereof he dyed, and she rewarded him
as before.

Likewise she confessed, that because she lived somewhat unquietly with her
husband she caused ^atha to kill him, and he did so about.ix. years past, sith
which time she has lived a widow.

Also she said that when she would will him to do any thing for her, she would
say her Pater noster in laten.

Item this mother Waterhouse confessed that she first turned this Cat into a
tode by this means, she kept the ^at a great while in woll in a pot, and at
length being moved by poverty to occupy the wol, she prayed in the name of
the father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost that it would turn into a
tode, and forthwith it was turned into a tode, and so kept it in the pot
without woll.

Also she said, that going to Brack stead a little before her apprehentyon,
this Satan wylled her to hye her home, for she should have great trouble, and
that she should be either hanged or burned shortly, more at this time she
would not confess.

Ione Waterhouse, daughter to the mother Waterhouse, being of the age
of.xviii. years, and examined, confesses as follows.
First, that her mother this last winter would have learned her this art, but
she learned it not, nether yet the name of the thing. She says she never saw
it but once in her mothers hand, and that was in the likeness of a tode, and at
that time coming in at a sodeyn when her mother called it out to work some
thing withal, she herd her to call it Satan, for she was not at any time
truly taught if, nor did never exercise it before this time as follows.

Item she confessed that when her mother was gone to Breakstede, in her absence
lacking bread, she went to a gyrle, a neighbors child, and desired her to
give her a piece of bred and cheese, which when she denied and gave her not, or
at the least not so much as would satisfye her, she goinge home did as she
had seen her mother do, calling Satan, which came to her (as she said) she
thought out of her mothers show from under the dedde, in the lykenes of a
great dog, demanding what she would have, wherewithal she being a fearde,
said she would have him to make such a gyrle a ferd naminge this gyrle, then
asked he her what she would give him, and she said a red kocke, then said
he no, but thou shall give me thy body and soul, whereby she being soore
feared, and desirous to be rydde of him, said she would: And herewith he went to
this gyrle in the lykenes of an evil ^auou^^d dog with horns on his head,
and made her very much afearde, and does yet haunt her, now can not these
witches (as they say) call him in again, because they did not let him out. And
more (says she) she never did, but this her doing was the reuealyng of all
the rest.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London by Willyam Powell for Wyllyam Pickeringe dwelling at
Saint M^gn^s corner and are there for to be soulde.

Au^o 1566. the. 13. August.

The second examination and Confession of mother Agnes Waterhouse and Ione her
daughter, upon her arainement with the questions and answers of Agnes Brown
the child, on whom the spirit haunteth at this present, deliberately declared
before Justice Southcote and master Gerard the queen's attorney, the.xxvii. day
of July Anno. 1566. no less wonderful then most true.


The Confession of Agnes Waterhowse the.xxvii. day of July in Anno. 1566. at
Chelmsforde before Justice Southcote and M. E^rard the queen's Attorney.
First being demanded whether that she were gyltye or not gilty upon her
araynement of the murtheringe of a man, she confessed that she was gilty, and
the^ upon the evidence given against her daughter Ione Waterhouse, she said
that she had a White Cat, and wylled her cat that he should destroy many of
her neighbors cattle, and also that he should kill a man, and so he did, and
then after she must go.ii. or.iii. mile from her house, and then she took
thought how to keep her catte, then she and her catte concluded that he the
said catte would become a tode, and then she should keep him in a close house
and give him milk, and so he would continue till she came home again, and
then being gone forth, her daughter having ben at a neighbors house there by,
required of one Agnes Brown, of the age of xii. years or more, a piece of
bread and cheese, and the said Agnes said that she had none, and that she
had not the key of the milkhouse door, and then the said Ione went home and was
angry with the said Agnes broun and she said that she remembered that her mother
was wont to go up and down in her house (...) to call Satan Satan ^he said
she would prove the like, and then she went up and down the house and called
Satan, and then there came a black dog to her and asked her what she would
have, and then she said she was aferd and said I would have thee to make one
Agnes brown afraid, and then he asked her what she would give him and she
said she would give him a red kock, and he said he would have none of that,
and she asked him what he would have then, and he said he would have her body
and soul, and so upon request and fear together she gave him her body and
soul, and then said the queen's atturneye, How vvylt thou do before god. O my
lord, I trust god will have mercy upon me, and then he said, thou saiste
well, and then he departed from her, and then she said that she herd that he
made the said Agnes Brown a fearde.

The said Agnes Brown was then demanded and called for, and then she came in,
and being asked what age she was of she said she thought she was, xii. years
old, and then the queen's attorney asked her what she could say, and then she
said that at such a day naming the day certain that she was chirning of
butter and there came to her a thing like a black dog with (...) face like
an ape a short ta^^e a (...) and a silver whystle (to her thinking) about his
neck, and a peyre of horns on his head, and (...) in his mouth she keye of
the milkehouse door, and then my lord she said, I was a fearde, for he
skypped and leaped to and fro, and sat^e on the top of a ne^^le, and then I
asked (...) what he would (...) he would (...) and I said I had none (...) and
then he said he (...) aue some or he went, and then he did run to put the keye
into the lock of the mylkehouse door, and I said he should have none, and he
said he would have some, and then he opened the door and went upon the
shelfe, and there upon anew chese laid down the key, and being a while within
he came out again, and locked the door and said that he had made (...) butter
for ^ee, and so departed, and then she said see told her (...) of it, and
then she sent for the priest, and when he came he ^ad her to pray^ to god, and
^al on the name of Jesus, and so the next day my lord he came again to me
with the keye of our milkehouse door in his mou^he, and then I said in the
name of Jesus what haste thou there, and then he laid down the key and said
that I spoke evil words in speaking of that name, and then he departed,
and so my aunte took up the key for he had kept it from us. ii days and a
night, and then we went into the milkhouse and there we did se the print of
butter upon the chese, and then within a few days after he came again with a
bean pod in his mouth and then the queens attorney asked what that was, and
so the other Justices declared, and then she said my lord I said in the
name of Jesus what have thou there and so then he laid it down and said I
spoke evil words and departed and came again by and by with a piece of bread
in his mouth, and I asked him what he would have and he said butter it was that
he would have, and so he departed, and my lord I did not se him no more till
wenseday last, which was the.xxiiii. day of July why said the queen's attorney
was he with the on we^seday last, ye she said, what did he then to thee said
he, my lord said she he came with a knyfe in his mouth and asked me if I
were not dead and I said no I thanked god, and then he said if I would not
dye that he would thrust his knife to my heart but he would make me to dye, and
then I said in the name of jesus lay down thy knyfe, and he said he would
not depart from his ^^eete dames knyfe as yet, and then I asked of him who was
his dame, and then he nodded and wagged his head to your house mother water
house, then the queens attourneye asked of the said Agnes waterhouse what she
said to it, then she demanded what manner knife that it was, and Agnes Brown
said it was a daggar knife, there thou lie said Agnes waterhouse, why quod
the queen's attorney, mary my lord (quod she) she says it is a daggar knif, and
I have none such in my house, but a great knyfe, and therein she lies, yea
yea, my lord, quoth Ione waterhouse she lies in that she says that it had
a face like an ape, for this that came to me was like a dog, well said the
queen's attorney well, can you make it come before us now, if ye can we will
dyspatche you out of prison by and by, no faith said Agnes Waterhouse I can
not, for in faith if I had let him go as my daughter did I could make him come
by and by, but now I have no more power over him, then said the queens
atturneye, Agnes waterhouse when did thye Cat suck of thy blood never said
she, no said he, let me se, and then the iayler lifted up her kercher on her
head and there was diverse spots in her face and one on her nose, then said
the queen's attorney, in good faith Agnes when did he suck of thy blood
last, by my faith my lord said she, not this fortnyght, and so the iurye
went toge^ therefore that matter.

Imprynted at London by Willyam Powell for Wyllyam Pickeringe dwelling at
Saint^ Mag^^^s corner and are there for to be soulde.

An^^ 1566. the. 13. August.

The end and last confession of mother Waterhouse at her death, which was the
xxix. day of July. Anno. 1566.
Mother Waterhouse.
First (being redi prepared to receive her death) she confessed earnestly
that she had been a wytche and used such execrable sorserye the space of.xv.
years, and had don many abominable deed, the which she repented earnestely and
unfeignedly, and desired almighty God forgeuenes in that she had abused his most
holy name by her deuyllishe practyses, and trusted to be saved by his most
unspeakable mercy. And being demanded of the by standers, she confe^sed that
she ^ent her satan to one Wardol, a neibour of hers, being a tailor (with
who^ she was offen^ed) to hurt and destroy him and his goods. And this her
Satan went therabuot for to have done her will, but in the end he r^turned to
her again, and was not able to do this myschiefe, she asked the cause, and he
answered because the said Wardol was so strong in faith that he had no power
to hurt him, yet she sent him diverse and sundry time (but all in vain) to
have mischeuid him. And being demanded whether she was accustomed to go to
church to the common prayer or divine service, she said yea and being required
what she did there she said (...) did as other women do, and prayed right
heartily there, and when she was demanded what prayer she said, she answered
the Lords prayer, the Aue Maria, and the belefe, and then they demanded
whether in laten or in english, and she said in laten, and they demanded
why she said it not in engly^^e but in laten, seeing that it was set out by
public authority and according to gods word that all men should pray in
the engly she and mother tongue that they best understand, and she said that
satan would at no time suffer her to say it in english, but at all times in
laten: for these and many other offenses which she has committed, done and
confessed she bewailed, repented, and asked mercy of God, and all the world
forgyuenes, and thus she yielded up her soul, trusting to be in joy with
Christ her savior, which dearly had bought her with his most precious
bloudde.

Amen.
Imprynted at London by Willyam Powell for Wyllyam P^ckeringe dwelling at
Saint M^gn^s corner and are there for to be soulde.

Anno 1566. the. 23. August.


