GODS VISITATION: IN A SERMON PREACHED AT LEICESTER, AT AN ORDINARY VISITATION.
By T. P.

ISAIAH 10.3. What will you do in the day of Visitation and of Desolation?

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Robert Allott, and are to be sold
at his shop in Saint Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bear. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND HIS WORTHY FRINDS, Mr. TO. COATS, MAYOR: Mr.
THO. Chapman, Recorder: Mr. James Ellis, Alderman: Mr. T.G. Mr. W.S. with all
the Society of that ancient Incorporation of Leicester, Grace and Peace, etc.
I Cannot deny but in my youth, among other weaknesses, I yielded to the
tentation of printing Sermons, at request of such as had a power over me. But
since I grew both an elder man, and a poor retired Vicar in an obscure angle
of the Country, I resolved against any more such adventures. But behold your
vehement entreaties (Mr. Ellis and Mr. G.) and charging me with my respecting
Gods Glory, have drawn these poor Meditations abroad: yet with this
protestation, that I desire (if it were possible) no eye might be taken of from
richer stuff and worthier Books (wherewith the world abounds) to look on
this, save only yours, wherein I have ever yet found so much, and so undeserved
favor, that peradventure even for that affectionate favors sake, this will
seem to you better then in deed it is. being only plain matter and not
elaborate in style or ornaments of quotations. With it (if that be any amends)
I dedicate my self and my best endeavors to rest at your Service. And so
praying for the continuance of all Gods blessings upon you all. I remain

Yours in the Lord Jesus, THOMAS PESTELL.

Worthy Sir,
I Am importuned to importune you, to do that which I hope your wisdom will
willingly consent unto: yet as I do heartily wish it, so I must earnestly
entreat you, or else I shall betray the trust that I am put in. The matter is,
that you would be pleased both for a general and a particular good; to cause
your late both excellent, and learned Sermon, preached at the Visitation at
Leicester, to be put in print, that the virtue thereof, by the power of God,
may disperse it self to them that heard it not. I desire it not only for your
own sake, though no doubt it would make your name to smell like a precious
ointment in the Church of God, but for the glory of Gods sake, which would be
much increased by the public view thereof. And you are bound in conscience, to
do the best service you can, in setting forth your Masters glory with all
alacrity, that has made you so able a Minister to perform it. Therefore let
me entreat you, not to deny the setting forth of that, which may give many
thousands of Gods people much cause to bless God for it, and you also praying
to God for his assistance, in this and all your godly endeavors, I commend you
and all yours, to his protection, that is able to keep you and all yours for
ever.

Yours to be commanded, JAMES ELLIS.

GODS VISITATION.
JOB, 31.14. What then shall I do when he rises up. And when God shall visit.
What shall I answer him?


THe Text comprehends those two notions, which comprehend all. God and Man. For
the whole world was in God before he made it, and wheir he made it, he made
it all for Man: and made it all over again in Man. And made Man in his own
Image like God, and that Image, defaced and Man lost to recover him, and make
him new he vouchsafed to make himself Man. God and Man in one person: and the
consummation of all his works, (which is also the consuinmation of all Man's
hopes) is to bring God and Man into one place. But this must await his time and
obey his own method, which he so frames by his powerful hands, his
understanding and his will, that as in infinite mercy, so with his Honor and
his Justice too, he may assume them to that place of Glory. He will give
grace and glory, Psalm. 84. but grace first, therefore enlightening rectifying,
purifying their understanding, will, affections, hewing and polishing, pruning
and dressing, every stone in the building, every branch in the vine: and in
that nature we find him here, visiting, looking to the ways of Man, that Man
might look up to him.

Briefly (not to reflect yet on the coherence, at which I shall touch anon in
place convenient enough.) The text delivers us two parts. First, Gods office.
Secondly, Man's office. His to visit, Man's to debate and answer.

1. God is the visitour. The School makes these degrees of perceiving God in
names. First, negatinis, remotionis. What God is not, not the Sun, Moon, not
finite, mutable. Secondly, perfectionis, affirmationis, when what is most
excellent in things create we apply to him by way of analogy and resemblance,
so we call him just, merciful, high, glorious. Thirdly, of supereminence,
such as this of a Visitour, gathered from his action here, and joined with the
Emphasis of my text -- when he shall visit. Men are visitours, but they more
easily answered, their place and power but deriuatiues from this primitive. He,
he the grand vizier, Altissimus -- most high. So that to Gods absolute power,
every where presence, this attribute and this transcendent ability of an holy
watcher a superuisor is proper. It Is proper blazon, and title suitable, denoting
throughout these words, not height alone; and power, and superiority, -- when
he shall stand up: but majesty and terror too -- what shall I answer him?

We have found his office, but will God perform it. It Is a question of men's
performing their offices, and a question too of false Gods. They had an Idol
in Egypt called by such a name Baal Zephon. Dominus speculae; Lord of the
watchtower, to fright their fugitives; but when Moses and the people of Israel
past that way, and pitched the camp there, this god was asleep, but he that
keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. He kept his Israel then and since,
he made good the title then, and since, and dare we question it now? But how
does God visit? Search the scriptures, they testify of him; Those books are
moral, to teach Man his office, the whole duty of Man, to make the Man of God
perfect to every good work, but they are historical too, and prophetical
too; instructing us what God has done, and what God will do. Look then to
those records and we shall find what and when, and how, in his several
Visitations. His Visitations are his actions, Action is from intrinsique
virtue, virtue there is none such in God as supposes infirmity, or
imperfection, as faith, hope, etc. But such as argue perfection, mercy,
justice, wisdom, bounty, power. According with these, we find his Visits:
first in general, then with reference to men, both ways, their persons in
mercy, sin upon their persons in justice.

1. In general, in all places, and over all things above. Heaven is his Throne
where he ouerlooks the orders and royal armies of his Angels, ascending,
descending, in the material Heaven, disposing that numberless variety of
those glorious Stars, calling them all by their names in the ayry Heaven
amidst those flocks of foul, his providence extending to the fall of every
little sparrow. If we go down to the Sea, amongst those infinite shoales and
innumerable fishes, there we see his wonders in the deep; or if we go
deeper. If we descend to Hell, be is there also, binding the fury of infernal
spirits: and for the earth, it is his footstool, unmoved he sits in midst of
Heaven, and yet they be the eyes of the Lord that run to and fro through the
whole earth. Zach. 4.10. reigning above, yet containing and upholding all
below, compassing all about, yet piercing all within. But applied to Men, they
are the eyes of God which behold, and his eye-liddes which try the children of
men. But first the persons in mercy, as we use the word in our Visitation of
friends, or of the sick. And of this kind (as well pleased therewith) is that
where God doubles it; Visitans, visitaui. Exodus 3.16. -- Visites and remembers,
visites and restores, Ier. 17. vlt. This is called the face, the beauty of his
holiness when he causes the light of his countenance to arise. Then secondly
sins upon the persons, and this changes the aspect -- he frowns and bends
the brows, sets his face against them; visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. Numb. 14.18. first, or
last: on them, or theirs, by no means clearing the guilty. Then he is
described to visit in thunder and earthquake, in storm and tempest. Isa.
29.6. and in this sense the word is used among the Prophets promiscuously for
recompensing, punishing, auenging, and even this threatened on his own people,
tender as the apple of his eye, and his chief treasure; above all nations.
Ose. 1.4. and 12.2. Ier. 11. Esa 10.3.

We may not omit his merciful Visitation, should it not show like a piece of
ingratitude not to touch here first, though our voyage be to that of final
judgment? and the first particular of his merciful visitation (wherein is his
delight) is considerable as man is a body. God then did visit him in the house
of dust, as his last work will be joining and refining the same dust again in
glory, and what might be said of his visitation in the womb -- thou saw my
substance being yet imperfect, etc. What of all those wheels and wyers within
the body, that mill and clock of his contriuing, of his winding up, at thought
of which David speaks with a kind of strange shuddering. O Lord I am
fearfully and wonderfully made. What of man's shape, speech, beauty; and how
largely spread might this webb be, if we took in all those threads and quils of
his providence by which he conueyes a thousand influences of his bounty, even
loading Man with his benefits, Psalm. 68. -- and renewing them every morning.
Lamen. 3. light after darkness, spring after winter (as now we see that Giant
in his course stealing an ascent over us and subduing the cold;) giving rain
and fruitful seasons, etc. What addition to this, above all this from the
nature and fabrique and faculties of our soul, in substance nobler then the
Stars, able not only to give being to the body, like other forms, but
capable of eternal felicity?

Secondly, as Man is a Christian, by means of the revelation of Jesus that
oriens ex alto, -- the dayspring from on wigh has Visited -- Luc. 1. that
Sun which rises with healing in his wings, and this was and is a blessed
Visitation, for thus it runs* -- Visited and redeemed his people, himself
did Visit and his Servants did it in his name, rising early for early
visitation, and since his ascension he sends by his Apostles, Pastors, and
Teachers, that heavenly treasure in their earthen vessels, this manna, this
light, the glory of his people Israel, and because that had not concerned us,
it is also a light revealed to the Gentiles, this reuiues us when he is said to
visit the Gentiles also to take of them a people to his Name. Acts 15.14. But
not that word of grace, though the Word of life and power, and mighty in
operation not all those gracious promises, those letters of love indicted by the
holy Ghost in prose and verse, which cry unto us to turn and look upon and
accept the salvation profer'd, that salvation which our blessed Savior wrought
for us by strong cries, and-by the effusion of that blood which yet cries and
interceed's freshly for us, not all these available till the third visitation
of his Spirit, which is therefore called the Comforter. Coming as Jobs friends
in visitation, both to mourn and comfort him. Nay what visitant, what
physician, what Confessor, what wife of thy bosom, what friend who is as
thine own soul, would so attend, for he abides for ever. So Minister (for
he helps vna subleuat, the greek better expresses it, (...), assists in
lifting against our infirmities) so pray and groan for us, with sighs, and
groans that cannot be expressed, against all our faintings and despaires, our
sick fits of fear and distrust, giving us evidence, earnest, broad seal of
Heaven, until the day of our full redemption. And this is that comfortable
visitation of the sacred spirit respectively to the means of grace, when he
will not trust me with the Bible alone, the story of his birth and death, nor
the Sermon alone, the exposition and application of that story, but comes after
both and sees how they work, nay makes them work in me, and inables me in
some good measure to work by them.

Man's office in regard of this merciful visitation is to debate and answer.
Debate first, think what we were before he visited. Lost. Captives. Enemies.
Dead in sins and trespasses. -- He then to drop his blood and grace, his
manifold grace, preventing, exciting, guiding, confirming; softly pierceing
even into stony hearts, which is describd by many a sweet and amorous
metaphor. these are his flaggons and apples, and our state a marriage, above
that too, there is vna caro, one flesh. But this union so high and holy, no words
reach it, pereundem spiritum, by one and the same spirit.

But what shall we do? first believe, else we make God a liar, and there is
the quarrel, when we trample upon, despise and count the blood of this
covenant as an unholy thing: and if we tremble to contemn him, shall we dare
to think it nothing, shall we take a solemn pride in despising his servants,
and. eo nomine even therefore hold a man despicable because a Minister.
Remember it is observed as the height a precipice of all iniquity, as far as
people could do, or God could suffer, when God rising early by them was mocked
in them, the text says then there was no remedy, 2. Chron. vlt. cap. But
again debate what shall we do; and the Apostle meets this consultation. Make
your calling and election sure, and this to be done in Gods method: inquire
after one calling first, and not begin at the wrong end. Hearken to that cry
of the spirit within thy soul, the kingdom of Heaven is within you, and not
too fondly spend the time in searching those roules of Gods predestination, and
take heed of sinking thy soul toward a despair in his mercy, or to a self
condemnation; for the Spirit of God speaking peace, dare thou still proclaim
a war, or if God have no bill against thee, shall thy timorous conscience be
framing vain and carnal answers. Does not God ask by way of indignation,
where is the bill of thy mothers divorce, or to which of my creditours have I
sold thee? Esa. 50.1.

If so, then what shall I answer? answer God in obedience, all the creatures
preach this answer; there is in all a correspondencie. The corn, and wine, and
oil, hear us; and the Earth hears them; and the Heavens hear it: but all
hear him even the most unruly creatures are our rule, the stormy wind and
tempest obeying his voice. So we, his voice without, in his Word, and his voice
too within by his spirit speaking to our hearts, not then drown those motions,
or bury them in company, and wine, and worldly cares or pleasures, least so we
quench, grieve, or do despite to the spirit of grace, and obey him actually
not in professorie religion only, but walk in light, and bring forth fruits
worthy amendment of life.

Lastly, quid retribuam? what answer but a grateful admiration, as he that
spoke after a full apprehension. O Lord what is man that thou do so visit
him? This sacrifice as he counts it an honor, so it is all we can offer, all
we can offer him on earth, and when all things here have end, endless thanks
shall have their beginning in Heaven. As that church in triumph there, all those
Angels, and all those Virgins, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, with their loud
clarious and Trumpets and Harpes of gold and iuory strike nothing, sing
nothing, but Halleluiah. So we that are parts of the Church militant, should
exact our voices and join in full Chorus. We praise thee GOD, we acknowledge
-- etc. Heaven and Earth shall thus be full of his glory.

2. GODS second Visitation is in judgment: and for sin general. When we find
him coming forth of his treasury, his storehouse of plagues, war, famine,
wild-beasts, pestilence, and particular of crosses, sickness, loss: But it is
the great visitation here chiefly meant, in the day of judgment. For Job was
under temporal calamity now already, at the pronouncing of this text; yet (as
we are viatores) in our way to take notice of this, especially as it reaches
his servants, his choicest, though with limitation, with that distinction ever
ad correctionem, non ad ruinam and yet they fall hi^^e, in the morning says
Job, in the night says David, nay visits him every morning and tries him
every moment, Job 7.18. For is there not a swarm, an hydra and wheel of
troubles in our whole life, per caput and circa saliunt latus, (says he) when
rose the Sun so fair, but ere his fall some clouds have seized on them, if
not on him, some grief, some, nay many, many perturbations, enough I Will
warrant thee, for I have Gods own testimony, Enough for the day is the evil
thereof.

Upon this visitation when it drops, when it falls, when it powers on us. What
shall we do? why, first debate; stand and consider as Job, if all should go:
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked must I return. Is it the
height, the depth of any grievous affliction? What is it more then that of my
Savior? O but he was more then man, is it more then theirs in Heb. 11. rackt,
sawen asunder, etc. Have thou yet resisted to blood, or is it come to the fiery
trial? And then in affliction, at least after it, ask thy soul, is it not
good for thee Heb. 11.2.
as the Apostle speaks of strangers, may not a man this way too receive angels
unawares? as Genesis 28.16.
Jacob on his journey at Bethel, when he waked and said surely God is in this
place, so God is in this visitation, and I was not aware. I took at first no
notice of his fatherly corrections, which are indeed his compassions, and
consolations: thy rod and thy staff comfort me. Psa. 23. But now I feel his
coming to visit me is like his visiting the earth, which he visites and
enriches. Psalm. 65. like a Physicians visiting an hospital, to cure, for if I
am sure it is the hand of my God; I am sure also that it is in Love, for God is
Love, it is his essence immutable. No reason then his visitation should prove
to an irreligious sadness, or a melancholy, a deiection, a jealousy, a
diffidence. So long as the work is his, though he purge or cut, so he give
me not over, so he cast me not out of his hands; so I hear not that voice
which is more dreadful then ten thousand thunders, Depart from me, etc.

Thus far I am to debate, what am I to answer in affliction? Surely the best
answer is no answer at all. Tacui Domine, and my soul kept silence, not as
unaffected, remorcelesse, but as subdued by faith, repentance, obedience,
working me to a blessed patience; captiuating and bringing into subjection,
every exorbitant, every wild and wandering imagination. Once have I spoken
(says holy Job) but I will no more: or if my heart will vent, I have forms
and moldes ready wherein to cast my words; that of Elie, It is the Lord, etc.
and David, Behold here am I. Let him do unto me as it seems good in his own
eyes: and I will confess too, to his glory, the fruit, and the root. I find
that thou O Lord of very faithfulness, have caused me to be troubled, Psalm.
119. and thy visitation has preserved my Spirit, Job 10.12. And to draw this
into practice in each particular affliction, for every one is Gods ambassador,
and none to be dismissed, unanswered. The application is a world of matter,
which I cannot look at now: only for that I find my self in a Seminary, in
a College of Divines, I may have the liberty, the recreation too, to make for
you and my self one particular application. For we (my brethren) that are or
should be pars indocili melior grege, if your pulse beat like mine, are
certainly so much infected with no worldly calamity, as when saeuit malignum,
and ignobile vulgus, as when we find our selves disgraced, counted the scumme
of those that are indeed the fcumme of the world. When all we can say or do,
which way soever we frame our doctrine or conversation, it is as water spilt
upon the ground. For though we pipe unto them, they will not dance; though we
mourn, they will not weep. Let a man's behavior be like John the Baptist;
rough, austere, they cry he has a Devil: or if enlarged in freedom of
conversation, like our Savior, away with him, a glutton and a winebibber, a
friend of publicans and sinners. So that the ground of the quarrel rests not
in being thus, or thus affected or qualified, or endowed, but they hate us for
our very calling. But what answer have we? I could tell you one, a harsh one,
of the Cynicall Philosopher, who being demanded how it happened that the great
and wealthy people affected rather to be liberal in rewarding fools, and
players, and iesters, and beggars, then men of his profession, answered for
that they might perchance have some hope of proouing such themselves, but no
hope of turning scholars. This was bitter: But we have learned a better of the
Apostle, I pass not to be judged by you, and a better yet of a better master.
Let not your hearts be troubled: they called our master Beelzebub, and shall I
not drink of the cup which my father gives me (says he) so shall we not
drink the potion which our Lord has begun to us, which by tasting first, he
has sweetened for us. Is the Disciple greater, so is he daintier then his
Master. Were we like the Apostles persecuted, whipped, imprisoned; that
consideration would make us march on in all these difficulties; and like hardy
soldiers, non gementes sequi imperatorem. But rather rejoicing that we were
counted worthy to suffer any thing for his Name sake: and if it came to death,
we know our answer. Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. But
I forget my self, for I am bound to a further port, to that which is appointed
after death; for after that to judgment: When God shall visit, etc.

Of this final judgment, the text informs us two things. It shall be, and it
shall be most dreadful: therefore needs debating, and casting for our
answer, first it shall be, he will visit; Even the heathen had an
apprehension, an expectance of such a day, a time quo mare, quo tellus,
correptaque regia coeli, ardeat and mundi moles operosa laboret. All this frame
vnling'd, vnpin'd, and burnt: and the new-discouered world have discovered his
too, though who discovered it to them, is hard to determine. But I speak to
Christians, who as fully as we believe God in Heaven, believe from thence he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

But where, when, what, where? I know not: about Mount Oliuet; and they think
they argue it fairly, and probably, from what we find in the prophet of the
valley of Iehosophat, Joel 3.2. and that of the Angels. This Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come again, as you have seen him go
into Heaven, Act. 1.11. Howeuer that, sure we are of this, his elect, by his
Angels from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other shall be
gathered into one place, Math. 24.3^.

When, tell us when shall these things be? you know who asked that question,
and you know our Saviors answer. Take heed that no man deceive you: and when
wicked mockers asked it, the Apostle sets no day, he durst not, he could not.
Job was resolved in the article, he shall stand the last upon earth, Job 19.
but no time limited. The prophecy fathered on Elias, tells us of 2000. years,
inane. 2000. Lex. 2000. dies Messiae and then the conflagration. But our
Savior controuls all, ouer-rules all, of that day and hour knows no man, nor
angel, nor the Son himself. Only by maine signs accomplished, by the
Apostles calling those the last days then, what may we imagine now? if but
(...) then: a tantillum then. That span of time is now contracted to an inch,
and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry. But what, what will he
come for? he will come to Visit such a session, visitation, as none before
it. No Star chamber, no high Commission, no Parliament bar, no council
table, no inquisition so formidable. Why, who comes the circuit? The LORD, the
LORD chief Justice, Judge of all the World: wise, incorrupt, with power and
great glory; with such a train, all his Saints, all his Holy Angels, and this
is that day, the day, the great day of his wrath, Zeph. 1. Of his wrath, who is
a consuming fire, and will come so, in flaming fire to render vengeance, with
strange effects; the Sun obscured, the Moon lost, Stars fallen, Powers of
Heaven shaken, the Heavens themselves passing away with a noise, Elements
melting with fervent heat, Earth, and all her works burnt up; 2. Pet. 3. with
the great sound of a Trumpet, which even the dead shall hear; Graves shall
fling open their marble doors, and Seas vomit up millions of drowned
carcases: Hell it self shaking thereat, and yet all this passing in a moment,
in a twinkling, falling on the world as a snare, stealing as a thief, rolling
as the flood, confounding like lightning from the East! Then for strictness in
this Judges proceeding as for reward first, wherein men's laws are lame and
defective, there is a Kingdom his own, thy Masters joy, the same Throne Reu. 3.
and then the purity of that bliss, which Angels enjoying adore; and last, the
eternity, in Psalm. 16. at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. So
contrary, those four conditions of hell torments, for variety the most
greatness insufferable; for purity unmixed with least allay of comfort, or hope
of mitigation; and for continuance everlasting. Is it not high time to debate
and answer? and thither we are come.

Consider this, you that forget God; that is, you that would forget him, that
would dampe out your own light, you that say in your hearts, that is, you that
wish in your hearts, there were none; what will you do? what, answer him? He
has answered me already, that you shall not be able to answer him; not able to
stand, when he stands up in judgment, for the mouth of all wickedness shall
be stopped; your answer may be a vain cry to the hills and rocks to fall and
cover you from the presence of that Judge. But I preach not (I hope) to
Atheists and desperates; But when Saint Peter faith, the Righteous shall scarce
be saved, does he not enforce a necessity of debating? Had we a trial in law,
or debts on Interest, we would fall to reckoning. This is more; the title of
our souls, and eternal Salvation is at trial: a debt doubted, and redoubled
in sins of youth, of age, of ignorance, of presumption; and are our purses
nearer then our souls? But is there no avoiding? None, not for the young men
that are least touched with remorse: -- he will bring thee to judgment,
Eccles. 11. we must all appear. There are ways, and those ways are trodden
too, many go those ways, to elude the temporal judgment of men. But in Romans
14.12. it is (...): and it is (...): every one must account, and every one for
himself, no atturneyes, no proxies. Think too, think of our distance, shall
I speak to the Lord that am but dust and ashes? what words shall I choose,
says he: Job 9.15. Alas all thought of answer then will be in vain, for
besides that we are not able to answer him one thing of a thousand: that day
is his day, his day of wrath, the time of mercy is over, past, irreuocably
past; his day of doom is come, it is come to sentence, and therefore what shall
we do? why? while we have time, put in our answer: yet the Chancery and Court
of Requests is open. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation. My
text is future yet, he shall come, he shall visit. Here is a latitude for
repentance; yet he expects, calls for our answer, and we know to what: we
have his Bill, his Articles, Interrogatories, that is his Law written, and
engraven in our hearts: we must now frame and put in our answer: what is it?

Repentance first, for so may that of the Apostle be understood in Ephesians. 6.
where he enioines the Christian soldier to have his feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace: I know some take that preparation of the
Gospel for a readiness to preach the Gospel, which should they belong alone
to us Ministers, others for a promptness in profession, others evangelical
obedience, and some take it to be patience, and not unlikely. But may it not
also endure this meaning of Repentance too? considering it is made the first
step in the way of life, and so the first entrance into the field, against
Satan, by John first, the day star, who rose before the Sun, and came to
prepare they way: how? Repent, etc. And our Savior in the same mind upon the
same text: Repent for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Sad sighs, and
prayers, and tears, make up the first part of Repentance, and make up so the
sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which God will not despise.

And have thou thus? Is the rock cloven; come drops of warm blood in anguish
from thy heart: break there floods of bitter weping from thine eyes: This is a
fair piece of an answer. Such tears have a voice, that reaches Heaven, and
not from David only. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, but from
Manasses too: a fearful Sinner. Because thou have wept before me, I have
heard it. It Is music to the Almighties self, and raises a joy in Heaven. Can
the Prodigal that had wasted all his stock of grace say but, Father I have
sinned. See, before he can come to say so; God, he meets him on the way, and
receives him to mercy.

But this answer has a second part, Take heed least your hearts be hardened
by sins deceitfulness. It is a Circe, and a Siren; we must stop our ears,
and resolve to be deaf to all her charms, charm she never so wisely, never
so worldly wisely; giving not a faint and cold, but a peremptory and small
answer with the Psalmist: Away from me, for I will keep the Commandments of
my God. Will keep them? I, that is, I have sworn and am steadfastly purposed:
This is the meaning of the Apostle, Tit. 3. The grace of God has appeared,
teaching Us; what? Our answer, -- and how that? by denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts. The best answer is a flat denial, a round refusal: like our
head Christ Jesus, who being tempted had his answer ready. And this is our
first answer, in a full Repentance, made up of grief and Resolution.

2. A second answer is Obedience: our works for words, will not carry it. Not
every one that says Lord, Lord; And some answers (we read of) shall not
serve the turn. Some will answer; Lord thou have preached in our streets,
and we have preached in thy Name. Tell not me of preaching (says our Savior)
unless your life's have preached too. Away from me you workers of iniquity. God
will have this answer complexioned of piety and honesty, when these are
married, they are crowned with the grace and blessing of God. A number deceive
themselves, as the Jews when they cry Corbun once; as the Papists crack of
Ecclesia catholica Romana; so these conclude all lies in being professors:
zealous magnifying themselves, and despising others. But what were the
Pharisees? by Christ's own testimony, religious and yet wicked. People may draw
near with their lips, and their hearts far enough off. If thou have faith
(faith Saint James) let us see it: Let your light shine: how? why in action
shine, or else to bare profession, our Savior threats a round and
proportional answer. At that day I will profess to you, I know you not.

Objection. But will the weak soul say; May I trust to these answers: May I
first trust to my Repentance? I feel indeed the weight of sin, and finding
the offense of an infinite Justice, I am horribly afraid, dejected, like David,
when he asked his sad soul: why art thou so heavy? I am so: so wounded,
pierced, struck through, and my heart rebounds into my eyes. I weep, and I
cry mightily for mercy: but can I help it? Is not sin a Serpent, a Sea, a
Fire, a Poison? was I not stung by this Serpent, drowned in this Sea, miserably
schorcht by this fire, enuenomed in the whole mass of my nature with this
corruption before I was borne? And since alas I have added to this Ocean: put
fuel to this fire, helped to infixe this sting, and work into my heart the
contagion: and then am I able to resolve against sin, to deny ungodliness,
to reject the tempter, to give my Iusts their final answer. I find indeed
natural men, moral men, when they will compound an happy man, put in this as
one ingredient, responsare cupidinibus, and sibi imperiosus, enabling him to
check and control, to Command and subdue rebellious passions, by the
dictates of rectified reason: And their several answers, to diverse corrupt
affections, are enough to shame me, and all that profess themselves
christians. But were they able to keep their own rules, or am I able? What to
hate sin so as I ought, with a perfect hatred. I fly some enormous vices for
fear of Laws. But toll periclum, iam vaga prosiliet, etc. and though I know
there is death in the pot; the wages of sin is no better; though I pull the
fruit and taste it, and prove it to be naught but gall and bitterness, nay
barrenness and shame: Yet such is my madness, to pursue a new shame, and
seek death in the error of life; falling like a bird or a beast: Nay no
bird, no beast, would so often fall into the same snare, same pit, into the same
sin whereof I have again, and again, repented me.

What then shall I do? Shall I rely on my second answer: and trust in my own
righteousness? Some bold men dare do so; and dare teach others so; dare boast
a stock and treasury of mercy and satisfaction. But Lord I find the language
of Canaan, thy holy Word, and the cries of thy holy servants far otherwise. I
find thy Bernard say: Nolo: Horreo meritum. Thy David, O Lord, if thou enter
into judgment, no flesh shall be justified. And thy blessed Saint Paul, I
find another law haling me, etc. Romans 7. and therefore I hear him crying
ripe, to say, O miserable man, who shall deliver me? These are yet the
eiaculations of an humble soul, asking, seeking, knocking at the gate of
heaven, and this very debating, is a fruit of the Spirit, growing on to a
perfect answer. In Men's consultings and resoluings for worldly affairs, they
may, they do usually mis-count, mis-carry; fortune choaks their artillery:
But in these holy provisions, the end is ever gracious, success glorious. If
the Iailor in the Acts, and Saint Peter's hearers come but to a wounded
conscience, to be pricked at their hearts, and to cry, What shall we do? Mark
what follows, and how fast it follow: Believe, repent, be baptized and saved.
Saved, how? by believing in him that is able to frame a sufficient answer. He
that made them wonder at his gracious answers, and to whom no man was able to
answer a word. Who was that, and where is he to be had? If any man sin, any
man that finds himself a sinner, Let him put his answer to his advocate: for
we have him, says Saint John, we have an advocate Jesus Christ the righteous.
He is the propitiation for our sins. Take then thy Shield of faith, and
quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. This is the new and living way of
answering God by his Son, by the blood of Jesus, Hebr. 10. May not then the
Christian believer have access with boldness: for shall both bleed for sin,
or shall he bleed in vain? Peccaui peccatum grande, says he, I have
committed an heinous sin: yet on my faith and repentance, I will go to God,
and say, Lord thou can have but blood, merit, sacrifice, satisfaction, exact
obedience. Take then thy Son Jesus: He is all these, and all these to me: for
he is mine, I receive him by faith, and I find comfort, hope, lively hope,
full assurance in him. I will not therefore fly with Cain, and cry with him,
My sin is greater, no thy mercy reioyces against sin, and now therefore there
is no condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus. My answer then to thy bill
is, it was torn, when his body was torn, It Is cancelled, and was nailed to
his Cross: My debt was great, but is pai'd to the utmost farthing. Thy wrath
let it be a cup, he has drunk it of; Let it be more, a whole Wine Press, he
has trod it alone. I will then put on my Lord Jesus, and come in the raiment
of my elder brother, and be roab'd in his innocence, and can thou then deny
me? No thou can not, thou may as well deny thy self: for if I have it
fair to show under thy own hand: Every gracious promise in thy Gospel is
such, yea this was thine own act in my salvation: For God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself. But may I not prodigally and presumptuously
fling away my soul in a vain confidence of mercy? Yes, many do so, that
will do nothing themselves, not when they have the assistance and proffer of
help from heaven. Therefore I will compound and put all these answers
together. I will trust to my Saviors merit: but I will repent too, and pray
too, and work too, and so work out mine own salvation, with fear and
trembling. And though I have no holiness of mine own; and without it no
seeing thee at the day of judgment, yet thou the God of my peace wilt
sacrifice me against that day. 1. Thessal 5. O blessed and full answer now!
and O blessed condition of such happy souls, so far from affrightment at
thought of the Judges coming that they shall then rejoice, and lift up their
faces, and in the mean time are of the number and Communion of those Saints
that love his appearing, looking for, and hasting to the coming of their Lord
in glory, calling and crying: Bow the heavens and come down; and, Lord how
long? and come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

I have done with the explication of my Text. There is a fourefold application.
First, in general, to the land and state, whereof we are a part: God has
performed his office of a Visitour over us; both ways: In mercy. Thus long
preserving us, and extending peace over us as a flood, even then, when it has
been a Sea, a red Sea of blood and ruin round about us. Visiting us in his
vigilance, and defeating our enemies blasted attempts, in 88. In the
Powder Treason. Giving us strange and miraculous deliverances amongst them not
the least; the bringing back our present Royal Sovereign from the hand and
land of his enemies. How many other ways has this holy watcher from his
circle and seat of heaven visited us, and kept us under his wings of gracious
Providence; and if he had not, would not our foes by this have rooted out our
name from under heaven, and the name of English Protestants been no more in
remembrance; for wanted there either might or malice in them; hoping and
proiecting often to have made our land like Sodom, clouds of Pitch, and heaps
of ashes. But the snare has bin hitherto still broken, and we yet delivered by
his gracious and merciful Visitation. That second way of visiting in judgment
the Lord has also of late begun to try amongst us, by that plague, which
swept away so many thousands, and by the loud and dreadful sound of war in
neighbor Countries, that have really tasted, and actually endured, all that
prophetical description: The noise of weapons, rolling of garments in blood,
spoiling their houses, rauishing their wives and Virgins, and breaking their
children in pieces, before their eyes: And these things befalne such as deserve
from us a tender and dear respect, we being wounded through their sides; or if
these accidents beyond the water, will not waken us, God has his way in the
Sea (faith the Scripture) and we might have marked his dealing with us there,
for a long time being able to do no good there, and our enemies able to do us
much mischief from thence; God has his way in the earth and under it, and we
have felt him there, sensibly perceived his mighty hand from thence; in the
air, he has his path too, and walks upon the wings of the wind, and there
he causd those rotten vapors to blend themselves into a pestilent defluxion,
and power their virulence on the earth. And if we take into consideration the
present bravery of the enemy abroad, and our home-diuisions, our great boughs
beating one against another, no man that is not extremely stupid, but will
easily find that God is angry with his people, and that our sins deserve the
hastening of the last judgment, in the other element of violent fire. And then
what manner of men ought we to be (says the Apostle) in holy conversation? How
watch, pray, and strive to answer him respectively to these visitations. But
alas, for his merciful visitation have we been responsible so much as in
thankfulness? O no, it is our national sin. Secure ingratitude wherein we
sleep and dream away our lives without remembrance of that gracious God, --
qui nobis haec otia fecit. Who has so preserved us. And to his summons and
warning-pieces of his angry visitation have we returned our repentance, or our
obedience and doing good: I looked for that, says God by his Prophets, that's
his aim in striking, I looked for righteousness, but behold a cry: a loud and
fearful cry composed of all our crying sins together, and the cry continued
and enforcd to such an height, that we cannot hear his voice crying to us, nor
he in heaven hear the cry of his peoples Prayers, it is so drowned and
swallowed up in this Tumultus peccatorum. What then shall we do? Every man
search into his own soul and drag thence his most beloved sin, and
sacrifice it as an offering acceptable to God, before that last and dreadful
visitation here spoken of in the text, specially such oppressors as are
threatened with his coming, in Mal. 3.5. And such deadly drunkards as the Age
produces now, who were warned by our Savior with a special Caveat. Take heed
lest your hearts be overcome with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that day
come upon you unawares.

But I am to touch upon a pair of sins here coupled in this Chapter, and to
which my Text has special relation, and this I call the second application,
and my return to speak of the coherence which I promised. The first is
Adultery: for of that is mention made before, from the 9. to the 13. verse,
implying, the heinous and dangerous nature of this sin, as one of those which
we shall find most unanswerable at the day of judgment. Every heathen author
has some impressions of this. Tacitus in his Poem reckons amongst fires and
slaughters, great adulteries as a plague and cause of plagues. Horace -- hoc
font deriuata clades, etc. What might be added of the defilement, disgrace,
infection and danger to the agents, their posterity, the whole land? In
populum, patriamque fluxit: with such a flow as brought the flood on the old
world, to rince and soake it clean from this pollution, and brought Gehennam e
Coelo, Hell out of Heaven upon the Sodomites, and therefore caused David to
call and cry for all the streams, the whole Ocean, according to the multitude
of thy mercies; Psalm. 5. One place of scripture may stand for all the rest,
that 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. Whereas if God had required nothing else; or at least
Sanctification did mainely consist in this. So he speaks enforcingly, This is
the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that you should abstain from
fornication, that every one of you should know to possess his vessel in
Sanctification, and honor; not in lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles that
know not God. We find by this, what is the Will of God: and what then shall
Men do, what shall they answer him? First every Man cite himself in foro, in
the consistory of his own conscience, then convicted; (for who is free in all,
when our Savior extends this sin even to a lustful eye?) to fly and avoid
it, and for our own strength is weakness, to pray for assistance of the Holy
Ghost to ouer-shadow us, and learn from examples of Holy Men to answer this
tentation. Joseph's answer, Shall I do this wickedness and sin against God?
Saint Paul's answer, 1. Cor. 6. Shall I take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of an harlot, God forbid.

The second sin to which the words of my text have immediate reference is
Rigor and cruelty to Inferiors: why is this such a matter? May I not use my
servant at my pleasure, no: it seems so by Iohs question here, and yet in his
time servants were slaves, but even a little, but even one degree above beasts,
the Masters being owners, and having power of life and death, and no doubt but
these slaves (as amongst the Turks at this day) felt and endured inhumane and
cruel usage in the world. We read of a number of insolent examples among the
Romans, and God himself confined his own people, and pinned them down with
Laws, and still controules the rising of their cruelty by remembrance of
their own condition in Egypt: and for that very end the holy Ghost proceeds
here with a double argument against such insolency: which Tremelius calls
elegantissimam (...): the first argument drawn, says he, a Iudicio Dei,
(...): the judgment of our common Lord and Master, respectlesse of any man's
person, and therefore the despising, either of his person, or of his cause, yea
of such a cause as wherein he dares contend with me, that am his Master; even
this, God will not bear. I must answer for this; nay I shall not be able to
answer it, if I be guilty but of this. And the second argument is taken a iure
naturali, in the 15. verse, Is my mold or mettle better then my man's? Is a
Lords flesh and blood, of a purer composition then his grooms, or his
footemans? Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb? or fashion us in one womb, that is the common womb
of our mother Earth: What is then the lesson hence, but meekness for all to
practice, but specially those in upper place, since none is more superior then
a Master over his slave; and for this purpose the Scripture presents us with
two strange examples. Moses so chosen to advancement by God himself. So known
of God as his friend. Dignified by his miraculous power in the eyes of his
enemies, and by the conduct of his people, that never man more prompted to take
state upon him, and yet it is said this Moses was the weekest man alive. The
other is David when he danced before the Arc, and Michol reproouing him, he
told her he would be more vile: Since so she called his humility, and
confesses the bottom of his heart, Psalm. 131. I have behaved my self and
quieted my soul even as a wearied child. We find this was (at least they
said so) in the intent of those Philosophers both Sceptique and Epicurean, to
arrive at Mansuetudo, and Tranquillus animus, to clear the soul like a fair,
and vnclouded Heaven, and this was brought us by the Doctor of Heaven Christ
Jesus, both in precept. Learn of me to be humble and meek, and in patience
possess your souls; and in practice, stooping himself not to a saruay of our
miseries: but clad, enclosed, compassed with all man's infirmities, sin only
excepted: and as vnasham'd, as glorying in his humility, he cries out; tell the
daughter of Sion, not her Servant, but her Sovereign, her King, the King of
Kings, comes unto her meek. -- And is it not then a miserable consideration: a
wretched spectacle, to see a proud man and an humble God, an angry, impatient,
and a merciless man, and yet a God of Love, and long-suffering. I look to
Heaven, and thence I find descending the Savior of the World, ((...), is his
description in Heor. 1.3.) the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the
express image of his person, in shape not only of a man but of a Servant; He
that commands legions of Angels, and whose attendants they were in the
wilderness, and proud of the office, to serve him as his cooks and butlers:
And shall not this example work on me, that am but dust and worms? and keep
me from insulting over inferiors, who though my servants, and my meanest
Hines and drudges are yet respecting him our Lord and Father both my
fellow-seruants, and my fellow-brethren?

Observe the prouocations to this virtue. He scorns the scorner, resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble. The Meek he will guide in judgment, in
his judgment, he will teach them his way, Psalm. 25. when he shares the world
he tells us, the Meek shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in
abundance of peace, Psalm. 39.7. which he ratifieth in his blessing, Math. 5.5.
But this is earthly blessing, is it not heavenly in things so? Hear him in his
Prophet Isa. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to
preach good tidings, (and we know what that means) to whom, to the Meek. His
first coming was for the Meek, in the same Prophet, Esa. 11.4. and (to meet
again with the text) when God shall visit, when this Son of God shall stand
up to ludge, and to cast all proud, and barbarous, and cruel dispositions into
Hell. So he will then lift up the Meek, and never leave these polisht jewels
till he has inset them in Heavenly Glory. For the Lord takes pleasure in his
people, and will beautify the Meek with salvation, Psalm. 149.4. And therefore
who is a wise man, says Saint James, Ia. 3.13. let him show out of a good
conversation his works in meekness of wisdom: for such is Heavenly
Wisdom, at verse. 17. first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, etc. If we preach, it must be in Love, and the
spirit of Meekness, 1. Cor. 4. vlt. If you hear, receive with Meekness the
Word, Iam. 1.21. If we will both Preacher and Hearers walk worthy our
vocation, it must be with all lowliness, and Meekness, etc. Ephe. 4.2. For
as if in this one grace all the rest were locked and infoulded, so does the
Apostles speak there, and reckoning up the several gifts of the spirit in
Gal. 5. They seem all to be but Meekness, diuersified to several names. To
end, I beseech you (brethren) by the Meekness and gentleness of Christ, be
ye clothed with humility; and upon that reason which is here in my text, God
visits for rigor; he resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble, 1. Pet.
5.5.

Furthermore, if cruelty exclude from Paradise, and disable from standing in
the day of visitation. Use this for terror against all the terrible Ones upon
earth, all exalted and cruel oppressors: They must hear of the wrath of this
superuisor in Heaven, who sees them from thence, and from thence they shall in
that day see him come to visit for this sin. Though they can ouersoare and
escape all power on Earth, yet see what a day the Lord threatens to make in
Amos 8. and join to that the prophecy of Esa. 10.1.2.3. etc. and Ierem. 6.6.
etc.

Lastly, extend this for Consolation. Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
says he, the highest power on Earth, can stretch but to their Vassalls: but
over Princes themselves in his prerogative and dominion that here stands up in
my Text, and of whom Solomon says, he is higher then they. In the cause and
quarrel of Christ Jesus, then we must, then put on the resolution of those
three valiant Children. The God whom we serve is able to deliver us, Dan. 3.
but if not, we will not disobey his command, for any countermand on Earth. And
in this all those poor Saints of God that groan under the Turkish yoke or
Spanish inquisition, all those poope tennants and servants that live rackt and
oppressed and ground to powder, under the merciless and rigorous Lords and
Masters must advance the eye of their souls, with comfort to the coming of
this great and glorious Judge and Lord of Heaven: for that day of his
visitation shall be also the day of their full redemption. My third application
is to four sorts of visitours. First, you that are authorized over us, you see
God will discharge his office: do you set God ever before you, his example,
and his fear, and first learn his first visitation in mercy, in kindness to
us your brethren, to do us good. It Is God (we confess) appoints degrees of
Superiority and excellence in all. Orders of Angels in Heaven, in the Sky
greater, lesser lights. Lower still, Eagles and Flies, Cedars and Shrubs, among
the very Stones, the brightest tincture given to the Ruby, clearest light to
the Diamond. But by comparing parts of the body, the Apostle proves the head
cannot want the foot, among us specially of the clergy, no proud insulting,
for the rule holds on this side the water too, that the Capuchin, and
Cordelier, the poorer part of this Tribe, uphold the dignity of Priesthood,
ballancing with the pomp of some superior prelates.

Secondly, do you visit as God -- ad correctionem, and not hold it a virtue,
laxare disciplinam. Remember the worlds intertaining Mahumetisme is ascribed to
three causes. P^^tis Arrianae, Manichaes furores; and the third d sciplina
laxata. But wherein do we need your inspection? in both our learning and our
life. First, see to our insufficiency, ignorance; what silly things suffered
not only to read, but (clothing their fancies with pretext of the Spirit) to
preach too; and then the maine way of teaching in many places yet vnpractis'd
and that is Catechizing. Alas! what is it to enrich the peoples cares for an
hour, who if they sleep not, gape, and praise the Sermon, as they like the
tune says Ezekiel, as they do a Loue-song, Eze. 33.32. Then are you over men's
lives too, over the Layety to curb, their woluish and fox like shifts and
cousenage in the Lords portion; but chiefly in that sin whereto my text
appoints you in Gods stead: for whore mongers and adulterers, God will Judge,
he will visit, does it daily, and will then do it dreadfully. In the mean
time are you his Deputies, Delegates, Commissioners. What though the scornful
fools as Solomon calls them, make a mock of this sin, a sport, and pursue it
as an art and trade: Yet you know it is (respecting a man's self) unhallowing
of Gods Temple, a dismembring the body of Christ: respecting others, and
defiling of the most holy and solemn covenant on Earth, a keruing asunder
those whom God has joined, and therefore stands the Commandment forbidding
it, betwixt Theft and Murder. Lastly, respecting the Land, it is a fire as Job
speaks here, at Ver. 12. devouring foundations and hurling the flame round
about it. And are not they who have power of coercion, if they do it not, as
so many spreaders of this fire, as so many bawds, and pandars, if for bribes
they wilfully palliate, or wink at this disorder, or look upon it through a
false and colored medium. And if ever there was cause to cry loud and lift up
the Trumpets voice to waken both you and the whole state, is it not now, when
like Egypt plagued with Frogs, the Land even stinkes of this corruption, and
had we no other infection, enough to bring some fearful curse upon us all.

But are our lives so clear, they need no visiting, need none from you? no?
Is not a debaucht and drunken minister within your power? Drunkenness, a crime
hateful in the lay, but hideous in the clergy man: a sin in them, but
sacrilege in us; And are not you to visit for these things, and vindicate our
mother from this stain? But when? when shall we see a great and rich adulterer
perform the open penance of the Church? Or when shall I hear an Archdeacon,
a Commissarie, a Chancellor, or a Bishop rather, (for that's the title of God
here an Ouer-seer,) rattle and fright some of these swollen and putrid offall of
the Levites: these hateful roaring drunkards, in the midst of the assembly of
their brethern. Remember God in his visitation on Sodom, says he will go
down, and see whether so or no: So should you, stay to inquire, and not make
the Visitation (as the Country calls it in scorn) a busy taking only, or
passing over us like a vision rather then a Visitation.

But who should help it? how can there any thing be reformed without
presentment? this concerns a second sort of Visitors: Churchwardens: And what
says your bill my Masters: Some poor Rascal will not pay his levy, or the p
per has got a bastard: but how many has your Landlord gotten? Alas, Sir, we
are poor people, and it would be our undoing to m ddle with such. But what
your Minister? they say, is a lewd Tosse-pot, a very drunken Sot. O no! Omnia
been, a good Fellow; a little given to company keeping: thus the best of you
are content to mince it, or some perhaps ready to defend him, and reason why:
they keep the Alehouse, and he is the prime guest: if it were not for him they
might knock down the sign. Blessed be God I am persuaded you know not many
such as I describe, but yet I feared there be some still within the compass of
these marks. And dare not you present them? Nay, dare you present any thing?
Shall men in office, Visitours, Wardens, nay Watchmen sworn thus play with
their oaths? What a wretched thing is it thus to fear men and despise God?
That great Lord Warden of his Church, who when he shall visit you, for this
perjury, what will you answer him?

A third sort of Visitours are our selves, Seers called in the old Testament,
and Ouer-seers in the new. Acts 20. all Bishops. Phil. 1.1. Let us then learn
to discharge it, first by heeding and visiting our own hearts; reflecting on
and examining our own souls, whither the God in our Books, in our Sermons be
such in our secret breasts, and whether we hear or feel our selves rather when
we preach, or whether our preaching run not through us like a wooden Spowt,
like the old riddle of Through the wood and never touch it; never touch, never
affect the heart. And then ore look our learning, and strive to mend our nets,
giving our selves (as Tully says) recoquendos, till we become workmen that
need not be ashamed, dividing the word aright, able to exhort and convince
soundly, Tit. 1.3. for this is Ars artium, regimen animarum, which to perform
as commonly it is done, flatteringly, or lazily and perfunctorily, is both easy
and acceptable, but it is too most miserable and damnable. And then ore-see our
lives and those exempt and defend from baseness, but specially that odious
sin, which goes too much in black, drunkenness. The way to make the Seer
ouerseene, to lose the eyes of his mind, to drown his holy unction in drink,
and suffocate the Spirit of grace, he must be apt to teach (says the Apostle)
and adds, not given to wine, 1. Tim. 3.2. and again be not drunk with wine,
but filled with the spirit, as if the first would empty us of the second.
Briefly, see to your charge, whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers.
It Is an high trust. God makes me ouerseer of his will, that will wherein he
has bequeathed so many golden Legacies, and shall I not discharge this trust:
and reveal the whole Will of God. What though the people complain not, the
Court takes no very strickt bond of us; will not God require it? Son of man,
I will require their blood at thy hand, and the Apostle therefore pronounced
himself free from the blood of all men, because he had disclosd the whole
counsel of God. Think of the Apostles and Pastors gone before us; Speak and
testify you glorious company of Apostles in heaven, and you goodly fellowship
of ancient Prophets, is there a room in your royal army for that cowardly or
lazy soldier, that betraies or preuaricates the cause of his Lord and
Savior, and respects not the precious souls of his people? Think on the
Devil, what a careful Visitor, how he goes about like a Lion roaring after
his prey, compassing the earth, and his agents and factors those mountebanke
Jesuits, that creep into houses, and lead captive our silly women; boasting
of their conquests and victories and triumphs, and are in danger of being
dulled by assisting at so frequent conuersions. Which though I take for a brave
lie of the shaueling, yet let us learn sedulitie from these our professed
adversaries. Last of all, if nothing else, let the reward advance our
industry. When the great Bishop of our souls, who now cries, Pasces oues, and
vrges us, be instant in season, etc. will in due season visit us, and if he
come and find us so doing, as he commands, we know the blessing by hear say
now, but shall feel and taste it then; and because we cannot comprehend it, we
shall then be comprehended of it: We are not able to conceive it now, it cannot
enter into us, but we shall enter into it then: Well done good and faithful
servant: Enter into thy Masters joy.

To conclude all, We all are Visitors, as men, and as Christians to look to
our bodies, estates, else worse then infidels, to visit God in his holy Temple,
to meet him often and grow familiar with him, in his Word, Sacraments, in our
Prayers, to do these things while the doors of his Temple are open, and the
Gospel offered, lest there come a famine, or a darkness seize upon us, and
then to visit men the Saints and Servants of God, and not those that are rich
only, for they have many friends, many visitants too, too many even to a
weariness, tota salatatrix turba peregerit orbem, like walking ghosts,
tormenting whom they visit, but God would have his poor members regarded,
Papists will tell you of pilgrimages and travailing to shrines, but not the
dead images, but these living images are in Gods Care, and if we care for his
final doom at that last and most dreadful day of his great visitation, we
must visit them, when poor and naked, and sick and in prison, or else be
visited then for our not visiting now. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. But
if we do our duty in this hospital below, we shall be cheered and
refreshed with him and them in his dining Room, in his palace of heaven above,
with a Come ye blessed of my Father, etc.

The last application of the Text is in our Prayers to God: O Lord, our great
and gracious Visitor, etc.

FINIS.

