Elizab^^^^ quasi vivens.

Eliza's Funeral.

A few April drops, showred on the Hearse of dead Eliza.

OR The Funeral tears af a truehearted Subject.

By H.P.



LONDON* Printed by E. Allde for M. Law, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, near
unto Saint Austens gate 1603.

To the Wor. and Courteous Gentleman M. Richard Hadersham, H. P. wishes
increase of Worship* and virtue.
I Have (Worshipful and wise) contrary to the expectation of many, presumed
to publish the formal manner of my private sorrows, for the great loss of your
late deceased Lady-Mistres, and Englands Sovereign. And knowing your worcester. a
sad and pensive mourner for so great a loss, I have made bold to shroud my
tears under your sad garment, which if you deigne to shadow from the heat of
envy, there is no fire of malice can have power to partch them. Shroud them at
your pleasure, keep them no longer then you please to mourn, which I know
will be of long continuance; not that you have cause by this late change, but
that the memorial of so sweet a Princes can not be suddenly buried in oblivion.
God grant that the ancient saying in this barter may be verified, which is,
we have changed for the better. Is it possible a better then She should
succeed? but what is impossible with the Almighty? What Eliza was in her
life, you know, nay the world knows her fame girdles in the earth: what her
successor has been in his Kingdom of Scotland, his subjects they know, and we
have heard, which has been much to Gods glory, his countries peace and his
Majesty's honor; Therefore since it has pleased God to continue his wonted
favor toward us in blessing us his unworthy servants, with so gracious a
Sovereign, adding unto his royal Crown the highest title of Majesty and
earthly dignity: Grant thou most of might (Almighty King) that our dread
Soueraign James the first of that name of these three united Kingdoms, England,
France and Ireland, and of Scotland the sixth, may be so directed and governed
by thy Almighty hand, that he may rule his several Kingdoms in peace to thy
glory, reign in tranquillity Nestors years to our comfort, and in the end, dye
in thy favor, to live again in glory with his aeterniz'd Sister divine Eliza.
Thus not dreading your kind acceptance of my love, I humbly take my leave.

Your Worships most obsequious: Henry Petowe.

The Induction.
I That obscure have wept till eyes be dry,
Will teach my pen another while to weep.
Obdurant hearts that they may mollifye,
For loss of her that now in peace does sleep.
Peace rest with her, but sorrow with my pen,
Till dead Eliza does revive again.
Amongst high sp'rited Paragons of wit,
That mount beyond our earthly pitch to fame,
Creepes forth my Muse, ye great ones favor it,
Take her not up, alas she is too tame.
She Will come to hand if you but lure her to you,
then use her kindly, for shele kindly woe you.
And if this Infant of mine art-lesse brain,
pass with your sweet aplause as some have done,
And, mean good favor of the learned gain
For showring tears upon Eliza's tomb.
my Muse shall hatch such breed when she is of years
shall bring you comfort and dry up your tears.
The last of many, yet not the least of all,
Sing I a heavy dirdge for our late Queen:
And singing, mourn Eliza's Funeral,
The Eperse of all that e're have been.
She was, she is, and evermore shall be,
the blessed Queen of sweet eternity.
With her in heaven remains her fame: on earth
Each modern Poet that can make a verse
Writes of Eliza, even at their Muses birth.
Then why not I weeepe on Eliza's Hearse?
Som-where in England shall my lines go sleep
till England read, and ( England reading) weep.
Eliza's Funeral.
THen withered the Primrose of delight,
Hanging the head over Sorrows garden wall:
When you might see all pleasures shun the light,
And live obscuer at Eliza's fall.
Her fall from life to death, oh stay not there!
Though she were dead, the shriltong'd trump of heaven
Raised her again, think that you see her here:
Even here, oh where? not here, she is hence bereaue^
For sweet Eliza in Elysium lives,
In joy beyond all thought. Then weep no more,
Your sighing weeds put off, for weeping gives
(Wayling her loss) as seeming to deplore
Our future toward fortunes, morn not then:
You cease a while but now you weep again.
Why should a soul in passion be denied
To have true feeling of her essence miss?
My soul has lost her self now deified,
I needs must moan her loss, though crowned with bliss
Then give me leave, for I must weep a while,
Till sorrows deludge have a lower ebb,
Let lamentation never find a style,
To pass this dale of woe, until the web
Appointed for my latest mourning weed
Be spun and wouen with a heavy hand.
Then will I cease to weep, I will indeed,
And every beating billowe will withstand.
It Will not be long before this web be spun,
Died black, worn out and then my tears be done.
Of Aprils month the eight and twentieth day*
M. Six hundred three by computation:
Is the prefixed time for sorrows stay.
That past: my mourning weeds grow out of fashion.
Shall I by* prayer hasten on the time?
Feign would I so, because mine eyes are dry,
What cannot prayers do for souls divine,
Although the bodies be mortaliitie?
Divine she is for whom my Muse does morn,
Though lately mortal, now she sits on hie,
Glorious in heaven, thither by Angels borne,
To live with them in bliss eternally.
Then come fair day of joyful smiling sorrow,
Since my tears dry, come happy day to morrow.
Ye Herralds of my heart, my heavy groans,
My tears which if they could, would shower like rain
My heavy looks and all my surdging mones,
My moving lamentations that complain
When will you cease, or shall pain, never ceasing
Seize on my heart? oh mollify your rage,
Least your assaults with ouer-swift increasing,
Procure my death, or call on tymeles age.
She lives in peace whom I do morn for so,
She lives in heaven, and yet my soul laments.
Since she is so happy, I Will convert my woe
To present joy, turn all my languishments.
And with my sorrows see the time does wast,
The day is come, and midday welnigh past.
Gaze greedy eye: note what thou do he hold,
Our horizon is of a perfect hew,
As clear as crystal, and the day not old.
Yet thousand blackes present them to thy view.
Three thousand and od hundred clouds appear,
Upon the earthly Elament below
As black as night, trampling the lower Sphere,
As by degrees from place to place they go.
They pass away, oh whether pass they then?
Into a further clymat out of sight,
Like clouds they were, but yet like clowded men,
Whose presence turned the day to sable night.
They vanish thence, note what was after seen,
The lively picture of a late dead Queen.
Who like to Phoebus in his golden Car,
Was the bright eye of the obscured day*
And though her glorious prograce was not far,
Yet like the smiling Sun this semblance lay.
Drawn in a Ietty Chariot vayl'd with black,
By four fair Palfraies that did hang the head,
As if their Lady-Mistris they did lack,
And they but drew the figure of the dead.
Oh ye spectators which did view that sight!
Say if you truly say, could you refrain,
To, shed a (...) of tears in deaths despite,
That rest her hence, whom art brought back againe^ Queen
He that knew her and had Eliza seen,
Would swear that figure were fair Englands
Fair Englands Queen, even to the life though dead,
Speak if I write not true, did you not cry?
Cry forth amain and say, her Princely head
Lay on a pillowe of a crimson dye,
Like a sweet beauty in a harmless slumber:
She is not dead, no sure it cannot be,
Thus with unlikely hopes, the vulger number
Flatter themselves (oh sweet lyu'd flattery.)
Indeed a man of judgment would have thought,
Had he not known her dead (but seen her so,
Tryumphant drawn in robes so richly wrought,
Crown on her head, in hand her Scepter to)
At this rare sight he would have sworn and said,
To Parliament rides this sweet slumbring Maid.
But that my warrant's sealed by truths one hand,
That in her counterfeit Art did excel:
I would not say that in this little land,
Pigmalions equal does admired dwell*
Enough of that, and now my tears are done,
Since she that died lives now above the Spheres,
Luna's extinct, and now behold the Sun,
Whose beams soake up the moisture of all tears.
A Phoenix from her ashes does arise,
A King at whose fair Crown all glory amyes.
God grant his royal virtues simpathize,
Which late Eliza's, so God save King James.
He that in love to this says not Amen,
Pray God the villain never speak again. Amen.
FINIS.
The order and formal proceeding at the Funeral of the most high, renowned,
famous and mighty. Princess, Elizabeth of England, France and Ireland late
Queen: from White Hall to the Cathedral Church of Westminster. The 28. of
April, 1603.
BEfore thou read, prepare thine eyes to weep,
If that thine eyes contain one liquid tear:
Or if thou can not morn fall dead in sleep,
For naught but death such sorrows can out-weare.
Twi'll grieve hereafter souls as yet unborn,
That one souls loss did make so many morn.
Did make so many mourn? oh heavy time
That brought a period to her happy life.
But cruel death the fatal stroke was thine,
Her loss is ours, heaven thereby gains a wise.
Yet had not sin bin hugged in the arms of Pride,
England had smild and heaven lost a Bride,
But now, oh now our mourning weeds are on,
And many thousand blackes for her are worn:
Which do demonstrate that Elizas gone,
For whose vn^imly loss so many mourn,
What these sad mourners are, good reader see:
And seeing read, and reading weep with me.
First, Knight Marshals men to make room. Then followed 15 poor men. Next 260.
poor women. Then Servants, of Gentlemen Esquiers, and Knights. Two Porters.
Four Trumpeters.
Rose, Purseuant at Arms.
Two Sergeants at Arms. The Standard of the Dragon. Two Querries leading a
horse covered in black cloth. Messengers of the Chamber. Children, Of the
Almondry. Children of the Woodyard. Children of the Scullery. Children and
Furners of the Pastry, Scalding house, and Larder. Then followed Grooms,
being: Wheat-porters. Coopers. Wine-porters. Conducts in the Bake-house.
Bel-ringer. Maker of spice-bags Cart-takers, chosen by ye board Long Carts.
Cart-takers. Of the Almery. Of the Stable. Wood-yard. Scullery. Pastrye.
Scalding-house. Poultrye. Catery. Boyling-house. Larder. Kitchen. Lawndrie.
Ewerye. Confectionarye. Waferye. Chaundrye. Pitcher-house. Butterye. Seller.
Pantrye. Bake-house. Counting House. Then, Noble-mens and Ambassadors
servants. and, Grooms of the Chamber.
Four Trumpeters. Blewemantle.
A Sergeant at Arms. The Standerd of the Greyhou^d Two Querries leading a
Horse. Yeomen: being Seruitors in the Hall. Cart-takers. Porters. Almonrye.
Herbengers. Wood-yard. Scullery. Pastrye. Poultrie and Scalding-house.
Purueyers of the Poultrye. Purueyers of the Acatrie. Stable. Boiling house.
Larder. Kitchen. Ewerye. Confectionarye. Waferye. Purueyer of the Wax.
Tallow-Chandler. Chaundrye. Pitcher-house. Brewers. Buttrie. Purueyers. Seller.
Pantrye. Garneter. Bake-house. Counting House. Spicerye. Chamber. Robes.
Wardrobe. Earls and Countesses servants.
Four Trumpeters. Portcullis.
A Sergeant at Arms. The Standerd of the Lion. Two Querries leading a horse
trapped with black velvet. Sergeant of the Vestrie. Gentlemen of the Chapel
in Copes, having the Children of the Chapel in the middle of their company, in
surplices, all of them singing.
Clerks.
Deputy Clarke of the market. Clerks extraordinarye. Cofferer. Diet. M. Cook
for the household. Pastrie. Larder. Scullerye. Wood-yard. Poultrye. Bake-house.
Acatrie. Stable.
Sergeants.
Gent. Harbenger. Wood-yard. Scullerye. Pastrye. Caterye. Larder. Ewerie.
Seller. Pantrie. Bake-house. M. Cook of the Kitchen. Clerks of the Equerrie.
Second Clarke of the Chau^dry. Third Clark of the Chaundry. Second Clark of the
Kitchen. Third Clark of the Kitchen. Super-visors of the Dresser. Surueyer of
the Dresser for the Chamber. Musicians. Apothicaries. Chirurgians. Sewers of
the Hall. Marshall of the Hall. Sewers of the Chamber. Groom-Porter. Gent.
Vshers quarter wayters Clarke. Marshall. Auenor. Chief Clark of the wardrobe
Chief Clark of the Kitchen. Two Clerks Controllers. Clerks of the
Green-cloth. M. of the Household. Sir Henry Cock Cofferer.
Rouge Dragon.
A Sergeant at Arms. The Banner of Chester, Clerks of the Counsel. Clerks
of the privy Seal. Clerks of the Signet. Clerks of the Parliament. Doctors
of Physic. ^ Chaplains. Secretaries, for the Latin* and French tongues.
Rouge-Crosse.
Two Sergeants at Arms. The Banner of Cornwall. Aldermen of London. Soliciter.
Attorney. Sergeants at Law. M. of the Revels. M. of the Tents. Knights
bachelors. Lord chief Baron. Lord Chief Justice, of the Common Plees. M. of
the Iewell-house. Knights, which have been Ambassadors. Gentlemen Agents.
Sewers for the Queen. Sewers for the body. Esquires of the body. Gent. of
the priuye Chamber. Gentlemen Pencioners, holding their Pol-axes heads
downe-wards, covered all with black.
Here Reader stay: and if thou ask me why,
It Is to entreat thee bear them company.
But if the high spirit cannot weep so low,
Weep with these flowers of honor that drooping go.
L(...)ster.
The Banner of (...). Lord Mayor of London. Sir John Popham. Sir John
Fortescue. Sir Robert Cicill* Principal Secretary. Controller of the
household. Treasurer of the household. Masters of Requests. Agents for Venice
and for the Estates.
Windsor.
The Banner of Ireland. Baro^^. Bishops. Earls eldest sons. Viscounts.
Du(...). Earls. Marquesses. Bishop of Chichister'sA(...), and (...) at the
Funeral. Lord Keeper. Archbishop of Canterbury. French Ambassador. Four
Sergeants at Arms. The great imbrodered Banner of England.
Somerset and Richmond.
York* Helm and Crest. Chester, Target. Norrey, K. at Arms. Sword.
Clarenciaux, K. at Arms. Cote.
Art thou yet dry, as if thou had not wept?
Read further then, and thou will force a tear.
But had thou seen her figure as she slept,
In memory, thou would her semblance bear.
Whose dear remembrance would so touch thy mind,
That in thy passion thou no mean conda'st find.
The lively picture of her Majesty's whole body in her Parliament robes with a
Crown on her head, and a Scept^r in her hand, lying on the corpse inshrin'd in
lead, and balmed covered with Purple-veluet: borne in a Chariot drawn by
four Horses trapt in Blacke-veluet.

(...) (...) (...) body. On Each side the (...)ble-men. Footmen. The Earl of
(...) of the horse, lea(...)frey of Hono(...) Two Esquiers and a (...) to
attend, and (...) Gentleman usher. Garter K. at Arms. The Lady Marquis of
Nort. (...) (...). (...) (...) Viscountesses* Butler(...) Baronesses. Maids of
honor of the privy Chamber. Captain of the Guard, with all the Gu^^d
following (...), and five in a rank, holding their Holberds downward.
Lo here are all that in black weeds do wourne,
And now methinke(...)
What will thy (...)
The (...)one Sun.
And since that D(...) from hence bereauen,
We have an other (...) or (...) by heaven,
(...) so glorious shine,
That after death he may be crowned divine. Amen.
Viuat Iacobus: Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae et Hiberniae Rex.
FINIS.

