PHYSIC against Fortune, as well prosperous, as adverse, contained in two
Books.

Whereby men are instructed, with like in differencie to remedy their
affections, as well in time of the bright shynyng sun of prosperity, as also
of the foul lowryng storms of adversity. Expedient for all men, but most
necessary for such as be subject to any not able insult of either extremity.
Written in Latin by Frauncis Petrarch, a most famous Poet, and Orator.

And now first Englished by Thomas Twyne.

At London, printed by Richard watkyns. An. Dom. 1579.

To the right woorshypful Master Richard Bertie Esquier. etc. quietness of
Conscience, health of Body, continuance of Life, with increase of worldly
VVoorshyp.
PEtrarches remedies against both Fortunes in Latin, Right woorshipful, were,
as it appears, dedicated unto Azo, an honorable Gentleman of Italy. Azo had
good cause to enterteyne them thankefully, for that being strangely wounded
with adversity, and cast down from the dignity of a Lord, to the state of a
wretched forlorn man, he might receive thereby no small comfort in his
sorrows. The same work now called Physic against Fortune in English, and
entitled unto your Woorshypful name, who are no mean personage of this our
Realm of England, but in this respect far exceeding the degree of Azo, in
that you have gained surpassing prefermentes at the hands of Fortune, is
semblably presented unto your favorable acceptance. Not that it is doubted,
the infirmity of your mind any way to be such, that you stand in need of
these, or the like Medicines, to mittigate the sugered Bankettes, or sower
sauces of either Fortune, that is to say, prosperity or adversity: Although,
whosoever list to examine your right worsbypfull estate, shall well perceive
thereby, that if your mind could be carried away by any of these two
affections, the same by lykelyhood should be it which is quite contrary to
that which troubled Azo: since it has pleased Fortune, or GOD rather, to
bless you with such valor of Mind, Virtue, Godliness, Wisdom, Gravity,
and Learning generally in all Faculties, Good letters, and Tongues, as few or
none the like far and wide to be found in this our age. Add hereunto
moreover the commendable cumlinesse of your person, with integrity of health,
and good constitution of body: And lastly, the access of a noble Duchess to
your Wife, of an honorable Countess to your Daughter, of a Lord apparent to
your Son and Heir, besides large Revenues and fair Houses, and which makes
not smally to the accomplyshment of worldly felicity, the favor of a most
virtuous and loving QVEENE, and a most flourishyng Commonwealth to live in.
These, albeit I confess they be very great, yet are they not such, but that
your wisdom of it self is able to bear them with sufficient moderation, and
as in deed they be, so to esteem of them. But rather in respect of these your
rare gifts, and the love that you bear unto learning, and the favorers
thereof, I have been induced to exhibit the medicines of Petrarch against
Fortune, unto you, that as many of our Countreimen as shall have occasion
hereafter to read or use them, may the more freendly accept them for your
Woorshypfull name sake. In consyderation whereof, and likewise if it shall
please you not discontentedly to accept them at my hands, I shall not only
think my travel well requited, but also in regard of other benefits
received, acknowledge my self much bounden unto you, and to remain your
Woorships evermore ready at commandment:

Thomas Twyne.

The Epistolare Preface of Francis Petrarch, a most famous Poet and Orator,
written unto Azo, concerning the Physic and remedies of both Fortunes, as well
adverse, as prosperous.
WHEN I think upon the affairs, and fortunes of men, their uncertain and
sudden chances and changes, truly I find nothing almost more frail, nothing
more unquiet, then the life of man. For I perceive how nature has provided
well for all other living creatures, by a woonderful kind of remedy, to wit, a
certain ignorance of them selves: but in us only she has converted our
memory, understanding, providence, and moreover the divine gifts of our
mind, unto our own toil and destruction. For being always subject not only
unto vain and superfluous, but also hurtful and pestiferous cares, we are
both grieved with the present time, and also vexed with the time past, and that
is to come: so that we seem to fear nothing so much, as not to seem at all
times to be in misery. Our study is so great, whereby we heap together
causes of miseries, and nouryshmentes of sorrows, whereby we make our life,
which if it were well governed, were the most happy and pleasant thing that
we possess, a wretched and woeful toil, whose entrance is blindness, going
forward toil, end sorrow, and the whole course error: Which he shall find
to be so, whosoever with diligent eye consydereth the whole race of his own
life. What day do we pass over in rest and quietness? or rather do we not
find more painful and troublesome then other? What morning have we ever
passed so merry and pleasant, that has not been surprised with sorrow and
heaviness before night? Of which evil, although a great cause do rest in
the things them selves, nevertheless unless our selfeloue deceive us, a
greater cause, or to confess the truth, the whole cause consists in our
selves: and to let pass all other things whereby we are troubled on every
side, what war, and how perpetual is it which we maintain against Fortune,
wherein Virtue only can make us conquerours? But willingly, and wittingly we
revolt from her. We only being weaklinges and unarmed, encounter a most fierce
foe in unequal fight: whom she again, as lightly as things of naught,
tosseth us up, and throws us down, and turns us round about, and plaieth
with us, so that it were better for us to be quite overcome, then continually
to be had in skorne. And what is the cause hereof, but only our own lightness
and daintines: for we seem to be good for nothing else, but to be tossed hither
and thither like a Tennise bal, being creatures of very short life, of infinite
carfulness, and yet ignorant unto what shore to fall with our ship, or unto
what resolution to apply our minds, whose determination is always to hang in
doubt: and besides the present evil, always to have somewhat to grieve us
behind our back, and before our eyes to make us afeard. Which thing happens
unto no creature besides man, for unto all other it is most perfect security
to have escaped that which is present. But we, in respect of our wit, and the
understanding of our mind, are in continual wrestling and strife with an
enemy, as it were a three headed Cerberus. So that it had been almost better
for us to have wanted reason, since we turn the force of our heavenly nature
against our selves: for it were now an hard matter to resist and subdue this
evil, being so deeply rooted through age and custom. Notwithstanding, we must
endeavor to do what we may, unto which purpose besides the industry of a
courageous mind, to whom nothing is hard, nothing inexpugnable, it were most
convenient to adioyne the sundry speeches of wise men, although this kind be
now also very rare, and especially continual and diligent reading of the
works and monumentes of good auctours, so that there want not in us a willing
mind to consent unto their wholesome instructions, which I may boldly term in
earth to be the only and lively fountain of good and fruitful advice.
Wherefore, since we know that mean writers sometime are commended for their bare
affection, or for that they have seemed to have broken the Ice unto those that
have followed them: how greatly are we beholden unto the great and famous
writers, who being conversant many hundred years before us here upon the
earth, in their divine wits, and most godly ordinances, do yet live, dwell,
and talk with us? And among the perpetual surges of our minds, like so many
bright shining Stars fixed in the firmament of Truth, like so many sweet
and pleasant gales of wind, like so many industrious and expert sailors, do
both point us to the haven, and direct the flittering sails of our barks
thither, and guide the stern of our flitting mind, until such time as our
consultations, which have been tossed and driven to and fro by tempests, do stay
their course, and qualify their motions. And this is the true Philosophy, not
which is lifted up with deceiptfull wings, and vainly casts about, most
proudly boasting it self in unprofitable disputations, but that by assured and
modest degrees leads the rediest way unto safety. To exhort thee unto this
study perhaps it were freendly done, but truly it is not necessary: For
Fortune has made thee greedy to read much, and to know many things, who,
as they say, bears a great stroke in the world, exposing thee to be tossed
in the troublesome and deep sea of cares and troubles. Howbeit, as she has
taken from thee the leisure to read, so has she not the desire to know, but
that being delighted always in the frendshyppe and familiarity of learned
men, and upon the most busiest days, as often as opportunity shall serve to
steal idle hours, thou myghtest have a will to be every day better
instructed, and learned in most excellent matters: wherein I am a witness that
thou have often used thy memory, wherein thou art inferior to none, in steed
of books. Whereunto if thou were prone enough in thine youth, thou art now to
be deemed so much the more proner: as the wayfaryng man that settech forth
late, may seem to be fresher and redier to travail, then he that set forth
in the morning, forasmuch as this is a common complaint among them, that the
way waxes longer, and the day decreaseth: the which thing happens unto us in
this course of our life, whilst we travail toward the euenyng, and see that
we have yet a long way to walk. I need not therefore to exhort thee to do
that, which thou have always done most greedily of thine own accord: It
shall suffice me to have admonished thee, that thou bend thy mind in such
sort, that no care of humane and worldly affairs remove thee, which in the
very finishing of great and most excellent works, have turned many away, after
their worthy and commendable traueiles begun. Adding this moreover, that
seeing it is impossible for thee to read, or here, or remember all things at
once, thou repose thy self upon the most profitable, and, for that brevity is
friend to Memory, ye most briefest of them. Not that I persuade thee to
neglect the more busy and great conclusions and resolutions of wisdom,
whereby thou may defend thy self in the ordinary conflict with Fortune,
but that thou might be lightly furnished in the mean while with these short
and precise sentences, as it were with certain light and continual armor,
against al assaults and sudden invasions happening on any side whatsoever. For
we wage double war with Fortune, and in both there is in a manner equal danger:
whereof there is but one part commonly known by yt name, to wit, yt which is
called Adversity. The Philosophers although they knew both, yet they judged
this to be the harder. And therefore ye saying of Aristotle in his book of
Ethikes is received as true, wherein he thus defines, concerning this matter:
saying, That it is an harder matter to endure adversity, then to abstain from
pleasures. Whom Seneca following, and writing to Lucillus: It is a greater
matter, says he, to pass over difficult matters, then to moderate the
prosperous. What shall I say? May I presume to gaggle among such worthy men?
It is an hard matter, and breeds no small suspicion of rashness, for a new man
to meddle wi^h old matters. And therefore on the one side I am moved by
authority, on the other by antiquity. But there comes unto my mind, the
authority of an other great and ancient man: For it cannot be otherwise, but
that every man conceive an opinion of a thing, according as it appears unto
him. They are the words of Marcus Brutus, writing unto Atticus, which I
suppose to be so true, that nothing can be more true. For what can I judge of
any thing, otherwise then I think? unless perhaps I be constrained to judge
by other men's judgments, which who so does, he judges not of him self,
but reports the judgments of other. I therefore thus with reverence passing
over the judgments of such notable men, being in such manner affectioned,
if I would say any thing concerning mine own judgment, I know well that some
have diversely disputed otherwise of the virtues, and that the pre-eminence is
not always given to the most difficult, neither that it happened by chance that
modesty, or whether thou had rather call it temperance, possessed the last
place. But as touching our purpose whereof we entreat, I suppose it an harder
matter to govern prosperity, then adversity: and I plainly profess, that
in mine opinion, and also in mine experience, flatteryng fortune is more to be
feared, and far more perilous, then threatnyng fortune: unto which opinion,
it is not the fame of writers, nor the subtlety of words, nor the false
sillogismes of sophisters, but true experience it self, and the daily examples
of this life, and the scarcity, which is a great argument of the difficulty,
which enforces me. For why? I have seen many that have indifferently
sustained losses, poverty, exile, imprisonment, punishment, death, and great
sickenesses that are more grievous then death: but that could well bear riches,
honors, and power, I never yet saw any. For oftentimes, even in my sight,
those that have stood invincible against al violence of adverse fortune,
prosperous fortune has overthrown with small force, and her flatteries have
overcome that valiencie of man's mind, which her threatenings could not
subdue. It comes to pass, I wot not how, that so soon as fortune waxes
more mild, the softened minds of men begin likewise to grow proud, and by
enjoying prosperity, to conceive forgetfulness of their own condition.
Neither is it spoken without cause, and used now among our country men as a
proverb, that it is an hard matter to bear prosperity. Neither was it
spoken by Horace unadvisedly, Learn to bear well good fortune: For he judged
it to be an hard matter, and not known without diligent study. But Seneca
very breefely discoursed of that part of fortune, which seemed unto him to be
most difficult, and is doubtless at the first sight the more rough and hard of
the twain. Which book is commonly abroad in men's hands, whereunto it is not
my meaning to add or detract any thing at al, both for that the work, being
written by so great a wit, disdayneth to come under our censure, and also being
busied about mine own affairs, am not purposed to correct or carpe other
men's doings. But forasmuch as Virtue and Truth are public things, there
is no reason that the study of antiquity should be any hindrance to the
industry of posterity, for whose cause we know that it was undertaken, to
the end we should thereby be styrred up and helped. And therefore I purpose to
entreat with thee somewhat concerning the same matter, that that which he did
then for his freende Gallio, I may now do in like sort for my freende Azo,
which I am determined so far forth to accomplish, as shall lie in this my
busied and werie wit to do: and over and besides also, to touch the other
part, which either of forgetfulness or purpose was by him pretermitted. I
have moreover of set purpose mingled a few matters, not touching the defectes
of any fortune, but the excellency of virtues or vices: which although they
be besides the purpose, yet are not unlike in effect, and seem to be such as
are able to make men's minds glad or sorrowful. Wherein how I have behaved my
self, thou shall be judge, being mindeful of my business and the shortness
of the time, who with great admiration saw the whole work begun and
ended in a very few days, I only am judge of the credit. I have endeavored
not to set down whatsoever seemed best lykyng to my self, but that might be
most profitable unto thee and others, whosoever else happily has touched the
same. To be short, the end which I always proposed to my self in this kind
of study, was not so much the commendation of the writer, as the commodity
of the reader, if so be there may be any hoped for or received by me, having a
special respect hereunto, that it should not be needeful for thee to toss and
turn over thy whole armorie at every alarm and doubt of the enemy: but
rather to the intent thou myghtest have in a readiness against ever mischief,
and hurtful good, and either fortune, a short medicine, but freendly confected
for a double disease: so that thou may always have at hand, as they say,
in all places, and at al times, as it were, an effectual remedy contained in a
little box. For as I have said, both Fortunes faces are to be feared, but
notwithstanding both must be endured, whereof the one has need of a bridle,
the other of comfort: in the one, the pride of the mind of men is to be
repressed: in the other, their werinesse and grief to be succored and
relieved. Wherefore, when I thought upon this variety, and purposed with my
self to write somewhat concerning this argument, not only thou came into my
mind worthy of that gift, which both of us may use indifferently, as says
Cicero, but alonely moouedst me to write it, not only in words, as being
privy of al mine enterprises whatsoever, but also in deeds, being of
sufficient ^bilitie to perform them both. For we know how that Fortune has
tormented many upon the rack, and many she has lulled asleep in delites, and
many she has swinged up and down in her wheel: neither want we examples of
such as clymbe, nor of some that fall, neither am I ignorant that some have been
thrown down from the top of high dignity. How many Emperors of Rome, how
many foreign Princes, being plucked out of their regal thrones, either by their
own hands, or the hands of their enemies, have been deprived both of their
lives and Empires at one instant? Shall we borowe al our examples of antiquity,
since we our selves have seen of late days some kings taken prisoners, and
some slain in battayl, and some beheaded at home, and (which is most extreme
of al) some hanged by the neck, and some most shamefully mangled in pieces?
Thou art one unto whom Nature has given a princely heart, but Fortune has not
given a kingdom, nor yet taken it away: yet whom in other respects she has
more diversely tossed and turmoyled, I suppose there is none to be found in our
age. For being sometime in excellent good health, and enjoying very great
strength of body, it is strange to recount how not many years since, to the
great wonder of all that know thee, being thrice given over by the Physicians,
thrice thou reposedst thy life and safety in the only help of the heavenly
Physician, and at the length wast by him restored to thy former health, but in
such wise, that thou have utterly lost thine accustomed strength of body, with
no less wonder of thy excellent dexterity, and rare gravity: yt thou who
before time had most strong and valiant legs, and feet almost as hard as
brass. art now grown so weak, that thou must be lyfted up to thy horse
back by thy servants, or leanyng upon their shoulders, art scarcely able to
tread upon the ground. Thy country almost at one time saw thee both a lord,
and a banyshed man: but so notwithstanding, that thou seemedst to be nothing at
all blemished by thy banishment. There was never any almost of our countrymen,
that stood in like favor of noble men and princes, and never any that
sustained like injury. And whereas not long before they striued in showing
thee tokens of courtesy, afterward the same men consented in nothing so much,
as in conspyring and laying their heads together how to procure thy
destruction. Of whom some sought means to take away thy life, who before time
had honored thee the space of many years with gold and precious stones, and
many other large gifts, during the time of thy prosperous and favorable
fortune, and, which is most grievous of al, to spoil thee of thy friends and
clientes, and thy whole family, by afflictyng them with sundry grievous
torments, and strange kinds of death. But such as were of the more courteous
sort, invaded thy great patrimony, thy lands, thy people, thy houses, thy
towns: insomuch as they that saw thee not long before, and perceived how
suddeinely thou wast fallen from great wealth into extreme poverty, wondered
as it had been at some strange miracle of fortune. Some of thy friends, as I
have said, are perished, and in those that remain, their faith is decayed, and
the goodwil of men, as yt common manner is, flies away with prosperity: so
that thou art brought into a doubt which to bewail first, either the death of
thy friends that are peryshed, or the loss of their assuredness that are
living. Now in the midst of these troubles there happened unto thee a most
desperate and dangerous sickness, wherein thou wast brought so near unto
death, that when every man supposed thou could not escape, it was generally
reported that thou wast dead. Which sickness, which poverty, which heap of
troubles, in that thou wast driven out of thine own country, and far from
thine own house in a strange land, and war round about thee, and thou on
every side oppressed, gave occasyon that in the mean while thou could have
no intercourse, either of letters, or conference with those thy friends, which
either thy virtue had purchased, or fortune had reserved. There was no
extremity wantyng, saving imprisonment, and death: although we cannot say
neither, that thou wast quite free from imprisonment, whilst thy most faithful
wife, and al thy sons, being part of thy bowelles, and thy daughters also
were taken prisoners by thine enemies, and there was no comfort remaining unto
thee of so many children: N^yther yet from death, whilst thou thy self
striuedst every day with death, and at that time also one of thy sons gave up
his tender and giltlesse ghost in prison. To be short, we have seen that
fulfilled in thee, which we read of two most excellent personagies, Caius
Marius, and the great Pompeius, to wit, that fortune has severally expressed
in thee, and thy children, what good and evil she is able to do, and never
mingle any prosperttie with adversity: whose flatteries in times past,
although theu have not casted so plentifully as many happy men have done,
notwithstanding thou have abidden her threats and force of late days, with so
courageous and invincible a mind, that in this respect thou have given
occasion unto many, who before hated thy name, to love thee, and wonder at
thee. For virtue has this property, that it stirs up good men to love it,
and astunnisheth the evil. Which property as it is common to every virtue, so
is it peculier especially to fortitude, whose tranquillity and uprightness is
the more acceptable, and light more conspicable among the troublesome turmoyles
of fortune, and darkness of terrible things. For unto me thou have not only
heaped up much new good will, upon the ancient love which I bare toward
thee, which I thought to have been impossible, but have also converted my
quill, which made have toward another matter, to write this work in time
not purposed, both that thou might behold the countenance of thy mind in
my wrytinges, as it were in a lookyng glass: and also if herein there were any
thing that seemed unto thee nothing fine, but rather rude and barbarous, and
which in deed did not like thee, that in this manner thou order and take it:
that if it shall chance that fortune hereafter varrie with thee in any strange
manner or device, whereof she has great plenty, yea innumerable in store,
that thou be not troubled at al with any hope. But being provided for all
chances, and redye for what soever may happen, thou may despise both the
sweet, and the sower, crying out most confidently these verses of Virgil
against them, O virgin, there is no new or suddeyne show of troubles can
arise unto me, I have forethought upon al matters, and forecast them alredie in
my mind. Neither am I ignorant, that as in the bodies of men, so also in their
minds that are affected with sundry passions, the medicines of words will
seem unto many to be without effect. Notwithstanding I know well enough, that
as the diseases of the mind are invisible, so are there remedies invisible
also: For they that are seduced by false opinions, must be remedied by true
persuasions, that they that fell by hearing, may also rise by hearing. Moreover,
who so wyllingly offers unto his freende, being in need, that which he has
to relieve him withal, how small soever it be, he has fulfilled the duty of
perfect freendshyp. For freendshyp weighs the mind, and not the thing,
which though it be but small, yet may it be an argument of great good will. For
my part, as I wyshe unto thee al honor, so have I nothing at this present more
convenient to give thee: which if thou think to be of any force, the
commodity of it, which makes every thing to be regarded, shall sufficiently
commend it. But if thou perceive it to be of no force, notwithstanding thy good
will toward me shall excuse it. And thou shall come to read it, as though
those four most famous and coosinne passions of the mind, to wit, hope, or
desire and joy, fear and sorrow, which the two sisters prosperity and
adversity brought forth at equal byrthes, lay on either side most fiercely
assaultyng the mind of man: howebeit reason, which governs the chief
castle, makes answer unto them al, and being furnished with her shield and
head piece, by her means and proper force, but specially being assisted with
most myghtie power from heaven, defends of the weapons of the throngyng
enemies. But I conceive such hope of thy wisdom, that thou can soon judge
which part will have the victory. I will now hold thee no longer, but to the
end thou might understand my purpose, it was needeful for me to write this
epistle, as it were an argument to the book: which if thou cause to be set
before the work, consider thou of these both, that an ouerlong preface
trouble not a short book, none otherwise then an over great head burdeneth a
little body: For there is nothing well favored, without due measure and
proportion of the parts.

Of floorishing years. The first Dialogue.
JOY. REASON. MY years are floorishyng, I shall yet live a long time.


Reason. Lo, this is the first vain hope of mortal men, which has already,
and will hereafter, deceive many thousands.


Joy. My years are floorishing.


Reason. A vain joy, and a short: and while we be speaking, this flower
withers.


Joy. My age is sound.


Reason. Who will call that sound, which wants much, and when that which
remains, is uncertain?


Joy. But there is a certain prefixed term, and law of living.


Reason. Who made that law? or what is the prefixed time of life? Surely it is
a very vnequl law, that is not indifferent unto al men: yea rather, it is so
variable, that there is nothing more uncertain in the life of man, than the
term of man's life.


Joy. Howbeit, there is some term and measure of life, which the wise men have
defined.


Reason. To appoint the term of life, it is not in his power that receives
it, but in his that gives it, which is GOD. And I understand, how that
hereby you mean the term of threescore and ten years, or if nature be somewhat
stronger, fourscore years, and there you appoint the end: unto which who so
does attain, their life is but pain and travail: unless he advance your
hope a little further, who says, The days of a man's life are many times an
hundred years, unto which age how few do attain, we see: but admit that it
happened unto al, which happens but to few, notwithstanding I pray you how
much is it:


Joy. Very much truly: For the life of young men is more assured and farther
of from old age, and so from death.


Reason. Thou art deceived: for although there be nothing safe to a man,
notwithstanding that is the most dangerous part of his life, which to much
carelessness makes unadvised. There is nothing nearer to other, then death is
to life: when they seem to be farthest a sunder, then are they nearest
together, always the one passes away, and the other draws nygh: whyther
soever ye flee away, death is at hand, and hangs over your heads.


Joy and Hope. Well, at the leastwyse, youth is now present, and old age is
absent.


Reason. Nothing is more flytting then youth, nothing more deceyuable then old
age. Youth stays not, but in delightyng she slyppeth away, old age
immediately following after softly in darkness and silence, strikes men at
unawares: and when she is thought to be far of, then stands she at the door.


Joy. My age is in rising.


Reason. Thou trustest to a most deceitful thing. This rising, is a going
down, this short life, this unstable time, steals away, yea without making
any noise with the feet, even while we sleep, and make merry. And, O that
this swiftness of time, and shortness of life were as well known in the
beginning, as it is in the end? which to those that enter seems infinite,
and nothing when they go out, and are scarce so many minutes as they appeared
to be hundredes of years. So then, at length deceypt is known when it can not
be avoided: whereby it comes, that many times counsel is given in vain unto
those years, they are both vnbeleeuyng, and unskillful, disdainefull of
another counsel, and wantyng of their own. And therefore, there is nothing
that discovers the errors of youth, although they be innumerable and
grievous, and yet notwithstanding hyd and unknown to those that committed
them, better then old age does, and lays them forth before their eyes, who
sometime dissembled them, and winked at them. Neither do ye sooner perceive
what ye ought to be, then ye be made that which ye would be, and then ye can
possibly be none other then ye be. But if there were any that could
understand these things in time, or by him self, or believe when he is
taught, surely him would I account a worthy and happy youth among many
thousands, he should not pass his life through so many difficulties, whose
only course lies safe and straight through virtue.


Joy. Mine age is nothing spent.


Reason. How is that unspent, which since the time it first began is every
day wasted, and while it is given, is also taken away by very small portions.
For Heaven turns about with perpetual motion, minutes consume hours, and
hours the day. That day thrusts forth another, and that, the next day
following, and there is never any ceassyng. So do months pass away, so
years, and so does an whole age make have, and run, and as Cicero says,
flees away. And as Virgil says, It never waggeth the swifte wings. So
likewise, they that fare by Sea, they are carried away in the ship, and feel
not how, and many times are at their viage end before they be ware.


Joy, and Hope. An age that begins, is far from the end.


Reason. Within the space of a short life, nothing is far of.


Joy and Hope. But there is no part farther from the end, then is the
beginning.


Reason. None in deed, but this should be truly said, if all men lived like
space of time. Howbeit, even the very first age falls sundry ways into
death: whereby it chances many times, that he that seemed farthest of, is
nearest his end.


Joy and Hope. Truly, I am of a most floorishing age.


Reason. Although few do mark it, yet there is some change wrought since we
began to speak, and in the drawyng forth of every syllable, there is some
part of life passed away, and some piece of transitory flower of youth
decayed. And I pray you, what has this deyntie and gallaunt young man, more
then that rough and riueled old man, besides this short and transitory flower
which fades every day? wherein what should be so pleasant and delectable I
do not find, since he knows that almost sooner then a man can speak it, he
shall him self be such an one as this old man now is, or else is mad if he
know it not, unless of twain which are led togeto be put to death, he is to
be accounted the happier, which is commanded last to lay down his neck
upon the block to be cut of, who truly seems unto me in a manner in the
more miserable state for the deferryng of the death: Howbeit the condition of
these men, and of the other of whom I spoke before, is not all one, insomuche
as this man may have some entreatie or means made for him in the mean while
to escape his fellows execution, and to live. Only death can prevent a young
man, that he shall not live unto old age. To be short, there consists no
great felicity in a small process of time, and unto lofty minds there is
nothing that is short accounted acceptable. Awake ye that sleep, it is now
time, and open your dim and slumbring eyes. Accustom your selves at length
to think upon eternal things, to love them, and to desire them, and
therewithal also to contemn transitory things. Learn to depart from them
willingly, which can not continue with you long, and to forsake them in heart,
before by them ye be forsaken.


Joy, and Hope. My years are stable and green.


Reason. They lie which say that there is some age (I know not which) stable.
There is nothing more swift then time, and time is the charret of al ages, to
carry them away in: And do thou then imagine that it is permanent? O
vanity, there is nothing durable, for even at this present thou art violently
drawn away. etc.


Of the goodly beauty of the body. The second Dialogue.
Joy. THE beauty of my body is goodly.


Reason. It is no more permanent then the time that comes with it, with
which also it flitteth away. Stay the time if thou can, and so perhaps thou
may stay beauty.


Joy. The beauty of my body is singular.


Reason. Thou restest upon a brittle foundation. The body it self passes away
like a shadow: and do thou think that a transitory accident of the body
will continue? Accidents may perish, the subject remaynyng, but when the body
perishes, they must needs decay. And among all the qualities which pass
away with this mortal body, there is none swyfter then beauty, which so
soon as ever it has showed it self as a pleasant flower, it vanishes even
in the sight of them that wonder at it and praise it: it is quickly nipt with
the least frost, and beaten down with a small wind, and either suddenly
pinched of with the nail of some enemies hand, or overthrown with the heel
of some sickness passing by. To be short, vaunt and rejoice as much as thou
list, behold he comes apace that will cover thee in a thin veil. How much the
beauty of a living man is to be esteemed, death declares, and not death only,
but old age also, and the space of a few years, yea one days fit of a sudden
fetter. Last of all, to admit yt no outward extremity do happen, by
continuance it consumes of it own accord, and turns to naught, neither did
it bring so much delyght when it came, as it procures grief when it
departs. The same, if I be not deceived, did the beautiful Roman Prince
Domitian prove sometime to be true, who writing unto a certain friend of
his: Understand says he, that there is nothing more acceptable then beauty,
nor more brittle. And although it were durable, and a gift of nature that
continued, yet do I not see what there is in this glitteryng beauty, which is
no sound thing, and which rests only upon the uppermost part of a man, that
should be so much desired, which covers many fylthy and horrible things,
flatteryng the senses, and deludyng them with a simple and slight ouercastyng
of the skin: And therefore it is better to take pleasure in true and permanent
good things, then in such as are false and transitory.


Joy. The beauty of my body is most excellent.


Reason. Thou have a veyle before thine eyes, a snare before thy feet,
byrdlyme upon thy wyngs, thou can not easesily either discern the truth, or
follow virtue, or mount aloft with thy mind: Beauty has hyndred many from
atchiuing honest exploites, and turned them to the contrary.


Joy. The beauty of my body is wonderful.


Reason. You say well, to call it woonderful, for what is more woonderful then
this vanity? From how many delectable things do fair young men absteyne?
what trauayles do they sustain? how much do they punyshe them, to the end
they may (I say not be) but appear the more beautiful, and that only to set
forth their beauty, not thynkyng upon either their good health or pleasure?
How much time therewhile is there spent in eating and drinking? how many
honest, profitable, and lastly, necessary businesses are there neglected? And
therefore keep unto thy self this short and transitory good and vain joy, and
that without envy. Thou have thine enemy at home, and that which worse is, a
delectable and pleasant one: thou have that which will take away thy quietness,
and spend thy time, and is a perpetual torment: thou have the occasion of
pain and trouble, a plentiful matter to minister dangers, a maynteyner of
lusts and letcherie, and an entrance no less to purchase hatred, then to
procure love. Perhaps thou shall be amorous to women, but odious to men, or
peradventure suspected: For jealousy in wedlock is by no means more kyndled,
then by bodyly beauty. And nothing is more ardently coueted then beauty,
nothing moves the mind more forcibly, and therefore nothing is suspecied more
vehemently.


Joy. The beauty of my body is great.


Reason. The same is wont to enforce foolish young men to that which is not
expedient for them, while they think that even as they lust, so also it is
lawful for them to use their present commodity, not regardyng what is meet
and convenient: which thing many times has been the cause of a sharp and
shameful ruin to many.


Joy. The beauty of my body is alowable.


Reason. It shall be so but a very short time, seeing that this coomlynesse and
color of thy face shall be changed. These yellow locks shall fall away, the
other that remain shall wax hoarie, the skalie wrinkles shall plowe the
loathsome furrows upon thy tender cheeks and glysteryng forehead, a sorrowful
cloud shall cover the cheereful beams and shynyng stars of thine eyes,
rotten raggedness shall consume and fret away the smooth and white iuorie of
thy teeth, not changyng them only in color, but disorderyng them also in
place, thine upright neck and nymble shoulders shall wax crooked, thy smooth
throat shall wax curled, thou shall think that those dry hands and crooked
feet were never thine own: What need many words? the day will come, in
which thou wylt not know thy self in a lookyng glass. Of al these things
which thou think to be far from thee, to the end that when they come
thou shall not be astonished at such monstrous bugges, say not but that thou
have ben forewarned: And now I pronounce unto thee, that if thou live, these
things will come upon thee almost sooner then it can be spoken: and if thou do
now believe me, thou shall then less wonder to see how thou art transfourmed.


Joy. In the mean while my beauty is noble.


Reason. What can I say more briefly then that saying of Apuleius Mandarensis?
Stay a little while, and there shall be no such thing.


Joy. Hitherto the beauty of my body is excellent.


Reason. I had rather the beauty of thy mind were excellent. For the beauty
of the mind is a thing far more precious, pleasant, and sure, then is the
beauty of the body, consisting likewise of semblable laws and cumlinesse of
order, with apt and due disposition of the parts. It is a worthy matter to
wish for that beauty, and to employ a man's travail in pursuyng the same,
which neither length of time shall consume, nor sickness extinguyshe, nor death
it self overthrow. But now you have mortal things in admiration.


Joy. Truly at the leastwyse now my beauty is rare.


Reason. In this, as in many other things, a mediocritie is to be wyshed. But
if thou neither please thy self with this thy beauty, neither endeavor to
please others but with that which is comely and convenient, and shall use it
chastely, soberly, and modestly, thy commendation thereby shall not be smally
advanced.


Joy. A beautiful face honesteth the mind.


Reason. Nay rather it proves it, and oftentimes draws it into danger: And
why should thou glory of that, since it is neither thine own, neither can
thou keep it long, which was never glorious unto any to have had it, but unto
many to have cast it of? I let pass to speak of other: Spurina was renowned,
not for her natural beauties sake, but for her procured deformity.


Joy. I do endeavor that virtue of the mind, may be joined with the beauty
of my body.


Reason. If thou bring that to pass, then shall I say that thou art truly and
in all respects fortunate: then shall thy beauty appear more excellent, and
thy virtue more acceptable. And although Seneca do write, that he seems unto
him to be deceived, who says,

And virtue found in body fair, the greater grace it bears: yet me thynks he
might have been more worthyly reprehended if he had said that it had been in
deed greater, or perfecter, or higher. But now since by saying it is more
acceptable, he respected not the thing it self, but the indigent of the
beholders: surely Virgil seems unto me to be deceived in so saying. To
conclude, as the grace of beauty has in it no soundnes, and nothing to be
desired? so if it be wyllyngly added to virtue, neither the one be impaired by
increase of the other, I will suffer that this be termed an ornament to the
other, or a thing not unpleasant to sight, howbeit short and frail. But if it
be alone without virtue, I will then call it a burden to the mind, and an
unlucky sign of sorrowful deceit.


Of bodily health. The third Dialogue.
JOY. MY health is prosperous.


Reason. Whatsoever I said er^ while concerning beauty, imagine that it were
now again repeated.


Joy. My bodily health is strong.


Reason. Behold how old age comes against thee, guarded with a thousand
kinds of sundry diseases to invade good health, and in the mean while
pleasure fights against thee a familyar combat.


Joy. The health of my body is joyful.


Reason. An unadvised ioyfulnesse, which uses to make the possessours thereof
careless and necligent, and many times to procure those diseases, which the
distrustful carelessness of the party has feared, as ready to impair his good
health.


Joy. The health of my body is good.


Reason. Use it well, else it is but a small good: Yea, it is a great evil, if
(as it is wont,) it minister cause of some offense. Good health has been
dangerous and hurtful to many, that might with more safety have been sick in
their beds.


Joy. I am in very good health of body.


Reason. A very good thing truly, and much profitable, whether a man has
ought to do with the body, or with the mind. But like as there rests the
force of poison in the roots of certain herbs, which being corrected by
minglyng of other things with them, there is an wholesome drink made of many
things together, which before consistyng but of one thing, wo^^^e have been
hurtful: So likewise bodily health, to the end it be not harmefull to him
that has it, ought to be tempered with none other thing, then by adioynyng
thereunto the good health of the mind. A sick mind dwells in no place
worse then in an whole body.


Of restored health. The fourth Dialogue.
JOY. I JOY that I am delivered of a long sickness.


Reason. Restored health I confess, is more pleasant then retained. Most
unthankful men, ye scarce know your goods otherwise then by loosyng them,
and therefore when they be lost they grieve you, and when ye recover them, they
make you meery.


Joy. A most sharp fever has forsaken me.


Reason. Physicians call those fevers most grievous, which fry with heat
within the bones and marow: How much more grievous are they which lie hyd
within the mind, whereof I would wysh thee specially to be delivered?


Joy. My sickness is gone.


Reason. Present sickness has oftentimes done good, while weakenyng the
strength of the body, it has procured health to the mind. Consequently
therefore when this is wantyng, it hurts and diminishes the light of the
mind, and augmenteth the pride of the body: albeit then, sickness seem to be
naught, yea, very evil, notwithstanding that evil is to be embrased which
brings remedy to a greater evil.


Joy. At length my long sickness has an end.


Reason. Oh thou most foolyshe man, do thou think thou have thus escaped
death, to whom thou runnest daily? Thou art now nearer unto him, than then,
when thou thoughtest thou wast hard at him: your journey is vnreturneable, and
ye stay in no part thereof, ye have no Inn to rest in, ye cannot slow your
pace, your sleep and watchyng, your toil and restyng, your sycknesse and
health, are steps a like unto death.


Joy. I am ryd of a perilous disease.


Reason. Thou have a creditour whom thou can not deceive, thy day of payment
is deferred, but thou art not discharged of thy band: for thou must needs be
sick again, and dye.


Of bodyly strength. The.v. Dialogue.
JOY. THere has happened unto me strength yenough, yea very much.


Reason. Read over that which is said touching beauty and good health: Of
like things, like is the doctrine.


Joy. I have much strength.


Reason. Beware thou attempt nothing trusting in thine own strength, whereby
thou may appear weak.


Joy. I have great strength.


Reason. This is a glory, as if it were for a Bull.


Joy. I have plenty of strength.


Reason. An Eliphant has more.


Joy. I have much strength.


Reason. I believe that well: to much, turns to stark naught, or is it self
a fault.


Joy. I have overmuch strength.


Reason. If this overmuch be brought to a mediocritie, it is well. But what if
it turn to a want? what if this great force be converted into a notable
weakness? Believe me, there was never yet any strength of body so great, but
that it was broken either with immoderate labor, or sharp sickness, or with
old age, that consumes al things. The force of the mind only is vnfatigable
and invincible.


Joy. The strength of my body is mighty.


Reason. None was more strong then Milo, but many more noble.


Joy. My body is hugie, and of great force.


Reason. Virtue, which is of all things the most worthiest, has no need of
the bygnesse of the body, but dwells in the mind.


Joy. There is nothing hard to this strength.


Reason. Yes, there are many things impossible for thee to do, and this one
thing especially, that who so puts his trust in his body, should be avle to
clymbe on high.


Joy. My strength is above the strength of a man.


Reason. Whosoever in this behalf surpassed al other men, yet in the same he
was inferior to many living creatures.


Joy. There is nothing that with this strength I can be afraid of.


Reason. Yes truly very much: for against so great confidence in a man's own
strength, fortune armeth her self with great force, and many times disdayning
to encounter in equal fight, to the intent she may show how weak a creature
man is, yea, when he thinks him self most strong, in slender conflict she
has overthrown Giantlike personages. Hercules, whom none could overcome, the
force of lurkyng poison subdued. Milo, who was known and renowned at al
exercises of strength and valiencie, one poor tree caught fast, and held him
there to be torn in pieces by wyld beasts. And so that valiant strength of his
without example, was found to be inferior to the force of a cloven Oak: And
will thou trust to thy strength?


Joy. I am of an hugie strength.


Reason. Every hugie thing, is troubled with his own mole and bigness.


Joy. My strength increases.


Reason. This is for the most part the nature of al things, that when they be
come to the highest, then they fall down again, and that not with like leisure
as they gate up. For their rising is slow, but their falling is sudden. This
strength also whereof thou vauntest, when it shall leave to increase, will not
continue, but first will privily begin to decay, and afterward at length will
openly fall. Al mortal things do equally flyt away, except the mind only, but
the signs and footesteps of their departure do not appear alike, unless a
man will say, that those living creatures do go less or slowest, which either
go in the dark, or make no noise in their creeping, and put out the prynt of
their going with the pressing of their tails.


Joy. I boast in the strength of my body.


Reason. What would thou then do in thine own? Think how great thine own
strength is, for this is not thine, but the strength of thy harborow or Inn,
or rather thy prison. It is a vain thing for thee, being thy self weak, to
glory of thy strong dwelling, or to speak more aptly, of a strong adversary.


Joy. I rejoice in my strength.


Reason. What other shall I say, then that saying of the Poet? Thou shall not
rejoice long, and in steed of mirth, complaints shall come in place. Dooest
thou remember how he that was so strong, of whom I made mention twyce
erewhyle, complayneth of his strength in old age?


Of swiftness of the body. The syxth Dialogue.
JOY. But I am very swyft.


Reason. Tell me whyther thy runnyng ^endeth? Many have been destroyed through
their own swyftnesse.


Joy. My swyftnesse is wonderful.


Reason. Run ye mortal men whither ye lust, the swiftnes of heaven outrunneth
you, and leads you unto old age, and death. The one of these will take away
your runnyng, the other your mooueyng.


Joy. My swyftnesse is very great.


Reason. It tends thither, where it shall have an end.


Joy. My swiftnes is s^e^, as ^he like has not been heard of.


Reason. It tends thither where there shall be great slownesse.


Joy. My swiftne^^ is infinite.


Reason. Be it as great as it list, it shall have no place where to exercise it
self: for the whole earth is as is were a small prick or point.


Joy. My swyftnesse is inestimable.


Reason. This commendation is due unto wit, unto which the seas, and heaven,
and eternity, and the spaces of nature, the hydden places, and secrets of al
things lie open. As for this body, which is circumscribed and compassed about
with a prick and small moment of space, whyther will the swiftness thereof bring
it, and where will it leave it? Admit this space were very wide and great,
either in respect of time, or of place, notwithstanding whyther soever it
turns, it makes have to the grave. This narrow roomth, and place of
necessity, is known without Astrologicall conjecture, or Geometrical
demonstration. So then ye run thither, where in deed there is no runnyng at
all.


Joy. My swyftnesse is incredible.


Reason. Although thou excel al men, yet thou art not able herein to match an
Hare.


Joy. My swiftness is marvelous.


Reason. The same accompaniyng many upon hanging hills and broken mountains
sides, has disapoynted them of the plain ground: and many also that would
run, or as it were, fly, by vautyng, or otherwise, upon the walls and
battlementes of towers, upon the tacklynges of ships, upon the cragges of
hills, without hurtyng them selves, shortly after by some little tripping or
slyding of the foot, have in this outrage been found dead in the high ways by
falling. It is a dange^ us thing, and against the course of nature, that there
should be such lightness in heavy bodies, and the practice thereof will make a
man not to be nimble long: For, although he escape without hurt, yet he shall
soon leave it of through weerynesse: for the strength of a man is but short,
and his swiftness shorter.


Joy. I am now very nymble.


Reason. An Ass also is nymble in his youth, and a Parde waxes slow with age.
In time nimblenes will wax styffe. The first age has spurs, the last has
bridles: whatsoever thou art thou shall not be long, and if thou desire to be
good, endeavor to be so. Only virtue is not afraid of old age.


Of wit. The.vii. Dialogue.
JOY. MY wit is also quick.


Reason. I pray God it be unto virtue: Otherwise look how much the quicker, so
much the nearer to destruction.


Joy. I have a ready wit.


Reason. If it be also appliable unto good arts, it is a precious furniture of
the mind: If otherwise, it is burdensome, perilous, and troublesome.


Joy. My wit is very sharp.


Reason. It is not the sharpness, but the uprightness and staiednes of the
wit, that deserve the true and perpetual commendation. The sharpness of some
wits is rebated with small force, and will fail at the first encounter, and
the most strongest things if they be stretched forth to the uttermost, become
feeble, and so likewise weakness overcomes all strength.


Joy. I have a most sharp wit.


Reason. There is nothing more odious unto wisdom then to much sharpnes:
Nothing more grievous unto a Philopher then a sophist: and for that cause, in
old time the ancient fathers feigned that Pallas could not abide spyders,
whose curious work, and fine webs are brittle, and serve to no purpose.
Therefore let the edge of the wit be like the edge of a weapon, that it may not
only pearse, but also stay from going further.


Joy. My wit is prompt, and ready to every thing.


Reason. This was sometime attributed unto Marcus Cato Censorius, that he was
as ready and apt to learning, as to the wars, to matters concerning the
field, as the city, and also to the exercise of husbandry: which thing in
part the Gretians do ascribe to their countreyman Epa^inundas, and the
Persians to their Cyrus. Take herd whereunto this thy ready wit be inclined,
that it be not crafty, and that it be not only not quick and pliant, but
rather light and inconstant. For it is one thing to be able to stay, and
another to be able to go whyther soever a man lust.


Joy. My wit is excellent.


Reason. It skilleth much in what kind a man do excel: For the signification of
that word is uncertain: and true it is, that a man's wit is of force, if he
do thoroughly bend it. And therefore give me rather a good wit, then an
excellent: for the one cannot be converted to evil, the other is flexible unto
many things. For Salust writes, that Lucius Catiline was a man of notable
courage, but of a corrupt naughty wit and disposition.


Joy. My wit is great.


Reason. I require a good and a modest wit, the greatness only is suspected: For
a great wit has many times ben the beginning of great euylles. And seldom
were there any great errors, but they sprang from great wits.


Of Memory. The.viii. Dialogue.
JOY. MY memory is very great.


Reason. Thou have then a large house of loathsomenesse, and a gallery full of
smoky images, among which many things may displease.


Joy. My memory conteyneth many things.


Reason. Among many things there be but few that do delight a man, the more
part of them do molest him, and oftentimes the remembrance of pleasant things
is grievous.


Joy. My memory comprehends sundry things.


Reason. If they be good, it is well: If they be evil, why art thou glad thereof?
Is it not grievous yenough, either to have suffered or seen evils, but that
they must continually come into our mind, or always lie forth before our eyes:


Joy. My memory conteyneth diverse things.


Reason. That is to say, diverse both faults, and offenses, and heinous
trespasses, and reproaches, and shames, and repulses, and sorrows, and
travails, and dangers, although (as some say) there is pleasure in the
remembrance of this whereof I spoke last: wherein notwithstanding we must this
understand, that not so much the remembrance of the forepassed euyls, as the
delyght of the present good state, procures the pleasure. And therefore no man
takes delight in the remembrance of his labor and danger, unless he be at
quiet and in security: no man can gladly think on poverty, but he that is
rytche? on sickness, but he that is in health: on prison, but he that is at
liberty: on bands, but he that is free: on banyshment, but he that is
returned home again: Only the remembrance of shame is grievous, yea, in the
midst of honors. So that there is nothing that is holden more dear, or is
more incurable, then is a man's honor and good name.


Joy. My memory is manyfolde, and conteyneth much time.


Reason. In manyfold remembrance, are manyfolde troubles. For some do nyp the
conscience, some prick it, some wound it, some confound it, some terrify
it, some overthrow it, whereby it comes to pass, that when men call them to
remembrance, red blushyng and wan palenes enterchangeably possess their faces
in silence, which thing chances sometime to the vilest and wickedst persons,
causing their going to be uncertain, their speech doubtful, with many other
such passions more, signifiyng that the mind is troubled with to well remembryng.


Joy. My memory is prompt.


Reason. I had rather thy will were godly, thy desire chaste, thy counsels
honest, thy deeds innocent, and thy life without rebuke.


Joy. I have a very firm memory.


Reason. How should you men then forgeat the heavenly precepts, which are so
few in number: How should you forgeat the only God? How should you then forgeat
yourselues:


Joy. My memory is passing firm.


Reason. I think well it be so, of earthly and unprofitable things. But whyther
and to what purpose tends this vagabounde and flickeryng memory? Which
wanderyng through heaven and earth, and forgettyng to return to it self,
calls not to remembrance that one thing which is necessary and healthful: in
which if perhaps sometime it find any small pleasure, most times it finds
plenty of grief. And therefore not without cause, when one offered to teach
Themistocles the art of memory, which at that time was invented by Simonidis,
answered, that he had rather learn the art of forgetfulness. And although he
seemed justly to answer so, as one that above al credit excelled al other in
that gift of nature, and whose memory was overwhelmed with innumerable
representations of matters and words, notwithstanding it agrees almost with all men: for so al of you learn the things that you ought to forgeat, and
forgeat the things that ye ought to learn, exercising your memory in such
matters as were profitable to forgeat, and therein not contented with the
limitatio^ of nature, ye set forth your madness in art.


Joy. My memory is almighty.


Reason. This title is proper to God only. You would have said perhaps that it
is of great power, notwithstanding if an excellent memory be of any force,
which in deed is better then al othervaine curiosity, let it reject ye
hurtful, and embrace the profitable, and not so diligently pursue the things
that delight, as the things that profit.


Joy. My memory is the best that can be.


Reason. There is nothing better then the best, and therefore if thou will seem
to say true, it behooves thee to show thy self mindful in ye best Remember thy
sin, yt thou may be sorry for it: remember death, that thou may leave
to syn: remember the judgment of god, that thou may be afraid: remember his
mercy, yt thou do not despair.


Of Eloquence. The.ix. Dialogue.
JOY. But mine eloquence is notable.


Reason. I grant it is a great instrument of glory, but doubtful, with two
points. It skilleth very much how a man do use this also.


Joy. Mine eloquence is flowing and swift.


Reason. Some, not amysse, do compare the eloquence of a fool or a lewd
person, to a mad man's sword, both whom it is meet when they go abroad, to be
unarmed.


Joy. Mine eloquence is famous and bright.


Reason. A thing is said to be bright many ways, the Sun is bright, a fire
is bright.


Joy. Mine eloquence is very shynyng.


Reason. The sorrowful cometes, and hurtful swords, and hateful helmets of our
enemies do shine: but that the shyning of eloquence may be glorious, it must
be tempered with holiness and wisdom.


Joy. The plenty of mine eloquence is very great.


Reason. If it be joined with modesty, I do not deny but that it is an
excellent thing, and surpassyng the common measure of men: otherwise it were
better to be dumb.


Joy. I have eloquence yenough.


Reason. That there was eloquence yenough and but little wisdom in that most
wicked man, thou read in Salust, yet sought he not for any glory by his
eloquence: how be it, if it be more deeply considered, it was not eloquence,
but unprofitable babbling. For no man can be a true orator, that is to say, a
master of eloquence, unless he be a good man And if thou, being a good and a
wise man, did suppose that this stream and readiness of words, which
for the most part does most abound in the fancy and impudent crew, was
sufficient for the commendation of the Oratorie, and the perfect duty of
eloquence, or that this cunning in speech only was yenough, thou wast
deceived. The redines of the tongue, and plenty of words, and the art and
skill also to use them, may be indifferent to the wicked and the godly: but that
which thou seek apparteineth to the best sort of men, and not to al of them,
but to very few: so that evil men are banished from this commendation, being a
thing whereunto the good gifts of yt mind, as virtue and wisdom, are required,
which they do want. Which, if thou do not understand to be so, I will show
thee how. And remember these two things whereof I speak, and imprint their
diffinitions in thy mind, whereof the one is Catoes, the other Ciceroes. The
first says thus: An Orator is an honest man, skilful in speaking. The other:
Eloquence, says he, is nothing else but wisdom, speaking copiously. By these
words thou see, that to the essence and substance of an Orator, and of
Eloquence, is honesty and wisdom required, which notwithstanding are not
sufficient, unless there be cunning, and copy. So that the two first things
do make a man good and wise only, the other make him neither good nor wise, nor
eloquent, but full of words. Al these joined together, do make a perfect
Orator, and his cunning which truly is a more rare and high thing, then they
suppose that hope that it consists in multitude of words. And therefore if
thou covet the name of an Orator, and seek for the true praise of Eloquence:
first study virtue and wisdom.


Joy. Mine eloquence is full and perfect.


Reason. To that which is full and perfect, nothing is wanting, but there will
be much lacking if the premises be away. And therefore before thou pronounce
of the whole, recount this one thing secretly with thy self.


Joy. Mine eloquence is the chiefest.


Reason. There is nothing above that which is chiefest, and therefore if these
cease, it cannot be chief, but a certain transitory and misshapen thing, that
has neither roof nor foundation.


Joy. Mine eloquence is pleasant and comely.


Reason. This pleasantness and comlynesse, I know not what flattery and
craft, not profit or vprightnes it resembles. Howbeit, ye pleasant and comely
pleading of a deceiptful man, is of no more force before upright judges, then
is the payntyng of a harlot, or sugared poison, or the strength of a frentike
person, or the gold of a covetous miser. Whatsoever it be, although it appear
to be somewhat, and do delyght, if it want the essential beginning, it ought to
seem nothing at al, or almost nothing.


Joy. I have great confidence in mine eloquence.


Reason. Great confidence has oftentimes opened the way to great dangers. To
the intent it may lift up the mind, and help it, let a man bridle his
affection, and know him self, and examine him self what he has to do: let
insolency and disdain be far of. But if, going yet farther at liberty, it
begin to forget it own strength, it is no longer confidence, but rashness and
boldness, a thing of all other farthest of from wisdom. This, as in all
affairs it seems more precious to sight, so in affection it is more
dangerous then cowardice. For this keeps men at home flouthfull and deuoyde
of glory, and boldness pricketh them forth in heat, and whom it was thought
it would prefer, it casts down headlong, it makes most valiant men to
appear dastardes, it has caused most wary men to prove unadvised: and that I
may now come nearer to thee, it has made them that appeared most eloquent, to
be found without speech.


Joy. Mine eloquence is exceeding great.


Reason. If we may believe the Historician, eloquence has dwelt among infinite
vices: and hold thou fast his authority for an undoubted truth, and doubt
not of that which the prince of elequence writes in his rethorikes, That
eloquence cannot be without wisdom, which as it appears, is plainly
repugnant to that which goes before. And in deed this eloquence, howsoever it
be taken, the greater truly it is, the more noisome and hurtful it is, if it
be alone.


Joy. Mine eloquence is singular.


Reason. That same is the thing which led the most singular men both among the
Greeks and Latins into destruction: Which to be so, Demosthenes, and Cicero,
and Antonius, will not deny.


Joy. Mine eloquence is plausible.


Reason. If thou use it vpryghtly without boastyng, there is no one mean
whereby thou may sooner get the goodwyll of the multitude, and purchase
glory, without which it can not be gotten, but by mere exercise of virtue.
But if thou abuse it arrogantly and wickedly, thou shall soon bring thy self
into danger, and heap up the hatred of many upon thy head. It is the saying of
a certain wise man, that life and death are in the power of the tongue. The
tongues, not of one man only, but of a certain many, have overthrown whole
commonwealthes, and will overthrow hereafter. The tongue, is the worst and most
hurtful member of an evil person. There is nothing softer then the tongue, and
nothing harder.


Joy. Mine eloquence is ratlyng.


Reason. Thunder and lightning ratle also.


Joy. Mine eloquence is flourishing.


Reason. The poysonyng herb Aconitum florisheth likewise. To be short, turn
and return it which way soever thou can, thou have both a narrow way to
glory, and a very prone path unto envy.


Of Virtue. The.x. Dialogue.
JOY. IS it not then lawful for me to boast of virtue?


Reason. Admit it be lawful, yet it is lawful to boast in him only, who alone
is the auctour and geuer of virtue, and al goodness.


Joy. The virtue of my mind is great.


Reason. Take heed, lest the greater it be supposed, the less it be in deed.


Joy. My virtue is tried in doubtful state.


Reason. It is the property of virtue, to weigh not what is done, but what
ought to be done: not what we have, but what is wanting: whereby it comes to
pass, that we see it not vaunt of that which is already gotten, but careful
for that which is to get. I would say, if I might so speak, that virtue is
covetous, or truly like unto covetousness. It thirsts continually, it
burns daily, and the more it seeks, the poorer it seems to it self, and
the more it coueteth. It has no end of desiryng, it has no sufficient
recompense of desartes.


Joy. My virtue is greater, then is accustomable for men.


Reason. I fear me lest this boastyng proceeds rather from pride, then from
virtue.


Joy. My virtue is very much renowned.


Reason. Humility is the foundation of true virtue: neither is there any
renown so great, which pride will not obscure. This does he know to be true,
who being created bright, shinyng, and renowned, and aduauncing himself,
deserved not only to be made dark and obscure, but also the prince of
darkness. Which thing if it hapened unto him, what may other hope of
themselves?


Joy. My virtue is excellent.


Reason. It is not accustomable for virtue to boast or wonder at it self, but
to imitate that which is in other. And therefore always breathing higher, and
always aspiring farther, in comparison of it self, it little regards any
other.


Joy. My virtue is absolute.


Reason. Virtue never judges so of it self, it trusts not in it self, it
is not arrogant, it knows that this is a time of warfare, and not of triumph,
and therefore it never sleeps, but is always busy. It is always ready, as
though it began but now, which notwithstanding thinks not yt it has
accomplished al thing, or yt it is perfect and absolute. Believe me, it is not
virtue, error is obuersant unto virtue, and contrary unto it: whosoever
thinks that he is come to the top, in this he is first deceived, that he is
not where he thinkth him self to be. Moreover, in that by wandering that way,
it forsakes the path that leads thither, and while it preuenteth that which
it has not, it neglects that which it might have had of it own accord. For
why? there is nothing so contrary to profit, as the opinion of perfection. No
man endeuoreth to do that which he supposes he has done alredie. This
error has often times hindered such as have attempted great matters, and that
were now ready to reach to the highest.


Joy. My virtue is absolute, as touching the capacity of man.


Reason. If thou lay down al thy life before thine eyes, and being an
vncorrupt Judge in thine own cause, thou require of thy self an account of
thy words, deeds, and thoughts, through every day, then shall thou see how
much there is void in thy mind, and how great a roomth vices do possess.


Joy. At the leastwise my wisdom is commune and ordinary.


Reason. In the highest things a mean has scarcely any place: but admit it
have, notwithstanding that is not the matter of joy, but of traueile and
study: For that which tends to the highest, is not in quiet until it
attain thereto.


Joy. I have some virtue.


Reason. Leave the judgment hereof unto other. And if thou have any virtue,
the end of the joy is not there, but in him unto whom true virtue leads by
the narrow way: For we profess that Philosophy which teaches us not to
enjoy, but to exercise virtue: And therefore now this is not the f^l time of
rejoicing, being besette round about with so many dangers of death, but rather
of wishing and hoping. Thou may hope that thou shall rejoice, but so, that
thou fear that thou may be sorry.


Joy. If I have any goodness, I know from whence it comes, and I rejoice
therein: If I lack any thing, I know from whence to require it, and therein
is my hope.


Joy. This is virtue, and now thou have found an assured path unto true joy.


Of the opinion of Virtue. The.xi. Dialogue.
JOY. Whatsoever I am, men have a good opinion of me.


Reason. Opinion changes not the thing it self.


Joy. The common opinion is, that I am a good man.


Reason. What if thou be naught, is not then the opinion false? For him that
knows a thing, and falsely rejoices, it is a madness.


Joy. In the opinion of the common people, I am called good.


Reason. There is nothing which opinion can not imagine to it self. But
whatsoever good or evil dwells in the mind, it is not altered by diverse
opinions, nor speeches. And therefore, if all the men in the world do say
thou art a good man, thou art in deed made never awhyt the better.


Joy. At the leastwise I have a good name.


Reason. The wise man among the Hebrews says, that a good name is better then
great riches. And again in another place, A good name, says he, is letter
then precious oyntmentes. By these words he has expressed the value of a good
name, and the smell of good report, in comparing them to gold, and to an
ointment: But how can a name or any thing else be good, if it be false? And
therefore whatsoever name a wicked man has, his wickedness notwithstanding is
not the less. Then let him not glory in his vain name, but let him hear the
saying of the same wise man, The name of the ungodly. says he, shall rot away:
and that saying also of another man, This is our glory, to wit, the testimony
of our consience. If that do grudge within thee, what will the whisperyng of
flatterers avail thee? what good will that name do thee, which is gotten by
feygning and flattery? there springs no good out of an ill root: Neither
may thou say that a good name springs hereof, seeing in so saying thou
can not say truth.


Joy. My citizens think well of me.


Reason. It skilleth not what other men think of thee, but what thou thy self
think.


Joy. My citizens speak well of me.


Reason. Believe them not, they know not what they speak, and they lie
willingly, by reason of a certain itche they have in their tongues, to speak
doubly and on both sides, whose continual custom is turned into nature.


Joy. Very many speak well of me.


Reason. To believe those that are ignorant, what is it other, then willingly
to be deceived?


Joy. The country round about speaks well of me.


Reason. Perhaps allured by means of fair speech, or gifts on thy part, or
lookyng for some commodity at thy hands N^uer believe him that loves, or him
that hops.


Joy. My neighbors renoume my name.


Reason. One of them abuses another, and all of them abuse thee.


Joy. My citizens geuen^e a good report.


R ason. Within thy mind there is a more incorrupt and assured witness: Demand
of thine own consience, and believe that.


Joy. Men have a good opinion of me.


Reason. Opinion is the name of a doubtful thing Virtue is a thing most assured.


Joy. I seem unto my self to be a good man.


Reason. Then art thou evil: For good men do mislyke and accuse them selves.


Joy. I seem good unto my self, and to others.


Reason. What if thou be evil, and they fools?


Joy. My citizens hope well of me.


Reason. Endeavor that their hope be not deceived. It is a shame to delude them
that hope well of a man, in that which he may do of himself.


Joy. I think I am such an one of whom many do not hope in vain.


Reason. It thou were so, thou would not believe it. It is an evil thing
for a man to deceive others, but woorst of all to deceive him self.


Joy. All men think that I am good.


Reason. But what if thou know the contrary?


Joy. All men call me good.


Reason. And do thou believe them all? Art thou not ashamed to be called
that which thou art not? But among many other things, this is a strange
quality which is engraff^d within you, concerning your selves and your
affairs, yea, although they be secret, to believe every one better then your
selves. And according to Horace saying, Both to fear hing infamy, and to be
d^lighted in false glory.


Joy. The whole common people praise me with one voice.


Reason. There is no way more prone to error, and to falling down headlong,
then by the common peoples steps: For almost whatsoever the common people
does praise, is rather worthy of reprehension.


Joy. I please all men.


Reason. God despises those that please men, and to please men, is to
displease God: and the contraries, rejoice in their contraries.


Joy. I have the name of a good man.


Reason. That m^st be preserved by constancy and honesty of life, otherwise
it loyl soon vanish, for it waxes stale.


Joy. The people does much advance my praise.


Reason. Thou have planted wythered trees in a dry soil.


Joy. My commendation also is great among the learned.


Reason. If it be true commendation, it will continue, and as Cicero says, it
will gather root, and spread forth. But if it be false, it will quickly tall
as does a flower.


Joy. Al men, as it were with one mouth, do set forth my virtue.


Reason. Ye ought not to glory in the state of men, nor in your own virtue,
although it be true, but in him that is auciour of all virtues: who so does the
contrary, he shall not only not obtain by the testimony of men that which
he has not, but shall diminishe or loose that which he has.


Joy. All the whole common people speak well of me.


Reason, I have alredie said, and now I repeat it again: Whatsoever the
multitude thinks, is vain, whatsoever they speak, is false, whatsoever they
dislyke, is good, whatsoever they like, is evil, whatsoever they commend, is
infamous, whatsoever they do, is foolyshe. Then go thy ways now, and vaunt
thy self of the foolyshe speech of mad men.


Of wisdom. The.xii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have obtained wisdom.


Reason. A great thing if it were true, and which can not be separated from
virtue. And therefore if thou had embraced that, this were to be allowed:
but both of them are more easy in opinion, then in effect.


Joy. I am wise.


Reason. Believe me, if thou were so in deed, thou would never say so: For
a wise man knows how much it is that he lacks, and therefore he boasts
not, but suspecteth.


Joy. I profess my self to be wise.


Reason. It were well, if there were so many wise men, as there are professors
of wisdom: But the one of these is very hard, the other very easy.


Joy. I am wise.


Reason. If thou wylt be a wise man in deed, suppose not thy self to be so.
It is the first step of folly, for a man to think him self wise: and the
next, to profess him self to be so.


Joy. By my study I have artained to wisdom.


Reason. In deed by that means men attain unto it: but whether thou have
attained unto it, recount with thy self. It is not a matter of small study,
requiryng a space of time as other Arts do: it requires the whole life of a
man, be it never so long. If a man, as they say, runnyng all the day, come to
the euenyng, it is sufficient. That most notable saying of Plato, as many other
also of his is well known, wherein he pleases Cicero well, and me also: to
wit, That he is happy, to whom it has chanced, yea in his old age, to
attain unto wisdom, and true opinions. These, whether thou have met withal
half way, or rydyng upon some fleeyng Horse have attained unto before thy
time, it may be doubted, for that thou art so soon be come wise.


Joy. I have received the perfection of my wisdom from heaven.


Reason. I confess in deed, that wisdom is an heavenly gift, but truly he
was a great man, and a friend to heaven, that said these words, Not that I
have now received it, or am perfect.


Joy. I learned wisdom with a greedy mind.


Reason. As the desire of money and many other things is evil, so the thyrst
of wisdom is good: But whether thou be capable of so great a thing, consider:
Surely he of whom I spoke before: As for me, ^^yth he, I do not think that I
have atteyned it. And doubelesse he was a great man, who talkyng with God of
him self said thus, Thine eyes have seen mine imperfection. This is the
property of a wise man, to acknowledge and confess his own imperfection.


Joy. I am called a wise man.


Reason. Neither thine own nor any other man's saying can ever make thee a wise
man, but the thing it self.


Joy. I am commonly called a wise man.


Reason. The common people has learned, as it were by their own authority,
to call mad men wise, and wise men mad, that is to say, to esteem falsehood for
truth, and truth for falsehood. There is nothing so far of from virtue and
truth, as is the opinion of the common people.


Joy. All men call me wise.


Reason. This perhaps makes somewhat to thy fame: but nothing to thy
wisdom. But I perceive that thou cleauest to the titles of learning, then
which there is nothing more liberal: Howbeit they are not sufficient to make
them wise men that are not, but they make them synguler, and notable, and
honest, and honorable, and excellent, so that they are ashamed of the simple
title of wisdom, which unto how few in deed it is due, it is strange to
understand: notwithstanding custom has so prevailed, that it is numbered up
among excellent styles and tytles, which they that heap them together in
such wise, do know that them selves do lie: But they are wyllyng to be
counted civil, if it were but by lying. You that read them, and think them
not only to be true, but somewhat inferior to the truth, are deceived by a
common error. No man will enquire of his own matters: Every man believes
other men of him self. Would thou know how wise thou art? cast thine eyes
behind thee. Remember how often in this life thou have stumbled, how many
times thou have erred, how often thou have tripped and fallen, how many
shameful things, how many sorrowful things, how many irksome things thou
have committed, and then call thy self a wise man if thou dare: but I suppose
thou wylt not dare.


Joy. I know my self to be wise.


Reason. Learned perhaps thou would say: For there be some in deed that are
learned, although but few: but none almost that are wise. It is one thing to
speak wisely, and another thing to live wisely: one thing to be called,
another thing to be wise in deed. There have been some that have said that
there is no man wise: which saying, how true or false it is, I do not
dispute: Truly it is to peremptory an opinion, and prone to despair, and
repugnant to the study of wisdom. The Hebrews do much commend of their wise
Solomon: who, how wise he was in deed, his number of wives and concubines
witnesses, but most of all his woorshyppyng of false gods. The Romans vaunt
of their wise Laelius and Cato. Greece, whylest it flooryshed, is said to have
had seven wise men. These seemed unworthy of that title unto those that came
after. They that excuse them, say that they did not take upon them that title,
but that it was attributed unto them through the error of the people. There
was one only, that by his own possession, and in his own judgment, was wise,
the most fool of them all, Epicurus. Which title he would perticipate with
Metrodorus, neither did he refuse so honorable a gift at his friends hands,
and took it in good part to be called w^se, that the same glory of his, what
ever it was, might be the error of the other. Socratis only was judged wise by
the Oracle of Apollo: Perhaps for this purpose, that by a false testimony, the
false God might move him to m^onesse and pride, who came near in deed to a
wise man. This much I have said of the ancient wise (...). As for our age, it
is more happy, wherein there are not reckoned one, or twain, or seven, but in
every town are numbered multitudes of wise men, as it were flocks of sheep
and it is no marueyle that there are so many, seeing they are so easily made.
There comes a foolysh young man to the Church, his masters praise and
extol him, either upon love or ignorance, he swells, the people are
astunned, his kinsfolk and friends rejoice at him: He (being wylled) gets
up into the pulpit, and ouerloking al from an high, confusedly murmureth I can
not tell what Then the elder sort of Strines extol him with praise to heaven, as
one that has spoken like a God. In the mean while the belles iangle, the
trumpets rattle, rings fly about, kysses are given, and a piece of a black
round cloth is hung on his shoulders: When this is done, the wise man comes
down that went up a fool. A strange Metamorphosis, which Ovid never knew.
Thus are wise men made now a days: but a wise man in deed, is made otherwise.


Joy. I am wise.


Reason. They that think very magnificently of themselves, boldly do attempt
things above their power, and faylyng in the mids of their endeavor, do
learn by their own peril or shame, how partial judges they have been in their
own causes. It were better, believe me, to reject false opinions, to behold a
man's own insolency, and to wish that thou never have occasion to try thy
wisdom, which may declare how that thou have gloryed in nothing. This is a
more direct and safe means to seek wisdom.


Joy. I think that I have atteyned to wisdom.


Reason. But if thou will hearken unto me, thou shall sooner atteyne thereunto
by rising up and indeuouryng, then by beleeuyng. There is nothing that ryseth
higher then painful humility.


Of Religion. The.xiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Glory in my perfect religion.


Reason. There is but one most excellent and perfect religion, which is
established upon the name of Christ, and upon that most assured rock: al other
are vain superstitions, and goinges out of the right way, and errors which
^eade unto hell and death, not this which is transitory, but the everlasting.
How many, and what notable men, (thynkest thou) have suffered this miserable
want of true religion, who in all other things have excelled the residue? They
have cause to lament eternally, and thou whe^^^^ to glory and rejoice, not in
thy self, but in him, who has vouchsafed to prefer thee in so great a
matter before those that were far greater then thou, then which thing there
can no greater nor better be given unto thee in this life. Of which I would
not stick to speak somewhat more at large, unless it were now by heavenly
illumination almost known to al.


Joy. I am entered into holy religion.


Reason. Holy orders and ceremonies belong only to this religion, and of all
other they are madness, and sacrilegious superstitions, neither is it
sufficient to be entered. Perhaps it is a greater matter then thou thynkest for,
although it be a pleasant travail to a devout mind: neither is it yenough to
know God, which the deuyls do, that hate him: Love, and worshypping are
required, which consist of those things, which I would were by men s^ well
fulfilled, as they are known.


Joy. I please my self in my true religion.


Reason. To please a man's self, is to be proud: As for this true religion,
which tyeth thee unto God, and GOD unto thee, it engraffeth humility in godly
mynds, and rooteth out pride. In this manner therefore it is lawful for thee to
rejoice, that by how much the more merry and religious thou art, by so much the
better thou art, and more abounding in good works, giving thanks unto him, who
shows thee a direct path from this mortal life, unto the life everlasting.


Joy. I thank God for it, I have obtained true religion.


Reason. Thou have said well, god be thanked; keepe^ well then from erro^^s, from
negligence, from sins. And persuade thy self thus, if thou have obtained it,
and exercise thy self therein, as it behooves thee to do, then shall the
controversy cease whereof we contended erewhile, forasmuch as it is written in
holy scripture, Godliness is true wisdom: and by an other also, The fear of
God, is the beginning of wisdom, neither is the same over past with scilence
by profane writers. Of which matter Lactantius makes mention in the second
book of his institutions. Hermes affirms, says he, that they that know
God, are not only safe from incursions of Deuyls, but also that they are not
tied by destiny. Only godliness, says he, is their keeper and defense, For a
godly man, is neither subject to the wicked devil, nor to destiny. God
delyuereth the godly from all evil: For godliness is the only good and
felicity of man: And what godliness is, he shows in an other place by these
words: Godliness is the science and knowledge of God. He affirms also,
that Asclepius did expound at large the same saying in a certain princely
Oration. Thus thou see, how two most obstinate Paganes do grope about your
truth. Such is the force of truth, that oftentimes it draws the tongues of
the enemies unto it.


Of Freedom. The.xiiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Was borne in freedom.


Reason. He is not free that is borne, but he that dies; fortune has great
power over him that is coming into the world, but none over him that is dead:
She overthrows strong Cities: She vanquysheth valya nt armies: She subuerteth
mighty kingdoms. The grave is an impregnable castle: there the worms bear
rule, and not fortune. Who so therefore have stepped into that liberty, of al
men they are free from the insultes of this life. Thou boastest thy self to be
free, and know not whether thou shall enter this bay a free man, I say not
into thy grave, but into thy chamber. Your liberty which hangs by a weak
threede, as all your things else do wherein ye trust, is always waueryng and
bryttle.


Joy. I am a free man.


Reason. For this cause, I suppose, thou call thy self a free man, because
thou have no master: but hear what Annaeus Seneca says, Thine age is
prosperous, says he, perhaps it will so continue: know thou not at what age
Hecuba, and Craesus, and the mother of Darius, and Plato, and Diogenes came
into bondage? By these examples he admonishyth thee. There be many other
examples of Seneca, either concealed or not known. Dooest thou not remember
how Attilius Regulus (though unworthy) yet sustained this reproach? Have thou
forgotten Valerianus that was of latter years? whereof the one, of whom I
spoke last, was a captain, and the other a prince of the people of Rome, and
anon the one made slave to the Carthagians, the other to the Persians, and this
man cruelly put to death, the other consumed with long and miserable servitude.
What shall I say of the kings of Macedonia, and Numidia? Perses on the one
side, and Siphan on the other: who both fell down from the top of their
kingdoms into the Romans fetters. I omit the ancient fall of kings and
princes. Thine age has seen some thrust out of the court into prison, and the
same man also both first a king, and last a bondslaue. For every one is by so
much the more miserable in bondage, by how much he was the more happy in
freedom. Be not proud therefore of thy liberty, forasmuch as bond men are
made so soon, not only of free men, but of kings: And maruayle not at it,
seeing that according to the saying of Plato, Kings are no less made of
servants: humane things are changed daily. There is nothing under heaven
permanent: who will hope that any thing can be fyrme or stable, in so great an
uncertainty? Neither think thy self to be a free man in this respect,
because thou have no master, because thou art borne of free parents, neither
wast ever taken prisoner in war, nor sold for a slave. Ye have invincible
masters of your minds, and there is a secret poison and infection which
lurketh in the first Original of man. The generation of you in the very birth
is subject to sin, a greater bondage then which cannot be imagined. Ye have
hydden enemies, and privy wars. There be same that sell miserable souls,
which (alas) for to small a price, ye make sale of. Yea, some of you are
subject to outrageous mistresses, to wit, most fylthy pleasures, whereunto you
are tide with an vndissoluble knot. Go your way now, and vaunt of your
freedom: But you, being blind, see nothing but that which belongs to the
body, so that ye judge him to be bound that is subject to one mortal master:
As for him that is oppressed with a thousand immortal tyrants, ye account to
be free, even finely as ye do all other things. Verily, it is not fortune
that makes a man free, but virtue.


Joy. I am a free man.


Reason. In deed thou art so, if thou be wise, if thou be just, if thou be
valiant, if thou be modest, if thou be innocent, if thou be godly: If any of
these be wantyng, know thou, that in that respect thou art bond.


Joy. I was borne in a free country.


Reason. Thou have also known in thine age certain free cities, which in
short time have become bond. But if ancient examples be more known and
renowned, the most free cities of Lacedemon and Athens, first suffered a civil,
and afterward a foreign yoke. The holy city of Jerusalem, and the mother of
everlasting liberty, was in temperall subjection to the Romans, and the
Assyrians, and at this present is in captivity to the Egyptians. Rome it
self, being not only a free city, but the Lady of nations, was first bond to
her own citizens, and after to other most vile persons: so that no man can
ever trust to his own freedom, or his own Empire.


Of a glorious Country. The xv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Was borne in a glorious country.


Reason. Thou have the more travail to come into the light: For the small
stars do shine by night, and the Star Bootis, and the day star likewise, are
dull, in comparyson of the beams of the Sun.


Joy. I am a citizen of a famous country.


Reason. It is well if thou be an harborer of virtues, and an enemy to vice:
the one of these proceeds of fortune, the other of thy self.


Joy. My country is fortimate and noble.


Reason. It skilleth much by what nobility. For, a country is made noble by
the number of inhabitauntes, by the abundance of richesse, by the fertility
of the soil, and the commodity of situation, wholesome air, clear sprynges,
the sea nygh, safe havens, convenient rivers. A noble country is commonly
called such an one as is fruitful of Wine and other commodities, as corn,
cattayle, flocks of sheep, heardes of rudder beasts, mines of gold and
silver. Ye call that a good country wherein are bread strong Horses, fat Oxen,
tender Ryddes, and pleasant fruits. But where good men are bred, ye neither
inquire after, neither think it worth the enquiryng, so excellent judges of
matters ye be. Howbeit, only the virtue of the inhabitauntes is the chief
commendation of a country. And therefore did Virgill very well, who in
describyng the Roman glory and felicity, did not so much as touch one of
these things, which ye do only respect, but declared the mightiness of the
City and Empire, and the valiantness of the peoples minds: He called them
men also happy, in respect of their children and issue. This is the true
felicity and nobility of a City.


Joy. My country is famous for good Citizens.


Reason. What if thou thy self be obscure? But what if thine own fame bewray
thee, and bring thee out of darkness, and lead thee abroad into the light:
thou shall then be the sooner noted.


Joy. My country is very famous.


Reason. Catiline had not ben so infamous, unless he had been borne in so
famous a country Unto Gaius and Nero, there happened another heap of infamy,
to wit; an Empire: and favor advanced the worlds children unto the top of
fortune, that they might be the farther known.


Joy. I live in a most noble country.


Reason. Either sufferyng the contempt, or envy of many: For without one of
these a man cannot live in a great City: the first is the safer, the other the
more famous evil, and the nobleness of the country, whereof thou speak, is
cause of them both: Among so many eyes there is no lurkyng.


Joy. I am of a well known country.


Reason. I had rather that thy country were known by thee, then thou by thy
country, unless thou glister of thy self: what other thing will the
brightness of thy country bring unto thee but darkness. A famous City has
accounted of many as obscure persons, who if they had been in ye darkness of some
poor corner of the country, had been sufficiently famous and noble.


Joy. My country is renowned.


Reason. It has then it own peculyar commendation, and it takes part also of
thine: What so ever thou dooest well, the chief praise thereof redowneth in a
manner to thy country. There was one that went about to ascribe Themistocles
glory unto the city of Athens, who answered very gravely, and as it became
such a man to do: For when a certain fellow called Seriphius, an inhabitour
of a certain small and obscure Island, in heat of words, objected him in the
teeth, that it was his countries glory, and not his own, that made him famous:
Verily answered he, neither should I be obscure if I were Seriphius, neither
thou be renowned if thou were an Athenian. He trusted not to the glory of his
country, but to the glory of his own virtue: much more manlyke then Plato,
although he were the greater Philosopher. Howbeit sometimes in great wits,
there be great and wonderful errors: He therefore among other things
ascribes the renown of his country to his felicity. And that thou may
know the whole mind of this most excellent man in this respect, Plato said
that he gave thanks for many things. Truly this was well said, if so be that
he understood to whom, and for what gifts he should give thanks. He gave
thanks to nature. First, for making him a man, and not a dumb beast, of the
male kind, and not a woman, a Greek, and not a Barbarian, an Athenian, and not
a Thebane, and lastly, that he was borne in the time of Socratis, and not at
any other, to the end he might be taught and instructed by him. Thus thou
see, how among his causes of gratulation and glorying, he puts in also
that he was borne in Athens. What I will say herein, perhaps thou attendest.
Although our talk be begun concerning this point only, notwithstanding
forasmuch as it has chanced us to make mention of so excellent a man, I will
declare what other men, and what I my self also, do think of this his whole
talk. I know that there be some famous and eloquent men, which do boldly
affirm, that there was never any thing spoken by any man more foolishly: unto
whose opinion there lacks little but I do agree. For, I pray you, to what
purpose is it to rejoice in these things: what if he had been borne a
Barbarian, or made a woman? Have there not ben many Barbarians, that have
excelled many Grecians, both in virtue and wit? Are there not some women, that
both in glory of many things, and invention of Arts, are more commendable
than certain men? To be short, what if he had been borne an Ox or an Ass,
what should that have belonged to Plato of whom we speak? who then should not
have been Plato, but that thing rather which dame nature had framed him.
Unless perhaps he gave credit to the madness of Pithagoras, to wit, that
souls passed out of one body into another: which opinion is so fond, that
truly there was never any thing spoken more foolyshly or more impudently, I
say not by a Philosopher, but by a man nothing more dissonant to the truth and
godlynes, or that religious ears do more abhor. Farther then, What, was it
so noble a matter to be borne at Athens, that it could not be so good to be
borne elsewhere, no not at Thebes? Were not Homer, and Pythogoras him self, and
Democrates, and Anaxagoras, and Aristotle, and thousands other, borne eswhere
then at Athens, and as highly esteemed, as they that were borne there? And that
I may not now depart from Thebes, which the Grecians are used to despise: If ye
seek for a wit, was not the Poet Pindarus borne there? who as Horace says,
Can not possibly be matched by imitation? If ye require renown of excellent
deeds, Bacchus, and Hercules, were so famous, that Alexander king of
Macedonie, that contemned almost al men, proposed those twain to him self to
imitate, as the highest and chiefest paternes of glory. But if ye look for
both these in one, is there not fresh in memory, and as it were before your
eyes, Epaminundas of Thebes, an excellent Philosopher, and a most valiant
Captain, and in the upright judgment of all men, prince and chief of the
Grecians in all ages? The same is he that almost utterly subverted the
Lacedaemonians, and put Platoes cuntreymen the Athenians in such fear, that
when he was dead, being delivered of a great terror, immediately they gave them
selves up to licentiousness and flouth: And while he flooryshed at Thebes,
how many thousands of idle persons and fools lived at Athens, who is able
easily to recount in his mind? He ought therefore to have given thanks, not
for that he was borne at Athens, but for that he was borne such an one, that
is to say, with such a wit, and such a mind, and finally in such good
lykyng of his parents, and in such plenty of temporal goods, that he might
be set to school and instructed in all goodness: For these things, I say, it
was behouefull for so learned a man, so zelously to have given thanks unto
that GOD, which had bestowed them upon him: not for Socrates, nor for Athens,
in whose school, and in which city how many unjust and unlearned persons
there were, it is an easier matter to guess, then to know. But to speak no
more of the city: In that school among many other, were Alcibiades and
Critias, the one an emmie to his country, the other a most cruel tyrant: to
whom how much their master Socrates auayled, let Plato him self aunsweare
me, or thereby let him understand how vain a thing it is which the
doctrine of an earthly schoolemaister sounds in the ears of his scholars,
unless the grace of the heavenly Master be inspired withal into them,
without which, Socrates could do nothing: although, as we have said before,
he was judged to be the wysest man by the oracle of a living God. But
notwithstanding, let him excuse him self, or some other man for him, what ever
he be, of his most foolyshe conversation with his two wives, most tatter and
testie old women. But this and the residue, we have spoken, as it were by the
way, except this one thing only, whereby thou should understand, that Plato
being so great a man as he was, notwithstanding was led with the vanity of his
glorious country: Not to this end, that thou should cover thine error,
with the buckler of so great a companion, but that thou might more
diligently eschew him, unto whose example and authority thou see that
great wits have yielded.


Joy. I live in a large country.


Reason. The discommodities of a large city are many: the church is far of,
the market fat of. The one of these is hurtful to the mind, the other to the
body: ^he artificers, and our friends be far of. There is no harder distance
then this is, whom it is paynfull to go visit, and discourtesie to neclect.
Do thou hear how Horace complayneth of this matter? One of my friends,
says he, lies upon the byll Quirinus, the other at the farthermost part of
Auentine, and both of them must be visited. Whither soever thou determinest to
go, or to traueyll abroad, dispose the affairs of thy house, forasmuch as
thou art uncertain whether thou shall return or not, and the return it self
is painful: Some time men wander in such wise, that they need to direct
their course by the Load stone and Iron: this way is the easiest way, and that
is the readiest way: this way thou may avoid the place of judgment, and
that way the theater, and this way the market. These and a thousand more are
the rocks and dangers of Cities, through which when thou passest to thine
own house, thou go, as it were, to an other world, scarce hopyng that thou
shall come thither. This discommoditie also thou read in Horace, how that
Philip the Orator when he came home, complained, being in years, that the
ships were too far of from the place of judgment. These troubles are
wantyng in a small town, or whatsoever discommoditie otherwise is alleged.


Joy. I am removed from a small Town, into a great City.


Reason. Wyllyngly to launche out of a quiet Haven, into a tough Sea, is
rashness. But I marvel the less, for that the euentes were prosperous.
Notwithstanding, the family of the Claud^^ did the like in coming from the
Sabines to Rome, Marcus Cato from Tu^culum, Marius and Cicero from Arpine, and
it prospered well with them. But where shall a man find such men? It is not
safe to draw into an example whatsoever has been attempted by rare and
singular wits: But when thou have once determined, to endeavor with all
diligence among great difficulties, to rise up among them that are high,
gouernyng thine enterprise with judgment, which here I name in good part,
thou shall have the more prouocations to virtue. Perhaps there are some whom
thou wylt follow unto glory. Thou shall have a place where thou may
exercise thy self, where thou may concend for praise with thine equalles,
and where thou wylt be ashamed of so many witnesses. Unto many, not seldom,
that which the courage of the mind did not give, the force of shame has
supplied, and to abandon cowardice, often times a looker on has done more
good, then courage: Both these men truly of whom I spoke erewhyle: And Numa
Pompilius also, who was sent for from the Cures, and Seneca that came from
Cordub^, and Seuerus that came from Leptis, and many other that came from other
places, who should have been great men where ever they had been: that they
were the greater at Rome, both the emulation of virtue, and the plenty of
worthy examples, brought it to pass. Endeavor therefore, that that which is
only good, do not peryshe in this thy remoouyng, and that in thy wandryng,
thou seek none other thing, then that the beauty of thy new country may
advance thee in the sight of many.


Of an honorable Family. The.xvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Come of an honorable Family.


Reason. Do thou return again unto folly? What belongs that unto thee?


Joy. My stock is ancient, and glorious.


Reason. To glory in that which is another man's, is a ridiculous bragging. The
worthy deeds of the Grandfathers, are blemishes to the degenerating children:
And there is nothing that mere be wrayeth the staynes of the posterity, then
the bryghtnesse and glory of the auncetours. Many times the virtue of one man,
has been profitable to another. Unless thou win true praise of thine own,
look not to have it from another.


Joy. Mine auncetours have been of great nobility.


Reason. I had rather other should be known by thee, then thou by other:
But do thou some notable deed, that thou may also be noble: For unless
these men had done some thing worthy praise, they had never been noble.


Joy. My blood is of great cleerenesse.


Reason. All blood is for the most of like color, but if there be any cleerer
then other, nobility has not caused it, but health.


Joy. My parents are of great cleerenesse.


Reason. What if thine obscurity be the greater? your bodies always, and your
patrimony often, ye receive of your parents: But who so has integrity and
cleerenesse, he seldom transporteth it to his son: and he that has it not,
sometime beholds it in his child. How much more noble then his father was
Caesar? How much more obscure then his father was the son of Africanus? Who,
if clearenes and nobility could have been delivered by succession, how noble
he should have been, thou know. Howbeit, his father might love him, but
make him noble he could not: For he suffered an infinite eclipse of his light
in his son. So that which is most precious in the heritage, is by the
testatours judgment exempted, and all the solemnity of making testamentes, is
but for the bestowyng of the vilest substance. If I had leisure, I could now
resyte a thousand such obscure heirs of most noble parents, and also if it
were expedient. Thou know my meaning.


Joy. The nobility of my stock is ^ery great.


Reason. This nobility will do thee none other good, then that thou can not
lie unknown, if thou would: So that thereby thou art deprived of the most
pleasant state of living in secret and out of knowledge. Whatsoever thou
do, the people will talk of it: How thou live at home, and how thou facest
at dinner and supper thy neighbors will covet to know, as though thy Father
and thy Grandfather had sent spies unto thy house, to survey the secrets of
thy family, and the order of thy daily diet. Inquiry shall be made what thou
do with thy children, what with thy servants, and what also with thy wife,
yea whatsoever thou do, and the least word thou speak of the smallest
matter that can be: and they will most stomach thee, that have least to do
with thee. This is the fruit of thy clearenesse and nobility, that if thou
tread thy shoe never so little awrye, thou shall be called the shame of thy
stock, and a foul forsaker of that path which was trodden before thee unto
honor and dignity. This I say, happens always unto them that come of a
noble family. Other common matters almost whatsoever, do stayne the glory
which is alredie gotten, for that it is an hard thing to cover that which is
clear and shynyng.


Joy. I am borne most nobly.


Reason. Thou fool, nobility is not gotten by birth, but by living: and many
times also (whereat thou may wonder) by dying.


Joy. I was borne in great light.


Reason. Beware of shame, which by the bryghtnesse of light is more notable,
and easier to be seen. Unless thou do so, it were better to have been borne
in darkness. Whooremongers, and thieves, and all the crew of lewd persons,
do seek darkness: only this foul and false nobility flees not the
light, but coueteth to be known, to whom I would give this counsel as best
to avoid infamy, not to be known at all.


Joy. The nobility of my stock is ancient.


Reason. The virtue then belike was ancient, without which there is no true
nobility.


Joy. My nobility is very ancient.


Reason. Too much antiquity, takes away brightness of things, and breeds
forgetfulness. How many noble families have there been, whereof at this day
there is no memory? How many most floorishyng families have thou thy self
leene, which in few years have come almost to nothing? Whereby thou may
make a conjecture of those which now floorishe, and of those which now
begin to arise, and to lift up the head. Time deminisheth and consumes all
thing. Families do not only wax old, but cities also: yea, the world it
self, unless we be deceived, draws to an end. Thou which vauntest of
thine antiquity, beware that antiquity extinguyshe not thy glory, and that
the root be not wythered, with whose flowers thou would be odorned.
Whatsoever is made in time, decays in time: And your nobility began in
time, and shall end in time, and that which long time brought forth, and
longer did increase, the longest does overthrow. It may be that now while
thou imaginest of thy nobility, it surceasseth: and thou should perhaps
have been more noble, if thou had begun later.


Joy. My nobility is of old time.


Reason. A vain ambition, and which rests not on it own merits, but upon
the forgetfulness of other: For all things are confounded, and the line of
succession is doubtful. Among which things it happens unto thee, not to be
the more noble, but the more known. The beginning of all men is all one.
There is but one Father of mankind, all flow from one fountain, which
passes some time troubled, and some time clear unto you all: on this
condition, that that which a little before was clear, anon be made obscure,
and that which was obscure, be made clear. So that there is no doubt
concerning the fountain, but by means of what small channel the water of
this your noble blood (as ^^^crme it) flowed unto you. Hereof it comes, that
he that went to plough yesterday, goes a warfare to day, and he that was wont
proudly to ride through the mids of cities, managing his fierce courser with
a golden Bridle, now dryueth his flow Oxen up and down the flabbie fields
with a simple Goade. And I think that saying of Plato to be true: That there
is no king, but he came of a low degree, and none of low degree. but he came
of kings. This change and condition of man's state, is so chaungable and
inconstant, that it is sundry times altered from the one to the other: so that
thou can not marueyl if a Ploughman go to war, or a Soldier return to
the Plough. Great is the wheel of mortal things: And because the course
thereof is long, this short life perceyueth it not: Which unless it were so,
both the spades of kings, and scepters of clownes might be discerned. But now
time deceyueth men's memories, while they be busyed about other matters. And
this is all your nobility, wherefore ye swell, and proudly advance your
selves, like a vain generation as ye be.


Joy. The descent of mine ancestors is noble.


Reason. How far wylt thou wander? We speak of thy self. Thou go about
to substitute others, I can not tell whom, in thy steed: who perhaps may
aunsweare somewhat for them selves, but nothing for thee, unless thou furnyshe
out the cause with thine own witnesses. But admit that these thy
Graundfathers, and great Graundfathers were noble, to wit, when as they began
by the wings of virtue to lift them selves up above the common multitude:
that is the farthest root of nobility. But go then farther, seek out more
narrowly, thou shall find their Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers, obscure
and unknown men: To be short, this nobility of names and images, is both
short, and how much soever it is, truelly it is not thine own. Leave of
therefore to color thy name with other men's virtues, lest if every one require
his own, thou be laughed at, for thine own nakedness.


Joy. I am noble.


Reason. How much a valiant clown is more noble then a cowardly noble man,
thou shall then know, when thou have considered how much better it is to
found, then to overthrow nobility. If thou want examples, there be plenty
at home, and in the wars, and are commonly found in reading, so that thou
may by thy self be vmpire and judge of the residue: And among all, it
shall be sufficient to consider of two couple of men. Into one skale of the
Balance put Marius and Tullie, into the other, set the adversaries of these
twain, Aulus and Clodius: which way the beam will cast, and how much Rome
must give place to Arpine, who is so blind that he sees not?


Joy. I am noble by birth.


Reason. I said even now, a true noble man is not so borne, but made.


Joy. A wonderful nobility, at leastwyse of this common sort, is left unto
me by my parents.


Reason. This nobility comes not by birth, but by living. And hear also I
see one good thing. Ye have store of familiar examples, and ye want not
household leaders, whose steps it were a shame for you to forsake: This if
thou suffer to slyppe, thy nobility is but a famous and difficult evil. It
happens, I know not how, that it is a harder matter for a man to imitate his
own ancestors, then strangers: perhaps because virtue should then seem!
discende by inheritance. I speak it not willingly, but experience it self
she weth it: Seldom is it seen, the son of an excellent man, to be
excellent.


Of a fortune beginning. The.xvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Was borne in great fortune.


Reason. Thou begannest thy life with great unquietness: For Sailors not
improperly call a tempest fortune. And a great fortune is a great tempest: and a
great tempest, requires both great counsel, and great strength: Thou have
therefore rather cause of care, then of mirth.


Joy. I was borne in very great fortune.


Reason. Do thou think it better fortune to be borne in the wide Sea, then
in a small River? Although no wise man will grant the same, how much then is
it more fortunate to be borne in a Palace then in a Cotage? Our mother the
earth receives al men, wheresoever they were borne.


Joy. I was borne in great fortune.


Reason. Thou have wayed anchor contrary to good luck: and if thou have wasted
the day in foul weather, provide that when night comes thou may be in the
haven.


Joy. I was borne aloft.


Reason. Thou art subject to tempests and whyrlewyndes, and hope of lying hyd
is taken from thee. Pythie is the saying of the Lyrike Poet: The mighty Pine
tree is often shaken with winds, and high towers fall with the greater force,
and the lyghtnyng strikes the highest Mountains. As I must confess that it
is noble to be borne aloft, so is it neither quiet nor safe: All humane
loftiness of it self is unquiet, and continually troublesome. So that I
maruayle why that saying of Mecaenas in Seneca should so much be dislyked:
For the height it self thundreth at the lofty things. Seeing other have used
this word, why is he only reprehended? Moreover, there is nothing so high
that is not subject both to trouble, and care, and sorrow, and envy, and
grief, and in the end obnoxious to death: And truly, it is death only that
beats down al mortal pride and eminency.


Joy. I was borne in high and great estate.


Reason. They that fall from high, are sore hurt, and seldom is it calm upon
the wide Sea: so in the bottom thou need not to fear falling, neither
dread shypwracke upon the dry land.


Joy. My beginning was fortunate.


Reason. Mark the end: As other in their kingdoms, so can fortune also do
much in hers. The more fortunate the beginning is, the more uncertain is the
end. Do thou not perceive how all worldly things are tossed as it were
with a whyrlewynde, so that like as a troublesome tempest disquieth the calm
Sea, and after a fair morning follows a cloudie euenyng, and as many times a
plain way leads into a rough straight: so sudden calamity follows the
pride of prosperity, and sorrowful death stops the course of a most
pleasant life, and most times the end is unlike the beginning.


Joy. I began an high.


Reason. Take heed where thou leauest. The life is always reported by the
end, and thou shall plainly feel the end, although thou perceyuedst not the
beginning.


Joy. I was borne in great felicity.


Reason. We have both seen the sons of bondmen sittyng in princes thrones,
and the sons of princes fast fettered in chains.


Of Sumptuous fare The.xviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am brought up in a plentiful house.


Reason. This seems unto thee to be a great matter, but in deed it is little,
and anon wylbe nothing: Will the worms therefore spare thee more then the hard
husbandman? Or will they feed upon the softer meat more greedily? I do
neither jest with thee, nor terrify thee. Thou know, although thou do
dessemble it, that thou art food prepared for that banquet, and perhaps that
it is now almost supper time, or that at the least wise it cannot be far of.
For the day is short, and the ghestes be hungry, and death which lays the
table is ready, and therefore consider what this dayntie banquetyng will avail
thee.


Joy. I have been brought up most plentifully from mine infancy.


Reason. Oh evil beginning of chyldhood, wherein neglecting good arts, and
accustoming thy self to exquisite fare, and delicate foreign drinks, even
from thy tender years, thou art grown up to a worthy expectation: to know
their tastes and smelles, and with experience to wonder at deintily prepared
banquettes, and to reverence the glysteryng Plate, neither late, as was the
manner of valiant men, to assuage the hunger and thyrst with ordinary meats,
but with busy loathsomenesse, and payneful burdened stomach, to begin
again with them in the morning: When so many holy Fathers have hungered in the
wilderness, and so many famous Captains have lived hardly, sparyngly, and
soberly: When thou art beset about with thy Iewelles and deyntie dyshes at the
Table, if at one side of thee were Curious Fabritius Corumcanius feedyng in
earthen vessels on Herbs geathered with his own hands, and goeyng to
plowe fasting till night, and on the other side Quintinus and Seranus, or he
that was after these twain Cato Censorius Consul, saylyng into Spain, from
whence he returned in triumph, who drank none other wine then his Sailors did:
or if al these should meet thee being most known enemies unto pleasure, with
Paulus also and Antonius sittyng by a fountain side, and dividing the bread
which was sent them from heaven: would not thy superfluous meat for shame and
sorrow cleave to thy laws, and the delight of thine amazed taste abate? Thou
would call to mind how that by these men which were contented with so
slender fare, and so base toil, both their country was defended, and most
noble kings and peoples subdued, and, which is the most hardest conquest of
al, their own flesh, the world, and the invisible enemies of the soul
vanquished, and how thou thy self walowest in thy costly iunkets, and
sumptuous idleness, overcome with filthy voluptuousness,


Joy. My fare is most delicate.


Reason. I perceive well this, that al thine endeavor is, that thy loathsome
curiosity may come to the bottom of misery. There is nothing brought to:
pass by* the excellency of meat and drink, unless there be also plenty,
yea rather to much, and quatting. Do thou not call to mind, how that Augustus
Caesar, who perhaps if he had list could have fared more delicately than thou,
was, as it is written of him, a small meat man, and that almost also of a
common diet? I say nothing of the meats whereon he used to feed, to the
intent thou should not disdain him as some old rusticke father of the
country, and among thy Feasauntes, and Partridges, and Peacockes, laugh at the
course bread, and simple cheese, and small fyshes which that prince was wont to
eat. But how much better had it been if so he these your Feasances, and this
great furniture of your tables, and the great felicity of your throats had
lain still unknown at Colanos and the river Phasis, rather then to have flowne
hither to corrupt our age, and to provoke lasciviousness. How much more honest
was that world whereof Ovid says: Among those people the fyshes yet did swim
without taking by deceit, and the Oysters lay safe in their shells: neither
did! talie know the commodity which wel^ thy Iouia yeldeth, nor the foul
which delights to kill the Pigmees.


Joy. I enjoy most choice wine.


Reason. Euylly, but properly thou have said, I enjoy, that is your end, and
to that were ye borne? How much better would small wine, or wine delayed with
water, or a draught of the pure runnyng stream assuage your thyrst? Truly the
Prince of whom I spoke erewhyle, used also very seldom, for so it is written
of him, to drink wine, never drinking above thrice at a supper, while he was
in the camp. As for you, ye quaffe ten times before meat, and at meat an
hundred times, and the quantity of your carousses cannot be measured, and your
tents be more full of wine then your cities. There is no enterprise, nor
skyrmyshe made, but by such as are drunk. He absteyned from wine in the day
time, and you cease not to drink both day and night: He when he was a thyrst,
in steed of drink, did eat bread dypped in cold water, or received the top
of a Lettice, or a hit of a moist Apple, or a slice of a Cucumber: but you,
prouokyng thyrst by all means, do quench the same with hot burning wynes,
which do provoke another thyrst by drynking of them, or rather, to say the
truth, ye inflame it the more, neither do ye remember in the mean while,
that ye drink the blood of the earth, and the poison of Hemlock, while in
such sort ye drink wine, as Androcides wrote to king Alexander of Macedonie.
Whose counsel if he had followed, truly he should not have slain his
friends in his drunkenness, as Plinius says: nether should he himself in
his drunkenness at length have peryshed. The same use of indifferent meats,
and abstinencie in drinkyng, has always for the most part ben found in all
the worthy and famous captains and princes, and in Julius Caesar it was
singular: which how much it is to be preferred before your riotousnesse, your
sleep, being compared with their diligence and glory of adventures achieved,
may be judge.


Joy. I enjoy most bountiful fare.


Reason. If men be forbyddento enjoy honest things, how much more dishonest
and filthy things? Art thou not ashamed in that thou applyest the fruit of
thine immortal soul, to the service and slavery of the transitory body?
This is an Epicureal persuasion, but heretofore infamous and abandoned. To be
short, among all the pleasures which creep from the body to the soul, they are
concluded to be most vile, which are accomplyshed by feelyng and tastyng, for
as much as these senses are common unto us with beasts, and crook down the
reasonable creature unto beastly conditions, a more contemptible and abject
thing then which, the state of mankind cannot incur.


Joy. I am delighted in deintie, and sundry kinds of meats.


Reason. Be delighted in them, and enjoy them, if thou know nothing better: but
if thou know nothing worse, then be ashamed to rejoice in meat, as cattayle
do in their prouender, and to make thy belly a place to set up dishes of meat
in, and to take that office from the Binne. Finally, understand this much, that
thou can not long endure this life which thou so lykest: loathsomeness is
next neighbor to fullness, and fasting consumes meat. Hunger tastes
nothing, but it is sweet and sauerie. There is nothing so deintie, which
fullness makes not unpleasant and loathsome. And even those men which give
them selves to this delight, confess that it is increased by appetite and
seldom using, and, as al other pleasures are, is rebated with plenty and
often frequenting, and many times converted to nothing, and into the contrary:
Yea, Epicurus him self commended and observed a thyn diet, as the only stay of
his profession. And that which honest men do ascribe to sobriety and
modesty, that did he ascribe unto pleasure. Whatsoever kind of living thou
choose, thou must know that one path agrees with diverse ends, there is one
kind of diet continually to be used, and that thyn and moderate: unless
sometime perhaps seldom liberty upon honest respect do give a man license
without breach of sobriety. This kind of diet whereof I speak, makes men
dry, and strong, and pleasant to behold, and in smell of body neither
grievous to them selves nor to others. Compare with these those which are
moist, puffyng and blowyng, shaking, stynkyng, and to use Tullies words,
compare with these, those sweaters, and belchers, and then thou shall perceive
what difference there is between sparyng and surfetyng, and if the virtue do
not tell thee, yet the very lookyng and countenance of the men will show which
way the choice will lie: so that there is (...) man so much a bondslaue to his
belly, but if he weygh diligently the matter with him self, will prefer
sobriety far before excess. If thou contempne these things as light, do
thou also contempne the diseases which spring hereof, and death also? Which
although of it self it be to be contempned of noble and valiant courages,
happening naturally and honestly, or at least wise not shamefully: so is there
nothing more dishonorable or more to be eschewed, then death to happen upon a
dishonest cause. Dooest thou not hear what counsel Ecclesiasticus gives? Be
not greedy says he, of every kind of dyshe, neither give up thy self unto
all manner of fare. For in abundaunce of meat consists sickness, and
greediness provoke subuertion to the stomach: Many have peryshed by
surfetyng, but who so uses abstinence, prolongeth his own life.


Joy. I feed on deyntie and sundry kinds of meats.


Reason. If thou ouerloade thy Horse, thou shall overthrow him, and if thou
feed him to proud, he will kycke thee: The belly likewise is not to be
trusted concerning that wherewith it is charged. It were not unprofitable
counsalye in checkyng all enticementes and pleasures, but especially of the
belly, to consider their ends.


Of Feasts. The.xix. Dialogue.
JOY. I Vaunte in feasts.


Reason. Good fare apperteineth to pleasure, but feasts to madness. For what
is it other than pompous frenzy, to call together a great many rich folks
into one place, from their honest business, and to entertayne them with
honorable weariness, and to glut a number of bellies with delicate and
hurtful meats, for whom it had been better to have been empty, or to have
been filled at their own discretion? wherein as perhaps thou shall please one
man's mouth, so shall thou displease the appetite of many. For it is seldom
seen that ghestes agree in diet, and that is found to be true which the Poet
says: I have three ghestes which seem unto me almost to disagre, requyring
diverse meat, with a greatly differing appetite, what I give, what I give not,
what geuest thou, Flaccus, or what dooest thou? Unless a man would give them
nothing at all, and leave this care to them who have no greater care. Let them
do what they list, which can do nothing else. Now if three do disagree, what
will an hundred, or a thousand do? They will scarce depart, at least wise,
without secret murmuryng. This had an ill taste. That had an il smell. The
other should have been set down first. This came cold to the boarde. That
came out of season. The other dyshe was set down with a sorrowful countenance.
This with an angry look. That meat was raw. The other torn. One wayter was
to slow. This to hasty. That fellow could not hear. The other was
stubburne. One was to loud: Another to sylent. This servant brought warm
water to the table with unwashed hands: Another filled small wine to the
boorde. With these and such like complayntes, not only the Halles, but the
ways do resounde, and the streets also, and not without cause. For to what
purpose is it, so gently to solicit men with entreatie to dyne at thy house?
to what end serves that unprofitable cost, and superftuous labor, and to
bring so great a troop into one court, but only to boast thy self among thy
neighbors, and as it were thy self being on foot, to make a voluptuous
triumph of thy banquettes? The trumpets also and shaknes sound forth
together, so that it appears that al things are prepared for pomp, and
nothing for thriftinesse. Imagine, that the next day after, one of the ghestes
stood in need of so much as the dyshe of meat was worth which he ate: he
shall never be able to obtain it of the master of the feast. For the feast was
not made for the ghest, but for himself: Which although undoubtedly it be so,
notwithstanding when drunken men sytte at the Table swearyng and affyrmyng any
thing upon their oath, they strike the meat, saying these words: I swear,
say they, by this our good love and charity which now we exercise together.
To whom it may be well answered: Nay rather, swear by this your drunkenness
and surfeit. This were true charity, if being fasting and dry, you would
convert that to the use of the poor, which now ye lavish out to your own
destruction, then might ye not improperly swear by your charity. Ye bid unto
your feasts the proud rich men, and ye shut out the poor hungry sort,
thynkyng it a glorious matter to have plenty of woorshypful gheastes. And in
this point, besides the opinion of the common people, which is the fountain
of all error, ye have an aucthour: Believe me says Cicero, it is ae seemly
thing for the houses of worshipfulmen, to be open unto worshipful ghestes. In
deed sir, this is very good, for them to be open to chose that can requite
with the like, but to be shut against the needy. For which matter we know
that Lactantius, perhaps not unworthily, has reprehended Cicero, who has also
handled the same matter better in another place, but in the same book. This,
says he, is a great duty, as every one has most need of help, so
especially to succor him. The contrary whereof is practiced by most men, for
look of whom they expect greatest commodity, yea although he have no need of
them, to them they become most serviceable. Yea, now Cicero in deed thou
say well and truly, for so men ought to do, although many do contrary. But
to return again to the matter, if thou wylt be without the complayntes and
disdain of ghestes, absteyne from feasts: They that have been present at a
feast, have had some just cause perhaps to reprove somewhat, and to be
grieved: but he that is offended because he was not at the feast, he is no
ghest, but a most impudent Parasite, whose tongue is no more to be esteemed
then his belly, which is not only not to be feared, but many times to be
wyshed: for as the Satiricall Poet says, what commedie can there be better, or
what more pleasant Iester, then an hungry stomach? Some such are described
by the Comic writers, and diversely provoke laughter: what could they do,
unless they were heard in presence? To conclude, this is ye sum of al:
there is none other way to avoid the controulment of feasting, then by not
feasting, and to drive away the nips and madness of flatterers, then by laughing
at them, and contemning them: thou have none other means to purchase quietness.


Joy. I give my self to feastyng.


Reason. Thou have chosen a worthy study, what is most agreeable to this cast,
and what to that: or with what meats hunger is best staked, or with what
sauces provoked. Behold this noble and profitable part of Philosophy, what
meat shall first, what second, and what third, cloy thy loathsome stomach?
And what kind of wine does send up most pleasant fumes to the brain.


Joy. I am delighted in feasts.


Reason. If this be meant as the Latin word Conuiuium sounds, and as our
forefathers, who were the aucthours of this name did purport, I will not only
not reprehende it, but commend it: For it is a pleasant thing, and honest,
and to be wyshed, for friends to live together: but you call eating together,
a feast, and to a most filthy thing, ye give a most excellent name, as though
friends could not live together, otherwise then by eating and drynking, and
not better by thynking, and talkyng: seeing that, as Cicero says, To a
learned man, to think, is to live, and there is nothing more pleasant, then
the woonted and faithful conference of friends. Cover not therefore so
shameful a thing with so fair a name, for it will appear through: and that
which is called a living together, shall be known to be but an eating
together. Hearken rather to the Apostle S. Paul, How with a loud voice
among other things he exhorts us from evil bankettinges and drunkenness,
and take beede that ye be not carried away to filthiness by the glory of names.


Joy. Feasts do delyght me.


Reason. Speak plainly what thou meanest, eatings, drinkings, gorginges,
gurmandize: If thou be delyghted to receive these things, thou art but a base
debtor for a base benefit: But if thou have delight to give them, then art
thou a fool, and a slave to a foolysh carfulness.


Joy. I seek glory by feasts.


Reason. It is your fashion to seek for a thing, where it is not to be found.


Joy. I hope to win glory by feasts.


Reason. It is false glory, and a very error. We read how Alexander king of
Macedonie, gave himself over to feasting, yea, even unto blooddy drunkenness.
And so did Lucius likewise unto immoderate charges, and the lamentable loss of
his Empire. Show me other such two: what prince can thou name unto me, that
is wise, or king, that is sober, and is given to such pleasures? As for the
worthy Philosophers and Poets, it is needless to speak of them, and much
less of the godly men, and generally of all that have conceived any great or
religious matter in their mind, unto whom doubtless all this whole case is
infamous and hateful.


Joy. By feastyng I have won glory among the common people, and the favor of
many men.


Reason. A great price for most vile ware, to become a Cook to please other
men's belyes. I suppose there be some whom their stomachs do pinche, and
poverty does bridle, unto whom nothing is more acceptable, then to be
discharged of that bridle by the care and charge of other, and to obtain that
by other men's means, which by their own they are not able. Those that yield
them this supply, so long they extol and magnify, as they do so: But if once
they leave of, they themselves also shall surcease to be longer extolled: and
thus will I also surcease, and this is the sum of all. The condition of
ghestes, is to be delicate, and complaining, and very hard to please. And
concerning Parasites, learn this short rule: While thou feedest them
abundantly, they will eat, and laugh with thee, they will clappe their hands,
they will commend thee to be a good man, liberal, and call thee a notable
member of thy common wealth: They will leave out no one jot of perfect Grecian
adulation, whereof the Satirical poet speaking, terms it a nation most
expert in flattery, and a great deuourer of meat, with other such qualities
commonly known to boys. If thou leave of sometime thy liberality, they will
diffame thee to be covetous, wretched, and miserable. But if thou do it through
want, then they will report of thee, that truly thou art a poor man, but there
is no harm in thee, saving that thou art a fool, and have no wit, and they
will shun thee and thy house, as it were a rock. Then shall thou perceive
that saying of Horace to be true: The friends depart, when once the lees wax
dry in the caske: where the Poet speaks of such kind of friends. As for
true friends, they specially continue in adversity, and most diligently
frequent those houses which fortune has forsaken. Such follies and
difficulties it were best to redress in time, and to learn to contemn these
proud ghestes, these dry scoffers, with their bablyng and tittletattle, and
persuade thy self thus: There is no place for upright judgment, where al
thing is attributed to pleasure, and nothing to virtue. Finally, this
transitory name which is purchased by evil means, and this which is commonly
called glory, among learned men is counted infamy, not glory.


Of Apparel. and trimming of the body. The.xx. Dialogue.
JOY. BUT I am bravely aparelled.


Reason. Things that are pure, do love to be seen naked: And it is a common
fashion to cover filthy things.


Joy. I am most exquisitely apparelled.


Reason. Thou may be ashamed of thy outward trimnesse, as often as thou shall
think what is covered therewith: For it were a frentike part of pride, to
cover dounge with purple.


Joy. I am very neately apparrelled.


Reason. Have thou not heard what yt most valient man in Salust says? that
neatness belongs to women, and labor to men.


Joy. My apparel is fair and fine.


Reason. Then is it a banner of pride, and a nest of lasciviousness.


Joy. My clothes are excellent, and care.


Reason. I will not set against thee godly poor souls half naked, and stiff
with cold, and scarce able to keep of the winters bitterness, with their
simple mantles of Rugge. I know well, that sinful wealth, disdaineth holy
poverty. And the same most rich man also, of whom I spoke yet while in our
third disputation before this, used consideratly to wear none other garment
then home made, such as was spun and wrought by his wife, and his sister, and
his daughter, and his nices: For this is also written of him, Thus he that was
lord of al, weeried a few women, but such as were most near of kin unto him.
And thou perhaps being another man's servant, do weerie nations that are a
great way of from thee. For thee the Fleminges spinne, for thee they card, for
thee they weaue: for thee the Persians, the Seres, the Indians do ioyle: for
thee the Tyrian Murrey swimmeth, or Purple fish: for thee the soft grains of
Hispis hangs upon the shrubs: for thee the sheep of Brytaine look white:
for thee the Indian Sandix looks read: both Oceans sweat for thy sake: but
for Augustus, only his wife and his daughter, his sister and his nices do take
pain. Thus much is virtue decreased, and pride increased. And since men have
delighted in the contrary, the examples of modesty are waxed vile. For in diet
and apparel many contemning this great and worthy prince, have gone after the
woorst, as Caius and the residue, whose belly and back were never covered with
civil, nor manlike, nor Roman, nor truly humane, but with mad, and sometime
womanishe, at another time divine, superfluous on every side, and monstrous
attire.


Joy. My garments are most exquisite.


Reason. Costly apparel, both by suspicion of great diligence in trimming and
setting forth the beauty, dimisheth the grace, and by the bryghtnesse
thereof, bewrays the blemishes of the deformed, and styrreth up the eyes of
such as pass by to behold it. And therefore, a deformed man or woman, can
not hurt them selves by any means more, then by couetyng to seem fair and
well favored, The gallant apparel, and brave setting forth of the body,
which is of purpose done to win fame by, provoke laughter.


Joy. I am decked forth in most choice colors.


Reason. Nature cannot be surpassed by art: And many times disdayning that she
is provoked, by how much the more greater force she is pressed and covered, by
so much the more she rises up and shows her self. As for the natural
deformities of this mortal body, they can neither be altered with colors, nor
covered with odors, but they make them either more evident to be seen, or more
doubtful to be suspected.


Joy. I am carried away with the love of precious and variable attire.


Reason. Lay a dead carkase in a coffin of gold, beset it round about with
pearls and cloth of gold, the more thou trimmest it, the more horrible and
ugly it is. And to the intent thou may not be offended at that which I
speak, let us seek out the original of that name. For this word carkas,
comes of the Verb cado, which signifies to fall. Which being so, why may not
the body of a living man be so called, as well as of a dead? For, the one is
alrep^^^^^^on, the other shall fall, and falls continually.


Joy. I have (...) sle^parel, and made after the new fashion.


Reason. I have no time nor place now to lament and detest this counterfeiting
mockery of outlandish attire, which this present frentike age has brought in
among you from the farthest parts of the world. But both God and man do
utterly abhor these deformed beasts in the shape of men, whose minds are
brutish, whose speech is the latin tongue, whose apparel barbarous and
strainge, whose hear is brayded and frisled after yt delicacy of women, whose
manners are hard and uncivil, after the toughnes of boares: at one side, plainly
bewraying the filthiness of their bodies by the impudency of their demeanure:
on the other side, openly discoueryng the lightness of their minds, by the
wavering of the feathers in their top. But whether the masters that are so
vigilant, or the scholars that are so apt to learn, deserve most to be hated,
it is to be doubted: By whose devises thou see it is now come to pass, that
between Iesters and Dukes, between honest Matrons and Harlottes, there is in
sight almost no difference at all: Neither does this mischief cease, but it
daily increases, and the madness is diversely varied.


Of rest and quietness. The.xxi. Dialogue.
JOY. REst and quietness from labors, are happened unto me.


Reason. Two most acceptable commodities of man's life, unless immoderate use
have made them most grievous mischiefs, which it has wrought in many, and
has procured as many plagues to the body, as diseases to the mind: swellyng
to the one, and rust to the other.


Joy. I enjoy most pleasant rest.


Reason. Say rather that thou do use. We can enjoy nothing here, but we use
many things: thus says the holsomer doctrine.


Joy. This quietness is very pleasant unto me.


Reason. It skilleth much what kind of quietness the same is: for there are
two kinds of quietness, One is busy, which even in very rest is doing
somewhat, and busy about honest affairs, and this is very sweet: The other is
slouthful and idle, and given only to sluggyshnes, then which there is nothing
more loathsome, or more like to the grave* From the first (...) many times
spring great works, both profitable to the we snare^^ glorious to the
auctours. From the second comes nothing but inglorious flouth and sleepines.
The first is meet for Philosophers: but the second for sluggardes, and such
as are given to their belly and sleep, where they may eat and sleep their
fill without interruption.


Joy. I enjoy my wished rest.


Reason. That rest which we must enjoy, shall never have end. Consider
therefore in what rest thou take delight.


Joy. I have found wyshed rest.


Reason. Would thou say rest, or lusking, or sleep? which some Poets call
the kinseman, and some the image of death: and both very properly.


Joy. I sleep and take my rest.


Reason. And many also that go, do rest in mind, and many also that sit and
lie, are troubled in mind. And sleep it self, which is called the rest of al
living things, has it own secret griefs, with many horrible and troublesome
visions and fantasies: concerning which, the holy man talking familiarly with
God, and being afflicted, makes his complaynt.


Joy. I lie idly in my bed chamber.


Reason. Which of these, I pray thee, think thou rested more pleasantly?
either Vacia which lay sleeping at his Farm in the country, or Scipio
fighting against his enemies in Africa, and Cato against serpents, and Regulus
against both? For there is neither quietness without joy, neither can there be
any joy without virtue.


Joy. My toils being past, I refresh my self with pleasant sleep.


Reason. Toil and labor are the matters of virtue and glory, who so
rejects these, rejects them also. Contrariwise, too much sleep is the
matter of vice and infamy, which drives many, and throws them headlong into
perpetual sleep. For it nourishes lust, makes the body heavy, weakeneth the
mind, dulleth the wit, diminishes knowledge, extinguisheth the memory, and
breeds forgetfulness. It is not without cause, that wakeful and industrious
persons are commended: As for the sleepie, we see not them praised, but puffed.
And therefore as some us term sleep, death, so other call wakefulnesse, life.
Take heed then, of life and death which thou choose. It is best to wake, which
the wise do commend, that the life may be ye longer.


Joy. I enjoy a long, and un interrupted sleep.


Reason. It is well, if it be not broken by pinching cares, by covetousness, by
ambition, by fear, by sorrow, and by wicked love: but evil, if a man's sleep
be distur^ed by some care of dishonest st^die. Truly, while the people sleep,
the prince waketh, and while the army rests, the captains be vigilant,
which both experience declares, and Homers Ilias proves to be true. Upon
noble minds vigilant cares do depend, but such as are sober and hotsome. It
is credibly reported, that Augustus Caesar, of al Princes the greatest and
best, used but short sleep, and that also often interrupted. And thou gloriest
in the contrary.


Joy. I sleep profoundly.


Reason. So do gluttons, letchers, and wrathful persons, together with brute
beasts, but living notwithstanding: sl^ggish persons, and they that sleep,
are only compared to the dead: and as touching that part of time, that happy
men do nothing differ thereby from men in misery, thou know it to be a
position of Philosophy. Wherefore, as that part is diligently to be eschewed,
which leaves so small a difference of dreams only between men and beasts:
so is the contrary to be pursued, which offers no hardness to them that are
willing. For if in respect of a simple glory, or small gain, both Warriors,
and Merchauntes, and Mariners, do watch whole nights abroad in the open air,
the one among ambushmentes of their enemies, the other among the surgies and
rocks, more fierce then any enemy: art not thou able to watch some part of
the nyghtes in making prayers to God, and among thy books, for the true glory,
and a large gain?


Joy. Being weerie when I was awake, I have now wholly given my self to sleep.


Reason. Thus it is, ye change not your copy, ye deal in all matters after
one manner: and look what thing God himself, or nature, or any art, has given
you for recreation, that ye turn to your own shame and discommoditie* your
drink to drunkenness, your meat to surfeityng, your leisure to sleepiness,
your good health to voluptuousness, your beauty to lasciviousness, your
strength to injuries, your wit to deceitfulness, your knowledge to pride, your
eloquence to harmfulnesse, the bravery of your houses, and the apparel of
your backs, to pompousnesse and vain ostentation, your riches to
covetousness and riot, your wives and children to fear and perpetual
carfulness Go now, be astonished, complain of your fortune, and lament
your wickedness: of good things ye make evil, and of heavenly gifts, ye make
fetters, and snares, and chains for your soul.


Joy. I am delighted in pleasant sleep.


Reason. Not only Kings, Captains, and Princes, Philosophers, Poets, and
Householders, do watch up, and rise in the night, which Aristotle says to be
auaylable for health, for good husbandry, and philosophy: but thieves also,
and pilferers, and which is also more marvelous, mad men, and lovers, whom
the remembrance and desire they have to their trulles, does stir forward:
and wylt not thou for the love of virtue, hate sleep, that is freende to
vices? and as Horace says excellently, Seeing thieves rise in the night to
kill true men, wilt not thou awake to preserve thy self? Ye may be ashamed,
that filthy causes can so much prevail with you, and most souereine can do
nothing.


Joy. I sleep all night, and no man troubles me.


Reason. Aristotle seems, which I have touched before, in this manner to
divide a man's life, attributing half to sleep, and half to waking. And as
touching the one half thereof, he says, that a virtuous man's life differs
not from a fools life: in which place, he will have he night to be
understood for sleep, and the day for wakyng. This I confess, is a good and
true division, for it equally deuideth time into the parts: But if it be thus
taken, that the parts be of equal space, truly there is an other great
difference between them. For there is no cogitation or discourse more sharp,
or more deep, then the nyghtly, no time more convenient for students. If he
say that sleep is the one half of our time, it is a strange saying, to come
out of the mouth of so studious and learned a man. God forbid that a mind
which is well instructed, and given to study, should sleep half her time,
seeing to some the fourth part, and to voluptuous persons also the third part
is sufficient. I would counsel a man to rise in the night, in every part of
the year. God forbid, but that they which have any great exployt in hand,
sleep both the whole Winter and Summer nyghtes: Howbeit, it is sufficient
perhaps to have broken it once, and as much sleep as is broken by watching,
so much may be quickly supplied, if need so require, by taking a nappe after
noone. But the hours of the winter nyghters are often to be broken: in them it
were expedient to sing, to study, to read, to write, to think, to
contemplate, by wit some new thing is to be devised, and that which is won by
study, is to be repeated in memory. Hearken also to S. Jerome, writing to
Eustochius: We must rise, says he, twice or thrice a night, and we must
meditate on some part of Scripture which we have learned without book: And at
length, when your eyes are weerie with this study, ye must eftsoons refreshe
them with sleep, and being then recomforted with a little rest, they must
again be weeried with exercise, lest that by sleeping all the night long, and
lying still upon the pillowe, ye appear to be as it were buried carkases: By
the often and coomely styrring of your selves, declare that ye are alive, and
given to virtue.


Of pleasant smelles. The xxii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am delited with sweet odours.


Reason. These serve either for food, or apparel, concerning which thou have
heard mine opinion.


Joy. My study is upon sweet smelles.


Reason. Of smelles, some provoke the appetite, and some wantonness. The
desire of these incurreth the note of incontinencie, especially if it be
vehement. Others are desired for their own sake. The greediness of them, is
not reproved of dishonestie, but of folly: Whereby it comes, that the smell
of women's oyntmentes, and of iunkets, is more discommodable then the odor of
flowers, or apples. The same reason is also in those pleasures, which are
received by the ears and eyes. If ever thou have applied thy mind to the
readyng of Heathen writers, thou know these things, neither do I now
touch thee, but by notes I bring thee to remembrance of the truth, to the end
thou may see, that such kinds of delyghts are either dishonest or light.


Joy. My study is upon sweet odours.


Reason. I would it were upon good fame, the smell whereof is also called good,
but of evil fame much more: and it is more strong then the sent of any spices
while they are a beatyng, or of brymstone while it is a burning. Of these
savors, the mind judges, and not the nose.


Joy. I am delighted in sweet smelles.


Reason. If thou be led by sense, and seek after pleasure, as I have said, it
is either dishonestie or lyghtnesse; if for health sake, it is excuseable, so
that measure, which is the sauce of al things, be present. For a mylde smell
comfort a fayntyng spirit: but in all things that saying of Terence is of
great force, Nothing to much. For as in many other things, so in this also
there is ins^^te variety of kinds, not only between man and man, but between
nation and nation. For if the report be true, which great aucthours do not
condemn, the people that dwell about the head of Ganges do eat no meat at al,
but are noorished only by the smell of a wyld apple, whenever they traueyle
abroad, they carry nothing else with them then that good and wholesome fruit: and
are so impartent of stynke, that as the pure air noorysheth them, so an
infected smell stifleth them: A delycate complexion, which so lives and dies.
Hence it proceeds, that every nation toward the East, being pampered with
the delicacie of the air, as they are less careful of meat, so have they
less plenty, and are more desirous of sweet odours, and from thence forsooth
this curiosity came first unto us. The Assyrians, the Arabians, and Sabei,
when they were vanquished by your weapons, overcame you with their odours:
which the rough and invincible sobriety of your forefathers resisted so long,
that the five hundred threescore and fifth year, after the foundyng of the
City of Rome, provision was made by a straight edict of the Censores, that no
man should bring sweet foreign oyntmentes into the City. But not long
after, the vices of posterity, as the manner is, abrogating the decrees of the
Elders, wantonness gate the upper hand, and crept into the very Senate, which
had been the aucthour of that constitution.


Joy. I am desirous to smell well.


Reason. Strange odours, and the art of perfumyng, and pleasauntly smellyng,
is an argument of no natural good smell, and a token of some secret defectes.
In respect of which causes, not only any honest man, but honest woman also,
would be loath by such kind of delicacie, to offend the senses of any
valiant and good man. Thou remembrest the story of a certain young man, who
being anointed with sweet oyntmentes, and coming before the Emperor
Vaspatian to give him thanks for the office which he had bestowed upon him, as
he stood before him, the Emperor perceyuyng the smell, and disdayning at the
matter, with stern countenance and rough speech: I had rather said he, thou
had smelt of Garlyke. And so, well checked, either suppressing or cancellyng
the letters wherein he had granted him his good will, he sent him frustrate
away with his pleasant odours. Thus, as these smelles have been always a
shame, so have they also sometime ben hurtful, especially where there is some
grave and upright Censor of manners. Yea, what shall I say that they have been
dangerous to some? For thou know also, how that Plautius a Senator in the
triumuiral proscription, for fear of death hydyng him self in the Salernitane
Dens, was bewrayed by the smell of his oyntmentes: purchasyng thereby to him
self destruction, and to the proscribers excuse of their cruelty. For who
would not judge that he was justly stayne, who in such troubles of the common
wealth* and so great danger of private men, would then trym him self with
sweet smelling oyntmentes?


Joy. I have accustomed my self to artificius odours.


Reason. Leave them of, if thou wylt follow my counsel. It is more shameful to
frequent the artificius, then the simple: For every dishonest thing, the more
artificius it is, the more dyshonest it is. Art, which is an ornament to
honesty, is an increase to dishonestie. Hereunto add moreover, that it is now
grown unto far more excess than in old time, although that Rome, as I have
said, and Lacedemon also, which I had almost termed the Grecian Rome. when this
infectio^ came out of Asia, resisted it with rough manners and straight
edictes, as it had been an army of well appointed enemies. Notwithstanding, at
length the delicate band of sweet oyntmentes, with the legions of vices, gat
the upper hand, and their scoutes passed over into Europe, and there subdued
most valient nations. And because it were over long to prosecute every thing,
by the softened (...) ^^^sse of one most rough and payneful man, thou may
co^^ (...) ^he residue. For (...) the very thickest and heat of (...)
invincible and bar^^^^^ Hannibal was anointed, with his army: oyntmentes
(...) pearcing, (...) near^ing. And therefore, of this ^^^^minate ca^^ ^^yne
and his (...) those beginninges were wonderful, (...) was the end, as he ^ell
deserved. Whereby it (...) ^hee p^^^e, that where always* ye have been much
bound ^^^e virtues ^f Scipio Africane ye are somewhat also beholden to the
oint^^^entes of Hanibal for it had been good for them they had been dry, as it
was best for ^^u that they were anointed, This custom^ prevailed so ma^^
^^andred years after, that it were a pain, and also would astonysh a man, to
read what is (...) concerning this matter, both by Greeks and La^^^^ What
shall I use many words? Oyntmentes came unto (...) then whom nothing was more
high and excellent, namely I^SVS Christ, which he, that came and put away al
^^ft^^sse and delicacie of the m^^^, and to ex^inguish al prouocati^ as of
pleasures, suffered him self to be anointed withal: verily not delighted
with the pleasantness of the odours, but with the affection and tears of the
offerer. But now this custom is by little and little diminyshed, that whereas
your age is in many things inferior to the glory of your forefathers, yet in
this it seems to extol it, in that it is not carried away with the fond
desire of sweet oyntmentes: but they that are now delyghted therein, it
chances unto them not by the general infection of the time, but by the
special imperfection of their own minds.


Joy. I am enticed and delyghted with fragrant odours.


Reason. It cannot be otherwise, but that those things which of nature are
delightsome and pleasant, should entice a man, and while they be present
delight him. It is the saying of the wise Hebrew: With oyntmentes, and sundry
odours the heart is refreshed. Howbeit it seems to me that in ointments there
is not so much delyght, as loathsomenesse. But admit there were so in these
odours, yet in my judgment men should rather resist the things that be absent,
to (...) ^^^empt, and oblivion, and use the things that are ^^ese^ (...)
^^^^^ly, neither bestow any care or travail upon (...) ^^^^wne secret
judgment thou ^^^fesse thy (...) contemptible things. And that I may not
dra^^ (...) concerning odo^^^ ^^^eing dishonest an^^ (...) al effem^^^ing
men's minds to (...) ^^ter I embrace the opin^^n of S Augustine, who speake^^
(...) of the provocation of odour^ (...) desire them not, says he (...) they
be absent I require the (...) if they be present I (...), being ready always
to wa^^ (...). Do thou the (...) thou never smell evil of (...) odoures, or he
od^^^^ with harefull cleanlynes.


Of the sweeten (...) of Music xxi^^^ Dialogue.
(...). I Am delighted in synging (...) ^^strument.


Reason. Al how much better were it in tears and sygninges? It were better to
come to joy (...) by ioying to tears.


Joy. I take pleasure in songs and harmony.


Reason. Wild beasts and fowls are deceived by synging, and, which is more
strange, fyshes also are delighted in Musycke. Thou know the pretty fable
of Arion and the Dolphin, which is holden so true, that it is cronicled. Many
notable writers have made mention of that Miracle, but none more gallantly then
Herodotus, the father of the Gretian History. Hereunto agree the brazen images
which are there set up, where the Musician first arrived on shore safely out
of so great danger sittyng upon the back of the swimming fyshe. Moreover, it
is said, that the Sirenes do decey^e by synging. This is not believed, but
found true by experience, how by flatteryng words one man deceyueth another:
and to be short, there is nothing more apt to deceive, then the voice.


Joy. I am delighted with pleasant Music.


Reason. The Spider, as they say, annoynteth before he byte, and the Physician
before he strike, the fouler also, and a woman ^^^^terreth whom they mind to
entice, and a thief embraseth whom he will kill, and the Polypus fyr^^huc^ ^^^h
whom he ^^ea^teth to drown. And some naughty pe^^^^ are never more ^o be
feared, then when they sh^^^^ (...) cur^^^us in voice and behavior* (...)
ad^^^^ially to (...) found in the G^lmyo^ Dom^^^. Generally, there ^s sear^e
a^^^ (...)


Joy. I (...), and (...) in singyng^ (...) Re^^^^^: (...) heed, for it is
(...): So^^^ possesses the last part of joy: and again, the spi^^^^ shalb^^
(...) ^egore a fall.


Joy. I sing sweetly.


Reason. Th^^ (...) whether it be thy last. The Swan syngeth (...) his death:
More have peryshed through (...), (...) and there ^^^alate report, that one who
(...) wont, dy^d suddenly in the mids (...) I am de^ighted in song and
Music. (...) cause* Every day, and hour, and (...) the G^^^^, whyther it is
your (...) ^^ought with ^^^ngyng, and in old ty^^^, (...) ^ecorders, whereof
is that verse of Sta^^^^ (...): Whose custom is, the tender souls with Pipes
to bring (...). Thou take pleas^ (...) in both these pompes of funerals,
whither thou make have (although thou perceiuest not thy self to go)
without rest or intermission.


Joy. I love singing.


Reason. To what purpose? Doubtless in the minds of woorthymen especially,
there rests a most mighty music, but the effects are sundry, more then a
man will believe. And to omit that which serves not to our purpose, some it
moves to vain mirth, some to holy and devout joy, some many times to godly
tears: which variety of affections, has drawn great wits into sundry
opinions. For Athanasius to avoid vanities, forbade the use of singing in
Churches. S. Ambrose studious of godliness, appointed that men should sing. S.
Augustine makes godly mention among his confessions, that he aboade both, and
that herein he was sometime in some difficulty of doubt with him self.


Joy. I delyght to sing.


Reason. This has been a pleasure unto many heretofore, and now it is to thee.
For in old time, who so could not sing and play upon instruments, was
counted unlearned, which judgment fell upon Themistocles the Athenian, the most
noble of all the Grecians, for that he refused to play upon an Harp as he
sat with company at meat. And Cicero reports, that Fpaminundas the Thebane,
perhaps because he would avoid that ignominy, could play very excellently
upon instruments. It is strange, that Socrates being so grave a Father as he
was, would learn to play: and therefore let us not maruayle though Alcibiadis
were by his uncle Periclis set to schole to learn upon the Recorder, being
among them so commendable an exercise, that they learned the same also among
the lyberal arts. But let us commend the wit of a shamefast Boy, who taking
into his hand the instrument of an excellent Musician, who of purpose was sent
for and hired to teach him and puttyng it unto his mouth, and streynyng his
breath, (...) by his cheeks began to swell, and perceyuyng thereby the
detormitie of his countenance, blushed, and brake the Pype, and threw it away
disdainfully, deseruyng surely, though but small of years, to be an example,
that by the whole consent of the people the use of Recorders and wynd
instruments should have been banyshed the City of Athens. This ardent desire
of Music, although it be not yet come so far unto you, as to possess the
minds of al Princes, yet has it invaded the minds of some, and specially of
the worser sort. For Caius the Emperor, was very much given to syngyng and
dancing. As for Nero, how much he was addicted to the study of the Cytherne,
and what great regard he had of his voice, it is incredible to be spoken. This
is one folly in him, and very ridiculus, that the same night which was the last
of his life, and the first to the world, to take breath, as it were, for a
little time, among the complayntes which instaunt death and present fear and
sorrow did minister, this one thing most often and most miserably he bewailed,
not that so great a Prince, but that so great a Musician should perysh. I let
pass others: even unto this your age which now is present, though but here
and there, yet there is come some delyght of the ear, wherewith to be honestly
and soberly delyghted, is a certain humanity, but to be caught, and as it
were wedded unto it, is great vanity.


Joy. I am deceived with the pleasure of sweet notes.


Reason. Oh that thou dyddest hear the syghes of the godly? Oh that the
gronynges and lamentations of the dampened might enter into thine ears: And on
the other side, the reioycynges of the blessed souls, and the syngyng of
Angels, and that heavenly harmony which Pithagoras establysheth, Aristotle
overthrows, and our Cicero restores, and godliness and faith persuade thee
to be there perpetual, and the most sweet voyce^, if not of the heavens, yet
of the heavenly inhabitauntes, wh^^here without end do praise the first and
eternal cause. (...) these things, I say, should enter into thine ears, how
plainly myghtest thou discern which consent were the sweeter, and which the
holsomer? But now thou committest the judgment of the sound to a deaffe
sense, concerning which, perhaps hitherto may seem unto some to be a small
matter, notwithstanding it has troubled many excellent men. Neither was it
without cause that Plato, a man of a divine wit, supposed that Music
apperteyned to the state, and corrections of manners in a common wealth.


Of Daunsing. The.xxiiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Delyght in dancing.


Reason. I would have marueyled the more, if the noise of Vyals and Recorders
had not pricked thee forth also to dancing, and after the ancient manner, one
vanity had not followed another, howbeit a greater, and much more deformed. By
singyng there is some sweetness conceived, which many times is profitable,
and holy: by dancing never any thing but lasciviousness, and a vain sight,
hateful to honest eyes, and unmeet for a man.


Joy. I desire much to be at dauncinges.


Reason. The body covers and discovers the mind: the castyng of the
hands, the moouyng of the feet, the rouling of the eyes, declare that there
is some such like wantonness in the mind, which is not seen. And therefore
it behooves such as are lovers of modesty, to take heed that they do not
speak any wanton thing: For the hydden affectes of the mind, and secrets of
the heart, are many times descried by small tokens: moouyng, syttyng, lying,
gesture, laughter, going, speech, al these are bewrayers of the mind.


Joy. I receive great pleasure in dancing.


Reason. Oh foolyshe pleasure? Imagine that thy self leadest a dance, or
beholdest other daunsing, without hearing any instrument, and see the foolysh
women, or men more effeminate then women, without any noise to turn about, and
to dance forward and backward. I pray thee dydst thou ever see any thing more
absurd or doatyng? But now the sound of the instrument covers the uncomely
moouyng, that is to say, one madness hydeth an other.


Joy. I am delyghted in dancing.


Reason. There is not in dauncyng so much a present delight, as an hope of
pleasure to come: For it is the forerunner of Venus, to lead about selly women
that are astonished with the sound of the instruments, to court them, to
claspe them, and under color of courtesy to win them: there the hands are
free, the eyes free, and the speech free, there is noise of the feet, the
dissonant voices of the singers, the soundyng of the trumpets, the meeting
together, the dust, and that which is often added to plays and shows, mght
it self, enemy to honesty, and friend to vices: these be the things which
drive away fear and shame fastness, these are the prouocations of leacherie,
these are the laxations of liberty. And, that ye shall not think me to be
easily deceived, this is that delight which simply, and as it were innocently
ye profess by the name of dauncinges, and under the covering of pastime, ye
clooke wickedness. And although many times this be done among men only, or
women only, they do then but severally exercise themselves, and learn what
they shall do when they meet again: like as scholars do meditate while their
master is absent, what they shall say when he returns. Pluck up by the coote
this crafty and wicked show, take away lasciviousness, and thou shall take
away dauncinges. Believe me, no man will dance before the Lord with King
David, lest peradventure his wife laugh him to skorne, although no man be
mocked for dancing, or wantonly demeaning himself before his Lady.


Joy. Dancing is delectable.


Reason. Thou art iumpe of mine opinion. If it delight, it is in respect of
some other matter, for of it self it is an absurd thing, and brings more
weariness then pleasure. For, to turn round, what is it other then to procure
giddines of the head, and to go about without end? Among the local motions
which Plato reckeneth, to wit these, forward, backward, on the right hand, on
the left, upward, dounward, and round about, only the seventh is infinite. And
therefore the things that are perpetual, that is to say, heaven, and the
planets, do continualy observe the same: and in earth, the madness of men
increase ably puts it in practice, almost in all their actions and devises.
Neither is there any Orpheus to stay the Isionian wheel, but invisible
dauncinges, where the volubilitie of the minds, carries the bodies about with
them. And therefore when that which is written may be said of al, then may it
most properly be verified of these: The wicked walk round about. This sport
has been the cause of many shameful deeds. Many times an honest Matron has
by means hereof, lost her long preserved honesty. Oftentimes the unfortunate
young virgin has hereby learned that upon her wedding day, which she had
better never had known.


Joy. I am willing to exercise my self in honest dancing.


Reason. I had rather thou had choosen some other kind of exercise. But I
perceive whereabout thou go, and what thou meanest. Thou would have this
general restreinct taken away, thou would have liberty to be given, and an
order therein to be prescribed. Forasmuch as therefore thou art so minded, and
such is thy manner and custom, then which if it be naught, there is nothing
worse, and if it be good, there is nothing better: let this be a rule unto thee
in all these things, that such as thou can not altogether want, thou use
them most modestly and seldom. That thou behave not thy self softly, nor
womanlyke in any matter, but let thy manly rigor show it self, yea somewhat
beyond it own bounds: and let thy dancing, or what other pastime soever
thou frequent, be a relaxation to the weeried spirits, and an exercise to the
body, and not a pleasure to effeminate the mind. I would gladly abstain from
examples, for the imitation of excellent men is not safe for all to follow.
Every feathered foul is not able to follow the Eagle. Of imitatours, some
imitate the contrary, some one thing, and some another. Few do fully attain
to the perfection of that which they imitate. The younger Cato, when his mind
was ouerpressed with cares of the Common wealth, was wont to refreshe him self
with wine. The like did Solon among the Greeks. Now some man perhaps
desirous to imitate these, will always do one thing only which they did, he
will drink: and that which they used to do seldom times, and moderately,
this man will do continually, and immoderatly: and that which they used for a
remedy, he will abuse unto drunkenness. The like may be easily showed in
other things also: but now thou understand, as well as I, what that is
which I fear, with thee. Notwithstanding, forasmuch as thou have enforced me
to undertake the defense of a condemned matter, I will set down unto thee, the
example of a notable personage, which thou shall not follow, or not change,
which I will recite unto thee in these words, which Seneca uses in that
book wherein he searches after the tranquillity of the mind. Scipio, says
he, moved that same his triumphant and martial body, after the tune and
measure of instruments, not wantonly mincing, as it is now the manner to swim
in dancing, far more effeminately then women, but as the ancient men in fore
time were wont at plays and festival times to dance, after a manlyke sort,
which should no way impair them, if their enemies did behold them. By which
words, what he thought then of his own age, may be perceived: But he was
happy that he saw not thine. And although he do allow of some large scope
of dancing and drinking, saying, that sometimes it is lawful for a man to
drink till he be drunk, which I merueill that so precise a disposition
would grant: yet if thou wylt follow faithful counsel, drink wine
sparyngly, and abstain from dancing. There be other more honest kinds of
recreation, wherewith thou may refresh thy loathsome and weeried mind. But
in all things this is the best counsel which he uttered last of all, to be
circumspect, and take heed: and whatsoever thou do, so to do it, as though
thine enemies beheld and marked thee: It is much more better to live in such
sort that thine enemies may wonder at thine abstynence and gravity, then that
thy friends should excuse thy lasciviousness. That good fame is more noble,
when no man is able to object a true crime, and dare not object a false, then
when a fault is objected, and purged. Perfect virtue makes the accuser afeard:
but that which is but mean, provoke him. And as touching sobriety, I had
rather thou were like Caesar, whom his very enemies can not deny but that he
was a man of little wine, as Suetonius writes, then like Cato: I mean not the
ancient Cato Censorius, of whose sobriety we have spoken before, but the
latter, whom Seneca in this sort defends for drunkenness objected against
him, that Catoes life was such, that a man may better object an honest crime
against him, then a dishonest* But concerning that whereof now we entreat, I
had rather thou should not dance at all, then to dance as Scipio did. But
if thy mind force thee unto that which I would not have th^^ do, I would
wyshe thee to imitate these captains, that if that sayeing of the Lyrike Poet
have fully persuaded thee: At one time we must drink, and at another dance:
Drink wine so as Cato drank, and dance so as Scipio daunced.


Of playing with the Ball. The.xxv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am delighted also with playing at the Ball.


Reason. Lo, there is another foolysh occasion of crying, and leapyng.


Joy. I am desirous to play at the ball.


Reason. It seems that ye hate rest, ye seek toil and labor every way,
which I would they were comely. For if this play be undertaken for exercise
sake, which, I pray you is better, for a man to weerie himself with a furious
throwing and striking, wherein nothing can be kept in the mind, or else with
moderate walking, wherein is both profitable moving of the body, and honest
stirring of the mind? Which manner, certain of the Philosophers did make so
proper to themselves, that the most famous sect took name thereof Had thou
rather follow Dionysius of Syracuse, then Aristotle of Stagyrite? Forasmuch as
we have heard that the Philosopher used to take delight in studious walking,
and the Tyrant in this troublesome game: howbeit I will not deny, but that
modest minds have sometime been delighted with this pleasure: For Quintus
Mutius Scaenola, the Southsayer, could play very cunningly at it, and Augustus
the Emperor, after that he had ended the civil wars, from exercises of the
feelde, betook him self to the bal: and also Marcus Aurelius Antomu^, as it
is written of him, played very well at tennise. Notwithstanding, although the
first of these were very well seen in the law, both of God and man, and the
other also were learned, and both were good princes, yet do I not like any
thing the better of this hasty and clamorous game. For all vehement motion,
specially if it be joined with outerie and clamor, is unsitting for an honest
wit.


Of playing at Dice and Lottes. The xxvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am delighted with playing at dice and lottes


Reason. In the one of these games is loss, in the other folly: yet it is
reported yt Scenola frequented them both, and that which is yet higher, that
Augustus the Emperor used the one. Yet notwithstanding, that this first chose
these to be a recreation to him self from the ceremonies of the Gods, and
the laws of men, in the knowledge whereof he excelled, and Augustus from the
cares of his great Empire, which he governed long and well, now and then to
refresh himself from his ioyle: I will not commend the like in thee. For great
and learned men have certain strange and peculier appetites, which if thou
imitate as well in manners as in doctrine, thou may sone fall: for all things are
not worthy to be praised, which are praised.


Joy. I take pleasure in playing at Tables.


Reason. Who would not be delighted to throw forth a couple or more of squared
bones, with certain numbers marked upon every side, and look which way they
run, that way to direct the fingers, to place the round Tablemen in order? A
glorious exercise, which is like to deserve a famous name, with a triumphant
chariot, and renoumed days.


Joy. I delight moreover to play at Lottes.


Reason. O chyldishe desire, O lost time, O superfluous cares, O most vain
outcries: foolyshe joys, ridiculus anger, for old doting men to stand
gaping over a pair of tables, and a few rouling pieces of wood, by stealth
robbing and falling in: whereof that game was in old time called Ludus
latruncularis, whereat there was an Ape that played, as Pliny writes. Do
thou marvel at it? Why, it is a peculier play for an Ape, to geather together
the stones, counters, or tablemen, and to cast them abroad, to throw them
against the wall, hastily to cast forth the hands and to pluck them in
again, to insult over his adversary, to threaten him with grinning teeth, to
be angry, to contend, to chafe, and sometime, as Horace says, to scrath the
head, to gnaw the nails, and briefly to do al thing that may provoke the
lookers on to laughter. And do ye omit any one of these? or in your gaming let
pass any one kind of madness? Are ye not in such wise tormented and vexed,
as though the good estate of your selves, or of the commonwealth were in
hazard? There be many, I suppose, which might have overcome their enemies in
battle, if they had been as diligent to furnish their soldiers in the
field, as they have been no place their Boxen or Iuorie table men in order.
Scarce shall you find any man more earnestly bent to any thing, then to this
foolysh practice. But this is a general rule in the kingdom of sollie, that
look what thing is least profitable, thereof is conceived most delight and
pleasure.


Joy. I am delighted with dice playing.


Reason. If thou wylt be ruled by counsel, I will tell thee of an honest and
worthy kind of diceplay, which in old time was frequented by learned men in
Athens: that upon holidays, when a company of friends were met together,
every man should allege somewhat concerning learning, not some ambiguous
Sophisme, but some substantial matter, according to the discretion of the
alleager, apparteining to virtue, and honest living. Now, when they had
conferred upon these matters without envy or anger, they which by the
judgment of the best learned seemed to be overcome, were amersed of some small
piece of money. Let the same money be converted to Philosophical suppers: And
so it shall minister sufficient provision for the charge, exercise to your
study, and a spur to your wits, which shall as well provoke the conquerours,
as the conquered. With this kind of dice play, wherewith our forefathers were
wont to furnishe their Saturnalia, furnyshe you your godly holidays, and
wherewith they were wont to pass their Athenian nights, pass you also your
Roman nyghtes. Thus have thou a game whereat thou may wyllingly play, and
shall not be ashamed to have played at it.


Of prosperous playing at Tables. The.xxvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a desire also to play at tables.


Reason. O wide gaping whirle podle, that can not be filled: O sorrowful and
sudden flitting of the patrimonte? O tempest of the mind, and cloud to fame,
and provocation to wickedness, and way to desperation. Those whereof we have
spoken before, deserve indifferently to be called games, but this is a mere
sorrow.


Joy. But I have had prosperous success at this play.


Reason. There is no good luck at tables, al is evil, and miserable: For both
he that leeseth is grieved, and he that wins is enticed and drawn into
danger.


Joy. I have played fortunately.


Reason. Present prosperity has oftentimes been the aboving of future
calamity, and this plague has it own proper prouocations. If all that play at
tables should lose, no man would play: but some do win, howbeit those
winninges are the forerunners of loss.


Joy. I have played and won.


Reason. It is well, if thou return not again into the feelde: otherwise
there is no feelde more plain, nor fortune in any feelde more inconstant.


Joy. I have played and won.


Reason. Thou shall play again, and lose. That which thou winnest, a thousand
will pluck from thee on every side: and that which thou losest, none will
restore. Add this moreover, that if there were any justice, that which thou
winnest is not thine, and that which thou losest, although it be not another
man's, yet it cease to be thine. Finally, there be diverse causes which may
dehort and pluck back a good mind from this madness, unless a certain
headdinesse, pricked forward with covetousness, urged ye thereunto.


Joy. I have won at tables.


Reason. Understand that thou have received an hundred times vzurie of an
impious banker: thou must therefore restore that which thou have won, and ad
thereunto somewhat of thine own, which cannot be demanded again, and is of
it self consumed, and thou have left of to be fortunate in thy sleep.


Joy. I have won, and thereby am the richer.


Reason. All money is unstable, and by reason of the roundnesse thereof, it
runs away: but there is nothingmore unstable then the money that is gotten
at tables. Table playing gives nothing to any man, specially that plye it
diligently, but many times they borowe one of another, or it wresteth somewhat
from them, and is the more cruel, the more flatteryng that it seems. For
there is no loss more grievous, then is to him that has begun to taste the
sweetness of gain.


Joy. I have played, and gained.


Reason. To rejoice for winning at tables, is even as a man should rejoice at
sweet poison: For both anon will break out at the beynes.


Joy. I take pleasure in my prosperous play.


Reason. Delyghtyng in sin, is worse then sin it self. There be some that
sin, provoked thereto by means of an evil custom, who rejoice not after
they have sinned, but are sorry, and if it could be, would rather they had not
sinned. And some we have seen, who among the scorching flames of lust, have
fealt a cold yeinesse of sorrow and repentance, and if a man may so term
it, a will and a nyll at one instant, although they have been borne away to the
worse by force of some custom, whom we may not nevertheless utterly condemn,
but by much practice they may be brought to better state: but as for those
that rejoice in wickedness, what hope, I pray you, shall a man have of them?


Joy. I am delyghted in playing at tables.


Reason. I hope thou wylt not be so still, or long delighted: the state of
cities is every day altered, and do thou think that the fortune at tables
is permanent? Believe me it will turn, and convert thy joy into tears. I do
not mean that they will turn, as thou have seen them, and as they have done
to thine advantage and vain joy: but they will so turn, that it shall be to thy
very tears and sorrow.


Joy. I take pleasure in playing.


Reason. A detestable and desperate delyght, and which proceeds from a
fylthie and corrupt mind: and thou deseruelt therefore to be chydden and
rated. For what Gentleman, or what man, that is not rather a savage beast, will
be delyghted with the name of a game, which is full of wickedness, and most
filthy impiety? Where there is nothing manly besides the men's faces, and
their countenaunces, distract between anger and sorrow, and outragiously
confused with outcryes, more then is sitting for men: where there is no
cumlynesse in behavior, nor modesty in words, no love toward men, no
reverence toward God, but chydyng, raylyng, deceit, perjury, and rauine,
and in the end, bloodshedde and murder. Humane rashness can devise nothing
more cruel against GOD, then the blaspheming of his holy name, wherewith above
all the forgeries of mischief, that game abounds* Where, if any perhaps hold
their peace for shamefastness, yet with their often lookyng up, what they
speak with the lyppes of their heart, them selves do know. What honest man
can, I say not play at, but with his eyes behold this game, and is not grieved
and driven away with the loathsomenesse of so wicked a sight?


Joy. Notwithstanding, I am delighted with this game.


Reason. Take heed that the Cretaine curse fall not upon thy head, to be
delyghted in evil custom, then which nothing is more light to be spoken,
nothing more grievous to happen, and nothing more near to destruction.


Joy. I am delyghted with playing at Tables.


Reason. Dishonest delyght is to be abiected, if not for virtue sake, yet for
regard of thine estimation, and care of thy honesty: For thou shall not find
any thing among the actions of men, wherein their manners and vices are more
plainly set open. Thou have seen some set down to play, that have trembled,
and prayed most earnestly, and called upon the chance which they would
have: and others, who otherwise were courageous and vpryght of mind, at this
game, for a little money, to pray, to be angry, and in fine, to be furious.
What, and how many things have certain valiant men done at game for a
small sum of money, which in an other place they would not have done for a
great treasure? There is the kingdom of al vices, but especially of wrath and
covetousness. Thou remembrest, how Ovid in the same book where in he
teaches the dishonest and superfluous art of love, yet sometime intermyngleth
some profitable matter: He admonysheth the women lovers, that to conceal the
vices of their mind, they absteyne from this, and such like games, least being
seen either swellyng with anger, or greedy with covetousness, they displease
their lovers. How much better were it for this commandment to be given to
men, that they offend not only the eyes of men, but also of GOD that sees
all, and loves good minds and courteous manners?


Joy. I have played, I have won, and am glad.


Reason. A fylthy game, and hurtful victory, a vain pleasure.


Joy. I have won, and am glad.


Reason. All reioycyng in a man's own evil, is foolyshe: And therefore it was
some Helhounde that first devised this game, the unskillful whereof are subject
to mockes, and loss: and the skillful, to wonder and astonyshment. For what is
more marvelous, then that which is commonly spoken in the old proverb, and
is vulgarely found to be true by experience? That all the great players and
masters of this game, are naked, bare, and poor.


Of Iesters. The xxviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Take delyght in the pastyme of Iesters.


Reason. The delyght of Musycall Harmony is more noble, which is procured by a
certain lyberall art: as for this, it is full of vanity and impudency.


Joy. I take pleasure in Iesters.


Reason. I had rather thou tookest pleasure in poor folk, in humble friends,
and in carfulness.


Joy. Iesters do make me laugh.


Reason. And what dooest thou make them do? How many times have Iesters
mocked their masters that laughed at them? How oftentimes wonderyng at the
folly of those that wonder at them, have they feygned some other matter,
whereby they falsely delyght them, and truly delight themselves.


Joy. I have learned Iesters.


Reason. Thou have those that thou may laugh at, and that wyllaugh and gyrde
at thee. An ancient plague among the rich, which beginning among the
Hetruscanes, grew so great at Rome. and came to such boldness, that Esope
left a woonderful and very great patrimony unto his son which he had gotten
thereby: and Roscius geathered this distracted and vagraunt practice into an
art, writing a book of the Art of iestyng* wherein he was not ashamed to
compare it to Oratorie, and to match him self with Tullie: and that for this
cause, for that those sundry affections and secret conceyuynges of the mind,
which Cicero was wont in eloquent speech diversely to pronounce, he could also
express the very same after another fashion, but to like effect, by apt
iestures. And truly he was very cunnyng, neither do I know what were so
hard or sorrowful, which he could not easyly have mollified: I speak not
how by means of his wit he purchased the friendshyp of the most courteous and
gentle Cicero, and was found worthy for whom so great an Orator should
plead, and of whom he should leave a work to the remembrance of
posterity: but that he qualified the cruel and proud mind of Sylla, and by
him that despised al men, being received into favor, was rewarded with a ryng
of gold: who also as often as him lysted, could provoke to mirth and laughter
so many grave and severe fathers, and that Senate by which the whole world
was governed: Who enticed the people of Rome, being so great and so many, to
give to him, above a daily stipende out of the common treasury of an hundred
pence, besides his seruautes and assistantes. A great reward, although it were
paid in sinal money: and I cannot deny but that these things were handled by
him with wonderful and rare agilitie of mind, so that if there were a Roscius
any where to be found, perhaps it is not denied to thee which was lawful for
Cicero, not only to use his pastime otherwhiles, but also his wit and
familiarity. For there is great agreement of wits one with an other,
although they differ in study and profession. But where we seek him, many
notable arts have in short process of time peryshed, not only the art of
Jesting, which is now come to this pass, that it is certain that they which
now follow it, are of a corrupt sense and false judgment. And truly hereof it
follows, that they to whom evil things seem good, good things are unknown:
and that they are unaccustomed to noble cares, that are delyghted with vile.


Joy. Many iesters do frequent me daily.


Reason. They will leave to frequent thee, when thou shall leave to be rich and
liberal, I should rather say, foolyshe and prodigal.


Joy. I have a great troop of iosters.


Reason. Thou may rather say of Flies, which follow thee while thou art
anointed, and when thou art dry, will forsake thee: and it is not sufficient
that they do forsake thee, but that like infamy will follow this farewell. There
be some tongues to whom rest and quietness is a punishment, they have no
delyght but to talk of other folk, either in falsely praysyng them, or
bitterly slaunderyng them: and look whose wealth they cannot byte, they gnaw
his fame. This is one general law among iesters and Parasites, that they be
both sorts of them armed with slatteries, and follow fortune: For the one sort,
it is sufficient to fyl their bellies, the other sort has another hunger, unto
whom it is an injury to make mention of meat, whose greediness must be
filled, which has no bottom.


Of the games of VVrestlyng. The xxix. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am delighted with the games of wrestlyng.


Reason. If to be a looker on, thou art a fool, if to wrestle, thou art mad.


Joy. I use to exercise wrestlyng.


Reason. By every one of thy words, it appears unto what master thou art a
slave. For these, as well as the abouenamed, do belong to the body, and as I
have admonished a little before, there be things that may be done more honestly
without force and noyce. And there is also a more excellent moving of the
mind, which if thou knew, thou would contemn and hate these bodyly
endeavors. But you esteem of your mind, as a degenerate and hateful ghest:
and of your bodies, as some great and dearly beloved lord: for him you plowe,
for him you sow, for him you mow. Truly in so doing ye do well: but in this
ye deal unjustly, in that ye refer al things to the body: and not regarding
the mind, for this ye spend whole nights in wakefulnesse, for this ye sigh,
for this ye vow, for this ye learn good arts, this ye obey and serve, of al
other a most sumptuous and unthankful master, to whom neither any thing is
sufficient, and if perhaps it want somewhat at any time, it never is mindful of
a benefit received, and yet notwithstanding ye obey whatsoever this master
commands, and sufferyng the mind to hunger, for this you do not only provide
necessaries, but also superfluous things in each respect, and such as will
hurt: and not only such things as apparteyne to food and apparel, whereof
we have spoken in their proper places, but also to games, and sundry lusts,
not perceyuyng how much the truth is against your devises, which speaks by
the mouth of the most eloquent Cicero: whereby it appears, that he which
neglects the body, neglects not him self, but his frail and transitory
house: but he that regards not his mind, truly regards not him self. For
be says not, Thou art he whom this outward shape declares, but every man's
mind is him self, and not this form which may be poynted unto by the
finger.


Joy. I am delyghted with the exercise of wrestlyng.


Reason. The heat of Charrettes, the noise of horses, and the guydyng of the
scorching wheels through narrow straightes unhurt, the cry of the wrestlers,
and their throngyng together, the oil, the sweat, and the woonderful dust,
is a great token of the dullness of the senses, whether it be the pleasure of
the eyes, or nose, or ears, that is thereby conceived: Which if it were
sound and perfect, not these places of outcryes and tumultes, which they
term places of wrestlyng and exercise, but rather the diligent observation of
this place of exercise and toil, which they that are borne do enter into,
which they that live do tread and trample continually, from whence they that
dye do depart, should delyght thee, being a more profitable and honest
pleasure.


Joy. I am given to the study of wrestlyng.


Reason. This was not the least glory among our forefathers in old time, but
so great, that unto Diagoras Rhodi^s, who was also him self a famous wrestler,
when he saw two of his sons in one day rewarded with wrestlyng victories, as
though there remained nothing more noble in this life whereunto he might aspyre,
another ancient man of Lacedemon, a friend of his, said, Now dye Diagoras, for
thou shall not ascend up into heaven. He accounted it so great and high a
matter for three of one family at one time to be tried wrestlers. Truly a
very small and light Grecian estimation of true praise, but so common, that it
troubled also great wits. For Plato, being so great a Philosopher as he was,
was famous for his deeds at Olympus, and in that practice known by many
euentes, but this was while he was a young man. The valiantness of his
courage, from whence some think that Platoes name was deryued, the strength of
his body, and the heat of his years, moved his youthly mind to the trial of
his strength, wherein he was equal with the best: but in process of time,
consyderyng what he had done, he betook him self to that which was better,
and chose rather to belyk^ Socrates, then Milo. And truly great age accuses:
Youth is easyly forgeuen: there is no excuse to a man of his folly.


Joy. The study of wrestlyng delyghteth me.


Reason. In this game the vylest person sometime has the victory, and the
virtue of the mind is vanquyshed by the hugynesse of the body. What Duke or
noble man can thou name unto me, which Milo could not overcome, who would
run a Furlong with a live Bull upon his shoulders, and kylling him with a
stroke of his bare fyst, stuck not to eat him whole in one day? A strange
matter, but commonly written by Historiographers. Who therefore shall meet with
this fellow to match him in his kingdom of Cheualrie? Verily, there is
nothing more shameful then to behold noble spirits to be overcome with such a
beast: and therefore let valiant minds which trust well to themselves, have a
special regard that they enter not into such exercise where they may be
conquered by the most cowardes: But if thou take pleasure in contention, enter
that conflict wherein he that overcomes is the better man, not of the
strength of the body, or of any other matter, wherein one may be both the
worst and the conqueror. Strive not therefore for riches, nor for dignity, nor
for power, but for virtue and knowledge: and not to the end thou detract from
any man's good name, but that the emulation of another man's praise may be a
provocation unto thee toward glory: let there be no iotte at al of envy, but
of virtue. Here have thou an example of the younger Cato, of whom Salust
writing: He striued not, says he, neither with the rich for ryehes, neither
with the factious for faction, but with the valiant for virtue, and with the
shamefast for honesty, and with the innocent for abstinence. This is the most
honest kind of contentious exercise, not only to be kept at Olimpus, but in
every place: no less in the bedchaumber, then in the judicial Court: and no
less in leisure, then in business: and no less with them that are present,
then them that be absent: and with all noble minds of al ages, and of all
countries. I have always judged that saying of Scipio in Liuie to be notable
and princely: I am persuaded, says he, that this cogitation is in the mind of
every noble personage, to compare him self not only to renowned men which
now live, but that have lived in all ages. And thou likewise, if there be any
among the troops that be present, which I scarce can hope, or among all the
memory of antiquity, choose some match unto thy self, with whom thou may
contend, not with arms and Cuggels, but with wisdom and virtue, without
fear of danger, but in hope of an immarcessible crown. This is my counsel
and opinion concerning the wrestlyng exercise.


Of sundry Spectacles and Shows. The.xxx. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am delyghted with sundry Shows.


Reason. Perhaps with the Curteine or Theater: which two places are well known
to be enemies to good manners: for look who goes thither evil, returns
worse. For that journey is unknown to the good, which if any undertake upon
ignorannce, he can not choose but be defiled.


Joy. I am delyghted with the plays, and the pryses of Fence.


Reason. Other dilightes have some part either of vanity, or of sensuality,
and this has both, besides cruelty, and inhumanitie, unworthy of good
minds, neither is it any excuse for us, that in foretyme the Romans which
were the flower of men were delyghted in these: for in upright judgment, that
same City which most abounded with good and noble examples, had nothing in it
more to be reproved, or deformed, then the residue, saving at one side the
troubles of civil wars, on the other side, the immoderate study of plays:
as though the great bloodshed at home in the wars, were not sufficient,
unless the peace also were blooddy, and the pleasures blooddy: unless perhaps
some man will say, that the Theater were more honest, wherein thou may see
not only the people gaping, but also the Senate, and the Emperors of Rome, the
Lords of all the world. In like sort were they also delyghted in spectacles,
who were made spectacles to mankind. I will tell thee a strange matter, but well
known and common. That same rage and folly of frequenting the Theater, so
invaded the minds of al men, that it brought abroad into common assemblies,
not only the wives and daughters of the Emperors, but also the Virgyns
vestale, whose chastity was such, as nothing was more perfect, nothing more
tender then fame, nothing more reverent to be preserved, in so much that in
them al motion, all trymming, al wanton talk was reprehended and pu^yshed: and
yet we read that there was a place appointed for these in the Theater, not by
every one, but by the good and great Prince Augustus Caesar, Notwithstanding
the error wherein great men are ouerseene is not therefore the less, but
rather the greater, and more conspicable.


Joy. I am very willing to see plays.


Reason. A thing which is neither honestly playde, nor honestly beheld,
neither easily to be spoken whether the player or the looker on be more
infamous, or whether the Scene be more dishonest, or the several place for the
Senators, saving that poverty many times draws men to the one, and vanity
always plucketh them to the other. For in every offense, it skylleth much
whether a man offend through poverty, lasciviousness, or pride.


Joy. I am delyghted with the syghtes of the Amphitheater.


Reason. A very hurtful delyght every way, as well public as private, which
thou may easyly geather if thou call unto mind out of the stories the
beginning hereof, and the increase, with what expenses of common charge, and
with what care of Princes near unto madness, and finally, with what study
and toil of the people it was builded. Truly it is an hard matter to report
the manyfolde vanities, and superfluous to repeat so many common things, a
thousand couple of Fensars at once, which were not only not sufficient for the
play, but for the fight, with the flocks of Elephantes, and Tigres, and Lions,
and Leopardes, and wild Asses, and courageous Horses, and sundry kinds of
strange beasts, sent from al parts of the world, from their Deserts,
Parkes, and Forestes, to serve the Roman Theater. Moreover, that the same
sumptuousness of buyldyng had no pattern, but not like to want imitation,
Pyllers of Marble brought by Sea and by land for the use of the plays,
cunnyngly carved by the great industry of the woorkmen, proudly polyshed on
the tops, and the branches glysteryng with gold. Of which madness Scaurus
was the chief and beginner, he that was Edilis or Master of the works in
buyldyng the Stage of the Theater within the space of a few days, which was
reared with a small deal of timber and a few roopes, bringing in three
hundred and threescore such monstrous pillars, to please the eyes of the
people that rejoiced in such toys: and finished a work, as thou know it
is written, the greatest that ever was made by man's hand, not in respect of
the temporal continuance thereof, but by everlasting destiny, whereby he
deserved truly to be reported, yt as first by a grievous proscription he sent
the citizens, so afterward in his most vain Edileship he sent good manners
into banishment: as one that was both auctor and example of much loss time to
the foolyshe commons, and of many great expenses to the common wealth. But O
strange case: shortly after, the madness of them that came afterward,
surpassed this outrage: whereby it came to pass, that what by the
wonderfulnesse and number of the works, there was nothing in all the whole
world to be wondered at, but Rome. For thou see also how it is written, that
the very bowels of the earth were perced, the ^^^ntes dug up, the bidden
rocks discovered, rivers turned aside and conue^ghed away in pipes, the
frettyng sea shut in or out with great banks, tops of mountains hanging,
and the secrets of the sea seatched, and to be brief, a great and large scope
of madding left to the posterity, and the expec^ation of your Grandfathers
fulfilled in you, to wit, that your lasciviousness would never leave ye. And
that the mischief might be the more ^eaped, private calamity was added to
public loss: For the people being tied with the desire to see, and in the
mean while forgetting their daily gain, they neither let one day escape them,
neither perceived how armed penury pinched them by the back: And thus
enterchangably private destruction, was turned into public, and public,
into common. Neither is the loss of patrimony more grievous then of manners,
where lust is learned, and humanity forgotten. And therefore what ye should
hope for by shows from the very beginning, your first king Romulus gave a
president, who in them circu^^ented the rough and severe chastity of the
Sabine women. And although the houour of matrimony covered both the injuries,
unto how many since that time has this been a mean, not to marriage, but to
whoordome, and wandryng sensuality? To be sh^rt, believe this one thing, that
we have seen chastity often overthrown by plays, but always assaulted. And
to speak nothing of those men who have proceeded to such outrage of
wickedness, that they do almost glory in their adultery: the good name and
honesty of many women has there peryshed, many have returned home unchaste,
more doubted of, and none the honester. Moreover, to the end there may want no
kind of mischief, what bodyly slaughters, not only of private men, but of
whole multitudes do there happen: the effuse laughing, turned into sudden
sorrow, and the dead corpses carried out of the Theater, and the troops of
weepers, mingled with the companies of reioycers, do declare. Thou have
heard, how that the same Curio, which was slain in the civil war in
Africa on Caesar's side, went beyond Scaurus in wit, whom he could not
match in wealth, how he, I say, deuisyng a Theater of wood, but double and
hanging, by wonderful art hung up a loft above ground, that conqueryng people,
being overcome with the plays of the nations, and rejoicing in their own
perilles, that laughing within, and amazed without, they might be both laughed
at and pitied of the beholders. And do we wonder that he could turn the mind
of one great banished personage, by laying before him the hope of an Empire,
who by proposing so light and short pleasure of the eyes, could turn about so
many thousand citizens in a moveable spectacle? But, some man will say unto
me, there perished no body: ^^t there might have perished, and thousands also
in another place perished. And that I may not touch both new and old
downefalles together, by means whereof many have found both their death, and
their grave: under Tyberius the Emperor, at a notable show at the city
Tidena, thou remembrest how by the fall of the Amphitheater, twenty thousand
men were slain. This is the commodity and end that the lookers on do get.


Joy. I behold shows with great pleasure.


Reason. Either of faygned love, or true hatred. The first is not for a man to
behold: the second not for a reasonable creature. Who will wyllyngly receive
a dagger to his heart? Who will power more blood upon an hot wound? Who can
wax pale sooner, then when he sees death? What delyght have ye to go to the
school of cruelty? Ye need no scholemaisters, ye learn evil too fast of
your selves: Ye learn more of your selves at home, then is needful. What if
the masters of mischief, and the mystresse of error, the common multitude
should join unto this with ready wits? Many whom nature framed gentle, have
learned cruelty by means of shows and spectacles. Man's mind, which of it
self is prone to vice, is not to be pricked forward, but brydled: if it be
left to it self, it hardly stands: if it be driven forth, it runs
headlong. There comes in much evil at the ears, but much more at the
eyes, by those two open windows death breaks into the soul: nothing enters
more effectually into the memory, then that which comes by seeing: things
heard, do lightly pass by, the images of things which we have seen stick
fast in us, whether we will or not: and yet they enter not, unless we be
wylling, but very seldom, and they depart soon. Whyther go thou then?
What violence caryeth thee a way? To be merry an hour, and always afterward
to be sorry? To see that once, that thou wylt repent a thousand times that
ever thou saw it? To see a man slain with a weapon, or to be torn by the
teeth and nails of wild beasts, or some such other sight as may trouble a
man that is awake, and terrify him when he is a sleep: I can not perceive
what pleasure is in it, or rather, what bitterness and grief is no: in it:
and I can not discern any greater argument of madness in you, then in that
bitter sweetness and unpleasant delyght thrust you daily forward to death,
enticyng you by miserable flatteries, drowned as it were in a Stygian sleep.
Ye observe one order almost in all things: Whatsoever ye desire, whatsoever ye
go about, whatsoever ye do, it is against you.


Of Horses. The.xxxi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Take pleasure in a nimble Horse.


Reason. A most fierce and unquiet beast, which sleeps not, and is never
satisfied.


Joy. I am destrous to ride Horses.


Reason. It is not much more dangerous to sail upon the raging Sea, then to
ride upon a fierce prauncer. There is no beast more proud toward his master:
neither is this improperly gone for a proverb among horse breakers, That an
horse does twice evil, although be be at one time humble, and at another
proud: Who being of such strength and swiftness, will suffer him self for a
little bile meat to be subject to another, to be tamed, to be hampred, to be
haltred, to be linked in chains, to be brydled, to be sh^oed with iron, to
have nails driven through his hoofes, to be spurred, to bear an armed rider,
to abide slauishe imprisonment, and fi^thie servitude? On the other side, as
though he were untamed, he behaueth himself as if he were free, and doe^h
every thing as if he were his masters enemy: When he should run, he
regards not the spur: When he should stay, he takes the bridle between
his teeth: When he should snort, he is asleep: When he should lie in secret,
he snorteth. This is that plyant beast which some term trusty and
faithful, whereof fables do report so many goodly matters, calling him
commonly a noble, a princely, an excellent, an honorable beast, worthy to be
bought at a great price, and kept with great diligence: Nay rather, it is a
beast whose weerisomnesse, if it be compared with his serviceableness, no wise
man will buy him, no good husband will feed him: a beast that is impacient,
both of rest and labor, with the one he is proud, with the other he is tired:
with the one a fierce beast, with the other a dull jade: at one time bold, at
another time fearful: at one time flying, at another time falling: at one
time startlyng at a fly or a shadow, at another time dispising his master,
and diverse ways drawing him into danger. Who can sufficiently discribe his
stubbernnesse, the danger of his teeth, and his heels, his neighing, and his
impaciencie of his sitter and rider: For truly look how many conditions
there be of horses, so many dangers are there of the horsemen.


Joy. I have great delight in horses.


Reason. I should wonder the more at thee, unless I remembered some great men,
bent also to the like study to to folyshly. Who has not heard that Alexander
king of Macedonie, erected a tomb for his horse which he loved, and named a
city after his horses name? But the coutage and heat of mind wrought no
wonderful thing in him while he lived. There was more stomach in Augustus,
although less folly: for he builded not a tomb for his horse, but he made a
grave, which thing notwithstanding was unmeet for his wit and gravity. For
whether Julius Caesar's monstrous horse were by him (or any other) consecrated
with a statue of marble before the temple of Venus, it may be doubted. Antonius
Verus, who came after in years and glory, but in riches and imperial name was
but little inferior, that I may omit to tell what fare, and what furniture he
ordained for his horse which he loved immoderately, truly he caused a statue
of gold to be made like him, while he was alive, and when he was dead, a
sepulture to be builded (that we might be the more grieved at it) in Vaticanum,
among so many holy bones as were there buried, and to be buried. This is scarce
credible, but true notwithstanding. The Poet thinkyng on this, and such like
things, makes the souls of such men to be delighted with horses in hell. And
yet this vanity is never awhit the less, but the greater, which is able to
allure so great minds unto it. But that no man shall think that this was some
ancient folly only, and not at this day reigning, let him call to mind one
dwelling not far of, and not long since, who is yet living, and not very old,
and dwelling here in Italy among you, whose name it shall not be needful for
me to utter: a man highly in fortunes favor, and of no small wit and
judgment, a man otherwise of great courage and policy, whenever he has
occasion to utter himself, or has any weighty affairs in hand, who
notwithstanding when his horse which he loved was sick, laid him upon a bed
of silk, and a golden pillowe under his head: and while he him self, being
bound and not able to stir by appointment of his Physicians, for the gout,
was governed by their orders, nevertheless being either borne in the arms of
his servants, or upon some other horse, and carrying his Physicians with him,
he would go visit his sick horse twice or thrice every day, and sorowfully
sighing, would sit by him, and gently stroke him with his hand, and comfort
him with fair speech: To be short, there was no kind of means by Physic let
pass unassayed, and nothing omitted that might relieve his sick friend.
Perhaps posterity will call this a tale, howbeit it is true, and known among a
great people. Thus this noble gentleman, was as careful for the good health of
his horse, as for his own, and lamented for his death as he had been his son.


Joy. I delight to ride.


Reason. It is profitable sometime, and also an help to swiftness, and a
remedy for weariness, and a token of nobility, to ride upon a goodly courser,
and to excel al theresidue, not only by the head, but also by the shoulders,
and to be higher then the other by the whole body. Contrariwise, a fierce horse
is most troublesome, and many times hurtful to his master. If thou would
go a journey on foot, thou have no power nor space to rest thee: and therefore
thou chosest rather to exchang ye dustines on foot, for the danger on
horseback. And for this cause, horses have delivered many from the mids of
death, and brought sundry also into extremity of destruction, or hurt them
with falls, or tumbled upon them with their bodies, and so killed them. Yea,
horses are not the least seed of war. Take away horses, thou shall take away
foreign invasions of countries, and the greatest part of warlike destruction:
That as in natural Philosophy the question is moved of winds, and of Julius
Caesar in histories, whether it were better the wind should blow or not, or
that Caesar were borne or not? The like question may also be demanded
concerning horses, there are so many contrary reasons on the contrary side.
And it was not without cause, that Thessalia, which first found out the use of
horses, and tamed them, first coined money, of silver and gold, and first
assayed to go upon the Sea in a ship, seemed to be the store house of Mars,
and for that also not once only, after so many hundred years it was wette
with plenty of valient blood.


Joy. How much think thou, does our poet delight me, where he describes the
manners, spirit, and courage of a noble horse.


Reason. And does not the saying of the Hebrew prophet make thee afraid,
where he says: (At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, have they fallen asleep that
got upon their horses?) Examine every poinct, not only that pleasant, but also
this rough saying.


Of hunting and hauking. The.xxxii. Dialogue.
JOY. BUT I am delighted in Dogs.


Reason. Now I understand the delight of a beardles youth, who as Horace
says, Delights in horses, and dogs, and the pleasant green feeldes. But
beware thou be not that which follows: Apt to be plucked to vice, and sharp
to them that tell thee thy fault. A flow prouider for profit, lauishe of
money, proud, covetous, and ready to forsake that which thou have loved. I fear
me thou art such an one, since thou set thy pleasure upon such
transitory delights.


Joy. I am delighted with dogs, and fowls.


Reason. This piece of madness was wantyng: is it not sufficient for thee, to
gadde and wander abroad, but meanest thou to fly also?


Joy. Thou mockest me, for I mean not to fly, but I am delighted in the
fowls that fly.


Reason. But they will fly away, and contemn thy pleasure, and not know
thee, and unthankfully be deaf when thou call them. What should thou do
that want feathers, seeing thy pleasure is winged? Imagine that they
returned, the taking of them would be hurtful: thou would call again, and
forgetting thy more profitable affairs, loose thy time. Again, looking back,
and castyng thine eyes up to the clouds after thy foolyshe bird, perhaps
thou will weep, as though there were no necessary work to be done in this
life: by reason of the pleasure which you find by your idleness and sloth,
ye glory in that ye are slaves to your birds. Nature has given you two
hands, with the one ye rule the bird, the other you trouble with crooked
talentes. So being idle on al sides, and being come lame with desire to fly,
to ye end ye may not seem to do any thing with great noise, ye rise before day,
and sodeinly run out of the doors, as though the enemies were at the
threshold, and all the day after, ye run about the pondes and waters, wooddes,
and bushes, filling the air with sundry outcries, and evil favored houlinges.
And in this pastime ye spend your breath, which is meet for some greater
matter: with which spirit your forefathers made their enemies afearde in
battle, and in peace mainteyned justice. At night when ye come home, as
though ye had atchiued some great enterprice, yet sit within doors, declaryng
how well that bird flue, and how well this bird has endued his meat, how
many feathers of the train, and how many of the wings are remaning or lost.
Is not this all your skyll? is not this your love? is not this your felicity?
and is not this al which ye requite to God your Creator, to your country
that bredde you, to your parents that be gate you, to your friends that love
you, to wit, your Spathaukes, or your Hernshawes skimming in the air, and some
piece of a torn foul, and swet, and dust, and your nyghtly story of your
lost day? Unto this ye be always valient and vnweeried, and unto earnest
business, weak and dainty. Liuies stories, and Tullies orations, and the
holy Scriptures, ye condenme as ouerlong: whereof ye may be ashamed. Who can
hear this with vnoffended ears? Who will bear with you, being borne to other
things, to live in these delites, if ye live in these doings?


Joy. I take pleasure in Spanyels and Hawks.


Reason. We have heard of many princes and noble men, whereof some were wont to
take delight in horses, and many in dogs, insomuche that Adrian the Emperor
erected monumentes, not for horses only, as those of whom we made mention
before, but for dogs also: And moreover, builded a city in the same place,
where in prosperous hunting he had slain a she Bear with his own hand, and
used many time to kyl a Lion, but never that he made any tomb for a bird or
foul: For which cause, some say that Virgil mocked Marcillus that was nephue
to Augustus, in that he seemed to take pleasure in them when he was a young man.


Joy. I delight much in huntyng.


Reason. This exercise was peculiar sometime to the Latins, but now to the
Frenchmen, which experience teaches to be true, and whereof some of their own
writers do boast. Wherefore to speak nothing of those kings, whose whole life
was perpetual huntyng, the chiefest king of them all, whenever he had any
rest from battle, excercysyng him self in daily huntyng, at length when he
grew to the extremity of death, relieved the discommodities and weerysomnesse
of his age with this exercise. A strange matter, specially in a wise King, and
not abhortyng from good learning: Howbeit, this was his country manner as some
report. But let it be his country guyse, and let them enjoy it alone, neither
let the Ita^ians take it away from the Frenchmen, neither contend with them in
folly: For if, laying error aside, thou cast thine eyes upon the thing it
self, thou shall perceive that this is the exercise of base Noble men of the
meanest degree, whom a certain sloth and distrust, which is companion to
cowardice, and from low matters shame and pride do dehort and pluck back.
Wherefore, being unfit for honest affairs, they dwell in Wooddes, not to lord
a solytarie life, whereunto they know them selves as unmeet as for the life
polytike, but to live with wy^o beasts, and Dogs, and Birds, which they
would not delyght to do, vnsesse they were joined unto them by some
likeness: who if they conceive any pleasure thereby, or only passing away of
their time, they do foolyshly on both sides, and yet perhaps may attain to
their desire. But if they seek thereby any glory of their wit and
magnificencie, then are they deceived For, what commendation (I pray you) is
it, I say, not for Princes, but for Gentlemen, to take pleasure in handy
crafts, or rather seruyle practices, and affairs? which is one of their
excuses. For they which have utterly renounced the liberal studies, which
their forefathers esteemed, and proclaimed open war against learning, whyther
shall they run but to the enemies Camp? But perhaps they will be ashamed when
they look back to the elder times, and confer them selves with their
predecessors: For they shall oftentimes read how Plat^ studied Philosophy,
and Homere exercysed Poetry, and ^ullie pleaded, and Cae^ar triumphed, but
never read that they hunted.


Of great retinue of servants. The xxxiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am accompanied with a great train.


Reason. Cumbred thou would say.


Joy. I have a great retinue of servants.


Reason. Say rather that thou have a great number of enemies about thee, from
whom (an hard case) thou can not escape, who behold the secret places of thy
house, and bewray thy counsel if they know any, who, besides their continual
theeuery, a thing which never happened to any besieged, must by thee in the
mean while be clothed, and fead, and kept within thine own house: an hard
and doubtful kind of war, which never has peace nor truice, where under
thyue ensign, the enemies army possesses thy walls.


Joy. I have many servants.


Reason. Where many servants are, there is much strife, much discord, and
many domestical conflictes, whereof either thou must be a shameful beholder, or
a painful appeaser, and being an indifferent person between the playntifes and
defendantes, thou must serve them, being of their master, become their judge.


Joy. I have many servants.


Reason. A servant is a most curious beast to enquire, and most negligent to
obey. He will know what thou dooest, and what thou thynkest: and what thou
commaundest, he will not understand.


Joy. I keep many servants.


Reason. A few will do a man more service then many, whether it be that
grateful diligence auoydeth the multitude, or else that whereas many be, one
looks upon another, and they pinch courtesy who shall go about the business.
For as it is a shame to the diligent to avoid labor, so is it a glory to the
slothful, which al men know to be true: but none will give counsel to the
contrary, and every man is delyghted with a multitude.


Joy. I have many servants in my house.


Reason. Where many servants are, there is much noyce, and little service, and
no secrecy at al. Look how many servants tongues, so many cryers trumpes:
How many servants ears, and eyes, so many riftes in the house, whereby even
the things that are in the bottom will easily run out. A servants mind is a
broken and leaking king vessel, it holds nothing, what so ever thou pourest
in, it runs out immediately.


Joy. I have many servants at home.


Reason. Thou have many hissings, many viperous tongues, and thou know not
the pleasure of domestical peace: thou have also many wide and capable bellies,
slippery throats, troubles in thy hal, shame to thy bedchamber, destruction to
thy store, and perpetual gurmandize. It is an hard matter to govern a few
servants well, but many, it is impossible.


Joy. I have many servants at home.


Reason. It were better for thee to be alone. There is nothing worse, then when
quantity or number augmenteth the quality of evil things: a few servants are
evil, but many far worse.


Joy. I have many that do serve me.


Reason. It were well if the promise, and the thing promised, were al one. But
how much difference there is between the^, they which have experiment do know.
They promise much, I confess, and call the Gods to witness of their promise,
that they will never deceive, or be untrue. But if a man require the
perfourmance of the promise, he shall find none at all. Promise and faith were
sufficiently performed, if they did not abuse or deceive these whom they have
promised faithfully to serve and obey: but they count it sufficient to have
made such promise only. Add this moreover, that besides their promise of
service, they profess also knowledge in all things, but when it comes to
trial, they know very little or nothing, and they will be sure to do nothing but
what their belly, sleep, and lust persuades them. There is nothing more
humble and lowly then these at their first entrance, and nothing more insolent
or unfaithful then their continuance, and nothing more odious and hateful at
their departure. It is an hard thing to think, I say not to suffer, with what
pride and insolency these servants, and seruyng men, will walk by the
masters of houses, and promysyng their service, will take maistershyp and
government upon them, and as though they were hired to make wast, they do not
only devour al, but dispearse abroad and consume, and fyl their bellies with
their gifts, being prodigal of other men's goods, and most greedy to catch
that which is not their own: Whom if at any time shame or necessity bring
them to their own consyderation, that they remember them selves to be
servants, with what pride, with what complaynyng, and with what grudging they
do their service, who is he that knows not? That a man would be loath, not
only to give money for such service, but to have it for nothing. And to be
short, such hatred and enmity as they have privily conceived at home, as soon
as ever the^ be out of the doors, they fall to open contention and raylyng
with their tongues against their masters whom they hate, ready to try the
matter with them by dint of sword, if it were lawful. And if perhaps any of
them absteyne from reprocheful words, not the love of the first master, but
the fear of the next master, woorketh that effect: unto whom in this respect
he fears to be discredited and suspected, while he may judge the like evil
cond^^^^^^ (...) ^ym, toward him self. By means (...) which things,
vnles^^ (...) blinded their eyes, men might evidently perceive, how m^^ (...)
^^ter it were to be without al such servants and service. (...) have servants
round about me.


Reason. Under the (...) servants indeed, as I have said, most cruel and
wicked em^^ (...) are contained, and yet pride will not suffer you to live
without th^^ (...)* And in this point, as in many other, poor wretches, ye
(...) in your own harm. In this respect ye chiefly (...) for this ye wander
by Sea and land, for this ye^^ (...) ^^ther, and cast abr^de gold, to the
end that the hand of your enemies may grow every day greater and stronger.
B^^ (...) is it not so? Is not the company of the rych generally of (...)
^^ther opinion? Many times a man shall see a well goue^^^d family of a
reasonable calling, to be inferior unto the most (...) and gorgeous Courts of
the Persians and Lydians almost (...) none other thing, yea rather far to
surpass them in most (...) ^^tere, saving that those Courts do feed more,
and more (...) ^^ly.


Joy. I have a great troop of servants way^ing vp^on me.


Reason. Nay rather vrgyng thee, and treadyng thee under foot, and leadyng
thee bound in ratlyng chains, so (...) may well be said to thee: What have
thou done, wre^^ (...) thou should need so many keepers to guard ^hee.


Joy (...) servants guard ^^e on every side.


Reason Thou have (...) of flight, and therefore not of escaping with life. To
(...) ^ernly delighted with a man's own harm, is a point of desperate madness.
And therefore in this respect poverty is to be wyshed and loved, in that it
delivers a man from all the discommodities which riches do bring, but
specially from the crafts and weerisomenesse of servants.


Of the magnificencie, and beautifulness of houses. The.xxxiiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a gorgeous House.


Reason. What shall I say other then that saying of Tullie: The house is to be
furnished with dignity, and not altogether to be sought of the house: neither
o^^ch^^^^ ^^^ner seek credit by the house, but the house by the (...).


Joy. I have ag^^o^y house.


Reason. Why art (...) ^^oud thereof? It is the workemans praise, and not
thine. (...) I dwell in a most beautiful house.


Reason. Where (...) may lie hyd, where thou may wander, where thy ser^^^^es
may riot, where the people may tarry, where the Para^^^^ may hunger, a wide
place capable of much weerysomnes. (...) I dwell in a great house.


Reason. Of cities and hou^^^ (...) like, for he that dwells in a wide place,
dwel^^ (...) ^^or to the happy life, it skilleth not how wide, but (...)
meeryly thou lyuest. Oftentimes in Kings Palaces dwell ^^^^^e and grief: and
in poor men's cottages quietness and (...) the largeness and beauty of the
house were the chief^^ ^utter, the art of buylding were the most worthy art of
al o^^*


Joy. I dwell in a princely house.


Reason. As though (...) place could drive away cares and sicknesses: or that
death (...) ^^th a Ladder to climb up to the tops of Towers? Did (...)
^^ullus Hosti^ius abide in his Court, when he was stricken (...) ^^ghtning f^^^
heaven? And was not also Targuimus (...) in his Court, when he was slain? To
be brief, Targui^^^ ^^^perbus was also in his court, when he was driven out of
(...) ^^ngdome. There is no place inaccessible to dangers, and no (...) ^^ut
against death.


Joy. My dwelling is mine own (...).


Reason. Nay thou have but a short time of dwel^^ ^^e, the day of thy departing
is at hand: thou imaginest thy self to be a Citizen, and thou art but a
stranger, and dwell but for a rent: There will come one that will thrust thee
naked out of doors.


Joy. I have a gorgeous and beautiful house.


Reason. When thou art departed from hence, thou shall have a dark and narrow
one: but if thou do uprightly consider of thy house, it is but obscure and
narowe, and decaying, and every day worse able then other to stand upright,
continually failing and foreshewing it own fall: which neither is far of from
utter ruin, neither can delight a valiant tenant as an house, but grieve him as
a prison, where he w^^^ ^e loath to stay, but desirous to be discharged. Go
(...) ^^^yes ^owe, and vaunt of other men's houses, or of thine own prison.


Of strong defenced Castles. The xxxv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Dwell in a most strong Castle.


Reason. There is some commodity in houses, but much more evil in Castles.
Houses defend men from heat, and wind, and rain: but these cast storms of
carfulness into the minds of the possessours, and bring cares and dread to
his political security.


Joy. I have a Fortress enclosed with very strong walls.


Reason. Have thou forgotten the Spartane saying: who to his fr^^nde that
showed him the walls of his country, answered: If you have made these for
women, it is well: but if for men, it is shameful.


Joy, I have a most strong hold.


Reason. What other thing was it then your impaciencie, and your pride, and
covetousness that made you have need of Castles? How much better were it to
live indifferently with men, and to live upon the plain and tylled land in
quietness, and there to take the pleasant sleep, then to enclose thy self
within rough and craggy rocks, houlyng with nightly watches, and through thine
own misery to make thyselfe suspected, and hated of al men? Have thou
forgotten what Publicola did: who although he were one of the chief of those
that delivered the City of Rome from subjection to the kings, perceiving
nevertheless that the people suspected him by reason of the situation of his
house, to the end he might discharge him self of that false suspicion, he
plucked his house down from the hill.


Joy. I have an impregnable Castle.


Reason. Have thou not heard the old proverb: There is no place so
impregnable, into which an Ass laden with gold can not enter? A strong Castle
provoke, not hyndreth besieging. The Castle Tarpeian resisted a while the
insult of the Senones, and so did Tarentine of the Carthagiens, until in due
time they were both succored. Camilius relieved this last, and the other
Fabius. But was Hannibal able to defend both Castles of Locris: No truly, nor
Ilion it self, nor Byrsa could be defended, nor Corinth, which of ancient
time had the f^^^^^f ^^egnable, notwithstanding Mumius the conquere^ (...) Was
not the Castle Praenestine, a more strong and better fortified then which I
know not whether ever there were any, about threescore and ten years since, by
that great enemy, because he could not by force, yet by flattery and false
promises, taken and rased, which at length rose up again, being shaken and
weakened, as it were, by a long continual fever? To be short, there is nothing
invincible, nothing safe against the craft of man.


Joy. Lying in a most strong Castle, I fear nothing.


Reason. Castles have given cause unto many of hurtful boldness. Many that
might have lived safely in peace without Castles, have committed them selves to
the defense of Fortresses, and perished in them, to the end their boldness
might there especially be tamed, where it first began, men's minds ought not to
be provoked to adventures, but rather to be brydled. All deep security is
folly, unless it be concerning God.


Joy. I dwell in a most sure defenced Castle.


Reason. Admit thy Castle be somewhat, yet what is it other then a certain
refuge, and a dishonorable place of lurkyng to abide besieging, which as
Liuius says, is in war a most miserable thing. When did thou ever hear,
either that Julius Caesar at any time, or both the Africanes, or Pompeius
Magnus, or Marius, or Alexander, or Pirhus, or Hannibal, or any other princes
of great fame, enclosed them selves within Castles, or rather did not insult
over Castles: Understand this much, that Castles are not the receptacles of
valiant men, but the hiding places of dastardes. Sthephanus Columnensis, a man
in this our age equal to the best of all ages, when a certain Noble man, a
stranger unto him and unknown, being moved with the fame of his excellency,
came to aid him, and as it chanced were upon a certain day in a grievous
and doubtful conflict, compassed with a great band of enemies: This strange
Gentleman perceiving the danger, drew near, and, O Stephan, says he, where
is thy Castle: He smylyng, as not having any house of his own in Rome, and
laying his hand upon his breast, This, says he, is my Castle: truly a speech
most worthy of him that spoke it. And in deed so the case stands, holy and
devout persons, put al their trust in GOD: vpryght and polytike men, in virtue:
valiant and warlyke men, in arms: cowardes and fearefulmen, in walls and
castles.


Of precious household stuff. The xxxvi. Dialogue.
JOY. IN my great house I have excellent furniture.


Reason. In superfluous roomth, an unprofitable weight: The one mininistreth
lurkyng for the eues, the other preye: but both of them danger for thee, and
nooryshment for burning and malice.


Joy. In my wide house, I have plenty of household.


Reason. The one of these thou must forsake when thou changest place, and if
thou wylt enjoy the other, thou must often remove it: which will bring more
trouble then pleasure, and more burden then honor.


Joy. I have great store of all manner of furniture at home in my house.


Reason. A continual war, not with thieves only, but with Myse and Moathes:
Spiders also, and rust, and smoke, and dust, and rain, do continually fight
against ye. Oh ye delicate rych men, with what weapons will ye drive away these
enemies?


Joy. My household stuff is most precious.


Reason. Not the value, but contempt of the thing, makes a rych man: otherwise
desire grows by seeking, and poverty by desiring: so that nothing makes a
man poorer, then the riches of a covetous person, which if they were rightly
wayed, and contempt proceeding from an indifferent mind ensued, that were the
true way of riches. I will never count thee wise, while thou art in love with
such follies, no if I saw thy house were covered, and thy furniture al beset
and glitteryng with gold and precious stones.


Joy. My furniture is so brave, that it is envied at.


Reason. Perhaps it is so in the sight of the eye, or persuasion of the mind,
but in very deed it is a burdensome and troublous heap of pelf: but there is
nothing more hungry and miserable, then covetousness, whose greediness is
provoked by the things that are sought, and yet when they be obtained, they
have no taste: forasmuch as while they are hoped for, they shine, and while
they are possessed, they wax vile: so that while many a man thinks he has
won wealth, he has gained but sorrow and carfulness. These are thy dear
burdens: but if thou chance to behold any dearer and more precious, or daily
beholding them take away thy wondering, thou wylt not esteem them. But admit
thou love them still, and thy wondering at them do continue: does there not also
withal a difficult and perpetual error remain? For in getting there is but
one care, but many toils in keeping: thou shall have something always to look
to, to number, to fold, to beat, to brushe, and something also that shall
please and displease thine eyes.


Joy. I have great plenty of household stuff.


Reason. O foolyshe man, that art delighted with the greatness of thine own
impedimentes.


Of Precious stones and Pearls. The.xxxvii. Dialogue.
JOY. THE glittering and beauty of precious stones delight me.


Reason. I confess, this is not the least part of terrestrial and mortal
vanity, of them that do enclose large patrimonies within a little stone: whose
price is unstable, and uncertain, and changes every day, in that it depends
only on the fame of the buyers, and light belief of the mad richer sort: so
that some that have lain long time neglected, suddenly rise to great prices:
and some that have been of great value, soddenly fall to be of no estimation: I
know not upon what marks appearing, not so much in the things themselves,
as in the opinion of such as have skill in them. A worthy knowledge truly,
which neglecting the woorshipping of GOD, the care of the mind, and the
knowledge of them both, gives it self only to the searchyng out of veins of
stones. But this is the world: And this is not the first time that they are
much accounted that craftily make prices of them: as for the true prices,
there are none at all, or not known. But how dangerous this vanity is, and
how doubtful and uncertain the judgment, it may appear who so calls to
mind that which chanced of late, how that when as that Gentleman of greater
fortune then wisdom, had bought a little stone, which was a carbuncie, for ten
thousand crowns: he said oftentimes, how that the exceeding brightness and
beauty, surpassing all common and natural stones, brought him in suspicion of
the rightnesse thereof, and for that cause he showed it unto a very cunning
Lapidarie, to have his opinion therein: Who answered, that in deed it was no
true stone, but rather glass, or some such like kind of stuff: not
natural, but devised by some supernatural and wonderful art. Which doubt
of this Gentleman's, what was it other then a confessyng that the same glass
was more beautiful then any stone, although perhaps the stone be harder:
Notwithstanding let them judge hereof, who cast away they money in this kind
of gain, which they might convert to more hon^st uses, or misspende their time
in this kind of knowledge, which they might employ in better studies. And if
this doubting were just, and upon good cause, who sees not what ambition, and
how much blindness there is in them which pay so decre for a thing, not in
respect of the form and substance, but of the bare name only.


Joy. There is nothing that I hold more dear, then precious stones.


Reason. Truly I believe thee: Not virtue, not thine estimation, not thy
country, not thy life it self. And to say nothing of those two things which
you make account of, as nothing more vile: the two last things, and therewith
also great riches, and whatsoever else ye esteem most precious, I will prove
that they have given place to the price and love of a precious stone, and that
the keeping thereof has been preferred before exile and poverty: yea and if
need had so required, before death also. Who knows not of Nonius practice in
the like case? This Nonius was a Senator of Rome, and a very rich Gentleman,
and had a precious stone esteemed as twenty thousand crowns, and the stones
name was Opalus. It grows in India, glisteryng with variety of all colors.
Now Antonius the Triumuir, being provoked and set on fire with the desire of
this jewel, as a man of all other most proud and covetous, and unto whom
whatsoever nature made desired, fortune made lawful, conceived (as it fortuned)
a mortal hatred of ye owner, with an unlawful desire of the stone: Whereby it
came to pass, that in that general heateof proscription and banishment,
wherein so many lights of the common wealth perished, that Nonius name also
was published among the residue: which whether it were for this crime, that he
possessed a thing that was precious, and very well liked of the tyrant, it is
not certainly known: But he, as one that took example of the Tiber of Pontus,
to the intent he might redeem his liberty, by the loss of his hurtful
burden, and provide for his safety, which was more dear unto him, then his
present danger, he took that with him, and so departed: persuading him self,
that if he had that with him, he would take no care for the loss of his living
or country, being ready therewith to go into banishment, to beg, and if
need were, to dye. Who will not think well of that, whereunto a Senator bare
so great affection? And truly one of these twain we must needs grant,
either that the Jewel was of great value, or that the owner was of a hase
mind. But thou look not to know which of these twain I conclude to be
truest. For although the judgment of this and such like, or rather the
infection of them which they leave in the mind, have far and wide infected
the manners of the common multitude: notwithstanding, it behooves great wits,
neither to be delyghted with money, nor any thing else, saving the beauty of
virtue only: unless it be, that through the means of these short pleasures
which delyght the eyes, the mind, being styrred up, be taken with the love
and desire of the eternal beauty, from which fountain it springs
whatsoever is fair.


Joy. I am enticed with the love of excellent precious stones.


Reason. This excellency nature has not made, but opinion only, which among
some has given the cheifest price to the Carbuncle, and among other, to the
Diamoude. That which I reckened first, is the special judgment now a days
among the common Iewellers and Lapidaries. And this last, the opinion of
certain ancient writers, according to whose judgment, the Diamond, which is
not only the most precious of al stones, but of all earthly things, was wont
to be the Jewel and gemme in old time of kings, and not all, but of the
chiefest. But now at this day, forasmuch as there is no encre ase of any thing
so great and so speedy, as of lasciviousness and pride, it grew not only to
be worn by kings, but also to be set upon fingers of the common people. Next
unto this is the Indian and the Arabian Pearl in estimation, and after them
the Smaragde, I know not by what perturbation of order. For if the redness and
palenesse of the first be commendable, why likewise should not the whiteness
and greenenesse of these in like manner should not the whiteness and
greenenesse of these in like manner delight the eye? The Saphyre also may more
justly complain, since there is nothing that the earth brings forth, that
in likeness more resembles the clear heaven. Howbeit, as I have said, it is
the madness of men, and not the nature of the things, that is in price, the
vain follies of the rich, and the fables of idle persons, who would soon
contemn these trifles, if they would busy them selves about more profitable
affairs concerning peace or war.


Joy. The glisteryng precious stones, and pleasant shinyng pearls, do much
move mine affections.


Reason. Move thee, say thou? yea rather they overthrow, tread under
foot, effeminate and make weak the mind. Concerning which matter, if I
should go about to heap up examples, both of men and women, I should not
instruct thee, but weerie thee. I will touch one only, and which is greatest
of all, to the end thou may understand, how dangerous this folly is to
the weaker minds, which has invaded the most high and valiant. Pompeius,
surnamed the great, the most continent of all the Roman captains (I mean of
the latter sort, who, how much they excel the residue in noble exploites, and
valiant deeds, so much they are inferior unto their forefathers in modesty
of manners, and frugalitie of life) when he returned conqueror out of Spain,
from subduing the West parts of the world, and had driven the thieves and
pirates into one place together, to whom the name of Conuenae, meeters
together, was given, which shall last for ever. There upon the Pyrenean
mountains, the sharpness of the place perhaps assisting, and modesty
helping the matter, and abatyng the pride of his age and victory, he set up a
manlyke Trophei, and monument, framed in manner of a counterfeite, of his
natural and rough vizage: being then great in deed and magnificiall, who
although he were but young in years, yet was he old in manners, and ripe in
mind. The same man afterward, when he had taken the Pirates, and vanquished
the East, being then changed, as it were with the alteration of the time and
place, and returnyng another man, from another part of the world, he showed in
triumph not his humility, but his manly countenance, become more effeminate
then before, after a womanishe, or divine manner, not portraited in Brass or
Marble, but adorned with rare and exquisite pearls. This is no small rebuke,
for the pride and spoil of the East, to be laid upon the head of one man, not
without the insultyng of the conquering people, and to the excusing of the
Princes that should ensue. For what should not Rome (being afterward in
slavery under tyrants) suffer, which being free, beheld this so great
insolency, of a most loving citizen. As for the other furnitures of his
triumph, which was more humble or sober, they are not mentioned, neither the
armor and horses of the subdued nations, as the manner was wont to be, nor the
prisoners, charrets, nor other booties: The vilest things which we reave to
have been there, was gold, precious stones, and pearls. Among many other
things, there was a great Guardeuiandes of Chest, wherein was great store of
treasures of all sorts and colors, every one consisting of several kinds,
both cups of gold, and garments, and pictures: Yea, there was among other
things a Moon of massy gold, of a wonderful weight, and beds of gold,
and sundry crowns and gar^andes, beset with great and white pearls. Moreover,
there was a mountain of gold, the form whereof was four square, al beset
with Hearts, and Lions, and figures of sundry beasts, and living creatures:
also with trees, and all kinds of fruits, with glitte^ing pearls coueryng
the golden branches of the trees upon the top of the mountain. Of the same
substance also there was a clock, so cunningly wrought, that the
woorkemanshyp excelled the stuff, which continually moved and turned about,
a right wonderful and strange sight to such as use to admire vain matters.


Joy. With these things I am wonderfully delighted.


Reason. Truly I think it well, and I suppose that thou would gladly have
beholden this Triumph, and more greedily have led it, and most greedyly have
possessed it, whereunto the state of thy passionate mind persuadeth thee. But
believe thou me, these things which do so much delight the sight, are always
hurtful to the body and soul. And a^ for him of whom we speak, there was
nothing that ever did more hurt his triumphant glory, not the Thessalica day,
nor the Egyptian foil. For there he yielded not wholly to fortune, but here he
yielded wholly to vice. There appeared the force, and unfaithfulness of
another: but here his own frailty, and ambition. And therefore there he lost
his power, and his life: but here he impaired the fame of his populare name,
and of his excellent modesty, and his name of Pompeius the Great, which he
had won by his great travel. A strange matter to be told, how that he that
was found to be more victorious against the Spamardes, being a warlyke nation,
then against the dastardly and faintharted Asians: and this the more to be
marueyled at, in that during the time that he aboade in Asia, he remained
perfect and invincible, when as he bare himself most vpryghtly and
abstynently in the Temple of Jerusalem, of all other the most rychest that
ever was. But at the last he was not able to withstand the force of vice,
neither continued he, as before he had always been, a singular and one manner
of man, but being made, as it were, one of many, was so captiuated and cast
down. This was the effect of the glitteryng of the precious stones, of the
beauty of the pearls, and of the weight of the gold, In like conflicte
before Asia had overcome Alexander, but it is small victory to win him that
is overcome by his own vices, and a great matter to overcome the ouercommer of
himself. After whom, there was almost no captain that could govern himself
vpryghtly among the pleasures of Asia, which being transported over into the
country of Latium, did vanquysh you in your own native soil. For if ye will
confess the very truth, when ye had conquered all other nations, your selves
were conquered in the Asiane conquest. Go thy ways now, and make much
account of precious stones, which are friends to the eyes, and enemies to the
mind, and the vanquishers of valiant men.


Joy. I take great pleasure in glitteryng precious stones.


Reason. Some man is delyghted with them that are of sundry colors, and some
with the palenesse of other, so that this appetite is diverse, but the vanity
is one. Thou have heard how that in the judgment of king Pyrrhus, who made
war against the Romans, the Achate was esteemed of all stones the most
precious: And now, as prices of things do alter, it is of the least value,
wherein, as the report goes, were represented the shapes of sundry things,
as of beasts, rivers, forestes, birds, and wild beasts, not framed by the
hand of any woorkeman, but by the industry of nature. In this princely
Jewel, as Solinus terms it, were not engraven, but naturally imprinted the
portraitures of the nine Muses, and Apollo the notable Musician playing in the
midst of them: these spots and marks of the stone so lynked one to
another, that within that space, which was but very little, every Image and
portraiture might be discerned by it own special notes, as they were placed
within the ring, and for farther ornament, the kings name was also thereunto
added. For such things as belong to great personages, are the more esteemed.
But I pray you, what good did this Achate unto him? Did it make him invincible
in battle, or save him from death, or could it deliver him from the
reioycyng of his enemies, or from the stone which the hand of a woman threw
at him? What, I say, auayled it unto Pyrrhus to have had that stone? or what
hindered it Fabritius and Curious that they wanted it, by which two valiant
captains he was vanquished, and driven out of Italy? I dare affirm, that
neither of these twain would so much yield in mind unto him, as to make
exchange of their hard and rough helmet, for his swoorde that was so beset
with gold and precious stones, or for his kingly ring. Thus valiant men
despise all wanton and effeminate things. How should they covet the kings
ring, who only upon the confidence and trust in virtue, contemned the king
himself, his princely riches and kingdom? But you, contrarywyse* by distrust
of mind, wonder at every thing, and covet them* as if they would advance you
^o felicity: and virtue only is contemned. There is also a more ancient
report and fame of another precious stone, wh^che Polycrates king of the Sam^^
possessed: some say is was a Sardonix. That stone, among that most rich
princes treasure, was counted the most precious: and therefore he, as one that
had never in all his life felt a^y adversity, meaning to appease ^he malice of
subtle fortune, which openly flattered him, and privily went about to
overthrow him, took shypping, and launched forth into the deep Sea, and
with his own hand threw in his ring wherein was that rich stone, to the
intent he might once in his life be sorry: persuading himself, that he had
craftily dealt with fortune, if he recompensed so many joyful good turns, with
one sorrowful mischance. But she, as being neither easily deceived nor pleased,
indifferently mingling good with evil, required yet a farther matter, for so
long a time of favor, but a short thing, mary very hard: that he, who in all
his life time seemed to himself and others most fortunate, should at his
death appear and be most miserable, by so many vices and punishments lyghtyng
upon one head: and therefore refusing that which was offered (O the daliance
of fortune) even as though she had sent a fish on message to receive the ring
into his mouth: this fish was taken immediately, and served to his table, and
in him restored his ring unto him, no^ without the woondring of the beholders.
This stone (many hundred years after) Augustus Caesar, as they say, being
moved with the price and strangeness of the thing, caused to be set in a
crown of gold, and dedicated it in the temple of Concord. Here again I
demand, what it auayle^ the tyrant that afflicted his country to have had
this jewel? or hindered Pythagoras to wan^ his country, wherein they were both
borne, and his own house, and his friends, which he forsook upon misliking
of his manners? Forsooth, when by the consent of all men this tyrant was hanged
upon the gallows, and most extremely punyshed, he was yet worthy of greater
torments: But the Philosopher dying in peace, was worshypped for a GOD, and
his house esteemed for a church. This difference there was between the precious
stone of the one, and the cloak of the other. But neither could Polycrates
Sardonix work such effect, that his body should not be consumed by fowls
upon the gallows: Like as also of late days neither could the Carbuncle of
John king of France, which he woore upon his finger, and was found and taken
from him that day, preserve him from the overthrow and falling into his enemies
hands: whose chance it was notwithstanding after certain years to see and
touch it again, being redeemed, as it were, in another world, and sent to
him by a friend, as a thing of inestimable price, but of no more efficacy or
virtue then other stones of that kind are. For, that precious stones are
bright and glysteryng, I do not deny, least I speak against common sense: But
I deny that they be good for any thing, or have any virtue, but that only
which is commonly reported, they can also break up the locks of covetous
rich men, and empty their coffers.


Joy. Precious stones are indifferently efteemed of, and they much delyght my
mind.


Reason. But it is great madness to bestow much care and cost upon things,
which although they seem somewhat, yet in deed are nothing: This is only to
take delyght in the pleasure and deceit of the eyes. Why dooest thou travail
in those things, which do not only not avail to felicity, but they detract
nothing from misery, neither when they be present, nor when they be absent? And
although there be many strange and woonderous matters written by many, which
are not correspondent to a truth, nor profitable to the readers, but only set
down to make them amazed, specially by the Magiciens, who have had so much
leisure that they might fill whole volumes with such triflies. Notwithstanding
in this respect I fully agree with Plinius the second, and I suppose that they
wrote these things not without contempt and laughter at mankind, to the intent
that they might both fyl their foolyshe lyghtnesse of belief with vain
opinions, and delyght them selves with our follies.


Joy. I take pleasure in those precious stones, wherein it is credible that
there is some virtue.


Reason. What virtues those are thou have heard, and if there by any other,
what so ever they be, they be myngled with the lies of Merchantes and writers,
and not so much feygned by industry of Art, as increased and confyrmed by your
assent: which things it were much more better either wisely to reprove, or
valyantly to contempne, then to understand the pryses, virtues, and vices of
al precious stones. But in this one point I disagree from Pliny, most of whose
sayings do much please me: He promyseth to show a mean to find out the
knowledge and craft of counterfaytyng false stones, where he says, It is good
also to enstructe ryotousnesse against deceypt: But in mine opinion,
ryotousnesse ought not to be defended and armed, but to be left alone, and
forsaken, as naked among the armed troops of the subtyle counterfeytours, to
the end, that being oftentimes circumuented and deceived, if by none other
means, it man ^r leastwyse be chastized by (...) ^^^eipt.


Of Cups made of precious Stones. The xxxviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Delyght to drink in precious Stone.


Reason. It is an ancient kind of wantonness and riot, to cause precious
stones to be made hollow for drynkyng Cups, in despite of glass, which
though it be brittle, yet is it a most beautyful and clean substance, and
also of silver and gold, which in times past was wont to be the bttermost
bound of humane couecousnesse. And there was sometime found out whereby riot
might exceed covetousness, which was not counted a sufficient worthy cause
of so great an evil. This the Poet saw, when he said: This man strong cities
does besiege, and houses in distress. A great evil doubtless, not only
contrary to justice, but also to humanity. And to the end thou myghtest know
from whence it springs, he adds, That he might drink out of precious
stone. Behold two causes of civil furies, that whereas a silver chalice had
been sufficient for the divine service, yet a golden one seemed in man's eye
scarce good yenough, unless the danger also enhaunced the price: and precious
stones were cut hollow by foreign woorkmanshyp, in which a poor simple
wretch should drink, and with the greater pleasure apply thereunto his
lyppes, defiled with lies and fylthynesse: being a thing both unhandsome to
drink in, the fear breakyng of the pleasure, and costly by means of the
trimmyng, and also difficult to be preserved, and ieoperdous for health, and
most fyt for poysoynyng. For this saying of an other Poet is true: There is no
poison drunk in earthen pottes. But when thou begynnest to drink in pottes of
precious stone, then be afraid of poysonyng.


Joy. I account it a glorious matter to drink in precious stone.


Reason. While pride aduaunceth her self, she thinks neither upon falling,
nor ruin. Ye be more desirous to drink costly, then safely, more ambitiously,
then saue^ly. Thus vices are overcome with vices, and the taste of the (...)
does not so much solicit^ ^^^^e appetite, as the color of the cup provoke
pride. Ye stand amazed at the beams of precious stones, and this amazyng ye
esteem at the greatest price that may be, not only of money, but of virtue.
Does not this Virgiliane ouerthrower of his country, of whom I speak, seek
for a precious stone of that price, lightly ouerpassyng justice and godliness,
and by loss of them, to gain this, that he might drink in precious stone,
and forget him self to be a Euizen and a man.


Joy. I am desirous to drink in cups of precious stone.


Reason. Perhaps there is some other cause of so fervent desire: For it is not
the glistering only that allureth thee, but some hydden virtue. For who is able
to declare all the operations and virtues of precious stones: Thus I say then,
if al those things that are reported or written of them, the seventh part were
true, it were a worthy matter: but neither the seventy part, neither the
seuenscore is true in deed. And if, as Plinius says, there be no one deceypt
in the life of man more gaynefull, who will ma ruayle if there be none more
plentiful? Not that there is more common sale of precious stones, then of any
other thing, as being such things as the preciousnesse of them makes them
rare, but that the truth is never more rare in any merchandise. For in no ware
is there less liberty of experimentyng, or more liberty of lying, or more
vantage of untrue dealyng, or impudency more free, or the custom of vsyng it
more common. But if perhaps among all these virtues there be any thing true,
shall we account this to be it which the authority of Magiciens confirms,
and the opinion of the common people establyshed upon the same auoweth, that
the Amethist withstandeth drunkenness? Is it then without cause, that this
precious stone is meet to make cups of for drunkenness? Now I jest with
thee: Iestyng many times provoke anger* to wit, in ascribyng that to one,
which another has deserved: unless we will say, that this was the wit and
devise of pleasure, that the drinkers sight might be delited together with his
taste, and so the senses being tickled on al sides, the drunkenness might be
the more curious and merry. This, unless I be deceived, is the truest and most
certain cause of this matter, both in other, and also in this, which is
specially provided as it were a captain against drunkenness, over which
sobriety only may triumph, in using little wine, according to the saying of
that excellent counselor, and that not to be drunk for pleasure, but for
profit, to abando^ the infirmities of the stomach, with a little small wine, I
say, delayed with water, to avoid the force and rage of strong and myghtie
wynes, and to quench and bridle them, as it were with a floodde of water, to
know and remember that in hot and strong wine, and often, or to much
drynkyng of it, there lurketh much matter of shame, sorrow, and repentance,
that whyther soever thou turnest thy self, this is always in men's eyes, and
that no man of a sound mind can dissemble it. These be the profitable weapons
against that Monster. What place is there here now left for the Amethist, or
for any precious stone? The Magiciens have devised that lie, and there have
been some that have believed, that by the virtue of this stone, promysyng the
in sobriety, they might boldly quaffe without fear of drunkenness: Falsely
and impudently affyrmed by the Magiciens, as many things more, and foolyshly
believed of the common people, as al things else. This is therefore the sum of
all, there is nothing else that procures unto you this and such like follies,
but pleasure, provoked and incensed with dangers, but specially pride and
forgetfulness of your state, and an hurtful fear of mind, which being such, as
there is nothing more hurtful to the life of man, so I marueyle that there is
nothing more pleasant, I say not, in that virtue, being so great a good,
seems but vile in your judgment, but your life, your health, your safety,
your riches, and finally your pleasures, which in your judgments are the
chiefest felicity. All these things give place unto pride only, this above
all other things makes you to covet precious stones, which are evermore
unprofitable, many times hurtful, and never necessary. By provocation of pride
it is come to pass, that being always busy and fearful, but delycate, the
floores of your houses be like the Altars of your Churches, golden and
glytteryng with stones, and your purpled and decked sacrifices, are laid out
to the furniture of your covetousness, and curiosity of your wantonness, and
the residue of your bravery to pride, al which vices jointly and severally
reign over you, howbeit, pride, as I have said, claymeth the principality.
Covetousness peradventure, which the name it self imports, might
indifferently content her self with a great portion of gold, and
lasciuiousnes repose her self in her banquettes and pleasures, pride only
never rests, so long as she sees any thing above her, who at the first
beginning of al things, sought to make her self equal with GOD, and the very
same enforces you paynfully to seek for precious stones, and curyously to
join or hollow them, to the intent that when ye gooe abroad, or sytte in
open places in judgment of Courts, or at Feasts, ye may shine and glyster
like Stars, and continually repyne at the beauty of heaven. And to return
to my purpose, by the means of this guide, with your houses, with your
apparel, with your meat and drink, and generally with all your things
which were invented to serve either the necessity or pleasure of mankind, ye
have continually mingled some fair and shyning danger, by encreasyng whereof,
this mischief comes to light, that of precious stones ye now make not only
Pottes, but Basins, and Dyshes, and kettles, and Morters, and almost al manner
of necessaries. Therefore rejoice pride, that thou have gotten the upper hand:
thou requiredst pottes of precious Stone, and thy ministers have prepared for
thee al manner of vessel of the same stuff. And it is now as common a thing to
use precious stones to these purposes, as to plowe land to sow corn in: and
so that is grown among you into a custom, which was lasciviousness among
your Elders.


Joy. I delyght to drink in cups of Crystal.


Reason. Now I spare precious stones, this frosen yse excuses them, which
has in it nothing more then has glass, for it is as soon broken, and cannot
be made whole, saving that it is harder to be gotten, and either it is brought
from far, or if it be found neerehande, it is to be dygged out of the
impassable and frosen rocks and clyftes of the Alps, by hangyng down by a
small rope, and for this cause it is the dearer, and of greater force to
provoke your desire unto it. And therefore, thou read how the Emperor Nero
was stroke with a suddeine report, and how among al his other great losses, he
bewailed most grievously the loss of two crystal cups, which were broken by
chance, or rather, as I think the truth of the story to be otherwise, that
being thoroughly enraged with anger, and offended with the age wherein he lived,
and envying the posterity that should come after, knocked them together, and
brake them with his own hands, that there should never any man drink out of
them more. Behold the expiation of hard fortune, there was never any thing
devised or found out, wherein this master of mischief might more sharply
exercise his cruelty: he wreaked him self upon his Crystal, which above al
things he loved most dearly. Some man will say, that this is an excuse for
meaner men. In deed to imitate a prince it carries some credit, but to
imitate Nero no good man wylbe wylling.


Joy. I take pleasure in vessels of Crystal.


Reason. And percepuest thou not how frail and bryttle thy delyght is? But
this is your manner, ye take pleasure in things of your own nature, and
whereas your weakness ought to seek some firm thing, and your principal
part, which is your soul, to behold, look, and desire high and heavenly
things, on both sides ye seek after weak and base things. It happened well,
that Murrhine stones are not had in price at this day among deynties. The
incredible madness of your ancestors, with the same conquest which brought
in many forraygne things among you, brought in these also, even at that time
when Pompeius tryumphed in Italy, and road so royally into the City of Rome,
brynging in with him out of Asia an unprofitable seed, but which was sown in
a fertyle soil, and by diligent husbandmen: and it grew up so fast in short
time, that a man might see the price of one Murrhine stone to be at seventy
talentes, and how the lyppe of that cup was greedyly bitten away by the
teeth of a certain lover, by means of which strange effect of love, that
blemyshe much commendyng the beauty of the cup, increased both the fame and
price thereof. In this respect therefore, neither your lasciviousness, wherein
ye give place to no age, nor your pride, is less then was your forefathers:
but in respect of both, the matter is diminished, not only by the falling of
the Murrhine stone to serve your turn, but also in that they are not known
unto you: in steed whereof a new kind of riotousnesse has invaded your
minds, the root of the Felberd tree, being a worthy wood, to make cups of,
bravely set forth with knottes and skarres, a special folly which now rests
among the Frenchmen. To this purpose also are there other trees found out,
some foreign, and called by strange names, and some known, some called by
one name, and some by another, but al of like vanity, and there will more be
daily found, and there wylbe no measure of new devises, until the glory of the
Murrhine stones be surpassed by your cups. In this one poyne I confess, ye
have given place to the madness of your ancestors, in that they highly
esteemed of Amber cups, which scrued to no purpose, but only to have them for
wantonness sake, and reckoned them amongst their chiefest delights: insomuch
that it is read, how that Nero himself, not only of al princes, but of all
men the cruellest, by publyshyng of certain verses, adopted unto him self the
yeallowe locks and tresses of his ill belcued, and worse murdered wife, under
this name, and by a special chosen title. For, a woonderous matter to think
it, that cruel disposition of his was friendly to the Muses, in that he called
them his, because they seemed golden. O fierce and unfortunate flatteries, O
comely and commendable head, worthy by some wicked foot to be troade down to
the Devil? How be it you have Ambar cups, and esteem them not, or esteem
them modestly, or regard them sparingly.


Of Engrauinges and seals in precious Stones. The.xxxix. Dialogue.
JOY. I TAKE great pleasure in Engrauynges, and marks in precious Stones.


Reason. I confess how that to the comeliness of nature, a certain ornament
of Art is added, and how stones are engraven with pretty faces and
portraitures in them to seal withal, a kind of skyl truly, which is
reckened among the fynest workemanshyppes of most curious wyts: and among al
stones the Amethist is most easy and fortunat for engrauyng, as it is
reported: and among woorkmen Pyrgoteles first wan to him self the name of a
cunning engrauer, for that among al woorkmen of his scienc, ehe seemed unto
king Alexander most meet to engraue the counterfeit of his phisnomie, which
afterward the Emperor Augustus did wear, when as the precious Stone, which
he before used, was commonly iested at among the people, and termed the
rydlyng Sphinx, so that besides the difficulties of the exactions, the very
perplexity and doubtfulnesse of the seal, seemed to purchase hatred to the
most modest Prince. Next unto this man both in skyl and age, were Apollonides
and Eronius. After whom was Dioscores, of great name in this Art, whose work
when Pliny did set down, I marueyle that he expressed not also his name. This
is he that engraued the counterfayte of the Emperor Augustus, which he used
him self so long as he lived, and after him many of the Emperors, such
reverence they hare either to the countenance of so good a Prince, or woondred
at the skyl of so cunnyng a woorkeman. But now that we have discoursed thus
much of precious stones, which either nature has yielded whole and sound
for your pleasures, or art has made hollow and engraven for your delight, I
demand of thee this question, how much more ought the brightness of heaven,
which is to be gotten without cost or pain, delight thy mind? And not that so
much, as he, who is the spring and fountain of that light? Do the radiant
Carbuncles, the green Smaragdes, the bright Sapphires, the white pearls, so
much allure thee, that neither the brightness of the Sun and Stars, nor
the greenness of the earth and trees, nor the pureness of the air and sky
in the clear morning, can move thy mind? Ye stand am^z^d at the beholding of
faces which the hand of man has engraven in stones, but ye wonder not at the
cunning of that workman, neither do ye honor him, ne there do ye acknowledge
him, although ye have so many and so excellent means so to do, who has made
these precious stones, and the cunning, and the hands, and the eyes wherewith to
behold them, to understand them, and to make them. O ye, that are evermore the
imitatours of vile things, and always the contemners of worthy and excellent
things.


Of Pictures, and painted Tables. The.xl. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am delighted with pictures, and painted tables.


Reason. A vain delight, and no less folly then has reigned sometime in
great personages, and no deal more tolerable then it has been in old time.
For every evil example is then worst, when as either the weight of authority,
or of years is joined unto it. The force of custom is great from whence
soever it took beginning, and age as it aduaunceth good things to better, so
does it cast down evil things to worse. But O, I would God, that ye that do
far surpass your auncetours in vain things, would match them in earnest
matters, and with them would esteem of glory and virtue, with whom ye stand
fondly gazing at Pictures without end.


Joy. Truly I am woonderfully delighted with painted tables.


Reason. O wonderful madness of man's mind, which woondreth at every thing,
saving it self, since there is nothing not only among all the works of art,
but also of nature, more wonderful?


Joy. Painted tables delight me.


Reason. What mine opinion is herein, thou may perceive in that which I
have said before. All earthly delyghtes, if they were governed by discretion,
would stir men up to the heavenly love, and put them in mind of their first
original. For, I pray thee, who ever loved a river, and hated the head thereof?
But you weltring heavily upon the ground, stouping, and as it were fastened to
the earth, dare not look vpwardes toward heaven, and forgettyng the chief
woorkeman, with marvelous pleasure ye behold the slender pictures of the
Sun and Moon, and determine where the passage is to the highest places, but
there ye end the bounds of your understanding.


Joy. I am specially delyghted with painted tables, and Pictures.


Reason. Thou conceiuest delight in the pencill and colors, wherein the price,
and cunning, and variety, and curious dispersing, does please thine eye: even
so likewise the lively gestures of lyuelesse pictures, and the immovable
motions of dead images, and countenaunces coming out of poastes, and lively
portraitures of faces, do bring thee into woondring, insom^ch as thou will
almost think they would speak unto thee: and this is the only danger in this
behalf, in that many great wits have been overtaken by these means. So
that, whereas the clown and unskillful person will with small woondryng pass
them over: the wyser will repose him self with sighing and woondring. A
cunning matter truly, howbeit it is not possible from the beginning to unfold
the first original and increase of this art, and the wonderfulnesse of the
works, and the industry of the woorkemen, the madness of princes, and the
unreasonable prices wherewith these have been bought and brought from beyond
the seas, and placed at Rome, either in the Temples of the Gods, or in the
bed chambers of the Emperors, or in the common streets, or public porches
and galleries. Neither was this sufficient, but that they must also apply their
own right hands, which of duty ought to have been busied about greater
affairs, unto the exercise of this art, which the most noble Philosophers of
all Greece had done before: Whereby it came to pass, that among you the art
of paintyng was esteemed above all handie crafts, as a thing more near to the
work of nature: And among the Grecians, if ye will believe Pliny, it was
accounted among the chiefee of the Liberal Arts. But I let pass these
things, for that they are in a manner contrary to mine intended brevity, and
present purpose: and may seem rather to minister infected humors to the
sickness, whose cure I promised to undertake, and by the excellency of the
things, to excuse the madness of the woonderers at them. Howbeit I said yer
while, that the greatness of them that did err, made not the error the
less: but I touched that point the rather to this intent, that it might
appear how great the force of that folly was, with which so many and so great
wits have conspired, unto which also the prince of error the common
multitude, and long continuance, which is the engenderer of customs, and
acutoritie, which is a great heap of all mischiefs, are joined: so that the
pleasure and admiration thereof, is able privily to remove and withdraw the
mind from contemplation of higher matters. But if these things that are
counterfeited and shadowed with vain colors do so much delyght thee, cast
up thine eyes upon him that has adorned man's face with senses, his mind with
understanding, the heaven with stars, the earth with flowers, and so shall
thou contemn those woorkemen whom thou woondredst at.


Of Statues and Images. The.xli. Dialogue.
JOY. BUt I take great pleasure in Images.


Reason. These be sundry arts, but the madness is one, and there is but one
beginning of them both, and one end, but diverse matter.


Joy. I delyght in statues.


Reason. These come in show more near unto nature, then pictures: For they do
but appear only, but these are felt to be sound and substantial, and there
their bodies are more durable: Which is the cause that there remain to this
day in no place any pictures of men of ancient times, but statues innumerable:
Whereby this age in this point, as in many things else erroneous, would seem
to have been the first inuenter of pictures: or whether that because it
alleges that it has devised somewhat which comes near to the first
invention thereof, being perfect and excellent in it, and in all kinds of
engrauing, and dare boldly and impudently affirm, though falsely, that it is
not inferior to any, in grauing and caruing all sorts of seals and statues:
seeing in very dtede they be almost al one art, or if they be diverse, they
sprang both from one fountain, to wit, the art of drawing, and doubtless are
of one antiquity, and flourished at one time. For why, Apelles, and
Pyrgoteles, and Lysippus, lived at one time, which may by this means be
proved, in that the great pride of Alexander of Macedonie, chose these three
together above the rest, whereof the one should paint him, the other engraue
him, and the third carue him: strayghtly forbiddyng all other, upon
whatsoever cunnyng or assurance of skyll presumyng, to meddle with expressyng
the kings face any manner of way: and yet was not this madness less then the
residue. But every disease is so much the more dangerous, how much more
stable and fixed the matter is whereof it proceeds.


Joy. But I am delyghted in Images.


Reason. Think not that thou errest alone, or that thou have no fellows but
the common people: For in times past how great the dignity has been of
statues and images, and how fervent the study and desire of men was reposed
in such pleasures, the most diligent inquiry of Augustus and Vaspasian, and
other Emperors, and Kings, of whom it were impertinent and too long to
entreat, and also of other noble personages of the second degree, and
industrious keepyng of them when they had found them, and their sundry
dedicatyng and bestowing them, may sufficiently declare. Hereunto also may be
added, the great fame of the workmen, not rashly spread abroad by the common
people, or reported upon dumb works, but celebrated in the soundyng books of
learned and approved writers: which being so great, seems in no wise to be
able to spryng from a small root. A great name comes not of nothing, it must
be great in deed, or seem to be so, whereof great men do seriously entreat.
But all these things I have answered before, and tend to this purpose, that
thou may understand with what force so ancient and stout an error must be
resisted.


Joy. I conceive pleasure in sundry statues and images.


Reason. There is one of these arts, which by the handy work does imitate
nature, men commonly call it framyng and fashionyng. This art woorketh with
wax, plaster of Paris, and cleaving claye, which although among all the
other arts that have affinity with it, it be more freendly, and come nearest
to virtue, or is less enemy to modesty and thriftinesse, which two virtues
do more allow of imagies and statues of Gods and men to be made of earth,
and such like matter, then of gold and precious stone: Yet what delyght there
is to be conceived in looking upon faces made of wax or earth, I do not
understand.


Joy. I take delyght in noble statues and images.


Reason. I know the meaning of covetousness: it is the price, as I suppose,
and not the art that pleases thee. I am sure thou do in mind esteem one
image of gold of mean woorkemanshyp, above many made of brass, and marble,
and specially of clay or other cast stuff, and not unwisely, as the present
valuation of things now adays requires: and this is as much to say, as to
love the gold, and not the statue, which as it may be made noble of a vile
matter, so may it be made rude of pure gold. How much would thou esteem
of an image, whether it were the kings of Assyria, which was made of gold
threescore cubits long, which it was death not to adore, although there be
many at this day that would adore it to have it of their own, or whether it
were made of a great Topace of four cubits long, of which thou read that
the Queen of Egypts image was made? a strange thing to be spoken, I suppose
thou would not very much enquire after the woorkeman that made it, but
rather after the matter that it is made of.


Joy. Images and statues cunningly wrought, delight mine eyes.


Reason. Images and statues sometime were the tokens of virtues, but now they be
enticementes of the eyes. They were erected in the honor and remembrance of
such as had atchiued worthy deeds, or voluntarily yielded them selves up
unto death from their common wealth: Such as were decreed to be set up in
honor of the Ambassadors that were slain by the king of the Vet^i: such as
were erected in the honor of Scipio Africane, the deliverer of Italye, which
his most valiant courage, and worthy modesty would not receive, but which
after his death he could not refuse. They were erected in the honor of wise
and learned men, the like whereof we read was erected unto Victorinus: and now
adays they are erected unto rich Merchantes, wrought of outlandish Marble, of
great value.


Joy. Statues artificially wrought do much delight me.


Reason. Every kind of stuff almost will admit cunning woorkmanship: but I
perceive how this thy delight is full of wisdom, and joined with the most noble
matter. Howbeit I can not perceive how there should be any pleasure in the
gold, no although it were wrought by Phidias, or what worthiness there
should be in it, being but a dross of yt earth, although it be yelow, but by
means of the Anduil, hammers, tongues, coals, invention, handy labor. What
thing may be wrought that is to be wished of a man, or has in deed any
magnificencie in it, consider with thee self.


Joy. I can not chose but take great pleasure in images.


Reason. To take pleasure in the witty devises of men, so it be modestly done,
is tolerable, and specially of such as excel in wit: For unless malice be an
hinderaunce, every man does willingly reverence that in another, which he
loves in him self. To take delight also in the images and statues of godly
and virtuous men, the beholding of which may stir us up to have remembrance
of their manners and lives, is reasonable, and may profit us in imitating ye
same. Profane images also, although sometime they move the nunde, and stir it
up to virtue, whilst lukewarm minds do wax hot with the remembrance of
noble deeds, yet ought they not to be loved or esteemed of above reason and
duty, lest they become either witnesses of our foslie, or ministers of our
covetousness, or rebellious to our faith and true religion, and that most
excellent commandment of the Apostle, Keep your selves from Images. But
truly, if thou behold him in thy contemplation, who created the fixed earth,
the moveable sea, and turnyng heaven, who also has replenished the earth, not
with feigned and counterfeite, but with true and living men and beasts, the
sea with fishes, the heaven with fowls, I suppose that thou wylt as little
esteem of Polycletus and Phidias, as of Protegenes and Apelles.


Of vessels of Corinthe. The.xlii. Dialogue.
JOY. WHO will not be moved with delyght unto Corinthian vessels?


Reason. Earthly things can not move him that is accustomed to heavenly: and
even so, if these vessels be compared with the heavenly treasures, they be
small, they be nothing, they be but loathsomnes, and an heavy burden. For how
can the mind, which thinks upon it own beginning, gape into the pittes of
earth, or esteem of that which is dug out of them, while he beholds the
Heavens, the Sun, the Stars, and himself, and is busied in the
contemplation of the most high creator of all things.


Joy. I take pleasure in Corinthian vessels.


Reason. Know thou not then, that thou take pleasure not only in a cold
and senseles burden of the earth, but also in the woorkemanshyp of a smutchie
and filthy woorkeman, and lasty, in the remnauntes and relics of the Roman
spoils? Return to histories. When Mummius had by fine force taken the City
of Corinth, and after the spoil consumed it with fire, al manner of images, as
well of gold, and silver, as of brass, whatsoever by chance had escaped the
hands of the conquerours, whereof that City in old time had great plenty,
were with like fire molten together: all kinds of mettalles ran there
flowing, as it were, in one channel, and by that means of al those mettalles,
there arose one most noble metal, which was the beginning of these most
p^ecious vessels: and from the destruction of the City, sprang forth the name
of lasciviousness, not that the same madness arose in that City which now
was falling, but the matter only was prepared for the madness that should
follow hereafter, And by this means, Corinth was at that time the beginner of
this madness, which now comes from Damascus: and from thence at this day are
vessels sent, which will soon rauishe both your eyes and minds.


Joy. I am delyghted in Corinthian vessels.


Reason. I should marvel the more at thee, unless it were read in excellent
good writers, how that Augustus the Emperor, although he were a most modest
and grave prince, yet was he notwithstanding so invaded, and driven headlong
with this delyght, that he was thought to have condemned certain in the
Triumuiral proscription for none other cause then the desire of such vessels:
insomuche as there was an infamous libel fastened upon the statue of this
worthy Prince, to his perpetual ignominy, wherein he was termed a
Corinthiarian. And if ye will believe me, there was but small difference in
this respect, between this most excellent Prince, and the vilest that ever
was, Antonius, saving that a less cause moved Augustus to do an injury: and
every offense is the more grievous, the greater the person is that offends,
and the less cause he has to offend: Neither can the greatness and power of
the offender escape the wounds of tongues and pens, or exempt them out of
the judgments of men: but rather they do sharpen them, and provoke them to
farther revenge. The pratlyng multitude spares not the blemishes of kings,
and although they fear them in presence, yet privily they use their liberty,
they hiss in dens, and bark in darkness, and send forth doubtful
voices to the clouds: they disperse sharp verses in the streets, they clappe
up papers upon statues, they speak by signs, they cry out in silence, they
threaten with their eyes, and strike with their tongues. Thus oftentimes great
infamy grows upon small causes, and vile dye terms, upon honorable
names. If this could happen to so great a Prince, what may private men hope
for, who ought to embrace mediocritie, and abandon superfluitle?


Joy. I take pleasure in vessels of Corinth.


Reason. If thy breast were shut up against error, and thine eyes against
bryghtnesse, it might easily appear unto thee, how much Potters vessels are
to be preferred before Corinthian, and how much more easy to be gotten,
pleasant to be used, safe to be kept, and fyt to be employed, both about divine
and humane uses. And truly as touching security, if this note of the Emperor
Augustus be true, they which were proscribed and condemned, should have lived
in greater safety, if they had been without Corinthian vessels. And as
touching divine service, that God is as mercyful unto men when he is worshypped
with potters vessels, it is not doubtful unto me, nor unto Seneca. But
concerning humane use, although it be certain that Tuberoes earchen vessels by
blind voices or scrutinie did hurt their master, as a great rebuke and
slander among the people, and thereby he had repulse in the Pretorshyp, and in
the judgment of Valerius Maximus, who does popularly excuse this deed of the
people, they seemed unworthy of such a public function: How be it, I am of
opinion in this point with Seneca, who commends very much of them: for they
are most agreeable to the ancient sparyngnesse, and the manners of the Romans,
by which as the pryuate family of a modest householder, so ought also the
honest common wealth of a well governed City to be guyded, that brydlyng their
steps, they may keep the bounds of a well ordered and peaceable state upon
the earth. And therefore if Helius Tubero in brynging forth his earthen
vessels before the Chapel of Jupiter, whereby he consecrated his frugalitie
and sobriety, and as Seneca says, His poverty in the Capitol, did offend
the eyes of the wanton people, it was not the fault of the good Citizen, but of
the time: for then al things began to declyne from the ancient
strayghtnesse, to this effeminate delicateness, which first began to wonder
at, and fall in love with cups and dyshes of gold, and of precious stone,
platters engraven about the brym with branches and ^oures, Saltes with knottes
and vynes round about, vessels with tunnyng Iuie, and such like devises,
which Galienus the Emperor sent unto Claudius that should be Emperor after
him. Diverse other kinds of madness also which are attributed to
magnificencie, but last of al now in these days, not only running yuie, or
vine branches, or other curious branches, but also the whole woods
themselves, with their in habitantes, as all kinds of trees, and wild
beasts, and fowls, and men's faces, and whatsoever the eye has seen, or the
ear heard, or the mind imagined, are of long continuance now expressed and
engraven in gold and precious stone, of which we have entreated a little before.
To be short, pride so much increases, that gold waxes vile. Not long since
these Corinthian vessels, which thou praysest, were not regarded, and contempt,
which might have been praised concerning the true estimation of vile things, is
now made discommendable by the false admiration of worthy things.


Joy. But I am now in love with Corinthian vessels.


Reason. Corinth which was burned with your fyrebrands, has brent you again
with her flan^e, and has revenged the rasing of her walls upon your minds:
And this is no strange thing, for oftentimes when ye have been the conquerers in
foreign wars, ye have also ben overcome by foreign vices. Even after this
manner Scipio Asiaticus, and Manilius Volsio, ye conquerers of Asia, did
overthrow you with the Asian pleasures, with beds of purple, and garments of
gold, and exquisite furniture for household, and, which is most vile, with
banquets and cooks: so did Pompeius Magnus overcome you with pearls and
precious stones, and Mummius with painted tables and Corinthian vessels, while
your captains triumphed over your enemies, and your enemies triumphed over
your affections.


Joy. I am enamored with the use of Corinthian vessels.


Reason. The Corinthian or golden vessels make the meat never a whit the
better, neither the Samian the worse: for this desire of yours rises, not from
the quality of the things, but from the sickness of your minds, or rather is
it self a sickness of the mind: which to the end thou may the better cure,
and so wax whole, in steed of the care for so many unprofitable vessels, take
one most profitable and wholesome care upon thee, that ^hou may know how to
possess thine own vessel in honor, and holiness, as it is written, and not
in the passion and desire of having.


Of store of Books. The.xliii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have great store of books.


Reason. The occasion to speak of them, is ministered in convenient time: For
as some get books for learning sake, so do some others for pleasure and
boastyng. There be other some also which do furnish their chambers with this
kind of stuff, which was invented to furnish the mind withal, and use them in
none other sort then they do their Corinthian vessels, or their painted tables,
and images, and such other like, whereof we entreated last. There be some also
which, under the color of books, do satisfy their covetousness: these be
the worst sort of men, which esteem not the true prices of books, and as they
are in deed, but as they may sell them. A vile plague, and lately grown, and
which seems but newly to have crept in among the practices of the richer
sort, whereby there is grown one instrument and art of concupiscence more.


Joy. I have great plenty of books.


Reason. A painful, but a pleasant burden, and a delectable distraction of the
mind.


Joy. I have a marvelous multitude of books.


Reason. Thou have therewithal also great plenty of traueyl, and scarcity of
quietness: thy wit must be busied this way, and that way, and thy memory be
troubled with this matter, and that matter. What would thou have me say?
Books have brought some men to knowledge, and some to madness, whilst they draw
out of them more then they can digest. As fulness sometime hurts the stomach
more then hunger, so fares it with wits: and as of meats, so likewise of
books, the use ought to be limited according to the quality of him that
uses the^. In all things, that which is to little for one, is to much for
another. And therefore a wise man seeks not plenty, but sufficiency in all
things. For the one of these, is many times hurtful, the other, always
profitable.


Joy. I have immoderate store of books.


Reason. We call that immoderate, which has neither end nor measure, without
which, what there is good and agreeable to it self in humane affairs, do thou
consider with thy self, yea, in those things which are accounted best,
unmeasurableness and immoderatnesse is to be eschewed, and this saying of the
C^^nicke Poet is always to be had before our eyes: Beware of to much.


Joy. I have an inestimable many of books.


Reason. Have thou more then had Ptolomeus Philadelphus, king of Egypt, more then
the libraries of Alexandria, wherein it is well known, were (...). M. books
gathered together, which being with great study and diligence brought from sundry
places, were hurut together in one fire? which Liuius terms an excellent
work of the majesty and dilygence of a kings trauayl, whom Seneca
reprehendeth for that judgment, saying, that it was not a work of the
majesty and didigence of a king, but of his studious lasciviousness, and not
so good neither, but of a King vaynely boastyng him self in spectacles and
shows sought of purpose. And yet notwithstanding perhaps the riches of a King
may excuse the saying of Liuius. and the deed of Ptolomeus, and the Kings
intent forseeyng and prouyding a far of for public uses: which in this
respect truly was commendable, in that he caused the holy scriptures, which
are not only profitable for the world, but also necessary, with great travail
and charge by choice men for that purpose, to be translated out of the Hebrew
into the Greek tongue. But what shall a man say, when private men do not only
match, but surpass Princes in sumptuousnes? We read how that Serenus
Sammonicus, who was a man of wonderful knowledge, and yet had greater defyre of
more learning, but had far many more books, to the number of threescore and
two thousand, who when he died, gave them al to Gordianus the youger, unto
whose father he had been most freindly and familiar. Truly a great
inheritance, and sufficient for many wits, but able to overthrow one wit, who
doubts? what (I pray you) if this man had done nothing else in all his life
time, if he had him self never written any thing, or taken the toil to
search, or had never gone about to take the pain to read or understand any
matter that was comprehended in all those books: Had he not business yenough
to know the books themselves, and their titles, and the names of the
aucthours, and the forms, and number of the volumes? A worthy occupation,
which of a Philosopher, makes a book keeper. Believe me this is not the way
to noorysh the wit by writings, but to ouerwhelme and kyl it with multitude,
or else peradventure after the manner of Tantalus, to torment the astonyshed
mind with thyrst, which tastes nothing, but gapeth after every thing.


Joy. I have an innumerable multitude of books.


Reason. And also an innumerable multitude of errors, some publyshed by the
wicked, some by the unlearned. And those of the first sort, contrary to
religion, godliness, and the holy Scriptures, the other repugnaunt to nature,
equity, and good manners, and the lyberall sciences, or Histories, and the
truth of things done, but al generally striuyng against the truth: and in
them all, specially the first, where greater matters are handled, and true
things are myngled with false, the discernyng of them is hard and dangerous.
And to admit that the integrity of aucthours were perfect and absolute, what
writer is able to remedy ignorance and slothfulness, which corrupt and
confound al things? For fear whereof, many excellent wits have given over
sundry worthy works, and our most lewd age is deservedly plagued with this
punishment, which is careful of the Kytchyn, and negligent of learning, and
encourages Cooks, and not writers. And therefore, whosoever can a little blot
paper with ynke, and knows how to hold a pen in his fyngers, shall be counted
a writer, yea, although he be void of all learning, without wit, and destitute
of knowledge. I do not seek now, nor complain of Orthographie, which is
long since peryshed, I would to GOD they could write by one means or other
indifferently that which they be wylled, then the weakness of the writer
would appear, and the substance of the things not lie unknown. But now by
means of their confused copies and registers, promising to write one thing,
they write so another, that a man cannot tell him self what he wylled them to
write. If Cicero or Liuius, and many other of the famous ancient writers,
should come again into the world, but specially Plinius the second, and
read their own works, would they understand, and not in many places doubt,
whether these were their own works, or some barbarous writer? Among so many
ruins of humane inventions, the holy Scripture remains, both by means of the
more special care of men, but chiefly by the express woorking of God the
aucthour thereof, who defends his holy word, his sacred Histories, and
divine laws, and gives continuance unto his inventions. The most principal
of all other arts do perysh, and the greatest part of them are lost. Thus of
so great a loss there is no remedy, because there is no perceyuyng of it,
which in this case is no strange thing, for the great losses of virtues and
manners, are neglected. Now when ye prouyd for small matters with such
diligence, ye account of the loss of learning among trifles, and there be some
that reckon it among gain. There was one of late, not in the fields or
wooddes, but that which thou may the more marueyle at, in a great and most
floryshyng City of Italy, not a shephearde or a ploughman, but a Noble man,
and of great credit among the people of the country where he dwelt, who swear
that he would give a great sum of money, upon condition there would never
any learned man come in and dwell in the country where he inhabited. Oh wicked
voice of a stony heart. It is reported also, that Licinius was of the same mind,
and loathed learning, which (as it is written) he termed a common poison and
pestilence. Howbeit, perhaps his rude and clounyshe birth may excuse his folly:
But surely if he had been advanced to the state of an Emperor, he would not
have abandoned that nature. For the saying of Horace is true. Fortune changes
not a man's kind. But what shall I say of your noble men, who do not only
suffer learning to peryshe, but pray and wysh that it may so? Truly this
contempt and hatred of so most excellent a thing, will in short time drown you
in the deapth of ignorance. And moreover, not to wander from the purpose, the
writers are restrained by no law, and allowed by no examination, and chosen by
no judgment: there is not so much liberty given to carpenters, to Husbandmen,
to Weauers, not almost to any artificers, although in others it be but a small
danger, but in this, a great peril: Nevertheless every man runs to writing,
without choice or discretion, and they that destroy all, have assured rewards.
And this is not so much the fault of the writers, which according to the common
custom of men do seek after gain, as of students, and those that are put in
trust with public government, who never had any care of such matter, having
forgotten what Constantinus gave in charge to Eusebius of Palestine, to wit,
that none should write books, but such as were of skill, and well seen in the
study of antiquity, and very expert in the Art wherein they write.


Joy. I have good store of books.


Reason. What if thy mind be not capable? Dooest thou remember Sabinus in
Seneca, how he vaunteth in the skyll of his servants? What difference is
there between thee and him, but that thou art the more fool, and both of you
brag of that which is another: he, of his servants, which in deed were
his own, and thou, of the learning of thy books, which apparteyneth nothing
unto thee? There be some that will seem to know what so ever is written in
their books at home: and when there is mention made of any matter of learning,
that book, says he, is in my study, supposyng that that were as much to
say, as it is here also in my breast, and so with a proud look they say no
more: A ridiculus kind of people.


Joy. I have abundaunce of books.


Reason. How much rather had I that thou dyddest abound in wit, and
eloquence, and learning, and specially in innocence and virtue? Howbeit, these
things are not to be sold for money, as books are, and if they were, I know
not whether they should find so many buyers as those books do: Those
furnysh the walls, these the mind, which forasmuch as they are not seen
with the eyes, men regard them not. But truly if store of books made men
learned or good, then they that are the rychest men, might be the best and
learned men: the contrary whereof we see commonly.


Joy. I have books, which are means and helps to learning.


Reason. Take heed that they be not rather impedimentes: For as great
multitudes of souldyers have been unto some an hynderaunce of wynnyng, so
plenty of books have been a let unto some of learning: and of store, as it
chances, comes scarcity: but if it be so, that a man have them, they are
not to be cast away, but laid aside, and the best are to be used, and diligent
heed to be taken, least perhaps they which would profit in time, may hinder
out of season.


Joy. I have many, and sundry books.


Reason. The diversity of ways many times deceyueth the trauayler, and he
that want assuredly in one path, was in doubt when he came to a cross way, and
the incertentie of three or four ways meetyng together, is far more great:
and so it happens often times, that he that has read one book with effect,
has opened and turned over many without profit. There be many things
burdensome to them that learn, but to the learned, few words do suffice: to
much is hurtful unto both, but with strong shoulders it is to be borne up.


Joy. I have gotten together a great many of excellent books.


Reason. There is no man that I can now call to remembrance, that was famous
for his multitude of books, besides the King of Egypt, of whom I spoke before:
which honorable name he wan, not so much by the number of his books, as by
his worthy transtation of certain of them. Doubtless, a marvelous work of
so many wits, unless the wit of one that came afterward had been a greater
wonder: but if thou seek glory by books, thou must take another course, for
thou must not have them only, but know them, neither are they to be committed
to the Library, but to memory, and not to be shut up in the full study,
otherwise, no man shall be more glorious then the public library, or his own
study.


Joy. I have many notable books.


Reason. Thou have many tied in chains, who if they could break away, and
speak, they would bring thee to the judgment of a private prison: then will
they privily weep, and that for sundry things, but specially for this one
thing, for that one covetous person many times has plenty of those, which
many that are studious do want.


Of the fame of writers. The.xliiii. Dialogue.
JOY. YEA, what say you unto it, that I write books my self?


Reason. A public disease, contagious, and incurable. Every man takes upon
him the office of writing, which belongs but to few, and one that is sick
of this disease infecteth many: It is an easy matter to envy, and hard to
imitate: so that the number of the sick increases daily, and the strength
also of the sycknesse waxes more myghtie: every day more do write every day
worse, by reason that it is an easyer matter to follow, then to overtake. Very
proper, and approved, and found true by experience, is the saying of the wise
man of the Hebrews: There is no end of writing books.


Joy. I do write.


Reason. I would wyshe that men could keep them selves within their bounds,
and that an order amongst all things were observed, which by the rashness of
men, is confounded: They should write that have skyll and are able, and other
read and hear. But now is it no small pleasure to the mind to understand,
unless the proud hand make haste also to pen and paper? and whosoever does
understand, or think that he understands some small piece of a book,
thinks he him self meet by and by to write books? I would that this one
saying of our country man Cicero in the very beginning of his Tusculane
questions were engraven in your memories, so that it might be known unto all
that are in high degree, and place of light and knowledge: It may be, says he,
that a man may mean well, but yet is not able eloquently to utter that which
be means. It follows also: But for a man to commit his meaning and thought
to writing, that is not able well to dispose and set it forth in comely order,
neither by any means to delyght the Reader, is the part of one rashly abusing
both his leisure, and learning. These words of Cicero are most true, but this
abuse is now grown so common, that every man takes that to be said to
himself, which sometime was to that most holy banished man, who wrote such
matter as he had learned out of the very fountain of truth, and not out of
the dried puddles, said, and oftentimes repeated this word: (Write.) Which
commandment al contemners of al precepts do obey: for all do write. And
if, as I have said, there be so great danger in those that write other men's
books, what shall we think of them that write their own, and them that be
new? Whereby they bring into the world doubtful and damnable arts and
opinions, or that, which is the least mischief that they commit, they weerie
men with their rude and unpleasant style, insomuche as who so wants in them
promptness of wit, if he list to loose his time and bestow the traueyle of
his years, he shall not want weariness. This is the fruit (and none other)
of your inventions, to infect or affect, but seldom or never to refreshe.
Notwithstanding all men write books now adays, and there was never such
store of writers and disputers in any age, and never such scarcity of those
that are skillful and eloquent. It chances therefore that that happens unto
these men's books which Cicero says in the same place, And therefore, says
he, they read their books with their friends, neither will any man touch
them, but such as would feign have the like liberty in writing granted unto
them, This was rare in Ciceroes age, but now it is common. And every man
medleth with them, because all would have the same liberty. Thus these
triflers, and pamphlet writers, commend, exhort, cheryshe, and prick forth
one another, and arrogate unto them selves falsely the praises of other men in
like cases. Hereof comes this boldness in writers, and disturbaunce of
matters, and therefore please not thou thy self ouermuche in writing of books.


Joy. I write books.


Reason. Perhaps thou may do better in readyng them, and conuertyng that
which thou read into the rule and government of thy life: For the knowledge
of learning is then profitable when it is applied to purpose, and declares it
self in deeds, and not in words only: otherwise that is often found to be
true which is written, Knowledge puffs up. To understand perfectly and
speedily, to remember many things and those great also exactly, to utter them
comely, to write them cunningly, to pronounce them sweetly: unless all these
be referred unto our life, what be they other then the instruments of vain
braggerie, and unprofitable labor, and foolysh ianglyng?


Joy. I write books.


Reason. Perhaps it were better for thee to go to Plough, to keep Sheep,
to be a Weauer, to play the Mariner. Many whom nature has made Handicraftes
men, in despite of her, have become Philosophers: And contrariwyse, fortune
has kept under foot some which were borne in the feeldes, or under hedges,
or upon the shop boordes and staulles of Artificers, or the nettyng of
Ships, which were apt to have been Philosophers. Whereby it comes to
pass, that they that are ignorant of the causes do wonder, if as in the
mids of the Sea, or Country, in the Wooddes, and Shoppes, there be found
sharp and quick wits, when as in the Schools there be dull and blockyshe:
For if nature be won, she is hardly won.


Joy. I write earnesty.


Reason. How much more earnestly have some written in fore times, whose heat
is so extinguished, that it were unknown whether ever they had written or not,
unless other had written so of them. No humane work endures always, and
mortal labor makes no immortal thing.


Joy. I write much.


Reason. How much more have other written? Who can reckon the works of
Cicero, or Varro? Who can recite the books which Titus Liuius or Plinius has
written? There is one Grecian, who wrote, as it is said, six thousand
books. O fervent spirit, if this be true, O long and quiet leisure? Truly if
it be a business of great travel to write well one or two books: that one
man should write so many thousand, it is not so easy to believe, as strange
to wonder at: Howbeit writers of credit do report it, whom it were hard not
to believe, who say that they have not only heard so, but also seen them,
and that more is, known it to be true, for that them selves have read the
books: which if it be a marvelous matter that one man could read so many,
is it not more marueyle that one man could write them all? It were ouerlong to
repeat what men amongst you, and amongst the Gretians have written, and what
they have written among whom none has been fully fortunate to the full
accomplishment of his study: but that some part of the one, and a great part
of the other, and some, are wholly perished, and therefore look what thou can
prognosticate of thine own studies.


Joy. I write, that is mine only delyght.


Reason. If it be to exercise thy wit, and in writing unto others to instruct
thy self, if to forget the time, and to the intent that by the remembrance of
that which is past thou may avoid the present weerisomenesse, I do excuse
thee, and if thou do it to the intent to cure thy secret and incurable disease
of writing, then do I take pity upon thee. For there be some, if thou
know not so much, which would not write, but because they can not leave of,
and running as it were headlong down an hill, and unwilling to stay, are
forcibly carried away with that desire.


Joy. I have a great courage to write.


Reason. They say there be infinite kinds of Melancholy. Some cast stones,
some write books, and to write so, unto one is the beginning of madness, and
to another the end.


Joy. I have, and do write much.


Reason. If it be to profi^e posterity, there is nothing better: If to get a
name only, there is nothing more vain.


Joy. I have written much.


Reason. O notable madness, and may we marueyle then if paper be deerer then
it was wout to be?


Joy. I write, and thereby I look for fame.


Reason. As I said erewhyle, perhaps it were better for thee to dig, and go
to plough, and thereby to hope for a good Harvest: for it is salfer sowing in
the ground, then in the wind. For the study of fame, and earnest travel in
writing, as it has advanced the renown of many, so has it sent over
innumerable to be fools and beggars in their old age, and showed them bare
and babblyng spectacles to the common people. For while ye be writing, fyt time
for better traueyles escapes away: and being ravished, and forgetting your
selves, ye mark not so much, until at last old age and poverty awake ye.


Joy. Notwithstanding, I write for desire of fame.


Reason. A strange desire, for pains, to seek wind: Truly A had thought,
that Sailors only had wished for wind.


Of Maistershyp. The.xlv. Dialogue.
JOY. BUT I have taken the degree of a Master.


Reason. I had rather thou had gotten learning, for there is nothing more
shameful, then rude and unlearned Maistershyppe.


Joy. I am woorthyly made a Master.


Reason. Thou can not woorthyly be made a Master, unless thou have been a
scholar: and necessary it is that thou have showed thy self duetifull,
lowly, and willing to learn, or else thou have gone astray out of the way that
leads to Maistershyp: although I am not ignorant how that some have risen to
the highest degree of knowledge without a Master, which certain excellent
men of great name have reported and written of them selves: but their traueyle,
their wit, their desire to learn, their intent, their diligence, and
continuance stood unto them in steed of a Master, neither wanted they an
inward Master in silence, Howheit, I speak now of the common sort.


Joy. I am called a Master.


Reason. The false name of Maistershyppe, has hindered many from being true
Masters in deed: and whylst they believed every body of them selves, more
then them selves, and were counted to be that, which they were not, they
happened not to be that which they might have been.


Joy. I have the title of a Master.


Reason. Thou have seen a Tavern, wherein was sour wine, freshly decked
forth with Pictures and flowers, where the thyrstie wayfaring man might be
deceived. But is the Vintener also deceived by his own craft? Truly there be
some so accustomed to deceitfulness, that by long use of deceyuing others, at
length they begin to deceive them selves: and that which long time they have
been persuading others, in the end they persuade them selves: and that which
they know to be false, they believe to be true. Glory thou as much in thy
Maistershyppe as thou wylt. But if it have chanced unto thee woorthyly, it is
no strange thing: if vnwoorthyly, it brings these two mischiefs with it: the
one, that it makes thee ashamed to learn: the other, that it makes thine
ignorance the more known.


Of sundry titles of Studies. The.xlvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am adorned with many and sundry titles.


Reason. There is great vanity of boughs, but no fruit.


Joy. I abound with store of titles.


Reason. If with true titles, it is a painful burden: if with false, it is
filthy and shameful. And what need a man to seek for such titles, in
which there is either toil or ignominy? Virtue being contented with one, or
no title at all, is a sufficient title to her self.


Joy. I have deserved to be a Master of Philosophy.


Reason. Philosophy promises not wisdom, but the love of wisdom.
Whosoever therefore will have this, he gets it by loving. This title is not
hard and paynefull, as some suppose. If thy love be true, and the wisdom
true which thou love, thou shall be a true Philosopher in deed: For none
can know or love the true wisdom, but pure and godly minds. And therefore
it comes to this point, which is written, (Godliness is wisdom.)

Your Philosophers, standing in contempt and ignorance of this opinion, fell
unto brablyng and bare Logike. And therefore when Divines rashly entreat of
GOD, and Philosophers of Nature, they circumscribe his most mighty Majesty
with triflyng arguments, and prescribe laws unto God, that laugheth and
mocketh at their foolish presumption: but these dispute in such sort of the
secrets of nature, as if they came lately out of heaven, and had been of
Gods privy counsel, forgettyng that which is written: Who knows the
Lords meaning? or who was his counselor? Not regardyng also, or hearing Saint
Jerome, who often and by many strong arguments in the same book, wherein he
bewayleth his brothers death very precisely and briefly: Philosophers, says
he, disputyng of heaven. speak they know not what.


Joy. I profess many Arts.


Reason. That is an easy matter, but to know many is very hard: for
confessyng, is more safe then professyng: The one is a token of humility and
repentance, the other of lyghtnesse and insolency. For they that do
confess, deserve pardon more easily then they that do profess knowledge.


Joy. I have obtained the title of Divine and Humane wisdom.


Reason. Wisdom wants not tytles, she is sufficiently known of her self.
Who ever lyghted a Candle to go seek for the Sun? Many with these tytles
have been obscured, and without them have become renowned. Oftentimes there
has been none for good, but some notable sign hung forth, where have been
evil wares to sell.


Joy. What say you to this, that I have won a poetical garlande about my head?


Reason. There remains yet one labor, to seek the truth, and this traueile
also is double, to seek, and to set forth, and to feign to the delight of
the ear it is a great matter, hard, difficult, and therefore very rare. They
that are woorthily called Poets in deed, do apply them selves to both, but
the common sort neglect the first, and are contented to use deceit and
colorable means.


Joy. I have obtained the rare glory of Poetry.


Reason. Thou have found a mean in respect whereof thou may neglect the
common wealth, and thine own private wealth likewise, thou have sought also a
way unto poverty, unless that dame Fortune of her own voluntary
liberality, will largely bestow riches upon thee, thou have moreover sought
out the means to seem unto some mad, and unto some insolent.


Joy. I have won the Baye garland unto my self.


Reason. The Baye is a most floorishyng and green tree, when it is first
gathered, and unless it be watered with a pregnant wit and diligent study, it
will wither immediately.


Joy. I have gotten the Laurel garland.


Reason. When a man has taken pains, he has won also envy withal, which
is the reward either of study, or of warfare. That slender bough has
purchased nothing to thy mind, but only a vain sign to thy head, showing
thee unto many, who thou had better had never known thee. For what has it
done, other then laid thee open to the teeth of the envious? These notable
tokens of knowledge, have hurt many, both in peace and war.


Joy. I profess the Art of Oratorie.


Reason. This is strange which I hear: For it seems that of late it is
grown out of use, so great and innumerable are the things whereof it
consysteth, that there have always been fewer good Oratoures, then excellent
Poets. And therefore some have said, that it is the proper duty of an
Orator, to be able to speak copiously and trimly of every matter that is
proposed. Although this opinion be rejected as most arrogant, notwithstanding
of how many things an Orator ought to entreat of, although not of every
thing, in applying a certain artifitiall and sweet eloquence in every thing
whereof he speaks, which of it self is a great matter, if thou consider of
it uprightly, thou wylt be amazed, and perhaps thou wylt repent thee of thy
rash profession: least thou beware that whylest thou wylt go about to seem
to know all thing, thou appear to know nothing, and as it often chances
under the profession of great skyl, thy hidden ignorance do necessarily
appear.


Joy. I am a professor of the liberal Arts.


Reason. This matter many times conteyneth in it more boldness, then learning.
A man's life is too short for any one Art: and art thou sufficient for them
all? One Art suffices one wit, with sweating and toyling to attain to the
top thereof. To cast of many, as much as necessity requires, is not
amiss, and more modesty it is to know it, then to profess it. I will also
add this, which has seemed true unto the best learned, that it never yet
happened unto any of the most excellent and famous learned men to be thoroughly
and absolutely perfect in any one Art. And as touching Rechorike only, this
saying of Seneca is well known, Eloquence says he, is a great and manifold
matter, and was never so favorable to any, that it happened wholly unto him: he
is happy enough, that has atteined to some one part thereof. This, by what
men, and what manner witnesses he proves it to be true, thou have heard,
which being so, let these numbers of professors which are almost match to
the common multitude, both in rudeness and multitude, consider with them
selves what they do, and whereabout they go, which are not contented with
one part, nor with one Art, but without discretion invade them all. O
wonderful confidence and presumption: but it is now common.


Joy. What will you now say concerning the professions of Physic and Law?


Reason. Let thy patientes and clientes make aunsweare to this. What did ever
these titles avail them to the health of their body, or gaining of their
causes? Perhaps they have procured thy profit, and for this cause ye hunt
after arts, and the titles of arts, to the intent that what is wanting in
learning, may be supplied in degrees and apparel, and that the saying of the
Satirical Poet may beverified, The Scarlet, and the Iewelles beset with
Amethistes, do sell the Lawyer. Which thing would appear to be true, yea, if
the ancient Rethoricians returned again into the world: for no man would
give unto Cicero two hundred crowns, unless he woare on his finger a great
ryng of gold. To be short, let this he unto thee the sum of all that has
been spoken of, to wit, that there be some men of rare disposition, whose
studies are sound and honest, the ends whereof are truth and virtue. This is
the knowledge of things, and the amendment of manners, and either the ornament
of this mortal life, or the entrance to the eternal. As for the rablement of
the residue, whereof the number is great, some of them hunt after glory, some
a glittering, but a vain reward, but to the greater sort, the only respect
of money is their end, which is not only a small reward, but also a filthy,
and not worthy the travail, nor match to the toil of a gentle mind: in all
these respects, as I have said, the title and apparel is not to be contemned,
for it is effectual unto that whereunto it is appointed: for why? the minds
and judgments almost of al mortal men, specially of the common multitude,
which are destitute of this mean, are deluded with shadows. Most matters are
governed by opinion. But for them that are given to virtue, to glory in titles,
is not only strange and dissonant, but also (as Iiudge) impossible.


Joy. I profess many things.


Reason. It were better to do one good deed, then to promise many. And men
were in good case, if so be they were such as they profess them selves to be.


Of the Tytles of business, and affairs. The.xlvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I AM the Kings Procurer.


Reason. Then art thou the peoples enemy.


Joy. I am the Procurer of the Exchequer.


Reason. Then art thou the common wealths enemy.


Joy. I follow the Kings business.


Reason. It is painful for a man to follow his own business: What is it then,
thynkest thou, for him to follow another man's, specially theyrs that are of
might, whom to please, is perpetual servitude, to displease, danger, heavy
looks, and punishment ready for a small offense?


Joy. I follow the kings business.


Reason. Thou have an account to yield to an hard judge, which thou shall
scarce be able to make even with the spoil of al thy goods, with hate of thy
self, and grievous offense.


Joy. I solicit the kings business.


Reason. Take heed least, while thy soliciting is difficult, thine account be
yet harder, and so inextricable, that as we have seen it chance in many, it
entrap thy patrimony, fame, and life.


Joy. I am the kings Procurer.


Reason. Thou must needs displease many, and last of all thine own Lord and
Master, and which is most dangerous, GOD him self, and for the kings small
commodity, the great discommodities of the Realm, and exceedyng damages of
the people, must be dissembled, or procured.


Joy. I am made the Kings Procurer.


Reason. So soon as ever this odious office began to touch the thresholde of
thine house, even that day thou beganst to leave to live for thy self, from
thencefoorth thy liberty, thy quietness and pleasure are departed. In steed
of these, are servitude. pain, business, fear, sorrow, trouble, and bytyng
cares, come in place: now art thou not a live, although thou breath: for the
life of such as are busy, is death, who being al of them in misery, yet are
they in most miserable case which are busied in other men's matters, specially
in the affairs of Kings, Tyrants, and great personages.


Joy. I am a Judge.


Reason. Judge so, as though thou should forthwith be judged by another.
There is one judge of all men, and one incorrupt judgment seat: Before this,
shall all ye mortal men appear, what need ye then to have the skyn of the
false judge nailed upon the judgment seat, or to have any barbarous
admonition to do justice? Every Judge sytteth in that seat, where if false
judgment shall be given, neither money, nor favor, nor false witnesses, nor
sinister entreatynges, nor vain threats, nor eloquent Patrones, shall avail
him.


Joy. I am one of the Consuls of my country.


Reason. A very difficult glory. It is a rare matter so to give counsel, that
thou may at once both profit and please, that there may be truth in
word, faith in counsel, scilence in that which is committed, sweetness in
speech: fortune shall govern the event, and the event shall purchase credit
to the counsel.


Joy. I am governor of a City.


Reason. Thou leadest an unbridled beast, and as Horace terms it, that has
many heads, with a small twyne, and gouernest a great ship alone, that is
tossed with hugie waves. A little house is hardly guyded, how difficult
therefore it is to govern a whole City, see thou: Had thou so great need
of trouble, or so little at home, that thou have undertaken the public? Yea
moreover, it is not only an office of difficulty, but also a vile function,
insomuche as the Satyrycal Poet terms the governor of a City, a Steward,
or Baylyffe, notyng thereby the state of these times. If then he were a Baylife
or Husbandman, what is he now other then a Woodryfe, or Woodman? At that time
Rome began to be a vyllage, and now it is a Wood.


Joy. I am a President of a Province.


Reason. Being condemned unto an honorable exile, thou have exchaunged private
quietness, for foreign carfulness: look for no rest or pleasure. The
state of Presidentes is bitter and troublesome, they are forbidden plays and
feasts upon holy days, their doors are shut against gifts, and open to
contentions, their houses are void of pastymes, and full of complayntes and
chydynges, what so ever is a mysse, whatsoever out of order, or out of square,
throughout the whole Province, there it must be handled and amended, an hard
case: for how difficult a matter it is to amend many, in this appears, that
very few do amend them selves.


Of titles of wars, warfare, and Cheifteinship. The xlviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I HAVE received the honor of the warlyke Gyrdle.


Reason. Seemed it unto thee that thy life had in it to few discommodities
already, unless thou had learned also the Art of warfare, by means whereof
thou myghtest always remain either unquiet, or without honor, or open to
dangers, or subject to contempt.


Joy. I profess warfare.


Reason. Ye profess that when ye are borne, and therefore what need you
otherwise to profess it: One armeth his body with harness, another his mind
with deceits, another his tongue with eloquence. There is not one of you
unarmed: one sows, another builds, another declaimeth, another pleads
causes, one goes on foot, another rides on horsback or in a Couch, one
runs, another saileth, one commands, another obeys. There is never an
one of you idle: what strange kind of warfare is this? One man lives in the
Camp, another in the judicial Court, one in the schools, another in the
wooddes, one in the fields, another upon the Sea, one in the Palace, another
at home, one spends his life abroad in travail, al are at warfare, and not
men only, but Horace says, that the Whelpe also is at warfare in the wooddes.
And truly of them that go to warfare there be many sorts, but the warfare it
self is but of one kind, to wit, man's life upon the earth: which he that
defyned to be warfare, truly seems unto me to have weighed with deep and
vpryght judgment, if so be that he had added battle to this warfare.


Joy. I am pressed to goo armed into the wars.


Reason. Why dooest thou arm thy self outwardly? The war is within the
mind, that is, which the vices do besiege and overthrow: What need weapons
in this case, unless they (...) worn for the ornament of the body, and not
for defense of the mind? There be some that say, that there is no sight more
gallant then to see an armed man: but what bravery there is in an armed man's
breast and head, more then in that which is peaceable and unarmed, I cannot
perceive. But forasmuch as thou art carried away with this delyght, goo to,
gyrde thy body with armor, receive the shewres and Sun upon thy Helmet, take
unto thee thy weapons, cover thy self with thy shield, and while thou art
sleepyng at home, thou shall be alwaked by Alarm, and thynkest thou have won
some great pres^^ment, but thou wast deceived, and have chosen to thy self a
dangerous and blooddy trade of living. Hope has many deceiptes, and there be,
I confess, many cheynes which draw the minds of those into destruction,
which with greedynesse have unadvisedly sought after that good, which all do
desire and covet. Neither do I deny, but that some have by service in the
wars atteyned unto very great riches, and been advanced to great Empires:
but believe me, more have fallen into poverty, come to imprisonment,
servitude, violent and sudden death, by means thereof. Thou, since thou art
so disposed to profess thy self a souldyer, unless thou wylt disgrace thy
profession, make always account of thy life as if thou were continually in
dying, and let that Emperial voice evermore thunder in thine ears, Learn to
strike, Learn to dye. One syllable long or short shall vary thy deeds and
alter that case with thee, for either thou shall kyl, or be killed, and
therefore it behooves thee at al times, and in all places, to make thy self
ready. These Arts are thy delight. Hearken unto the Satyricall Poet, where he
speaks, and recites the rewards of warfare, where having rehearsed an
innumerable fort, he geathereth notwithstanding very few, among which, the
first and chief is, Liberty to offend: A reward truly not so much to be
desired of good men, as to be accepted by the armed laws, which among armor
and weapons are put to scilence.


Joy. I have sent my son forth to the wars.


Reason. It is almost commonly seen, that the son of a souldyer, is him
self a soldier also. For the father can leave none other inheritance to his
son then he has, to wit, his Bow and Arrows, his Piece, his Shield, his
Swoorde and War, and that also which makes up the game, his gylden spurs.
And this which we have said to the father, the son may think it spoken to
him self.


Joy. Being a Captain in the wars, I am become ^^^^^s with victories.


Reason. How much better were it, that being a governor in peace, thou
becamest famous in virtues.


Joy. I have sustained many wars.


Reason. Thou have bereeued thy self and many others of rest and quietness, a
woorthye work.


Joy. I am famous for victories and triumphs.


Reason. Many times evil is more known then good, and a dark tempest more
spoken of then a fair Sunshyne day. To conclude, thou have provided titles for
thy Tumbe, talk for the people, and nothing for thy self.


Of the friendshyppe of Kings. The xlix. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have won the friendshyp of Kings.


Reason. True friendshyp among men is rare, and thou fanciest to thy self that
thou have won the friendshyp of Kings, whom the excellency of their estate,
and the loftiness of their mind, makes them commonly the contemners of their
inferiors.


Joy. I am beloved of kings.


Reason. I perceive then that thou carest not for thy soul, virtue, fame,
quietness, rest, and security: for the fashion of most kings is well known,
they scarcely love any, but such as setting al other things apart, will make
them selves the bondslaues and ministers of their cruelty, lust, and avarice.
And therefore, if thou be beloved of Kings, there is no enquyryng farther of
thee, thou little carest for thy self.


Joy. It is by means of my goodness and virtue that I am beloved of Kings.


Reason. What answerest thou then to Salust? For Kings, says he, are more
suspicious of good men, then of evil, and always they stand in fear of other
men's virtues.


Joy. In respect of good qualities, I am beloved of my Prince.


Reason. Of what qualities, I pray you: Haukyng, or Huntyng? Concerning these I
reproved thee in a certain discourse not long since, of warfare, whereof we
disputed last: Which unless it be commended by large bloodshed, and great
dangers, it deserves not the name of warfare, but of warlie cowardice, not
only in the judgment of kings, but also of the common people.


Joy. The king loves me for my conditions sake.


Reason. It is for thy vanity, or danger: or perhaps for some crimes that are
in thee, murder, poysonyng, vauderie, treason, flattery, and lying, comman
plagues, which daily custom in thee excuses, and vrbanitie commends: For
these be the most fyttest means to win the good will of some kings, to whom
there is nothing more hateful then virtue and learning. By these therefore there
is no hope to purchase their favor, which are rather the cause of their
hatred: thus is peace confirmed between wisdom and fortune.


Joy. I am a great man with the king.


Reason. Art thou greater then Lysimachus was with Alexander, or Seianus with
Tiberius? the greatness and fall of both whom, thou know, although writers
do vary concerning the first of them: I let pass others, the story is long.


Joy. I am well-beloved of my King.


Reason. It were better he knew thee not, and peradventure more profitable
that he hated thee: for then thou should avoid the danger which now thou
folowest. Worse is the flatteryng voice of the fouler when he calls the
fowls into his net, then the noyce of the ploughman that makes them afraid.


Joy. My King loves me well.


Reason. There are some of whom a man may doubt, whether their love be more
dangerous then their hatred, these are worse then serpents, in whom there is
poison myxt with medicine, but in these men there is nothing but pestilent or
hurtful, for whether they love or hate, the mischief is almost all one, saving
that their hate dryueeth away, and their love deteyneth. And to be short, there
is nothing more unquiet and dangerous, then the friendshyp of Princes, unless
it were the government of a kingdom it self, although I am not ignorant of
that danger also, which many have wyshed for in vain, and often have bought it
full dear, and obtained it with great peril: such is the trade of men. Thus one
danger is procured by another, one with many, and with great the greatest. A
strange matter: a great good thing that comes freely is contempned, a greater
evil with great euylles is sought for.


Joy. I hope that my Prince loves me.


Reason. That which thou hopest, think what manner of thing it is, a brittle,
waueryng, and frail foundation, which the often falls of Princes do declare:
a cloudie, troublesome, and unquiet advancement, which the sorrowful, busy,
and dangerous life of princes proves to be true. Take heed therefore where
thou buyldest: for like as the fortune of Princes, so their wylles and lykyng
also is always uncertain, variable, and inconstant, although notwithstanding
if these things were permanent, there were no goodness in them, but rather
much hurt and evil.


Joy. I have with great pain and danger, deserved the love of my King.


Reason. Oh, how much more safely and easily myghtest thou have purchased the
favor of the King of all Kings.


Of the abundaunce of friends. The.L. Dialogue.
JOY. I Abound in frendshyp.


Reason. It were strange that thou only should have such plenty of that
thing, whereof al either men have such scarcity, that throughout al ages there
are but very few couples of friends made mention of.


Joy. I have great plenty of friendship.


Reason. Counterfeite friendshyppe perhaps, for as for true friendshyp it is so
rare a thing, that whosoever in his long life time could find one, is counted to
have been a very diligent trauayler in such matters.


Joy. I am fortunate for friendshyppe.


Reason. Thou can not know that, unless thou be unfortunate in other
things: For this saying is true, The fortunate man knows not whether he be
loved or not.


Joy. My friendshyps be assured.


Reason. Then is thy adversity assured: for this saying is also true, An
assured friend is tried in time of adversity.


Joy. I have much friendshyp.


Reason. Commit the judgment hereof to experience, not to report, that lies
in many things: perhaps thou shall find fewer then thou supposest.


Joy. I have to great plenty of friendshyp.


Reason. Avoid superfluity in all things: he that has sufficient, requires
no more.


Joy. I have sufficient store of friends.


Reason. This never happened to the people of Rome, while they were in their
most floorishing state, neither unto any mortal creature, as thou may read
in the most excellent Historician.


Joy. I have great store of friendshyp.


Reason. I said erewhyle that they be either feigned, or imperfect, as the
Philosophers hold opinion, for that it may so happen, that at one time thou
may rejoice with one friend, and be sorry with another: or if debate chance
to happen among them, thou must needs break thy faith, either with the one or
with the other, or with them all.


Joy. I have store of profitable and pleasant friends.


Reason. I perceive thou speak of the common sort of friendshyp, which
notwithstanding cannot be many at one time, in that to requite the
friendlynesse of many, and to live familiarly with a multitude, is very
difficult, specially unto him whose mind is busyed in the execution of some
grave affairs, and traueile of wit.


Joy. I have friends that profit me, and delyght me.


Reason. It is but slender freendshyp, whose foundation is either pleasure or
profit: for while these things remain, the freendshyppe shakes, and when
they decay, the freendshyppe fails: This is not only possible, but easy, yea
almost necessary, inasmuche as for the most these things do follow either
prosperity, or age, and the comlynesse of youth, then which there is nothing
more uncertain. But the freendshyppe which is established upon virtue, is
immortal, in that virtue it self is a stable and firm thing, and to use
Aristotle's words, a continuing thing, for that it can not dye. And therefore
those which we have loved in respect of honesty, we love them also when they
are dead.


Joy. I am deceived, but I have faithful friends.


Reason. Beware that thou be not deceived, and desire not to make experiment.
For it chances often, that look whereof the conceit has been pleasant,
the trial has been bitter and grievous.


Joy. I think I have good friends.


Reason. Examine diligently whereupon thou do think so, and specially how
much thou thy self love: For there be some that love not, and yet think
that they are beloved, which is a great folly, and a common error among
rich men: they think that love may be bought for money, which is only
purchased by mutual loving and liking. A good mind is a most excellent thing,
it is not moved with herbs, or charms, not with gold or precious stones,
no not with the swoorde or extremity, but is won by loving and gentle
entreating. Moreover, the amorous saying of Ecato the Greek Philosopher is well
known, which pleases well Seneca and me: If thou wylt be loved, says he,
love thou. Although this be many times in vain, so many, so insearchable and
deep are the secret places of the heart, and the minds of some are so
venomous, discourteous, and cancred, that where they be much made of, they
disdain: and where they be loved, they hate: and are not only contented to
requite no good will again, which is not incident to the most cruel wild
beasts, but the more courteously they be dealt withal, the more dogged they
wax: And, if a man may believe it, by love they are stirred to hatred, which is
ye most dangerous and grievous evil that ever in this life man's simplicity
tasted.


Joy. I think that I have very good friends.


Reason. This word good, is evermore the Epitheton that belongs to
friendshyp, which though it be not named by the tongue, yet is it always
understood in the mind. And if thou wylt speak it short, say, friends, and
there withal thou shall say, good.


Joy. I think I have friends.


Reason. Beware thou be not falsely persuaded, lest happily experience make thee
one day believe otherwise. To search the deapth of the mind, it lies not in
man's power, and now adays ye geat friends at the Wine, and prove them with
your tears, and that is last which should have been first.


Joy. As the world stands now with me, I have many friends.


Reason. Thou meanest, I think prosperity: For thus it falls out for the
more part, that although all fortune have need of friends, yet they have
greatest stoare of friends that have less need of all other things: And
thus always scarcity follows scarcity, and plenty wayteth upon plenty.
When need and poverty comes on, then they decrease, or rather to speak
more truly, friendshyp at that time is descried. Who were friends to thee,
and who to thy prosperity, it will appears when prosperity departs. Thy
friends will follow thee, and her friends will go after her: Thine will be
the better, but hers will be the greater company. Thou must not marvel, if
when the Caske is drawn dry, they depart which came only for the sweetness
of the wine: for adversity dryueth away a dissembler, and the dregs a
drynker.


Joy. I seem to have an innumerable sort of friends.


Reason. It is well said, I seem. Whereupon ryseth this thine opinion, seeing
that true friendshyp among all men is rare, and thine, thou say, are
innumerable? For thou must thus first persuade thy self, that there is no
friendshyp but among good men, and then hereby thou may the more certainly
conjecture in thy mind, I say not how many true friends thou have, but how
many there be in the number of all mankind, when thou shall begin to number
how many good men there be.


Joy. I have very many friends.


Reason. Many acquaintance say, and yet how truly thou shall say so, it is
in doubt: For there is no living thing, no wares more difficult to be known,
then man.


Joy. I have many friends.


Reason. Companions perhaps or ghestes. These will not fail thee, unless thy
cheer do fail: As for friends, there be always few, or none at all, and
many times (which is most injurious) a householde enemy possesses the name
of a friend, and under color of feigned good will, there lurketh domestical
treason.


Joy. I have more friends then need.


Reason. It is very necessary, and especially to be regarded of all that are
in authority, that among so many lies of flatterers, there may be one that
hare and will speak the truth, in which respect an enemy is far more
profitable then a friend.


Joy. I have many friends.


Reason. Believe me, thou have need of many: And this world would be far
more holy, vermous, and quiet, if there were as many friends, as there are so
accounted.


Joy. I have a friend.


Reason. That is much: For there is nothing more dear, nor more rare, then a
friend.


Of Friends not known, but by report. The. Li. Dialogue.
JOY. PResent report, has purchased unto me absent friends.


Reason. This happens many times, that report makes not only those that a
man knows not, but also very enemies to be friends. Report made Masinissa
known to Scipio, so that he that was wont to be the leader of all the
Carthagien horfemen against the Romans, became afterward General of the
Roman horsemen against the Carthagiens, and gatte him not only the hearts of
his private enemies, but also of thieves and Pirates, which are the common
enemies of all the world: For the glory and excellency of his name drew^ them
unto him, upon whom while he remained in exile at Linthern, they came lorcibly
rushyng in, so that at the first sight they appeared terrible. But when they
perceived them selves to be suspected, laying aside their threamynges, and
setting apart their weapons, sendyng away their guarde, they conformed them
selves to unaccustomed mildness, and only the chief of the thieves came unto
him, to the intent to woorshyp him as a God, and his house as a most holy
Church: They weeried his victorious right hand with many kysses, and hung up
their gifts in the porche of his house, as the custom was in those days to
offer them upon the aulters of the Gods, accomptyng it in steed of a great
gain that they had seen him, and reioycyng as if they had seen an heavenly
vision, they departed wonderfully coutented. This happened unto Scipio: but seek
for such another, and where, I pray thee, wylt thou find him? How be it it
may happen also unto others, and the excellency of a man's fame may win him
the freendshyppe of one that is absent: for I do not deny, but that report
bears great sway in the world. Notwithstanding, is it not much to be
feared, lest that as one says, Presence do diminishe the report? How many
have there been whom absent men have woondred at, and contemned them when they
have seen them before their face? Man's judgment is a tender thing, and is
easily turned.


Joy. Report has won me friends beyond the Alps, and beyond the Seas.


Reason. All your doings are almost of like fondness and vanity: For what
commodity or profit shall thou reap by him of whom thou wast never seen,
nor never shall be seen, and whom thou never saw, nor never art like to
see? your vices also do make your present freendshippes unprofitable and
untrusty, although to say the truth, they be no true freendshyppes in deed,
but are only so rearmed. What may thou hope then of these thy freendshyppes?
Behold, the Comicall Poet says, that Courtesy wins friends: but truly,
true friends in deed are scarce obtained with great and manifold courtesies:
and thou thynkest that thou have gotten a freende with a few words, and
those possible none of thine own, thou art too full of hope.


Joy. Report has brought me a freende from the farthest part of the world.


Reason. A contrary report will also take him away from thee, and so much the
more easily, by how much men's ears are more commonly open to evil, then
good reports.


Joy. Fame has gotten me a good freende.


Reason. How know thou how good he is whom thou never saw, seeing that
thou know not all this while what they be whom thou speak unto daily, and
art conversant withal? Your over quickness of belief oftentimes deceyueth
you, ye soon believe that which you would have. Ye give much credit to
lying fame. Thou hopest that thou see his mind, whose face thou never yet
saw, notwithstanding that there be so many secret couertes and hydden places
in the hearts of those that are very well acquainted. It is an hard matter to
know a freende, but in great adversity: and it is more difficult to know
him, then to get him. For perhaps he may be gotten some time with a few
words, who shall scarce be known in many years, and by many tryalles. I
speak now of a freende after the common manner of speech, but as for a true
freende, he is not found before he be tried: Neither truly do other men's
words, or his own, prove a freende, but the trial of his love and
trustiness.


Joy. Report has won me a freende a far of.


Reason. Some body has won thee a freende by tellyng a lie of thee: and
likewise by reportyng the truth, or peradventure by blasing a false tale of
thee, another will take him away from thee. For look by what means all
things are made and do grow, by the same they are soon undone and resolved:
And nature will have it so, that things which soon do grow, shall soon
decay.


Of one only faithful Freende. The.Lii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have one faithful and approved freende.


Reason. In trying, your judgment is often deceived, and look wherein ye
think your selves most expert, both in that, and so likewise in all other
things, your opinion fails.


Joy. I do know it, and not suppose only, that I have a most faithful
freende.


Reason. And how many have there been, thynkest thou, that beleeuyng so much,
yea, and as they thought, knowing so much, yet when the matter came to more
diligent examination, found them selves to be deceived: Whence comes it that
there be so many complantes made daily of friends, but only because whom ye
counted most saythful, ye have found untrusty: There is no conjecture nor
estimation so difficult, as is of the mind of man.


Joy. I do not conjecture nor suppose, as I have said, but I know that I
have a most assured freende.


Reason. Either thou have a most excellent thing, or else thou art in a most
foul error.


Joy. Concerning this matter, I am in no error, but I have a freende whom I
have tried in sundry and great difficulties.


Reason. Then have thou a most sweet and sacred thing, a more excellent then
which, next unto virtue only, neither nature, nor fortune, not labor, nor
study, have granted unto Mankind. A man's parents, I confess, are dear
unto him, his children dear, his brethren dear, all these may wax
unpleasant, and yet for all that they are still our parents, children, and
brethren, yea though upon occasion they surceasse to be sweet unto him: only
a freende, as long as he is true, can not surceasse to be sweet and
dearelybeloued. Parents, I say, are dear: Notwithstanding, did not Iubiter
expulse Saturnus his father out of his kingdom? Did not Nicomedes deprive of
life Prusias his father, that was king of Bithynia, who at that time was in
consultation with him self how to murder his son? Ptolomeus also, hereof
surnamed Philopater, who having slain his father, mother, and brother, and
last of all his wife Euridice, governed the kingdom of Egypt in such sort by
the advice of harlottes, that he had nothing in his whole Realm proper to him
self, besides the bare and vain name of a king. Did not also Orestes slay his
mother Clytemnestra, Nero his mother Agrippin. and Antipater his mother
Theslalonice? Children also are dear. Did not These us command his most
chaste son Hippolytus, and Philip king of Macedonie his son Demetrius, a
young Gentleman of singular towardness, to be slain? Did not also the other
Ptolomeus, which is a name repugnaunt to godliness, who was also a most
trusty king of Egypt, slay two of his sons? Likewise, Herod king of Judea
slew one, and Constantinus, Emperor of Rome, slew one of his sons, called
Crispus. Did not also Maleus, general of the Carthagiens, hang up Carthalo his
son? Yea moreover, mothers, whose love is more tender, and their kind more
mild, have also showed cruelty against their children. The history of Medea
is known to all men. What say thou to the Queen of Laodicea and
Cappadocia, who upon the immoderate desire she had to reign, slew five of her
sons? Parents, I say, are dear (for I repeat these again) children are
dear, brethren are dear. But to conclude al wickedness in one example,
Phraates king of the Parthians, the most wickedst wretch that ever lived, and
of al men most enraged with fury and desire to reign, cruelly and unnaturally
slew his own father Orodes. being an old and diseased man, and moreover his
thirty brethren, the sons of the abouenamed king, and with these also his
own natural soune, to the end there should none remain in Parthia to
govern the kingdom. But these examples be old: hear we not how of late
memory in Britanie. the father and the son contended for the crown? and
how this other day in Spain, brethren were together by the ears for the
kingdom? Howebeit of such contentions, and specially among brethren, there be
plenty examples both new and old, that it were almost an harder matter to
find out which brethren were friends, then which were enemies, But we will
let them both pass, for now we gather remedies, and not examples. Moreover,
are not husbands dear, and wives dear? Concerning this matter thou shall
enquire of Agamemnon and Deiphobus, and of your countrymen, Claudius the
Emperor, and Africanus the younger: these men shall tell thee how dearly
beloved they were unto their wives. On the other side, demand of Octauia, and
Arsinoe, what the one thought of her husband Nero, and the other of her
Ptolomeus. The first of her adoptiue, the other of her natural brother, and
both of them of their husbands. The first will testify as she has been found
toward her self, the other toward her children. Thus, as thou see, we
gather the most choice and worthy examples: As for the common sort, both of
cities, and vulgar life and trade of men, which are full of such like
complaints, I let them pass. Which being so, since in all kinds of those
things which seem most dear, what by privy hatred, or open displeasure,
oftentimes there is much bitterness, freendshyp only is void of such
grief and displeasure, and friends never not only not flue or destroyed, but
did not so much as hurt one another willingly: Wherefore if thou have found
such a freende as thou speak of, persuade thy self that thou have found a
great treasure, and take heed thou do not as the common sort of people do,
who geuyng them selves to the searchyng and following after vile matters, and
contemnyng excellent things, do busy them selves more with tyllyng their
land, and following their trade of Merchandise, then in seeking of friends,
and ensuing of virtue, and so happily thou neglect this commodity which thou
have gotten. If ye bestow so much care and diligence in preserving your gold
and silver, and oriental precious stones, which are but the excrementes of
the earth, and purginges of the sea: how much more diligent ought ye to be in
enterteynyng and keepyng of a freende, which is a most precious and divine
thing? Beware thou offend him in no respect, or that upon occasion of any
word he conceive displeasure against thee, and so depart from thee, and then
too late thou hear that saying of Ecclesiasticus: Like as one that lets a
bird fly out of his hand, so have thou lost thy neighbor, neither can
thou take him again, or follow him, for he is far of. He has escaped as a
Roe out of the snare, and because his soul is wounded, thou shall not be able
to entrap him any more. And therefore, as I say, thou have a great and sweet
treasure, but painful notwithstanding, and difficult: paineful, I mean to be
gotten, and kept. A freende is a rare Jewel, he must be kept with great
diligence, and if he be lost, be lamented with great sorrow.


Of plenty of Riches. The.liii. Dialogue.
JOY. BUT I abound in riches.


Reason. I marueyle now the less, that thou seemedst to abound in friends:
for it is no strange nor new matter, to see the doors and entries of the
rich frequented by common friends, and feygned attendance.


Joy. I have great plenty of riches.


Reason. A dangerous and burdensome felicity, which shall purchase more
envy, then procure pleasure.


Joy. I flow in wealth.


Reason. It follows not strayghtwayes that therefore thou flowest in
quietness and pleasure. Thou shall scarce find a rich man, but he will
confess that he lived better in mean estate, or in honest poverty.


Joy. I am grown to great wealth. Security, joy, and tranquillity are
decreased, which if they would increase with riches, I would not only permit,
but exhort men to love them.


Joy. I have great riches.


Reason. Then have thou a thing hard to be gotten, careful to be kept,
greenous to be lost.


Joy. My riches are great.


Reason. If they be dispearsed, they will decrease, and if thou keep them,
they will not make thee rich, but keep thee occupied, and make thee not a
master, but a keeper.


Joy. I have great riches.


Reason. Take heed rather that thou be not had of them, that is to say, that
they be not thy riches, but thou rather their slave, and they not servant to
thee, but thou to them: For if thou know not so much already, there be many
more that are had, then that have riches, and there is more plenty (whom also
the saying of the Prophet notes) of men that belong unto riches, then riches
that belong unto men: Thus the greediness and baseness of your minds, of
masters makes you servants. The use of money is well known, to b^y those
things that are necessary for nature, which are but few, small, and easy
to be gotten: what so ever is superfluous, is noisome, and then they be no
longer riches, but cheynes and fetters, and no longer Ornaments of the body,
but impedimentes of the mind, and heaps of carfulness, and f^ate.


Joy. I am full of riches.


Reason. Beware that they burst thee not: for every fullness seeks an issue.
Riches have procured the death of many, and do bereave almost all men of rest.


Joy. I have woonderful store of riches.


Reason. A thing repugnant to good manners. To much riches have not only
corrupted the manners of private men, but also of the whole people of Rome* and
ouerthrewe their great and wonderful virtue, who so long were a noble, just,
and vpryght people, as they were a poor people. In poverty they were
conquerers of nations, and which is more glorious, conquerers of them selves,
till at length they that had overcome vices, were them selves overcome and
overthrown by riches: I speak that which I know, and therefore thou see
what thou have to hope of riches.


Joy. I abound in riches.


Reason. How much had I rather thou aboundedst in virtue.


Joy. I rest in my riches.


Reason. Poor wretches, ye lie a sleep in the briars: your sleep is sound,
that ye feel not the pryckles: Behold, the day comes that shall awake you,
and shall plainly expound that which is written. The rich men have slept
their sleep, and when they awaked, they found no riches in their hands.


Of finding of a gold min. The.liiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have found a Mine of gold.


Reason. This hope of riches, has been cause of poverty unto many, and of
destruction not unto few, whilst neglectyng all other things, and bestowyng
al their care and travail upon this one thing. Notwithstanding their toil
has turned to little profit, whylest in respect of the greedy desire that
they have to gold, forsaking the sight of heaven and the Sun, they learn to
lead forth their life in darkness, and are consumed with the thick and
noisome dampe before their time.


Joy. Chance has offered unto me a gold Mine.


Reason. To the intent that being turned away from the contemplation of
heavenly things, thou might gape after earthly things: and not only that
thou might live more unfortunately, and shorter time, near to the ground,
but also drowned under the ground.


Joy. I enter into a gold Mine.


Reason. Nero the Emperor, the same terrible and miserable night, which
notwithstanding he had deserved, which was the last night that he lived, being
put in mind by such as were about him, to hyde himself in a certain Cave
under the ground, to the intent he might escape the reprochful death, and
abusing of the people that sought after him: answered, That he would not go
under the ground while he was living. But thou, being compelled by no fear,
but only carried away with covetousness, go alive under the earth, neither
can the comfortable shynyng of heaven keep thee from thence, neither the
horrible darkness of the earth drive thee away. What marueyle is it, if men
consume themselves with trauayling all the world over to seek riches, seeing
also in seeking and digging for them under the ground, they disquiet the
infernal souls and Fiendes of Hell? And as the Poet Ovid says, Men have entered
into the bowels of the earth: And those riches which God had hyd up, and
covered with the darkness of hell, they are dug up notwithstanding, which
are the prouocations unto al mischief.


Joy. I have found a Mine of gold.


Reason. It is an old proverb, Many times one man starteth an Hare, and
another catches him. Thou have found a booty which many will covet, one only
shall possess, and peradventure thou shall not be that one. Unto desired things
there is much resort, and it is dangerous when one man has found that which
many will covet, and none will be wyllyng to share with other. And this is the
cause, that though Italy, as Pliny says, be inferior to no country for
plenty of al sorts of metalles, notwithstanding by ancient provision and
acts of parliament, order was taken that Italy should be spared.


Joy. I dig earth that will yield gold.


Reason. The travel is certain, but the event doubtful: what if thou dyg long
and find nothing? what if thou find much, but not for thy self? what if it be
the worse for thee to have found sum what, and better for thee to have found
nothing? Man's joy is most times accompanied with sorrow.


Joy. I am gone down into my gold Mine.


Reason. This question is commenly moved amongst men: what device will drown
a man in the bottom of hell? and thou being in bell, do thou seek what will
advance thee to the top of heaven?


Joy. I have found a Mine of gold.


Reason. Thou have found the ready way to the Devil.


Of the fyndyng of Treasure. The.lv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have found treasure.


Reason. Beware of the crafts and deceites of fortune: The hook is offered in
the bayte, the line as ginnes pretend a kind of delight.


Joy. I have found treasure.


Reason. Treasure has been death unto many: and though it bring no danger to
the body, yet is it perilous to the soul. Riches do not satisfy the desire,
nay they slake it not, but rather provoke it: man's desire is set on fire with
success, and as the gold increases, the thirst of gold increases also, and
the desire of seeking more: but virtue decreaseth, which only is the death of
the soul.


Joy. Chance has brought me treasure.


Reason. An hurtful burden, and enemy to modesty. He will arrogate any thing
to him self, whom sudden fortune has made happy.


Joy. I have fallen upon treasure by chance.


Reason. Perhaps thou myghtest more safely have fallen upon an Adder,
forasmuch as plenty of silver and gold do commonly bring scarcity of
virtues: and this is proper to al things, specially that do come sodaynely,
that though other do hurt, yet they do it by little and little, whilst in time
they draw away somewhat from the truth, and give confirmation to the erronius
opinions: but these procure sudden astonyshment, and trouble the mind, with
an unexpected invasion.


Joy. The treasure which I found, I have laid up at home.


Reason. That which is chief in this thy joy, thou have found an heavy and
unprofitable lump of earth, it is a shame for the mind, which is of an
heavenly nature, to wax proud thereof.


Joy. A treasure unlooked for, has sodaynely happened unto me.


Reason. Thou thynkest it will continue* but it will suddenly decay: for look
what is soon grown, is as soon wythered. Sudden (...), is like the
prosperity of one that is in a dream.


Of Usury. The.lvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have laid forth my money safely to Usury.


Reason. There are some that will abuse things that were invented for a good
purpose, and those things that were evil invented, to worse purpose, or worst
of all: thou have found money, not to the end thou would be rich, but to
the end thou would be naught, and (as I suppose) would not be so evil,
unless thou had found money. There be some that be the worse for their
good chances, not acknowledging therein the blessing of GOD, neither like unto
him of whom it is written, He will thank thee, for that thou have deast
mercifully with him: But rather, supposyng that GOD from above has given them
occasion, and (as it were) a mean and way to commit wickedness: And therefore
thou have found money, wherewith thou myghtest purchase ignominy, and,
unhappy man, myghtest make a lyuelesse metal to be a burden to the lively
soul.


Joy. I have well laid forth my money to usury.


Reason. Say not that an evil thing may be well laid forth, but only laid
down. If thou cast away an evil burden, it is well: otherwise wheresoever thou
bestowest it, as long as it apparteyneth unto thee, it ceasseth not to be evil.


Joy. I have well laid forth my money to good increase.


Reason. How an evil thing may be well laid forth to commodity, see thou.
Truly how much the more abundant every evil thing is, so much it is worse.
Thou know the saying of David. Their iniquity is sproong forth, as it were
out of fatness: And the richer an usurer is, the worse he is, so much the
greater his covetousness and wickedness is.


Joy. I apply usury.


Reason. Could thou find out no better Art to bestow thy time upon: Or
dyddest thou find many, but this was most meet for thy disposition? Or what
else was the matter that among so many thou appliedst thy mind to this, a more
worse or vyler then which, I know not where thou could have found any, or
that depends upon the lykyng of a more wretched, base, and cowardly mind?
Among so many Arts as are at this day known, and so many trades of living,
thou have chosen the worst of all: which thou have done for that it seemed a
quiet kind of life, namely to sytte still and reckon the days, and to think
long until the last day of the Month come speedyly: little regardyng how
therewithal also thy hours, days, months, and years do pass away: and
like as their time draws near that are indebted unto thee, so does thy
term likewise approach: and like as their time, I say, draws near that
they must pay thee, so does thy time draw near, that thou must pay thy debt
unto nature, leauyng that behind thee which thou have shamefully gained, and
not knowing when the time will come. Thus thou extortest from the poor, to
enriche thou know not whom, and art always in fear of the future
judgment, and in the mean while art not master, but a fearful keeper of
that which is gotten by fylthie Rapine, and pinched with hunger and infamy. I
would marueyle how this mischief could be suffered in well governed Cities,
but that I see al mischiefs are suffered in them. And therefore when as not
long ago, Usurers as Leaperous persons lived separated apart from the company
of other men, that not only none should come at them but those that stood in
need, but also were eschewed by them that met with them, as stynkyng and
contagious persons: Now they live not only among the people, but they be
conversant also with Princes, and they be advanced by maryages, and come to
great honor and dignity: such is the force of gold. Yea moreover, a thing
which thou may wonder at as a Monster, Princes themselves be usurers. the
Lord amend them, so small regard have they of the loss of soul and honor,
so sweet is the savor of money howsoever it be gotten.


Joy. I take delight in usury.


Reason. A fylthie and miserable delyght.


Joy. I use to lay forth money to usury.


Reason. If we believe Cato. thou have slain a man.


Joy. I am an usurer, I have learned none other trade to live by.


Reason. This is a defense for thy covetousness, this is the cause which thou
pretendest: and if it be hard for him that is wyllyng to learn, who can
learn against his will?


Joy. I will always occupy usury.


Reason. Then shall thou always be a wretch, always covetous, always poor,
and in the end goo to the Dyuel.


Of fruitful, and well tylled land. The lvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have fruitful land.


Reason. Understand thereby then the power of him that makes fruitful, and so
use the heavenly gifts, that thou displease not the geuer of them: which thou
shall do, if the fruitfulness of thy land, drive not away the sobriety and
modesty of thy mind, and thy plenty, be bestowed upon thy freindes and the
poor: there is nothing pleasant or sauorie to one that is alone.


Joy. I husband most exquisitely fruitful land.


Reason. Man ought not to be servant to the land, but the land to man: by
means of man's transgression, it is come to pass that the earth yields
nothing to the owner without travail: if it be not husbanded, it brings
forth but a rough croppe, Burres, Thistles, Briars, and Thorns: the same to
labor with the plough, and by strange manuryng, to make it soft and pliant,
man's need has enforced. Hereof began husbandry, which in times past was the
most holy and innocent life, but now subject both to the ancient toil, and
new vices, since nothing has been left unsearched by envy and avarice:
Townysh vyllanies have crept into Country cottages. Truly it is lykely that
husbandmen were the last that waxed wicked: whereof it comes that the Poet
says, When Justice forsook the earth, she left her last footesteps among
them: But it is to be feared, least they that were last evil, be now chief:
so that if happily men should one day generally return to virtue, and the
ancient manners of old time, these men would then also be last. But now I
come to the Art of husbandry, which was sometime had in great price, and used
by men of great calling and wisdom: wherein, as in many other things, Cato,
surnamed Censorius, possesses an high roomth, of whom when it was written, and
that most truly, that he was an excellent Senator, an excellent Orator, an
excellent Captain, and at length, to the fyllyng up of his commendacion, it is
added, that without comparison or example, he was the most excellent Husbandman
of his time. Who will then be ashamed to till the ground with Cato? who will
think that there is any thing vnfytting for him self, which he thought
seemly yenough for his person? who besides the gifts of his body and mind,
and the glory of his worthy deeds, had triumphed for conqueryng of Spain?
Who would be ashamed to drive forth and call to his Oxen, whom that voice drove
along in the furrow, which had sometime hartened so many great armies to
battle, and most eloquently defended so many doubtful causes? Who would
disdain the plough and the harrowe, which that triumphant and Philosophical
hand touched, which had purchased so many notable victories over so many
enemies, had written so many excellent works of worthy matter, apparteynyng
both to Philosophy, History, or common use of life, as are those books which
he wrote concerning this matter whereof we now entreat? He was the first
amongst you that geathered the precepts of Husbandry, and brought them into
the form of an Art, and set them down in writing: after whom there followed
many other, whereof some have advanced that poor and simple skyl, in worthy
and excellent verses, which now calling to my mind, and not forgetful of
man's necessity, truly I do not now discommende of Husbandry.
Notwithstanding, neither the excellency of writers, neither the fear of
poverty, shall ever constrayne me to judge it meet to be preferred or matched
with the liberal and commendable arts? although the first age of the empire
had those that were both valiant captains, and good husbandmen, but now by
continuance of time the case is altered. Howbeit, it happens not now through
the frailty of nature, that your wits are not sufficient to atteyne unto
things of so diverse nature: And therefore in this age, I will permit that
excellent personages give their minds sometime to Husbandry, not to make it a
toil, or their trade of living, but rather for their recreations, and to put
greater cares out of their heads, as namely, sometime to graffe the tender
twygge upon the buddyng stock, or to correct the rank leaves with the crooked
hook, or to lay quycksettes into the Dyke in hope of increase, or to bring the
silver streams by new dygged furrows into the thirsty mebowes, I am content
to give these men license after this manner earnestly to busy them selves, to
dygge, and delue: but wholly to apply the mind unto the earth, unless
necessity constrayne thereunto, I count it unmeet and indecent for a learned
and valiant man, who can not lightly want some matter of more noble exercise.
The good mother Nature, when she gave many arts unto men, she made a
difference also between their wits and dispositions, that every one should
follow that, where unto he was most euclyned. Thou shall find some one, who
being of an indifferent wit, can so cunnyngly either till the land, or sail
over the seas, that in this behalf no Philosophers wisdom may be compared to
his industry. It is a folly, and a bootlesse thing, to contend with another
man, not in thine own, but in his art: wherein, although otherwise thou excel
him, and be higher, as they say, then he by the head and shoulders, yet thou
shall be found his vnderlyng, and where thou art superior in the greatest
matters, thou may easily be overcome in many small.


Joy. This Summer, my land has been very fruitful unto me.


Reason. Mark the next, for present plenty has many times been a token of
future scarcity. It is a rare matter to find prosperity without intermission.


Joy. I have husbanded my land diligently.


Reason. It is well done, if thou had nothing else to do.


Joy. I have trymmed my Vineyarde exquisitely.


Reason. Perhaps thereby thou have promised to thy self a plentiful vintage:
but have thou also made an agreement with the frost, and hayle?


Joy. I have sowed my ground thicker then I was wont.


Reason. Thou shall feed the more Cranes and Wildgeese abroad, more Mise and
Rattes at home, thou shall be host to fowls and woormes, a picker forth of
Darnell, a maker of thy floor, a buylder of barnes, and a servant to thy
reapers and thresshers.


Joy. I have sowed my fields plentifully.


Reason. Be of good hope, thou shall reap that which thou have sowed, corn
and carfulness: unless perhaps I may say this more truly, that the come
belongs to many, and the carfulness to thee alone: and to speak as the
truth is, the field is thy mind, the tillage thine intent, the seed thy
care, the harvest thy traueyle: these shall thou find most plentiful.


Joy. I have well husbanded my land.


Reason. I will tell thee a thing that thou may wonder at. Those ancient
husbandmen, those valiant men that took great glory in Husbandry, were of
opinion that it should be well followed, but not too well: an incredible thing
perhaps to be heard, but by proof of experience found to be most true, for
the profit scarce counterueyleth the charge, and among the ancient writers,
there is a comparison, not unfit, made between a man and a feelde: These
twain if they be sumptuous, although they be prifitable, the remainder will be
little or nothing at all, and therefore in that respect, neither is to be much
regarded.


Joy. I till my land with great diligence.


Reason. I had rather thou did till and husband thine own self: but thou,
being an earthly creature, love the earth, which is no strange thing, since
thou thy self shall make fat that earth which now thou tillest. Till and
husband as much land, and as many trees as thou list, yet in the end, thou
shall not possess very many feet of ground, neither, as says Horace, Among
those trees which thou husbandest and tyllest, shall any follow thee their
short Master, besides the hateful Cypres trees.


Of pleasant green Walks. The Lviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have pleasant walks.


Reason. I confess in deed, that these sometime do bring honest pleasure, and
sometime dishonest. And therefore, those that be studious of virtue, and such as
give them selves to voluptuousness, do equally delight in shadowie
withdrawing places: For the place provoke some to wisdom, and some to
repentance, and some to incontinencie and wantonness. For it is not for
nothing that the great Orator, when he objected adultery against a vile
person, described also the pleasantness of yt place where the fact was
committed, as adding a spur unto the wickedness: and therefore we ought not
to take delight in the place, but to be merry in mind, if it have happened unto
thee to have such an one, as knows well how to use al places.


Joy. I have store of pleasant walks.


Reason. Who has not heard of Tiberius secret walk, and the withdrawing place
of Caprea? I am ashamed to recite the things that are known to al men. The
old man Hircinus, how does he rail against secret walks: How much more
gloriously did Scipio Africane live a poor banished man in the dry country,
then the Roman prince in all his pleasures? I therefore repeat this again: Al
your felicity consists not in places, neither in any other things, but in
the mind only. So that they which have commended of the solitary life, and
secret withdrawing places, would have it thus to be understood, to wit, if
the mind be able to use them wisely, and not otherwise. And therefore I
attend to hear, what profit thou reapest of those thy pleasant walks, and
then mark what I will pronounce thereof. For if thou vaunt thee so much of
the places which yesterday were not thine, and to morrow perhaps may be taken
from thee, and if thou consider uprightly, at this present are none of thine,
doubtless thou vauntest of that which is another. What have thou then to
glory of? What belongs it unto thee that the Alps be cold in Summer, that ye
mountain Olympus is higher then the clouds, that the hill Apenninus bears
wood and trees? What though Ticinus be bright, Athesis pleasant, Sorga
soundyng? If these be praises, truly they are not the praises of men, but of
places: but it is thy part to minister just matter of thine own commedation.


Joy. I walk in pleasant places.


Reason. In the mean while it skilleth what cares do walk in thy breast: for
what avails it to put stinking oyntmentes into iuorie boxes? What, to have a
foul mind, in fair places? How many holy fathers have flourished among the
rough mountains? How many filthy adulterers have rotted in the green meadows?
Moreover, it has been proved that such places have not only ben hurtful to
men's minds, but sometimes also to their bodies and lives, not only by taking
too much air, but also by the sword and sudden invasion. Who reads not in
Curtius of ye most pleasant groves and woods, the secret walks and herbars
which the kings of the Medes planted with their own hands, the chiefest
thing wherein the kings and nobles of the Medes bestowed their endeavors and
took greatest delight, as it is reported? Howbeit, in them at the
commandment of a drunken and frantyke young King, the ancient and noble
Parmenio was stayne, who, as I suppose, was the chief of the Dukes and
Captains of the Macedones. Who knows not Caieta, and that bendyng of the
shore there, a fayrer and pleasaunter place then which, there is none under
the Coape of heaven: in which place the noble Cicero was murdered at the
commandment of drunken and cruel Antonie? This place in some respect might
be convenient for so worthy a man, that since the destenies had denied him
power to dye at Rome, he might dye in that flouryshyng country, the most
flourishyng Orator of all other, and best citizen: Howbeit the manner and
auctour of his death was far unworthy, It was by chance that Cicero at that
time walked in those places, to avoid the troubles of the city, and was after
his manner either devising some new matter concerning Philosophy, or
apparteyning to the course and trade of living, or bewaylyng the common wealth.
The grief of his mind which he conceived of the state of his country, he
aswaged with the delight of his eyes, when as the Butchers that were sent by
him that was enemy to all virtue, dispatched such a man out of the world, as
no age to come will restoare the like. Thus therefore it happens, that
delectable places are most ap^ for treason and deceypt, whilst men live there
most loosely, and have least regard to foresee dangers. For the wild beasts
are sonest snared in the thickest wooddes, and birds are most easily limed in
the green twigges.


Joy. I walk meryly in my pleasant walks, and void of care.


Reason. Mirth, and neglect of care, are always contrary unto heedefulnesse.
So long as every man thinks earnestly upon his own dangers, and the common
state of man's life, there shall scarce any man live very merrily, or deuoyde of
care: And it is neither the beauty of the places, nor hope of riches, that can
breed forgetfulness of mischiefs that are at hand.


Joy. I take delyght to be abroad in my walks.


Reason. Not more delyght then do the wild Boares and the Bears. It makes
not so much matter where thou art, but what thou do: The place shall never
make thee noble, but thou the place, and that never ouherwyse, then by
attemptyng some notable matter therein.


Of Flocks and Heardes of Cattle. The.Lix. Dialogue.
JOY. I Joy in my flocks and heardes.


Reason. A brutishe joy.


Joy. I abound in heardes and flocks.


Reason. A beastly prosperity, which beasts have procured.


Joy. I love flocks and heardes.


Reason. In all loves, it is to be suspected, that there is some likelinesse
between the loving, and beloved.


Joy. I love heardes and flocks.


Reason. Ye love every thing saving virtue, and one of you another: Those
things which especially ought to be loved, ye care not for, and those things
which ye should not esteem, ye love.


Joy. I love heardes and flocks.


Reason. O wretched lovers of vile things, and haters of the worthy? Ye love
those things which understand not that they are loved, neither are able to
love you again, for you your selves do not love one another, nor love them
that love you, and all this mischief comes through covetousness, that you
not only prefer a bondslaue before a free borne man, but also a beast,
before a reasonable creature.


Joy. I have plenty of heardes, and flocks.


Reason. If thou feed them thy self, what other shall thou be, then a most
busy sheaphearde? A vile office, although it be praised of many, specially of
Catullus of Verona: but if thou do it by other, then thou art not the
sheaphearde thy self, but servant to thy sheapheardes, and laid open unto
their deceytes. Sometime thou art indamaged by thy neighbor, sometime by
falling from an high, sometime by murreine, sometime by thieves, sometime by
straying, every day some excuse must be feigned, whereby thy loss, sorrow, and
abuse do grow: but the greatest grief is, to be deceived by a rude rustike
varlet.


Joy. I am rich in flocks and heardes.


Reason. Riches are praised, yet are they uncertain, and subject to many
chances, deceites, theft, murreines, which come so often, and are so hot,
that many times they consume whole flocks, and dispearse whole heardes. Thou
know the rotte which Lucretius described, and afterhym Virgil, with many
other, which for the want of writers, are not set down of like fame, and also
as hurtful.


Joy. I am rich in flocks and heardes.


Reason. Wide and large riches, which can not only not be comprehended in a
coffer, as gold and precious stones, but also not within the compass of a
most great house, so that thou art not safe from servants, nor from thieves,
nor from cruel wild beasts, for every one has power over thy goods.


Joy. I rejoice in my heardes and flocks.


Reason. Thou shall once rejoice, and be sorry a thousand times. There shall no
day pass over thy head without some sorrowful news: Now the Sabeis are broken
in, and have taken away all that thou have, and have put thy servants to the
swoorde, as it was once in time past said to that good old man that was so
rich in cattle: As one time an Ox has broken his horn, at another time an
Horse has strayned his leg, now a Woolfe has devoured a straggling Lamb, at
another time the rotte has invaded the infected flock. Wretches, ye are not
contented to behold your own miseries, and mortality, but that you must also
bewail the death of bruit beasts.


Of Elephantes and Camels. The.Lx. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have Elephantes.


Reason. To what purpose I pray thee, for peace, or war? With these, the two
most notable enemies of Italy, Pyrrhus and Hannibal, whilst they hoped to
break the array of the Roman armies, they troubled their own orders: A
grievous and noisome beast, and which, as thou know well, has oftentimes
destroyed their own masters and keepers: to sight strange, and for hugeness
of body, form, swell, and noise, terrible, unprofitable to use, and hard to be
gotten.


Joy. I have a great Elephant.


Reason. There have been sometime Elephantes in Italy, not taken by huntyng*
but caught from the enemies, and led in triumph, which at the first sight
m^de the Italian horses afearde, when these Elephantes followed them into the
Capitol, and were not long before taken from Pyrrhus: As for the Carthagiens,
they were not so much taken from them, as forbidden the use of them: for such
were the conditions of the yeace, which they agreed unto when they were
vanquished, and it was specially and namely provided, that they should deliver
up such as they had that were already tamed, and thencefoorth they should tame
no more. And thus by small and small the use of Elephantes decayed, not only in
Italy, where they were far strangers, and were brought thither as it were by
force, but also in Africa and Egypt, which are countries nearer to the places
where they do breed. Thus report goes, that in Italy in the days of your
great grandfathers, Frederike that was king of the Romans had one, and the
king of Egypt also but one only: and both these princes had them rather for
show, then for (...) use. Thus these beasts in India and Aethiopia, being
de^y^^^^ from the weerisomnesse of foreign nations, dwell quietly in these own
native wildernesses. And what art thou that seem so much to glory in an
Elephant? Art thou a second Hanaibal. who being carried upon an Elephant, and
lookyng with one eye, troubled all Italy? This beast, although he do somewhat
resemble the understanding and reason of mankind, as some writers have
reported, and is much commended for mildness of manners, yet do I say that he
is but an unprofitable beast, and more meet for the prodigality of a Prince,
then the calling of a private person, which is able to fill an house, and to
empty a barn.


Joy. I have Camelles also.


Reason. These are almost both to be considered of a like, but that the
Elephant is meet to bear turrettes, and Camelles to carry burdens, and the
more commodious and profitable of the twain. If thou will follow my counsel,
use such beasts as most prudent nature has engendered in those parts of the
world where thou thy self lyuest, who has distributed beasts and all other
things, as they are most meets for every climate.


Joy. I have a Camel.


Reason. Job had three thousand, and lost them: For both sicknesses, and
thieves, and infected pastures, and falls, and a thousand other chances hang
over your heardes. Feeldes, and hills, and walls are daily destroyed: what
then shall a man say to these which do not stand? All your goods for the
most part are in perpetual motion, and that fame which ye ought to seek
through the engraffed virtue of the mind, ye hunt after with the rareness of
strange and fortaine beasts.


Of Apes, and other beasts of pleasure. The.Lxi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Take pleasure in an Ape.


Reason. A beast filthy to behold, and unhappy in effect, of which what
can thou hope other then weerisomnesse? Whatsoever he finds in the house,
either he spoyleth it, or casts it about. If then thou take delyght in such
things, doubtless thy Ape is pleasant unto thee. Cicero calls him a
monstrous beast, saying also that there is nothing less to be marueyled at,
then that an Ape ouerthrewe the pitcher of lottes, which that most learned man
woorthyly mocketh at, to be written of in the Greek histories for a wonder,
when as in deed it might seem more marvelous, if he did not overthrow and
cast every thing about.


Joy. I have plenty of beasts of pleasure.


Reason. There is nothing that can be at once both filthy and pleasant: for
what pleasure or delyght is there in filthiness? Howbeit, a man ought to
eschew whatsoever offends his eyes, his ears, his nose, and his mind, and
that taste is corrupt which takes pleasure in bitter things. But this is your
manner, to be delyghted with filthy things: and ye take singular pleasure, not
only in filthy and unprofitable beasts, but, which is more vile, in
dishonest persons, and men of unseemly speech, and odious demeanure: and to be
short, the more evil ^auoured a thing is, the more acceptable and beloved it is
unto you. This is a renerall rule amongst you, this is your fantasy, this is
your disposition, this is your study, and the commendation of your judgment.


Of Peacockes, Chyckens, Hens, Bees, and Pigions The.Lxii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have stoare of Peacockes.


Reason. By their tails I would advise thee to think upon Argos eyes, least
the most famous plague that follows the neglecting of good rules, do hurt thy
feet.


Joy. I have many Peacockes.


Reason. I confess it is a beautiful and comely bird to behold, but this
pleasure of the eyes is requited with great weerysomnesse of the ^a^^^, against
the horriblenesse of whose most hellysh noise, it were ^eedeful for men to run
away, or to stop their ears with V^^^ses wax: I will say nothing of the
grief and complaints of the neighbors, which are more hateful then any
thing else. But you, whilst imperiously, and leauyng nothing unassayed, ye
tender your throat and belly, ye think neither upon your own nor your
neighbors discommodities, forgettyng how that in old time the most valiant
and worthy men had no such care or desire, when as fyshes, and wild beasts,
and fowls, were (...) ^uedled withal, and besides the feathers there is
nothing to be ly^^^ of, as Ovid says. And now truly I can perceive nothing in
this foul that may delyght a man, besides the excellency of the ^^esh, which
some say will never putrify, though it be kept and long while, which thou
may prove if thou list, and S. Augustine says, he has proved. Thus,
unless ambition and prodigality be present, neither your meat nor your
delyght can satisfy you. Truly, it is reported that Hortentius the Orator
was the first that ever killed a Peacocke at Rome to be eaten for meat, a man
of great eloquence, in manners delicate and soft as a woman: but such a one,
whose manners very many, whose eloquence very few, do imitate.


Joy. I noorysh Poultrie and chickins.


Reason. A trouble to thy house, meat for Foxes. scrapers of the floor, by
means of whose talentes thou shall always have dust, and never an even floor.


Joy. I have great store of Hens.


Reason. To omit their noysomnes, the commodity and charges almost al one, one
egg is dearly bought, and casts much cacklyng.


Joy. But I have plenty of Bees.


Reason. Thy felicity is not only mortal, but flying on the wyng, and fugitive.


Joy. I have many Hyues.


Reason. There is as much business and noise in every one of them, as in a
great City, or an army of men. Now the swarms are ready to t^^e away, now the
kings will fight, now they need ringing of a ^^an or brazen Basin, now
castyng of dust, that they may be saue^* Many times when thou have done all that thou can, thou shall be never the near. And thus thynkyng thy self to
be rych, shall find thy self naked: and therefore if thou compare the
carfulness of the keeping, with the honey, thou wylt say, It is bitter Honey.


Joy. I have plenty of Pigeons.


Reason. By night the Bees be whist in their bedchambers, faith Virgyl: but
Pigeons be never at quiet, for there is no living thing more unquiet then a
Pigeon.


Joy. My Pigeon houses are full.


Reason. Then have thou some that strive and fight, some that moan, some that
foul the house by day, some that break thy sleep by night: behold what a
great matter this is of rejoicing.


Of Fyshpondes. The.lxiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Rejoice in my fyshpondes which I have made.


Reason. I do not think, that thou have made them with more felicity then
did Solomon. And therefore when thou shall turn thy self to behold all the
works which thy hands have made, and the traueyles wherein thou have swe at
in vain, in them al thou shall perceive vanity and affliction of mind, that
perhaps thou may be sorry in that wherein thou have taken pleasure, reputing
it both loss of time, and of expenses.


Joy. I have made me fyshpondes.


Reason. It is not sufficient for the belly to have searched through al lands,
but the waters also are assayed, and there is a prison made for fishes in their
own kingdom.


Joy. I have stored my fishpondes.


Reason. Thou have deprived fishes of their liberty, and natural habitation,
and those whom nature made whole, thou haft taught to be sick.


Joy. I have let in the water into my fishpondes.


Reason. Thou see, how to have enforced the waters, it was noted and
ascribed unto price in Julius Caesar, as great a man as he was: what do thou
then think of thy self?


Joy. I have enclosed fishes with in my Wears.


Reason. Ye keep flying fowls in prysons at your pleasure, what marvel is
it then, if you have the flow fishes at your commandment? All things are in
your power, and subject under your feet, ye most painful and covetous mortal
men, except your own mind only, which either ye cannot bridle and govern,
or, which more true is, ye care not to do it. And therefore being wild and
vagrant, he dryueth you about, and enforces you to al kinds of vanity and
mischief: which if it were obedient unto you, or rather subject to reason, he
would then lead you in a more ready path, to a better end, and cause you to
contempne many things which ye covet.


Joy. I have fysh shut up in my pondes.


Reason. Forasmuch as all things are subject unto you, see how seemly a
thing it is for you to be subject to pleasure, unto the most vylest thing of
all other, the most noblest thing that is under heaven. But thus it fares, you
will rule al, to be servants your selves to sensuality. And this folly is not
new, nor of the common sort, but ancient, and of the chiefest. Fyshpondes and
Wears for Oysters, did Sorgius Orata first appoint at the shore Barane. About
the same time Licinius Muraena began the Wears for other fishes: who both
took their surnames of a fyshe. These are worthy causes of a surname, to wit,
for that one of them loved the Gysthead, the other the Lamprey. These be they
that have deserved the tytles to be called Africani, or Macedonici: and perhaps
these men have taken no less pains in taking and bestowyng their fyshe, and
in buyldyng their Wears, then Scipio and Paulus did in deliueryng and
beautifiyng their country, with their conquestes and triumphs. And therefore
it is very true which some say, In quantity al men's cares are almost equal,
but in quality far unequal. And as evil examples have always plenty of
folowers, after this Licinius, there followed noble men, Philip, Hortentius, and
Lucullus also, a man otherwise of famous memory, who not being contented with
a simple Wear, near unto Naples, he caused an Hill to be cut away: which
stood him in as great charges as the buylding of his country house, or
vyllage, devising a place of rest for the fyshes which he had taken, by the
cutting away of a stop which was made of hard rock, and lettyng in the Sea,
as it were a cauline Haven. And therefore Pompeius the great, who devised not
only Wears, but Empires also, not improperly termed this Lucullus ye Roman
Xerxes, that is to say, a dygger away of hills. What shall I say of others? The
first that made Wears for Lampreis, was one Curus, I know not what he was;
for, notwithstanding al his Lampreys, he is scarce yet known, whereof he had
such plenty, that with six thousand of them he furnished Julius Caesar's
triumphant supper. This man had also his imitatours, namely Hortentius the
orator, of whom we spoke before, a man that never failed in following an
example of wantonness: and therefore it falls out many times, that your
learning nothing abateth your madness: but it never brings any thing that a
man may wonder at, whylest they that have attained unto learning, think that
it is lawful for them to do every thing, and arrogate much unto them selves,
which they durst not, if they had not learning. It is reported therefore that
this man had a Wear at the shore of the Baiane coast, whereas, among other
fyshes which he had, he loved so dearly one certain Lamprey, that he mourned
for him when he was dead. Behold a worthy love, and meet to provoke so grave
a man to tears. He that (as it is read) neither bewailed the civil wars of
his time, nor the proscriptions and slaughter of the Citizens, neither yet
would have lamented the overthrow at Cannas, if it had happened in his time,
did he weep for the death of a Lamprey? This lightness is so great, that that
which is of later days must needs be pardoned. The age and sex of Antonia
makes her folly more excusable, who is reported, not to have wept for her
Lamprey, but while he was living, to have decked him forth with ringes and
jewels of gold, insomuche that the strangeness of the sight, caused many
folks to repair to Paulos* for that was the name of the vyllage, lying in the
Baiane confines. There were also Wears of Wylkes and Perewincles, and other
vanities concerning fyshes, and specially the Pyke of Tibur, which was taken
between the two brydges. But I have spoken yenough of other men's errors, in
which the more thou see enwrapped, the more diligent take thou heed least
thou be snared in the like: neither do I now forbydde thee the use of fyshes,
but only the over much care of vile and unnoble things.


Of Cages of birds, and of speaking and singing birds. The.lxiiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have shut up sundry birds in a Cage.


Reason. I leave now to wonder at the prysons for fyshes. There be some also
provided for birds, whose dwelling is the open air, a more large and wide
country: Gluttony has found out huntyng, it has found out fyshing, it
has found out haukyng, and it is not sufficient to take them whom nature
created free, but they be also kept in prysons. How much more seemly and
honest were it, to enforce the belly to be contented with meats that may be
easily gotten, and to leave the wild beasts to the wooddes, and the fyshes to
the Sea, and the fowls to the air, then to bestow so much travel upon them,
that if it were bestowed to catch virtues, in this time by good study having
obtained them (for they will not fly away) ye might have planted them within
the closet of your minds, from whence they could neither escape away, nor be
purloyned.


Joy. I have filled my Cage with birds.


Reason. A thing nothing at al necessary, and no less hard to be found, then
difficult to be preserved, ancient notwithstanding, which above a thousand
and four hundred years since, one Lelius, surnamed Strabo, first devised, not
that Lelius that was counted the wise, who, if he had found out byrd cages,
had lost the title of wisdom. There be some inventions that seem to be
profitable and pleasant, which notwithstanding become not noble wits: they
that first found out fyshpondes, and hyrde Cages, what other thing did they
respect then their bellyes, which is far from those that are studious in
virtue?


Joy. I have fat Chrushes, and Turtle doo^^s in my Cage.


Reason. But not slow tormentours, since thine appetite being provoked by so
many enticements, requires the punishment of a sick stomach. Have thou not
heard the saying of the Satirical Poet? This notwithstanding is a present
Punishment, when thou put of thy clothes, being swelling full, and cariest
thy undigested Peacocke with thee into the baine. He speaks there of a
Peacocke. It is a beautiful and a famous foul: but it is not he alone that
pincheth the ouergreedfe panche. The delyght of thy belly, is but of short
taste, which in short time will also turn to loathyng, unless it be moderated.
Rawnesse that is not easily disgested, is a sickness that brings long pain,
and many times death: Go thy ways now, and brag of thy fat Thrushes, and
Turtledooues.


Joy. I have speaking Choughes, and Pyes, and Parrats.


Reason. The Emperor Augustus taking pleasure in the like, gave great sums
of money for them that saluted him conquerous and trimphant Caesar. And when
afterward there were many other such presented unto him, answered, that he had
yenough such saluters at home already, laying there a measure to that vanity:
saving that the last Crow with his strange pastyme, caused him self to be
bought more dear thou were the residue. These histories are read in the
Saturnalia: But what in the natural History of our neighbor of Verona: This
Crow that was so docible, vsyng to fly out of the Cobblers shop, where he was
most diligently fed, and coming abroad into the open street, would salute
Tiberius Caesar, and Drusus, and Germanicus by name, and the whole people of
Rome, with such admiration and love of them all, that when as a neighbor
moved either with envy or anger had killed him, with great sorrow and grief
of almen the killer was first driven out of those quarters, and afterward
stayne by the people, and the Crow with diligent exequies and solemn funeral,
was taken up and buried. O always unspeakable madness of the people? In that
city there was a Crow wept for and buried, and he that killed him, being a
Citizen of Rome, was put to death: in which City neither Africane the greater
had a Sepulcher, neither the less a revenger, for that on Gods name this
Crow, as I have said, saluted the people, but these men of whom I speak, did
not salute, but procured safety and glory to the people. Thus the speech of
Crows is more acceptable, then the virtue of valiant men. Let any man now
deny, that it is safe for him to agree to the peoples judgment: although who
so is an vpryght considerer of things, he will not marueyle at the public
contempt wherein worthy men are had, since of these woonderers at Crows, and
other prattling birds, divine voices, and heavenly Oracles are despised.


Joy. I have a fair Parrat.


Reason. This bird forsooth above all the residue is notable for his golden
chain, unless it be the Phoenix again, for he among birds wears a chain,
and is moreover the only bird of his kind. But the Parrat, being a great
saluter, and specially of princes, nature has plainly made him as it were a
flatterer: whereby this Disticon or two verses are known, I Parrat will learn
other men's names of you: But I have learned this of my self, to say, hayle
Caesar.


Joy. I have a most eloquent Pie.


Reason. When as eloquent men are very seldom found, have thou a most eloquent
Pie? I confess it is a pratlyng bird, and a diligent saluter: whereof comes
this saying, I prattling Pie do call thee my master with a perfect voice: If
thou saw me not, thou would deny that I were a bird. Verily there be
strange things (I know not whether as true) reported, concerning the diligence
and desire to learn of this bird: But this above the residue is scarce
credible, that if she forget the word which she is taught, she is very much
vexed and grieved, which grief of mind, she bewrays by her secret
meditation, and if she chance to call the word to her remembrance, then
waxes she woonderful meery: But if through hardness of the word, or
weakness of her memory, she be thoroughly overcome, many times she dies for
sorrow: so that now the Poet Homers death is to be counted less strange, if so
it be true. Howbeit, all Pyes are not of like aptnes to learn, but those only
which receive their meat and name with mast, and are commonly called mast Pies.


Joy. I have gotten a pleasant singyng Nightyngale.


Reason. Pliny the second reports, that there are Nightingales also and
Starles found that are apt to be taught the Greek and Latin tongues, and
moreover, that in his time there was a Chrushe in Rome, that did imitate the
speech of a man: the like whereof was known commonly of late of a Starle,
whom it has been thy chance to hear and wonder at many times even in
Plinies Country, speaking orderly many words together, poyntyng and
pronouncyng them like a man: For as touching the Parrat, it is now so common a
thing, that it is no more to be marueyled (...). How often have thou heard
him plainly call for meat? How often calling his Feeder by his name, and the
better to persuade him, flatteryng him with sweetness of gestures and
words? How often laughyng, in such sort, that he has caused the standers
by to laugh, that it was thought not to be the laughter of a bird, but of a
very man? Which although it be so, yet al these, believe me, but specially the
Nightingale would sing more pleasantly upon their own boughs then in your
Cages, saving that your lust lyketh of nothing but that which you have made
your own, although nature have made al things common. Thus covetousness
stretches beyond her own bonds, and her own name.


Joy. I have gotten together innumerable store of birds.


Reason. Although thou have many, yea though thou have al, yet I think thou
wylt lack the Phoenix: whether there be such a bird, or whether there be no
such bird, or whether we believe that to be true which some have written, to
wit, how that upon the four hundred year after the building of the city,
this bird flue out of Arabia into Egypt, and being taken there, was brought to
Rome, and there at an assembly was showed unto the people, and at length, as
it is like yenough, died: which last thing, those grave writers doubt not but
it is false, which notwithstanding are in some distrust of the first. And
therefore when thou have al kinds of birds, yet shall thou lack the most
woonderful and beautiful bird of al. Sorowfully and angerly I jest with thee:
why do ye always rejoice, like children, in vain pleasures? And as Solomon
says, Ye little babes, how long will ye love infancy? Turn at the length unto
my correction, as he also says. For these are his words which I speak unto
you: and O ye blind wretches, suffer the birds to live in the wooddes, to
breed, to feed, to sing, and wander abroad, and stretche you forth the
wings of your slouhtful minds unto heaven, and lift up your selves from the
ground, endeavor not to catch birds, but to become birds. And omittyng
these matters, whereof I am ashamed to speak, if thou have any thing wherein
it is meet for a man to rejoice, utter it.


Of the worthiness of Marriage. The.Lxv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have married a noble Wife.


Reason. I had rather thou had at home, not only Pies and Parrattes, but
Owls and Shritches: They would sing, she will chyde: they would tell thee
somewhat, she will do thee nothing: thou myghst cast them of, but her thou
can not.


Joy. I am adorned with a noble marriage.


Reason. Thou art tied with a fair chain, from whence death only can deliver
thee.


Joy. I am happy, by means of a noble marriage.


Reason. Thou were more happy, if it were by a chaste marriage, and most happy
by a single life.


Joy. I am beautified with a goodly marriage.


Reason. The choice of a wife is hard, a foul one is loathed, a fair one is
hardly kept, by reason that there is perpetual war between the beauty of
the body and chastity of the mind. But if that do happen, which is most
rare, and honesty be joined with beauty, I will then reason more largely with
thee. Admit she have all other ornaments of a woman, nobility, wisdom,
riches, fruitefulnesse, eloquence, good name and fame, good and commendable
behavior, yet know thou this, that with these pride is entered, intermingled
into thy house: So that it is not without good cause that the Satirical Poet
says, That he had rather have Venusin^, then Cornelia, that was mother to the
Gracchi, and daughter to Scipio Africane, that was proud of her fathers
triumphs and glory.


Joy. I have chanced upon a noble and honest marriage.


Reason. What say thou of the pride and disdain? Art thou ignorant of the
manners of women? Learn to serve, learn to suffer, learn to loose thy dearest
friends: thou must attend thy wedlock only. A wife is a dangerous rock, and
destruction to friendshyp, imperious, and governor of the husbands affections.


Joy. I have married a Gentlewoman to my wife.


Reason. An heavy burden, and hard fetters to weerie thy shoulders and feet,
which sometime were free: Grievous to be spoken, more grievous to be thought
on, but most grievous to be suffered, a ghest not for one day, but for thy
whole life, and perhaps an enemy has entered upon thy house void of defense:
So that, as I have said, the hope of the ancient remedy of divorce being
taken away, death only must set the free.


Joy. I have married a well-beloved wife.


Reason. Thou art deceived, she has married thee, thou liuedst to long at
thine own liberty, thou have taken a wife to be thy Mistress, a tormentour
to her Children in law, an enuier of her Mother in law, a yoke to thy
Household, a burden to thy Kitchen, a pain to thy Storehouse, a charge to thy
Coffer, an ornament to thy Hal, a show for thy Window in the day, and an
unquietness for thy Chamber in the night.


Joy. I have gotten a most loving wife.


Reason. In the steed of love, which thou know not, jealousy, suspicion,
and complaints, are come upon thee, thou have continual wars at home, even
in the mids of pleasures and pastyme disagreement will spryng: thou shall be
safe neither at boorde nor at bed, thou shall find no time void of strife, at
midnight ye shall be together by the ears.


Joy. I have obtained a wished marriage.


Reason. Marriage with a wife, and peace with a divorce.


Joy. I have a wife whom I please exceedingly.


Reason. Peradventure it were better for thee to displease her, then should she
not trouble and consume thee with loving, but suffer thee to muse on thy
matters, and to follow thy business, and to take thy natural sleep: Whereas
now in pleasing thy wife, thou think upon nothing that may please thy self,
but upon her only, she challenges thee wholly to her self, and yet thou alone
art not sufficient for her. If upon occasion thou would go any whither, she
will say thou runnest away, and seek causes to depart from her: if thou do
any thing, she will say thou forgettest her: if thou muse upon any matter, she
will say thou art angry with her: if thou abstain from meat, she will say her
provision pleases thee not: if thou take thy rest, she will say thou have
weeried thy self with playing the game of love with other. And therefore, in
being pleasant to thy wife, thou must needs be unprofitable to thy self and
others.


Joy. I have a wife, whom I love ardently.


Reason. It were better to love her chastely, virtuously, soberly, and modestly:
for what is ardent love other then the burning of the mind, which while it
flameth, what place can there be for modesty, for coniugale reverence,
tranquillity, and quietness? Does thy wife love theee ardently? Unless she
perceive that thou love her again, her love will wax cold, and she will
turn her goodwyll into hatred: but if thou wylt match her in love, thou must
needs burn likewise, and give thy self over only to thy lover, and be the
wakeful husband of a ielous wife: some time with fair words, and sometime
with complaints and feigned accusations thou must be awaked and troubled in
the night, if peradventure thou have wantonly east thine eye aside, or laughed
heartily with one that has laughed, or saluted thy neighbors wife, or
commended the beauty of another woman, or returned home late at night, or
finally, shall do or say any thing whereby thou may be suspected of the
breach of love: which, if it may be called a life, then know not I what is to
be termed death. And this is my opinion concerning your ardent love.


Joy. I have a perpetual companion of my Bed.


Reason. And also a perpetual banishment of sleep. The sleep of the wedded
bed is rare, and small, where there is sometime pleasure, sometime chyding,
and never quietness.


Joy. I have a most faithful wife.


Reason. I deny not but there have been some faithful, even to the death. And
truly to a man that has chosen this kind of life, a good and faithful wife
is a great treasure: yet the multitude of the contrary sort is greater, for
that many worthy men have perished through their wives tretcherie. I omit the
cruel and blooddie marriage of Danaus, that infamous night, and miserable
slaughter of so many young men together. Not this, they of whom we spoke
erewhyle, not grave Agamemnon, not Deiphobus the Phrygian can deny, and among
your country folk, Scipio Africane the younger, and lastly of latter time,
not king Alboinus, whose blood stained the banks of the fair river Athesis,
which was shed there by his unchaste and cruel wife.


Joy. I have met with a noble, chaste, gentle, humble, obedient, virtuous, and
faithful wife.


Reason. Thou art a notable fouler, thou have found a white Crow: and yet
there is no man that thinks he has found a black one.


Of a fair Wife. The.Lxvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have chanced upon a fair Wife.


Reason. Thou have gotten an hard province, be watchful. I have said alredie,
that it is an hard thing to keep that which is desired of many.


Joy. My wives beauty is excellent.


Reason. The beauty of the body, as many things else, rejoices commonly in
the like, and hates vnlykelynesse and inequality. If therefore thou thy self
be of like beauty, thou shall be busied, if not, thou shall be contemned, both
which are grievous.


Joy. My wives beauty is great.


Reason. Her pride is as great, for there is nothing that so much puffs up
the mind, and makes proud.


Joy. My wives beauty is passing great.


Reason. Take heed that her chastity be not as small. The Satirical Poet has
a pretty saying, It is seldom to see beauty and honesty to agree: Which
admit they be together, yet who can abide the insolency of behavior, and
daily contempt?


Joy. My wife is passing fair.


Reason. Then have thou at home a sumptuous Idol, and a painful, thou shall
daily see strange and new fashions, and daily disgu^sing of the body, to see
how well every thing becomes, and an inuentyng head to devise every way: Now
term the loss of thy patrimony, a gain.


Joy. I have a most beautiful wife.


Reason. Thou have a contentious Idol, and a proud, which being assotted,
thou may woorshyp, which being ravished, thou may wonder at, and
honor, and depend wholly upon her, submit thy neck to her yoke, and reposing
thy self only in the beauty of thy wife, cast away from thee all other
cares, and thine own liberty: And, as I said erewhyle, beware thou praise
none but her, turn not thine eyes from her face, wax not faint in speaking
her fair, be not less fond then thou wast wont to be, whatsoever thou
mislikest in her it is treason, al wisdom in thee is forsaken of her:
Finally, live at thy wives commandment, and observe the becking of thy
Mistress as a Drudge, and not as an Husband: Do this if thou think it so
great a matter to embrace thy fair bedfellowe, and to enjoy her smooth skin
for a little while, and to beget children upon a white womb, as it were to take
choice apples out of a fair vessel.


Joy. I have a beautiful wife.


Reason. A sweet poison, golden fetters, an honorable servitude.


Joy. I take pleasure in my wives beauty.


Reason. A vain and short pleasure. There is nothing more frail then beauty,
specially a woman's. Who so loves his wife for her beauties sake, will soon
hate her.


Of a fruitful and eloquent Wife. The.Lxvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a fruitful wife.


Reason. She will bring thee forth many cares, and many troubles: A barren
wife, is but one trouble in an house, but a fruitful wife, is many. Thou
know the saying of the Comical Poet, I married a wife, what misery did I
not taste of thereby? Then had I children, another care.


Joy. My wife is not only fruitful, but eloquent also.


Reason. At one side thou shall have children and nurses: on the other side
thou shall not lack iestes and words. Thou have one with whom thou may
dispute, and declaime. And have thou not heard the saying of the Satirical
Poet, where he says, Let not thy wife which lies by thy side, be a
Rethorician, or a Logician, neither well seen in all Histories. Thou soughtest
for a wife, and have found a Schoolemistresse: and now thou art in this case,
that thou can not utter any rude or common thing, without thy wives
controullyng and mockyng, and thou shall wyshe in vain that which the same
Poet says, Let the husband be licenced to speak false congruitie. Among the
weerisomnesses of the world, there is none more odious then a saucie woman, or
she that can not hold her tongue.


Of a great Dowry. The.Lxviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am enryched with a great Dowry.


Reason. And with a great tyranny, and so one mischeife is heaped upon
another. There be two prouocations of pride in wives, their dowry, and their
beauty.


Joy. My wife has a great Dowry.


Reason. There is nothing more importunate or intractable, then a woman with a
great dowry She thinks that ther^ i^ nothing unlawful for her to do, which
compares her riches to her husbands poverty, which mayntayneth her husband,
and thinks her self to be his Mistress, and not his fellow.


Joy. There is a great Dowry come into my house.


Reason. Where the Dowry comes in, liberty goes out: Which thing Lycur^^s
very well foresaw, who made a law, That Maidens sh^ulde be married without a
Dowry: adding also a reason, to wi^, That the wife should be married, and not
the money, and men should look more narrow^y to their marriages, when as they
were restrained by no Dowry: And both wisely, for in deed in many houses the
husband is not married to the wife, but the money is married to covetousness,
and doubtless a great Dowry is the wives liberty, and the husbands bridle.


Joy. I have a very great Dowry with my wife.


Reason. Nay, rather change the places of thy words, and say thou have a wife
with a great Dowry: How much more wyllyng would thou be to shut her out of
doors, if thou myghtest do it without the money? Truly that marriage is
shameful, when as a Virgin is not brought to the bed in hope of issue, but
the desired Dowry brought to the coffer by provocation of covetousness.


Joy. My wife has brought me a great Dowry.


Reason. Speak more truly, a great price for thy liberty, which if it had
been dear unto thee, as it ought, thou would have sold it for no money.


Joy. There is happened unto me a very rich wife.


Reason. Thou speak nothing of her conditions: for I think thou thoughtest
nothing of her manners, and of the chiefest Dowries in women, to wit, faith,
shame fastness, chastity, and modesty: These ye regard not, and in your
marriages ye respect only money and beauty, that is to say, covetousness and
letcherie, fytte means for such marriages.


Joy. My wife has great store of money.


Reason. Mark whether that saying of Themistocles, wherein he concludes, that
he had rather have a man without money, then money without a man, may not aptly
be applied unto women also?


Joy. My wife is very rich.


Reason. How much better were it, to live in quietness with a poor wife,
then to be troubled with a proud: and to be hungry with a poor wenche that is
humble, then to live in brawlyng with a rich and insolent Peacocke?


Joy. My wives Dowry is exceedyng great.


Reason. It follows that the pride of her mind is as great, and has no
regard nor fear of her husband. Thou wylt not dare to reprehende her faults
when thou consyderest her Dowry, thou wylt not presume to humble her when thou
remembrest that thou art proud by her means, and thou must not only put up
her loftiness, and tediousness, but also her checkes and injuries. Do thou
not remember the Prince Aurelius Antonius, who lost not the surname of a
Philosopher, although he were an Emperor? Who knowing his wives whooredome,
and when his friends exhorted him either to put her to death, or to put her
away, aunsweared: If I put away my wife, I must also restore her Dowry, which
was the Empire. Thus thou see how a Dowry brydled the mind of a most grave
man, and great personage: and will not thy wives bridle thee?


Joy. My wives Dowry is very great, infinite, and inestimable.


Reason. The Dowry of marriage was devised to support charges, not to provoke
covetousness And therefore the more it is increased, the more it is defamed, as
by means of the greatness thereof, doing hurt two ways, declaryng both the
impudency of the geeuer, and increasing the greediness of the receiver.


Joy. My wifes Dowry is very great


Reason. It skilleth not how great the Dowry be, but what manner of woman the
wife is: and truly in a Dowry, not so much the quantity, as the quality is
to be considered, to wit, from whence it came, and by what means it was
gotten: for many great Dowries have been gotten by evil means. Thou know
the Hehopolitane and Punik^ manner, whose marriages are not made by their
country Religion, but their Dowry is gotten by whooredome and filchinesse.


Of pleasant love. The Lxix. Dialogue.
JOY. I Enjoy pleasant love.


Reason. Thou shall be overcome with pleasant snares.


Joy. I burn in pleasant love.


Reason. It is well said thou burnest: for love is a secret fire, a pleasant
wound, a sauery poison, a sugared bitterness, a delectable sickness, a sweet
punishment, and a flatteryng death.


Joy. I love, and am loved again.


Reason. The first thou may know of thy self: the second thou may
stand in doubt of, unless thou take thy sweet hearts secret talkyng in the
night for a testimony thereof.


Joy. Without doubt I am beloved.


Reason. I perceive she has persuaded thee, and it is no hard matter to
persuade one that is wyllyng, for all lovers are blind and quick of belief.
But if thou think that there be any trust in a lovers oath, then bring forth
the bil of thy lovers hand which was written in the brittle Ice, whereunto the
Southern winds were witnesses. But, O thou foolysh man, never give credit to
a dishonest woman: sex, heat, lightness, custom of lying, desire to
deceive, and the gain of deceit, every one of these, and much more al these,
makes it suspicious whatsoever comes out of her mouth.


Joy. I love that which delyghteth my mind, and I burn in love sweetly.


Reason. Thou thynkest to hear that of me, which the Master of love says,
That thou may rejoice in thy happy burning, and sail forth with thy wind
of pleasure. But that is not my counsel: For mine advise is, that the more
pleasauntly thou burnest, the more warely thou should avoid the fire.
Euylles are never more perilous, then when they do delyght: but many times a
most sharp end follows such sweetness.


Joy. I love, and am beloved.


Reason. If it were so, what is it other then a double knotte, a near link, a
grievous danger? I should think the better of thee, if thou did love
only, and thou were not beloved again, although the facility and difficulty
of love be a like hurtful, as some say, in that the mind is taken with
facility, and strives with difficulty: Notwithstanding, I am of opinion,
that there is nothing that: procures love more, then to be loved: and on the
other side, nothing more deterreth a man or woman from loving, then to know
that he or she is not beloved, neither shall be loved. Howbeit the blind and
greedy mind of the lover, will not easily believe it, who is one of that sort
whereof it is written, That they which be in love, devise them selves dreams.


Joy. I love with pleasure.


Reason. He that knows not in how ill case he is, is without sense: and he
that rejoices in his misery, is mad.


Joy. I confess that it is pleasant unto me to love.


Reason. I had rather it were hateful and grievous unto thee, that thou
myghtest be more ready to eschew evil, and more near to the hope of health:
but now the delyght noorysheth the disease, and he refuses to be whole, that
takes pleasure in being sick.


Joy. Let every man do as him list, as for me it is my desire to love.


Reason. As men commonly understand and speak, but unto me it seems servile
and base, and a thing which does effeminate and weaken the most valiant men. I
will tell thee that which every man knows: there is no man but will wonder at
it when he hears it, the remembrance of great matters is so wonderful, yea to
them that do not know them. But to the end that I may not recite all, which
I think neither to be necessary nor possible, call to thy remembrance out of
two most flooryshyng nations, only two most excellent Captains, Julius Caesar,
being conqueror in France, Germany, Britanie, Spain, Italy, Thessalia, and
Egypt, and again shortly after in Armenia, Pontus, Africa, and last of al
again in Spain, like to have the upper hand: in the mids of so many
conquestes, he him self was conquered at Alexandria by princely love. Hannibal
being conqueror at Ticinium, Trebeia, Trasimenus, Cannas, and at length to be
overcome in his own country, first was overcome at Salapia a City of Apulia,
and that the matter might be more heinous, he humbled him self to the love of
an Harlo^. How great seems the force of this mischief unto thee, which by
so small assault could invade so stout minds and so valient hearts, and with
so brittle bands hamper so swyft feet, and so strong arms? I let pass
fables and old tales, how Jupiter was transfourmed into beasts, and Mars
caught in a ridiculus net, and Hercules spinning his stint upon the distaffe,
moreover Leander in the surgies of the sea, Biblis by tears, Procrys by her
husbands dart, Pyramus by his own weapon, and Hyphis peryshyng by the
Haulter, and, which is more certain, and more credible, the Grecian Captains
fyghtyng for love, and Troy burning with known fire. Without all these, and a
thousand such like, those two captains whom I spoke of before, are
sufficient to prove our purpose, either for the greatness of their names, or
for the truth of the History.


Joy. I love, what will you say of hatred, if you condemn love.


Reason. As thou take them, I condemn them both, neither will I call any
thing good therefore, because it is contrary to evil: For two extremities that
are contrary one to the other, and of equal distaunce from the mean, that is
to say, the virtue, are both evil.


Joy. Then it is evil to love.


Reason. That I confess.


Joy. But I find nothing better then this evil.


Reason. I think well, as thy judgment now stands, but thine opinion
concerning matters, is affectionate and blinded.


Joy. Let them hate that list, I will love.


Reason. I may well term hatred and love, things indifferent: For as it is like
praise worthy to hate vice and to love virtue, even so both the hatyng of
vice, and loving of virtue, are alyke to be condemned. To be short, thou shall
scarce find any thing which of it self deserves either praise or disprayse,
but that by means of some small addition, praise and disprayse do come one into
another place: and therefore take heed what thou love.


Joy. What should I love, but that which other do love?


Reason. Al men love not one thing. There have been some that have loved God so
fervently, that for this loves sake they counted it a vauntage to leese them
selves and their lives. Others there have been, who not lookyng so high, have
done the like only for virtue, or their countries sake: I would name these,
but that they were innumerable.


Joy. I was never in heaven, neither have I at any time seen virtue, but I
love the things that can be seen.


Reason. If thou love nothing but that which may be seen, then love thou no
excellent thing: yea, thou do directly against the most common
commandment, Love not the things that are seen, but the things that are not
seen: For the things that are seen, are temporal, and the things that are
not seen, are eternal. But you, being blind in mind, and given only to your
eyes, are far unmeet not only to love, but to understand or think upon any
eternal thing: but ye follow those things that shall perish with you, and
covering your filthy affections with an dishonest cloak, ye term letchery love,
whom ye worship, and, according to the liberue of your speech, ye make him a
God, to the end he may excuse your shame, which the heaven can scarce abide to
cover. For what does God command to be done that is evil? Go your ways
then, and build Aulters to your God, and offer incense unto him, he will carry
you to heaven: nay rather, the God of heaven will throw both him and you dawne
into hell together.


Joy. You turn the pleasures of youth into slander, I love, and therefore
bear with me.


Reason. If pardon be to be asked of him that is hurt, then forgive thy self:
for thou hurtest none but thy self, and ah poor wretch, among what rocks
dooest thou drive thy slender boat?


Joy. I take pleasure in living so, and I know not what should forbid me.


Reason. It is a miserable thing to sin, more miserable to be delyghted in
sin, and most miserable to excuse and love sin: and then is the matter
absolute, when as to the study of pleasure, a certain opinion of honesty is
adjoined.


Joy. I love, neither can or will I do other.


Reason. Thou might if thou would, and perhaps hereafter thou wylt wyshe
thou had. For thus it happens in many matters, but specially in this
sickness, that the same remedy which virtue has long time assaied in vain,
continuance of time has brought to effect.


Joy. There is no time shall see me otherwise then loving.


Reason. Go to then, play, rejoice in thy mad sleep, and thou shall weep
when thou awakest.


Joy. I will not weep, but sing, and comfort my self with verses, after the
manner of lovers,


Reason. This is a point whereof much may be spoken, and seeing thou leadest me
unto it, I will stay upon it. Among many other things, I confess, that the
madness of lovers is wonderful, not only among the common people, among whom by
custom, growyng into nature, al madness is excusable, but also among the best
learned in both tongues. For it is evident, that the Greek Poets, and yours
likewise, have writ^en plausible somewhat of others love, and much of their
own, and have gained the glory of eloquence in that, wherein they deserved the
blot of reproach Amongst the Grecians, ^app^^o was the most to be borne withal,
whose age, sex, and lightness of mind might well excuse a wench: but what shall
we say to Anacr^o^, and Al^aeus, who were both of the^ not only famous poets,
but also valiant men, and renowned in their common wealches for their worthy
deeds: or what shall we say to your Poets, Ovid. Catullus. Propertius,
Tibullus, who have written almost none other thing then love: Howbeit, why
should I blame the Poets, unto whom there is granted more liberty in
writing, and not rather the Philosophers, which are the governors and leaders
of life? In which respect thou may also rejoice, that there was much more
gravity in yours, then in the Greek Philosophers. For among yours, thou shall
scarcely find one, that has not only not committed any such folly, but also
laughed at it, and condemned. But among them, a man would wonder, not only at
the common sort of them, but also at the Stoikes, which are the most precise
sect of Philosophers, yea Plato him self, whom we know to have been in this
error. The Stoikes will have a wise man to love: and truly if they can agree
upon the kind of love, they are not deceived: For as I have said, a wise man
will love GOD, and his neighbor, and virtue, and wisdom, and his country,
and his parents, and his children, and his brethren, and his friends: and if
he be a perfect wise man, he will love also his enemies, not for their own
sakes, I confess, but for his sake that so commands. Among al these
things, I pray thee, what place is there left for beauty? For thus we read
it defined in Ciceroes Tusculane questions, That love is an endeavor to make
friendshyp, in respest of beauty. But who is so blind, that sees not what
this beauty means? And therefore Cicero aptly demands this question, What
love of friendship is this, says he? Why will not any love an evil favored
young man, neither a well favored old woman? forsooth, age and favor are here
specially respected, which are the foundations of this friendship, which by a
more honest name, is rather called friendship then lust, or sensuality, but
what in deed it is, it may be easily perceived by open and sound eyes. And
therefore the matter comes to this issue, that if there be any love in all the
world, without careful or dishonest desire, without sighings and burning grief,
the same is granted to a wise man: it must be without al manner lust or
lasciuiousnes, as the same Cicero says, and without al vexation and trouble of
mind, which of wise men are specially to be avoided. For as the appearance of
things may be covered by speech, so can not the truth of them be changed: and
we speak now of none other then the libidinous and sensual love which cannot
possibly be without many of these, and other great euyls. And thus much
concerning the Stoikes. Now I come to Plato, who is called the prince, yea, the
God of Philosophers. And although there be great contention among many in this
point, notwithstanding in every controversy we must stand to the judgment of
the ancient and better sort, and not of the greater number. Plato, I say, this
great Philosopher (that I may speak if by the license of so worthy a man)
has written much more licentiously concerning his filthy loves, although to a
true philosopher in deed, there is no lust that is not filthy, and not to be
allowed, then becomes the name and gravity of Plato to have written. He has
written notwithstanding, and, for which I am the more sorry, his works be
extant, neither was he ashamed of the blot of so renowned fame, nor the
judgment of posterity, the force of this passion of his mind, and the
sweetness of his style which pricked forth his pen, so far ouercommyng his
care and fear in this behalf, which he had now so abundantly in this filthy
and shameful argument, that a man may sooner discern the beams of the
Platonicke wit, in the wrytinges of the Epicures, then of the folowers of
Plato. And this I perceive to have been the cause that many forsook their
wrytynges, which they might either more honestly not have written at al, or
more wisely have suppressed, and also, as I guess, wylbe the cause heareafter
that many will do the like: but I have now touched the chiefest. Thus have I
said somewhat concerning the reprehension of this madness, and much more also
may be said, and for remedy thereof not a little. For as touching the comfort in
this sickness, whereof thou speak, which thou imaginest to come by verses,
let Hor^ces short verse and demand be unto thee in steed of an answer,
Do thou think that by these verses thy pains, vexations, and grievous
cares may be driven out of thy mind? By speaking and singing, love is
noorished and kyndled, not quenched and assuaged, so that those songs and
verses of which thou speak, do not heal, but hurt thy wounds.


Joy. By your aduertisment and experince I now begin to believe you, and
therefore setting other things apart, convert your style, if it please you, unto
remedies.


Reason. Many in fortymes have gone about to get these together, among whom
Ovid the great Physician loved better the sickness then the health, whose
medicines, as may be seen, are some chyldish, some filthy, or without effect:
Others also have written, among whom has Cicero, shortly, and effectually. To
be short, among all that I have chosen and liked, these are in few: changyng of
place, which as it is sometime wholesome for the body, so is it also for the
diseased mind: diligent eschewing of al things whereby the countenance of the
beloved may be brought into remembrance: also busiyng of the mind, and
eftsoons conuertyng it unto new cares and troubles, whereby the foot steps
of the former disease may be utterly extynguished: earnest and continual
thynkyng how shameful, how sorrowful, how miserable, and lastly, how short, how
slipperie, and how small a thing it is that is sought for by so many dangers and
troubles, how much more easily and commodiously it might otherwise either be
fulfilled, or wholly rejected, and reputed among the most vylest things.
Moreover, shame has cured many, which remedy happens to the most noble
minds, whylest they seek to avoid infamy and irrision, and are loath to be
poynted at as they go in the streets, laying before their eyes the
filthynesse of the thing, void of effect, full of shame, full of danger, full of
just causes of sorrow and repentance: last of al, setting false excuses and
vain persuasions aside, to put on the true, to wit, that neither nature, nor
destiny, nor stars, bear any sway in this matter, and finally nothing, but
only a lightness and free judgment of the mind. For it is in the choice of
him that is sick, to be made whole, so soon as he begins to have a will to
be whole, and can find in his heart to break of the pleasant linkes of their
sweet company, which is an hard matter to do, I confess, but possible to
him that is willing. For as Cicero says most gravely, This is to be declared
which is found to be in every perturbation, that it is nothing but in opinion,
in the judgment, and in the will. For if love were natural, then all should
love, and should always love, and al love one thing, and then shame should not
deter one, and musing another, and sasietie another. For this last, which is
sacietie or fullness, is by some numbered among the remedies, and so is also a
new love, whereby the old is driven forth, as it were one nail by another:
which although unto Artaxerxes king of Persia, whom the holy scripture calls
Assuerus, it was put in mind by friends, and found profitable by effect, as
Josephus declares the matter more at large. I contend not of the event, but I
speak of the choice. And therefore truly I have been of opinion, that these
two remedies have sometime been profitable, but always dangerous: and if with
none of these, nor with them al thou can recover, then must thou in thy mind
run to the causes of the disease. These, as I suppose, are the chiefest and
greatest of al, health, beauty, and good favor, riches, leisure, youth. And
as contraryes do best cure the diseases of the body, so will they excellently
remedy the mind also, as sickness, deformity, poverty, great business, and
old age, which is a worthy refourmer of the errors of youth. These be my last
remedies, which are hard in deed, but in respect of the greatness of the
plague, to be wyshed.


Of the birth of children. The.lxx. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have children borne unto me.


Reason. A double mischief, and a domestical burden.


Joy. There are children borne unto me.


Reason. Thy wife is troublesome, her Aunt more troublesome, and her children
most troublesome of al.


Joy. I have children borne.


Reason. A most bitter sweetness, and gall anointed with Honey.


Joy. I have sweet issue borne unto me.


Reason. Think that there is sprung unto thee at home a fountain of grievous
cares: thou shall never live without fear, and anguysh.


Joy. I have begotten children.


Reason. Thou could before neither fear, nor hope, nor pray: but now thou
shall learn to thy cost, thou shall learn also to take compassion upon
parents bereaved of their children, and thou shall learn to experiment long
cares in thy short life, and that now thou take longer business in hand,
thou shall learn to be grieved for the things that belong nothing unto thee,
and to dispose that which thou shall never see: To be short, thou shall learn
to love another more then thy self, thou shall learn to love most ardently,
and to be loved most coldly, which are hard matters.


Joy. I have children.


Reason. Now thou begynnest to understand what duty thou owe to thy
parents.


Joy. I have begotten children.


Reason. Thou have planted a tree which must be husbanded with intolerable
pains, which will keep thee occupied as long as thou lyuest, and whereof
perhaps thou shall reap either no fruit at al, or late fruit, and that
peradventure when thou art dead.


Joy. I have children.


Reason. If they be good, a continual fear, if they be wicked, a perpetual
sorrow: in the mean while a doubtful comfort, and an undoubted care.


Joy. I have children.


Reason. Then have thou whereof to be sorry while thou art living, and to be
known when thou art dead, and wherefore thou may be willing to die often.


Joy. I am the father of good children.


Reason. The better thy children are, the more dangerous is thine estate. Thou
know not what cause of sorrow thou have purchased by begetting children,
what entrance thou have made into thy house for tears, what power thou have
given unto death and misery over thy self. O wretched mothers, says Horace:
but O wretched fathers, say I.


Joy. I am father of very good children.


Reason. Thou should wish for death while thou art in this prosperity,
lest that whilst thou lyuest, thou surcease to be that which deliteth thee,
and at length, with Nestor thou demand of thy fellows, why thou have lived so
long.


Joy. I rejoice and am happy, for that I have wished issue.


Reason. A troublesome felicity, a careful joy, and many times sorrowful, a
miserable happiness. I could aleage many excellent men, whose felicity was
by nothing so much hyndred, as for that they had children.


Of a pleasant young child. The.lxxi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a pleasant young child.


Reason. If so be that this mirth turn not to sorrow, and the pleasanter thine
infant is while he is present, the more sorrowful thou be when he is from thee.


Joy. I have a child of good towardnes.


Reason. What if in nothing? That age is of al other most frail, and is many
times cut of in the mids of their flower. And as there is nothing more
sweet, so is there nothing almost more bitter.


Joy. I have a most flattering and prattling Infant.


Reason. O, take heed that these flatteries turn not into tears. The sight
and pratlyng of a young child is very pleasant, I confess, and as it is
written in Sta. Papinius* their heavenly looks, and interrupted words, after
the manner of verses or mytre, which while they are heard, do delight, when
they can be heard no more, do grieve, and can not be remembered without sorrow.
Thus in all worldly things, but in nothing more then in this, bitterness is
evermore set against sweetness.


Joy. I am delighted in my most pleasant Infant.


Reason. I forbid thee not to be delighted, that I may not withstand nature,
but I seek for a mean in all things, without which there is nothing well
done. I would have thee to rejoice more sparingly, that if thou have occasion
to be sorry, thou may also more sparingly be sorry: and I would wish thee to
think, that it may easily come to pass that thou may trust to a broken
staff, or lean to a rotten wall, which Adriane the Emperor is reported to
have said often, when he had adopted Aelius, who was a fair child in deed,
and but weak: and thou may also sing to thy self this verse of Virgil, The
destinies shall only show him to the earth, but not suffer him to live longer.


Joy. I rejoice in my young Child.


Reason. Rejoice so, as if thou should be sorry, either for that, as I have
said, it may chance he may die, or, which is much more grievous, and happens
very often, of a most pleasant child, become a most unthankful and
disobedient young man.


Joy. I joy much in my young child.


Reason. There is no husband man so foolysh that will rejoice much in the
flower, the fruit is to be looked for, and then he ought to rejoice moderatly.
In the mean while tempests, hayle, and blastinges are to be feared, and the
joy must be moderated with dread.


Of the excellent favor of Children. The.Lxxii. Dialogue.
JOY. MY Children favor is excellent.


Reason. If thou have learned by mine instruction not to regard thine own
favor, then thou know how much thou have to esteem of another.


Joy. The favor of my children is great.


Reason. A thing very dangerous for the male kind, but much more for the
female: For beauty and chastity dwell seldom together, they will not, and
again, if they would, they can not, seeing al humane things, especially
honesty can if or kept in safety now adays, chiefly if it be joined with an
excellent beauty. There be some whose beauty is envied at, but that envy
keeps it self within it own bounds, some are sorry, some angry with their
beauty as much as may be possible, many have waxed old, continuing undefiled
among the hatred of many, some have showed perpetual and unquenchable tyranny.
How many sailors do pass every day upon ye calm sea? how many Merchantes do
travail through ye desartes with their wares safe, and neither Pyrate meets
with the one, nor the Thief with the other? But what beautiful woman can
thou name unto me, that has not been assayed? Although she be chaste, she
shall be tempted and overcome. What woman's mind is able to resist so many
corrupters? The scaling ladders of sugared words are set to the walls, the
engines of gifts are planted, and the secret moynes of deceites are cast up
under the ground: If these means will not serve, then force is violently
offered. If thou require proof, call to thy remembrance the most famous
rauishmentes. Beauty has tempted many, and caused many to be tempted, some it
has overthrown, and driven them into wickedness, or to death. Among the
Hebrews, Joseph was an example of vehement temptation, but the providence of
God turned the danger into glory. Among the Grecians, Hippolytus and
Bellerophon: and among you, Spurina, to the end she would not be tempted,
defaced her self with her own hands. Among ye first was no: Thamar? among the
second was not the Greekish Penelope? among the third was not the Roman
Lucretia safe? Finally, among all sorts, the most part have been commonly
either tempted, or overthrown. These be the fruits of this transitory and
brittle beauty, which many times have not only overthrown whole houses, but
great Cities, and mighty Kingdoms. Thou know histories. Truly, if Helen
had not been so beautiful, Troy had stood safe: if Lucretia had not been so
fair, the Roman kingdom had not ben so soon overthrown: if Virginea had
not ben so beautiful, the authority of the ten men had not so soon failed,
neither Appius Claudius being so great a law maker among the Romans, being
vanquished with lust, had lost his fame at the bar, and his life in prison.
Finally, there have been innumerable, who if they had not been so fair as they
were, there should not have been so many, that being forced and deceived, have
fallen out of the castle of chastity, into so great reproaches and ruin of
their souls: and therefore utter what good effects thou have found in
beauty, that they may be compared with their contraries.


Joy. My Child is passing beautiful.


Reason. This beauty having enflamed the lust of one called Messalina, choose
which thou had rather of these twain: either to deny, and so to be slain
at the lovers commandment, either to agree, and to perysh by Claudius
swoorde. Thus at one side by chastity death is purchased, and by adultery
there is nothing but only a little deferring of death procured: and this is the
effect of this noble and excellent beauty. In this therefore, as in all other
things, the mediocritie is commendable: and if any of the extremities were to
be wished, beauty is more delectable, but deformity is more safe.


Joy. I have a most beautiful Daughter.


Reason. Be careful of treason, and beware of force. Do thou think that
there is but one Jason, or one Theseus, or one Paris? Yes, there be a thousand.
To have a Daughter, is a care and trouble: if she have beauty, there is fear,
which thou can not avoid but by death or old age: for by marrying her into
another house, thou shall but translate thy fear, and not extinguishe it.


Joy. I triumph and rejoice in the singular heautie of my Children.


Reason. For young folk to glory and rejoice in their beauty it is a vain
thing, but common: but for an old man to rejoice in the beauty of his
Children, which unless he doated, he would perceive to be full of vanity,
or subject to dangers, it is more folly, and next coosen to madness.


Joy. My Child has an heavenly beauty.


Reason. Thou have read, I think, the four and twenty book of Homers
Iliades, where Priamus speaking of his son Hector. He seemed not, says he,
to have been ye son of a mortal man, but of a God. This said Priamus, but
Achilles showed that he was the son of a mortal man, and not of a God: and
remember thou likewise, that this heavenly beauty of thy child whereof thou
speak, may be taken away and blemished, and so long as it continues,
whatsoever account be made of it, it is but an uncertain thing. Howbeit the
immoderate love of fathers, which is enemy to vpryght judgment, brings
forth these errors and trifles.


Joy. I have a passing fair Daughter.


Reason. If nothing else chance, thy house must be most sumptuous.


Of the valiencie and magnanimity of a Son. The.Lxxiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a valient Son.


Reason. The more valient he is, the more it behooves thee to be fearful: For
Fortune lays more dangers upon none, then those that contemn her, that is to
say, Valient men. And not without good cause: for other men hyde them selves,
and seek to avoid her force: but these lay themselves open to her fury.
Recall forepassed ages to memory, and thou shall perceive, in a manner, all the
most valient men consumed by violent death.


Joy. My Sons valiencie is exceedyng great.


Reason. Fortitude is a most excellent virtue, but accompanied with sundry
chances, and therefore see thou have always tears, and a coffin in a
readiness: Death is at hand to all men, but nearest to the valient.


Joy. My Son is a most valient man.


Reason. Then have thou one that perhaps may purchase unto his country
liberty, to his enemies slaughter, to him self honor, and one day unto thee
tears, but fear continually.


Joy. My Son is valient, and of great courage.


Reason. What other thing did Creon bewail in his son that was slain, then
his courageous desire of martial praise? What Enander in his son Pallas, then
his new glory in arms, and the sweet honor of his first encounter? Whereof
did fearful Priamus admonish his son Hector, then that he should not alone
expect Achilles? What does ye careful mother entreat her son, other then to
shun that warlike champion? Finally, what did Hectors wife (being ignorant of
the heavy chance that already was happened) say that she feared, other then
her husbands well meaning, and the heat of his mind, that was not able to
stay him out of the first array of the Soldiers, but would rather run
before them all? Which thing also she feared at the beginning, when as she
spoke unto him as he was going into the wars, in this manner, Does thy
valiencie so deuilishy be witch thee, that thou take compassion, neither
upon thy Son, nor me his Mother, who shall shortly be thy Wydowe? Lastly,
what other did Achilles mother say, being fearful for her Son, Now must I
seek for my son Achilles by Land and Sea, and I would he would follow
me? Whilst in wayne she took him, being feeble, out of the garboyle of the
hot wars, and carrying him into the palace of the calm old man, hyd him
up in her virgins secret closets. All these lamentations and fears were by
nothing else procured, then Martial force, and valient courage.


Joy. My son is exceeding courageous.


Reason. A great courage, without great power, is great folly. True valiencie
and magnanimity apparteine but to few men: although they that seem most
mighty and strong, how weak they be in deed, many things besides death do
declare, but specially death it self: so that it may be said shortly and
truly, There is nothing more weak, nor more proud then man.


Joy. I have a courageous son.


Reason. Rejoice therefore, for thy house shall be full of great attemptes, and
empty of rest and quietness, and thou shall often wish that thy son were
not so courageous. To conclude, fortitude is a noble virtue, and magnanimity
beautiful, but both are painful and troublesome, and modesty is safe and
quiet.


Of the Daughters chastity, The.Lxxiiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a chaste Daughter.


Reason. A great joy, but a careful: For the greater her chastity is, the more
watching is lust over her. For there is nothing more ardently invaded, then yt
which is defended with chaste watch, and womanly shamefastness. When the
corruptor has won the path, he goes forth then more slowly, and permitted
things are more coldly desired: a thing that is much coueted, is hardly
preserved.


Joy. My Daughters beauty is excellent.


Reason. There it is then, where a very good thing ministers matter to the
most vilest. The beauty of Lucretia was great, but nothing in respect of her
honesty: so that the chastity of this noble Matrone violently pricked forth
the hot young man to adultery. Thus the wickedness of the reprobate, abuses
the ornaments of the virtuous.


Joy. My Daughters chastity is known.


Reason. Pray that it may continue. Thou read in the Poet, A woman is
always diverse and changeable: Which although Virgil said it not, were it
therefore less true? How many have we seen that have been honest while they
were young, and have afterward proved wanton in their age? And so striving
with their present vices, against their forepassed honesty, do seem in a
manner to repent them of their time honestly spent: a more foul reproach then
which, there can chance in no sex and age.


Joy. I have a most chaste Daughter.


Reason. If she knew her self; and understood whose gift chastity is, and
giving thanks unto him, could apply all her study to preserve the same, and
wou^d continue undefiled in safety, thou shall then have great cause (I
confess) to thank God, and rejoice with her, more then if thou had
married her to a King, and yet, believe me, some time to fear also: For since
constancy is rare in all things, be sure there is none at al in women.


Of a good son in Law. The.Lxxv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a very good Son in law.


Reason. Thou ought to love him more dear then thine own son, for thine
own son comes to thee by chance, but thy son in law by choice. Thank
therefore thy Daughter, who owing unto thee Nephews, has now brought thee a
son.


Joy. Fortune has brought unto me a very good son in law.


Reason. In this kind of affinity, there be examples of notable faith, and
treason. Seldom or never has any Son been so faithful to his father, as
way Marcus Agrippa to Augustus Caesar, as Marcus Aurelius to Antonius Pius,
unto whom even unto his lives end, which was the space of three and twenty
years, he so behaved him self, that not only he deserved his love and his
Daughter, but also the succession in his Empire as his Son, through his
continual faith and diligence. But Nero was no such son in law unto
Claudius, although he not by his desartes, but by his mothers policy, obtained
the Emperors daughter, and Empire.


Joy. I have found a courteous, and agreeable Son in law.


Reason. Beware least either the hope of succession, or the seeking after
goods, do infringe this agreement. Who will not wyshe that he may live, whose
life he sees to be profitable unto him self? But if he once begin to
attempt any thing, so that perhaps he suppose thy life to be an hynderaunce,
or thy death begin or seem to be profitable unto him, then the affections of
the mind are changed, and secret hatred will soon break forth. And of what
force the discord is between the Father and the Daughters husband (to say
nothing of the ancient Fable of Danaus, and Nummianus, who was slain by the
wicked treason of Aprimus his Father in law, and likewise Stilico, who through
the desire to reign forgot his Father in law that was dead, and his Son in
law that was living) the most memorable example of Caesar and Pompei, does
sufficiently declare.


Of second Marriage. The.Lxxvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Mean to be married again.


Reason. If thou knew thoroughly what a woman were, or what excellent
auctours do write of her, thou would not have married at the first.


Joy. I entend to marry again.


Reason. If thy first marriage have not tamed thee, then marry again, and if
ye tame thee not, then thou may also marry ye third time.


Joy. I am about to marry again.


Reason. Who so having children by his first marriage, brings a Stepmother
among them, he sets his house afyre with is own hands. If youth prick
thee, or letcherous old age stir thee to lust, then which there is nothing
more filthy, perhaps (to speak now more ciuilly then virtuously) it were more
profitable, were it not the cause of sin, or forbid by the law of God, to
remedy the matter by keepyng a Concubine, then that a quiet house be disturbed
by Stepmothers tempests and hatred.


Joy. I entende to marry again.


Reason. Thou may do so by the law of man, the law of God rather suffryng
it, then praising it: All men know what Saint Paul says concerning that
matter. And truly we may easily perceive, how that among the Gentiles, who in
that respect lived in more liberty, this was more suffered, then lyked of. For
your Forefathers did always repute the experiment of many marriages, to be a
token of a certain lawful intemperauncie: which opinion Saint Jerome
embracing, how much he writes against second marriages, and how sharply, our
promised brevity will not suffer us to declare: which although it seem al to
be spoken against women, and not against men, and doubtless that sex ought to
be the greater preserver of chastity and honesty, notwithstanding there is
more wisdom and constancy required of men.


Joy. I have need of second marriage.


Reason. I should wonder, unless I knew your conditions: for you make not only
vain, but hurtful things also necessary for you. And as for thee, thou have
a very hard mouth, if thou have need of another wife to bridle thee.


Joy. I make have to be married again.


Reason. Too it then apace while thou art hot, and when thou art cold, thou
wylt repent thee: Have thou not noted how pleasant sleep is in an empty
chamber? Thy mind is only bent upon that filthy and miserable act, which
passes away and wounds.


Of the marriage of Children. The.Lxxvii. Dialogue.
JOY. MY offspring is increased by the marriage of my children.


Reason. This care is somewhat more commendable then the last was, and yet
notwithstanding, the increase of the hines has often been more profitable,
then the bodyly issue: The one fills the caske with pleasant wine, the other
annoyeth the friend with bitter cares.


Joy. I have bestowed my daughter in marriage.


Reason. If thou have so done circumspectly and happily, thou have both
preserved thy daughter, and found a son, or as I have said erewhyle, one
better then a son: but if thou have done otherwise, then have thou both cast
away her, and purchased to thy self an enemy, and to thy daughter a Tyrant.


Joy. I have bestowed my daughter in marriage.


Reason. If she were a good daughter, thou have bereft thy self of a sweet
and pleasant jewel, and transported it into an other man's house: If she were
an evil daughter, thou have eased thy self of an heavy burden, and laden
therewith another man.


Joy. I have married my daughter.


Reason. Rejoice not to much at it, Marriage has been unto many the beginning
of a careful and unfortunate life: and admit that al things fall out happyly,
a wife is a trouble some thing, and thou have sent forth her whom thou love,
about an hard labor and a payneful business. Children will come at home, and
thereof will spryng up a peculiar fountain of cares: But if there come non^,
then that is a misery and grief. Thus fruitefulnesse shall make her
burdensome, and barrenness shall make her odious, and perhaps she will wyshe
she had tarried at home with thee, and will have this thy ouerhastie love in
bestowyng her.


Joy. I have gotten an husband for my daughter.


Reason. The end of an idle life, and the beginning of a payneful, an heavy
burden of household cares, the knowledge of the world, and the tri^^ or
hers^^^e.


Joy. My daughter is married.


Reason. But she ^oth (...) her liberty, her virginity, and her quietness,
which is n^ indifferent change.


Joy. I have provided a wife for my son,


Reason. The bringing home of a daughter in law is worse then ye sending ^ooth
of thine own daughter, forasmuch as civil war is always more dangerous then
foreign. Thou have set open thy Castle gates perhaps to an enemy, or truly
to a partner, for now thou art not Lord and master alone of thine own
goods, and therefore it skylleth to know what manner one thou let in.


Joy. I have provided for my son, a noble, rich, and a fair wife.


Reason. Why dooest thou conceal that which follows, to wit, a proud, and
an importunate one, who is envious of her husband, and of thy life? There is
ancient war between the husbands father and the sons wife, and neither of
them has the greater vauntage, but equal fear, for they be both in one state
and condition. There is no living thing that so much affects the higher
place, as does a woman: For in case she perceive her self (by means of your
life) debarred thereof, what she imagines then in her mind, and what she
wysheth, it were an hard matter to conjecture.


Joy. I have married my son to a wife.


Reason. What know thou whether thou have procured an everlasting
weerysomnesse to him and thy self, or perhaps secret danger to you both? Many
daughters in law, have consumed their fathers in law, and husbands, with
continual pride and doggednesse: some have made them away with poison, and some
have shortened their days with a weapon. How many sons had Egisthus, before
he had ever a daughter in law? Yea, there has been found such a daughter in
law, who being carried away with desire to reign, and impaciencie of the
second roomth, to the end she might the sooner see her husband and her self
possess the government, having procured the death of her own father, caused
her Chariot to be driven over his stayne carcass: If this be the reward of
fathers at their own chyldrens hands, what shall the sons father look for
at his sons wives hands?


Joy. I am glad that I have celebrated my daughters marriage.


Reason. How many times has an unlucky event disturbed this celebration? and
tears and tumultes followed songs, and banquettes, and dauncinges? All
immoderate joy is foolish, specially in these things whereout sorrow may and
woonteth to arise.


Joy. I have both provided a wife for my son, and an husband for my daughter.


Reason. Thou have changed burdens, thou have laid a strange care upon thine
own shoulders, and carryest thine own care upon other men's shoulders.


Of Nephues. The.lxxviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a young Nephue, borne of my son.


Reason. A great love of thy sons, and a continual care, notwithstanding it
has a certain end: but if it pass any further, there is no end of
carfulness, and both he that is borne of thy son, and he likewise that
shall be borne of him, finally, all of them, are borne to thy pain, whose
number, how far it proceeds, or may proceed, thou know. He that was the
father of the people of Israel, if he, being affected as thou art, had in such
sort lived during the life cyme of our first fathers, how great a burden of
cares should there have rested upon the weeryed old men's shoulders: For
besides Priests, and women, and children, and other unable persons, there
sprang of his line in few years above six hundred thousand fyghtyng men.
Go thy ways now, and boast thee in the armies of thy Nephues, among whom if
perhaps there be any happy, there must needs be wretched of them innumerable.
What then? ye must nevertheless not only love your sons and Nephues, but al
men also: Ye must love them, I say, in him in whom ye be all brethren:
notwithstanding, thou must not be careful, nor to immoderately glad, least
presently thou be vexed with contrary affections, and it repeathee sometime to
have rejoiced, and thou be ashamed that thou art constrained to hate him, being
a man, whom thou loue^st dearly sometime when he was a child, as it many times
happens.


Joy. I have a Nephue borne.


Reason. It may chance so to fall out, that either through the wickedness of
thy Nephue, or perhaps the force of fortune, thou wylt call that an unhappy day,
which now thou think to be fortunate. Yea, peradventure the child may dye
shortly, and so purchase thee as much sorrow, as ever he procured thee joy.
There be many, and diverse, and suddyne, and unlooked for chances, that happen
unto men, but (...) innumerable. If all should live that are borne, the (...)
not hold mankind, no though they lived not continually, for if they should
live continually they were not men, but even until they came to old age, or
unto ripe and lawful years. Wherefore, it is a folly to conceive great joy of a
very short thing, and uncertain to what end it will come, which is found to
be true in children and nephues, but specially in nephues, and most especially
now in nephues children, the further they be distant from the root.


Joy. I have nephues borne of my mother, my daughter, and my sister.


Reason. These apparteyne less unto thee, commit this joy and care unto their
fathers.


Joy. I have a nephue borne of my brother.


Reason. So was Luca^e nephue unto Anneus Seneca, who proved to be no small part
of the Spanyshe eloquence, and likewise Iugurtha unto Mycipsa king of Numidia,
who was not the last example of the Libyan treachery, the destroier of his
country, and murderer of his brethren.


Joy. I have a nepheue borne of my sister.


Reason. So was Psensipus Nephue unto Plato on the sisters side, and in a manner
his heir in Philosophy: likewise Alcibiades such a Nephue to Pericles, the
disturber of his country, and the rayser of the wars in Greece: and Brutus
also to Targinius the proud, who threw him down from his kingly dignity, and
was a great man, and profitable to his country, but utter enemy to his Uncle.


Joy. I have a Nephue borne of my daughter.


Reason. Innius, being a modest and grave man, was Nephue by the daughter unto
Pacunius, and succeeded him in Poetry, and so was Commodus unto Antonius pius,
a most shameless and light person.


Joy. I have a Nephue borne of my daughter.


Reason. Romulus and Remus, being nephues unto Numito^ of his daughter,
restored their grandfather to his kingdom of Alba. Aucus Martius, being Nephue
unto Numa by his daughter, possessed his grandfathers kingdom at Rome with
great honor: But Cyrus that was Nephue unto Astiages of his daughter, expulsed
his grandfather out of the kingdom of the Medes. These Histories are aleaged
to this purpose, that concerning the birth of nephues, how much may be hoped,
so much also may be feared.


Of adopted children, husbands children by a former wife, and wives children
by a former husband, The.lxxix. Dialogue.
Joy. I Have adopted a son.


Reason. Adoption is handmayden unto nature, which although she be the more
noble, yet is adoption the more wary, and that which nature does without
advice of the begetter, and as it were by chance, in adoption the same is
accomplished by the judgment of him that adopteth.


Joy. I have gotten a good son by adoption.


Reason. Thou ought do so, if thou have neglected it: for as begettyng, so
is not election excusable, herein thou can not blame thy wife, nor accuse
fortune.


Joy. I have adopted a son.


Reason. This ciuyl remedy was denised well to help nature. The same has been
experimented to have been profitable, and to some pestiferous. Nerua adopted a
good son, but I know that some writers are of opinion, that Traiane was
deceived in his adoptyng. And that Augustus was deceived in adoptyng his Nephue
Agrippa, his puttyng of him away, which shortly after happened, does testify:
but that he was not deceived in the adoptyng or succedyng of Tiberius, I
perceive him almost constrained thereunto to confess the same, by puttyng
certain of his friends to death, which his own speech also declares, and
the preface of his last Wyland Testament. But Mysipsa, of whom I made mention
not long since, was altogether an unfortunate adopter, sendyng not a son,
but rather a cruel Dragon, into his Palace among his children: whom although,
while he lay a dyeing, he exhorted so to live that he might not seem to have
adopted better children then he had begotten? Howbeit, for the more part better
are adopted then begotten, and no maruayle, since the one is guyded by
experiment and aduyce, and the other by neither. But many times it falls out
contrary wise, that not worse only, but worst of al, are adopted: For man is a
close and doubtful merchandise.


Joy. I have a good son in law.


Reason. Seldom is there found a good son in law, but more seldom, a good
father in law.


Joy. I have a good son in law.


Reason. What matter is it unto thee how good he be? unless thou rejoice as
being thy wives factour. For what shall the virtue of another man's child avail
thee, but only to bewray the lewdenesse of thine own children?


Joy. I have a very good and faithful son in law, not inferior to any of my
children.


Reason. It may be so. Such a son in law was Drusus to Augustus, but not
Nero such an one to Claudius.


Of an excellent Schoolmaister. The.lxxx. Dialogue.
JOY. I Vaunt of mine excellent schoolemaister.


Reason. Thou ceassest not yet to boast of that which is another man's: For what
does the excellency of thy schoolemaister apparteine unto thee? Believe me,
which I repeat oftentimes, it must be within thee, which must make thee
glorious.


Joy. I glory in an excellent schoolemaister.


Reason. Let him in the mean time enjoy as he list that which is his own,
and glory also if he please, although if he be very excellent in deed, he
will not do it, and touching thy self we will say somewhat hereafter.


Joy. I have a notable schoolemaister.


Reason. I long to hear what manner scholar (...) art? For before I know that,
I can pronounce no certeintie. How many fools and dullardes (...) thou were
^here in the schools of Socrates and Plato? How many without any
schoolemaister at all, have by their own industry become excellent, insomuch
that they became schoolmaisters unto either, that had no schoolemaisters
themselves? We read not that Virgil had any schoolemaister. The Poet Horace
speaks nothing of his schoolemaister, but that he was very liberal of his
whipping cheer, which I suppose he meant of the stripes which he received
being a child. Cicero would not advance his schoolemaister with great and
most worthy praise, neither could he: On the other side, his son, by what
instructers and schoolemaisters he was brought up, namely his own father, and
Cratippus prince of Philosophers at that time, if we believe Cicero, it is
apparent, nevertheless how notable a knave, and famous drunkarde, he became,
it is well known, who might have been learned and sober, had it ben with the
only look and example of his father. Plato himself, although as I have said
before, he boast of his schoolemaister Socrates, yet is it more for his glory
that he excelled Socrates, then that he learned under him.


Joy. I have a very learned schoolmaister.


Reason. The schoolemaisters learning may be profitable unto the scholar, but
it cannot be glorious: yea, whereat thou may the more maruayle, he may
diminysh thy fame, and exaggerate thy slothfulness: but thou have shut from
thy self all means of boastyng, and of excuse: thy knowledge shall be ascribed
to thy schoolemaister, and thine ignorance to thy self: And therefore thou
have no cause to glory, but rather to aspire unto glory. Thou have such an one
whom thou would be wyll^ng to follow and attain unto, not whom thou must
^^^nke thy self to be, for that thou art his scholar. To be short, there is in
him not which thou have, but which thou couetest and hopest to have, and that
not without thy great study and travail.


Joy. I have a worthy man to my daily schoolemaister.


Reason. Ciceroes son, of whom we spoke erwhile, had two notable men to his
schoolemaisters, whereof the one instructed him with books at hand, the other
with words from a far, but how much he pr^^^^d thou have heard. Do we not
know, that many Princes children have had many excellent schoolemaisters at
one time? But what avails it to have them that teach, if there be none to
learn? If the patient be not aptly disposed, the force of the Agent woorketh
in vain. Verily, if to look upon, and to speak with learned men, would make
the lookers on, and the conferrers learned, although we see few desirous of
virtue or learning, notwithstanding we should see great concourse and resort
unto them.


Of a notable Sholar. The.lxxxi. Dialogue.
JOY. FOrtune has brought me a notable scholar, whom I love al^ost more
dearly then mine own child.


Reason. It is a troublesome business to form thy wit unto the unequal steps
of a chyldes capacity, and always to have thine eyes and mind bent upon one
child, and to submit thine understanding and voice unto his ability and
sufferance. But if thou have more scholars, then have thou a greater heap of
traueiles in hand, which will toss thee, and tumble thee, this way and that
way, and as the Satyrial Poet says, To observe so many moving and wavering
hands and eyes of children without end.


Joy. I have one only most excellent scholar.


Reason. For one notable scholar, thou exposest thy self to many secret
judgments: Wherein soever he offends, it shall redound unto thy discredit.
Behold his learning, will men say, his eloquence, his manners: see the
scholemaister in the scholar, there can be expressed no better resemblance of a
man, then of his disposition.


Joy. I have gotten a famous scholar.


Reason. Go to then, thou have great hope of glory, his profiting shalhe
ascribed unto his own wit, and his default unto thy negligence: for as much as
Plutarche the Philosopher writes unto his scholar Traiane the Emperor, that
the public report uses to lay the faults of the scholars upon their
scholemaisters: which, as we read, many have found to be true, among whom
was Quintiliane, and Seneca, and the father of Philosophers, Socrates him self.


Joy. I have famous scholars.


Reason. It were better they were modest, howbeit, there is no true fame and
renown without some sparkle of virtue.


Joy. I have the charge of a great scholar.


Reason. Thou encountrest with a threefourmed Monster, at one side to profit
the child, on the other to please the parents, and thirdly to render an
account to the common wealth, which she will require at thy hands, in lookyng
for him to be instructed, who was altogether ignorant and unlearned when he
was committed unto thee.


Joy. The charge of a noble child, is reposed in my credit.


Reason. His age, and nobility are to be suspected. The one, signifies that
he will be vnmyndful, the other, that he will be proud.


Joy. The child that is put in trust unto me, stands in awe of me.


Reason. What wylt thou say, if he contemn thee, when he is a Springall, and
will scarce know thee when he is a man? The faith and constancy of children
is well enough known.


Joy. The Child that I have in trust, loves me.


Reason. Thou have printed a mark upon an unfinished wall, which shall be put
out as the wall increases: faithful love requires a sound age.


Joy. I have a noble Child to teach.


Reason. An unquiet chance, an uncertain event: some wits there be whom no
diligence can amend. Sometime the Father leeseth his cost, the Schoolemaister
his traueyle, the Child his time. Teach him that is apt, trouble not him that
is unapt to learn, weerie not both thy self and him in vain: Art hardly
overcomes nature.


Joy. There has chanced unto me a young Scholar, and not unapt to learn.


Reason. Although thou stand upon a slipperie ground, and build upon an
uncertain foundation, notwithstanding, look faithfully to that which is put
in trust unto thee. If he be of ripe years, he may remember it: otherwise his
is the forgetfulness, and thine is the trust: Virtue is a sufficient reward
to it self. There is nothing more sweet, then a conscience bearyng a man
witness of his good deeds. Let not despair of reward, withdraw thee from
virtue, for that even in this life there is no good deed unrewarded, the most
plentiful fruit whereof, as the wise men have said, is to do it, and to
remember it in silence.


Joy. I have found a Scholar of great towardness.


Reason. And truly of great troublesomnesse, and if he prove good, thine heart
has begotten thee a son, and thy tongue has brought him forth: if evil,
an enemy, who so often as he shall remember how he stood in fear of thee,
will hate thee.


Joy. The bryghtnesse of my Scholar is very great, whereby I hope to shine.


Reason. Moderate bryghtnesse delyghteth the eyes, but immoderate offends
them. Moreover, none will lyghten thee, unless thou shine of thy self, and
although thou be covered, the true light is within.


Joy. I have a great Scholar.


Reason. No greater, I think, then had Seneca. Some Scholemaisters have been
defended, and some oppressed by the greatness of their Scholars, and unto some
they have been an assured Haven, and unto some a most dangerous Rock.


Of a good Father. The.Lxxxii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a good Father.


Reason. Acknowledge then thy good, for it is but short.


Joy. I have a very good Father.


Reason. He will procure grief unto thee, or thou unto him.


Joy. I have a most tender Father.


Reason. If the order of nature be observed, great heaviness remains unto
thee for inheritance, but if the order be perverted, the like abides him.


Joy. I have a Father yet.


Reason. Use him with diligence, this is a frail pleasantness, and thy Father
is an old man.


Joy. I have an old man to my Father.


Reason. There is now no place for lingering: make haste to gather the last
fruit as it were from a ruinous tree. Keep him company as much as thou
can, see him diligently as if he were immediately departing, but hear him
more willingly, and lay up his last aduertisementes in thy careful mind, and
when thou go from him, leave him furnished with necessaries, as if thou were
going a far journey. The time will come thou shall lack his counsel, and
shall seek him, and not find him at home.


Joy. I have an extreme old man to my Father.


Reason. Make haste to show the last duetifulnesse of virtue toward him
while there is time, if thou omit any thing now, thou wylt always be sorry.


Joy. I have a virtuous Father.


Reason. Then have thou such an one, as desires to dye before thee, and
fears to live after thee.


Joy. I have a very good Father.


Reason. Thou shall not know what he was, before thou want him, and for whom
thou wylt lament, when thou have lost him.


Of a most loving Mother. The.Lxxxiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a most loving Mother.


Reason. But thou art unto her a continual fear and carfulness.


Joy. I have a most loving Mother.


Reason. The Fathers love is greatest, but the Mothers love is most vehement,
and both their loves are such, and so great, that the affection of the child,
unless it be very rare, can scarce counteruayle it. Notwithstanding, the
contention between the Parents and the Children, in showing love and duty
one toward another, is commendable and virtuous, and let them have the
victory upon whom the fountain of heavenly charity is most abundantly
powered. But hitherto the Parents have the upper hand, neither is yet the
duetifulnesse of the Children, or their reverence toward their elders and
progenitors such, that it may minister just cause that we should think it
would be otherwise: but if it should chance so to happen besides
expectation, there were no sight in the earth that could be devised more
acceptable unto the heavens.


Joy. I have a very good Mother.


Reason. Be thou at leastwise a good child unto her: remember that thou was
first a burden and coil unto her, and afterward a most bitter pain, and
lastly a continual trouble, and ielous carfulness. Think on her womb that
bare thee, and her breasts that gave thee suck, how many sleeps, and how
many meals or pleasures thou have broken her of by thy crying? What fear and
sorrow thou have procured her by thy chances, and sometimes also perhaps
perilous pleasures. Many times, as the fear of chyldrens death has enforced
the wretched Mothers to end their lives, so also has the joy of their life.
This last point appeared plainly that day, wherein they that remained after
the slaughter at Thrasimenus, being dispersed, returned safe to their friends:
and when two Mothers, who thought no less but that their sons were slain in
the battle, saw them notwithstanding come again in safety, not being able
to sustain the force of so sudden a joy, they dyed presently. So that by this
and such like examples it is truly verified, that amongst men there is no
greater ingratitude then that which is showed against the Mother.


Joy. My Mother is yet living an old woman.


Reason. As often as thou look upon her, and beholdest the earth also,
think from whence thou come, and whyther thou shall, out of how narrow a
place thou came, and into how narrow an one thou shall depart, to witteout
of the womb of thine own Mother, into the bowelles of the Earth, that is
mother of al things. Among all the things therefore, which between these
twain do delight, and busy the mind, draw back the raynes of pride and
covetousness.


Of good Brethren, and loving and fair Sisters. The.Lxxxiiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have loving Brethren.


Reason. A rare matter, for parents for the most part do always love, but
brethren most commonly do hate and despise one another. And therefore the
truth cries out by the mouth of the Poet Ovid, That seldom is love sound
among brethren: whereas there is noted the wickedness and undutifulness of
brethren, children, and almost al sorts of men, exceptyng parents.


Joy. I have very good Brethren.


Reason. Truly I wonder at it, it is enough that they be good, for most times
they be evil, and the worst of all other, and so much worse then open enemies,
by how much there is less heed to be taken of domestical treachery. How
great the love of brethren is, that I may not bring to light them that are
unknown, nor offend them that are present, the most famous couples, the
Micenian, the Thebane, and the Roman brethren, do declare: which infamy, why
it should more redounde unto one city, then to the whole world, I see no
cause. Behold the first brethren that were in the world, one was slain by
the hand of the other: and yet have thou not heard? a most horrible mischief
to tell, for Phraates, king of the Parthians, of whom I spoke before, beside
his most detestable parricide in murdering at one time his own father and
natural son, we read how he slew moreover his thirty brethren, not fearyng
by so foul a massacre and bloodshed, to establish his ill gottten kingdom, and
utterly to extinguishe al fear of competitours.


Joy. My Brethren are good.


Reason. I suppose you have not yet divided your inheritance, for then your
malice wylbreake forth: Gold is tried by fire, and so is the mind by gold.
That agreement which seems to be great, is oftentimes overthrown by a little
gold.


Joy. I have loving Brethren.


Reason. Perhaps thy single life, or lack of children causes them to love
thee. Thy marrying will discover them, but having of children more better, when
they shall perceive them selves deprived of the hope of succession, which hope
has caused the most impatient to suffer much.


Joy. I have brethren that love me most dearly.


Reason. It ought to be so, unless malice, or fear, or covetousness, or
immoderate desire to have: which while it coueteth to be satisfied, quite
forgetting the law both of God and man, do hinder it. How great so ever the
love be between the parents and the children, yet are the manners and
conversation diverse, which although the parents do perceive quickly, yet do
they acknoledge it too late. Although fathers love their children at the first,
yet it is long are they receive them into familiarity, yea, many times in
their ^^^^age. But brethren, before they be borne, and after they be borne, are
conversant together in one house, and are wrapped in the same cl^utes, and are
of equal years, and of like manners. So soon as they be borne, they see one
another, are fed with the same meat, under the same parents, are accustomed
unto the same fellows, to the same pastimes, to the same Schools, to the same
Schoolemaisters and bryngers up, they grow up together, they w ^^ men
together. There is equality between them on every side, and love confirmed
and established by many assured knottes and indissoluble linkes, unless some
accidental causes do break them, and the hardness of a rough mind do
infringe them, which is so common a thing, that I know not whether there
ought to be any love greater, then between brethren, or any malice be more
cankred, or displeasure more deep: equality is always so troublesome a
thing, and man's mind so impacient of a match.


Joy. I have virtuous and godly brethren.


Reason. Keep them with like virtue and godliness. Love is a very dainty
thing, make much of it, it is hardly gotten, and easily lost.


Joy. I have good Sisters likewise.


Reason. An heavy burden, but pleasant, and almost the first travel for young
men, wherein they may exercise themselves when they come to their own liberty,
and wherein they may win their first renown of virtue and honesty.


Joy. I have good Sisters.


Reason. See thou that they may have a good Brother of thee, and while thou
live, although your Father be dead, let them not feel the want of him.


Joy. My Sisters are very fair.


Reason. Thou art keeper of a slipperie thing: beware of deceit when thou
watchest most circumspectly, let the troops of suitors that are about her awake
thee. It is an hard matter to preserve beauty where one man assaulteth: what
think thou then where there be many? The guard of chastity ought to be by
so much more circumspect then of gold, as it is more precious, and not to be
recovered. Truly, there is no means whereby a Virgins chastity may better be
preserved, then by tymely marriage.


Joy. I have fair Systers at home.


Reason. Provide that thou have them not there long, they would better
furnyshe many houses.


Of a good Lord. The.Lxxxv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a good Lord.


Reason. Whether thou have him, or he have thee, think with thy self: but
this is the manner of speaking, for so you have a Lord, as a man may say he
has a Scab, or a Cough. There be many things which the possessours have
against their wylles: those riches be troublesome, which a man can not shake
of.


Joy. I have a good Lord.


Reason. Then have thou lost thy liberty, for no man can have a Lord, and
liberty at one time. Now neither thy Systers, of whom thou spakest erwhile,
neither thy Daughters, neither thy Sons wives, neither thy Wife, neither thy
Patrimony, neither thy life, are in safety: for in respect of the Lord, whom
thou have, thou have left of to have all other things at once.


Joy. Chance has offered unto me, and my country, a good Lord.


Reason. These twain are repugnant, and quite contrary: for if he be good, he
is no Lord: and if he be a Lord, he is not good, specially if he would be
called a Lord.


Joy. I have a good Lord.


Reason. Parents are good, brethren and children may be good, but friends are
always good, else are they not friends: howbeit, for a Lord to be called good,
is a gentle lie, or a pleasant flattery.


Joy. We have a very good Lord.


Reason. Perhaps a good governor of the people, and defendour of the Common
wealth: a more acceptable thing then which can not be offered unto God by man.
He is not only not worthy to be termed very good, yea, not so much as good,
but rather woorst of all, who takes away from his Citizens and Subjects, the
best thing that they have, to wit, their liberty, which is the chief and most
special commodity of this life, and for the fulfilling of one man's
bottomless gulf of covetousness, which will never be glutted, can willingly
behold so many thousand wretches in misery, with dry eyes. And if justice and
mercy can not prevail, yet at leastwise shame and honesty must revoke him
from so heavy a spectacle, although he be affable to be spoken withal, fair
spoken to persuade, and lastly, liberal unto a few, of the spoils of many.
These are the means that Tyrants do use, whom men commonly call Lords, and
are found to be Hangmen: With these mistes, they bleare men's eyes: with these
baits, they cover their hooks, and catch the credulous in their snares.


Joy. I have a mighty Lord.


Reason. There is one only in heaven (who of his own right has called him
self Lord) and commands him self so to be called: for Augustus Caesar,
that was lord of the earth, provided by proclamation, that none should call him
Lord. The one is God of gods, the other Emperor over men: The one mayntayned
his Majesty, the other preserved his modesty. Finally, in this respect he
sharply reproved the people of Rome: for thus it is written of him, He always
abhorred the name of Lord, as a reproach and slander. Which moderation also,
it is well known that his successor observed, although in all degrees he were
far inferior unto him: who though he were greedy of government, yet
refrayned him self from the title of Lordshyp, and so keepyng as it were a
middle course between ambition and modesty, he was content to be a Lord, but
not to be called so, knowing that it was unjust which he desired, and therefore
desired so as he might avoid the blemish of reproof. Hard, proud, and
grievous is the name of a Lord, specially where is love of liberty, and shame
of seruilitie? Whose foootesteppes Alexander that was Emperor of Rome wifely
followyng, would have no man write unto him in any more lofue style and manner
then to a private man. As for the other Alexander, that was king of Macedonie,
he would not only be called Lord, but also God: whom these petty Thieves of
our time followyng in like pride of mind, scarce having possessed by sinister
means a town or twain, will not only be called Lords, but count it a shame
to be reputed men, and take it as an injury to be so t^armed.


Joy. I have a very good Lord in deed.


Reason. There is one very good Lord in deed, whom if thou have, thy service
is most honest, and more happy then a kingdom.


Joy. We have a just Lord, and (...) very good King.


Reason. The Greeks make no difference between a King and a Tyrant, according
unto which signification, our Poet speaking of a king, says, It shall be unto
me some part of contentation to have touched the Tyrants right hand. But among
you, only the purpose and manner of government makes the difference: so that
he is truly to be termed a King, that rules with justice and equity. But
who so sitting in the high seat of princely dignity, is not a diligent looker
to the profit of the Common wealth, but rather a procurer of his own private
lust, or either seeking after rapine, or imagining revenge, pursues his own
wilfulness or wrathfulnesse, and gives him self up to the outrageous and
unbridled motions of his mind, the same is a slave unto evil masters, and no
king, although he appear in more majesty then the residue, and bear the
Regal scepter in his hand, and vaunt him self in his Purple and princely
apparel, but is rather a Thief that is risen unto dignity, by vexing the
Commons, or troubling the people, and is set in that place, to the intent that
exercising his cruelty with a more free scourge, proouing some, and tempting
other, troublyng and molestyng all, being him self ignorant, and followyng
his own passions, notwithstanding, by the ordinance of him that turns evil
to good purpose, although with wicked and unjust hands, yet executes he the
just judgment of God, even as a blooddie tormentor puts in execution the
vpryght sentence of a righteous Judge.


Joy. My country has a just and godly King.


Reason. A rare treasure, and a most happy state of the Common wealth, unless
the present joy procuring fear of that which is to come, diminished the
felicity, by causing a change to be suspected, and the wantyng of that which
is lost, which shortly after is like to heap up together future miseries,
were remaining in men's minds that know the conditions of humane things, and
Fortunes slypperie wheel, which suffers no prosperous thing to continue
long. Custom asswageth the feelyng of that which is evil, and unaccustomed
things cast a man down, so that some have said that it is best to be always
in adversity, which they would not have said if prosperity would always
endure.


Joy. We have a just and mercyful Prince.


Reason. Wyshe to dye while he lives, that thou may not lament the
alteration of the state: For seldom does one good Prince succeed another,
but ofttymes after an evil comes a worse, and most times after a worse, the
worst of all.


Of the clearenesse of the Air. The lxxxvi. Dialogue.
JOY. THe air is clear and pleasant.


Reason. Who can now justly say of you, that your heavenly mind is addicted
to the earth? For ye hang it up now in the air, and ye bestow your love upon
the Element, then which there is none more unconstant.


Joy. The air is clear and caulme.


Reason. If thou stay awhile, thou shall quickly see it cloudy and troublesome,
that thou wylt think thy self to be under another heaven.


Joy. The air is clear and calm.


Reason. How much rather would I wish that thy mind were clear and calm:
that cleerenesse and constant tranquillity were profitable, which neither
clouds could cover, nor winds trouble.


Joy. The air is clear.


Reason. Every clear thing is not by and by the best, for we read that
cloudie provinces are more wholesome then the clear, and in this respect the
West part of the world is preferred before the East.


Joy. This bright air delights me.


Reason. To take delyght in the creation and handy works of God, it is not
forbidden, so that ye whole delight of the mind be converted unto God, who is
the fountain of al goodness, and the eternal Creator of al things be praised
in these things which are temporal: otherwise, hearken what is written, If
says Job, I beheld the Sun in his brightness, and the Moon when she shyned
clear, and my bart rejoiced in secret, and I kissed my hand with my mouth,
which is a very heinous offense, and a deniyng of the most high God.


Joy. The air is very clear, I would it might always continue so.


Reason. Thou art not able not only to abide it so still, but also not any long
while: The alteration of time is worthily commended to be very commodious of
many, but specially of Cicero.


Joy. The air is very clear, I would it might not be changed.


Reason. Thou know not how soon this cleerenes will bring weerisomnesse:
There is nothing so pleasant, which continual frequentyng the same makes not
loathsome. There is no medicine more effectual against all tediousness of
this life, then variety of time and place: With this, man's life is nooryshed
and fed, and as S. Augustine says, He that cannot be filled with the quality
of things, at leastwyse may be glutted with variety.


Of fortunate sailing. The.lxxxvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Sail prosperously.


Reason. I perceive the matter, Neptune lays snares for thee.


Joy. The Sea has showed it self calm unto me.


Reason. A deceitful calmness, and as I may term it, a bayte for shypwracke:
For if the sea were always rough, no man would venture upon it.


Joy. The Sea is pleasant and sweet unto me.


Reason. It is a suspicious sweetness: thieves flatterynges are threatninges.
This face of the Sea will suddenly change, so that thou will little think it to
be the same, but being cold for fear with the strangeness of the sight, wylt
seek and say, Where is that Sea which I praised erewhyle? from whence come
these so many and horrible Mountains of water? from whence this roaring of the
hougy waves, and these boisterous billows which with threatnyng froath rise up
to the clouds? None know but those that have proved, what the Sea is, and how
outrageous a beast, and what moved the Poet to call it a Monster. For there is
nothing more monstrous in the whole world, nothing more untrusty or
inconstant, nothing so often transfourmed, so dangerously, or suddenly:
finally, nothing more quiet while it rests, or more unmerciful when it is
troubled.


Joy. The Sea is now calm and quiet.


Reason. The earth it self sinketh, and opens, and do thou attribute
firmness to the Sea, as if thou dissembledst thy senses? trust it not, to
tempt fortune oftentimes, is mere madness.


Joy. At least wise, I have now sailed prosperously.


Reason. There is no savage beast that falls into the snare, but he feels
some sweetness before.


Joy. I have sailed prosperously.


Reason. Wicked persons also sail prosperously, and godly men commit
shypwracke.


Joy. I have sailed happily.


Reason. Believe me, if thou continue, thou shall sail vnhappyly.


Of wisshed arryuyng at the Haven. The.lxxxviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am now come to the Haven: now I sytte upon the Shore.


Reason. Many perish in ye Haven, more upon the Shore: thou have exchanged the
kind, but not eschewed the danger.


Joy. I am come to land.


Reason. Thus thou say, as though the dangers of the land were either less
or fewer then of the sea, although they be more secret: Did not he esteem them
both alike, who sometime by the one, and sometime by the other, had been greatly
distressed upon them both? Neither is it without cause, that the same poor
searcher of waters in Statius, when he died, commended the Winters and South
wind, and the better dangers of the experimented Seas.


Joy. I am upon the land.


Reason. Thou art the more subject unto chances, in respect there be more men
Inhabit the earth, then the Sea. For one man is the greatest part of the
miseries that chance unto another: so that death comes from whence succor
ought to come, to let pass the sundry kinds of beasts, whereof the life of
man is full.


Joy. At the least wise the earth will stand steady under foot.


Reason. But many times it has not stood, and for confirmation hereof, I let
pass ancient examples, as Achaia, and the residue of Greece, with Syria and
other countries, where in times past both whole Cities have been utterly
swalowed up, and hills sunk down, and Islands drowned: to omit also unspoken
of the ancient ruins of your own hills Etna and Vesenus, amongst you of
late days. Rome it self the head of cities was shaken with an earthquake,
which in the time of the civil wars was counted a strange matter. In this age
the Alps tre^bled marueilously, and the high rocks being torn away, gave
license to the Sun beams to view such places as were never discovered
before, since the creation of the world: a great part also of Spain and
Germany was overthrown. Thou have seen Cities, strong Castls, and Towns, at
one time standing most firmly, which within few days after, a miserable and
fearful sight, lay al flat upon the earth. Yea, the river Rhine it self ran
forth in his chanel as it were weepyng for the ruins wherewith his banks were
on each side defaced, specially that side which was sometime most beautified
with buildinges, whose rubbishe he washes now with his rattling whirlepooles.
And therefore cease thou to be careless where is no security.


Joy. I have the earth under my feet.


Reason. Not so certain a place of dwelling, as of buryal.


Joy. I am glad that I am come to the ground.


Reason. Like, I see, rejoices in it like, and thou art earth also.


Joy. I am come to earth.


Reason. Not yet truly, but shall shortly.


Of coming forth of prison. The.lxxxix. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am glad I have escaped out of prison.


Reason. Truly I confess that this liberty after it has been restrained is
more acceptable, and more also when it is resfored then preserved: but al
things that delyght, do not profit, and many times sweet things are
hurtful, and bitter things, wholesome. Many times not prison only, but death
also has been profitable, and as often life and liberty hurtful.


Joy. I am glad I have escaped forth of prison.


Reason. Erewhyle thou reioycedst that thou had gained the Haven, and now
thou art glad that thou have escaped it. Prison unto some has been an Haven, to
some, a refuge and Castle of defense, and has preserved some that would have
peryshed, if they had been at liberty. Things that are shut up and tied in
chains, are easily kept. Blind mortal men know not what is good for them, and
therefore they desire their own harms, and when they have obtained them, they
rejoice, whereof they shall soon be sorry. And that thou may not seek far for
an example: thou saw of late that man, whose enterprise was more courageous
then constant, who in time of trouble durst profess him self Patron of the
common wealth of Rome, First he took upon him the name of Tribune, and
afterward when fortune changed, was banished the City: then after his fall
into prison that first was Prince, and then Bishop, being in both well and
honestly reputed, at length by evil chance being set at liberty, and not only
stayne, but also hewed in pieces by his enemies weapons, as he was dying, I
suppose, wyshed he had been in prison.


Joy. I rejoice that I am come forth of prison.


Reason. Henceforth thou shall be conversant in the courts that are
troublesome with contentions, in the streets of the cities, and tumultes of
business, and supposing trouble to be liberty, shall falsely gratulate to thy
self the one for the other, while a thousand snares shall entrap thee, whom
before one key did shut up: and when al men rejoice out of a storm to come
into the Haven, thou only art a woonderful Maryner, who willyngly set out
of the Haven into a tempest.


Joy. I am glad that I am returned out of prysyn.


Reason. The goodness and commodity hereof, as of such other like things, is
neither to much to rejoice, nor to much to be sorry, but in each state to keep
an equanimitie, as the government of your life, specially in so great darkness
of future accidents: neither is it so miserable a thing, as some make it, to
go into prison, neither so happy to come forth. How often has the prison of
the enemy, ben more safe then his liberty? How often has liberty, which you
also much covet, turned to destruction and death:


Joy. I am come forth of prison.


Reason. Many chances may deliver a man out of a large prison, but out of his
narow prison, death only.


Joy. I am come forth of a painful prison.


Reason. Into that prison thou may return again, but when thou art once
departed out of the other, thou can not come again in this time.


Of a quiet State. The.xc. Dialogue.
JOY. Having disposed mine affairs in good order, I now live quietly.


Reason. Forsooth, even as thy ship out of the surgies of the sea, so thy mind,
being discharged of ye cares of this life, is arrived in the harbor of
troubles and terrors: but in deed it is not so, for now have thou greatest
cause to fear. Know thou not that the state of humane things does not
continue, but he that sits highest upon the wheel, is the nearest to
falling?


Joy. Al things go with me as I would wyshe.


Reason. Thou say well in saying they go al, for nothing tarrieth. Before
then that thou seem happy, perhaps hope possesses some place within thee, but
afterward fear, and last of all sorrow, but joy never, I speak of the true
joy, until such time as we attain to the true and permanent good things.


Joy. Haueing disposed mine affairs, now I take my rest.


Reason. Travail and sorrow are the sum of humane things, and can thou
take thy rest in them? An hard head, that can endure to lie between an iron
pair of sheets, and rest thy self upon a pillow of thorns.


Joy. All things are well provided for.


Reason. I suppose that thy ship of merchandise is arrived, thou have escaped
danger, thou have builded an house, thou have tilled thy land, thou have
pruned thy vine, thou have watered thy meadows, thou have made thy floores,
thou have planted trees, thou have cast ryuers, thou have plashed hedges, thou
have builded a dove house, thou have put thy flocks and heardes into pasture,
thy bees into their hiues, thy seed into the furrows, thy new merchandise
thou have sent to sea, thou have laid thy money safely to bank, thy coffers
are full, thy hall is rych, thy chamber neat, thy barnes well stored, thy store
house full to the brim, thou have provided a dowry for thy daughter, a wife
for thy son, thou have won the peoples favor with thy ambitious flattery,
thou have gotten their voices, thou have prepared unto thy self a ready way
unto riches and honor, there now remains nothing, but that thou rejoice in
thine own felicity. This, if I be not deceived, is thy conclusion: but mine
is far other wise, to wit, that thou dye. It seldom happens unto men, to
enjoy long that which they have gotten together with great diligence: the
toil is long, the use is short.


Joy. Now that my affairs go forward prosperously, I am in an assured state.


Reason. How thou can stand, while thine affairs go forward see thou,
for I cannot perceive.


Joy. I rejoice, now that my business proceeds according to my desire.


Reason. Now therefore it is time to dye: thynkest thou that there can any man
live long meery hear? Dye therefore while thou art meery, before thou begin to
be sorrowful. I will now repeat again that which I have said: For the
repeatyng of profitable things is not tedious, but pleasant. Dooest thou
remember in Tullie, what Lacon said to the ancient Diagoras Rhodius, who at
that time much rejoiced, though upon very light occasion, which thou heardest
before when we entreated of Palestrical exercises? Die now Diagoras, quoth he,
for thou can not clymbe into heaven. And truly it was gravely spoken: For in
this so great an alteration of things, what can the mind look for more, then
to leave to be merry, and to begin to be sorrowful? And therefore Diagoras very
seasonably followed his friends counsel: for in the sight and a midst the
shoutyng and gratulation of the people, in the midst of the embrasinges and
kysses of his sons, he gave up the ghost. This History is written in the
book of the Attike nights: and in sum, more have peryshed through joy, then
sorrow. Of all therefore that are wise, but specially that are in great joy,
death is to be wyshed, of which we ought always to think, but most of all in
time of prosperity, and this cogitation will bridle al other.


Joy. I have taken pain, and now I rest.


Reason. Ye hope al for that, but therein ye be all deceived: The course of
your life fares otherwise, and the end thereof answers not your
expectation. This thy rest is either short or false, or, to speak more truly,
both: and how then carrye dream any rest hear? So does he that is in prison
dream of liberty, the sick man of health, and he that is hungry, of dayntie
cheer: but behold, the last day is at hand, which will shortly drive away
these dreams. But be ye not deceived by dreams and false opinions, whereof the
life of man is full, promise not unto your selves rest hear: Believe me, death
is all the rest that men have after their travails.


Joy. I have al things most plentifully, that I think to be necessary
for^ine.


Reason. All things more then needeful, are wast and superfluous, but this is
the manner of man's mind, that professyng and ascendyng upward to heaven,
burdeneth it self with so great care and study, as it is scarce never able to
disburden it self again: so that being wayed down with a foreign burden,
while it endeavors to rise upward, it falls down, and the earth is unto it
in steed of heaven.


Joy. I have abundaunce of al things, and they be now in the Haven.


Reason. Then are they in the end of their course: For this present life is
like to the troublesome Sea. The end of the one is at the shore, and of the
other in death, so that they may be both well termed Havens. And truly the
most part of men, while they be careful in heaping together necessaries to
live by, in the chiefest of their preparation they are cut of by death, and
there is nothing now more common, then for death to prevent the carfulness
of this life: it happens but unto few to obtain their desire, and from
these, the use of their daily gain is so soon taken away, that the shortness
of their joy is an increase of their sorrow, whereof it is known that many have
complained at their death.


Joy. Now that I have ended my trauayles, I live in security.


Reason. So does the foul fly safe between the line and the grin, the fish
plays among the hooks, and the wild beasts among the toils. Oftentimes
whereas is most danger and least fear, it is fortunes cunning to take away
distrust, that she may strike the more freely.


Joy. I have toyled al my life time, to the end I might take my rest at last.


Reason. Thou have placed thy rest and security upon a dangerous downefal,
and have lived in sorrow, to die in mirth, wherein thou have followed no absurd
government concerning thy life and death, so that we agree about the quality
of the security, and rest, and sorrow, and joy.


Joy. I have provided al things to furnysh my self while I live.


Reason. Nay rather, to make thy death more greiuous: Thou have well provided
for the Physicians, they will shortly come thick unto thee, prattling about thy
bed: There will come also some to make thy Testament, and some to look for
Legacies: some that will dissemble their joy, and counterfeite tears, and
secretly curse that thy life continues so long, and thy death approaches no
faster: some will mark the crisis or determination day of the sickness, some
the signs and tokens, and some will watch the golden carcass. All these goods
which in all thy life time thou have scraped together, will be the means
only, not for thee to live the better, but to dye the more accompanied. Thou
have not altogether lost thy labor, for thou shall not lack company when
thou art sick, neither money for thy lust and superfluities, neither pomp for
thy burial.


Joy. Now that I have gotten al things, I may take my rest.


Reason. I said erwhyle, thou soughtest rest and comfort of life, but thou have
found pain and tediousness of death.


Joy. I have disposed all things, and attained prosperity.


Reason. Thou have heaped together a nest of most deceitful and transitory
hope, which so soon as it grows to any ripeness, will flee away, leaving thy
heart void and sorrowful, and many times it perishes before it be fledge.


Joy. After my long traueyle, comes quietness.


Reason. Perhaps it will be as short as may be possible. For often the travel
of many years perishes in a moment, and when as for the most part al
procedinges are by degrees, the ends of things are not seldom sudden.


Joy. By long cares, at length I am come to the beginning of security.


Reason. Humane curiosity is very careful of the beginninges, but is so blind
that it cannot foresee the end. A thycke miste of the time to come, has
bleared the sight of mortal men's eyes. Let our deliberation be the
accomplishment of our fortune: But to speak more truly, it is the will of God,
in whose hands are al men's chances, not such as in your fond opinion and
ungodly hope you imagine to your selves, but which he foreseeth in his
providence. For this is his saying, Fool, this night will they take thy soul
from thee: Whose then shall these goods be which thou have gathered? An
horrible threatening, which if it be not able to quayle your hope, and break of
your sleep, doubtless ye are fallen deaf.


Of Power. The.xci. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have great Power.


Reason. Then have thou also much envy.


Joy. I am of great power.


Reason. And also in much peril.


Joy. I am of very great power.


Reason. Thou art subject also to infinite traueyles, and inextricable cares.


Joy. I may do much.


Reason. So much as thou may do over other, so much may other do over
thee.


Joy. I have very much power.


Reason. The greater thy power is, the more empire fortune has over it: she
bestirreth her self but coldly in small things, she chooses rather the more
plentiful matter to exercise her self in. In a great pile of wood the flame
rages with fiercer noise: great prosperity prepares the way for great
adversity. A man shall scarce find one that is in miserable state in deed,
that has not before been in great prosperity. The calamity of an unknown
man, can not be known.


Joy. Look what I would do, the same I can do.


Reason. Take heed then that thou have a will to do no evil: and know this,
that the more power thou have, so much the more business, and less liberty
thou have.


Joy. I am of great power.


Reason. How know thou whether it will continue? I am ashamed to set down
what men of power have come to weakness, and what kings have been brought
unto infamous slavery. Full of briars and slipperie are the steps of man's
rising, the top is waueryng, the fall is horrible: the rising to high degree
is difficult, the continuing is careful, the fall is soddayne and grievous,
which to be true, not only every king and people, but also the greatest
Empires do testifite.


Joy. I am myghtie in arms and riches.


Reason. True and firm power is founded upon virtue: if thou take away the
foundation, the greater the buyldyng is, in the more danger it is. What
avails it to fill houses with Riches, fields with Mattockes, seas with
Nauies, if in the mean while household enemies besiege and overcome the mind
within? Wylt thou have me grant that thou art of power? Overcome then those
enemies, and drive them out of thy bounds, subdue anger, covetousness, lust,
yea, and thine own self, who art enemy to thine own fame and soul. For
what power is this, to subdue other by a man's own passions?


Joy. My power is surely grounded.


Reason. How can that he when as your life it self is daily subject to
alteration? O thou weak creature, why do thou swell? thou disputest of
power, and in the mean while art in danger of thy life, which sooner then a
man can speak it, either some secret force of nature, or the bytyng of some
little beast, or some most vile and base person, has often times taken away
from the most mighty personages.


Joy. My power is very firmly established.


Reason. Where, I pray thee? upon the sand and waves, or in the wind, or, as
they say, upon Fortunes wheel? Howbeit, my friend, lay down this thy
foolyshe confidence. Here is no power stable, and to utter (though improperly)
that which I think, here is no power, that is of power.


Of Glory. The.xcii. Dialogue.
JOY. BUT I have found great Glory.


Reason. How great things may be expressed in a little, I do not understand.
If thou measure the shortness of times, and the narrowness of places, thou
must needs confess that here can be no great glory. I will not here rehearse
unto thee, how that the whole earth is but a prick, the greatest part whereof
nature has made inhabitable, and to fortune inaccessible, and that the time
present is less then a prick, and evermore unstable, and passes away so
swiftly, that a man can scarce follow it with his mind: as for the other two
parts of time, they are always absent, so that the one weerieth us with
slipperinesse of remembrance, the other with careful expectation: so that al
times, either by floods of water, or overmuch heat, or with some plague or
intemperance of the heaven or earth, or briefly by them selves, and their own
fall, are so torn and confounded, that no age almost has that which another
had: and no less in time then in place a man may see in short space, ye thing
that was commonly known, not to be known at al. These, and such other like
matters, I say, I let many pass: they be common things, whereby it is easily
discerned how great this mortal and earthly glory is.


Joy. I have gained that glory which my calling requires.


Reason. If it be unworthy, truly it is but short: if it be worthy, rejoice,
not for that thou have it, but for that thou have deserved it.


Joy. I have gained glory.


Reason. True glory is not gained but by good means: see therefore how thou
have gotten a name, and so shall thou understand whether it be true glory or
not: if chance has brought thee fame, the fame will also take it away.


Joy. I am in great glory.


Reason. Beware lest that glory which thou supposest to be true, be the Image
of false glory: In worldly matters there is great illusion.


Joy. I am in much glory.


Reason. Like as no poor man seeks to have the report that he has great
store of money, but only to deceive: so truly, for none other cause do the
wicked covet the opinion of great virtue: notwithstanding both of them are
privy to them selves whatsoever other men report of them, the one, how much
money he has in his coffer, the other, how much virtue he has in his mind.


Joy. My glory is notable.


Reason. If deservedly, use it modestly, that thou add not there unto the
blemysh of pride: if not, abuse the people no longer.


Joy. My glory is glitteryng.


Reason. Either study to deserve it, or put of that heavy garment which is
none of thine own. It were better to be without glory, then lyingly to be
glorious. For true glory is preserved by labor: What do thou think then of
false? It is hard to feign and dissemble in all matters, but most hard in
that which many do watch on every side. Men endued with true glory, are rare
to be found, whom because of their great difference and vnlykenesse, the
obscure and malicious common people do hate. It is an hard matter to lie hyd
among so many snares of the enemies, thou can not bleare all men's eyes that
are so diligently bent upon thee.


Joy. I appear glorious.


Reason. Perhaps it were better for thee to lie hid, and more safe. This
spoke he gravely, that has said many things lightly, He has lived well,
that has lain hyd well.


Joy. I am famous and far known, and widely renowned.


Reason. Malice pearceth and searches the most secret things, and think
thou that she will let pass the things that are in sight? Yea, they are but
few, for whom it is expedient to appear and be seen, and few whom fame
would not hurt to be fully known. The saying of Claudianus is well known,
Presence diminishes the fame: but how much more does knowledge of the
matter diminyshe it? Men are seldom found in deed to be such as they seem.


Joy. I appear glorious.


Reason. Thou lie hyd in an hollow cloud, forth of which when thou shall
come a little abroad, the falser thy glory was, the truer shall be thy shame.


Joy. But my glory is true.


Reason. None knows that better, then thy self: and so if in thine own
affairs thou put on the vncorrupt mind of an outward Judge, true glory, as
some wise men hold opinion, is as it were a certain shadow of virtue: for it
keeps company with her, and follows her, and sometimes goes before her:
which we see to be true in young men of noble and virtuous disposition, whom
the opinion which men conceive of them, makes them noble before their virtue
be perfect, which, as it were with certain pricks and spurs, provoke and
inflameth noble and modest minds, to be in all respects aunswerable to the
hope of their countrymen and citizens, and throws down headlong the
foolyshe and proud. Hereof comes the ridiculus metamorphosis of noble
youths into obscure old men: For praise that is profitable to a wise man,
hurts a fool. Hereby thou perceyuest that a shadow can not be of it self,
but it must be the shadow of another thing. Would thou then that thy glory
were true? see then that true and sound he thy virtue.


Of Benefits bestowed upon many. The.xciii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Rejoice that I have bestowed Benefits upon many.


Reason. When thou have found many unthankful, thou wylt be sorry.


Joy. I have powered forth benefits upon many.


Reason. Thou say true, for if a man consider the minds of the receyuers,
the most part of them is cast away.


Joy. Many are beholden to my benefits.


Reason. Some will release them selves by forgetfulness: others will requite
thy good turns with injuries, and if injuries cease, yet complaints will not
cease: how many do complain of such as have done them good? This is
injurious, I confess, but so common, that complayntes are not so often made of
the enemies. Thou have heard in Lucane. how Photinus complayneth of Pompeius,
and in Seneca, Sabinus of Augustus. But why do I call thee unto books, or
antiquity? Behold the myddest of Cities: every village is full of such
complayntes. There is no ingratitude, as I suppose, but it grows upon one of
these three causes: Envy, which thynkyng, by the benefits bestowed upon
others, them selves to be injured, forget the good turns that them selves have
received: Pride, which either judge them selves worthy of greater, or
disdain that any other should be preferred before them: Covetousness, which
is not aswaged, but inflamed by rewards, and in gapyng after that which is to
get, remembers not what is gotten alredie. I might more briefly term the
whole cause of this mischeife, foolyshnesse: for it is not only the cause of
this, but also of all other mischiefs, the ignorance of the true good, and
the perverseness of opinions. Herehence proceed the infections of the mind,
chiefly, pride and covetousness, unto whom no duty is not stubburne, no
bountifulness not too little.


Joy. I have been beneficial unto many.


Reason. A certain magnanimity which Aristotle entendeth, is said to
remember what it has bestowed, but to forget the benefits received. Which
opinion, although it want not some color, yet in my judgment he that has the
true magnanimity, is a contemner of mean and base things, and therefore
whatsoever he does, although in the judgment of many they be great, yet are
they but small to a mind that imagines greater and rarer matters: and
contrariwyse, if he have received any thing whereby he is made beholden to
another man, although it be but little, yet is it grievous unto one that loves
liberty, and aspireth unto excellency, whereof he is desirous with speed to
be discharged and unburdened. And therefore concerning this matter, I like of
the saying of Anneus Seneca, Let him that has done a good turn, says he,
hold his peace, and let him tell it that has received it. And it is finely
said, for that there are two poisons or wounds of beneficencie: The one, the
exprobation of the geuer, the other, the forgetfulness of the receyuer: both
are Mothers to ingratitude, and Stepdames to a good turn. The first, brings
forth ingratitude in another, the latter, in it self. The first also
extinguisheth a benefit in it self, the latter, in another. These mischiefs
how many soever they be, may be cured by Senecas counsel.


Joy. I have done good unto many.


Reason. But thou have not done unto most, which are grieved that they are
contemned and neglected. There is in us, I know not how, a more perfect
remembrance of injuries and offenses done unto us, then of the good turns
which we have received. And it chances many times, that for benefits
received, a man shall find his friends forgetful or luke warm, but his
enemies mindful and earnest.


Joy. I have done many great good turns for many men.


Reason. There are many of that disposition, that it is dangerous to do them
good: some have purchased a friend with a small benefit, and an enemy with a
great, for that a small debt is easily repayed, and they are ashamed to owe a
great debt, and are loath to repay it, so that there is no third leaft, but
that he must leave longer to owe that owes against his will. Thus whylst shame
greeueth him that owes a good turn, and sorrow him that has received it, the
ship of him that is beneficial, is carried between the two dangerous rocks
of Scilla and Caribdis, and so it is come to pass, that many that might have
lived hardly and sparyngly, have been brought into danger through liberality.
For a man can not freely be good among evil men, an hard sayeing, but I must
needs utter it: there is no living thing more unthankful then man.


Joy. I have showed my self beneficial far and wide.


Reason. There be some that be beneficial, but not friendly, whom the
greatness of their calling, and the necessity of men constrayneth to give
many things, unto such as they do not only not love, but not so much as
know, of whom if they hope to be beloved for their benefits sake, they be
very much deceived. There is none lightly, but loves where he is beloved.
Love is a mutual knot and reciprocation of minds. Gifts are oftentimes given
upon necessity, but love is bestowed by judgment. Therefore, as I will never
deny, but that benefits well bestowed, and with a merry countenance and well
meaning mind, employed upon worthy persons, are glorious: so is there no man
that doubts, but that many, yea, the most part of them, through the fault of
the geuers or receyuers, are lost and cast away: and that way unto love is more
easy, short, and straight, which I showed thee before, to wit, to attain
unto love by leuyng, in which, while thou go forward, if thou win the true
name of a beneficial person, it shall make thee famous and beloved above
expectation.


Joy. I have bestowed many and great benefits.


Reason. Not what, but how, and with what mind things be done, both God and
man do respect: great things are many times odious, and mean things
acceptable, but above all, the very naked heart only is accepted in the
sacrifice and gift of the poor.


Of love of the people. The.xciiii. Dialogue.
JOY. THE people love me.


Reason. Stay awhyle, and anon they will hate thee.


Joy. The people love me.


Reason. Make no great have, the end is not yet come: for as one day, so is
the whole life described by the end.


Joy. I am beloved of the people.


Reason. Who was of them better beloved then the Scipioes, then Camillus, then
Rutilius and Metellus? What shall I speak of Themistocles or Milciades, or of
his son Cymon, or Aristides? What of Theseus, of Solon, of Hannibal, or of
Lycurgus? These Citizens, I say, although they were never so dearly, and never
so short time beloved of their people, notwithstanding their ends are all
known, and this love turned either into contempt, or into hatred, and
requital unworthy of their desartes, travel at home and abroad, accusation,
death, exile imprisonment.


Joy. Most part of the people love me.


Reason. The woorser sort then, for there are but few good, and it is known
that the love of evil men, is purchased by evil means: For if a certain
similitude and likeness procure friendshyp, as the wise hold opinion, think
of thy self what thou art, in that most of the people do love thee.


Joy. The people love me.


Reason. A fair Wynters weather, Summers air, calmness of the Sea, the
Moons state, and love of the people, if all these were compared together, for
inconstancy, the last shall bear the bell.


Joy. The people honor me.


Reason. With their lyps I think, but their heart is far from thee: for it is
not more true unto thee then to God. The people does seldom any thing
wyllyngly, but raise tumultes and vprores.


Joy. The people fear me.


Reason. They will not do so long: For it soon decays that is not grounded
upon assured judgment.


Joy. The peoples good will is fervent toward me.


Reason. Of an hot beginning many times comes a warm middle, and a cold end:
which may be seen in nothing sooner then in the good will of the people.


Joy. The people praise me.


Reason. The praise of fools, is counted infamy among the learned.


Joy. The people have me in admiration.


Reason. After some small alteration they will despise thee, for always they
hold one of the extremities, but never the mean, as fearyng him whom they so
account of for an enemy.


Joy. The people do reverence


Reason. I would marueyle if thou could prosper under so attendyng
attenders.


Joy. The people have a good opinion of me.


Reason. They use to judge on both sides without discretion, and therefore the
verdict of the common people, among true judges, is an argument of the contrary.


Joy. The people esteem well of me.


Reason. The estimation and judgment of mad men is suspected of sound wits:
I had rather the people knew thee not, then so lyked of thee.


Joy. The people speak much of me.


Reason. And thou therefore art over credulus, and carried away with the
populare air: which although thou know to have happened sometime unto great
men, yet is the vanity never awhyt the less, to rejoice in a slender and
uncertain state.


Joy. The people have me in admiration.


Reason. And I also wonder at thee, that thou ascribest this any deal to thy
glory.


Joy. The people love me.


Reason. This is no praise to thee, but thy fortune: it is the peoples manner
oftentimes to love the unworthy, but from them many times they receive a most
worthy reward of their unworthy love.


Of inuadyng a Tirranny. The xcv. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have invaded a Tyrranny over my country men.


Reason. Thou have well requited thy foolysh lovers: They advanced thee more
then reason required, and thou have thrown them down under the yoke of unjust
servitude.


Joy. I have taken upon me a Tyrrannie.


Reason. Thou have deprived others of their liberty, thy self of security,
and both, of your rest.


Joy. I have obtained a Tyrranny.


Reason. A state of undoubted travail, of an uncertain event, but for the
most part unfortunate: I will not refer thee unto ancient and foreign
Histories. What was the end of Alexander Phaeraeus? what of Dionysius of
Syracusae? what of Phalaris of Agrigentum? what of Anno the Carthagien? what of
Elearchus of Heraclea? what of Aristotinus Ephirensis? what of Nabis the
Lacedemonian? and lastly, of Hipparchus the Athenian, whose death purchased
immortal fame to his murderers? Neither will I send thee to new and domestical
examples, Cassius, and Melius, and Manlius. Citizens of Rome, Catuline also,
and the Gracchi, and Apuleius, not Tyrants, but affectyng a tirranny, who were
espied in their wicked attempts, hyndred of their purpose, and suppressed: And
lastly, not unto those, who being greater, not better, cloked their cruel and
unjust tyrrannie, with the color of a just Empire, namely Caius and Nero,
Domitianus and Commodus, Bassianus, and the residue of that crew, who were
Princes only in name, and had both Tirantes minds, and Tirantes ends: but I
will rather refer thee unto other, whom in the remembrance of your fathers and
grandfathers, yea also of this present age, this your region has seen. These,
that I may not weery thee with them that are far of, I would have thee to
consider and behold, and thou shall see that the common and usual end of
Tyrants, is either by swoorde or poison, and thou wylt confess that the
saying of the Saterical Poet is true, Few Kings and Tirants dye without
murder and wounds, or of a dry death, without bloodshed.


Joy. I possess a tyrranny over my Citizens.


Reason. A booty and slaughter house to fyl thy self with gold, and with blood
to gither with the gold like an hungry Crow, and like the greedy Horsleach,
which will not let go the skyn till he be full of blood. But with what
countenance, or what conscience, do thou either shead that blood, which to
preserve (if thou were a man) thou should wyllingly shed thine own blood,
or extortest gold from thy Citizens, to give it unto thy cruel tormentors,
spoiling them whom thou should feed with thy riches, and enryching those,
from whom (as thou read) thou should by all means extort? so smally are
the examples and precepts of your Elders regarded. But this is one most vile
discommoditie in the life of Tyrants, that they stand always in fear of them
whom they should trust, and trust them that have no trust nor truth at al:
and all this mischief happens on the one side, for that injuries are offered
to them that have not deserved, on the other, for that benefits are bestowed
upon the unworthy, so that the whole course of things, being confounded
through disorder, enemies are made friends, and Citizens are made enemies.


Joy. I am the Tyrant of my country.


Reason. Could thou find in thy heart to be so, if thou remembredst that it
were thine own country. If the representation of your common mother came into
thy mind, thou would never in such sort tear thy brethren, with whom thou
have been brought up in thy chyldehood, and also in ryper years, have enjoyed
the same air, the same waters, the same religion, the same holidays, the same
plays and delights: with what mind can thou insult and reign^^ouer them,
and rejoice when they weep? Lastly, with what impudency ^^ooest thou live in
that City, wherein thou know thy life to he hated of all men, thy death
wyshed of all sorts, where thou art assured there is none that would not have
thee destroyed, as a most cruel Wolf in a gentle flock?


Joy. I have undertaken a Tyrrannie.


Reason. If thou compare the present time with the time past, thou shall
perceive how miserable a clogge thou have laid upon thy shoulders: thou
lyuedst sometime a safe and quiet life; but now henceforward unless thou join
madness to mischief, thou shall pass no day nor night without fear and
trouble of mind, eat no meat without suspicion, take no sleep without
dread, while thou beholdest on every side the sword hanging over thy head,
which Dionysius is reported, not unfitly, to have showed unto a certain friend
of his that wondered at his wealth and authority, who was a tyrant in deed,
but a most grave considerer of the state of tyrranny.


Joy. I have purchased a tyranny by the swoorde.


Reason. If thou have gotten it by the swoorde, thou must keep it by the
sword, and perhaps loose it by the sword: Thou have won worthy riches in
deed, to be odious and fearful unto all men, and that which follows
thereof, to be continually a fearful burden to thy self. But to admit there
were no danger, which in some Cities and countries the nature of the people
bears sufficiently, being apt to seruilitie and obedience, yet when, being
out of fear and danger, thou shall call to mind what Laberius, a Knight of
Rome, said unto him that was the first founder of this which now has the
name of a just Empire: Needs, says he, must he fear many, of whom many
stand in fear. The reason of which saying is that which Ovid aleageth, For
every man wishes him dead, whom he fears: which was first alleged by
Ennius, where he says, They hate, whom they fear: each man wysheth him dead
whom he fears. But if all fear and danger do cease which has happened
unto some Tyrants, their boldness being nooryshed by public calamities, or
the experimented dastardes of their Citizens: yet is it not a shame for thee to
govern those unto whom it were more meet thou were their vnderlyng, besides
thy injurious force, which is the worst thing of al^^*


Joy. I have put on a tyrranny.


Reason. Thou have put of all humanity and justice, and chosen a troublesome
and blooddy life, or else truly a doubtful death: Unhappy man, whose death only
thy country, which hare thee and brought thee up, does continually hope for.
Is not he in sufficient woeful case, whom al men would have to be in woeful
case? And is not he most wretched, who cannot possible be so wretched, but is
worthy to be more wretched?


Joy. I possess the chiefest place among my Citizens.


Reason. Thou possessest a tyrranny over thy Citizens, thou have placed thine
house upon sand, thy bed in the briars, thy seat upon a downefal, thy
poverty in rapynes, and thine envy in miseries.


Of a Kingdom and Empire. The.xcvi. Dialogue.
JOY. Behold, I am a King by right.


Reason. That cannot be long unknown, for what the difference is between a
King and a Tirant, I have declared already: And what avails it for thee to be
called a King, if thou be a Tirant? The safety of a King and kingdom,
consists not in a glorious name, but in true justice. I deem it less evil
for thee to refourme the government that thou have gotten, and afterward so to
behave thy self, that thou may appear to be a true King, then by
tyrannical vexation to spoil the kingdom whereunto thou come by right,
wherein thou lawfully succeedest thy father: for there belongs more true
praise unto the proceedyng and end, then to the beginning of things.


Joy. I am a king.


Reason. It were better and more quiet to live under a good King, then to be a
King thy self.


Joy. I have ascended into the Regal seat of the kingdom.


Reason. A conspicuous place, and object unto al men's eyes, and therefore
dangerous for slouthfulnes, and paynful and difficult for virtue: For a good
King, is a public servant.


Joy. I am advanced to the Regal throne of a kingdom.


Reason. To the end thou may seem worthy, forget thy self and thine own
affairs, think upon thy people and the commom wealth: the day first that thou
wast made a King, thou beganst to dye to thy self, and to live for other, and
which is the hardest case of al, for unthankful and unjust considerers of thy
travail.


Joy. I am come to a kingdom.


Reason. Perhaps thou may get there some transitory glory, but no
quietness at all.


Joy. I reign uprightly.


Reason. Thou do well, and a most acceptable thing unto God. And know this,
that thou seruest such as are always repynyng and full of complayntes, and
that will scarce give thee thanks before thy death. There is seldom any King
so good, but the people love him better that shall succeed, who when he is
come, the other is wyshed for again. These are the manners of the common
people, to hate the things that are present, to desire the things that are to
come, and to praise the things that are past. How then should complayntes
cease, if every good thing that is present do stynke, and nothing pleases,
but that which grieueth, whether it be already past, or hoped for.


Joy. I have gotten the Scepter and Diadem.


Reason. Glorious fetters, and a noble misery, which if all men thoroughly
knew, trust me, two would not so often strive for one seat, but there would
be more kingdoms then Kings.


Joy. I wear the princely robes.


Reason. It is not the outward apparel, but the inward furniture and princely
mind that makes a King. Alexander the Emperor of Rome was wont to say, that
Empire and government consisted in virtue, and not in sumptuousness.


Joy. I am advanced to a kingdom.


Reason. Now is the state of the subjects uncertain, whether they be happy
in that kind of happiness which is imagined to be hear, or in misery. For a
virtuous king, is the felicity of a transitory kingdom: but unto thee
remains doubtful travail, and weighty business.


Joy. I am a King, and a King may do what he list.


Reason. No man less: yea, that which in old time was lawful, is not so now:
And if perhaps thou look for licentiousness by means of thy kingdom, know
that thou art no King, but a Tirant.


Joy. I am a King, and I may do what I will.


Reason. Nothing but what becomes a King, who, as I said, has less liberty
then a private person. If in followyng this path thou seek for pleasure, thou
art deceived, and as the proverb says, thou go quite beside the Cushyn:
Pleasure is far behind, but this way leads unto pain and glory.


Joy. I am a king, and I shall now live in assured tranquillity.


Reason. Nay rather if thou were in any heretofore, it is now lost: he is but a
foolish marryner who seeks for calmnesse and tranquillity in forsakyng the
Haven, and making sail into the wide sea.


Joy. But I am made Emperor of Rome.


Reason. A very honorable name, but a very hard office. To keep great things
is an hard matter: but what is it to build up that which is fallen down, to
gather together that which is dispersed, to recover that which is lost, to
reform that which is defaced? thou have taken in hand the tyllyng of a
forlorn Farm, which many of long time have neglected: hard land requires
many spades, and dry meadows much water: thou must abide heat and cold, and
if thy travail find semblable success, thou shall reap the commendation,
and thy successor the residue, thou shall sow for him, and for thy self the
Harvest will come to late, for it requires many summers.


Joy. I am advanced to the Empire, I will take my rest and live in security.


Reason. Thou art in a false persuasion, thou could never do it less: have
thou clymbed up to the top of an high hyl to avoid winds and lyghtnyng? Have
thou not read the saying of Horace: The hougie Pine tree is most often shaken
with winds, and high towers when they are overthrown have the greater fall,
and lightenyng strikes the loftiest mountains? How much otherwise, did the
expert and wise princes Augustus and Diocletian judge of the excellency of
this state, whereof the one, as we read, thought of giving over the Empire, the
other, gave it over in deed, and being called unto it again, would not grant
thereunto? How much otherwise did Marcus Aurelius and Pertinax, whereof the
first being by adoption called to the hope of thempire, is reported to have
disputed much of the discommodities of thempyre, the other being made Emperor,
to have abhorred thempyre? Great is the advancement to the Empire, great are
the toils in the Empire, and when a man is once risen aloft, the greater and
more grievous is his fall. If thou will not believe me, ask Julius Caesar, and
Caius Caligula, and Claudius, and Nero, and Galba, and Otho, and Vitellius, and
Domitianus, and Commodus, and Pertinax, of whom I spoke last: Moreover
Bassianus and Macrinus with his son Diadumenus, and of al other, the most
filthy Heliogabalus, and far unlike unto him in manners Alexander, and the more
that thou may maruayle, the mother of them both, with her son: Also the
Maximi and the Maximiniani, and the Maximi and Gordiani: Moreover, the
Philippes and Decius, and Gallus, and Volusianus, and Valerius, famous for his
notable calamity, and Galienus the contemner of his fathers misery: To be
short, Aurelianus and Probus, Iulianus and Licinius, Constantius and Valens,
Gratianus and Valentinianus, and that I may not weery thee with rehearsing all,
demand the question of that whole race and succession of Tirants and Princes,
and they will answer thee all alyke, that look by what way they arose to the
Empire, by the same way they ran to ruin. And dooest thou then imagine that
thou shall find rest there, and live insecuritie, where all have found danger
and trouble, and many a most miserable end of their lives? This did not those
four imagine to them selves, whom I named in the beginning: Not he that was
grandfather on the mothers side to the Emperor Antonius Pius, Arius Antonius,
an holy virtuous man, as Histories term him, but as I confess of him, a wise
man, who picied Neruas state, in that he had taken the Empire upon him. For
truly it is injuriously done to envy at Princes, when as in deed they ought
rather to be pitied.


Joy. I am an Emperor, and I am able to revenge.


Reason. Against the enemies of the common wealth perhaps, but not thine own.
For these, if thou be a true Prince in deed, by thine advancement security
is purchased: thy public duty and godliness must bridle thy private
affections. Thou can not be enemy to this man and that man, since thou have
deserved to be father unto all men. For a Prince has that care and authority
over his subjects, that a father has over his children. A good Prince is the
father of his country: there was none of all his titles which that worthy
Emperor Augustus accepted more thankefully then this, who repressyng the
motions of his youth, determined to fulfill that name of a father: and
therefore, they which were sometime thine enemies, are now thy children.


Joy. I am an Emperor, I may be revenged.


Reason. Thou ought not to use thy power that way, but persuade thy self
thus, that when ye power of a great Empire falls upon excellent minds, and
that are equal to their calling, it is the occasion of pardon, and not of
revenge, whereof the more vile and weak a man's mind and strength is, the more
he is greedy. In which matter, it were expedient for thee to remember the
saying of Hadriane the Emrour, who (as it is written of him) when he was made
Emperor, said unto one that was his enemy, thou have now escaped my hands: A
princely and magnifical saying, and fit for an Emperor.


Joy. I am an Emperor, and I shall have treasure answerable to my charges.


Reason. This saying tends to rapine, and as of other things, so also of
charges and expenses there is a continual stream and bottomless pit, which
can never be satisfied. It would require a long time to set down in as large
manner the follies and madness of men, but specially of ye Emperors of Rome,
in this behalf. Notwithstanding, among al I will touch a few, and of them a few
things among many. Most notorious was the madness of Caius, who made a bridge
between Baiae and Puteoli, which raging crook of the sea he first passed over
on horseback, and afterterward triumphantly in a charret. What shall I speak
of pearls of great price dissolved in Vinegar, and golden loaves, and golden
services of meat set before the guestes at the table, whereby the meaning was
not according to the common custom of feasts to stake the guestes hunger, but
to consume the wealth of ye Empire, and to provoke their avarice? Add hereunto
moreover casting of money among the people, great moles and heaps of stones
and rubbish thrown into the rough and deep sea, hard rocks cut in sunder,
plain fields thrown up into hills, and tops of hills made leauel with
plain fields, to the one earth added, from the other earth taken away, and
that so suddenly, that the strangeness of the wonder was nothing inferior to
the violence done unto nature, to wit, when death was the reward of delaying
the work, by which means having within one years space consumed the great
treasure of his predecessor Tiberius, and all the riches of the whole Empire,
he was driven to extreme poverty, and most shameful rapine. Among these
things I do not reckon, how that he had determined in his mind to make a cut
through Isthmus the hyl of Corinth, which although it would have been a work
of great charges, yet had it been profitable for sea faring men, whereby the
two seas had been made one, and they that had passed from Brundusium to Athens,
or Chalcis, or Byzantium, should have avoided the great crook of Achaia. Next
follows Nero, match and superior unto him in madness, whose disordinate
expenses had no measure, specially in building, wherein he surpassed all
prodigal fools, and him self also. He was not more ^^^^ful in any other
thing, then in this: and therefore I will touch on^ (...) numerable follies. He
buyided an house, which reached from the hyl (...) unto ^sguiline, and
stretched also over a gre^^ ^^^art of the city, so that not unworthily among
the tauntes and reproaches wherewith the people with most free indignation girded
him home, this also was cast against him, All Rome shall be one house, ye Romans
depart ye to the Vehi, if so be that this house do not also streatch unto the
Vehi. This house he commanded to be called the golden house, not unfitly,
declaring the price by the name. For the house was seeled and knotted with
precious stones, and of such height, that at the entrance (...) of stood a
Colossus, an hundred and twenty foot high. Within was a Gallerie and Hal
seeled about with pendentes of Gold and Iuorie, and upon the top devises of
strange workemanshyp, with motions after the manner of heaven, by little and
little, of their own accord turning about day and night without intermission:
Also a Ponde like the Sea, adorned round about upon the shore with
buyldinges, after the manner of a City: Moreover, fields and pastures, and
vineyardes, and woods, replenished with all kinds of living things. The
midst of this house, as far as could be coniectured, was that place which is
commonly called Colosseum, whose ruins do yet at this day astonish the
beholders: and the more to augment the wonder of the matter, all these things
were in the very mids of Rome. So that notwithstanding he seemed to him self
not only not to have exceeded, but not yet to have answered the greatness
that ought to be in an Emperors house, insomuch as when he dedicated the
house, he made no greater wonder at it, but said this much only, Now at
length I begin to dwell like a man. I omit these trifles, that he never ware
one garment twice, that he never went journey with less then a thousand
Charrets, that his Mules were shod with shoes of silver, that he fished with a
golden Net, that his roapes and cords were made of sine Purple silk: with
many such other matters exceeding credit, and breedyng tediousness. But who
will not wonder at these things that reads of them, but more wonder if he
beheld them, ye remnantes and tokens whereof remain to this day? The Fishponde
that was begun from the bridge Misenus, and should have reached to the ^ake
Auernus, compassed and covered with wonderful galleries, and the dytch that was
cast from Auernus to H^stia^ (...) so long distance of way, and through so many
s^^lles, w^^^e bringing the sea into it, and sailing in it without the
accidents ^^^t happen on the sea, he might avoid both the toil of traueyling
by land, and the weerisomnesse of faring by water: the length whereof, as now
the inhabitants of those quarters do account it, is well known unto al men,
but as Tranguillus reckneth, is an hundred and threescore mile: the breadth was
such, that two Galleys might meet, and one not touch nor hinder another. Which
work if he (...) finished, he had beggered al Italy, and the whole Common
wealth, but that death only provided a remedy for so great mischiefs of the
world. After him follows Aurelius Verus, who, that I may let pass other
things, made such a supper, that if he would have made the like dynner, I
know not whether the Roman wealth would have been sufficient. Which thing
when his brother Marcus Aurelius understood, being as great a friend to
modesty as this was enemy, is reported to have lamented, taking compassion
upon the Common wealth and the Empire decaying. I leave others, for these are
too many, and I know that there be some of you that will think these examples
to be longer then need, and the remedies shorter then promise. But sometime it
delights a learned man, or one that loves learning and honesty, to hear
the madness of fools, which may be a warning for him to follow the
contrary, and with all might and main to eschew the like. All these things
tend to this end, that thou may recompt with thy self, what it is wherein
thou hopest to have treasure answerable to thy charges. For as good husbandry
and modesty require no great treasures, so neither treasures nor whole empires
are sufficient for prodigality and riotousnesse. And this cause, has not
only constrained men of mean calling, but almost all Princes, those I mean,
that have followed the vain of these latter times, of necessity to fall to
rapine and extortion, which has given occasion unto many of an hastened and
miserable death.


Joy. Are not so many Cities sufficient, to bear one man's charges*


Reason. Let these aunsweare thee, of whom I have spoken so much, and others
innumerable, whom the like plague has brought to like confusion. To conclude,
this most deep den of expenses, that I may so term it, like as that gapyng
pit of Curtius in old time, can not be filled with any riches, but may be
restrained by virtue, and specially by modesty. Wherein it avails to
remember that it is others goods which thou wastest: and in this point also it
is profitable to call often to mind ye saying of the Emperor Hadriane, which,
as it is read, he was wont many times to repeat in his speeches unto the
people, and in the Senate, That he would so govern the Common wealth, as
knowing that it was the peoples commodity, and not his own: A fytte saying
for so worthy a Prince.


Joy. I reign, and revenge is mine.


Reason. Truly it is not thine, for he lies not that said, Revenge is mine.
And verily, if thou be a true King, nothing is less thine then revenge, and
nothing more, then mercifulness. I could wyshe that nature had denied stinges
to the kings of Men, as well as she has to the kings of Bees: but now she
has only given an example to the free creature, not taken away his liberty:
but that which she does not enforce, it is my part to exhort. Behold that small,
but divine Worm, and leave thou of thy sting likewise, not in the wound, but
before the wound. The first is the part of a base person, the second of a
king: otherwise, as not without justice, so neither art thou a king without
mercy, no not so much as a man, but only, as the Fable says, a crowned Lion.


Joy. I am Emperor of Rome.


Reason. Thou have Augustus, Nero, and Vitellius, whom thou may follow.
Unto these three, not only al Princes, but al men are restrained. Choose unto
thy self then one of these whom thou may follow. If thou be delyghted in
latter examples, thou have of the same calling Traiane, Decius, and Galienus.


Joy. I am Emperor of Rome, Lord of the world.


Reason. The time has been when that might have been almost truly auowed, but
to what state things now are come thou see. And to the intent it may be
perceived, how safe it is to commit great matters unto fools and dastardes,
how great providence is there now fallen into how great madness? and how great
pain and diligence, into how great slothfulness? The Roman Empire is now no
longer a thing to rejoice in, but an example of humane fragilitie, and the
mutabilitie of fortune.


Joy. I am famous for mine Empire.


Reason. Famous names, obscure things, deceytes of the world, credulity of
man: these are hooks whereby flexible minds are plucked hither and thither.
The names of an Empire, and of a kingdom, are glorious names: but an Empire
and a Kingdom are the most difficult functions of all other, if they be
ryghtly executed, otherwise they be dangerous and deadly: neither is that
princely saying commended without cause, The glorious Crown is more full of
care, danger, and sundry sorts of miseries, then is the honest and happy
piece of cloth, which if men did know, there is none would seek for it, or
rejoice when he had gotten it, no not willingly receive it when it weere
offered, or take it up from the ground, if he found it. Wherefore awake at
length ye mortal men, open your eyes, and be not always blinded with false
glitteringes: Measure and weygh your own bodies, consider in how narrow
rooms you are enclosed, despise not Geometers and Philosophers, the whole
earth is but a prick, your end is frail and uncertain, and while ye be
young, and while ye be in health, ye wrestle with death: and when ye think
that ye rise, then do ye descend, and when ye seem to stand most surest,
then fastest do ye fall, neither is there any living creature that is more
forgetful of it own strength: and many times, when ye be Woormes, half dead,
yet ye dream of kingdoms and empires. Remember that you your selves are a
very small prick, or to say more truly, a prick of a short prick, yea, ye
are not so much as the thousandth part of a prick. This part like proud
inhabitants ye ouerbeare, who shortly shall be ouerborne your selves, and
shall no longer possess any jot of all that ye have, but that your bodies
shall wax cold and pale with death. And whereas ye be now blind and mad, and
walk with a proud swelling countenance, that which nature has made narrow,
make ye more large in mind, and while ye be in bands, imagine great matters,
and when ye be dying, think upon immortal things: and consider with your
selves, how that in this place and time, which in effect are nothing, ye
prosecute your ridiculous and mad fancies, during the space of a very short
time, to wit, rapines, injuries, reuengementes, troublesome hopes, uncertain
honors, insatiable desires, and your own furies and madness: and on the
otherside, ye affectate Kingdoms, Gouernmentes, and Empires, Nauies, Armies,
and Battayles. And when ye have thus continued long time in your madness,
whether ye be Emperors or Ploughmen, Rich men or Beggars, your bodies are but
rotten earth, your life but as a light smoke driven away with a strong blast,
and at length, but perhaps too late, ye shall scarce understand that this world
was but an high way to pass through, and no country to remain in, and that
al these names of Kingdoms and Empires are but vain and false.


Joy. I am made an Emperor.


Reason. When fools be made Emperors, they do not remember that they have been
and are men. Like as is the saying of Tiberius the Emperor, who, when a
certain friend of his, being desirous, by rehearsal of certain matters
passed between them, to bring him in mind of their ancient familiarity,
having scarce opened his mouth to say these words, O sir, do you remember: he
prevented him suddenly, and brake of his talk, and suffered him not to proceed
any farther, but answered hastily unto him, I remember not what I have been: a
wicked and proud saying, and not only deuoyde of friendshyp, but of al
humanity.


Joy. I am ascended to the Roman Empire.


Reason. Why do thou rejoice hereof: Men also ascend to the Wheel and
Gallows. And contrariwise, they lie down in their beds, and sit down in
their chayres, and most times quietness dwells in low places. Climbing has
been shame unto some, punishment unto many, and payneful to all.


Of a furnished Army. The.xcvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have a furnished Army.


Reason. I should have marueyled if that an Army had not followed a Kingdom
and an Empire, that is to say, one misery another. But Seneca commends
Scipio Africanus to the Stars, not because he led great Armies, which
frantike and wicked persons have done also, but for his great moderation, which
truly an Army never brings to a man, but often takes it away, or often
diminishes it: for what virtue is there so sound, which the keeping company
with so many rakehels and blooddy Butchers, and their wicked example, will not
quayle?


Joy. I have a great Army.


Reason. Thou have now occasion to live in ye fields: For neither can Armies
be received into cities, neither peaceable citizens and armed soldiers dwell
well together.


Joy. I have a most valient Army.


Reason. Thou have matter of war, and loss of peace: if thou rejoice in this,
doubtless thou belongest not to the heavenly city.


Joy. I have an huge Army.


Reason. Thou have armed enemies on both sides of thee, from whom thou art
defended neither by wall nor trenche, truly an heavy and dangerous case.


Joy. I have many valient legions.


Reason. The tediousnes, trouble, and insolency of these: no man can easily
recite, but thou shall learn by experimenting, how much it is better to live
alone, then with many legions: For truly there are no injuries, no falsehood,
no cruelty to be compared to ye wickedness of soldiers. Thou shall by thine
own experience find, how true that verse is which every boy has in his
mouth, There is no faith nor honesty in men that follow the wars.


Joy. I am Lord and governor of a great Army.


Reason. Perhaps thou were better be a sheapheard among Tigers and Bears. The
fury of wild beasts may be tamed, but the hearts of some men can never be
reclaimed: and wild beasts do threaten before they strike, but the malice of
men does suddenly break forth. These whom thou tearmest thine, and call thee
Lord, alas this hireling and inconstant generation, for how small a price, and
upon how light occasion will they be changed, and of thine own soldiers,
become thine enemies? Their flattering countenances shall be turned into horror,
and their right hands, which they delivered unto thee, perhaps shall be
converted to thy destruction: and if this happen, it is no rare nor
unaccustomed matter. At Placentia was that terrible commotion, when as Julius
Caesar's army rebelled against him, whereof this was spoken, What Captain
would not that tumult have made afraid? Howbeit, Caesar, through his
wonderful constancy and fortitude, repressed the vproare, and punishing the
aucthours, appeased the army, and brought them to obedience. Te like did
Alexander, that was Emperor of Rome, at Antioche, and it took magnificall
effect. But go forward a little, and thou shall see that shortly after he was
slain by none other then his own Soldiers. In the same manner Pertinax
perished before: in like sort afterward, the two Maximi, the father and the
son: so Balbinus and Maximus: so Probus, a most valient Captain: so Gratiane
and Valentinian the younger, a couple of good brethren, the one betrayed by his
legions, the other by his companion: so likewise others innumerable, whom their
enemies could not overcome, have perished by their own armies, and those whom
they called their Soldiers, they found eruell Butchers. Take heed therefore
wherein thou reioycest: For this thy cruel and unmerciful army, as he says,
is a beast with many heads, and dares to adventure any thing, being thereunto
provoked by anger, want, or covetousness.


Joy. I have an huge army.


Reason. At the Thessalike battle, says Florus, there was nothing that
ouerthrewe Pompei so much, as the greatness of his army: and it fortuneth
almost in all battayles, that the greater army is vanquished, and the lesser
vanquisheth.


Of a well appointed Navy. The.xcviii. Diaalogue.
JOY. I Have a well appointed Navy.


Reason. And the Air has well appointed Winds, the Sea well appointed Waves
and Rocks: Thou creature of the Land, why medlest thou with the Sea?


Joy. I have a well furnished Navy.


Reason. There be also tempests for thee and shypwrackes well furnished: thou
ioyest in thine own dangers, toil, and expenses, whereof there is no end
nor measure: of all your madnesses, a Navy is the most chargeable.


Joy. My Navy is furnished.


Reason. The violence of the heaven and sea will shake it, and be it never so
well appointed, a suddayne storm will scatter and destroy it, whereof not to
consider while thou saylest on the Sea, is the part of a fool.


Joy. I have a Navy upon the Sea.


Reason. Are ye not in dangers enough upon the Land, but must ye trouble the
Seas also? It is not sufficient for you to dig the earth, from whence is
fette the hurtful Iron, and Gold that is more hurtful then iron, as Ovid
says: but ye have also ventured upon the rough and horrible seas, which the
first men did only wonder at, in every place seeking your own trouble, and in
every place your own danger, and in this poinct ye be wakeful and diligent,
and in all other things slouthful and negligent.


Joy. I have entered upon the Sea with a great army.


Reason. Think upon thy return, for it is an easy matter to ^^t forth. The
Sea is commonly calm at the first setting forward, but when men are once
entered, it waxes monstrous and ^^^ible: notwithstanding, for one that was
borne among men to covet to live among Dolphins and Monsters of the Sea, is
doubtless a wonderful delyght of a wyld and rough mind.


Joy. I have a great, and valiant Navy.


Reason. Perhaps it were more for thy profit and safety either to sit in a
little Boat, or to stand upon the Shore and angle for fyshes, then with an
armed Navy, to offer violence unto nations. Many by their great Na^es has been
pricked forth to dangerous boldness, which has enforced them thither where
they have wyshed them selves at home. This the Grecians learned to be true at
the mountain Caphareus, when they returned from Troy, namely the Lacedaemonians
at Arginusis, the Athenians at the shore of Syracus^e, and the Carthagiens at
the Islands Egrates. Many dangers happen unto Nauies, not only by enemies, but
also by the Sea. To conclude, when as there were before sundry kinds of death,
this one kind more is now added to the number. O blind fools, and to to
lauysh of your lives, which ye love so dearly, seeking for death every where,
which ye fear above all things.


Of Engines and Artillery. The.xcix Dialogue.
JOY. I Have al kynds of Engines.


Reason. This is also a princely madness, to have wherewith to hurt men when
ye list, who of duty ought to be most beneficial of al men. And for this
consyderation only kings were first chosen and set over kingdoms to govern
men, and of them again to be honored and loved as parents. Some also that
are called fathers of their country, do every thing quite contrary, and are
feared and hated of all men as common thieves and tormentours.


Joy. I have store of engines to overthrow towns with all.


Reason. How much better were it to build them, and preserve them with all?
But perhaps thou thynkest it a more glorious matter to destroy, and had
rather seem to be the Policertes of thy age: but Towns are not always
overthrown with engynes. When Caesar in his wars in France, had erected
very great fortes against the Hadriatici^, first his enemies contemned him, as
though he attempted far impossible for humane power to archiue, but then they
saw them moved and brought close to their walls, turnyng their contempt to
astonishment and fear, they gave up their defense, and converted them selves
to conditions of yeeldyng. And likewise in Caesar's ciuyl wars, Brutus being
captain, when he had erected and brought the like unto the walls of Missilia,
he cast the besieged into as great astonishment, but not into as great fear:
and therefore issuyng forth in the night, they set on fire the turrets, and
engynes.


Joy. I abound with engynes and artillery.


Reason. Al these things whereof thou boastest, apparteyne rather to the
iniuryng of other, then to the increasing of thine own honor. How much more
commendable were it, and worthy for a man, to abound rather with the
instruments of mercy, then of cruelty, and rather to possess that wherewith
he may give entertaynment to his friends, and those that are in necessity,
then by besiegyng innocent towns, to disturb the common tranquillity.


Joy. I have engines that do cast great stones.


Reason. To cast stones, is the part of madness.


Joy. I have innumerable engynes, and artyllery.


Reason. It is marueyle but thou have also pellets of brass, which are
thrown forth with terrible noise of fire: thou miserable man, was it not
yenough to hear the thunder of the immortal God from heaven? O cruelty
joined with pride? From the earth also was sent forth inimitable lighning with
thunder, as Virgil says, which the madness of men has counterfeited to do the
like, and that which was wont to be thrown out of the clouds, is now thrown
abroad with a wooden instrument, but of a deuylish device, which as some
suppose was invented by Archimedes at what time Marcellus besieged Syracusae.
Howbeit he devised it to the intent to defend the liberty of his Citizens, and
either to avoid or defend the destruction of his country, which you now
also use to the subjection or subuertion of free people. This plague of late
days was but rare, insomuch as it was beheld with great wonder, but now, as
your minds are apt to learn the worst things, so is it as common as any other
kind of munition.


Joy. I abound in plenty of artyllery.


Reason. It were better thou aboundedst in the hate of war, and love of
peace, forasmuch? as other weapons are signs of an unquiet mind, and these of
a degenerate mind, and neither acceptable to such as love peace, but rather
hated of courageous warryours. Finally, understand this much, he that first
invented artillery, was either a dastard or a traitor, desirous to hurt, and
fearful of his enemies: and therefore he devised as Lucane says, How to show
his strength from a far, and to commit his force to the winds, as far as they
will bear them. Which may be understood of al kinds of weapons that are
thrown. A valyant warryour chooses rather to encounter his enemy at hand,
which the artylleryst escheweth.


Of Treasure laid up in store. The.C. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have laid up Treasure in store for wars.


Reason. An evil thing, for worse purposes: How much more profitable were it
for thee and others to lay it up for the use of thy friends and country, and
specially for the necessities of them that want? that in deed were true
treasure: but now the price of the heavenly treasure, is converted to the
purchasyng of Hell.


Joy. I have treasure for the use of war.


Reason. Treasure extenuateth the strength of the mind, and wars do
enfechle men, and both are hurtful.


Joy. I have great aid of treasure for wars.


Reason. Treasure commonly brings to the owner fear of loosyng, to the
enemy hope of gain, and bolonesse to fight: Who will not wyllyngly go into
their wars, where he may wyn much, and loose nothing: Thou read in Horace
of a poor fellow that fought earnestly and overcame, and when he was rich,
suddeinly fell again into poverty. And if thou list to consider of most
special and chief examples, thou shall perceive that while the Romans were
poor, they were the conquerours of all nations, and then began to be
vanquished when they waxed rich: so when riches came, victories and manhood
departed, delights and wantonness also, which are companions to riches,
entered in: so that the writers of those times did not without cause complain
of the departing of the Roman poverty. Poverty is a very good nurse of
virtues, and wealth, of vices. Thou hopest of victory by means of thy
treasure, but thou have more cause to fear thereof: riches have made many
dastardly and hartles, al proud and lofty, but none at al valiant.


Joy. I have gathered together a great treasure.


Reason. Thou have heaped up care and envy to thy self, provocation to thine
enemies, unquietness to thieves.


Of revenge. The.Ci. Dialogue.
JOY. Mine enemy is fallen into my hands, I have power now to be revenged.


Reason. Nay rather there is happened unto thee a trial of thy self, whether
thou be slave to anger, or friend to mercy: which were uncertain, unless thou
might be sed to both. Many think them selves to be that they are not, which
they do know when they have tried them selves what they are.


Joy. Mine enemy is in my hands, I may be revenged.


Reason. The bounds of power are one thing, and of honesty, another: thou must
not respect what thou can do, but what is scenely for thee to do, least if
thou would do as much as thou can do, it were better thou could do
nothing at al.


Joy. I may be reueuged, and there is nothing more sweet then reuengement.


Reason. There is nothing more bitter then anger, which I marvel why one said
it was sweet: but if thou feel any sweetness in it, it is a savage
sweetness, unmeet for a man, and proper to beasts, and that not of al
kinds, but of the most bruitest and fiercest. There is nothing that less
apparteyneth to a man, then cruelty and wyldnesse: and contrarywyse, nothing
that is more sittyng for him then mercy and gentleness, unto which there is
nothing more repugnaunt then reuengement, and whatsoever sharpness and
extremity one man shows against another in hastiness of mind. But if the
name of reuengement be so sweet unto thee, I will tell thee how thou may use
it with much glory: the most excellent kind of reuengement, is to spare and be
merciful.


Joy. I may be revenged.


Reason. It is much more beuer and glorious to forget injuries, then to revenge
them: there is no forgetfulness more honor able then of offenses. This one
thing the most excellent Orator, ascribed to the most excellent praise of a
most excellent captain, to wit, That he used to forget nothing but injuries.
And there is nothing forbyddeth but that one man's praise, not being taken from
him, may also be ascribed unto many: This one commodity, the goods of the
mind have especially above al other riches, when they are despersed abroad,
they do not decrease nor perysh. Take thou therefore upon thee this most noble
persuasion of Caesar's, which shall make thee far more renowned, then were
Cinaeas and Tarmadas with their great memories: For the one comes of nature,
the other from virtue.


Joy. I take pleasure in revenge.


Reason. The delyght of revenge, is short: but of mercy, everlasting. And of
two delectable things, that is to be preferred that continues longest: Do
thou that this day, whereof thou may receive perpetual delight. There is no
delight greater nor more assured, then that which proceeds from the pureness
of a man's conscience, and the remembrance of things well done.


Joy. It is honest to revenge.


Reason. But more honest to forgive: Mercy has commended many, but reuengement
none: there is nothing among men so necessary, or so common, as forgiveness:
for there is no man but offends, and no man but he has need of mercy,
which being denied, who shall take away so great abundance of faults and
offenses, or renew the broken league of humane society? Men shall always
strive one against another, and the wrath of God shall always strive against
them: there shall be no end of contention and punishment, neither shall weapons or
lyghtnings cease. Spare therefore, be mercyful, and moderate thy mind. Do thou
so unto a man, as thou would have another man, yea God him self, do unto
thee. Impudent is he that desires pardon of his lord and master, and denies
the same to his fellow servant. The Doctor Ecclesiasticus cries out
disdaynyngly, One man keeps anger in store against another, and does he
seek for pardon at Gods hands? He takes no compassion upon a man that is
like to him self, and yet he prays for his own sins.


Joy. I do no injury, but revenge.


Reason. What skilleth it whether thou offend first or last: It is not
indifferent to mislyke that in another, which thou lykest in thy self: Wylt
thou use that cruelty, which thou condemnest in thine enemy, and be like him
in manners, whom thou art vulyke in mind, and follow that thy self, which is
worst in him:


Joy. I will, and it is lawful for me to be revenged.


Reason. Thou ought neither to have a will, neither is it permitted by any
law, for although defense be lawful, yet reuengement is forbidden: it is
written, He that wylbe revenged, shall find reuengement from God. And again,
as I said before, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay when I see good, says the
Lord. Tarry thou for that time, let him revenge thy quarrel, who is Lord both
of the offendour and the offended. It is common among one lords servants for
one to know another: if thou have any spark of good nature in thee, if thou
have any care to attain to perfection, rather wish than pray that he do not
revenge, so shall thou turn thine enemies offense, to thine own commodity.


Joy. I mind to be revenged.


Reason. Give space to thine anger, give time to thy determination, bridle
thine affection, put it of, defer the time, either it will slake, or wax
cold. One short hour appeaseth the raging sea.


Joy. I will be revenged.


Reason. By one deed thou shall offend many: one iniurye has oftentimes made
innumerable enemies.


Joy. I will be revenged.


Reason. Thou wylt hurt thy self more then thine enemy. Perhaps thou may
destroy his body or riches, but thou shall cast away thine own soul and
estimation.


Joy. I will be revenged.


Reason. How often has an injury been doubled by study of reuengement? Many
times it has been dangerous for him that has been injured to dissemble his
only remedy, yea many times to have made complaint, or but by a secret beck
to pretend that he susteyneth injury.


Joy. I may destroy mine enemy.


Reason. It is better to get a friend, then to take away an enemy, but to do
both at once, is best, which is by no means more easily accomplished, then by
forgeuyng when thou may be revenged. The fittest instrument to take away an
enemy, is lenity: wherein if credit might have been given to the ancient and
wise Herennius, neither had the late conquerous army of the Samnites abode ye
Roman yoke, nor the general Pontius with the residue first suffered the yoke,
and afterward alone the axe.


Joy. I am much provoked and moved to revenge.


Reason. Resist that provocation with godly thoughts, and al manner examples
that may enclyne thy mind to lenity, and specially by recomptyng the
shortness and frailty of this life, for it seems unto Seneca, with whom I
agree, the most effectual remedy, in his book of the appeasyng of anger: with
whom accords the Doctor of whom I spoke erewhyle. For what meant he other,
where he says, Remember the last things, and leave of enmity? Doubtless this:
for there is nothing that noorysheth enmity more, then forgetfulness of a
man's state and condition. For this man, whose death thou so much thirstest, be
assured that without doubt he shall dye, and that quickly, perhaps to day, and
peradventure although thou think it not, thou may dye before him. Stay
awhyle, and moderate thy self, that shall come to pass which thou desire, and
that which thou fear: Howbeit the death which thou preparest for thine
enemy, is in making ready for him not by thy procurement. What avails it to
hasten the course of the swyft destiny, and to embrue thy hands, that shall
dye, with the blood of him that shall dye? It is not only a wicked part, but
also a needelesse matter, agreeyng to thine ungodliness, to hasten the time
that comes apace, which if thou would never so feign, thou can by no
means prolo^g or defer: how much more were it for thy quietness and honesty,
that he whole and sound, thou dry and innocent, then that both of you blooddy,
and thou should depart hence hurtful and wicked?


Joy. I am much provoked to revenge.


Reason. Beware thou yield not, but set against this provocation the
remembrance of such men as have been not only merciful unto their enemies,
but also favorable and beneficial: and on the contrary side, lay them before
thine eyes, who having hewed their enemies in pieces, and yet proceedyng to
farther outrage, have wreaked their cruelty upon senseless carkases. Then
choose with thy self whom thou had rather be like, and confer not only
their deeds, but their words also: For there rests no small part of
cruelty in the words. Cruel is the foot, more cruel the hand, but of al,
most cruel is the tongue. Many times that cruelty of the mind which the hand
could not match, the tongue has surpassed: As of cruelty, so of
mercyfulnesse, the tongue is the best witness. Therefore let that saying of
Hadriane, of whom I made mention not long since, and also of Tiberius, sound in
thine ear: of whom it is written, that when he heard that one that was
accused, called Carmilius, had prevented his own death, he cried out aloud,
saying, Carmilius has escaped my hands. O cruel voice, and if it may be so
termed, more cruel then the aucthour of the voice. What ordinary punishment
did he look for at his hands, whom he escaped (being in prison) by procuring
his own death with his own hands? Behold therefore two persons of one
calling, but of diverse minds, who used the self same word, but in sundry
significations. The one said unto his enemy that was present, Thou have
escaped my hands: the other, of his enemy that was absent, Thou have escaped
my hands: The one pardoned his enemies life, the other enuyed his enemies
death. Choose which of these twain thou will have reported of thee, either
the merciful saying of that good Prince, or the blooddy voice of that cruel
butcher. And I am not ignorant, that it is an easyer matter to command these
things to be done, then to do them, and I know also what may be objected
against them, to wit, That it is an harder matter to be mylde in the injuries
that are offered to him self, then to another: hard it is I confess, but
good. And thou thy self can not deny, but that every virtue consists in
that which is good and difficult: unto them that love virtue, al things are
easy.


Joy. I am assuredly determined to be revenged.


Reason. The worser part has gotten the victory, withstand it yet as long as
thou can, and take away the conquest from it, before it begin to use it, and
raise up gentleness that lies trodden underfoot, remember that thou art a man:
many have repented them of their revenge, but none of their mercy.


Joy. I am revenged.


Reason. It had been better for thee to have been overcome of thine enemy:
wrath has overcome him, that overcame his enemy.


Of hope to Win. The.Cii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Hope for victory in War.


Reason. Hope in all things is deceytful, but in war most deceytful of al:
Nothing is done upon premeditation, but all things at unawares. Most skylfull
and exercised in Martial affairs was he that is reported to have said, that
euentes are never less answerable to expectation, then they are in war.


Joy. I hope for victory.


Reason. It were better to have peace, which is said to have been a memorable
speech of the same Captains, Assured peace is better and safer, then hoped
victory.


Joy. I shall be conqueror in battle.


Reason. What if thou be vanquished? This hope has hastened many to
destruction, without hope of victory. No man goes willingly into battle.


Joy. I shall have the upper hand in battle.


Reason. That is a word of the Future tense: For all hope is of that which is
to come, and things to come are always doubtful.


Joy. I shall return conqueror out of battle.


Reason. O foolysh hope of men, perhaps thou shall return, neither conqueror,
nor conquered: but thou promisest thy self return, and a passage through thy
fooes to be made by the edge of the swoorde.


Joy. I hope to be conqueror.


Reason. There is one that hops the contrary, and therefore it must needs be
that both of you, or one of you, be deceived: For it may so chance, that one
of the Captains, or both on each side, kill one another, which I think has
happened often at other times, and once, which now I call to remembrance, at
Thebes, in the last conflict between the wicked brethren: and likewise at Rome
in the beginning after the expulsion of the kings, it is written, the like
event chanced, insomuch as Brutus the Consul, prosecuted the son of the
proud king unto the grave. For when death comes, there is no victory, which
being deferred, notwithstanding thou know that some Armies have departed out
of the field at even hand: And therefore it is evident, that both the
Captains have been defrauded of their hope of victory. But that one of them
is like to be deceived, it is so common a matter, and so daily found true by
experience, as to go to the battle: and how know thou whether thou art he
that shall be defrauded of the victory, concerning which thou flatterest thy
self?


Joy. I shall have the vpperhand in war.


Reason. As the victory is always doubtful, so is it often grievous and
blooddy. It is not gotten freely, which is won by peril of life: that is
dearly bought, which is bought with blood, more dearly, which may cost
death: as the conquering part may loose their Captain, so although thy side
overcome, thou may be vanquished. What shall I say of the wickedness that
follow victories? The vanquished fall not into so many miseries, as do the
vanquishers into vices? But if there be nothing more miserable then sin and
offenses, then is not the vanquished, in that he is vanquished, more wretched
then the vanquisher, but in this respect less wretched, in that he is subject
to fewer mischiefs.


Joy. I shall vanquish.


Reason. To make short, whether thou shall vanquish or not, or when thou have
vanquished, whether it will prove more for thy commodity, or otherwise, it is
doubtful.


Of Victory. The.Ciii. Dialogue.
JOY. BUT I have gotten the Vpperhande.


Reason. Beware lest anger, pride, cruelty, rage, and madness, get the upper
hand over thee. These are the companions of victory, and the invisible and
horrible enemies of the victours, of whom oftentimes the most famous
conquerours have been most shamefully vanquished. Fortune does not yet call
thee to account, there is between you a long and intricate reckoning, she is
an hard and wilful creditour, with whom now thou have great dealinges, and it
is her manner to require that which she has lent, with great interest.


Joy. I have gotten the upper hand in a great battle.


Reason. He that has gotten the upper hand in a battle, has often been
vanquished in continuance of war.


Joy. But I have won.


Reason. How often have the Garthagiens, how often the Frenchmen, how often
other nations had the better, and how often have the Romans been put to the
woorst? But the euentes of things are to be considered, specially of such as
alter, and can not stand still.


Joy. Verily, I have gotten the victory.


Reason. Although the end of war were certain, yet the event is doubtful,
and sorrow follows mirth, and mirth follows sorrow.


Joy. I have gotten a great victory.


Reason. There is nothing so great, but may be distinguished from that which is
too much: find it has so fallen out, that the winning side has been (...) t^
show most wounds, and most dead carkases. It thou will no^ believe me, ask
Xerxes, and Thermopilae.


Joy. It was my chance to gain a great victory.


Reason. A great victory can not be gotten for a final price. Concerning the
greatest war that ever was, whereof the greatest Historician that ever was
entreats, Fortune, says he, was so wariable, and the conflict was so
doubtful, that they were most in danger, that had the victory.


Joy. I have fully conquered.


Reason. There is no complet victory, where there remains an armed enemy?
howbeit if thou suppress one, other will rise up, and there be certain
conquestes, that may be termed the seed of war: so hatred cut down with a
weapon, ryseth up more thick then before, and soldiers return with more
courage into the field: not in such sort perhaps as sometime a strong
imagination brought unto Cassius the representation of an enemy which he had
slain, even the very same day that he dyed, with so hideous a countenance,
that the very resemblaunce of the dead man, put to flight that most valiant
Captain, that was not afearde of him while he was alive: but rather so, that
many being restored for one, with assured hands, do bear assured weapons,
against those that seemed to have had the victory.


Joy. I have gotten the victory, and now am I careless without an enemy.


Reason. Thou fool, as long as there shall be men, so long there shall be enemies.
Thou read how that after so many triumphs, and conquering of the whole
world, the city of Rome wanted not enemies: and hopest thou then to be
without? Perhaps if thou be quiet, thou may want foes, but never if thou
fight.


Joy. I am a conqueror.


Reason. Take heed thou be not so in vain: victory is profitable for them
that know how to use it, to use it, I say, not as Maharbal gave counsel to
Hanibal, but as Hanno that was a better man gave counsel to his Common
wealth. For truly Peace is the best use and fruit of victory, neither are
just wars taken in hand for any other end, then for peace.


Joy. Victory is on my side.


Reason. Beware she flee not away, for she has wings.


Of the death of an Enemy. The.Ciiii. Dialogue.
JOY. I AM glad of mine Enemies death.


Reason. To hope for any thing by the death of an enemy, and to rejoice in any
man's death, perhaps is permitted to him that is immortal, if any such may be
found: but to hope for the death of another man, which may first happen to
thy self, or to rejoice that that is befallen to thine Enemy, which needs
must happen to thy self, is a foolyshe hope, and a vain joy.


Joy. I rejoice in mine Enemies death.


Reason. Some other ere it be long will rejoice in thine.


Joy. I am glad that mine Enemy is dead.


Reason. If ye were mindful of your own estate, one man would never rejoice in
the death of another. When, I pray thee, was it ever seen, that when two went
together to execution, the one conceived any pleasure in the others death,
knowing that himself must go to the same pot: but does not rather lament,
beholding his own death in his fellow?


Joy. I have conceived delyght in mine Enemies death.


Reason. How often think thou, have men's deaths that have been desired,
grieved the desirers, and they have in vain begun to wish for their lives,
who before wyshed not in vain for their deaths, when as they begin once to
understand that they have wished to their own destruction? But your affections
are hasty. Whatsoever ye wish to have, ye wish it vehemently, as it is
written, Julius Caesar said of Marcus Brutus, Yea, rather ye wyshe it too
much, and your earnest desire can suffer no tariaunce. And therefore
whatsoever ye would have, ye will have it presently, whereof proceed not
only ungodly wyshes, but also poysonynges, and murders, and whatsoever one
man can imagine against another, being the most hurtful creature toward his
own kind* Ye wysh for many things, which if ye took advise of reason, ye
would stand in fear of, when they are accomplished, and the varieue of your
wishes, is an argument of your evil choice: neither does your rashness
return to that which is right, until your ^^olythe affections are checked
with hapless success.


Joy. I am glad of mine enemies death.


Reason. If thine enemy were but of small fame and reputation, to rejoice in
his death is shameful, and to be sorry, superfluous: but if he were noble and
famous, it is meet and decent to be sorry, though not for the man, yet for
virtues sake, which every day has fewer places to harbor in. Sodyd Metellus
Macedonicus bewail the death of the younger Scipio Africane, and Caesar the
death of Pompe^, and Alexander the death of Darius.


Joy. I recioyce in the death of my Foe.


Reason. How can thou rejoice in his death, whom thou art commanded to love,
not as thine enemy, but as thy neighbor, being the work of the same
woorkeman?


Joy. I am glad of mine enemies death.


Reason. Perhaps thou hear not, or regardest not the most wholesome and known
counsel of the Wise man, Rejoice not, says he, in the death of thine enemy,
knowing that we shall all dye: And will we notwithstanding be glad? Doubtless
this counsel or precept is wholesome.


Of hope of Peace. The.Cv. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for Peace.


Reason. It is better to keep peace, then to hope for it. It is the part of a
fool, to neglect things certain, and to embrace doubtful hope.


Hope. I hope for peace.


Reason. Thou should have kept her more narrowly, neither suffered her to
depart, whom thou now hopest for. What if thine impatience have brought thee
unto this Hope, that thou myghtest choose to be vexed with hoping, for that
which thou myghtest have used by enjoying?


Hope. I hope for peace.


Reason. Hope of peace has destroyed many, and calamity unlooked for,
followyng hoped peace, has overcome and oppressed the unskillful and sleepy,
whom it could not have harmed, if it had found expert.


Hope. I hope for peace.


Reason. Why do thou hope so long for that, which is in thy hand to attain
unto? It is seldom seen but they do find peace, that are in deed willing
effectually to seek it: but those to whom the name of peace is sweet, peace
it self is sour, and therefore they that seek for peace, withstand peace.
Peace has four enemies dwelling among you, to wit, covetousness, envy,
anger, pride: these if you send away into everlasting exile, your peace shall be
everlasting.


Hope. I am in assured hope of peace.


Reason. Between hope of peace, and peace it self, many things do happen: a
light word, and a small gesture, has many times disturbed compounded peace,
yea the very treaties and parlees of peace are often broken of by dent of
sword, and hope of peace sharpneth the minds, and aggrauateth wars: even so
may a man term the treaty of friendship which comes to none effect, the
whetstone and sharpning of hatred.


Hope. There is talk of peace, and there shall be peace.


Reason. There is often talk of peace to no purpose: many times dangerously
have the captains of the Frenchmen and Carthagiens entreated of peace, when as
Camillus surprised the one, and Scipio the other.


Hope. After war is ended, peace shall be confirmed.


Reason. How much better were it, that it were confirmed before the beginning
of war? how many mischiefs and loss of men's lives might be by seasonable
peace prevented? But you, like wilful and truently children, can never learn
wisdom without whipping: In peace, ye seek after war, and in war, ye
seek after peace, and never begin to know or love peace, but when ye are
afflicted with war, and then as ye lament that ye have lost peace, so anon
when it is restored unto you, with like lightness ye contemn it, until that
having lost it once or twice, ye are taught not to contemn your own
commodities, and to covet your own harms, finally, not to be mad, nor
foolysh, whereof ye may be ashamed before ye have obtained it. Ye must have one
thing told you often, and it suffiseth not to have heard, but ye must often
see and try: I will speak more plainly, ye must be beaten often, before you
can learn any thing.


Hope. Peace will follow war.


Reason. It had been better it had gone before, and stopped the course of war:
there is no such madness, as in hope of remedy, willingly to receive a wound:
Formentations are helps, and not causes of wounds. It is natural for him
that is sick to wyshe for health, but for one that is whole to wysh for
sickness, in hope of health, is madness.


Hope. We shall have peace.


Reason. Peace many times procures hurtful alterations to Cities and
Countries, which although of it self it be an excellent good thing, yet is it
accompanied with very evil companions, unjust laws, lascivious manners, secret
hatred, open tyranny. Remember what sometime in the civil wars that
Prognosticatour foresaid, and was not deceived, What avails it to pray to
the Gods for peace? This peace comes with the owner thereof. But warlyke
liberty, is more acceptable to valient men, then peaceable servitude.


Hope. I have peace.


Reason. In the mean while thou have war also.


Of peace and truice. The.Cvi. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have Peace.


Reason. An excellent good thing, if it were sincere and perpetual, but truly
it is neither: For it is no new thing, but too common and daily accustomable,
that war lurketh under the covert of peace, and though the peace were pure,
yet the instabilitie of minds will not suffer it to continue long, which
contend every day among them selves, no less then with an enemy.


Joy. I have obtained peace.


Reason. But wariness and warlike discipline are lost, and assured
preservation of cities: but thou have gotten idle slothfulness, and continual
dangerous security, since in most respects peace is better then war, but in
this one respect, war is better then peace, in that it is more wary, and full
of experience. The Roman prowess had never decayed, if the Carthagien war
had continued. The peace with the Carthagiens, was the destruction of the City
of Rome, and an everlasting document to all other Cities, to show that peace
is not always best for Nations and Empires: that which good Nasica will
swear to be so, in that it was committed sometime to his charge, and all the
learned will confess that he says true.


Joy. I have peace.


Reason. Use (...) modestly. Proud and negligent peace, is more hurtful then
any war. Many that have been in arms, have been safe among weapons, but so
soon as they have been in peace, they have fallen among weapons, and too late
have wished for war. What shall I speak of the ruin of Manners, and the
utter overthrow of Humanit^^ it self? How many that have been very good men
in war, have by peace become very evil, as though laying down all virtue
with their armor, they had put on all vices with their gown? Thus has the
inward affection been changed with the outward apparel. In confirmation
whereof, although many thousand men might be brought to witness, yet two
only shall suffice us, to wit, Sylla and Marius: of whom, the first, as it is
written of him, no man is able sufficiently to praise or disprayse: for while
he sought a^^^r conquestes, he showed him self to the people of R^^^^ to be
S^^pio, but while he exercised cruelty, he represented him sel^^ to b^
Hannibal. The second, was a man; as it is also written of him, whose virtues
if they be conferred with his vices, it is hard to say whether he were more
valiant in war, then pestilent in peace: insomuche as the same Common wealth
which he preserved being in arms, so soon as he put on his Gown and was in
peace, he defiled with all kind of tretcherie, and lastly, ouerthrewe like an
enemy with forcible Arms.


Joy. I rejoice, in that my Country is in peace.


Reason. What if peace some time extinguishe that which is best in a man, and
nourysh that which is worst? Well known is the saying of the Satirical Poet,
who when he had said much concerning the causes of the ancient Roman virtue
and valiencie, among which is, and Hannibal near to the City, at the last he
infers, But now we feel the discommodities of long peace. Wantonness and
riot more cruel then Arms, do urge and take revenge upon the conquered
City. Is there any peace, I pray thee, so much to be esteemed of, that is no
odious to excellent personages, if it be accompanied with sensuality and
riotousnesse? Truly unto him that shall deeply consider of the matter, though
arms be laid down, yet can it not seem peace, where the minds are oppugned
with domestical and most subtyl war, that wants (...) good manners are
exiled, pleasures bear rule, and virtues are trodden under foot.


Joy. The peace is assured.


Reason. And so, as I have said, are the companions of peace, liberty, and
licentiousness, with dan gers no less in quality, or quantity, then are in
war: These bring destruction unto the body, the other unto the soul, and
many times unto the body also. And therefore unto many, the brestplate has
been more fortunate then the gown, and the field more safe then the chamber,
and the Trumpet then the Pype, and the Sun then the shadow. There has been
some that were never in more safety then in the wars, as thou have heard
Julius Caesar report, concerning him self and his souldyers: as for peace, if
it would come without vices, I confess it is an heavenly gift, and such a
good thing as is inferior to none: but it seldom comes without vices.


Joy. But I have taken a truice.


Reason. Thou have given thine enemy respite to recover his force, that he may
strike more strongly then thou.


Joy. I have truice.


Reason. Truice is cosen germane to treason: Thou see that through subtlety
many things are done by the enemy, but thou read of many more: so that the
policies of war are never better executed, aid never more freely sought for,
yea, truice has made many invincible in war.


JOY. I have taken truice with mine enemies.


Reason. A loytryng time, neither meery with peace, neither exercised in war,
but doubtfully waueryng between both, where pride hyndereth peace, and fear
detracteth war: and I know not whether it be more hurtful so to continue, or
other wise to fall: For, to desire a time of breathyng, is the part of one that
is weery, and the part of a wretched and mad man, to be able to abide neither
peace nor war.


Of the Popedom. The.Cvii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Have atteined to ye Popedom.


Reason. Men use commonly to fly out of a tempest into the Haven, but thou
wyllingly thest out of the Haven into a tempest: thou art a wonderful
mariner.


Joy. I have ^^ten the Popedom.


Reason. A rare matter, I will not say difficult: Did the care over one soul
seem so little grievous unto thee, but that thou must take the charge and
burden of al upon thee: Thy shoulders are strong, or thine ambition is great,
so far to prick thee forth where thou know thou shall be in evil case.


Joy. I am ascended to the Popedom.


Reason. By what meaues see thou. For there are two ways, both tendyng unto
travail, but the one leadyng unto misery. Whichsoeuer of these thou
followest, know that thou art in misery: or, if the best happen, that of a
freeman thou art become a bondslaue. So thou that art said to have ascended,
art fallen down, being now become one of those to whom is song that saying of
the Prophet: They that go down into the Sea in ships, having business
upon many waters: they that ascend up into heaven, and descend down to Hell,
whose soul languishyng within them by reason of the greatness and abundance
of the storm, is troubled, and they stagger like a drunken man, and al their
wisdom is consumed.


Joy. I am ascended into the seat of the high popedom.


Reason. The deeper the sea is, the more it is subject to wyndes, and dangerous
for tempests.


Joy. I am made Pope of Rome.


Reason. Look how much Rome is bygger then other Cities, so much more toil
remains for thee. Some will houour thee, some adore thee, some attend and
stand about thee, some lay sylken couerlets under thy feet, harneyes thy white
Steedes with gold, prepare thee wine and banquettes, and taste them unto thee,
which is such a kind of service as the ancient Popes never heard of.
Contrarywyse, some will let their own business alone, and fasten their eyes
upon thee, thee will they note, of thee will they judge, but how justly GOD
knows, some also will reprove thy manners, wrest thy words, tear thy
fame, carpe thy life, and whatsoever is any where done amiss, men will say it
proceeds from thee, as the only cause and fountain of evil, and thou shall
be called the beginner of all discordes and mischiefs among the people: How,
will they say, can the body of the church be whole, when the head is sick and
ill at ease? I pray thee, is either a golden eup, or a silken bed, or a mitred
head, so much to be esteemed, that it should be purchased with the loss of
quietness and a good name?


Joy. I am chosen Pope.


Reason. Govern thy self in this tallyng as well as thou can, which is so
greatly esteemed at this day, which truly is altogether vain or intolerable,
insomuche that not without cause certain popes being ouerweeryed with
tediousness, have wyshed to their enemies none other punishment then that
felicity. For to speak in few words, the popedom if it be rightly
administered, is a great honor, a great burden, a great servitude, a great
labor: But if it be ill governed, it is a great danger to the soul, a great
evil, a great misery, a great shame, and in all respects a business full of
peril.


Joy. I hold now the seat of the popedom.


Reason. Thou shall not hold it long. Man's life is short, Kings lives
shorter, and Popes lives shortest of all, for that by reason of the greatness of
the cares and charge, the old days of the Pope are shortened, which are
already weerled and worn before he attain to that dignity.


Joy. I sit in the top of the Popes seat.


Reason. The higher thou syttest, the greater is the fall, and men can scarcely
come down from an high place without danger, or labor. Take heed thou
discende soberly, least thou be found to be one of those, of whom it is said,
They are lyfted up on high, to the end their fall may be the greater. There is
no man doubts but that men must descend from almortall advancement, but this
is the difference, in that just and wise men do descend, and al other fall
down headlong. And therefore the Carthagien Captain, who as it is reported of
him, said when he was dyeing, The end of all that are advanced, is to fall
down, spoke not improperly, as an unjust man.


Joy. I govern the state of the Popedom.


Reason. The first Popes were wont to be called from that state to the honor
of Martyrdom, but now a days they think that they are called to all kind
of pleasures and delicacie, and for that cause men strive now for this place,
and every man coueteth that preferment. For who is he that sueth or wysheth to
be Pope of Rome, or Bishop of any other place, but only for increase of power
and riches: Contrary to the precept of justice, men seek to govern, not to
profit, and that moreover which is sacrilegious and shameful to be spoken, fat
Benifices, and great Ecclesiastical prefermentes are bought with great
rewards, yea they be bargayned for, and promised before they fall. O most vile
exchange of manners, in that men cannot be drawn from that, unto which in
old time they were wont, and also ought to be enforced. And furious ambition
is now so hot, that it seems to exceed the bounds of christian
shamefastness and modesty, but rather, to be an Heathen desire and
wylfulnesse: Whom, I mean the Heathen, we have heard say to have been so
earnest that way in their petitions and suites, that it is read how that Julius
Caesar sued for the high Bishops or Prelates office, not without most large
and lascivious expense of money, wherein recountyng the greatness of his debt
when in the morning he went forth to the election, he kyssed his mother,
saying that he would never more return home, unless he were high Bishop: And
he kept promise, for he returned high Bishop in deed. It appears with what
vehemency (not request) he labored for that preferment, insomuche that he
determined to win it, or else to dye for it, or to go into exyle: which he
might do both lawfully, who in his youth had purposed unto him self to
reign: so that he thinks him self injured, yt there be any other governor
in the world but Caesar* or any land that belongs to twain. But how it may
be lawful for a Christian to sue for the popedom, that has proposed to him to
serve and bear the yoke of his lord, I do not perceive, and to sue for it,
not only by most lanish prodigality, but also, that is not much less vile,
by flattery and lies, which are aries unmeet for men, but so common and usual
now a days, that these are only the means to come to preferment.


Joy. I am pope of Rome.


Reason. Thou should say servant of servants: Take heed thou covet not to
be Lord of Lords. Remember thy profession, remember thy duty, remember thy
Lord, who wylbe wrath with none more for transgressing of duty, then with
him that presumes to be called his own Vicar.


Of happiness. The.Cviii. Dialogue.
JOY. I Am happy.


Reason. Thou think to be made happy either by the popedom, or empire, or
by some other kind of power, and also by riches: thou art deceived, these
things make not a man happy or wretched, but they disclose and discover him,
and if they made him any of the twain, they would make him rather wretched
then happy, for they be full of dangers, which are the roots of humane
miseries.


Joy. I am happy.


Reason. O wretch, that thynkest thy self happy in so many miseries?


Joy. I am happy.


Reason. Perhaps in thine opinion, which because it is false, it adds nothing
unto felicity, but much unto misery. For, for a man not to know his howne
misery, is the greatest misery of all.


Joy. I am happy.


Reason. So much did Pompeius the great vaunt of him self among the swoordes
of the slaughter men, which notwithstanding if it be deeply examined, he never
was, no not when he was most happy in his most floorishing state.


Joy. I am happy.


Reason. Thou art happy, and a strange wayfaring man, a wonderful runner,
which in this stonye and difficult path art happy, being tossed among so many
thousand dangers, not knowing wherein thou art here happy, which as I suppose
never any man was, nor never shall be: for who was ever happy in misery?
Therefore, there is none happy before he pass out of this vale of misery.
Among all the men in the world, there are twain counted happy, of which the
most especial is Quintus Metellus, both by writers and common report reputed
happy. Nevertheless, although the name of happiness be very large and amply
taken, I know it is taken from him by certain precise writers, by reason of
most grievous injuries which he sustained, and to increase the grief, at the
hands of a vile person. Now the false felicity of other is euydent. Scilla
was only called happy, notwithstanding, the haynousnesse of his life and
death, do prove that he was unfortunate. Although Alexander of Macedonie, and
Julius Caesar, had most prosperous fortune, yet their lives were ever unquiet
and troublesome, and therefore were not happy, for they both had violent
deaths: the one in middle course of his wars, the other after his conquest
suddenly: the one perished by poison, the other by weapon. The Martial
felicity of the Scipioes, in the one, is by his unworthy exile, in the other,
by his shameful and unrevenged death, diminished. It were ouerlong to recount
every ones fortune, and therefore I come to the last. Only Augustus the
Emperor seemed almost unto al men to be happy, both for the excellency of his
Monarchy, continuance of peace, length of his life, and pleasant end thereof,
and which exceeds all, perpetual tranquillity of mind and manners: who will
deny that he was most happy? But they that have applied themselves to search
after the truth, will not grant that he was happy. For the inward state of
his domestical life, hyndred his outward glory, and the change of his fortune,
much altered his want of natural and Male issue, the untimely death of his
Adoptyues and Nephues, and the untowardness of some of them more worse then
death: Moreover, the treason and secret practices of certain most vile
persons, and often conspiracies of his own kynsfolke against him, the common
whoredoms of his most dearly beloved and only daughter, and Niece: finally,
an heir that was none of his own, and a successor that he lyked not of, whom
he chose rather of necessity then of judgment, being unworthy of such an
Emperor and Empire. If then none of these were happy, either show me some
other happy man, with whom thou may be happy, or else be thou happy alone, or
else at length incline thine ear to the truer opinion, according to the purport
whereof I say again, that there is no man happy before his death.


Joy. I am happy in mind.


Reason. I know what felicity thou meanest: either therefore thou art happy in
thine own error, as one says, which happiness, as I have said, is misery,
or else by the virtue of thy mind, which is no perfect felicity, although it
be the way unto it. Last of all, when I examine every thing with my self, I
cannot deny, but that I am enforced to wonder what manner of felicity it
should be which some do dream of and promise unto others, being in many
other matters very sharp and wise, but in this, most blind. For whether that
there be required unto felicity an heap of all honors, and those never to
fail, but to continue permanent, and how many things are wantyng to a man
that follows this trade of life, every one can judge in him self, knowing
those things which he has, how uncertain and transitory they be, or whether,
as other suppose, the same be accomplyshed in virtue: truly they that govern
them selves according to virtue, whom these men account happy, and whom I also
confess to come nearest to felicity, endure continually most cruel conflictes
of temptations within them selves, lying always open unto many and grievous
perils, and are never in security before their death: which whether they know,
or know not, they are alyke to be reputed wretched. For there is no felicity
with error, and none without security.


Joy. I seem unto my self to be happy.


Reason. Thou haft already an answer: for if error could make a man happy,
most men should be happy: therefore thy felicity is false, and very short. It
never happened unto any to rejoice long in an error, truth only is sound and
substancial. As for error, it is a slender and vain thing, which between
the hands of them that embrace it, fades away as a smoke or shadow. But a
time will come, which shall drive away shadows, and discover false joys, and
bring them to light, and make humane felicity to be discerned from dreams.
And therefore, make enquiry of al these men of whom I last made mention, which
of them seemed happy to them selves or to other: and likewise where they be
now, and in what state they remain, what also they think of that their short
felicity? though them selves hold their peace, the truth will speak, and
bear witness that they that were accounted happy, were in deed most wretched.


Of good Hope. The.Cix. Dialogue.
Hope. How soever the world goes, no man shall take hope fromme.


Reason. In deed no man is able to take it from thee, but she will take away
her self by little and little, and wastes away, being often deluded with
unlooked for euentes.


Hope. I hope for many things.


Reason. Thou must needs also stand in fear of many things: for hope
dwells no where without fear.


Hope. I hope for some good.


Reason. Then thou fear some evil: for as hope is opposite to fear, so
does it spring out of a contrary fountain, and it must needs be, that look
what thou beginnest to hope for, the contrary thou must (as necessarily) fear.


Hope. I hope for prosperous things.


Reason. But yet uncertain, in hope whereof to neglect the things that thou art
assured of, is assured madness: for he that hops for that which he has not,
forgets that which he has.


Hope. I am not forbidden to hope for the better.


Reason. What if thou hope for difficult and impossible matters, and that will
never come to pass? What if those things which thou hopest for are bad, yea
very evil, and thou imaginest them to be better then they are?


Hope. I delight to live in hope.


Reason. Say more truly, to die in hope: for while men think upon future
things, the present pass away, and they that look a far of, see not what is
under their eyes, and they that hope to live to morrow, live not to day: for
that is not yet come, whose beginning is hoped for. So then, forasmuch as al
hope, is ye loking for a good thing that is absent, it follows, that he that
hops, in that respect that he hops, suffers some evil.


Hope. It is a sweet thing to hope.


Reason. Truly, I hear many say so, but I can perceive no sweetness in it.
For if it be sweet to hope, it is also sweet to lack that which a man would
have, which who so will affirm to be true, doubtless he wants the sense of
taste.


Hope. It is pleasant to hope.


Reason. Then to hang in doubt, to be affected, and vexed, is hope, and of long
punishment, there is long hope: nothing so much weerieth the mind, nothing so
much hasteneth old age. And therefore the wise man often terms lost hope,
vantage, and rejoices that he was delivered from infinite desires and
expectations of vain things, whereby he was enforced to take delight in his
own good things.


Hope. Let fortune look to the event, as for me, I rejoice in hope.


Reason. Take heed, lest hereafter thou be sorry in the thing it self, and it
repent thee, that ever thou wishedst or hopedst, or enioyedst thine hope. Many
whom hope long tormented while they lived in doubt, when it came to effect
which they hoped, were utterly overthrown: many have perished with the wished
successes of their long hope, which were very tedious, but not late enough.


Hope. None shall take hope from me.


Reason. None shall take from thee werisomnesse and trouble of mind: thou have
heard the old proverb, It is a great pain to look or hope for any thing.


Hope. The hopyng or lookyng for a good thing is pleasant.


Reason. But it is deceitful, and doubtful, and troublesome. If thou deny this,
thou never hopedst for any thing: But the company is inestimable of those that
deceive them selves, unto whom whatsoever offers it self, there is nothing
without some effect toward that they have in hand, they refuse nothing, they
deny them selves to none, they are easily turned, and quick to give credit. I
may say that it were a great argument of lightness and folly to embrace every
hope that a man shall meet withal, and immediately to repose him self thereon
as an assured good, whereunto all men of learning and experience are but slow.


Hope. In the mean while, I have a good hope.


Reason. In the mean while thou say, which wylbe unto such time as it has
deceyned thee. For this is your custom, ye cast of hope against your will, and
never forsake it, until it forsake you: Yea, many times when it forsakes you,
it is strange to say, how again and again ye wyllyngly embrace it, when it
returns: and gooyng forth to meet it, as soon as ye have laid hold on it,
ye forget how before it deceived you, and retain it again furnished with new
crafts, and lay it up in the secret closure of your hearts.


Hope. I will not forsake my good hope unto the last.


Reason. What if it forsake thee long before? Wylt thou call it back, or
follow it, or carry till it return? But go to, hope a Gods name, since there
is nothing more pleasant unto thee then to be deceived. It is not my meaning to
pluck thy hope from thee, which so earnestly thou enterteynest, only I
admonyshe thee this much, that it is no good hope which thou supposest: It is
no good hope that proposes good to it self, but that purposes well. The
most wicked persons may, yea, and commonly do, hope for that which is good:
and therefore that is good hope in deed, which is ryghtly conceived of the
true good: he that has this hope, let him hold it fast, and not let her
depart from him in the end, but join her other sisters unto her, to wit,
faith and charity. This hope is pleasant, sweet, true, and happy, which
neither fails nor confounds him that hops, but aduanceth him unto that
which is best, and in the mean while makes the mind cheereful, with the
remembrance of the good that is hoped for. But you, as hopyng for the true
good, which ye have ill deserved, or calling evil things by the name of good,
are in conclusion deceived: and therefore your expectation is sorrowful before
it come, and more sorrowful when it is come.


Hope. Mine understanding is humane, and I speak of those things which men
call good.


Reason. Heretofore there has been long contention among the learned, about
this name: which does yet continue, and will do for ever, to the worlds end,
some making but one good thing, and contrariwyse other some many.


Hope. Let us leave these matters to the Philosophers, as for me, I hope for
those things, which the common people call good.


Reason. Thou hopest then for thine own evil, which either will vex thee with
deferryng, or ouerpresse thee with the desired burden. Admit that al things
go well with thee apparteining to the body, and that thou have prepared power
against thine enemy, and as touching Fortune, that thou have borne the yoke of
an unconstant and vnmilde Lady, and that many of these things may be
converted to the affliction and destruction of the mind, forasmuch as the
things that delyght the mind, do oftentimes hurt it.


Hope. I have cast the anchor of good hope, and I will not remove.


Reason. But Sailors use many times when a tempest ryseth to cut their Cable,
and loose their Anchor, if they can not weigh him up, and to depart without him:
for it happens not always so, as in the calmness of the Sea, we read in the
poet, The Anchor held fast the Ships, with an assured tooth: so likewise, in
great troubles and raginges of the Sea, wherein the Anchor does not hold them
fast, but rather stays them; and endangereth them often with castyng away,
none otherwise verily in the storms and tempests of worldly affairs, settled
and tough hope has drawn many into destruction, who if they had cut of, and
cast away their hope, might have safely escaped Therefore, the Anchor of hope
must be oftentimes weighed up, or if it hold too hard, be broken of. And if
that can not be, it must even be quite cut away, and left behind under the
waters and flooddes of affairs, to the end thou may safely conueyth the
free bark of thy life, through the direction of foresyght, into the haven of
safety.


Hope. I hope well.


Reason. In well hopyng, and ill having, man's life passes away.


Of expectation of Inheritance. The.Cx. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Look for the inheritance of an old man, that has no children.


Reason. Thou saydst erwhyle, that thou wast in quiet, take heed thou be not
found contrary to thy self: for hopyng or lookyng for any commodity and
quietness of mind, can never dwell together: there is no loathsomeness in
this life more grievous then this expectation.


Hope. I expect the inheritance of an old man.


Reason. But thou know not what he also expects: for this is a general
madness among men, that almost every man hops, not only to live longer then
those that are of his own years, but also that are younger. Men are unwilling
to think on their own death, but gladly on other men's, when as in deed it
were more profitable for them to do the contrary.


Hope. I hope for an old man's inheritance.


Reason. How if he also hope for thine? One of you must needs be deceived. How
many old men may there be found, that look for the death of young men: And
truly, there is none so old, but he may live one year longer: and none so
young, but he may dye to day.


Hope. I hope for the inheritance of a chyldlesse old man.


Reason. Thy son may better hope for it. A more likely hope has deceived a
younger.


Hope. The inheritance of a childlesse old man shall fall unto me.


Reason. How know thou, whether thine shall fall unto him? Claudius
succeeded Caius, and Galba Nero, and Nerua Domitian, and Pertinax Commodus, and
the life of a man is full of such successions.


Hope. I tarry for the inheritance of a childlesse old man.


Reason. Whom cannot he deceive, of them that are willing to be deceyned, that
has deceived him, whom he would not willingly have deceived? Whom may not he
suruine, that has suruiued his own son?


Hope. A childlesse old man has already in writing appointed me his heir.


Reason. Has he engraven it in tables of Diamond, from whence thou can not
be blotted out? Dooest thou not know upon how light occasions old men do
alter their wylles? Many have mislyked of that, at the very end of their
lives, which before they lyked well of all their life time.


Hope. A chyldlesse old man will have me be his heir.


Reason. But it may chance, that hereafter he will not: For, there is nothing
that a rich chyldlesse old man takes in worse part, then to see his goods
loved, and him self not regarded: for then al is marred.


Hope. I am promised the inheritance of a chyldlesse old man.


Reason. I could wyshe, there were that vpryghtnesse and trust in men, that
they would never promise any thing, but that which is honest, and would also
perform that, which they have promised. But now, there is neither measure in
promising, nor regard of breach of promise, which men think they may most
lawfully do, in inheritance and bestowyng possessions. And for this cause,
the laws call the wills of Testatours while they live, walkyng Wylles. I will
not trouble thee with examples, the thing is well known. Thou have read, I
take it, unto whom in has happened, that not only they were promised the
inheritance of the living, but also received kysses, and ringes, and the last
embracinges of the party which lay a dying, which unto them was an undoubted
token of succession: when as in the mean while, there were other heirs
appointed, and no mention at all made of them in the Will: thus bold is
unfaithfulness, even in the mids of death. Do thou think then, that thou
art free from the deceites of them that are alive, when as thou read in what
sort, great and noble personagies have been deluoed, by the crafts of them
that have lain a dying? And not to stay upon many: The most honorable
Gentleman Lucius Lucullus, suffered some time this kind of mock and reproach,
and also a greater state then he was, Augustus the Emperor. An horrible, and
most strange delyght in deceyuyng, which will not forsake the miserable and
wretched souls, no not in the very point of death: but this is your manner, and
thou reposest thy trust upon a promised inheritance, whereof thou may be
disappoynted, both by the longer life, and shorter faith of the testatour:
although, if these do thee no harm, he may have most just cause to change his
purpose, to wit, an heir of his own, and young issue borne to an old man. For
Cato begat a child, when he was above fourscore years old, and Masinissa,
when he was more near to ninety. The like also happens now adays unto your
old men, who I would they were as like unto those anncient fathers in
strength of mind, as they are to force of engendryng: which being so, truly
the lawful heir hyndreth the intruder, and cutteth of his foolyshe hope.


Hope. I am named Heir in an old man's Testament.


Reason. But perhaps he is yet living, and like to live. As for the
Testamentes and Wylles, they are made in the life time, and confirmed in the
death: thou thynkest upon the Carcas and Burial, and Wolf may be weeried with
expectation and hunger.


Hope. An Inheritance shall come directly unto me.


Reason. As the Testatour, so also is the inheritance subject to casualties,
that a man can not always have that heir which he would: and an
inheritance many times is nothing but a vain name, yea, sundry times a small
inheritance is very dearly bought, when a man makes him self serviceable
and subject to a tatter old fool, and uses flattering words, unmeet for a
man. Surely, there is no commodity to be compared with the loss of honesty,
and that which is decent.


Hope. The Inheritance shall fall unto me, without contradiction of Law or
Fortune.


Reason. Whereby know thou that? seeing that saying of the most ancient and
wise Father Marcus Cato is true: I have heard oftentimes, says he, that many
things may happen between the mouth and the morsel. But admitie nothing
happen between, but that thine expected inheritance fall unto thee, it will
not tarry with thee, but depart from thee, to others. Worldly goods, are
roullyng, and money, men say, is of purpose made round, that it may always be
runnyng. Thou have gotten an inheritance for thy successor: thou being
perhaps sad, for him that will rejoice: thou being careful, for him that
is negligent: and look how thou have hoped of another, so will other hope of
thee.


Of Alchimie. The.Cxi. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for good success in Alchimie.


Reason. It is strange thou should est hope for that which never happened
effectually to thy self, nor to any man else, and if report go that it ever
happened to any man, that report was made by such as it was expedient to believe
them.


Hope. I hope for good success in Alchimie.


Reason. What success meanest thou, other then smoke, ashes, sweat, sighs,
words, deceit, and shame? These are the successes of Alchimie, wherely we
never saw any poor man advanced to riches, but many rich men fall into
poverty. And yet ye have no regard hereof, so sweet a thing it is to hope
and be deceived, whereunto ye be pricked forth by covetousness, and driven
headlong through madness, that ye think that to be true, which you hope for,
and false, which you see. Thou have seen some, that in other matters are
wise, yet in this behalf to be mad: and some very rich men, utterly
consumed with this vanity, and while they covet to become rycher, and gape
after filthy lucre, to consume their well gotten goods, and having spent all
their revenue in unprofitable expenses, at length to have wanted very
necessaries: and other some, forsakyng the City wherein they dwelt, have
passed forth the residue of their lives in sorrow and heaviness, being able
to think upon nothing else, but Bellows, Tongues, and Coals, and being able
to abide to keep company with none, but of their own disposition and
heresy, have at length become, as it were, wild people: many finally, that
first by means of this exercise lost the eyes of their mind, have afterward
also by the same, lost their bodyly eyes.


Hope. I hope for gold, which my woorkeman has promised.


Reason. It is hehofefull to understand what every artificer in every art
promises. There be some that can not be believed, whatsoever they promise, and
so much the less, as they bind their promise the more with an oath. But, O
you foolyshe men, is it not sufficient for you to be mad in true mettalles,
which the earth brings forth, but that other mineralles vex you with
counterfeiting? Is it a small matter to have wandered from virtue, but that also
loss be added to your error, and toil to your loss, and shame to your
toil? He that promises thee his gold, will suddenly run away with thy
gold. It is no new tale I tell thee, but a common custom, although the
deceyt that is committed by fire, is often also purged by fire,
notwithstanding, when thou art deluded by the subteltie of thy deceyuer, art
nothing damnified by his punishment, but shall be the better known and poynted
at for a covetous and foolyshe person, consumed with blowyng of Coals, singed
with the fire, smutched with the smoke.


Hope. The Alchimiste promises me great matters.


Reason. Bid him first perform that for him self, which he promises to
others, and that first he relieve his own poverty: For, for the most part
they are a beggarly kind of people, and confessyng them selves to be poor,
they will enryche others, as though other men's need were more grievous unto
them then their own: so that being wretched them selves, they use most
impudently to say, that they take pity upon others, and do promise great
matters, some time to them that they know not O shameful promise, and O foolysh
belief?


Hope. I have learned the art of Alchimie, I shall be rich.


Reason. Nay rather, if thou were rich, thou shall wax poor: for I say, that
this art whereof thou speak, is none other, then the art of lying and
deceyuing. But go to, forasmuch as thy mind is so bent, follow it, and I
tell thee before hand that thou shall reap profit by this art, thy house
shall swarm with strange gheastes, and wonderful kinds of implementes, thou
shall have store of eaters and drinkers, and that by good reason, as being
incensed with heat of the fire, and greediness of desire: there shall be
blowers, and deceivers, and mockers, every corner shall stand full of vessels,
and pottes, and basins, and pannes, and glasses of stinking waters: moreover,
strange heathes, and outlandy she saltes, and sulphur, and stilles, and
furnaces, by means of all which, in the end thou shall procure unto thy
self vain cares, folly of mind, deformity of countenance, filthiness of
body, dimnesse of sight, carfulness and poverty, and that which is woorst of
all, the name of a Iugler or Sorcerer, and a life continually to be led in
darkness, among the secret infamous lurkyng corners of Thieves.


Hope. I hope to obtain the effect of my desire.


Reason. Perhaps thou may conceive matter to hope and be glad hereof, but
not to rejoice.


Hope. I draw near to the end of my perpose.


Reason. Have thou fixed Mercury? or brought any other vain conclusion to
effect? Notwithstanding, thou art very far from thy purpose, thou shall
always lack some necessary matter, but never want deceyt.


Of the promises of VVysemen, and Southsayers. The.Cxii. Dialogue.
HOPE. DIuinours, and Southsayers, promise me many things.


Reason. Lo, thou have found out another kind of men, to whom if thou give
credit, thou shall always hang in suspense, and live in Hope: for the things
shall never come to pass which they promise, and thou shall never lack
promisers: so that on the one side, gapyng after the runaway promised things,
and on the other side, provoked by promises, thou shall continually be tossed
to and fro, after the manner of Ixion.


Hope. The Southsayers put me in good hope.


Reason. It is as easy a matter to bring the credulous into hope, as the
timorous into fear: as for constant minds, they are not easily moved unto
either side.


Hope. Mathematicians promise me many matters.


Reason. There is nothing more ready unto them that want honesty, then to
abound with promises: but who so are ashamed to lie, are flow in promising.


Hope. The Mathematicians promise me happy fortune.


Reason. Choose other auowers as a pledge, the kind of promises is brittle, a
bare word is scarcely to be trusted.


Hope. Mathematicians promise me many things.


Reason. Seek some that may fulfill those promises: it is sufficient for them
to have put thee in hope, no one man can do all things.


Hope. I am awaked by the Southsayers answers.


Reason. Thou shall be brought a sleep by the euentes, for nothing shall
happen that is promised thee.


Hope. I am willed to hope for great matters.


Reason. It is strange, that the mind of man that is stubberne to virtue,
should be so much obedient to vanity. If virtue command any one thing, be it
never so good, it is not regarded: but if vanity will any thing, although it be
difficult and most vile, it is obeyed.


Hope. The Mathematicians promise me happy fortune.


Reason. These be woonderful fellows, that know only what is to come, and are
ignorant of that which is past, and present, and do so pronounce of things
that are in heaven, as though they had been called to counsel among the
gods, and were now come down from thence with a fresh memory, when as in the
mean while they be ignorant what is done upon the earth, in their own
country, in their house, and in their chamber: so that it is very true which
thou read in Tullie, No man sees what is before his feet, but they search
the regions of heaven.


Hope. A certain notable and true Mathematician, tells me of great matters.


Reason. The more notable the diuinour is, the greater is his liberty of
lying, and his credit more prone to a false tale. Truly I use often times to
marueyle, and our country man Tully not without cause marueyled also, what
new or vnaccustomable accident is happened in this matter, that when as in all
sorts of men many true matters are obscured by one notable lie, and the
credit of the reporter is ever more afterward had in suspicion, it fares
otherwise in this kind of people, that one slender and casual true tale, as
it were a veyle being set against many fittens, notwithstanding purchases
credit to a public lie, if it be found that he once told true, wherein
there was never any so impudent a liar, but some time has told truth, either
against his will, or upon ignorance: but if any of those by chance do hit upon
the truth, then is the matter cock, he shall be believed if he foretell that
there shall fall a Star this day from heaven: finally, he may lie in all cases,
without suspicion of lying, that could be once found out of a lie. And they
stycke most upon this one point, for that they can see into the things that
are to come, being forgetful of that which is past, deceiving those that have
affiance in them, by means of the favor and sight belief which they bear
unto them.


Hope. I give credice unto Diuinours that foretell me good fortune.


Reason. To give credit to mad men, is madness. And truly although that
Cicero seems herein to be of an other mind, yet I am of opinion that the
name which the Grecians have given unto this thing, is more apt then that which
is given by your countrymen. For the Latins have derived this word
divination, a Diuis, from the gods, or a Diuinitate, from Divinity: but the
Grecians fetch their word Mantice, a Furore, from madness: you perhaps more
finely, but they more truly. The same art all the holy Doctors do by one
content condemn, namely Ambrose, Augustine, with the residue, who, if it so
happen at any time, as this pestilent custom has prevailed among many, that
among these brablers in disputation concerning the truth, they are had in
suspicion for the very names sake of their profession, so that the professors
of the true faith cannot be heard, with the free consent also of all other,
who being innumerable are of the same opinion. And although the godly or
virtuous men do condemn divination, what cause is there, or just occasion of
suspicion, but that only one, and especially among many, the most excellent
Cicero may be regarded and hearkened unto: For truly he condemns, mocketh,
and despises this whole kind of illusions and deceipts. And to be short,
omitting those things which this place cannot hold, not only al godly
religion, but also true Philosophy, and likewise Poetry, which directly
imitateth the same, and not the holy men only, but also all the learned, do
reject this vanity, except those only that live of it, or that being by them
seduced, are fallen into their snares, upon whose losses and errors they
found their Art, and raise their gain. In which Art, this is the chief and
principal point, to cloak their fraud with obscurity, and so to give an
ambiguous or doubtful answer, so that whatsoever happens, may seem to have been foretold, which is a common prouiso among all that profess the knowledge
of things to come, wherein not their Art, which is none, nor their wit, which
without learning and knowledge in matters is naked, but their subtlety and
boldness, and impudency, is wonderful. So that, that which once the rough
Cato spoke merrily, that he marueiled that one southsayer laughed not when he
saw another, may be also fitly applied unto al air watchers, southsaiers,
fortune readers, ghessers, chaldies, and Mathematicians, and the whole kind of
divination, so uncertain it is whether their fraud be more filthy, or your
madness more ridiculus: howbeit, it were an easy matter to answer their
quiddities, and refute their reasons, but it would be ouerlong, and is so
common a matter, and so notably handled by sundry excellent men, that the
repetition thereof would not only be superfluous, but also folysh. And unto
your most fond vanity, what may be said other, then that ye are worthy not
only to be mocked by earthly men, but also by men made of clay, and that have
none other knowledge, then by this means only to deceive fools, by pretending
great skyl, and abusing you with the name and color of heaven.


Hope. I am persuaded that prosperous fortune is at hand, the expectation
whereof is sweet, pleasant, and acceptable unto me.


Reason. Nay rather, bitter, sour, and troublesome: but you having lost your
sense, do judge of the obiectes of the senses, whereunto I suppose you are
easily persuaded. For it is an easy matter to persuade them that are wyllyng:
and some have no need of a perswader, for truly they are their own
southsayers, and take occasion to prognosticate happy euentes to them selves,
both by the meetyng of living creatures, and the flying and chatteryng of
birds. But if thou recount with thy self how often these things have
deceived thee, if thou ask counsel of thy neighbors concerning this matter,
or they, being infected with the same error, ask thine advice, thou shall
easily perceive how far thou ought give credit to these follies, unless
those three most notable and famous governors and Princes, Pumpeius, Crassus,
and Caesar, will happily say otherwise upon their oath, unto whom, as it
appears by a great witness, and best known of all men, Marcus Cicero, all
the Chaldeys, and southsayers promised, that they should all three of them
end their lives most gloryously in their own country, in happy estate, and
honorable old age: which how crew it was, perhaps thou attendest not to hear:
but truly, they dyed al by the swoorde, two of them more miserably far of
from Iralie or the City of Rome being slain, their honorable heads only,
whereof sometime the whole world stood in fear and reverence, with shameful
reproaches buried, but their bodies most pitifully thrown forth to be torn by
wild beasts, bytten by fyshes, and rent by fowls, cruelly mangled and
dismembered, lay there as a most miserable spectacle of fortune. Go thy ways
now, and say these southsayers have no knowledge, that they give judgment so
vncertaynly.


Hope. I have observed an acceptable token of southsaying.


Reason. O importunate madness: a wretched man hops to know the success of
his affairs, of birds, when he has none of him self: what folly is greater
then this? King Deiotarus, a gods name, was delivered from present destruction
by the sight of an Eagle: And Agrippa the Hebrew (...) advertised of his
delivery out of prison, the end of his adversity, and beginning of
prosperity, by the sitting of an Oule upon his head, which otherwise is
counted an infamous bird, whose song by Virgils verse, is counted deadly and
unfortunate.


Hope. A good token and prognostication has happened.


Reason. This word Omen, signifiyng a token, or an abodyng, is deryued from
the word Homo. that signifies a Man, and is an argument of men's madness,
whereby your minds are not only evermore drawn into error by some external
thing, but also by one thing or another that is within you, that there may be
no part void of fancies and tryfles: and therefore ye observe your servants
neesynges, and draw your chyldrens words, which they utter by chance, to
that purpose, not to the purport of them, but to your own purposes, to wit,
because the Centurion said, Here we shall remain best of all, the head of the
world was not removed: or because the little gyrle told her father crying,
when he was goeyng forth to warfare, that Perses was dead, it was necessarily
judged that the King of Macedonie should be vanquyshed. O strange and sotted
mind of man, with how small a force art thou driven into the pyt of error?


Hope. Good fortune happened unto me while I was a sleep.


Reason. But thou shall have sorrowful tidinges when thou art awake.


Hope. I saw good hap in sleep.


Reason. But thou shall find il hap when thou awakest.


Hope. I was an happy man in my rest.


Reason. But thou shall be wretched in thy travail. For many times ^reames
signify nothing, and many times the contrary.


Hope. True things are often seen in dreams.


Reason. But how more often false? The like judgment is to he given of this,
and all such other kinds of vanities, one thing happenyng true by chance,
purchases credit to a great many of false, and men's minds gapyng after that
which is to come, takes no regard of that which is past.


Hope. The Diuinours promise me many things.


Reason. I do not much wonder at these impostours and deceyuers, who according
to their manner do live by their practice: but I marueyle more at you, that you
subject your lives, souls, and wits unto their bellies: and therefore take heed what persuasion thou hold ^^r if thou wylt follow mine aduyce, thou
shall expect with a quiet and vpryght mind, not what the Stars, but what the
Creator and governor of the Stars has determined concerning thee,
fervently woorkyng somethyng every day, whereby thou may be found the more
worthy of his love. Concerning the euentes, let it not once enter into thy
mind to move any of them, unto whom the truth is less known then to thy
self, Finally, thus persuade thy self, that it is an hard matter for men to
know what it is to come, and that it is not lawful for them, if it were
expedient, nor expedient, if it were lawful.


Of glad tidings. The. Cxiii. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Have heard glad tydyngs.


Reason. Believe not fame, she is a liar.


Hope. Many tell me glad news.


Reason. It is better sometime to believe one, then many.


Hope. That cannot be altogether false, which so many messengers do report.


Reason. The manner of common report is well known, which is to mingle lies with
truth. A great many of lies are seasoned with a few true tales: for no body
will believe him that which al lies.


Hope. The first aucthour of the rumor is a cred^^le person.


Reason. But there is no man contented to report only as much as he has heard
or seen. it is nothing worth unless that every one add some thing of his
own to that which he has heard or seen, which when many have done, a man
shall perceive how one lie has been heaped upon another, so that this mischief
going from hand to hand, has increased in men's hands as it was going, and
which the most excellent poet says, It floorisheth by moouyng, and gets
strength by going.


Hope. Hitherto the report is very joyful.


Reason. What if it flatter thee, that it may strike thee? Many times after
joyful rumors, follow woeful massacres: this for the more part is the manner of
fortune, to promise hope, that she may wound the deeper, and she annoynteth her
cruel weapon with the sweetness of some glad tidings, wherewith she purposes
to cut the throat of him that rejoices. Which thing, forasmuch as the
learned and wise do understand, they are nothing moved with flatteryng
reports, but remain immovable, recountyng with them selves either that it
is contrary, or that this rumor that seems so acceptable, may be changed
into the contrary.


Hope. I am delighted in a joyful rumor.


Reason. Stay a while till thou know whether it be certain, and if it so fall
out, yet is it a shame for a manly courage to be moved with every small rumor,
though they be true, but most shameful with those that are false. Many have been
ashamed that they have rejoiced, and the remembrance of their false joy, has
augmented their true grief.


Of expecting a man's son, or Farmer, or wife. The.Cxiiii. Dialogue.
Hope. I Hope for my sons return.


Reason. Thou hopest for a careful joy, and a near sorrow.


Hope. I hope to see my friend again.


Reason. Thou hopest for a sweet thing, but deceivable: men's affairs tremble
upon a brittle foundation, perhaps he whom thou now look for is dead, which
thou may prove if thou live. There are a thousand kinds of impedimens, and
one that is common to al, that is, death.


Hope. I trust to enjoy ye desired sight of my friend.


Reason. These two are almost always joined together, to wyshe, and to hope:
but by sundry casualties they be daily separated. How many may we think were
there in Rome, that with very desirous minds expected the return of the last
Marcus Marcellus? But contrarywyse his most cruel foe attended his coming in
the mids of the way, whose furious savageness was more mighty then was the
mercyfulnesse of the conqueror that revoked his adversary from exyle. And
therefore Caesar at the request of the Senate could pardon Marcellus: but
Marcellus Client could not sustain any greater grief, then that he should
enjoy that benefit from Caesar.


Hope. I hope to see my friend, and I expect him, having no enemy to hinder
his coming.


Reason. What man is he that has not an enemy? and albeit he have no private
enemy, yet is there any without public fooes? I mean thieves and murderers,
who moved with covetousness have proclaimed open war against mankind. But
imagine there chanced some such good constellation, yt this mischief were
banyshed out of the world: notwithstanding who shall defend Wagons and Horses
from ouerthrowyng, ryuers and streams from ouerflowyng, brydges and houses
from falling, tempests on Sea and land from rysyng? Add moreover the
incursion of fierce and wild beasts, and venomous vermyne, by means of
which, Dicaearchus a most curious searcher of such matters, shows that not
only certain particular men, but also whole generations of men, have been
destroyed. And in sum, look how many chances there be in humane affairs,
whereof there is no certain number, so many enemies are there of mankind,
which may, I say not slack thy hope, but extinguysh it. And though nothing else
do happen, yet death, of whom I spoke erwhile, whether men go or stand, is
always at their elbowe, and perhaps more near to them that ride and traueile
upon the way, by how much their journey, and riding, and changyng of place,
seems to be subject to more kinds of casualties.


Hope. I hope for my friends return, after the prosperous dispatching of his
business.


Reason. How gloriously and prosperously Drusus Nero, that was son in law to
Augustus, behaved him self and accomplished his affairs, that he was beloved
of his enemies that he had vanquyshed, so that they did almost adore him as a
God, whose wonderful affection toward the memorial of him, even to this
present day, I suppose thou might perceive, if ever thou were conversant
among the states of Germany. Truly he atchiued such exploites whereof he might
woorthily vaunt him, the which appears yet remaining to this day engraven in
certain Roman stones, whereof some of the first sillables are defaced and
thrown down by misfortune, in these verses, At the departing of the Rhine, I
invaded the land and wasted the enemies country, while unto thee, O Rome,
which art glorious and renowned with thine everlasting Monumentes of victory,
Hister follows with a more calm stream. How thynkest thou, did the Emperor
Augustus, Lord of all the world, expect the return of so noble a young
Gentleman, whom in loving he had made his son? And how Liuia Augusta, unto
whom nature had made him beloved, but virtue more beloved, and his brothers
cowardice, I suppose, most dearly beloved? How moreover his brother him
self, how soever he was unto other, yet most loving of his most excellent
brother? And last of al, how Rome it self, and the whole common wealth, which
at that time depended so much upon no man? But what then? what was the end of
so manyfolde expectations? Sudden death took away this long looked for
Drusus, and that by natural sickness, and as some approved aucthours report,
by addyng thereunto the breakyng of his thygh: so that he that was looked for
to return a conqueror into his country, was brought back thither dead. What
shall I speak of his son Germanicus? I think there was never greater
expectation of any man. It was not his father nor yet Augustus that expected
him, who were then both dead, but it was the whole city of Rome. and that with
so wonderful desire, as if the whole city had had but one mind, and had been a
widow, and a mother that had but one child. And therefore, at the first report
of his sickness, all the city was amazed, and cast into heaviness, and al
men's countenances and apparel were changed, and there was sorrowful silence
throughout the whole city. But after that better tidings, although by
uncertain aucthours, reported that he was alive and recovered, immediately a
most happy and loud noise was in every place raised, which also awaked
Tiberius him self, and there was great concurse of people into the capitol
ho^^e, to perform vows, and give thanks to the gods, insomuche that the
doors of the Temples were almost borne away with the throng, the darkness of
the night was overcome with (...) a plenty of Torches and other lights, and
silence broken with the voices of them that sung for joy, Rome is in safety,
our coun^^^y is in safety, Germanicus is in safety. But what at length was
the end of this matter? Even that which is most common in humane affairs:
For there came a more certain messenger, which reported that Germanicus was
dead: whereupon arose a public sorrow and lamentation, which could not be
restrained by ^^ictes, holidays, or any consolations. The history is well
known, written in the fourth book of the Emperors.


Hope. I hope my young son will return.


Reason. Were not these young enough of whom I spoke erewhile? Then hear of a
younger. Marcellinus, that was Nephewe to the same Augustus on his sisters
side, how much think thou was he expected of his Uncle, who loved him so
tenderly, that he could not hear, without tears, those most noble verses of
Virgil, wherein that most excellent Poet celebrated the remembrance of that
young Gentleman, being but almost a child, and when he was reading them,
commanded the aucthour to hold his peace? How much of his mother Octauia, who
loved him so dearly, that she mourned for him continually unto the last day of
her life, as though he had but then dyed, and did not only contemn, but also
hate every one that enduoured to comfort her? What should a man say to these
matters, and what think thou other then all other men? He returned not, but
was translated: and as for Drusus, he returned not to Rome as he went to
Germany, neither did Antioche restore Germanicus, neither Baiana Marcellinus.
There is a common destiny of your expectations, but thou fansiest unto thy
self another, and perhaps that chance may happen which thou expectest, which
peradventure when it is happened, thou wylt begin to hope and wyshe that it were
gone again.


Hope. I hope for the return of my friend that is absent.


Reason. Who will marueyle, if they that are living be looked for to come
again, when some also that are dead, as report goes, are expected? It is
reported, that the Britains look for the coming again of king Arthure. And
some do dream that Nero the Emperor shall return, a little before the end of
the world. Your whole life, from the beginning to the ending, is not only full
of vain expectations, but it self is also a vain expectation. If thou
perceive not that this is so, thou have either lived too short time, or too
long, or taken no regard what is done here.


Hope. I look for my Farmer, that should come out of the Country.


Reason. Peradventure either his House is burnt, or his Harvest withered away,
or his Meadows ouerdried, or his Oxen dead, or his Vines hurt with the Hayle,
or his Trees overthrown with the whirlewinde, or his Cornefieldes drowned with
sudden waters, or his Bees flowne away, or his Fruits eaten up with
Caterpillars, or his Pigeon house destroyed by Crows, Mice, and other vermin,
or his Poultry devoured by the Fox, or his Lambs spoiled by the Woolfe: these
for the most part, are the tumors that come out of the country.


Hope. I hope for my Wives coming.


Reason. If thou hope for that, then do I not know what thou fear: yet is it
so notwithstanding, for some look for their wines, and some for an ague.


Of looking for better times. The.Cxv. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Look for better times.


Reason. All times are almost of a like goodness, for that the creator of times
is evermore of a like goodness: but you do always abuse good times, and in
this as al other things, ye impute your own faults to the things. If the
men were good, the times would be good enough.


Hope. These times can not continue, but more joyful shall succeed.


Reason. No time continues, all pass away, and when they are gone, they
return no more: through virtue, and industry, and the study of good arts,
they may be bridled, not but that they shall pass away, but that they do not
perish: for there is nothing sweeter then the remembrance of time well spent.
But you not knowing how to use any thing as it ought to be, when ye have
bestowed all your life time either in sleep or idleness, or in carfulness,
or unprofitable business, ye accuse the giltlesse time. Do I lie, if I say
that you consume your infancy and chyldhood in vain pastimes, your youth and
man's state in lasciviousness and avarice, your old age, in complaints and
lamentations? What fault is there here in the times? They pass away, I
confess, for it is their nature so to do, and you neglect them while
opportunity serves, which is not your nature, but your fault. You accuse
nature, and excuse your own fault, which is no new matter.


Hope. I hope for a better world.


Reason. The merrinesse, or sorowfulnesse of the times, as I have said,
rests not in the times, but in your own selves. By this means thou shall
not only understand how to hope for prosperous times, but how to deem of
the sorrowful, if thou look upon thine own age, which every day waxes more
heavy then other, as it is described by the Poet, and found in most old men.
And truly, if thou cast thine eyes backwarde, and begin to recount and
consider thine own years, thou wylt also therewithal begin to despair of
that which thou hopest. There is no cause why thou should hope for
alteration of the course of the world. The times that follow are not better,
but I fear me rather the worse. And what is the cause, I pray thee? but only
because men wax worse and worse, which certain notable men have foretold
should be so, and the effect plainly declares? but that you men, upon good
hope do evermore conceive some great opinion of your noble and modest youth,
from which opinion I am far of, for my mind can not prognosticate nor
foresee any good to ensue at al, every thing is so prone unto vice and
untowardness.


Hope. The times are evil, but better shall ensue.


Reason. Every age has complained of the manners that have been then, says
Seneca. And I add, that every age had cause in deed whereof to complain, and
shall have hereafter, to the worlds end.


Hope. I hope for a better time.


Reason. There is one way unto that, whereby if thou attain to a better state,
thou wylt then hope for no farther matter. Frame unto thy self a merier mind,
which thou can not do without virtue, and when thou have so done, al things
shall be merry and fortunate, and nothing unprosperous or sorrowful.


Hope. I look for a better time.


Reason. If it chance to come, which is doubtful, verily as that approaches,
thou drawest away. How much were it better to use well the time present,
rather then carefully to expect that, which perchance either will not come at
all, or thou shall never live to see.


Of the hoped coming of a Prince. The.Cxvi. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for a Princes coming.


Reason. As many things are feared, which were rather to be wished: so many are
wished, which were rather to be feared: on both sides there is great want of
judgment.


Hope. I hope for the Princes coming.


Reason. How much more seemly were it to hope for liberty: for truly, he
that hops for a Lord or a Master, hops for his own servitude.


Hope. I hope that the Prince will come.


Reason. Thou hopest also for the common mischief which comes with him. But
the time has been, when Princes have hoped for their kingdoms, and the people
have hoped for their Prince: but now the kingdom is a burden to the Prince,
and the Prince a plague to the people.


Hope. I and the common wealth, do hope that the Prince will come.


Reason. What thou alone dooest hope for, thou know best thy self, wherein
also thou may easily be deceived: but as for the hope of the Common wealth,
it is but foolyshe. For what man, unless he were mad, would hope for, or
desire that, which he has so often times experimented to be hurtful?


Hope. I hope that the Prince will come.


Reason. And he will bring with him sundry stirs and tumultes, alterations of
Cities, hurtful novelties, famine, pestilence, wars, discord: al these at
once, or every one of them severally, use commonly to come with Princes now a
days. If thou like of these things, then hope for the Princes coming: but if
none of these be fearful, notwithstanding the very name of an Empire is full
of repor^es and rumors, deuoyde of al goodness, and only founded upon the
shadow of antiquity.


Hope. I hope that the Prince will come.


Reason. But I would have thee wise and circumspect, that as often as thou
hear of his coming, thou imagine that thou hear the voice of some
thunder that goes before lyghtnyng, nor begin not to hope, but rather to
fear, if so be one of them must needs fail. For to fear adversity,
although it be repugnant to virtue, yet is it agreeable to nature: but to hope
for evil, is contrary to nature and virtue.


Hope. I hope that the prince will be here shortly.


Reason. When thou see him present, imagine that thou beholdest an
unfortunate star to the Common wealth: and concerning this matter, take
advice of thine own memory, or demand of thy Parents, or of thy
Grandfathers, or great Grandfathers, and thou shall find it to be so as I say,
which thing, declare thou also to thy children and posterity, least they also
like fools, hope for the Princes coming. I pray thee tell me, when did ever
the small Beasts hope for the Lions coming, or the lesser Fowls for the
Eagles? Pardon me, if I tell yt truth, Man is a most foolyshe creature, and
always most desirous of his own harm: other have need of a bayte to take
them withal, and man is caught only with rumor of fame.


Of hope of Fame after death. The.Cxvii. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for Fame after my death, for my desartes.


Reason. Many hope that they deserve fame, when they rather deserve infamy:
and like traueylers that wander out of their way, when they think they go
right forth, then go they backewarde.


Hope. I am famous in my life time, and I hope to be more famous after my death.


Reason. This is true, I confess, in some, insomuche as Anneus Seneca in a
certain Epistle profecieth, that he should he beloved of posterity: and
Statius Papinius says, that he has prepared a ready path for the present fame
unto his work among posterity: and likewise the Poet Ovid foretold of the
eternity of his name to come, and that he should be read by the mouth of the
people, and live by fame throughout all ages: and truly none of these are
deceived. But how many thynkest thou have there been, that have hoped the like,
but their hope has failed them? Many perhaps have thought as much, and have
written, but have not found that which they promised to them selves.


Hope. If I be famous while I live, why should I not be more famous after my
death?


Reason. For that it is an accustomable and common experience, that many that
have been famous and noble in their life time, after their death have become
obscure and unknown. Dooest thou wonder at it? The cause is manifest, which is
a certain affability, neat and pleasant speech, a fawning countenance, a
friendly look, gentle greeting, benefits bestowed upon neighbors, defending
of clientes, hospitality toward strangers, courtesy toward al men. These,
and such like, do purchase f^me to them that are living: but so sone as they
are dead, they continue no longer, unless perhaps as long as they remain that
knew them, which how short a time it is, thou see: for how should things
continue, that are not grounded upon a sure foundation? It is the course of
nature, that the things that are weakly established, and slenderly increased,
do soon decay. And therefore that thy fame may be durable, it must proceed
either from thy holiness of life, or worthiness of thy desartes, or
singularity of thy written works. A rare kind of honor, these prayers, and
courteous kind of gowned Gentlemen, which walk in their Silks, and glitter in
their precious Stones and Jewels, and are poynted at by the people, are known
no longer then they can speak, or a little longer. An hard case, that all this
bravery and pomp, this show of knowledge, these thunderyng speeches, should
so soodenly vanishe away into a thin smoke: an hard case, I confess, but
true it is in deed, for they have ministered none occasion of any testimony of
their due praise, but only of ambition, lucre, or slothfulness.


Hope. I shall have fame after my death.


Reason. Fame never profited the dead, but has oftentimes hurt the living. For
what was it other that procured the destruction of Cicero and Demosthenes, then
their surpassing fame of learning? The like also may be said of Socrates and
Zeno, and infinite other, who are all known. For what was it that gave
occasion to the Athenians to murder Androgeu^, that was son to king Gnosius,
but only the fame of his wit and learning? What brought the chosen men, as
they term them, of the great ship Argos, who in deed were very Thieves, unto
Oetes king of Colchos, but only the fame of his riches? For what else may we
think to be signified by that famous golden fleece of the Ram, but great
riches diversely dispersed, wherewithal beastly rich men, and such as are
destitute of the true riches, are plentifully endued, like as Sheep that are
clad with their fleeces?


Hope. I shall be famous.


Reason. Admit thou be, what great matter conceyuest thou thereof? Fame perhaps
were somewhat, if knowledge were joined with it, as it often happens in the
living: but will it avail thee any thing, to be praised of them which know
thee not if they see thee? I pray thee tell me, if thou should see Homer and
Achilles, if Virgil and Augustus, should they not pass by unknown, although
their names be never so well known, and famous? Believe me, your hopes are for
the more part vain in two respects: the one, in that the things that ye hope
for, come not to pass: the other, in that if they do come to pass, yet do
they not perform that which they promised. For why, for the most, al humane
things consist more in hope, then in effect. Cast away therefore this vain
hope, and fond desires, and contemnyng of earthly things, learn at length to
wyshe and hope for heavenly things.


Of Glory hoped for by buyldyng. The.Cxviii. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for Glory by buyldyng.


Reason. I knew not so much before, that glory was won out of Lime, and
Sand, and Timber, and Stone: but I supposed it had only been gotten by
atchiuing of valient deeds, and exercise of virtue.


Hope. I purchase Glory unto my self by buyldyng.


Reason. But it is a frail and transitory Glory. Whatsoever is made by man's
hand, is either overthrown by man's hand, or fails of it self in
continuance of time. For long time, has very long and strong hands, there is
none of all your works that can withstand old age. Wherefore, when these
things shall fall whereon this thy Glory is founded, it must needs be, that
it fall also. If happily thou believe not, behold the things that are of
antiquity, whereof thou can not be ignorant. Where is now that proud tower
of Ilium in Troy? Where is Byrsa of Carthage? Where are the tower and walls of
Babylon? It is now an habitation of Serpents and wild beasts: I speak now
of the ancient City of Babylon. As for the nearer and new Babylon, it
stands yet, and is in case to be soon destroyed, if you were men. To be
short, where are those seven notable works, which the Greek writers have so
much celebrated? And to come unto more later times, Where (I pray thee) is
Neroes golden house, which how much it weeried the woorkemen, imagine thou, it
weerieth now the readers of it: which house, with other outragies and follies
in buildyng, wherein he exceeded al other, brought him to poverty, and
enforced him to rapine? Where are Dioclesians warm Fountaynes, and Antonius
Bayne, and Marius cymbrum, and Seuerus Septizonium, and also his Senerian warm
Wells? And briefly to conclude, where is Augustus Market place, and the house
of Mars the revenger, and of thundryng Jupiter in the Capitol, and the Temple
of Apollo in the Palace? Where is also his Gallerie, and Library, both Greek
and Latin? likewise his other Gallerie and large Treasance, which were builded
and dedicated in the names of Gaius and Lucius his two Nephues? and the third
Gallerie of his wife Liuia, and his Sister Octauia, and Marcellus Theater?
Where are all the notable pieces of work, which sundry noble men buy? ded
in many places of the City with so great pain, and excessive charges, at the
commandment and instance of the same Prince? Merius Philippus house of
Hercules and the Muses. Lucius Cornificius house of Diana, and Asinius Pollioes
Court of Liberty, and Munacius Pancus house of Saturn, Cornelius Balbus
Theater, and Statilius Taurus Amphitheater? Over and above these, the
innumerable works of Marcus Agrippa? And not to touch every thing, where are
all the vain and ouerriotous Palaces of Princes and Emperors? Seek in
books, and thou shall find their names: but seek all the City of Rome over,
and thou shall either find nothing at all, or a few remnantes remainyng of so
many great works: and therefore thou know what thou may hope of thine
own. Truly, unless that Augustus, who was chief of al, had left somethyng
behind him besides buyldynges, his glory had long since fallen to the ground:
and not only the Temples of the Gods, which he prepared, fell down upon
those that builded them, but other places also in the same City, at this day
have some of them fallen down, some trembled and shaken, and now they can
scarce stand alone and bear their own burden, except one only, which is the
Temple of Pantheon made by Agrippa. Believe me, glory that must continue,
requires other foundations then are made of Stone.


Hope. I seek for glory by buyldyng.


Reason. Seek it where it is, thou shall never find a thing where it is not:
true glory consists not in walls nor stones. There are, I confess, commonly
judgments and estimations of things given forth, in which respect glory is
said to be gotten three ways: by doing some notable deed, so that good
aucthours may condingly write of thee: or by writing some excellent work,
which posterity may read and wonder at: or by buyldyng some syngulare piece
of work: which if it be so, yet this last is the least, and of the other the
most transitory.


Hope. I leave behind me works of buyldyng, wherein I vaunt when I am dying,
and hope to gain glory among posterity.


Reason. Augustus the Emperor, of whom I spoke, vaunted that he had left the
city of Marble, which he found of brick, which glory notwithstanding, unless
it had been helped with other things, whereunto it would have come, we see:
and therefore if thou be wise, dye in other traueyles, and embrace permanent
hope. For these things whereof thou trustest, are both of no price, and also
will shortly follow thee, and return to the earth from whence they came.


Hope. I have builded houses whereby I hope for praise.


Reason. Perhaps they will praise thee that shall dwell in them. A short and
narowe praise: but they that do come after shall either not understand that
it is due unto thee, or as men say commonly, give out that those works were
builded by Paganes, and thy name shall be unknown.


Of glory hoped for by keeping Company. The.Cxix. Dialogue.
Hope. I Hope for glory by keepyng company.


Reason. It skilleth much with whom thou keep company, for there are many,
which I would it were not so, whose company is discredible and infamous.


HOPE. I know that there is no glory won but by good arts, or conversation
with good men: I rest my self upon this last, and hope to be good either by
the example of good men, or if that fail, I hope that the familiarity of good
men will purchase me glory.


Reason. Truly in a young man this is a very good sign, who unless he had
a good mind, would never wyshe to be joined with good men. For, of all
friendshyppes and familiarities, a certain likeness is the cause and couplyng
together. Proceed therefore, and if thou can match those whom thou dooest
imitate, it is well done: If not, yet if thou do thy best, thy good will shall
not want the reward of glory. For the chief and greatest part of virtue is,
to have a good mind unto virtue, and unless this go before, virtue will not
follow.


Hope. I boast in my familiarity with good men.


Reason. Verily, I prayle thee for it, from which let neither the hope of
gain, nor of any other thing withdraw thee, and bend thou al thine industry
unto this, that thou may be like them: otherwise, that which is done for
glory only, deserves not true glory.


Hope. I hope for glory by conversation with good men.


Reason. A great hope, and not discommendable, seeing it consists in
obseruyng and imitating of knowledge and eloquence, and other good arts of
peace and war: For many have become noble, by conversation with noble men.
But take heed of this, that through error thou choose not to thy self evil
leaders in steed of good, or by means of the lamentable scarcity of good
men, and penury of virtues in this age, thou attain not to that for which
thou seek.


Of manyfolde hope. The Cxx. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for many things.


Reason. In much hope there is much vanity, and great means left unto
fortune to deceive.


Hope. I hope for many things.


Reason. Many things disapoynt a manyfolde hope: Who so hops for little, has
left but a narrow way for casualties, but not utterly stopped it.


Hope. I hope for good health.


Reason. A forgetfulness of mortality.


Hope. I hope for long life.


Reason. A long prison, wherein thou shall see much, and suffer much against
thy lykyng.


Hope. Fyrme members.


Reason. Strong bands, but pleasant notwithstanding, from which thou art a
frayde to be loosed.


Hope. Surpassyng beauty of the body.


Reason. Provocation unto pleasures.


Hope. Happy end of my years.


Reason. The matter of a shameful and sorrowful thing.


Hope. The couenanted death of my lover.


Reason. Some short and fylthy matter, I know not what.


Hope. Liberty to offend.


Reason. A miserable joy, and long repentance.


Hope. Opportunity to revenge.


Reason. An entrance unto cruelty.


Hope. A nymble and strong body.


Reason. A stubburne and rebellious drudge.


Hope. Great riches.


Reason. An heavy burden of Burres and Briars.


Hope. Ships to return from sundry Seas.


Reason. Fortune diversely dispersed, between the monsters of the Sea and the
Rocks, beaten with the Surgies, drawn with ropes, and driven with the wind.


Hope. Gain by the hoped merchandise.


Reason. A bait which will corment thee with continual carfulness, and by
the hope of one small gain, drive thee headlong unadvisedly into many losses:
A new Merchaunt is easy to believe, but he that is expert forseeth many
things.


Hope. Honest bestowyng of my son, or daughter in marryage.


Reason. There is no hope almost, that is so often and so grievously deceived.


Hope. Great power.


Reason. An hateful misery, a rytch poverty, a fearful pride.


Hope. A kingdom and empire.


Reason. A cragged headlong downfall, and tempestuous storms, and under a
glitteryng diadem, a careful countenance, and heavy heart, an unfortunate life.


Hope. Honors of the court of pleas.


Reason. Dust, and clamor.


Hope. Wedlock, and children.


Reason. Contention, and cares.


Hope. Warfare for my self, and a son for my wife.


Reason. Travail to thy self, and pain to thy beloved.


Hope. The death of mine old wife, and that I may have a younger.


Reason. To be loosed from a worn stryng, and to be tied to a strong new Rope.


Hope. Wit, a tongue, and learning.


Reason. An Handuyle, an Hammer, and a piece of iron, whereby to break thy
self and others of their sleep.


Hope. Commendation at my buryall.


Reason. A Nightyngale to sing unto a deaf person.


Hope. A golden Pyramid.


Reason. A painted house for a blind man.


Hope. Glory after my death.


Reason. A prosperous gale of wind after Shypwracke.


Hope. A name among posterity.


Reason. A testimony from unknown persons.


Hope. An heir for my self.


Reason. A friend to thy patrimony, and an argument to thy self that thou
shall not return.


Of hoped quietness of mind. The.Cxxi. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for quietness of mind.


Reason. Why had thou rather hope for, then have peace? Look how soon thou
shall begin thoroughly to seek it, thou shall find it.


Hope. I hope for peace of mind,


Reason. To hope for peace, is the part of a warryour. Who makes war
against thy mind, but thy self only? that which thou have taken away from
thy self, impudently thou requirest and hopest of another.


Hope. I hope for peace of mind.


Reason. From whence, I pray thee? Or how can thou hope for that which thou
may give unto thy self, and so, as none can take it from thee, but thy
self? Lay down the weapons of lust and wrath, and thou have absolutely
purchased peace for thy mind.


Hope. I hope for peace, and quietness of mind.


Reason. Why then is that which thou dooest against peace? And why dooest thou
strive so much against peace? Men have scarce need to endeavor so much to be
in safety as they take pains to seek their own destruction. Continual
war and traueyle of mind, is bought more dearly then are peace and
quietness: thus men's desires do strive against their studies, in such sort,
as if one man had not the mind of one but of many, and all those repugnant
one to another.


Hope. I hope for quietness.


Reason. I marueyle from whence ye have this desire of hopyng always, O ye
mortal generation. For when ye have once obtained that which ye hoped for,
then do ye again cast forth your hope abroad to another thing, and from
thence to another, so that to morrow is always better then to day, and future
things better lyked then present. There are some unto whom nothing is more
pleasant, then to live in hope, who would not have their hope of the things
they hope for to be altered by any euentes: unto whom what should I wyshe
other, then that puttyng of all things till to morrow and time to come, and in
the mean while, spoylyng them selves of all their goods, they may wax old
among their vain hopes: whereby at length they may understand that they hoped
to none effect, and lookyng backwarde into their forepassed life, they may
perceive that they sought for that elsewhere, which they had of them selves.


Hope. I hope for peace and quietness of mind.


Reason. A great part of humane affairs are shadows: and a great part of men
are fed with wind, and take pleasure in dreams. O, how many do go forth
to everlasting labors, and wars with this hope?


Of the hope of life everlasting. The.Cxxii. Dialogue.
HOPE. I Hope for the life everlasting.


Reason. There is no hope more excellent, more beautiful, more holy, so that
it be not blind and headlong. For there be some men, who by always dooyng
evil, do notwithstanding hope for good, then which nothing can be more
foolyshe.


Hope. I hope for the everlasting life.


Reason. Such is the consanguinitie and lynkyng together of virtues, as the
Philosophers do dispute, that who so has one virtue, must needs have all:
whereof it follows, that who so wants one virtue, wants all: which if it
be true in the moral virtues, what may we judge of the Theological? And
therefore if thou have hope, thou must needs also have faith and charity. But
if one of these be wantyng, it is no longer hope, but rash presumption.


Hope. I hope for the life everlasting.


Reason. Thou hopest for a good, or rather a most excellent thing: and
therefore see thou, that that good which thou dooest, thou do it well. There
be some that do good things evil, and he is no less an vpryght deemer of
things, that consydereth as well how, as what shall be and is done, and
does as well weygh the Aduerbes, as the Nownes, and Verbes.


Hope. I hope for the everlasting life.


Reason. Not the heavenly Powers only, but also the earthly Lords do love to
be hoped of: but by whom? truly by those of whom they know them selves to be
beloved, or else perhaps that some time were odious and rebellious, and being
desirous to be received into favor, have flyen unto mercy and forgiveness.


Hope. I hope for the life everlasting.


Reason. Amend thy temporal life, for that leads to the eternal.


Hope. I hope for the everlasting life.


Reason. This is the only hope of all men, which if thou conceive a right, it
will make, and alredie it does make thee an happy man.


Hope. I hope for the life everlasting.


Reason. First thou must hope for mercy, and afterward for life, and soberly
and modestly for both.


Hope. It is the everlasting life that I hope for.


Reason. O happy man, if this thy hope fail thee not.


Deo gratiae.

Thus ends the first Book.
The Epistolare Preface of Frauncis Petrarche, a most famous Poet and Orator,
into the second book of his work of Physic against Fortune, wherein he
disputes of Adversity.
OF all the things wherein I ever took delight, either in reading or hearing,
there is nothing almost more firmly settled, or more deeply imprinted, or
that more often comes into my remembrance, than the saying of Heraclitus,
That all things are made by disagrement. For in deed it is so: and almost all
things in the world do testify that it is so. The Stars move against the
swift firmament: the elements of contrary qualities strive one against
another: the earth trembles, the seas flow, the land shakes, the fires
crackle, and the winds be at perpetual conflict among themselves: on time
contendeth against another time, every thing against another thing, and all
things against us: the Spring is moist, the Summer dry, Harvest pleasant, and
Winter sharp: and this which is called change and alteration, is in very
deed, strife and disagreement. These things therefore upon which we dwell, by
which we live and are nourished, which flatter us with so many enticements,
notwithstanding how terrible they are, when they begin once to be angry, the
earthquakes, and most vehement whirlewindes, shipwrackes, and burnings raging
upon the earth, or in the air, do sufficiently declare. With what violence
does haill fall? What force is there in storms and tempests? What rattling of
thunder, what rage of lightning, what fury and feruencie of the waves, what
bellowing of the Sea, what roaring of flooddes, what excursion of rivers, what
course, recourse, and concourse of clouds? The sea it self, besides the
manifest and forcible rage of winds, and secret swelling of the flooddes which
come by uncertain turns, has also certain and determined times of ebbes and
flooddes, in many other places, but most evidently in the West. Which thing,
whilst the secret cause of the manifest motion is sought after, has raised no
less contention in the scooles of the Philosophers, than in the sea, of the
floodes. Yea, moreover, there is no living creature without war: Fishes,
wild beasts, fowls, serpents, men: one kind of these persecuteth another,
none of these are at quiet. The Lion follows the woolfe, the woolfe the
dog, the dog the Hare, with unquenchable hatred. There is also a more
courageous kind of dogs, which uses not only to fight with woolfes, but
also to hunt Lions, Leopardes, wild Bores, and such like cruel beasts. And
of certain, their courage is so noble and valiant, and their stomach so
haughty, that they contemn Bears and wild Bores, and vouchsafe to set upon
only Elephantes and Lions. The like whereof, there was one sent unto king
Alexander, and for that he contemned such small game, and his other qualities
not being known, was therefore not regarded, but, as we read, slain at his
commandment. Then was there afterward another sent unto him, who proved
accordingly, whom the King loved entierlie, and took exceeding delight in
him. But touching the love of dogs toward men, unto whom they are reported
to be most friendly, yet how great their love is in deed, unless hope of
vittailes do get their goodwill, besides their biting and unspeakable barking,
not only the fable of Acteon, but Euripides also, truly proves their
tearing and renting of men in pieces. The subtlety of the Fox, among many
other beasts, is notable. Certain fishermen, carrying fish to the town, to
the market, which in the summer time most willingly they do by night, upon a
time found a fox lying in the high way, as if she had been dead: whom they
taking up, meaning to uncase her at their leisure, to save the skin, threw her
upon their rippes. Then the fox filling her belly with the fish, suddenly
lept away: and so to their great wonder and indignation, escaped them. How
many other sleightes of Foxes are there? what howling of wolves? what barking
about the staules of cattle? what watching of crows and kites about pigeon
houses, and broodes of chickens? what natural and everlasting hatred between
them, as some do report? The one goes into the others nest, and there breaking
the eggs, destroieth the hope of their brood. As for the Cuckowe, he has not
only one or two enemies, but all birds, in a manner, insult over him, as
being a fugitive, and always complaining. Moreover, what continual wait do
the Weesels lay for the Aspes to entrap them? what assault of thieves is there
against the privy chambers and closets of rich men? what great watching and
warding is there in every several kind, how great and diligent contention?
who is able to declare the manifold labors and watchings of hunters, and
haukers, their crafts and ginnes to take beasts and fowls, and of fishers,
their hooks and nets to take fishes? or on the other side the subteltie of
the wild beasts, fowls, and fish? Al which things, what are they other than
the instruments of contention? Moreover, what stinges are there in waspes and
hornettes? and what battles and conflictes are there between these plagues
and the poor neat? Neither are the dogs, or horses, or other kinds of
four footed beasts at any more peace and quietness. What troubles have they
with flies in the summer time, and how are they molested with snow in the
winter, which some in jest do term, the white flies? what continual
unquietness is there among rattes, what insult of fleas by night, what
contention of gnattes by day, what battles between the storckes and the
snakes and frogs, what wars between the Pigmeis and the Cranes? What
strange and wonderful conflictes does the greedy thirst or desire of gold
raise up between the people Arimaspi, and the Gryphes? So that it is not easy
to judge whose wickedness is the greater, but that the one endeavor to steal,
the other to keep: the one are pricked forth by covetousness, the other by
nature. The like desire to keep and steal, I find likewise in the farthest
parts of the world among the Indians: whilst certain Emotes, of incredible
bigness, and wonderful cruelty, do semblably defend their gold against the
like covetousness of that nation. The Basiliske fraieth all other serpents
with his hissing, drives them away with his presence, and kills them with
his look. The Dragon encloseth the Elephant within the foldes and windinges of
his body: for they are doubtful and uncertain. Whereby it comes to pass,
that there is natural enmity between living things, as thirsting after warm
blood in summer, which some do write of, and the end of the battle makes it
credible enough, if it be true, that the one does die dry and without blood,
and the other having sucked the blood of his slain enemy, like as a
conqueror in the battle, yet being him self overcome with his deintie
delicates, and burst in sunder with over much drinking of blood, falls down
dead in the same place. Many other things likewise there be, that do grieve
and offend this kind of beast, as the most sharp pain after the drinking of
an horsleech, and the most fearful seeing or hearing of a silly mouse. It is
a strange case, that so great a beast, and of so huge strength, should so much
abhor the sight of so small an enemy. But thus dame Nature has created
nothing without strife and offense. The Lion him self, being a courageous and
valiant beast, and contemning all weapons for the defense of his young ones, yet
dares not behold the turning, nor hear the rattling of running wheels, or
empty carts and wagons: and moreover, whereat a man may the more wonder, he
cannot abide the sight of the cocks comb, and much less his noyce and
crowing, but above all things, it is said, that he cannot away with the
crackling of flaming fire. This strife therefore has this beast proper unto
him self, besides hunting, which is common unto all wild beasts. Tygres also
have their contention, who by wit and subtlety do hinder and frustrate the
policies and purposes of their enemies that come to steal their whelps, and
run away. As for the she woolues, they be ever at strife with hunger,
husbandemen, and shepheardes, I speak now of venomous, and wild beasts. But
at what quietness are the tame flocks of cattle? with what force, and malice
do the hogs contend among themselves? How do the leaders of the heardes
lie together by the ears? What bickerments are there between them? what
flights? what pride is there in the conqueror? what sorrow in him that is
conquered? what remembrance of injuries? what return to revenge? Who marketh
not in reading, how the warlike bulls, and the buck goats that fight with
their horns, have exercised the wits of the Poets? What shall I say of other
things? They have all one cause of disagreement: every thing depends upon
contention. When was it seen, that a strange horse coming to a new stable,
or a strange colte turned into an unaccustomed pasture, could eat his meat in
quietness? Who has not observed, that during the time that the hen sits,
the heat is great, and the hartburning exceeding in so little a family?
although this also be common unto all fowls. There is no living creature so
gentle, whom the love of his young does not exasperate. The roust cocks
wound one another with their spurs, and by nature and desire of blood,
pluck each other by the comb in their fight, with all the force of their
body: so much envy, so much pride reigns in their hearts, such is their
desire to conquer, such is their shame to yield. Who sees not the
stubburnesse of the Duckes and Geese, how they thrust each other with their
breasts, chide their adversary with their gagling, beat him with their
wings, and hang together by their bills? And as for the wild kinds, it is
less marvel in them for it i^ a common and usual thing among them, that the
bigger fowls be a destruction and sepulcher to the lesser. The wild beast a
wild beast, the foul a foul, the fish a fish, and one worm deuoureth
another: yea, the land fowls, and four footed water beasts do search,
turmoile and ransacke the sea, rivers, lakes and flooddes: so that of all
things the water seems unto me to be most troublesome, both in respect of it
own moving, and the continual tumultes of the inhabitants thereof, as being
a thing most fruitful of new creatures and strange monsters, whereof there is
doubt, insomuch that in this point the learned do not reject the opinion of the
common people, that look what ever creatures there be upon the land or in the
air, the like in form there are within the waters, forasmucch as there are
innumerable sorts of such whereof the air and earth have not the like: among
all which, in a manner, either pray, or hatred breeds contention. Yea,
moreover, though these cease, yet disagreement cease not. For let us see what
hartburning there is in love, what disagreement in marriage, how many
complaints, what suspicion among lovers, what sighs, what pains, what
contention between masters and servants, who are nothing the less enemies
one to another, for that they are household foes, between whom there is never
any peace to be hoped for, but that which is procured either by death or
poverty. I will not speak of contention between brethren, whose agreement to
be very rare, the truth it self witnesses by the mouth of that Famous Poet
Ovid: neither of the disagreement between parents and their children, whereof
the Poem of the same Poet makes mention: But as touching the love of parents,
whose good will is most tender toward their children, yet how great their
indignation is, it is evident, whilst they love them that are good, and lament
their case, that are evil: and thus in a manner they hate, while they love
heartily. And as touching the most near and dear band of the name of brother
and father, we see it sometime to be without love, and not seldom joined
with hatred. I will come to the holy name of friendship, which being called
in Latin Amicitia, is derived from the word Amo, which signifies to Love, so
that it can neither consist, neither be understood without love. Now, among
friends, although there be agreement in the words and ends, yet in the way,
and in their acts, what disagreement and contrariety of opinions and counsels
is there? so that Ciceroes diffinition can scarce stand upright. For, admit
there be good will and love between friends, notwithstanding the consent of
all divine and humane things, wherewith he makes his diffinition complete, is
wanting. What then shall a man hope for in hatred? For there is hatred in love,
and war in peace, and agreement in discention, which I will prove to be so,
by those things which are daily before our eyes. Behold the wild beasts, who
being invincible by the sword, are tamed by almighty love. Incline thy mind,
and mark with what noise and murmr the she Lions, Tygres, and she Bears
do come unto that, which of them selves they do most willingly, and thou will
think that they do it not with desire, but by compulsion. Some wild beasts,
while they engender, do make a great noise and schritching, and some keep a
stir with their swift and sharp talantes. Now, if we will give credit unto
that, which certain great men do write of the nature of the viper, how much
contrariety is there, how great discord, when as the male viper upon an
unbridled (howbeit natural) sweetness and pleasure, puts his head into the
femal vipers mouth, then she being provoked with a furious heat of lust, biteth
it of? But when this widow viper, being by this means brought great with
young, approaches unto the time of her delivery, by the multitude of her
heavy young ones, which now make haste to come forth, as it were to revenge
their fathers death, is by them torn in pieces. Thus the first coupling of
these two worms, as well by their generation, as bringing forth of young, is
unfortunate unto the whole kind, and is found to be pestiferous and deadly:
whilst the engendring slays the male vipers, and the bringing forth, the
female. Consider the orders of Bees in their hiues, what thronging together,
what noise, what wars, not only with their neighbors, but among
themselves, what domestical conflictes and discensions is there among them?
Behold the neastes and houses of Pigeons, that most simple bird, and as some
write, that has no gall: with what battelles and disquietnesse, with what
clamor and outcries, I pray you, do they pass forth their life? thou
would think thou were in some barbarous and vninstructed camp, thou shall
perceive them to be so unquiet both day and night: I omit their invasions one
of another, yea that very pair that have severally coupled themselves in the
band of mutual society and pleasure, and for that cause are dedicated unto
Venus, with what complaints are they carried forth unto their desire? how
often does the cock go about the hen? and oftentimes the lover forcibly
persecuteth his lover with his wings and bill? I will refer thee unto the
most safest kind, whereof as the matter is not less, so is it also less
notorious, and less painful to be found. What craft and subtlety then,
what wakefull diligence does the spider use in taking of simple and poor flies
in her copwebbe? what nets does she set up for her deceit and rapine? what
the Moath over the cloth, what the rot over the poast, what the little worms,
which day and night not without weerisomnesse, and with a certain blunt and
hollow noise do fret through the bowelles of beams? especially of those in
felling whereof, the diligent observation of the Moon and seasons has not
been observed? Which common discommoditie, as it reigns our the smokie
cottagies of the simple husbandmen, so does it also over the golden pendents of
princes palaces, temples, churches, and altars: neither spares it also the
sacred richesse of Philosophers, the boordes of books, parchementes, and
papers. Whereunto also I will add this much, that unless there were provision
made by pitch and tar, and a little burning withal, many times it is the
cause of the danger of shipwreck, or of shipwreck it self: yea, they have
entered into the sea, and eaten through the plankes of ships, and have
procured great troubles to the unadvised. Again, what does the grassehopper
unto herbs, the caterpiller unto corn, or the wild geese to the ripe fruits
and grain, or the poor sparrowe, or the crane that translateth his dwelling,
and other importunate kinds of fowls? Whereof comes that saying of the Poet
Virgil in his Georgikes, whereat I was wont to meruel, but now I wonder
nothing at all, how fowls are fraide by noise making. For now unto him that
shall happen to dwell in any place in the country in Italy, this one thing
is begone to be one of the manifold summer anoyances. For so am I my self
continually troubled from morning to night with the falling of fowls, the
rattling of stones, and crying out of the husbandmen. Moreover, what does the
mildeawe to the vintage, the blast to the herbs, the canker to the leaves, and
the moule to the roots? To be short, the weeuill to the barnes and floores?
and the Emot which makes provision against old age come, as the Poet says,
what toil and unrest is there in that poor little creature, that whilst she
provides for her own winter, she troubles our summer? I should be very
slow to believe other herein, but I my self know by experience, with how much
not only weerisomnesse, but loss also, that dustie swarm, and which by their
hasty marching do evermore declare their fear, do not only spoil and
forrey the fields, but also cheastes, chambers, and storehouses. And therefore
I will now begin to believe, that in the Pisane co^fines there is a castle,
which unto them that sail upon the sea, seems to be not far of, that is
become desolate by means of swarms and abundance of Emotes. The like hereof
also is reported to have happened in the Vincentine confines. And I am of
opinion that it may be true in any of them both, or in any other place
whatsoever: it has so happened a late, that they have not only driven me out
of my country house, but well nigh out of my house in the city, insomuch that
I was feign to use the mean of fire and lime, and at last to run away. And
now I very well believe Apuleius, where he says, that there was a man eaten
by them, although there want of honey: Neither do I deny, but that I do
wonder, what should be the cause, that some have proposed the Emote to be the
pattern of carfulness: concerning which matter, some have made long
discourses, commending their sparingnes and industry. Well then, if all
carefulnes be commendable, perhaps this were a meet example for thieves,
and not for such as are willing to live upon their own, without doing injury
to an other. It is a careful creature in deed, no man can deny it, but
wicked, but unjust, living by rapine, industrious in nothing, but that which is
evil, serving to no good use, but bringing manifold discommodities and
wearisomues: why therefore they have proposed this example, and why they have
commended this little beast? Again I say, I marvel, especially when they might
have used the example of the Be, which is a most industrious and provident
beast, a creature that hurts none, but is profitable unto many, succouring it
self and others by it own natural art, and most noble travel. What should I
now speak of the hurtful plenty, and rank increase of branches and leaves
of trees, against which the wakeful husbandman gives his diligent attendance,
and lies in wait, being armed with his sharp nails, and the hedge brusher
with his crooked hook? what of the burres and briars, and the yearly return
of plants and roots, which minister perpetual matter of strife and toil? what
of the furious rage of shewres of rain, and heaps of snow, and biting of
frostes, and the sharpness and violence of ice, and the suddein violence of
flooddes, and the uncertain increases of streams, which many times shake whole
regions and great peoples: but especially the hedges and fences of the
husbandmen, who among so many mischiefs can scarce pass forth this earthly
life, wherein they are evermore bending down to the ground? And to say
somewhat concerning the discommodities and toils of the delicate and rich
sort: who has not endured the mighty conflictes of birds? Also the crying of
owls and schritches, and the bootlesse watching of dogs all night barking
against the Moon, and cattes making their meetings upon the tyles and tops
of houses, and the quiet silence disturbed with horrible outcries, and
troubling men with their hellishe clamor, and whatsoever else makes any
grievous noise in the dark? Whereunto may be added, the croaking of frogs
and toades in the night, and the lamenting and threatenings of the swallows in
the morning: so that a man would think that Itys and Tereus him self were
present. For as touching the quietness of birds by day, the squeeking
grasshoppers, the arrogant crows, and braying asses do disturb it, and the
bleating of cattle, and the bellowing of Oxen, and the vnwitten cackling of
hens without surceasing, who sell their small eggs for a great price. But
above al things, is either the crying of swine, or the common clamor and
laughter of fools, than which foolish thing, there is nothing more foolish, as
says Catullus: and the singing and merimentes of drunkardes, than which
nothing is more grievous: and the complaints of such as are at variance, and
the iangling and scoulding of old wives: and sometime the battailles, some
time the lamentation of children: and of weddings, either their unquiet
feasts, or their daunsings: and the merry mournings of wives, who by craft do
seem to lament the death of their husbands: and the unfeigned howlings of
parents at the decease of their children: add hereunto the thronging and
noise of the court of judgment, the altercations of Merchants, and such as
buie and sell, at one side the small regard, on the other side the oaths of
the sellers. Adioine hereunto the sorrowful singing of the workmen to aswage
their painful travel: at the on side the unpleasant Music of such as beat
and toose wool, and break it small with the teeth of the cards: on the other
side, the hollow breathing of the smithes bellows, and the sharp sound of
their ha^mers: whereunto may be added the winter night, which with these travels
is divided into equal parts, so that there is no time free from unquietness
and strife. And to touch some deal the kind of things insensible, what has
the loadstone to do with iron, or the diamond with the loadstone, the cause of
whose disagreement, though it be secret, yet is their disagreement manifest.
For the loadstone draws iron, but lay a Diamond by it, and it will leave to
draw, or let go hold, if it drew before. The virtue in them both is
wonderful, either in that Nature has given, as it were, hands and hooked
nails unto an heavy and euilfauoured stone against a rough and stubburne
metal, or whether she take them away unto her self by means of the other
stone that lies by, which is not the end of the first strife, but rather a
new strife. Howbeit, many deny this last thing to be true, and as for me,
hitherto I have wanted occasion and will to make experiment or proof thereof:
and therefore I can affirm nothing. But as for the first, it is so well
known, that there is no need to prove or auow it. Howbeit, having undertaken
a great work, with a mighty courage, in to short a time, and to narrow a
space, I do now easily perceive that I carry a greater desire than strength
to the accomplishing thereof. Neither were it an easy matter for me or any man
else that should take this matter in hand, sufficiently to discourse upon
every point, whereby it may appear, that al things consist by disagreement,
which whether they be great or small, are very wonderful and strange:
although I have not yet touched that which is greatest, and to be accounted the
most marvelous from the highest to the lowest of all Natures miracles: but I
will now touch it in few words. The Echinus, being but a small fish of
half a foot long, stays a ship, be it never so great, when it is under
sail upon the Sea, or driven forth by oars, being only able (of all
fisshes) to quail the force of the elements and men, by none other means
than by cleaving to the timber of the ship, by none endeavor or strength in
the world, but only by nature. Which thing, although it be written in the
works of learned and famous authors, yet should it be counted in the number
of things incredible, if so be perhaps it were written of the Indian, or
Scythian Ocean, and had not rather happened that in our seas this wonder had
bin known to the Roman Emperors. The cause of the stay was found by this
means, in that when an whole fleet of ships was setting forth, one of them
stood still, as if she had lien at anchor, not stirring a whit out of her place.
Then some that were expert, being let down into the sea, easily perceived
the truth, and there was found cleaving fast to the bottom of the rudder, a
little fish, like a snaile, which was brought away, and presented to the
prince, who disdained that so little a creature should be of so great power,
but specially wondered at this one thing, that when it was received into the
ship, it had no longer power to work that effect, which it did when it
cleaued to the outside. But as touching that other kind of strange thing,
truly I had rather keep silence, than absolutely to auerre it, the fame
whereof I know not how true it is, but surely it is new, and for that cause
the more to be doubted of. The thing is this: That about the Indian sea, there
is a certain bird of an incredible bigness, whom our countriemen call a
Roche, which is able and accustomed to take up, not only a man, but also an
whole ship in her beak, and to fly away with it into the clouds, and so
procures a terrible death to the wretched people hanging in the air. See
therefore how great the force of covetousness is, which not being able to
deter the followers thereof from sailing, neither by many other perilles,
neither by this most cruel danger, makes them a pray, that are so greedy of
pray. And now also to bring some invisible things to my purpose, in what
commixtion of contraries consists wished temperature, among which there is a
conioyning of repugnant co^traries for the bringing forth of the middle
virtue: By means of which differences, and by what disagreement of voices do
men atteine unto true Musical concord? Finally, examine whatsoever there is,
run through in thy mind all the heaven, the earth, the sea: there is like
contention in the top of the sky and the bottom of the sea, and there is
strife in the deep riftes of the earth, as well as in the woddes and fields,
and as well is there perpetual disagreement in the deserts of sands, as in
the streets of cities. And now lest through variety of matter I wander from
my purpose, I say nothing that at the very beginning of the world, there was a
battle fought in the highest of heaven, between the ethereal spirits: and
some are of opinion also, that they fight yet at this day, in this region of
the dark and mistie air. I say nothing, how that in the same heavenly
conflict, the angels that were vanquished, being now become inferior to
their conquerours, whilst they endeavor to be revenged upon us mortal men
that inhabit the earth, they have procured unto us an immortal war of
sundry temptations, with an hard and doubtful business. And, that I may
gather together into one sum, al things whatsoever, having sense, or without
sense, from the uppermost top of heaven, as I have said, unto the lowermost
center of the earth, and from the chiefest angel, to the basest and least
worm, I omit to speak, how there is continual and everlasting strife
between them. Man him self, the lord and governor of all living creatures,
who, only by the rule of reason, seems able to guide in tranquillity this
course of life, and this swelling and troublesome sea, with what continual
strife is he tossed, not only with other things, but also with him self,
whereof I will speak anon? But now I will entreat of the first: for there is no
mischief that one man works not against another, to admit that all other
harms, by what means soever they happen, whether by nature, or fortune, yet,
being compared with these, do seem but light discommodities. Which, if I would
discipher at large, which I would not willingly do, and it is far from my
purpose, both all the whole scene of humane actions were to be opened, and all the history of life to be perused. But it shall be sufficient for me to say thus
much: for if there had been never any other wars in all the world, but the
wars of the Romans, there had bin wars and strife enough. Add moreover
the disagrement of opinions, and the indissoluble knottes and intrications of
matters: who is able to reckon up the variety of sects, or contention of
Philosophers. The wars of kings and nations are at rest, but the Philosophers
are not at agreement, and they contend about a matter, that when it begins
to be the ones, it surceasseth to be the others. These men contend for the
truth, which every one of them cannot have on his side, and this strife
neither could the majesty of the purchased verity, neither Carneades the
Academike, a careful seeker after the Philosophical quietness, though in
vain, ever be able to appease. Insomuch that Anneus Seneca seems unto me,
not unfitly to have written, where he co^pareth the clocks and dials with
Philosophers, for the like discord that is found among the^. Which, how true
it is, whosoever applies his mind to Philosophers, and his ears to the
clocks, may well perceive: neither is the doctrine of other Artisants in more
tranquillity. what co^tentions are there among Gra^marians not yet decided?
what co^flicts among Rhetoricians? what alterations among Logicians? Finally,
what discord in all arts? what clamor among Lawiers? who, how well they agree,
the co^tinua^ce of their causes does show. Of the agreement of Physicians, let
their patients be judge. For, that life which they have pronounced to be
short, by their contentions they have made most short. Moreover, what
deformity and what disagreement of opinions is there in the holy rites of the
Church and Religion, not so much in the words of the learned, as in the
weapons of the armed, and more often tried in the field, than discussed in the
scooles? Thus, being but one truth, in all matters, unto which as says
Aristotle, al things are agreeable: yet the opinion of them is very dissonant
and contrary, that it troubles the professors of the truth. What shall I say
of the common life and affairs of men? That there are scarce two in a city
that do agree, both many things else, but especially the great diversity of
their houses and apparel, does declare. For whosoever succeeded any man in
an house, were he never so rich and good an husband, that has not
nevertheless changed many things in it? so that look what one man had a
desire to build, another has a pleasure to pluck down: witness hereof may
be, the often changing of windows, damming up of doors, and the skarres, and
new reparations that are done in old walls. Neither is this true in other
things only, but we suffer it also in our own, whilst every man's opinion
and judgment is contrary to him self, according to the saying of Horace the
Poet, He plucketh down, and builds up, and changes that which was square,
into round. By which it may more manifestly appear, which of us it is than
can agree with another man, or with him self. Now the manner and fashion of
our apparel, continues three whole days in our cities: and likewise the
acts and laws of certain Municipies or freedoms have been such, and of so
small continuance, that they have perished with their authors. Again, what
disagreement and contrariety is there among Captains about ordering a
battle, and among Magistrates for making of laws, and among sailors for
counsel, and taking aduisement? And as for this that I spoke of last, I have
learned to be true many times to my great danger, whilst the sea and heaven
threatening death, the dark night and clouds ouerspreding the land and
stars of the sky, the ship leaking and half full of water, the sailors in
the most danger and midst of death, fell most obstinately at contention with
contrary endeavors and opinions. Add hereunto, the contention which is
without an adversary: what battails have Shriueners with parchment, with ink,
with pens, with paper? what, smithes with ha^mers, with tongues, with the
anduile? what, plowmen with their coulter, share, and the cloddes, furrows,
and the oxen themselves? what, the soldiers, I say not with their enemy, but
with their own horses and armor, when as the horses rebel and wax
obstinate, and their armor troubles them and wayeth them down? what
business have they that speak, and those that write at the mouth of another,
whilst earnest intention constrains the one to speak many things
imperfect, and on the one side ignorance and unskillfulness, at the other side a
flitting and unconstant wit, always thinking on some thing else than it has
in hand, hinders them to conceive the things that are perfect? But what speak
I of every several thing? There is no handicrast that is void of all
difficulties. As for all other, as they have some known sweetness, so have
they also great store of secret bitterness: and of all the things that do
delight, there is none without strife. Now, what conflictes have infantes with
falls? what contention have children with their books and learning, most
sowerly sowing that, which they shall reap most sweetly? Moreover, what
strife have young men with pleasures? yea, I will speak more truly, what
wars have they with themselves, and what contention is there among their
affections? There is altogether no strife with pleasures, but a consent and
agreement, which is worse than any contention. I suppose and speak upon
experience, that there is no kind of men, nor age that tastes more strife, or
that sustaineth more inextricable and painful trouble, no kind of men that
seem more merry, and none in deed more miserable and sorrowful. And lastly,
in what difficulty and great danger are women in their child bearing? What
contention and wreastling have men continually with poverty and ambition?
what great carking for more than is needful for living? And finally, what
everlasting war have old men with old age and sicknesses when death draws
nigh, and all other things and persons with death also, and that which is more
grievous than death it self, with the continual fear of death? I might
dilate this discourse with a thousand arguments of sundry matters: but if, as
it was thy pleasure in the first book, thou will now likewise have this
epistle to stand in the stead of a preface, and to be part of this book, I
well perceive now how much this preface exceeds the measure of the book:
and therefore my curiosity is to be bridled, and still to be stayed. And
therefore to conclude, all things, but specially the whole life of man, is a
certain kind of contention and strife. But in the mean while, omitting this
external strife, whereof we entreated erewhile, which I would God it were
less, and therefore less known to all men: how great is the internal
contention, not only against an other, but as I have said, against our own
kind, not against an other particular person, but against our self, and that
in this bodily outward covering, which is the most vile and base part of our
selves? and every one has continual war with him self in the most secret
closet of his mind. For as touching this our body, with how contrary humors
it abounds and is troubled, enquire of those that are called natural
Philosophers: but with how diverse and contrary affections the mind strives
against it self, let every one enquire of none other than him self, and
answer him self, with how variable and uncertain motion of mind he is
drawn sometime one way, some time an other: he is never whole, nor never one
man, but always dissenting and divided in himself. For, to speak nothing of
other motions, to will, to nill, to love, to hate, to flatter, to threaten, to
mock, to deceive, to feign, to jest, to weep, to pity, to spare, to be
angry, to be pleased, to slide, to be cast down, to be advanced, to
stumble, to stand up, to go forward, to turn back, to begin, to leave of,
to doubt, to err, to be deceived, to be ignorant, to learn, to forget, to
remember, to envy, to contemn, to wonder, to loath, to despise, and to have
in admiration, and such like, than which truly there can be nothing imagined
more uncertain, and with which the life of man ebbeth and flows vncerteinly,
from the beginning to the ending without intermission. For what tempests and
madness is there in these four passions, to wit, to hope or desire, and to
rejoice, to fear and to be sorry, which trouble the poor and miserable
mind, by driving him with sodeine winds and gales, in course far from the
haven into the mids of the dangerous rocks? Which passions, some one way, and
some another, yea diversely diverse have expressed in less than in an whole
verse. And as Saint Augustine writes, the Poet Virgil has comprised in a most
known verity: of which passions truly I am not ignorant, that more and less
may be said on both sides. As for me I have not much studied for shortness
nor copy, but I have set down in writing such matter as in order has offered
it self to me, out of the common course of man's life, that I might not werie
the Reader, either with scarcity or tediousness. And let not the name of
Fortune grieve thee, which is repeated not only in the superscriptions and
tytles, but also in the woork: For truly thou have often heard mine opinion,
concerning fortune. But when I foresawe that this Doctrine was most necessary,
specially for such as were not furnished with learning, I have used in their
behalf the common and known word, not being ignorant, what other men
generally, and most briefly. S. Hierome thinks of this matter, where he
says, that there is neither Fortune nor destiny, so that the common sort
shall acknowledge and perceive here their manner of speaking: as for the
learned, which are but scarce, they will understand what I mean, and shall not
be troubled with the usual word. Of the one part of this twoofold work,
concerning passions and fortune, we have said alredie, what we thought good,
and of the other we will now speak, what we shall see convenient.

Of deformity of the body. The first Dialogue.
Sorrow, and Reason. Sorrow. I Complain, that Nature has dealt very hardly
with me, in making me evil favored.


Reason. O how many fire brandes has she quenched? how many flames has
she repressed?


Sorrow. Nature has made me deformed.


Reason. She has not given thee that which might delight thee: if she have
given thee that which may profit thee, it is sufficient, and therefore leave
thy complaints.


Sorrow. Nature has not given me the grace of good favor.


Reason. She has given thee nothing that sickness might deface, and old age
take away: perhaps she has given thee that, which death it self dares not
touch.


Sorrow. Nature has denied me the favor of the body.


Reason. If she have given thee the good favor of the mind, thou art much
beholden to her: contemn that repulse with a valiant mind, and comfort the
offense of the looking glass, with the uprightness of thy conscience.


Sorrow. Nature has envied me the favor of the body.


Reason. She has not envied it thee, but she is ashamed to give thee that
which is daily diminished and wasted. True liberality is perceived by a
continuing gift. Rotten and transitory gifts covetous persons do give: good
favor, which is a frail and transitory gift of Nature, is given unto few
for their profit, unto many to their destruction, but unto none to their
safety and true glory.


Sorrow. Bodily favor is denied unto me.


Reason. Excellent favor of the body, and honesty, do very seldom dwell
together under one roof. It is well with thee, if the worse being excluded, thou
retein the better geast with thee.


Sorrow. I have no part of the comeliness of good favor.


Reason. Why art thou sorry for that, or, what holy or godly matter do thou
reuolue in thy mind? For what cause do thou think the good favor of the
body to be necessary for thee, or not rather altogether burdensome and
hindering? Good favor has made many adulterers, but none chaste: Many has
it led through the slipperinesse of pleasures unto an infamous death, who if
they had been evil favored, might have lived without shame and danger. What
say I many? Yea it has brought innumerable into trouble, but all welnigh into
blame.


Sorrow. Why has nature made me deformed?


Reason. To the end thou should adorn and make thy self well favored,
with that favor which may remain with thee in thine old age, in thy bed* in
thy beer, in thy grave: and that which may be thine own commendation, not the
praise of nature, nor of thy parents. It is more beautiful, to be made
beautiful, than so to be borne: For the one comes by chance, the other by
study.


Sorrow. Much deformity of body oppresses me.


Reason. This deformity of some is counted a part of unhappiness and misery,
Believe thou me, the mind is not defiled by deformity of the body, but the
body adorned by the beauty and favor of the mind. Then it is not this that
oppresses or dishonesteth thee, but it opens the way, and lays forth the
matter and mean to honest the mind, and to rise aloft through virtue.


Sorrow. Nature has brought me forth deformed into the world.


Reason. If she had brought forth Helen evil favored: or, to speak of Men,
if Paris had been borne without good favor, perhaps Troy had stood to this
day.


Sorrow. I complain that I was borne evil favored.


Reason. But few good men have loved the comeliness of the body, none have
desired it, many have rejected it: for doing of which, that Tuscane youth is
commended, who of his own accord mangled and defourmed the excellent beauty
of his well favored face, which he perceived to be suspected of many, and
enemy to his own good name, and hurtful to the honesty of other: far
unlike unto thee, who wishest for that, whereof he dispoiled him self, and
which few did ever enjoy without hurt.


Sorrow. I want good favor.


Reason. It is more safe to want that, by means whereof thou may often fall
into a doubtful and painful experiment of thy self. Comeliness and beauty
has hurt many, it ^^th troubled all, many a^^^r sundry conflictes it has
made effeminate, and made them easy to be overcome, and thrust them
ouerthwartlie into blame and reproof.


Sorrow. My stature is deformed, and to low.


Reason. This discommoditie is not, as thou supposest, to be complained of:
the low stature is more comely, light, and nimble.


Sorrow. My stature is very short.


Reason. Who can gainesay, that as a big man dwells in a little house, so
may a valiant courage in a small body?


Sorrow. My body is small.


Reason. Thou lamentest, for that thou art not a burden unto thy self, but
light, and dapper, and active unto all things.


Sorrow. My body is very small.


Reason. Who ever complained of a small burden? Thou have a just cause truly
to be sorry, for that thou art not oppressed with the greatness of the body,
but only have a body, neither art a burden to thy self, but an usual
necessary.


Sorrow. I am of a contemptible stature.


Reason. As nothing is glorious but virtue, so nothing is contemptible but
vice. Virtue respects no stature.


Sorrow. The stature of my body is small.


Reason. Virtue requires not the stature of the body, but of the mind. If
this be long, right, large, magnifical or comely, whatsoever the other be, it
skilleth not, not only not at home, but not so much as in the field at warfare,
unless it seem to be more hurtful. Thou know how the most noble captain
Marius, chose tough and strong (not tall) soldiers. Which thing how wisely,
and with how fortunate success he attempted, his often and great conquestes
do testify. As for the height and tallenesse of the body, it carries more
majesty with it, but less force.


Sorrow. My stature is short.


Reason. The same hinders thee not, but that thou may notwithstanding be a
good and valiant man: yea, if need were, and fortune so served, a King, or an
Emperor. For although that Scipio Africane were tall of body, and Julius
Caesar of a lofty stature, notwithstanding Alexander King of Macedonia, and
Augustus Caesar; ^ere but low, neither did their shortnessed (...) body
hinder their greatness of mind, nor de^^act any thing from their fame.


^^^owe. I would (...) ^^^r and greater.


Reason. Arise (...) ^^^e, and thou shall be greater, and ^a^^er. (...) more
profitable and easy increase.


Sorrow. I de^^e to be well favored.


Reason. Learn to love and wish for that, which is better. It is a foolish
part to love a man's own danger: and a folly to desire that, which by no
means can be gotten. For, if thou endeavor to be well favored contrary
to the course of Nature, thou shall profit no more, than to appear more
deformed.


Sorrow. I traueill in vain to be well favored.


Reason. Endeavor to be good, and that shall thou not do in vain. This
virtue has a special gift above the residue, that it may be gotten, and can
not be taken away. And when other things stand at the courtesy of Fortune,
and without her cannot be purchased, nor preserved: virtue only is free from
her laws, and the more she strives, the more brightlie she shines.


Of weakness. The ii. Dialogue.
Sorrow. NAture has made me weak.


Reason. Like as a sword of steel is covered in a rotten skaberd: so, many
times lies there hid a valiant mind in a crasie body.


Sorrow. I am borne weak.


Reason. Thou art not meet to bear burdens, nor to dig and plowe land, but
for honest studies, and just superiorities: So, in a ship, the stronger sort
are set to handle the axes, but the wiser to guide the helm. The life of Man
being like a ship that ^^^ossed with the flooddes of affairs, and the de^^^
Sea of the world, has it peculiar oars, and helm: then seeing thou art
repulsed from the viler functions, convert thy self to the more worthy.


Sorrow. Nature has made me a weakeling.


R^^son. What (...) ^^^ade thee passing strong? Is strength a thing tha^ (...):
Comes it not to pass, that the stronger the old age is, (...) stronger is
the sickness? And to let pass the innumerable chaun^^^h ^ich do sud^^^^ie
enfeeble and weaken an whole man: the strength of the ^^^nde is to be wished
for, which neither continuance, nor fortune can empaire.


Sorrow. My body is weak.


Reason. Nourish and exercise thy mind, in her arts which thou doubtest not
to be best, and of most continuance: as for the labor of the body, leave it
unto husbandmen, sailers, and smithes.


Sorrow. I had no strength from the beginning.


Reason. But it is more tolerable never to have had it, than to lose it: For
if thou had had strength, it would not have continued, insomuch as Miloes
strength waxed old, and so would Hercules have done if he had lived. But so did
not the strength of Socrates, nor of Solon, nor of Nestor, nor of Cato.
Exercise the better: Nothing can delight a great mind, that does not continue.


Sorrow. This poor carcass of mine is weak.


Reason. If this instrument or vessel be sufficient for the soul or mind that
dwells within, then is there strength enough: For that the body was by
Nature ordained to serve the mind, there is no man so much a servant to the
body that is ignorant, if so be it do it own duty: what do thou accuse,
or what do thou desire more? For they that are strong of body, and weak of
wit, are most like unto beasts, and many times, which is a miserable case,
are servants unto other: and many times also, which is most miserable, and
the very sum of humane misery, they enforce their mind to be slave to
their body, and to serve it in most filthy servitude.


Sorrow. I have a weak body.


Reason. The true and notable strength of Man, is in his mind: As for the
body, it is as a man should say, a certain house of the mind, which, how
strong or weak it is, apperteineth not to the geastes, especially like to
soiourne there but a few days, so that it fall not down: for then necessity
constreineth them to remove into another, which is an everlasting house, when
they are driven out of the first. I would say more, if thou could conceive
more, and were not altogether become deaf by the common noise, to wit, that
the body is not the house, but the prison of the mind, not his friend, but
his domestical foe, for whose frailty thou ought to pray, whereby thou
might the sooner be made free, and a conqueror.


Sorrow. I have no strength.


Reason. While thou art in health thou want none: but if thou be otherwise,
then have thou other cause to complain. Thou meanest not then that thou have
no strength at al, but thou would say, thou have little strength. Thou art
not as strong and sturdie, as was thy coequal, nor he, as was another, neither
that other as strong as an exe or an Elephant: there is a measure in every
man's strength: dame Nature has most bountifully distributed unto every one
that which is sufficient, and is more loving toward her children, than any
man is toward his own. Ye cannot complain of want, but ye complain of
inequality. You troublesome and complaining generation, if this should be
taken away, the beauty of the world must needs perish. Thus that which is
best, ye can least abide.


Of sickness, The iii. Dialogue.
Sorrow. But I am sickly.


Reason. I hear that which I look for, for these complaints go always
together. But if the flesh be enemy to the spirit, and one of them strive
against another, which thing the great friend of truth, having felt within
him self, has pronounced it truly in all men, it follows, that that which
hinders one, helps another. But if the spirit be better and more noble than
the flesh, which then we ought most specially to favor, thou see, and
perhaps understand thy state of body, which thou say to be feeble, to be
in deed most prosperous.


Sorrow. I am sickly.


Reason. But sparingnes is an earnest exhorter, and a dehorter from
licentiousness, and a mistress of modesty.


Sorrow. I am sick.


Reason. If thy bodily health be good, lay away carfulness, whatsoever
happens to the body, thou art in safety.


Sorrow. My body is sick and weak.


Reason. Sickness of the body, has been available unto the welfare of the
mind in many. That excellent man, who from a low degree, from the water, and
his fishing nets, was advanced to the skies, and made key keeper of the
gates of heaven, whose only shadow drove away the sicknesses and infirmities
of the body, being demanded sometime why he suffered his own daughter to be
molested with a grievous sickness, answered: It is profitable for her it be
so. How know thou then, whether it be also profitable for thee or not?


Sorrow. I have bin long thus sick in body.


Reason. The same man of whom I speak, knew that his daughter might soon and
safely be made whole, and he made her whole, and made her able also to heal
others. See thou likewise that thy health seem certain and undoubted unto
thee, and perhaps thou shall be healed. Finally, as much as in thee lies,
cure thou thine own soul, and commit the cure of him unto the heavenly
Physician. In sum, this one thing will I say boldly: If not for that which
shall delight, yet at leastwise hope for that which is expedient.


Sorrow. My bodily state is painful.


Reason. Then have thou that, which will drive away forgetfulness and sleep,
and expel slouthfulnes.


Sorrow. I am weak.


Reason. Boast in thine infirmities, and accomplish virtue: these two thou have
learned at the mouth of one and the self same master.


Sorrow. The state of my bodily health is miserable.


Reason. An unpleasant companion, but faithful, which will often put thee in
mind, poinct thee the way, and admonish thee of thine estate, and which is
best in dangers, a faithful admonisher.


Sorrow. The estate of my bodily health is extreme without remedy.


Reason. Hold thy peace and rejoice, that thou art enclosed in a ruinouse
prison, out of which thou may depart soon, and easily.


Of a base Country. The iiii. Dialogue.
Sorrow. I Dwell in a base country.


Reason. Be thou noble: for there is nothing lets thee, seeing thy countries
nobility has nothing to do with thine.


Sorrow. I dwell in a small city.


Reason. Great cities have also small citizens, and for the most part consist of
such: and small cities in times past, have had great citizens. Yea, Romulus,
that was laid forth and nourished in the woods, builded the city of Rome, that
was queen of all cities, which Catiline being borne in the same great city,
went about to overthrow.


Sorrow. I was borne in a small country.


Reason. Study thou to advance it: there is nothing that so much commends
cities, as the virtue and glory of the citizens, Who so thinks that this may
better be done by the building, or fruitfulnes, or riches, is deceived. As it
is in every particular man, so is it also in cities and kingdoms, and Empires,
whom not antiquity, not towers and walls, not streets, not palaces and
churches of marble, not statues, not gold, not precious stones, not ca^pes full
of armed garizo^s, and havens replenished with fleetes of ships, not martes and
pawnes stored with outlandish merchandise, and every sea round about cut and
turmoiled for desire of gain: lastly, not the beauty, or number of the
inhabitants, not the plenty of al things, and the markets flowing with meat,
not the sumptuous apparel of the men, and costly making and fashion thereof,
not stateliness, not delites, not pleasures, but virtue only makes noble,
and the fame of valiant exploites, which men do purchase, not walls.


Sorrow. I am a citizen of a small freedom.


Reason. Know thou not that Bias was a Prienian borne, Pythagoras a Samian,
Anacharsis a Scythian, Democritus an Abderite, Aristotle a Stagyrite,
Theophrastus a Lesbian, and Tullie an Arpinate? Chous, which is but a small
Island in the Egeum sea, brought forth Philitis, who was no base Poet, and also
the father of Physicians, and the primes of keruers and painters, namely,
Hippocrates, and Phidias and Apelles: that it may be understood, how that the
litlenesse and narrowness of places, is no hinderance to the greatness and
excellency of wits.


Sorrow. My country is unnoble.


Reason. Endeavor thou as much as in thee lies, to make it noble, which thou
may do, if thou list, forasmuch as it cannot make thee noble. For the
baseness of their country was neither a bar unto Numa Pompilius, to keep
him from the Roman kingdom, neither Septimus Seuerus from the Empire.
Although Augustus, the most excellent of all men, came of later time of a
Roman generation, for that he was borne in the palace, notwithstanding the
more ancient descent his family was from the city Velitrae. Caius country
was Anthium, and Vespasians Reatinu^, an obscure village. But contrariwise,
Achilles aduau^ced the Lacissean fame: And the Pelean name, which had been base
and obscure many hundred years before, which was renowned by Philip, Alexander
advanced to the skies. It is not enough that the obscurenesse of the country
hurt not the inhabitants, unless the worthiness of the inhabitants do good
to the country. Rome was a base sanctuary, and a thing builded by
shepheardes, and never became famous, until it began to be renowned for
valiant exploites, and excellent virtue of the citizens.


Sorrow. I am bound to an obscure country.


Reason. Lighten the candle of virtue, whereby thou may shine in the dark,
wherein at the lestwise thou shall gain this commodity, that at lestwise thou
shall shine very much with a small light, and so shall it either make thee
noble, or thou it.


Sorrow. I dwell in a base country.


Reason. Be thou likewise lowly and humble, and let the mind that dwells
within thee, be lowly. Thou have an example of a public mother, extend not
thy self broader in thy nest, than by those wings which virtue has given
thee: These it is lawful for thee to use, and that many have used them with
good success, I declared erewhile. And therefore so long as thou shall be a
mortal man, at leastwise hold fast this bridle of insolency. Some men are
proud only upon the nobility of their native country: but those are a
foolish kind of people.


Of baseness of stock. The v. Dialogue.
Sorrow. I Am borne of base and obscure parents.


Reason. Thy state perhaps is not so odious, as thou supposest: I cannot tell
whether it were a wished matter to be borne obscure: consider thou bath ways
of life. For whether thou determine to follow pleasures, and the common way,
which the vulgar sort do ensue, the error shall be the more excusable which
wants domestical leaders, and then shall cease that most bitter improprietie
of such as degenerate from their noble parents, in that thou have no nobility
at home which thou may make obscure. Or, if thou choose rather with singular
steps to follow the paths of virtue, thou shall by so much become the more
noble, the greater the darkness is, out of which thou art risen, wherewith
before thou were oppressed and compassed round about, and so the whole
nobility shall be thine, and there shall be none partaker thereof with thee.
Imitation shall take from thee no part of thy glory: thy parents shall
defraude thee of none, neither thy grandfathers nor great grandfathers, thy
counselors nor masters: whatsoever thou have done well, thou shall reap the
glory thereof alone, thou only shall be commended for it, and shall be
called the beginner and first founder of thy family, which could not be, if
thou were borne noble. Do thou see then what occasion thou have offered unto
the^^of new praise: to wit, to become noble of thy self, and to g^^e
nobility unto others, not to receive it? Thou shall purchase this unto thy
posterity, that they shall be borne noble, which thy parents gave not unto
thee. It is a great deal better to found nobility, than to find it founded
by others.


Sorrow. My beginning is new and rude.


Reason. Howbeit, that shepheardlie founder of the city of Rome was accounted
more noble, for that he builded his fort in the wooddes, and covered his small
and base palace with poor thatch, than so many princes and Emperors that
came afterward, and erected their huge city walls, their vautes and roughes
of their houses of marble and gold: so great always is the commendation of
famous newness, and a great beginning.


Sorrow. I am borne of a base beginning.


Reason. Study then, that thine end may be noble. About the beginnings is
travel, and in the end comes the fruit, which if it be gathered before it
be ripe, it cannot long continue.


Sorrow. Vnnoblenesse has cut of the root of my glory.


Reason. Nay, it has not cut it of, but it has dug it deeper about, that
it may rise more strongly, though more lately, Howbeit, I can recite unto thee
out of all sorts of men, some not unnoble only, but unknown also, who
through virtue and diligence became most noble. And truly if virtue make a
man noble in deed, I do not perceive what should let any man that is
willing to be made noble, or what thing is so easy to make other noble, as to
make a man's self so.


Sorrow. I descend from unnoble parents.


Reason. What say thou to Socrates, Euripides, Demosthenes? Whereof the first
had a Marbler to his father, the second a midwife to his Mother: the last was
not only borne of base parents, but also of uncertain. As for your countreiman
Virgill, he descended of rude and homely parents of the Country: neither was
Horace ashamed that his father had bin sometime a bondsman, and was made free,
and also a common crier: notwithstanding they came both unto great glory, and
obtained the favor of a great Emperor, in such sort, that he unto whom all
Kings had submitted them selves, at whose hands all great things were sued
for, and from whom the hope of all men, in a manner, throughout the whole
world, but specially of the nobility, did depend, and finally, whose familiare
acquaintance was reputed a great matter, yea among the greatest men, even he, I
say, would require in sweet and flattring Epistles, as if it had bin some great
matter, the friendeship and company of these two unnoble persons, whom the
Mantuan and Venusine Countries had sent to Rome. And how many noble men were
there, as we may judge, at that time in the Palace (as for the most part there
were plenty, that were unprofitable and unlearned,) unto whom the nobility of
these noble men did not seem woorthily unnoble and to be envied at?


Sorrow. I come of obscure parents.


Reason. These examples move not thy mind: I will therefore use higher.
Marcus Cicero, as it is written of him, being borne of the family and race of
knights, from a low beginning by notable acts and honest degrees, came to
the Consulship, the^ whose time of Consulship, I can not tell whether there
were ever any more profitable to the common wealth.


Sorrow. I come of a rustike and unknown race of ancestors.


Reason. These are little worth I perceive: thou aspirest now higher. Truly
Marius was also a rusticane of the country, but a man in deed, as says his
countrieman Cicero, and had bin of long time an husbandman among the people
called Marsi, who was afterward seven times Consul of Rome, with so great
glory, that his said countrieman, although he were his friend, said
truly, That he twice delivered Italy from besieging, and fear of
servitude. And Marcus Cato, a man of mean beginning, being long time an
obscu^e inhabitant of a small Town, and afterward a most famous stranger in
the greatest City, shortly after, of an excellent citizen, was made Consul
and Censor. But if this be not enough, and perhaps thou hopest for a
kingdom: truly, neither does the baseness of a man's beginning forbid him
to hope for the same by sentence of desert: Herein call to remembrance the
third, and the fifth, and the sixth of the Roman Kings. Tullus Hostilius, as
approved authors do write, although other some do report no such matter of
him, being an infant, was brought up in a poor cotrage, and in his youth
was a sheephearde. Tarquinius Priscus had to father a stranger Merchant,
neither came of any Italian family. Seruius Tullus, was borne of a servile or
bond woman, although as some say, she was a captive, and as other affirm, a
noble woman, and by means of his virtue, deserved the kingdom of Rome.
Neither will thou marvel, if thou vnderstoodest the saying of Plato: That
there is no King, but he came of bond men, and no bondemen, but he descended
of kings. Thus the affairs of men, and thus long continuance and Fortune has
confounded all things. I say nothing of the kings of other Nations, and of
those, who from the flocks of cattle, and the exercise of most vile acts,
have been advanced sode inlie unto a kingdom. Alexander the king of Macedonie,
made a gardener a king in Asia: and this was not one of the least commendable
acts which he did. And on the other side, I say nothing of them that have
fallen from the top of a kingdom unto the bottom of servitude. Thus Fortune
governs her affairs, notwithstanding virtue may do much: for by her, men
rise safely unto the highest degrees, whose paths being forsaken, let princes
know, that they stand in tickle state, and that not only their decay is at
hand, but also their ruin.

What calamity then, that I may return again unto thee, of birth is this
from which neither hope of reigning, neither the effect is taken away?


Sorrow. I am sprung from a base root.


Reason. Every root is obscure and evil favored, from which nevertheless
fair and flourishing branches do spring forth: it is not so much demanded
from whence a thing comes, as what manner of thing it is.


Sorrow. I am descended of base parents.


Reason. I perceive that thou reuokest my style unto the highest empire.
Septimus Seuerus, of whom I spoke before, sprung from the degree of knights.
Helius Pertinax, being also the son of a bondsman made free, and a base
traficquer in the trade of buying and selling of wood, did both of them govern
the Roman Empire: as also did Philip the father and the son, being Arabians,
of very base condition and birth, and Maximinius and Maximus likewise, whereof
the first was borne of most obscure and barbarous parentage, and were both
ashamed when they had taken upon them the government of the Empire: and for
the latter, whether his father were a smith or a carpenter, it is uncertain.
Verily, Vespasian, who is reckoned among the good Emperors, from no noble
stock, becoming most noble, both governed the common wealth worthily, and
also left two sons behind him, one succeeding another, to be his successors
in the Empire, and the one of his virtue: howbeit, what do I stay upon these
small matters, since there is much ambiguitie about the original and birth of
Augustus Caesar him self? To be brief, certain it is, that the course of Man's
fortune, is not prevented by birth: a man may rise by any means, whether
Fortune reach him her hand, or virtue.


Sorrow. My stock is to low and base.


Reason. As much as concerns the degree of humane power, we have set down
examples, above which we cannot possibly go higher: yet there rests one, not
for kingdom or Empire, but in respect of another certain majesty, very
memorable. Ventidius Bassus, an Esculane, being borne of a base mother, and an
unknown father, his country being taken, and he a young man, was in the
triumph of Gneius Pompeius Strabo, who was father unto Pompeius the great,
brought away among other prisoners: the same man afterward, fortune chaungyng
her countenance, being made general over the people of Rome, fought with most
prosperous success, against the Parthian King, that was become proud by
reason of his ancient power and late conquest, and having slain the Kings
son, and discomfited the power of the enemy, which thing the destinies had
granted before that time unto none of the Roman captains, taking revenge on
that famous slaughter of the Romans, and most magnificently requiting the death
of the Crassi, him self being a conqueror and triumphing, beautified that
Capitol with his own charrets, wherein being a captive, he had sometime
furnished the triumphant charrets of another, and filled the Roman prison with
the army of this captive enemies. And that this spectacle might be the more
acceptable, and the conquest more wonderful, it was gotten the same day, as
the course of the years came about, upon which the most terrible slaughter was
received at Carras. Who is so ambitious, and greedy of a kingdom, that he had
not rather have this glory without a kingdom, then a kingdom without this
glory? And what, I pray thee, hyndred Ventidius from atteynyng to felicity and
great honor, although he were borne of base stock, and in the first part of
his life were at low ebb, and in misery? Truly that man whom Esculum did
contemn, Rome did regard, and matched that obscure name of a stranger with the
famous names of her noble Citizens. These are the steps to rise by, these are
the degrees unto virtue, whereby men are advanced, not only unto glory and
higher fortune, by endeavoring, hopyng, watchyng, but also enthronized within
heaven. And therefore thou that art meanly borne, endeavor to rise, restyng
thy first and last step within the entry unto virtue, not declyning any
whyther, nor staying.


Sorrow. My beginning is low.


Reason. That is now past, think upon the things that do follow: neither
am I ignorant, that as the first and last days of a man's life have seemed unto
some principally to govern the state of humane affairs, or as they speak, to
comprehend and conteyne it: verily I will easily agree unto the first,
although unto the second I cannot so wyllyngly consent. For although, as they
affirm, it skilleth much, with what good luck a thing be begun: although
the Satiricke Poet thynking upon such matters, has thus written, whereas he
speaks of Ventidius: For it avails much, what constellation receive a man
when he begins to yield forth his first noise, and comes away read from
his mothers womb. Notwithstanding we deny these things, and these prosperous
significations, and this so great force of the stars we renounce, ascribyng
all things unto the most glorious Creator of the stars, among whose
creatures we seclude none from this path of virtue, felicity, and glory.


Sorrow. The baseness of my stock is very great.


Reason. And what say thou to that? Would thou rather have thy pride be
much? Or what hereby dooest thou think to be wantyng unto thee, unless thou
would also feign declare thy madness, by the smoky images, and mangled
statues that must be erected in thy courts and galleryes, and as it were
charnell house of thy predecessors and family, standing full of rotten titles
for a gazing stock to them that shall pass by, whereby thou may fabulous^y
discourse with a proud look in the open streates, of those whom thou never
knew?


Sorrow. I am borne unnoble.


Reason. Not only to be borne unnoble, but so to live also, have seemed
felicity unto some. Have thou not read at leastwyse in the Tusculane which
Cicero has erected, the Anapaestus of the most mighty King, praysyng an old
man and calling him fortunate, in that he was ingloryous, and like to continue
unnoble and obscure unto his lives end?


Of a shameful birth. The vi. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY birth is not only base, but also shameful.


Reason. There is one only true and great shamefulnesse of the mind: if thou
take that away, all things are fair.


Sorrow. I am ill borne.


Reason. He that lives well, is borne well, and dies well: But he that lives
ill, cannot be well borne. For, what skylleth it in how bright a path a blind
man walk? Or what avails it from whence a man come, if he come into misery
and reproach?


Sorrow. I was borne in sin.


Reason. The most excellent man bewayleth this matter, and truly every man is
borne in syn. But beware that you heap not more grievous sins one upon
another, although there be also means to cleanse them: Howbeit that first
deformity many times at the first entrance into this life, is washed away in
the sacred fountain of Baptism, and the soul by clensyng made as white as
Snow.


Sorrow. My parents ill beget me.


Reason. What belongs it unto thee who have begotten well, so thou be well
borne, unless thou join thy wickedness unto the wickedness of another.


Sorrow. I am ashamed of my fylthy beginning.


Reason. Then do I not marueyle that you be proud of that which is another,
and also that you be ashamed of that which is not your own: and generally ye
repose your good and evil things in any place or person, rather then in your
selves, which notwithstanding can be in none other then your selves. And
unless thou thy self have committed some vile and shameful deed, what fault
is there in thee, or what rebuke, to have hand a dishonest father? Beware
then, that thou be not heir unto thy father in his lewdness, but study in
that behalf to be far unlike him. He that begat thee, thou not being privy
thereof, could not imprynt his spots upon thee against thy will within
thee, and from thee it must needs come, that shall make thee obscure or noble.


Sorrow. I am borne into the world by dishonest parents.


Reason. All parents ought to seem honest unto their children, but as they
are to be feared, so are they not all to be followed of their children: for some
time I would give them counsel to forsake them. Thus must thou otherwhyle
take a contrary course, and if he be a natural father, he wylbe content to be
forsaken, and will desire to have him self loved, but not his faults. This is
only the devised way, by which to suppress and tread underfoot their
parents name is a glorious and honest deed in the children, to live otherwise
then they did, that is to say, more continently, and holyly. Let the chyldes
tongue conceal the parents dishonestie, let not his vnlykenesse of life,
manners, and deeds, be silent. It is a great commendation to the son, when
it shall be said behind his back, O how much is this young man more modest
then the old man his father: and contrarywyse, there is no blemysh more
grievous in the wantonness of old men, then to compare it with the continency
of youth. And truly, if the honor of the parents be burdensome to the
children that live ill, with how great a weight does the praise of the
chyldrens honesty, press down the infamy of the ill living parents?


Sorrow. I was begotten in unlawful and condemned lust.


Reason. But it were better for thee to have a desire to be, and so to be
reputed the honest son of an dishonest father, rather then the dishonest son
of an honest father. For in all praise or disprayse, those things are most
chiefly to be regarded, which are a man's own. There is no man justly reproved
or praised for that which is another: although as I have said, whatsoever is
in you, it will be the more evident, if it be set by his contrary. For, as
every one is worthyly praised or dispraysed, so is the very and proper cause of
praise or disprayse within himself. But as one man is slain with another
swoorde, and one man's goods burned by another man's fire, so happens it not
that one man's good name perishes by another man's fault, for that the goods of
the mind are more permanent then the goods of the body, or of fortune, so that
they cannot be hurt or taken away against the will of the owner.


Sorrow. I was begotten against right, and law.


Reason. Thou have done nothing against the law, but thy parents have, and
therefore henceforward do every thing according to the law. In this respect
thou have committed none offense at all concerning thy birth hour, but of
thine own manners thou thy self shall yield an account. And although in
revenge of wandering venerie the force of the ciuyl laws is extended unto the
innocent children, notwithstanding GOD measures every one within his own
bounds, neither imputes the chyldes offense unto the father, neither the
fathers unto the child. And that Philosophy judges otherwise of this matter
then do the laws, thou have learned of the Philosophers them selves. Being
then beaten down by the laws, and erected again by the judgment of GOD, and
the Philosophers, thou have wherewith to comfort thy mind: neither as thou art
restrained from a private patrimony, so art thou barred from the public
inheritance of virtue. For the one of these descends by the ordinance of
man, the other is given by desert: and before thou were borne, as thou
deseruedst no glory, so truly dyddest thou merit none infamy.


Sorrow. Mine Original is unlawful and incestous.


Reason. What may be borne of incest, or what of adultery, for proof be
Romulus and Alcides. Perses was King of Macedonie, and lugurtha King of
Numidia, and both of them expulsed their lawful brethren out of their
kingdoms, by evil usage, and most vile means, but they expulsed them
notwithstanding. Alexander King of Macedonie, that was called Philippes son,
yet whose in deed he was supposed to be, thou have heard, and also how
Philip, toward the latter end of his life, was wont sometime to say, that
Alexander was not his son. Which thing his wife Olympias of her own accord
confessed unto him, and for that cause he was divorced from her, as some
aucthours have written. Constantius him self, being borne of a noble
Concubyne, was advanced unto the Empire before his brethren that were lawfully
begotten. Unto these would I add King Arthure, unless that to myngle Fables
with Histories, were nothing else then to dimyshe the credit of the truth with
lies. To be short, there is no cause why thy birth should discourage thee:
Howesoeuer men are borne, if virtue advance them, they have glory yenough.


Sorrow. I am ill borne.


Reason. Live well, and dye well: howsoever thou were borne, it belongs not
to thee, neither can thou remember it: neither inquire much after that
which belongs not unto thee, unless it be to make thee more humble and
mecke, but not more sorrowful.


Sorrow. I was borne fylthyly.


Reason. Courteous behayour, and an honest life, do not only take away all
blemyshes, but all remembrance of a shameful birth. Use this remedy while thou
may, for believe me, thou have none other.


Sorrow. I am ashamed of my parents infamy.


Reason. Put away this shame, for there is one father of all men, which is
GOD: and one mother of all men, which is the earth.


Of Bondage. The vii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Entered a bondsman into this life.


Reason. Be not sorry, thou shall depart a free man, if thou wylt thy self, as
many have done, who contrarywyse have entered free, and departed bond.


Sorrow. I was seruylely borne.


Reason. Live freely, there is nothing lets thee, for the better part of
thee, to be free. There is one most grievous kind of bondage, which is sin,
that is not able notwithstanding to oppress men against their wylles: cast of
that, and thou shall be free.


Sorrow. Fortune would needs make me a bondsman.


Reason. Thine own will may make thee otherwise, for although she use her old
custom, nevertheless thou know what to hope for. Thou know what a
monster she is, thou know her toys and pastymes, it lies in thee not only
to become a free man, but also Lord over thy master: although what she will
or will not, it skylleth not, and albeit she be inexorable, as some time she
is, nevertheless she has no power over the mind: and in every conflict
against her, we must require aid of her enemy. Many times whom fortune has
made bond, virtue has made free.


Sorrow. I am oppressed with grievous servitude.


Reason. Who so wyllyngly bears the yoke, makes it light. I will tell thee a
special comfort and an everlasting stay, which when thou art exempted from
the controulement of thy mighty master, will make thee a free man, and rycher
then thy master him self: apply the study of wisdom, and she will set thee
at liberty. It is the saying of Cato, confyrmed by Cicero, That only the wise
man is free, namely, by that liberty, then which there is none more assured.


Sorrow. I lead my life under most hard masters.


Reason. They shall be made gentle by no means more, then by faythfulnesse and
diligence, and perhaps in such sort, which has happened unto many, that
therehence thou shall gain liberty, where now thou bewaylest thy bondage,
and peradventure by some other means, and from some other place. For some one
is made free by his temporal master, and some by the Eternal. Thou know,
with how great danger Malchus escaped the threatenings of his master that
persecuted him, but nevertheless he escaped him: In the mean while think
thus of thy master, that he maynteyneth thee, and has taken upon him all the
care over thee, which carfulness to leese a man's liberty, what is it to be
called other then a profitable discommoditie? Unto many, their liberty has
been bond, and their bondage free. The yoke of men is not so grievous, as the
yoke of cares: who so can shake of the one, may indifferently bear the other.
Unto this man art thou a servant, unto him art thou only bound, yea he is
bound unto thee, he is thy master, or rather thy steward. Thou shall not be
advanced unto public prefermentes, neither shall thou sustain public
charges, nor counterfeite a careful mind to the common wealth, thou shall not
be tossed with troubles and suites of Court and controversies, neither be
turmoyled with the vncertaynetie of aduisementes, and counselles: no slownesse
of saylyng, no barrenness of f^eides, no dearth of victualles shall molest
thee: These troubles leave unto thy master, and many times thou shall sleep
far more soundly then be.


Sorrow. I have a froward and imperious Lord.


Reason. Think with thy self, that he was allotted unto thee not without
cause. Therefore, whatsoever tust thing he commands, think that God him
self commands it. But if he command any unjust thing, it behooves thee
to think upon the great Lord, who as he suffers thee to be a servant unto
honest though painful affairs, so will he have thee be free from dishonest:
wherein this would I have thee to understand, that there is one that would
have the servants of the most glorious princes of the earth, and of the true
religion, to be obedient unto their carnal masters in all things: and another
that commands them to be subject unto them in all fear, adding this
moreover, that they yield it not only unto good and modest masters, but also
unto the wicked, for it is not meet for the servant to judge of his master,
but to bear with his manners whatsoever they be. For the more outrageous the
master is, the more appears the servants patience, and this is the cause,
that the one of them makes mention of this matter: but as they must suffer
their manners, so ought they not always obey their commandments. For there
are some things that may most justly be refused to be done, if they be
repugnant to the pleasure of the heavenly Lord and master: with whom if this
thine earthly master be compared, he is no longer thy master, but thy fellow
servant, and so ought to be reputed. Thus therefore, let servants obey their
masters in all things that they command that are just, let no pain nor
difficulty stay them, no labor hinder them, nor discourtesie nor reward
denied, or which is the most bitter thing of all, no punishment inflicted.
Let them obey them in all things, so that injury and dishonestie be away:
otherwise stubbornness and liberty, and the breast and throat must be set
against their unjust and dishonest commandments, and that must be kept in
remembrance, which another of the promysers says, who when he had
commanded that servants should obey their masters in all things, he
adds, Not seruyng to the eye as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart,
fearyng the Lord. Hereby thou see, what is the state of thy degree: he is
not altogether a servant, that cannot be compelled to obey wicked beheastes.


Sorrow. I serve a proud Lord.


Reason. How know thou whether he serve the highest Lord: Perhaps he is
servant to his wife, perhaps to his Harlot, perhaps to those that are under
his government: how many see we daily that are servants unto their
underlings: Last, which is the most grievous bondage of all, perhaps he is
servant to him self, that is to say, to his own vices, and passions, and
violent affections. What shall I say: In truth there are but few free, and
those that are free, the more paynefull their life is, the higher it is. It is
much more prompt and easy to accomplish the duty of a ryghteous king, then
of a faithful servant. It is an excellent saying of Diocletian while he was a
private person and judged of that which was past, and had learned much by
experience, That there is nothing more hard, then to govern an Empire: for
which it may be thought he refused longer to be Emperor. Therefore embrace
thou thy calling gladly, which I confess to be base and low, but easy and
quiet, unless thou think it an happier matter to stand panting in open
sight, then to lie and rest in a chamber.


Sorrow. My Fortune has enforced me into bondage.


Reason. Do that willingly, which thou must needs do: that counsel also
is well known, and most fyt for humane necessities, Desire that, which thou
must needs, and so thou shall frustrate the force of necessity: bear the
burden of Fortune patiently, which some have done of their own accord, and
have chosen to be bond them selves, to deliver other from bondage. Among
which sort, most famous is the name of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, whose
voluntary servitude, as it ought, had happy success. Certain have sold
them selves for a small price, to the intent that being made bond, they might
redeem their masters from the bands of sin, and bring them into true
liberty, for which deed one Serapion an Egyptian Eremite, is much renowned:
These examples shall do thee more good, then monynges. Attempt thou some such
like matter, by means whereof thy servitude may be profitable to others, or at
leastwyse to thy self. Not to wyshe for that which thou have not, but to use
well that which thou have, is the part of a wise man. The one of these happens
unto all men, the other but to few.


Sorrow. I being a mortal man, am servant to a mortal Master.


Reason. Begin to serve the immortal Lord: he promises thee liberty and a
kingdom, although also while thou continuest in this state, thou art not
restrained from exercising good arts, and hopyng for better: and Terence also
was a servant, and learned with no servile disposition, and wrote Comedies
with no servile style, whereby he deserved liberty, and to be numbered among
the chief Poets. By what means then is it possible, that service should be
any imped^ment unto virtue, which is an absolute good of the mind, since it
can neither hinder external studies, nor outward glory? Plato him self was
carried into bondage, and yet it is written, that the Philosopher was greater
then he that bought him: truly a worthy profession, that makes the servant
greater then his Master. And doubtless a learned servant, is in this respect
greater then his unlearned Master, by how much the mind is greater then any
Fortune: and many times a bond mind dwells in a free body, and a free
mind in a bond body. Bondage may be a let unto the affairs of the
judicial court, but not of the mind. The court refuses a servant: but
virtue, diligence, and trustiness do not refuse him. Tiro was servant unto
Cicero, but by this means obtaynyng his liberty, he left unto posterity an
excellent Book of his Masters iestes and merimentes. A servant can not be a
General of an Army, nor a Senator, but he may be a Philosopher, an Orator,
a good man, yea, and also some time castyng of his servitude, he may be a King
and an Emperor: and we have known some advanced from this degree, not only
to a Kyngdowe and Empire, but also unto Heaven it self. A bondsman can not
serve in warfare under man, but he may serve GOD, the wages of whose service in
warfare, is to reign. The servant of GOD is King over all men, fellow with
Angels, a terror to Deuylles. The servant of GOD may also be servant to
man: and thus worldly service is no hunderaunce to the heavenly felicity.


Sorrow. I am a Servant.


Reason. If thou have always been so, custom may assuage thy grief: If not,
hope that thou may one day not be that, which some time thou wast not.


Sorrow. I am a servant.


Reason. If thou hope for an end of thy misery, let thy hope diminishe thy
sorrow. But if thou despair, let patience mitigate it, and heap not one
mischief upon another, neither vex thy self to no purpose willingly and
wittingly, which were the greatest point of folly that is incident to the
life of man. But a man must not despair, for when all things be wantyng,
death will come at the length, who in despite of thy Master, will loose thee,
and set thee at liberty.


Of poverty. The.viii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am oppressed with poverty, that I can not rise.


Reason. Poverty has many times persuaded modesty to an unwilling mind, and
that which Philosophy has attempted in vain, this has brought to pass.


Sorrow. Poverty besieges mine entry.


Reason. She besieges it not, but keeps it, neither is this a strange and
vnaccustomable thing, for in times past she preserved the City of Rome many
hundred years. For among the tents of sober and careful poverty, flouthfull
wantonness, sluggyshe sleep, and weak and effeminate vices do enter.


Sorrow. Poverty has invaded my house.


Reason. I advertise thee to meet her willingly, receyuyng and embracyng her
with unfolded arms, and a cheareful countenance. And though at the first
encounter she appear some deal sharp and bitter, and not without cause to be
compared unto a wayfaryng man, and one that is armed at all points, for that
her coming is speedy and threatnyng: notwithstanding, when she is once
received into familiarity, she will be a gheast nothing sumptuous, but quiet
and gentle.


Sorrow. Poverty rappeth at my door.


Reason. Open then unto her speedily, before that by sudden force she break
the bars, and pluckyng the door from the hooks, she enter in like a
conqueror: For, as she is very grievous unto those that withstand her, so is
she very pleasant unto them that give her place.


Sorrow. Poverty has broken up my house.


Reason. She is a passing diligent watcher against Thieves, and Pleasures,
which are worse then thieves, against the girdes and absurd judgments of
the common people, and also against the infamy of covetousness or
prodigality, which seldom sits in any other place then the entries of the
rich: From these euylles can thy house by no means be better preserved, then
if poverty guard it. And even as if a man be frank, yet if he reserve any
thing to him self, he is commonly termed covetous: so if he be poor, he shall
be counted greedy to have. It is the manner of near neighbors to envy at
wealth, and to pity poverty. The one they desire and disprayse, the other
they commend and abhor.


Sorrow. Poverty has possessed my house.


Reason. Now shall there be no place with thee for pride, nor for envy, nor for
notable losses, nor for the fear of losses, nor for a thousand kinds of
suspicions, nor for deceit, nor for surfect and loathsomeness, nor for the
Gout that is a gheast among the rich: all which being shut out of doors,
rest, quietness, and virtue, shall have larger entertaynement with thee, who
shall have the more roomth, the less that thy wealth is.


Sorrow. Hard poverty has entered my house.


Reason. I know what thou meanest: riches should have entered more pleasantly,
but poverty more safely. There are no riches, before whom security is not to
be preferred. For when all things whatsoever men do or desire, are directed
unto felicity: surely it may consist without riches, but not without security.


Sorrow. I have been long time oppressed with importunate poverty.


Reason. As no importable thing can long be borne, so is there no short thing
difficult. But thou wylt say this is hard: examine it with riches, do thou
make more account of gold then of virtue? Have thou not learned among the
Paradoxes of the Sto^kes, That only a wise man is rich? Or perhaps have
thou read it, and not regarded it? Which thing most readers do, to the end
to talk more finely, not to live more virtuously, applying nothing unto
honesty, but referryng all to knowledge and eloquence, then which nothing is
more vain.


Of Damage sustained. The.ix. Dialogue.
SORROW. Cruel Fortune has bereft me of all my riches.


Reason. She has done thee no injury, for she has taken but her own: but
this is an ancient and common unthankfulness, to forget what was given you,
and to remember what is taken away. And therefore your thanks are few and
cold, and your complaints many and fervent.


Sorrow. Fierce Fortune has taken also away the things that are necessary for
living.


Reason. No man can take away the things that are necessary, forasmuch as
nothing is cruely to be called necessary, without which a man may live well. I
say, live well, not voluptuously, not insolently, or gorgiously, but wisely, but
soberly, but honestly: wherein Fortune, be she never so proud, shall confess
that she has no right. And truly, although desire of having, is not satisfied
with all the gold that is in the world, and all the pomp of precious stones,
and plenty of all manner of things, notwithstanding, natural necessity is
contented with very little, that may be gotten by some light means of the
tongue, or exercise of the hand: thus virtue is pleased with a very little, and
vice with nothing.


Sorrow. Covetous Fortune denies me necessary food and apparel.


Reason. Thou must get it then some where else. Virtue is more liberal then
Fortune, for she denies a man nothing, but which will hurt if it be granted,
and do good, if it be forbidden: she takes away nothing, but which will hurt
to have it, and is profitable to loose it: she deferreth nothing, she
commands nothing, she plucketh not back her hand, she frowneth not, she
looks not strangly, she despises no man, she forsakes no man, she
deceyueth no man, she chafeth not, she rages not, she changes not, she is
always one, and every where, but that the more she is tasted of, the sweeter
she seems, and the nearer she is beholden, the fayrer every day then other
she appears. That thou may therefore be rich in deed, let nothing
carry thee away from this affliction, or repel thee, although it do exercise
and molest thee: the first entrance unto it is hard, as for the residue, it
is ready, pleasant, and easy. For when thou art once come unto it, thou shall
not feel poverty.


Sorrow. Fortune has spoiled me of all my goods.


Reason. Thou supposest amiss, this mischief is commune to all men: for
truly she has not spoiled thee of any goods, or if they were goods, they
were none of thine, but which perhaps, after the common account, thou
thoughtest to be thine: and I marueyle if thou know not yet that they were
another.


Sorrow. Fortune has left me bare and needy.


Reason. Virtue will apparel thee, unless thou refuse her, and also enrytche
thee, unless perhaps thou esteem more of Gold and Purple, then of
honesty, and the furniture of a valient mind: which if thou do, then
would I say that thou were very poor and bare in deed.


Sorrow. There is no means sufficient to save me against the assault of
Fortune, and troubles of poverty.


Reason. Why marueylest thou? All thy cunning, and thy weapons wherewith thou
think to defend thy self, are in thine enemies hand. She holds fast the
handle, the point is turned toward thee. If thou seek for advice, set these
things aside, and do some thing else, and apply thy mind unto those studies
wherein Fortune has nothing to do. Virtue is not gotten by riches, but riches
by Virtue. Only Virtue is the most sovereign art against all fortunes and
poverty. Thou have read, how that the Philosopher Aristippus, being cast up
by shypwracke upon the Rhodian shore, being bare and destitute of all those
things which Fortune can either give or take away, and delighted with the
strangeness of the place, as it happens often times, glauncyng his eyes about,
had by chance fastened them upon certain Geometrical descriptions, crying
then out aloude, he comforted his companions, and bid them be of good cheer,
for that they had not fallen upon any desert or forlorn Country, for that he
beheld there the foot steps and tokens of men: from thence entryng into the
City, he got him directly unto the Schools, and places of exercise of
learning: where, by means of his disputations among the Philosophers, he first
won admiration, and afterward gained the friendshyppe and rewards of the
greatest personages, whereby he provided meat and drink, and apparel, and
other necessaries for travail, not only for him self, but also for his
company. Who when they were departing, demaundyng of him what they should say
to any of his friends when they came home, notably bid them say this one
thing: that they should prepare those riches for their children, which can
not peryshe by shypwracke, which neither tempest by Sea, in civil or martial
affairs can take away.


Sorrow. I am destitute both of goods, and mind.


Reason. This first makes thee light, the second, poor in deed and wretched.
But I suppose thou have read the saying of Theophrastus, as well as the counsel
of Aristippus: but what avails it thee to have read a thing only, unless
thou also remember it, and put it in practice?


Sorrow. Being spoiled of my house, family, necessaries, and all mine
ornaments, what shall I do, or whyther shall I turn my self?


Reason. Unto those riches whereof thou can not be spoiled, which
accompanying thee whyther so ever thou go, will make thee rich and well
furnished. And for that me thinks I had need to help thy memory, this is
the saying of Theophrastus, whereof I made mention erewhyle, That among all
sorts of men, a learned man only is no stranger when he comes into a
foreign Country, neither is destitute of friends when he has lost his
Familiars and Kinsefolke, but is a Citizen in every City, and can valiently
contemn the chances of Fortune without fear: but he should think him self
to be defended not by the guarde of learning, but of felicity, that he walks
upon slipperie, not stable steps, but wreastleth with a feeble life.


Sorrow. I had an inheritance from my Father, which I have lost, What shall I
now do?


Reason. There discende two inheritaunces from the Father: the one of
transitory goods, which is governed by Fortune, the other of Virtue and
learning, which is so far reposed in safety out of the kingdom of Fortune,
that she can not hurt it. This is that inheritance which most loving fathers
do specially leave unto their children, which unless they do refuse it, does
adorn the possessours thereof in the end, and after the end of their life,
continuyng with them not only so long as the other, but also much more
comfortably and durably. Which thing well knowing the City of Athens, the
famous mother of Nurture, Eloquence, and Laws, when as the law of all the
other Cities of Greece, without exception, compelled the children to succor
and relieve their parents, she ordained, that those parents only should be
relieud, that had caused their children to be brought up in learning, for that
they only should leave an assured and permanent inheritance unto their
children.


Sorrow. I want many things to live withal.


Reason. To whom a few things may be sufficient, how he should want many, I
can not see. But you say ye want that to live withal, which is wanting to
your covetousness, whereby it comes to pass, that ye want not only many
things, but all things, as well that ye have, as that ye desire, in that ye
dare not touch the one, neither can attain to the other, and in either
respect, is like misery or poverty.


Sorrow. I live in too poor estate.


Reason. Comfort thy heart, with thy great and famous companions: Valerius
Publicola, one of the aucthours of the Roman liberty, Menenius Agrippa,
purchaser of the Roman tranquillity, because they had nothing wherewithal to
bury them of their own, had it out of the common treasury. Paulus Aemilius
conqueror of the Macedonian kings, and destroyer of that most famous and
ancient kingdom, being so rich in glory as he was, was so poor in money,
that unless this most valient man's Lands had been sold, his wives Dower
could not have been restored. Attilius Regulus, Cueus Scipio, Quintius
Cincinnatus, defenders of the Roman Empire, were so poor, yea in household
provision, that the first of them atchiuing great exploites in Africa, the
second in Spain, the one of them because of the death of his Farmer, the
other for the Dower of his Daughter, were both constrained to make suite to be
discharged from the Senate, which they had obtained, but that the Senate
providing better for the state of the Common wealth, did relieve the poverty
of those most excellent Citizens. Unto Quintius, while he was earyng his poor
four Acres of Land, by decree of the Senate and people of Rome, in the time of
extremity, the whole government of the state was committed. Unto these may be
added Curious, who was rich by his Garden, and Fabritius that was mighty with
a little, who contemnyng proffered riches, and having nothing but rich weapons,
right hands, and most rych minds, vanquished the King of Greece, and the most
valient people of Italy. They were as well invincible with gold, as with iron.
But what speak I of certain Citizens, when as the whole people of Rome, being
the fountain and example of a notable History, was good so long, as I began
to say, as it was a poor people? But Nero being drowned in lasciviousness and
reproaches, was not able to measure or reckon his goods. But Varius
Heliogabalus the most effeminate and fylthy beast that ever lived, and the
shame of your Empire, a shameful thing to speak or hear, would vouchsafe to
have the loathsome ordu^^ and burden of his belly to be received into none
other vessel then of gold: a thing not to be ouerslypped, if it were but to
set forth the irksome and outrageous desire of mortal men: When as he well
remembered, that not only the meals and daily diet of such men as the above
named are, but also the sacrifices of the Gods were wont to be served and
celebrated in earthen vessels. O miserable City in continuance of time by
destiny fallen unto so fylthy hands: But rather O gold the extreme desire of
covetousness: O hope that art the last and end of humane trauayles, thou that
art the wonder unto eyes, and the amazyng unto minds, to what uses wast thou
converted? I would commend the deed, or at leastwyse not reprove it, for
that there is no mockery more meet for so shameful error of man, if so be it
had proceeded from a man of sound judgment, and perfect reason: but now who
dares deny, but that goods are excellent, and to be wished, which men do in
such sort seek after with swoorde and wickedness, while neglectyng the best,
they abound with the worst?


Sorrow. I pass forth a poor life in travel.


Reason. Cleantes was constrained by need to draw water to water herbs in a
garden withal, and Plautus to lift up sackes and corn upon a hand querne. How
great a Philosopher was the one, and the other a Poet? and again, how poor a
gardener was the first, and the other a baker? Who both after their work was
done, the residue of the night wherein they should have taken their rest,
such was the courage of their mind, the one applied his time unto the study
of Philosophy, the other to the writing of Commedies, that he might sell them
for money. Lactancius Firmianus, a man of great learning, and rare eloquence
among his compeeres, being also schoolemaister unto the son of a great
Prince, led his life in great poverty of all things, yea of common
necessaries. Horace was borne poor, Pacunius lived poorly, Statius was poor:
both of them sold their Comedies, and thereby got their living. To be short,
Virgill also was sometime a poor man, until contrary to the common custom,
riches happened unto his wit. There be many such examples in all degrees of men:
and I omit these, because there are very many, who for the desire they had
unto heavenly riches, have not only with indifferent minds, but gladly and
wyllyngly, chosen not only poverty, but also hunger, thyrste, nakedness, and
all kinds of miseries upon the earth. If that by these as it were humble and
earthly examples thou art not moved, the Lord of heaven him self was here in
poor estate, that he might teach by his example, that this poverty is the
way whereby men attain unto great riches. He, I say, by whom Kings do
reign, was borne in poverty, lived in poverty, dyed naked, whom in the mean
while all the Elements obeyed: and thou sellie wretch do grievously bear
the state of thy Lord and master, and art not ashamed of thy foolyshe
insolency. Certaynely, who so thynkyng on him, shall arm him self with
virtue, being very rich in poverty and needyng nothing, will not desire a
Kings riches.


Sorrow. I have no store of riches.


Reason. As no riches are sufficient for a needy and base mind, so unto a
rich and frank courage no poverty comes amiss: as for the first, he
leans unto that which is another, but he of whom I spoke last, trusts
unto his own: to build upon another man's ground is a loss, but to build
upon his own is a vantage.


Sorrow. I am very poor.


Reason. If thou obey necessities, thou can never be poor: but if thou be
subject to lusts, thou shall never be rich.


Sorrow. Hitherto I have been poor, yea I am a very beggar.


Reason. Men's fortune and state does not continue: for as from great riches
unto extreme poverty, so from extreme poverty unto great riches, there is
often exchange. I suppose thou have read in Quintus Curtius the Historian, how
one, called Abdolominus, at the commandment or rather permission of King
Alexander, from a poor gardyner was advanced unto the kingdom of Sidon, and
by contemning the kingdom, is reputed greater then the kingdom. Truly,
which thou can not choose but have read, Romulus, from a shepherds cottage
becoming the founder of so great a city, was the first that took upon him
the Roman Crown, and the sixth King ascended unto the Kingly dignity, from a
very base, and as some have thought, from a seruyle degree: neither more
wealthy was the rising of Alexander son to King Priamus, nor of Cyrus the
most famous of all the Persian Kings, neither were their beginnings much other
then was that of Romulus. Gaius Marius, who had been, and should have been
often Consul of Rome, before he atteyned unto any of these degrees of honor,
being an hyrelyng ploughman, spent the first years of his life in the fields,
and at length after so many victories and triumphs, and between those seven
times that he was Con^ul, besides his hydyng of him self in the Fennes, and
his imprisonment, he begged also a little piece of bread. Julius Caesar, that
should afterward be Lord of all the world, and by his Testament dispose it
unto his heirs that should be Lords of all the world after him, was poor
when he was a young man. Thou having the company and fellowship of such
worthy men, can thou not either hope for riches, or contemn them?


Sorrow. I am waxen poorer then I was.


Reason. It is well: thou shall also be more humble, light, and at liberty,
then thou wast. They that go on a dangerous journey, love to go light. Thou
shall want thine accustomed riches, and thy Myse, and thy Thieves, and thy
stubberne Servants, and all other things that follow wealth, feygned
friends, following and catchyng Parasites, and all the whole household flock
of those that will laugh with thee to thy face, but will mock and byte thee
behind thy back. To be short, if thou compare thy lost riches with the
troubles that thou have lost also with them, thou wylt call it again. Surely
to speak nothing of security, humility, sobriety, quietness, modesty,
which are the companions of poverty, if she brought none other commodity
with her, then that she delivers a man from the troops of deceiptful
flatterers, and from the tyrranny of proud servants, there were cause
sufficient not only to suffer her, but also to wyshe for her, yea, to seek
after poverty. But let this suffice thee: for thou complaynest more then need
is, whereat I would wonder in thee, unless I had observed it of long time in
all men, that there is nothing whereof they do more grievously, and more often
complain: so that there is nothing among men better, nothing more hateful
then poverty.


Sorrow. I am poorer in life.


Reason. Thou shall be gladder in death. There was never any man living so
poor, but when he was dying, could have been contented to have lived poorer.


Of thin Fare. The x. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY fare is thin.


Reason. Then is thy pleasure thin, and thy sobriety clenly. Would thou,
upon desire to glut thy lust, and to satisfy thy deynty mouth, wyshe the
contrary?


Sorrow. I fare hardly.


Reason. Take it in good part that thou want the prouocations of appetite,
seeing thou have in a redynesse those that are sweeter, and easier both to be
gotten, and to be kept: For virtue has also her enticementes. I use now
Tullies word. When thou shall once begin to chaw and taste of these, thou
wylt not much pass for the other.


Sorrow. My fare is hard.


Reason. Hardness is friend unto virtue, and delicie unto vice. How many
excellent men wyllyngly abandonyng pleasures, have chosen this kind of fare
which thou myslykest? Whereof some when they might have fared deyntyly, took
pleasure rather in feastyng with bread and water? Shall we judge any man to be
so wedded to pleasure, that would not extremely hate her, if he could
behold with his eyes the sh^me that is wyned with her? But sweetness is a
pernicious thing, a deadly enemy unto virtue, and a beastly ticklyng, which
who so pursues, may be a man in show, but in deed is a brute beast.
Moreover, the familiarity which is contracted with vices, and the accustomyng
unto them which is very hurtefull, casts a mist before men's eyesight, that
they are not able to discern how fair that is which grieueth them, and how
foul that which delighted them.


Sorrow. My fare is to short.


Reason. Nay rather it is to sumptuous, and thy throat is to wide. The same to
see to, is but a narrow way, and in deed but one way, notwithstanding it is a
wide open way for all vices to run in by unto the foul. By this way the
flame of lusts, the dullness of the wit, the rage and fury of anger and
chydyng do enter in, and so does also imperious desire to have, which
commands you to suffer and do all things, so that you think them
necessary, when as in deed they be hurtful, and you call that the stay of
your life, which is the overthrow thereof. By this way enter in the
firebrandes of envy, and the implacable emulation, with disdeyning minds,
vauntyng that there be other that serve their throat and belly as well as you,
seeking for praise there, where as shame were to be feared. To be short, by
this way enters pride, whylest the swellyng belly that cannot receive it
self, communicates his swellyng unto the mind, and persuades him that he is
of some greater calling then a man, for that he has been fed with Ambrosia
and Necta^, the meat and drink of the Gods. Thus thou see how one vice
is the entry unto all, and yet if it can be shut by none other means, thou
art not willing that it be made fast with the bars of poverty. O amiable
poverty, that take upon thee the office of continency: it is profitable
for thee to be compelled unto that, which thou ought to do of thine own
accord.


Sorrow. My slender diet makes me leave.


Reason. Had thou rather then to swell? This leauenesse will drive the Gout
out of thy bounds, it will take away the head ache, and the gyddynesse of the
brain, and vomityng, and the hycket, and the lothsomnesse of the stomach, and
sweatyng, and weerysomnesse of thy self, the sudden alteration of color from
palenesse to redness, it will also help the strong smell of the breath, and of
the whole body that is noisome unto thy self, and others. Moreover, it will
moderate and repress the unstableness of thy feet, the tremblyng of thy
hands, the shaking of thy head, and which is chief of all, it will stay thy
mind it self. Wherefore then do thou complain, since that thou have
gotten so many commodities of the body and mind, by wantyng of meat, and the
small discommoditie of the sense of tastyng, being worthy to loose them, and
to be bondslaue unto taste only.


Sorrow. Thynne diet weeryeth me.


Reason. The contrary would make thee weery, unless perhaps thou call pain
an ease, Have thou not read, that the weerysomnesse of the delicate life is
great, insomuche that it could not be abidden the space of five days
together by men of temperate diet, and such as aspire unto higher matters
then are the throat and the belly?


Sorrow. My fare is thyn above measure.


Reason. There was an age, when as there was here, and yet is, a nation, among
whom was most gallant fare, but when the world was waxen worse, you
endeavored also to be worst of all, being always the aucthours of the public
decay and ruin: so that you that were the best of all other, now turnyng your
footesteppes contrarywyse, are become woorst of all men, and among the vices of
time and places possess the highest degree.


Sorrow. My thyn diet pleases me not.


Reason. The lovers and patrones both of virtue and pleasure, do commend a
thyn diet: what false opinion thou have embrased, I do not know. Plato
condemns the Syracusian feasts, and banquettes, and says that he lyketh not
to have the belly filled twyce in a day. Epicurus sets his pleasure and
delight in his Herbs and sallettes, and this diet which thou mislykest, he
aloweth in words and deed: Finally, as Cicero says, there was never man
said more of the thyn diet. If thou regard not the most famous ryngleaders of
two sects, what remains, but that through the heat of thine error, thou
follow loathsome gurmandize, which is enemy unto virtue, and not friend to
pleasure, which is a filthy end rather of a beast then of a man: and
moreover, which I speak with disdain and grief, beasts truly devour
much, but it is according to the receipt of their bellies: but you only, that
are the Lords over al living creatures, both know not your own proportion,
and also exceed it. Neither is it for naught that many do marueyle, why in
the remembrance of our fathers and grandfathers there were far fewer
Vineyardes then be now, but as many men or rather more, and yet notwithstanding
Wines were then sold better cheap: the reason is, the thyrst of the drunken
sort has every day since increased more and more.


Sorrow. From great fare I am fallen to small.


Reason. It is fortuned well, that penury has fulfilled that, which modesty
neglected. It is best for a man to do that wyllingly which he ought to do,
and the next to do it, though it were constraynedly.


Of Original Poverty. The.xi. Dialogue.
SORROW. YEA, I was borne in poverty.


Reason. Who comes not naked out of his mothers womb? In this matter kings
have no pre-eminence.


Sorrow. I was poor before I was borne.


Reason. Thou have a good memory if thou do remember it, and a most delicate
feelyng if thou did perceive it.


Sorrow. I was begotten in poverty.


Reason. Does this complaint any thing avail thee? It was not long of thee,
but of thy parents.


Sorrow. I was borne in poverty.


Reason. And shall likewise dye in poverty: thy end shall be like thy beginning,
unless perhaps thou think that the gold which thou have in the bottom of
thy cheast, will cure thy sicknesses when thou lie a dying.


Sorrow. The beginning of my life was in poverty.


Reason. The middle many times possesses false riches, but the beginning and
ending are very poverty: to be borne naked, and to die naked, is the
necessity of humane condition. For what, I pray you, avails ye chamber hung
with purple, and the funeral bed gilden, and whatsoever other pride the
ambition of mankind has devised, when a man is departing out of this world?
What have these things to do, or what apperteyne they to the Ague, or to
death it self whereof we speak, or the nakedness of them that dye? Is it so,
that as trappings and gallant furniture pleases an Horse, so do the costly
hangynges delight the walls? These things may please the eyes of the
beholders? In things that lack sense, there may be some what that may delight
others, but them selves can take no pleasure in any thing.


Sorrow. I was borne naked and poor.


Reason. Variety of fortune does alter almost all worldely things: the same
also makes many of them equal and of like degree, whereby she may bring
comfort unto the inequality of the residue: the greatest and chiefest whereof,
is this equality of birth, and death. Many and sundry are the sorts of
apparel which the living do wear, but nakedness only belongs unto them
that are borne, and dye, but that the first sort do find out many things
upon ignorance, and the other forsake all things wittyngly, so that the
knowledge of transitory things, ought to qualyfie the sense of so small a
loss.


Sorrow. Naked did I enter into this wretched life.


Reason. While thou thynkest on that, thou shall depart naked with a more
indifferent mind.


Of the heavy burden of many children. The.xii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am ouerburdened with many children.


Reason. With gold and silver also weak shoulders may be ouerlayed, howebeit
no man will complain of it, but will be glad to be so burdened. But as for
children, they are accounted among the chiefest gifts of your felicity.
Dooest thou say then that thou art ouerburdened, and not rather lyghtened by
them?


Sorrow. I am a poor man among many children.


Reason. Nay rather, thy children are thy riches: then how thou can be poor
in the mids of riches, see thou. For this happens but only unto covetous
men, and those that are unthankful for their goods.


Sorrow. Among a company of children; I live in beggarly need.


Reason. Children are not a toil, but an ease unto their Parents, an
appeasyng to their griefs, and a comfort in all fortunes, if they be good:
otherwise there is no complaynyng of their number, but of their manners.


Sorrow. I am hemmed in with an army of Children.


Reason. And why not rather accompanied, defended, and beautified? Truly not
Fathers only, but Mothers also do term children their Iewelles. Have thou
not heard, how Cornelia that was daughter unto Africane the great, when as a
very rich Gentlewoman of Campania, who by chance lodged in her house,
womanlyshly glorying showed her her most precious and fair Iewelles, prouokyng
Cornelia as it were unto emulation, of very purpose prolonged that talk,
until such time as her children should return from School, who then were
but little boys, but afterward proved excellent men: Whom when their mother
beheld, turnyng her self toward her gheast, These, quoth she, are my
Iewelles. Notably well said truly, and as it became the daughter of so
worthy a father: but these thy ornaments, thou tearmest impedimentes.


Sorrow. Who is able to feed so many children.


Reason. He that feeds thee from thy youth unto thine old age, who feeds
not only Men, but also Fyshes, and Beasts, and Fowls.


Sorrow. But who is able to cloth the bodies of so many children.


Reason. He that apparrelleth not only living creatures, but also the Fields
with Grass, and Flowers, and the Wooddes with Leaves, and Branches. And how
know we yet, whether these thy children perhaps shall not only feed and
clothe thee, but also defend and honor thee. Of humane affairs, as some that
begin with pleasure, do end with sorrow and care: even so contrarywyse,
some that have a bitter beginning, do end pleasauntly: such as for the most
part is the event of all virtuous actions, which are grievous at the first
entrance, but in process delectable.


Sorrow. I am poor, and have many children.


Reason. Thou marueylest, as though thou had not read of the plentiful
poverty of men. There are sundry kinds of Trades, and diverse gifts of
Fortune: they happen not all unto one man: unto some wandryng Merchandise, to
some the rough Earth, to some dead Metal, and unto thee living riches, which
are Children, are allotted. And shall we reckon Oxen, and Sheep, and Asses, and
Camelles, and flittyng Bees, and Pigeons, and Poultry, and Peacockes, and
likewise Menseruauntes and Womenseruauntes, in the number of riches, and
exclude Children only?


Sorrow. O, how many Children have I?


Reason. O, how many more have other had? Priamus had fyftie, Orodes king of
the Parthians had thirty, Artaxerxes king of the Persians had an hundred and
fifteen, Erothinius king of the Arabians seven hundred, in trust and
confidence of whom, inuadyng the confines of his enemies, with several
inroades he wasted the lands of Egypt and Syria. And truly it is a kind of
power and force, to have many Children. But I know what thou wylt say: These
whom thou have named were all of them myghtie Kings, and my state is far
otherwise. Was Appius Claudius a King? No, he was not so much as a Rych man, in
that ancient time, when as it was a reproach to be counted rich, and
blyndnesse was joined with his poverty, and old age with his blyndnesse, and
yet notwithstanding Tullie writing of him, Four Sons, says he, and five
Daughters, so great an house, and so great resort of Suitors did Appius govern,
being both blind and old. Neither is it marueyle that he governed well his
private affairs, when as, being troubled with these discommodities, he
governed also the whole Common wealth. The greater part of humane defectes,
consysteth in the manners, not in the things. Appius estate was not like a
King, neither did he desire it, but being contented with his own calling,
decked up his small house not with costlye furniture, but with virtues, and
maynteyned his family with a slender diet. And that which many Kings do
vnwyllyngly and camplaynyng, that did he with an indifferent mind: For he
sought not for riches, but conformed his appetite to his ability. Appius had
not the like wealth to king Craesus, nor to his fellow citizen Crassus, but he
was happier then either of them, although his riches were less: neither did he
live after a greater revenue, but as all good men do, after his own. Neither
truly do I require of thee, that thou live after any other proportion, for
thy self and thine, then after thine own, nor that thou feed and cloth thy
family with princely meat and apparel. Princes children feed dayntily, and
are bravely apparrelled: but they live not better, nor longer, nor pleasanter,
nor, as it is well known, more safely, nor more honestly, nor more virtuously.
In the steed of all these, they have one thing wherein they excel, they live
more pompously, that is to say, foolyshlie. Every one has his own manner of
living and measure, but not therefore the better, because the greater: whereby
it comes to pass, that oftentimes a man shall see some merry in a Cottage,
and other sad in the Court. There is one only Fountain of grace, but all
are not of like capacity: that Fountain I mean, unto whom it is said, Thou
openest thine hand, and fillest every living thing with thy blessing. What
makes to purpose the greatness or smalnesse of the vessels, when they be
all of a like fullness? But poor folk lack many things: but how much more
do kings want, seeing that saying of Horace is most true and approved, that,
Many things are wantyng to them that ask many things.


Sorrow. It is a grievous thing to begette many children.


Reason. What can thou recite unto me under heaven, that is not paynefull
and grievous, pleasure only excepted? then which notwithstanding, there is
nothing more paynefull in the end, nothing that leaves so many stinges in the
mind. Have thou not read in Horace, how, This life has given nothing unto
mortalmen without great traueyle? Do thou not also hear what another Poet
has written aptly touching the same matter? For when all the godly confess
with one consent, that all good things are given us freely from above, he
says that they are not given, but sold, and the price appointed, which is
labor. For thus he says, The Gods sell unto us al good things for labor.


Sorrow. The carfulness for so many children, is troublesome unto me.


Reason. Is not this sentence to be numbered among the true sayings, That there
can no man's life be found, that is without vexation and trouble? And likewise
this, That all the whole course of life, is a torment? What have the children
deserved, which if they be lackyng, yet other cares will arise? Believe me,
which way so ever thou turnest thy self, and whatsoever trade of fortune thou
assay, troubles, and molestations, and difficulties of life will be present:
and therefore what need vain lamentations?


Sorrow. I am oppressed with many children.


Reason. If thou say that thou art oppressed as it were with thine own
felicity, and thou take it in evil part that the things which men do first
and especially desire, have abundantly happened unto thee, this is a strange
kind of impacience.


Sorrow. What shall I do with so many Daughters? Who shall give me so many
Dowries for them?


Reason. There is one GOD of the Females and Males, he feeds his sons and
daughters: And as he will give them wit and arts to live by, so will he also
endue them with his gifts and Dowries. Wherefore, it is so written, Trust in
him, and be will do it: that which lies in thee to do shall be the best kind
of Dowry, namely, so to bring up thy Daughters, that they may be well lyked
and loved by vpryght judgment without a Dowry. Faustina had the Roman Empire
to her Dowry: and yet how many women thynkest thou have there been without
Dowries, that have been more chaste and fortunate then she? It is not the
Dowry that makes the happy marriage, but the virtue. Endeavor if thou can,
that thy Daughters money be not desired, but their honesty, but their
modesty, but their integrity, but their patience, humbleness, faythfulnesse,
and obedience: with these precious stones thy Daughters being adorned, with
this gold laded, with these handmaydens accompanied, let them go into their
husbands houses that are not rich men, but honest, where oftentimes
shamefastness is safer, and the life sweeter, then in the Bedchambers and
Courts of Princes.


Of money lost. The.xiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost Money.


Reason. And with it many cares, and continual danger.


Sorrow. I have lost money.


Reason. And also the pain of keepyng it, and the fear of loosyng it. Thus by
loosyng thy money, thou have found two good things, and both of them better
then that which thou have lost, to wit, carelessness, and quietness.


Sorrow. I have lost money.


Reason. It is well that it has not lost thee, which it has done many owners
thereof: For the form of money is hurtful, the bryghtnesse thereof pestilent
and venomous. And therefore like a Serpent that has golden skales, delyghting,
she pleases the eyes, and stryketh the Soul. So then, if thou be glad that
thou art safely delivered from her, rejoice that that is taken away whereby
thou myghtest be infected, and recount also with mirth and admiration, that
thou have passed unhurt through dangers. But if thou were infected, know now,
that the cause of the mischief is rooted out, whereby thou may return the
more easily unto health.


Sorrow. I have lost Gold and Silver.


Reason. What has an heavenly mind to do, with earthly dross? They that
follow the more manly Philosophy, do not reckon gold and silver among
goods: but they that profess the more effeminate learning, do call them
goods, but not of the mind. Which so ever of these thou follow, these
things either were not good, either were not thine, so that thou have no cause
for to complain. And if thou wylt needs have them called goods, which thing
many excellent men do deny, notwithstanding thou shall be enforced to term
them Fortunes goods, and not thine. So then, neither have thou lost any thing
of thine own, neither she any thing that was hers, but only has otherwise
disposed them.


Sorrow. I have lost money.


Reason. As thou could not have lost it, if it had been thine, so could
thou not loose it, not being thine: but in deed it was not thine, but his whom
it has followed, nay rather it was not his, but Fortunes, as I have said, who
lends it where she sees cause, for some short time of occupying, for a
great interest. And therefore learn now at length, to know thine own from
other folks.


Sorrow. I have lost money.


Reason. If other men's losses also and not thine own only do grieve thee, and
are vexed that any thing that is an others should be taken from thee, learn
to get those things that are thine own for ever, which are won with more
ease, and possessed with more honor and assurance. If thou would seek after
virtue, thou should not lose her: but you are become despisers of virtue,
and seekers and lovers of money: ye seem to be waxed deaf unto wholesome
admonition and counsel, whatsoever has been said by virtuous and learned
men, specially against this point of humane madness. Thou have heard your
Satyrike Poet protesting, For he that would be rich, and soon be rych: and
unto these words he adds, But what reverence of laws, what fear or shame
is there ever in the covetous man, that desires hastily to be rich? This
sayeing the wise man among the Hebrews compriseth in few words: Who so,
says he, makes haste to be rich, can not be without blame. Thou have heard
also another Countreyman of yours, whether he were a Satyricall, or Lyricall
Poet, saying, It is neither house, nor land, not heaps of silver nor gold,
that are able to expel Fevers out of the owners diseysed body, nor cares out
of his mind. The self same thing, this strange wise man comprehended in few
words, saying, Richesse do not help in the day of vengeance. But he told
moreover what would help, Righteousness, says he, shall deliver a man from
death. Since therefore the money which thou lamentest to be lost, in time of
greatest necessity can not profit the body nor mind, I marueyle, either why
it should so much be wyshed for when it is gone, or loved when it is present?
With these and such other things, your Orator being moved, There is no
sign so evident of a base and vile mind, says he, as to love riches. But the
Ecclesiastike Orator, There is nothing, says he, more wicked, then a covetous
person: nothing more unjust, then to love money. And the authority of very
many that agree in this matter, from which there is almost none that dissent,
is of such multitude and gravity, that the common peoples error strives to
no purpose against the judgment of the wise. And therefore, as there is none
more unjust, so is there no desire more ardent then the desire of money, as
being a thing upon which men are persuaded that all things depend that can
be wyshed for. But contrariwyse, the voices of the best learned men cry out,
experience and truth cries out, the multitude of ancient and new examples
cries out, that great masses of money are profitable to none, but have been
pernicious to many, are gotten with sin and toil, kept with fear and
carfulness, and lost with complaint and heaviness. Let the lovers of money
declare, either what falsehood is in these words, or goodness in their
riches? And to the end that a thing so much commended may be uprightly
considered, let every man call unto his remembrance, whatsoever he has seen or
read perfectly and sincerely concerning this matter, setting apart al regard of
the common peoples clamor, and the glittering of the mettalles. And for that
all men have not had the like occasion to see and try, let those things be
called to mind which are set down in writing by famous auctours, which the
learned might always read and hear at their pleasure. And is it not well
known, that money brought in new and unaccustomed manners, and that
effeminate richesse, by means of hateful riotousnesse, did pervert whose
ages, that before lived most commendably? And that richesse adjoined with
covetousness and ouerflowing pleasures, through sensuality and
lasciviousness, brought in the desire to overthrow and destroy all, which
both by writing and effect has often been found to be true, That the covetous
man is always in need. That iron is hurtful, but gold more hurtful. That
the wicked thyrst of gold d th enforce men's minds unto any mischief, and
that the spirits are weakened only with the sight of money. Is not gold able
to pass through a garrison of armed men, and to break stones more forcibly
then a thunderbolt? and does not hereof spryng treason, both against honesty
and life? By a golden shower of rain Danaes virginity was expugned, and
likewise there was one cause of the overthrow of the Greek Poet Amphiareus,
and his covetous wife, to wit, the fatal gold, which being well contemned, by
Argia Eriphila ill wished for, and ill gotten, brake up his house, and began
the occasion of horrible wickedness. Is it not most truly and properly said,
that false and transitory riches can neither perform that which they
promise, neither quench the thyrst of the mind, but increase it, neither
drive away cares, but bring them, nor relieve necessities, but increase them?
And that, The love of money increases, as much as the money it self
increases? And likewise this saying may be added, Money makes no man rich,
but rather contrariwyse, there is no man in whom it has not engendered a
greater desire of it. And no less this, Care follows money as it increases,
and greater hunger of it. And again, To them that ask many things, many
things are wantyng: and likewise, They that possess much, do lack much.
Finally, that whatsoever they be, they are not permanent and continuyng, as
being reposed in the hands of Fortune, subject evermore unto variable
chances, and at leastwyse to be lost by death. For when the rich man
sleeps, he shall carry nothing away with him: if he open his eyes, he shall
find nothing, and yet he can not leave that nothing to whom he would: for
why? Man passes away in an Image, and vaynely troubling him self, he heapeth
up riches together, and knows not for whom he shall gather them. While these,
and a thousand such like sayings of wise and learned men do in such sort
sound about our ears, notwithstanding infinite desire to have, has made you
deaf, so that the rych men of this world are in vain admonished, not to be
too hyghly wise nor to trust in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living
GOD, who gives all thing plenteously, to enjoy them to do good, and to become
rich in good works: for they that would be rich, namely in these riches
that are commonly wyshed for, fall into temptation and snares of the Devil,
and many unprofitable and hurtful lusts, that drench men in death and
destruction: For covetousness is the root of all mischieues. This counsayler
will they more harken unto, then they will hear him that says, Trust not in
wickedness, neither covet after rapine: if riches do abound, set not thy
heart upon them. Neither him more then his son, saying, Whosoever trusts in his
riches, shall come to destruction. And again, not more then all these, him
that is above all, whose heavenly doctrine can not be contemned but of mad and
frantike persons, who truly calls riches, and the companions of riches,
pleasures, and cares, by the name of thorns, which choke the seed of
wholesome words: this spoke he, in whose mouth was found no guyle. The lively
truth, I say, spoke this: and dooest thou think that he found any faith upon
the earth? Surely none at all, or but very little. And that which he terms
thorns, the world calls chief sweetness and pleasure. And where as one
says, that pearls and precious stones, and unprofitable gold, are the matter
of al mischief, they think them to be the cause of al goodness, and do all
auie seek after them as the chiefest good, and above al other things. And now
therefore in the streets of cities and towns, proclamation is made not
mockingly. O Citizens, citizens, ye must first seek for money, and for virtue
after money. And this saying also of another, Sell thy soul for gain,
traffic and peruse over al parts of the world. Thus the great gift of God,
that is not yet understood, but poverty that is the great reproach sent of
GOD, commands to do, and to suffer whatsoever a man lust. And that is every
day found true which another says, You riches, which are the most vile
thing of all other, you have raised a contention. For who is he, I pray you, at
this day, that for a reward at convenient opportunity being laid before him,
will not violate all equity, beheade Polydorus, and by force enjoy his gold?
Bring loving brethren, or friendly friends together, to an assembly, feast,
or any manner of meetyng, and shortly after let discord cast among them, I say
not an whole, but a piece of a golden Apple: for with these weapons she was
wont to try the quarrel, but now with swoordes, serious and triflyng matters
are debated. And like as there is nothing gotten with more wickedness then
gold, so to speak to my purpose, there is nothing lost with more heaviness.
For sin, which is a present destruction to the soul, is contemned, and the
next to that, which is loss of good name, is not regarded, and loss of time
is esteemed as a light matter. The loss of brethren is slenderly lamented, of
parents more slenderly, and of wives most slenderly, and many times is taken
most joyfully: only the loss of riches most grievously. And this saying is
very true, Lost money is bewailed with true tears. But we have said much of
that, whereof we can never say yenough, but never a little, or always to little
is said: for by talkyng with obstinate minds, concerning the love of money,
there is nothing else purchased by teaching of them, but hatred and contempt:
for whatsoever gainsayeth the common errors, is reputed mad or counterfeite.


Sorrow. I have lost money.


Reason. Thou art awaked, thou dyddest but dream only that thou waste rich.


Sorrow. My money which I loved is gone.


Reason. It is neither the love nor hatred of money that I commend, but the
study of good husbandry, and the eschewyng of covetousness: For as it is the
part of a base mind to love it, so not to be able to sustain it, is the
imperfection of a weak spirit, that has small stay in it self, and is
afraid to be subject unto money. Valient is he, says Anneus Seneca. that
uses earthen vessels as he would do silver: and no less coragious is be
that uses silver as he would do earthen vessels: that thou may
understand, that whether it be vice or virtue, it is not in the things, but in
the minds. It is not the hater nor lover of money, but the contemner of it
when it is absent, and the good Steward and vser of it when it is present,
whom thou must count to be a worthy personage. This saying did Tullie write
from my mouth: For when he had said that the love of riches apparteyned unto
a vile and base mind, he added, And there is nothing more honest and
magnifical, then to contemn money if thou have it not, and if thou have it, to
use it beneficially and liberally. In a plain matter I use evident witnesses,
and I would to GOD that I and they could be beleeeued: then should not
mankind in each respect, and in all matters, be so deaf and vnbeleeuyng. The
insatiable toylyng of men, their greediness to seek, and their searching
through all lands and Seas, do prove that covetousness, and the love and
desire of riches, have proclaimed open war, not only against virtues, but
also against life.


Sorrow. I have lost a great sum of money.


Reason. A great, and hard, and grievous weight, and also the office of a
Keeper, as I said before: for the proud desire to have, of Lords and owners,
has made you Keepers, commaundyng you to do and suffer all things, only to
the end that money may be gotten and hoorded up. And so that which was
first invented to serve men's uses and necessities, is converted to their fear
and carfulness. To be grieved, and vexed, and with dread to behold the
burning of other men's houses, to stand in doubt of the treachery of Thieves,
and the runnyng away of servants, neither to do good unto a man's self, nor
to other, but only to hang your noses over your gold, which serves you to no
purpose, these be your riches.


Sorrow. Some body, I know not who, has taken away my money, which I had at
home.


Reason. Truly, it is vile, transitory, and not a man's own, which may be
stolen, or taken away by force.


Sorrow. I cannot find my money, which I sealed up in my bags.


Reason. I will tell thee a story that is not very old. There was, not long
since in Italy, a certain noble and worthy Gentleman, rich in ancient
possessions, but rycher in virtues, howbeit not so in money, who in such sort
governed his money which he had, as one that had learned to be the Lord and
disposer, not the keeper thereof: he had a son, that was his eldest, who
was very apt and industrious in affairs apparteynyng to the judicial Court,
and civil controversies, insomuche that through diligence and sparyng, he
had gotten together great riches, and an huge mass of gold: and it was a
strange matter to behold in the ancient father youthly bountifulness, and in
the young son aged niggishnesse: His father often times exhorted him not to
defraude him self of that which was his own, not to forget to have regard of
godliness, and of his estimation, neither that in respect of gold he should be
careless of his honor and honesty, of his duty and right, which nature
required at his hand: and finally, that he would so dispose and conform him
self, that with his riches he might at last help him self, his old mother,
his young brethren and kynsfolke, and the poor, to which end riches were
gotten, and not to be watched and warded, and as it were to be a continual
punishment to the owners. Thus spoke his father oftentimes unto him. But the
old proverb is true, It is a vain labor to tell a tale to one that is deaf,
or a covetous person. Now it happened, not long time after, that this young man
was sent abroad about affairs of the common wealth, and with certain special
and choice men trauayled about business unto the Pope of Rome, and when he was
departed, his father immediately taking the occasion, making new keys unto the
doors of his chamber and cheast, entered in, and took away the Treasure out of
that lurkyng Den whereas it lay and profited no body, and very bravely
apparelled him self therewith, and his wife, and his children, and all his
family: He bought him self also goodly Horses, Place, and gorgeous household
stuff, and lastly a very fair house and large, but nothing trim, which he
enlarged with new buildinges; and furnished it with most beautiful pictures,
and al other implementes, which a gentleman's estate, and a plentiful life
required: and moreover he gave much a way to the poor. And as for the bags
in which his sons gold had been, he filled them full of sand and gravel of
the river, and sealyng them up safely, leaft them where he found them, and made
every thing fast, and so departed. All these things were done in short time,
for that the good old man had a willing mind, and the money also was in a
readiness. Now when the son was returned home, his brethren went forth to
meet him: at the sight of whom he was suddeinly amazed, woonderyng at their
apparel, and other furniture, which was far altered from that is was wont
to be: Whereupon he demanded of them where they had so fair garments, and
those goodly Horses: Who joyfully, and in chyldyshe simplicity, answered, that
al was my Lord their fathers, and that he had many more fair Horses at home in
his Stable: And moreover that their father and mother were sumptuously
apparrelled, and had great store of Princely garments. Wherefore he began
more and more to wonder at every thing. From thence proceedyng, when he came
within his fathers house, he scarce knew his Parents, nor so much as the
very walls of the house: whereat being not in a simple admiration, but rather
distracted in mind, and as it were in a trance, he went hastily unto his
Coffer, where when he saw nothing changed unto outward appearaunce, he some
deal contented his mind for that present. And because that the presence and
have which his Collegenesse made to depart, would not permit him to make
farther delay, he suddaynely opened his Coffer, wherein beholding his bags
fast shut, and stuffed full as they were wont to be, he forced no more, but
so departed. Shortly after, when as his public function was fynished, he came
home, and gooyng into his chamber, shut the door unto him, and opened his
Coffer, and searched his bags, and findyng his gold to be turned into sand,
he made a loud outcrie. His father came runnyng hastily, and, What is the
matter, son, quoth he, that thou cryest out and weepest? O father, says he,
I have lost my money, which with so much watchyng, labor, and travail, I
had gotten together and laid up in these bags, and I am robbed thereof
even in your house. How art thou robbed, answered his father? Do I not see
thy bags stroutyng full? But, O father, said he, weepyng, it is sand, and
not money: and with that he opened the bags, and showed it unto his father.
Then answered the old man, with a countenance nothing changed, What skilleth
it, son, to thee, whether they be full of sand or money? A notable saying
truly, and proceedyng from a singular judgment: For unto many, money is
unprofitable and without use, and does them none other good, but fylleth a
room, and occupies their minds, and among most men it is wickedly used, and
but among very few employed to good purposes.


Sorrow. I have lost my money which I loved.


Reason. Thou art released of a fylthy love: For the love of money is
covetousness: The less thou love it, the less thou shall desire it. For
the saying of the Satiryke Poet is found by experience to be true, That he
wysheth least for money, that has least money: and the loss of that is to be
wyshed, yea, if it were some great good thing, unto which a greater mischief
is inseparably joined.


Sorrow. I have lost my sweet succor and stay of my life.


Reason. How know thou whether it would have been a bitter destruction or
not? Many more have peryshed by means of riches, then of poverty.


Of Suretishyp. The.xiiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM molested with Suretishyppe.


Reason. Thou complaynedst erewhyle of the loss of thy money, and now thou
complaynest of the castyng of it away. Have thou not by wyllyng enteryng into
bands, thrown away thy money? This is a common madness among the greater
sort of people, by means whereof a man may soon loose both his money and his
friend.


Sorrow. I have given my faith and troth for another.


Reason. Thou shall break it for thy self, and to thine own hynderaunce and
loss shall learn, how pleasant a thing it is to owe nothing, and live out of
prison and fetters.


Sorrow. I have given my word in assurance for my friend.


Reason. Hence forth give unto thy poor friends, gold, silver, Wine, Oil,
Corn, Cloth, Houses, Farms, counsel and comfort, finally divide all that
thou have among them, only keep unto thy self thy sweet liberty, which
thou shall never give to nor for any other.


Sorrow. I have given my word for another: and the day of payment is come.


Reason. Dyddest thou not know that it would come? or dyddest thou not hope
to live so long, or at least thine heir, whom thou have wrapped in voluntary
bands? But it happens well, that the punishment of the error, falls upon
his pate that committed the error. But I know that it was the deferryng that
deceived thee. The mean time between the day of promise and the day of
payement, you measure vaynely in your mind, which as other times do, do
seem long, but when they be once past, appear to have been very short: For
away fly the hours, the days, the nyghtes, weeks, months, years,
cyrcuites of seven years, ages, and whatsoever seems to be farthest of, is
even at hand: Insomuche as that which you now behold amazed, within the
compass of a few months, if your eyes were open, you should clearly
discern through many ages: but you, as if you had the time at your
commandment, and it were not governed by it own nature, imagine that your
prefixed time will never come, nor the days pass away: and in this hope, as
it were, with closed eyes passing over the headlong downfall, ye seem unto
your selves to be pleasant and courteous in words, vndertakyng for others,
as though these words and private promyses would not soon come abroad to
light, and bring great trouble and hurly burly with them.


Sorrow. I am become Surety for my friend.


Reason. Thou know that a man's friends want, if his friend have
wherewithal, must be with present supply relieved. But do not thou encomber
thy self, neither promise any thing against to morrow: which thing I would
not speak, if there could none other shyft be made then by promysing. For to
what purpose is it to promise? If thou can not perform, thou dooest
foolyshly: if thou can, thou dooest superfluously. But you are most covetous
of the things, and most lauishe of your promyses, as though in deed those
promyses did not require the things them selves. But if thou aunsweare me,
that at that present thou had not wherewithal to help him, and wast in
hope thou should have shortly after, whereof thou wast deceived: then
had thou not learned sufficiently, that hope is the most deceitful thing
in the world. You shall find nothing that deceives you so often, and yet is
there nothing that you believe so wyllyngly, she is so crafty and flatteryng,
so sweetly and setretly she insinuates her self, and is hardly pulled from
you.


Sorrow. I am become a surety.


Reason. I think thou had forgotten the notable precept of Thales
Milesius, It is a loss to enter into Suretiship: and also that which the wise
man said, which I suppose not unprofitable to be recited, which being
translated into Latin by the poet Ausonius, sounds after this manner, Become
surety, says he, and thou art near a shrewd turn. I could recite a
thousand examples, to prove yt promisers, undertakers, and sureties, are worthy
to taste of repentance, but I will touch none by name. Let every man certify him
self of the truth, and recount with him self, what great loss has happened
unto many by means of suretishyppe.


Sorrow. I have done amiss by voluntary byndyng my self.


Reason. This trespass shall not need the fire of Purgatory after thy
decesse, it shall be purged where it was committed: For it is of the kind of
offenses that carrye their Purgatory with them.


Sorrow. I have bound my self by my promise.


Reason. Release thy self then by payment, and let the hand discharge him whom
his tongue has wrapped in bands: and it shall do thee good to have been
bound, for when thou have once escaped, thou will always the more abhor
hamperinges.


Of loss of time. The.xv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Lament the loss of my time.


Reason. This complaint were more just, then that is which goes before, for
that the loss of money is of smaller account then is the loss of time,
forasmuch as money is not so necessary unto well living, and when it is lost
it may be recovered, but time is necessary and can never be recalled, but only
that money is taken from men against their wylles, and they suffer their time
to run away wyllyngly. And therefore although I confess that those losses
are the greater which the fault of him that susteyneth them does increase and
make greater: notwithstanding I deny that there is just cause of complaynt,
where he that suffers any thing, suffers it wyllyngly.


Sorrow. I loose my time vnwyllyngly.


Reason. Who shall constrayne one that is unwilling, but only covetousness,
that is mother unto business? This vice only says Terence, does old age
bring unto men: we are all the sort of us more near and covetous then reason
requires. Herein he touches old men: And truly in this niggyshnesse, all
are become old men. For covetousness has invaded all ages, all states, all
sexes, and shortneth the time, and abrydgeth the miserable days of wretched
mortal men. While you be busy about this one thing, ye consume your whole
life, being unmindful, in a manner, both of your selves, and your pleasures:
which plague if it infected men against their wylles, then might time also be
taken from a man against his will, and the complaynt were reasonable for the
loss of so precious a thing.


Sorrow. It is not covetousness that snatcheth away my time, but necessity.


Reason. What necessity, I pray thee is this, which is able to take that from
thee, which is only thine own? I speak this, for that riches, honor,
power, authority, souereignetie, and such like, Fortune gives and takes
away at her pleasure, but time she can not take from any, contrary to their
lykyng, but it slydeth away by little and little, though a man employ it not, and
by small and small consumes quite away: Neither do you attend it, until it
be gone, then your complayntes do resounde, but too late and to no purpose,
then lament ye the loss of your time, but you say nothing of your own fault.


Sorrow. Only necessity constrained me to loose my time.


Reason. I demand again of thee, what urgent necessity was it, unless that
while thou wast busied about thy Lords and Masters afayres, thou neglectedst
thine own, as though covetousness and insatiable desire of gain were not the
only matter that enforced thee thereunto? Lay aside thine own desires, and
thou shall no longer obey thy Lords and Masters desires. But this incurable
poison is so dispersed throughout your Veins, and crept into the principal
parts of your bodies, that it dulleth your senses, and steals from you not
your time only, but also your liberty and life, while you perceive no such
matter. But if happily thou have not bestowed thy time in pursuyng of thine own
covetousness, or of others, but in the honest affairs of thy Common wealth,
this is no loosyng of time, but a commendable employing of the most precious
thing, upon the most dearest thing that is in all the world, wherein thou
have discharged the duty of a good man, and of a notable Citizen: Although I
am not ignorant, that the common sore of men do call that time lost, which
is not bestowed upon covetousness, when as in truth that is the lost time
which is bestowed upon it: and how know we, whether thou mean the loss of
thy time after the common manner of speaking? Which if I thought to be so,
leauyng of the saluing of so incurable a sore, I would confess that it is not
thy time, but thou thy self that art utterly lost and cast away. But if so be,
as I could rather wyshe, thou would, I say not give, but render thy time
unto thy GOD, which thou can not do without true godliness, know then,
that this were a great and inestimable lucre: For, by the expense of a little
time, thou should gain immortality: And what Merchant is he, that ever
happened upon the like fortunate exchange?


Sorrow. The cause of my loosyng of my time is far other.


Reason. I understand not what cause thou meanest: for if thou thynkest that
thou wast constrained thereunto by means of anger, or sorrow, or love, or any
other passion of the mind, thou art deceived. For there is the like reason in
them, and in covetousness, whereof I spoke erewhyle, they be all voluntary,
and none of them constrained. For that is evident unto common sense, and by
Tullie disputed in many places, and very often repeated. If none of these be
the cause, what is it other then sl^uth and idleness? And so we come to that
which Seneca says, Most shameful is that loss, which comes through
negligence.


Sorrow. Woeful necessity constrained me to loose my time.


Reason. Yet I understand not the matter: For, if thine enemy have thee in
hold, if death be at hand, these things I confess may hinder good actions,
but not virtuous and godly thoughts, which in that state are most eminent,
and apparent. In which cares and cogitations truly the time is not lost, I
know not whether less in any other thing: which cogitations truly may
either go into Regulus Barrel, or Phalaris Bull, or go up upon Theodorus
Cyrenensis Gallows, and no body let them. Thus which way foeuer thou turnest
thy self, the blame of loosyng thy time, shall be returned upon thy self.
Howbeit you, according to your custom, accusing nature for making the time
transitory, although here be nothing eternal, acquit your selves of every
thing, when as in deed ye be gyltie of all. For all of you, for the most part,
do loose your time, or rather cast it away, and contemn it as a vile thing,
and nothing worth, which I would God you would bestow in seeking after
virtue and glory, and not always in infamy and everlasting reproach,
although to speak truly, whatsoever is not converted to the use that it was
ordained for, may be said to be lost. To this end it is evident that man was
borne, and had the benefice of time given him, that he might honor and love
his Creator, and think upon him: and whatsoever is done beside this, is
doubtless lost, and cast away.


Of unfortunate playing at Tables. The xvi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost at Table playing.


Reason. Did I not tell thee when thou wonnest, that it was but vzurie, and not
gain?


Sorrow. I am drawn dry with gamyng.


Reason. This game is of the same quality that Physicians be, by ministering of
a lule, to draw forth a great deal: but believe me, thou have more cause
now to rejoice, then when thou triumphedst with false joy. Better is sharp
chasticement, then deceitful flattery. The little vantage which thou gottest
then, did bring thee unto the whirlepoole of gaming now, and this loss will
reclayme thee thence again. It is better to go the right way with a foul
bridle, then to be driven into a pyt out of the way with a golden pair of
reigns.


Sorrow. I have lost at tables.


Reason. But thou have won at the game of manners, if what thou have done
thou mark diligently: otherwise good medicines were in vain geathered
together for an incurable disease, if neither loss nor shame could revoke
thee from this bottomless pyt of destruction: for when as experience brings
no profit, there is it in vain to seek to do good with words.


Of her unto whom one was assured, judged unto another. The.xvii. Dialogue.
SORROW. THe Judges sentence have taken from me her, to whom I was assured.


Reason. Sentences of Judges have been against some deceyptful, against some
plainly wrongful.


Sorrow. I have lost her, to whom I was assured, by a verdict of Court.


Reason. Some by craft, and some by swoorde, and which is a means of all
other most shameful, some have lost their wives by gold. A man has nothing
that is his own: at the one side is theft, on the other deceypt, then rapine,
next prayers, then money, and last of all, death. By this wheel, the
government of temporal goods is turned up and down, and that which was
ones, becomes another, and anon shall pass to the third: which if it be to
be borne withal in profitable things, in hurtful and noisome things it is to
be rejoiced at. And what marueyle is it, if humane things be turned up and
down, seeing man him self is turned, and stands not still, but as it is
written, Comes forth as a Flower, and is trodden down, and flies away like
a shadow, and never continues in one state: Thou complaynest that thou have
lost her, to whom thou wast assured, who in passing away, and every day
decreasyng, dooest continually loose thy self.


Sorrow. I have lost in judgment her, to whom I was assured.


Reason. Some contend in the field: but it is safer to contend in law then
in war, with sedules then with swoordes. Thou have read in Virgil, what
strife and contention there was between Lauiniaes suitors, and what was the
end of the war? The wife follows the conqueror, and death follows him
that is conquered: thou have lost thy spouse, and saved thy life.


Sorrow. The Judge has berefte me of my spouse.


Reason. An Adulter or a Thief perhaps would have taken her away. It is a
lyghter matter to loose her whom a man is assured unto, then to loose his true
wife: For in the one, hope only is lost: in the other, a thing certain. Less
is the loss of a thing hoped for, then a thing in possession, and to speak
the same otherwise, of hope, then of an effect.


Sorrow. In judgment have I lost my beloved spouse.


Reason. Thou have not lost her, but have learned that she was not thine.


Sorrow. I have lost her, unto whom I was betrothed.


Reason. He that loses his wife, is delivered of many cares, but he that
loses his spouse, is preserved: both of these are good, but the second is
the better. And why should it not be the better, forasmuch as it is the next
thing, either not to have any wound at all, or to have a present remedy to
cure it. But you being carried forth by the force of your mind, and led
along by great and blind desire, do wyshe for marriage, which when you be
entered into, then do your vex you selves with continual grief and
complaints, and then repent you of the deed, when it can not be undone, and
when your repentance is unprofitable, and comes too late.


Sorrow. I have lost her, unto whom I was assured, and the hope which I had of
children.


Reason. Myngle not together lamentations of sundry kinds: for that whereof
thou spakest last, is another part of the rash desire of mortal men. For this
it is, ye desire to be married, and to have issue by your wives: but the gods
do not grant always unto men that which shall please them, but that which
shall profit them. Thou remembrest in Apuleius Madaurensis, how that the poor
Maiden, that was fallen into the Thieves hands, with the reigns of her bridle
turned the miserable Ass, upon which she road, into that part of the three
ways in which there was most danger, but he forced to go the contrary,
whereas it was the safest way, and covertly reproved the foolyshe wench that
hasted forward to her own hinderance: But in the mean while that they were
thus stryuyng, the Thieves, whom they thought they had escaped, came rushyng
upon them, by whom the Maiden, who so carefully contended for her own
destruction, was carried away into woeful captivity. Not much unlike to this
is the contention between the providence of GOD, and the folly of man,
concerning the iourneyng and passing forth of this life: For the providence of
GOD, which is of things that are to come, dryueth you thither, where all
things are pleasant and without danger, against which strives your blind
foolyshnesse, which favors her own wretchedness, in obeying and geuyng
credit unto such mischiefs as might well be avoided, until suddayne
miseries catch you by the backs.


Sorrow. I am overthrown in the Law, and have lost her, unto whom I was made
sure.


Reason. Thou art worthy to have won: for when two strive for one woman, he
that has her, loses, and he that has won her, is overcome, and he that is
overcome, is a conqueror, and a free man at his own liberty.


Of the loss of a man's wife. The.xviii. Dialogue.
SORROW. ALas, I have lost my wife.


Reason. O froward disposition, and strange nature of a man, that weepest at
the burial of thy wife, and dauncedst when thou wast married unto her?


Sorrow. I have lost my wife.


Reason. O mad man, sing the brydale song: It is now time to wear Crowns
and Garlandes, and to be decked with special Flowers and Nosegayes, dispatch,
and make an end. Thou have gotten the upper hand in a dangerous conflict, and
art delivered from a long beseegyng.


Sorrow. I have lost my wife.


Reason. Thou meanest that thou have lost her, in that signification, that men
say they have lost an Ague, or a Byle, or Scabbes. And sometime it is a kind
of gain, to loose.


Sorrow. I have lost my wife.


Reason. Perhaps thou never gaynedst more upon one day: out of what fetters
art thou escaped? From what shypwracke have thou swum to shore?


Sorrow. But I have lost a good wife.


Reason. All men use to say so, yea they that know the contrary: and although
a good wife, or rather a good woman, be a rare and strange creature upon the
earth, notwithstanding to avoid altercation, I will grant thee that thou have
lost such a wife as thou speak of: neither will I therefore aunsweare thee,
as once I aunsweared in Seneca, while this same question was handled, to wit,
That if thou made her good, thou may make another good: and if thou
foundest her good, thou may find another good. But I change mine opinion,
for I would not have thee often to assay so dangerous a matter, which
although it have once happily chanced, yet were it folly to adventure it
many times: An evil woman shall sooner find an hundred, then a good woman
find one like to her self. And therefore, who so has had an evil wife, let
him be afearde of such another: and he that has had a good one, let him not
hope for the like: but let both of them take heed, the one, that he increase
not his misery, the other, that he impair not his felicity. Thus every way,
it is best to abstain from second marriage. And therefore now, if thou have
lost a good wife, as thou say, rejoice rather for that which is past, then
conceive hope for that which is to come, neither commit thy ship often to
the wind, because thou have often arrived safe at the shore.


Sorrow. Death has loosed the band of wedlock, wherewith I was bounden.


Reason. Bind not thy self again: think with thy self how excellent and
incomparable a thing liberty is, and embrace the counsel of Cicero, who when
he had an old wife, of heart of oak, of whose death there was no hope to be
conceived, he sued a divorce, and was dismissed from her: But when his friends
exhorted him to marry another, he aunsweared, That he could not attend both
a wife, and also the study of wisdom.


Sorrow. I have lost a good wife.


Reason. How if this be no loss, but a gain, and an auoydyng of great danger?
For as a man may happily find a good wife, so where shall he seek for a
constant wife? Well known is the sayeing of the worthy Poet, Women be
always diverse, and changeable.


Sorrow. I have lost a good wife, and in her flooryshyng years.


Reason. Art thou not then sufficiently acquainted with the manners of women?
How many chaste young women do we see to become wanton old wives? For when
the heat of letcherie once takes hold in the bones of an old jade, it
burns the more violently, as it were fire in dry woodde. And now thou have
avoided the alteration of life that was at hand, or else to the end thou
would be out of danger, thou have made provision to eschew the burden and
tediousness of old age approchyng. The yoke of marriage is grievous unto
young men, but most grievous, hard, and importable unto old men.


Sorrow. I have lost a young wife.


Reason. Whether issue be sought for by marriage, or else pleasure, whereof the
one belongs unto an husband, the other to a lascivious person, youth is
aptest unto them both: but whether thou receyuedst the first of these of thy
wife, or the second, thou wast desirous she should come to that age in which
she should be unmeet for them both: or whether thou hopedst that she that was
by nature become unfit for these matters, could be amended by old age: which
truly was but a vain expectation, and a foolyshe hope.


Sorrow. Having lost my sweet wife, I am now alone.


Reason. It is a good solitariness, to be without evil company. There is
nothing softer then an empty bed, nor harder, then when it is filled with
twain, specially unto a busied mind, and him that loves sweet sleeps, and
rests in the contemplation of some great and excellent matter in his mind:
for there is nothing more enemy unto notable attemptes, then the company of a
woman. But I am not ignorant, what is wont to be said against this, by such
as take pleasure in their own misery, They that know not marriage, say they,
condemn marriage: and as it is said in the common Proverb, Batchelars wives
shall be beaten, and well taught: but I say contrary, that there are none that
use to complain of marriage, as far as ever I heard, but such as have borne
the burden of marriage.


Sorrow. I have lost a very good wife.


Reason. And even those that seem to be best and most loving to their
husbands, sometime will burn with jealousy and suspicion more fervently then
any other, by means whereof, domestical peace must needs become on fire. To
what end therefore is thy complaint? Thou have lost thy wife, and found thy
liberty, a single life, peace, sleep, quietness: Now shall thou pass forth
the night without braulyng.


Sorrow. I am without a wife.


Reason. And also without an aduersaris: Now shall thou begin to be Lord and
Master, both of thy self, and thine. Thou may arise in the morning, and
go forth when thou wylt, and come home again at night as late as thou lust:
thou may be alone all the day, or keep company with whom thou please, and
there shall be none to control thee.


Sorrow. I have lost my wife.


Reason. Thou may now revoke thy liberty and quietness into thy chamber,
which of late thou had lost and exiled, that shall be unto thee a companion
more profitable then any wife.


Sorrow. I have lost a good and a fair wife.


Reason. It is the part of a fool to love his fetters, yea, though they were
made of gold.


Of a shrewyshe wife. The.xix. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have a shrewyshe wife.


Reason. It were better for thee thou had lost her: and even now thou
complaynedst that thou had lost her in deed.


Sorrow. I have an unquiet wife.


Reason. For the first trouble that a man comes into, perhaps he is to be
pardoned or pitied, but for the second time he is to be blamed: and he that is
not sufficiently plagued with one wife, is worthy to have many.


Sorrow. I have a shrewde wife.


Reason. In other matters thou may some deal blame fortune, but in choice of
a wife, specially of a second wife, thou can blame none but thy self, for
thou have procured this mischief unto thy self.


Sorrow. I suffer a malapert wife.


Reason. Set on fire wet chafe, break thy tyles, and for other matters thou
art provided for: thus shall thou have sufficient means to drive thee out of
thy doors, to wit, smoke, rain, and thy shrewyshe wife.


Sorrow. I have an untrusty wife.


Reason. Then art thou not without danger: The wives of Agamemnon and Scipio
Affricane made away with their husbands, that in the mean while I may speak
nothing of Amphiareus, of Deiphobus, and of Sampson, with others, ouerlong and
many to be recited. But as for the other sort, they are innumeble, whose
wives neither constrained their husbands to die, nor suffered them to live.


Sorrow. Thou tellest me of mischiefs that are very well known, but I seek
for remedy.


Reason. There be some that in this raze would give thee counsel to chastise
her, and by correction to bring her manners from worse to better, and in that
only to apply thy diligence: but what is mine opinion herein? Truly to
chastise her, if chastisement will avail, but if it be in vain, then to arm
thy self with patience, to endeavor thy self to love her, and that which
thou art constrained to do, to do it wyllyngly. Vacro has written a Satyr*
which they call Menippea, concerning the duty of an husband, there shall
thou read the short, but effectual counsel of that learned man concerning
this matter, expressed in these words, The wives fault must either be taken
away, that is to say, corrected, or suffered. And this reason of the saying,
though short, yet sine, is likewise aleadged, He that takes away the fault,
says he, makes his wife more tolerable, but be that suffers it, makes him
self the better. Which saying some other writers have thus interpreted: That
this fault in a man's wife if it cannot be corrected, must be borne withal,
which a man may well do with honesty yenough, for that an inconvenience is
better then a mischief: and this they say was only Varroes meaning.


Sorrow. My wife is malapert and unquiet.


Reason. Suffer her manners if they can be changed, and how thou shall live
abroad, learn at home with Socrates. And since that he endured twain at once,
and other have abydden more together, do not thou fall to the ground under one
burden.


Sorrow. I have an unquiet wife.


Reason. Unto whom may it not happen to have an unquiet wife, unless it be to
him that altogether abstayneth from marriage? since that Hadriane the
Emperor, and the most excellent and courteous Prince Augustus, the one having
to wife Sabina, the other Scribonia, were both troubled with crabbed and
unquiet pieces, and of very rough behavior, well deseruyng to be divorced: and
Cato likewise, surnamed Censorius, being a man of so severe and invincible a
mind as he was, happened to marry with one called Paula, a fierce and proud
woman, and, that thou may marueyle the more at the matter, descended of a
base and obscure family: which I do note the rather, to the intent that no
man may hope that he can escape the troubles of marryage either by matchyng
with a wife of a base stock, or poor calling, other wise then by keeping him
self always unmarried: but those which he cannot escape, set him learn to
bear them with patience, and not vex him self with kickyng and stryuing
against them, and boastyngly sha^pen that yoke which he has wyllingly
undertaken.


Sorrow. I suffer an importunate, and an untamed wife.


Reason. Thou dooest well, for that must be borne which cannot be laid
down, yea, although it do wring.


Sorrow. I have a most unquiet wife.


Reason. Thou have an occasion whereby to win the commendacion of patience,
whereby to wyshe for quietness, whereby to love to travail from home, and to
be loath to return, where both thy tongue and thy stick must needs be
walking.


Of the stealing away of a man's wife. The.xx. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY wife is stolen away.


Reason. All violence, I confess, is grievous unto him that suffers it: but
if thou consider of this matter indifferently, I pray thee what cause of grief
brings it? forasmuch as if thy wife were an unquiet woman, the losyng of her
is the releasyng from a payneful hurden.


Sorrow. My wife is stolen away.


Reason. If he be rewarded that cures some grief of the body, what is he
worthy to have that relieueth the troubles of the mind? If a Physician should
free thee of a Tertian Fever, thou would give him both thanks and money:
and what wylt thou now give him that has ryd thee of a Cotidian?


Sorrow. My wife is taken from me.


Reason. Thou know not how much thou art beholden to him that has taken
her away, great care, and perpetual braulyng, and perhaps also no small
danger, is with thy wife departed out of thy doors. Many have been destroyed,
who doubtless had lived, if that by stealyng or otherwise they had lost
their wives: among the mischiefs of this life, there is none worse then
domestical disagreement.


Sorrow. My wife is stolen away, and gone.


Reason. If she be forcibly carried away, forgive her: but if she be gone
willyngly, by one deed thou art doubly revenged: For the Harlot is gone to her
Knave, and he has carried that, which annoyed thee, into his own house. For
what manner of woman may her sweet heart hope that she will be unto him, that
has showed her self so loving and trusty to her husband?


Sorrow. My wife is gone willyngly with him that carried her away.


Reason. Let him alone awhyle: it will not be long before he be weery of that
which troubled thee. If men would consider with them selves, what they go
about before they commit any wicked deed, they would not throw them selves
down headlong so hastily into offenses: But now the repentance that follows
them, condempneth their fervent appetites. You see nothing but that which is
done, your eyes are in your back, your face is blind.


Sorrow. My wife is stolen from me.


Reason. This kind of miurie not so much as kings could escape: for
Masinissa stole away Syphax wife, and so did Herod Philips.


Sorrow. My wife is stolen away.


Reason. That which has once happened unto thee, happened twyce unto Menelaus.


Of an unchaste wife. The.xxi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have an unchaste wife at home.


Reason. It were better that she were stolen away, or were a shrewe, and of
rough manners, rather then of wanton and dishonest behavior: Notwithstanding,
who so is of a lively spirit, and valiant courage, and contemns all mortal
things, must endure whatsoever may happen. Men's miseries are innumerable,
against all which only virtue is opposed.


Sorrow. I have a dishonest wife.


Reason. Notable and excellent chastity, has made certain matrones to
arrogant. She fears nothing, who is gyltie to her self of nothing. And
therefore that disco^moditie brings this benefit with it, that she will begin
now hereafter to be less saucie and insolent: For a guilty conscience abateth
the swelling pride of a woman's mind, and commonly she that knows that she
has trod her shoe awrye, will be afterward the more serviceable to her husband.


Sorrow. I have a wanton wife.


Reason. Thou must not wonder at that if she be fair, and if she be foul thou
need not care for it.


Sorrow. My wife is incontinent.


Reason. When a man brings a fair wife into his house, he ought also to
remember the saying of the Satiryke Poet, Beauty and honesty do seldom dwell
to geather: but if she be a foul slut, and do so abuse her self, thou may
rejoice that thou have found so just a cause to be divorced from her.


Sorrow. My wife has committed adultery.


Reason. Adultery many times happens upon ouerhastie desire of marriage, and
often times also it is the punishment of another man's adultery, and the more
just if it be of many. Recount with thy self, whether thou ever did that
unto another, whereby thou may think this worthily done unto thee. It is
an unjust and an unreasonable complaint, to be grieved to suffer that, which
thy self have done: and the moral law wylleth to look for that at another
man's hands, which thou have done to another: and to do that unto another,
which thou would have him do unto thee: truly, it is so excellent a law,
that the Heathen have commended it, being led thereunto by the indifferency
and gravity of the saying. But the licentiousness of humane wantonness,
being the repealer of al wholesome laws, does utterly confound al right and
wrong. And thus then it happens, that adulterers sometime do meet together,
who when they have defiled their neighbors wives, yet can they not abide their
own wives so much as once to be seen in open streate: and if they perceive
that any man does but look upon them, they will immediately be ready to run
mad for iclousie: So severe unto others, so partial unto him self, so
indiscreet a considerer of matters is every particular man.


Sorrow. My wife has broken her wifely fidelity toward me.


Reason. See that thou break not the same, not only unto other married men,
but also unto thine own wife. For there be some that require that of their
wives, which they them selves do not perform, excusing their wantonness under
the title of dalliance, and punishing the same in others most severely as a
most grievous offense, who in geuyng all liberty to them selves, deny al
things unto other. Most unequal judges, who being them selves unchaste, do give
sentence against incontinencie in others, and them selves will do what they
lust without controulment, and are carried away after uncertain and wandering
venerie, as if they were subject to no law. If the poor wife do but look a
little awrye, she is straight ways accused of whoordome: as though their
husbands were their masters, and not their husbands, and they not their
wives and fellows in the house and family both of GOD and man, but were
rather their handmaydens taken prisoners in battle, or bought for money: and
as though thy wife ought thee more service, or fidelity, then thou her: for
there ought to be like duty, equal love, and mutual fidelity in marriage. I
excuse not wives, but I accuse husbands, and put them in the greatest part of
the blame. And many times the husband is an example, and procurer of his wife
unto folly, and many times there has risen the beginning of the mischief,
where ought to have been the remedy: although shamefastness be the proper
ornament of a woman, and wisdom and constancy the peculiar commendacion of a
man. And therefore all folly and lightness of mind, is by so much the more
foul in aman then in a woman, by how much gravity is the more required in a
man.


Sorrow. I am heavy for my wives whoredom.


Reason. A common sorrow, an ancient injury, and no less frequented. For
(alas I speak it with bitter grief) Marriage is not more commonly used, then
is whoredom: and to speak in few words, it is a thing, as one says,
which can neither be suffered, nor prohibited, for that honesty forbids
the one, The aucthour speaks of his abominable country.
and letcherie the other. Dooest thou look then to have thine only woman wholly
to thy self, which thing could never happen, no not to the most cruel
Tyrants that ever were, nor to the most mighty Princes that ever reigned,
not in thine age only, but in any heretofore? I omit late examples, least happily
I offend some that are living at this present, it were better to stryke
Hercules, then a Clown of the Country: neither will I touch al ancient
examples, but spare the good name and estimation of the most dread and noble
men. But thou know them well, and although they say nothing, yet repress
thou thy mournyng, or else peruse the City, search near hand among thy
neighbors, and at each hand thou shall find plenty, that either lament the
loss of their good name, and the abandoned fidelity of their marryage bed, or
that, contrary to their opinion, are laughed to scorn of the common people.
These things are ordinary, not only to be heard with ears, but also to be
seen with eyes, whereof thou shall not mysse in what part soever of the world
thou trauaylest. Howbeit the greater the examples be, the greater is the
comfort. Think upon those Kings and Lords of the world, whom thou have
seen, and then call to mind those of whom thou have read, or heard of by
report. Look upon the fable of King Arthure, and the Hitories of other:
consider of Olympias that was wife unto Philip, and Cleopatra to Ptolomee, and
Clytemnestra to Agamemnon, and Helen to Menelaus, and Pasiphe to Minos, and
Phaedra to Theseus: neither would I have thee to think that the city of
Rome, which in old time was as it were the Temple of shamefastness and
honesty, is free from this mischief. Call to mind Metella, which was wife to
that Sylla, who if he had known of his wyfes whoordome, which was commonly
spoken of, not only at Rome and over al Italy, but also at Athens and over all
Greece, verily I suppose he would not have usurped the name of happy, which
apparteyned nothing unto him. Next unto her think upon Iulia the wife of
Agrippa, whom on the one side the woorthynesse of her husband, on the other
the Majesty of her father, ought to have stayed from wickedness: and also her
daughter, nothing unlike the mother either in name or lasciviousness: and
lykemyse Iulia the wife of Seuerus, who followed their steps both in life and
fortune: an unlucky name (I think) for the preservation of honesty. What
shall I say of Domicia, the wife of Domician? What of Herculanilla the wife of
Claudius? Or forasmuch as this Emperors fortune was to have Whoores to his
Wives, what shall I say of Messalina, that was a most foul blemyshe and
reproach to the whole Empire? Who leauyng the bed of her lasie and weeried
husband the Emperor, used to go about to the Stews and brothel houses,
committing that there, which were shameful to report? To what end should I
briefly touch these, or any other? or what brothell house were not to little to
receive all the strumpettes that were Emperors wives? the rehearsyng of whose
names, I confess were neither honest, neither in any part extenuateth the
offense of adultery, but makes it rather more grievous? Nevertheless, the
likeness that men do perceive in the miseries and troubles of others unto
their own, carries with it no small efficacy of comfort: not that any man is
so spiteful to rejoice at other men's harms, but rather that it might be
meeryly said to be an intolerable deintienesse, or pride, for a man of mean
calling to take that impatiently, which he knows that the Lords of all the
world have so often suffered. Every man must take his own fortune in good
part. Which that they ought to tolerate with more indifferency then a common
chance, it is well known unto all men, as well to the smallest as the greatest,
as also who so were most overthwart to grant a verity. And therefore thou
see, how not only women that are married unto husbands, but also virgins
that are vowed unto God, do fall sometime into this crime, and, alas there
while, neither the reverence of their so mighty a spouse, is able to bridle
their unhappy and headlong soul. For, whom will unrestrained and frantike
letcherie spare, which stands not in fear of revenge from God? or from whom
will it absteyne, which leaves not the bodies, which are consecrated to God,
undefiled? Which so great and heinous monsters of most filthy lust and
lasciviousness, are not seen only in this our age, although in indifferent
judgment there were never any more shameful, or that deserved the reuengement
of greater offense, but also in that age, in which wickedness was as geason,
as virtue is now, and in which it was punyshed more extremely then at any
time before or since. Yea, the Vestale Virgyns them selves, unto whose most
pure chastity, the Tribunitian and Cenforian authority refused not to give
place, whom also we find to have been taken up into the Charrettes of them
that rode in triumph, least that their triumph should happily be hyndered by
any, and to be short, who we read to have sauod from punishment such
offenders as they met going unto execution, and to have revoked the force of
the laws, and sentence of death, only in reverence and regard of their
Virginity: in whom on the other side, not only a fylthie deed, but also
light iesture, apparel, or speech, was not suffered, without sharp
punishment and infamy: nevertheless some of them, unmindful both of their
honor and honesty, and of the terror ensuyng thereof, and of the most
horrible crime of adultery, or rather incest, have been buried quick in the
earth, as it appears in histories. Go thy ways now, and being overwhelmed
with so many, and so notable, and so holy examples, in so great a ruin and
overthrow of honesty, to the great reproach of so many noble personages,
bewail thou the crazed fidelity of a mean and inferior bed.


Sorrow. My wife is an adulteress.


Reason. The same has been an occasion unto some men of changyng their life to
the better, who being discharged of the fetters of matrimony, and castyng of
that heavy burden, have clymbed up to an higher degree. And what shall let
thee, to make this thy wives fylthinesse, the first step unto thine
advancement to a life of more liberty? Some time a burden, and many times a
companion have stayed the feet that would have gone apace. If thou go alone
and without carriage, thou shall go the faster whyther soever thou pretendest
to go.


Sorrow. I am defamed through my wives dishonestie.


Reason. By another man's offense a man may sustain loss and sorrow, but not
infamy: as of another man's virtue, he may conceive joy, but can win no glory:
it is thine own virtue or vice only, that can make thee glorious or infamous.


Sorrow. I am touched with my wives infamy


Reason. Either hold thy peace, or flee from it, or revenge it. The middle of
these did that holy man follow, who won a surname by his simplicity. And
truly touching the first of these, it is too gentle, and the third, too hard:
as for the middle, it seems more commendable, and agreeable with the nature
of a man, specially such men whose calling is of the middle degree. For it
were in vain to go about to make a law over the proud mighty sort: will,
lust, anger, pangues, these are the laws of mighty insolency. They are of
opinion, that every wound should be cut away with any instrument: but in
deed there be many that need no instrument of inc sion, but may be cured
only by playsters, and fomentations.


Sorrow. My wife is dishonest.


Reason. If thou can be content to suffer, perhaps continuance of time, and
trouble, and toylyng, and children, and poverty, will reclayme her: yea, very
shame has been a profitable bridle unto many.


Sorrow. My wife is gone away with infamy.


Reason. Pray that she return no more, for to wyshe that she were not gone, is
now too late.


Sorrow. My wife is gone away after her adulterer.


Reason. Had thou rather that she had brought him into thy chamber? This
shame and regard of estimation has moved the unchaste woman at least wise to
lead her filthy life far of from thee, she has avoided thy sight, and was
ashamed to abide in thy presence: and therefore thou have to accuse her
dishonestie, and not her flight.


Sorrow. My filthy wife is gone.


Reason. If thou be sorry for that, thou art worthy that she had carried with
thee, and that she soon returned unto thee.


Of a barren Wife. The.xxij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have a barren Wife.


Reason. Barrenness is one remedy of the inconveniences of marriage, for it
makes women obedient and humble. She that brings many children, thinks her
self no longer to be a wife, but a Lady: but she that is barren, weepeth, and
holds her peace. Dooest thou not remember Helcana?


Sorrow. I have happened upon a barren wife.


Reason. Thou complaynedst erewhyle of thy wives incontinencie, and now thou
find fault with her barrenness: But if thy first complaint were just, then
is this thy second unjust. It is expedient for an incontinent man to have a
barren wife, for then shall he not keep an other man's children, which is a
more odious and grievous thing, then any the wives injury or filthiness
whatsoever: if it be a woeful case to have an adulterous wife, it is more
miserable to have a fruiteful wife.


Sorrow. My wife is barren.


Reason. See that thou do not that which many a one does, object thine own
fault to another. Many women being married unto some one man, have seemed
barren, which when they have been married unto other men have had children.


Sorrow. My wife is barren.


Reason. How know thou what manner of son she would bear thee, if she
were fruiteful? The byrthes of some women have made their fruitefulnesse
hateful, and therefore to have been wyshed that they had been barren. The
Empire of Rome had not suffered and abydden those cruel monsters of men,
Caius, Caligula, Nero, Commodus, Bassianus, if that Germanicus, of Domitius, if
Marcus Antonius. if Septimus Seuerus, had had no wives at all, or else if they
had been barren.


Of an unchaste Daughter. The xxiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY Daughter is too nice.


Reason. It is reported, how that Augustus the Emperor was wont to say, that
he had two delicate and nice Daughters, whom both notwithstanding he must
suffer, to wit, the Common wealth, and his daughter Iulia. But as for his
daughter Iulia, he said that he knew that she was of a pleasant disposition
and merry, even unto the resemblance of incontinencie, but was assured that
she was free from any dishonest deed dooyng. Howbeit the most wise prince, in
so thynkyng, was deceived in them both: For the Common wealth had then begun to
degenerate from the ancient virtue and integrity thereof, and his daughter
wast not only nice, and wanton, but also shamefully reported of, and her good
name blemyshed with reproaches, which the father only never heard of, and at
length, though too late first, brake forth into the light: notwithstanding
according to this signification, thy Daughter may be nice, but honest enough.
Which thing though I grant thee, nevertheless it can not be denied, but that
niceness and delicateness are the ready way unto woorishnesse.


Sorrow. My Daughter begins to wax wanton.


Reason. Look unto her at the beginning: hard things require an instument of
iron to take them away, but tender things are plucked away with a man's
fyngers. Who so is desirous to have an habit, or the perfect use of any thing,
let him begin in his youth to practice it, whether it be in him self, or
another. Young things are easily fashioned, and turned which way soever a man
list.


Sorrow. My Daughter waxes lascivious.


Reason. Withdraw her dainty fare, take from her, her soft and brave
apparel, her Ringes, and Bracelets, and other Iewelles, and what ever she has
else, wherein either she takes delyght her self, or indeuoureth to please
other. Lay upon her other care of household, stint her at sewing and spynning,
or whatsoever work thou can devise to make hard her soft and delicate
hands. Restrain her from common shows, and resort of people. Keep her
within doors upon Holidayes, leave her no time to think upon vain and
unprofitable matters. Business, and labor, and homely apparel, and hard
fare, and solitariness, and continual bendyng of the mind upon one thing,
moreover a beloved and feared witness, often warnynges, gentle threatninges,
and if need require, some time sharper: these be the doors and bars of
chastity against dishonestie, and that keep of inuadyng and assaultyng
passions from entryng into an idle mind, and abandon them if they be entered.


Sorrow. My Daughter is dishonest.


Reason. This is the counsel of Ecclesiasticus, Take diligent heed over thy
dishonest Daughter, lest that she chance to bring thee to shame. Although
there be nothing that thou could suffer more grievous then this,
nevertheless if thou leave no part of thy fatherly duty undone, thou have
wherewithal to comfort thy sorrow: For the grief may be thine, but neither the
shame, nor the fault, forasmuch as it is a very hard matter to bridle the
mind that is prone unto lust and viciousness, and a thing that is impossible
for man to do, unless that GOD set to his helpyng hand. For the force of the
affection is so great and disordinate, that many times the father in vain, in
vain the brethren, in vain the husband also stryueth against it. And no
marueyle, since it is written, I am not able to live continent, unless GOD
give me the grace. Howbeit, this is no excuse for dishonestie, for GOD
grants it unto as many as require it at his hands with a pure faith, and
which endeavor of them selves what in them lies, acknowledgyng whose gift it
is, and esteemyng truly of it, and of the auctour thereof.


Sorrow. My Daughter is an Harlot.


Reason. If she be married, then is thy son in law partaker of thy sorrow:
thou have also Augustus the Emperor, both to be unto thee a companion of the
injury, and an example of the reuengement.


Of shame coming from another. The.xxiiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am slaundred for an other man's offense.


Reason. I told thee erewhyle, and true it is, that the grief of another man's
offense may touch thee, but so can not the infamy. I tell thee true. And if
it be a false infamy, though for the time it be grievous, yet is it not
durable, and to make infamy or glory durable; thou must look into thine own
field, and prune the vine of thy mind with thine own sickle.


Sorrow. I am sorry for another man's fault.


Reason. Truly I believe thee. But rejoice then in thine own innocence,
unless thou grieve more at other men's matters, then at thine own, for the
inheritance of fame descends not as does the inheritance of a patrimony,
for if it were so, it might sometime be refused. No man is constrained to take
upon him a burdensome and infamous inheritance: for as I said before, it
descends not by succession of name: there is no degree of kyndred expected in
this matter. whether thou desire to have a glorious or obscure name, it must
come from thy self, and not from another, and therein thine own desartes are
necessary. There is a time when as another man's deeds can neither defame
thee, nor commend thee. To what purpose dooest thou expect the Carrier, or the
Post, or the Testatour? or repose any trust in thy most loving and noble
auncetours, thy Father or Grandfather? or to what end art thou afearde of any
of them, to become infamous or obscure, by any of their means? Truly by
neither sort of them comes either estimation, or discredit. Fame is not
bequeathed, but won.


Sorrow. I am ouerburdened with the infamy of my friends.


Reason. It is rather thine own fancy that oppresses thee, which is one of
the cheifest roots of humane misery. Cast of that, and thou shall lyghten thy
self of a false burden.


Sorrow. I am diffamed with the offenses of my friends.


Reason. I deny that it is possible to be so, howbeit I confess, that it were
better for thee to be diffamed for other men's crimes, then that other men
should be for thine: For more heavy is the weight of offense, then infamy,
for where offense is, there is perfect misery. And contrariwyse, false infamy
has no part of perfect and true misery, as has false glory, although the
one vex the minds of the common multitude, and the other delyght them.


Sorrow. I can not choose, but be grieved and touched with the infamy of my
friends.


Reason. To be touched is charitable, to be discomforted is wretched. And
therefore, while there are some remnantes of hope remaining, be careful for the
good name of thy friends, and have respect unto the unquietness and trouble
which thou have conceived. If all hope be gone, my counsel is, layng them
aside, to put of all grief and vexation: for to endeavor in vain, and seek
for matter of sorowfulnesse, is a like madness.


Sorrow. I am blamed for my servants crimes.


Reason. Thou art woorthily punished for thy patience, and too much sufferyng,
when thou myghtest have avoided that ignominy, by punyshyng and correctyng the
aucthours of the mischief.


Sorrow. But I am molested with reproaches, which are due unto them that can
not easily be corrected, nor put away.


Reason. Who be they, I pray thee? For, as touching the correction of the
parents, it is in no wise permitted to the children. And therefore by that
means there can grow no infamy, but rather in vpryght judgment, there will
spryng up unto thee as it were a certain bryghtnesse out of the dark: for
since unto virtue difficulty is proper, it is much more harder to keep the
right way under conduct of obscure, then famous leaders, and Captains. But if
it be thy wives, what in that case thou ought to do, and whose remedy to
remember, I have alredie declared. If of thy children, note what men what
manner of children they have had, as Fabius Maximus, and Scipio Africane, and
Pompeius the great: for I follow not now the order of Empire and riches, but
of age and glory: and what manner one Vespasians last was, or Aurelius
Antoninus only, or Seuerus eldest son? What manner ones also, though in
another kind, had Hortensius and Cicero? And lastly what a daughter Augustus
the Emperor had, or what a son Germanicus? and thou shall see great
darkness to have spring out of great light, and thou shall also perceive, how
this evil fortune in children, I know not by what chance, does most
accustomably creep into the most honorable families, and that every one has
that way one grief and imperfection or another, either unknown to the next
neighbors, or not regarded. There are not lackyng also examples of Brethren,
and Nephues. Only I have set down those, whose shame may seem most grievous
unto a man, and to touch him nearest. The order and reason is like in all,
that the blemishes of another person what so ever he be, can not hang or be
fastened upon any man against his will.


Of Infamy. The.xxv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am oppressed with mine own Infamy.


Reason. I was affearde least thou were oppressed with thine own conscience.


Sorrow. I am grieved with shameful infamy.


Reason. If it be deserved, lament not the infamy, but the cause of the
infamy: but if it be undeserved, contemn the errors of men with a valient
courage, and comfort thy self with the testimony of a good conscience.


Sorrow. I sustain great infamy.


Reason. Thou gronest under a burden of wind: thus naturally the weakness of
the bearer, makes a light burden heavy.


Sorrow. There is great infamy risen upon my name.


Reason. It skilleth much upon what roots it is sprung up: if upon truth, it
will continue, and increase: otherwise it will wither and fall away quickly.


Sorrow. There is great slander grown unto me.


Reason. Thou say well, if thou speak of the blowyng of it abroad: For fame
is but a blast, yea that fame is but the breath of an impure mouth oftentimes,
which does so much shake you, and make you afeard. But vehement infamy in
deed, has been unto many the beginning of great fame and renown: For the
common multitude has been often ashamed of their own dooinges, and that after
their old custom and manner they might heap one error upon another, and
exclude all mean and measure from every thing, have at length obscured a small
infamy, with immoderate praises.


Sorrow. On every side I am sorely slaundered.


Reason. While the winds ruffle round about thee, return thou into the
Haven, and from the storms of thine ears, withdraw thy self into the closet
of thine heart, which if it retain it own tranquillity, then have thou a
place where to rest thy self from the weerisomnesse of chyding and brawlyng,
and as the common saying is, Rejoice in thine own bosom.


Sorrow. My fame is blemished, but my conscience is clear.


Reason. Had thou rather then, that thy fame and estimation were renowned,
and thy conscience foul and blemished? And is that saying of Horace altogether
true, False honor delyghteth, and living infamy makes men afearde? O most
vain vanity. True things in deed may delyght men, or make them afearde, but
to dread shadows is not the part of a man.


Sorrow. The burden of infamy is heavy.


Reason. If it be geathered by wickedness, I confess it is heavy, if it come
by chance, it is but light, but if it happen through any honest endeavor, it
is glorious: For that infamy which is purchased by honest means, is a
praise. Let fools insult over thee, but rejoice thou in so noble a gain, to
wit, in virtue, which is a most rare and dayntie merchandise, although thou
have won it, paying therefore a great price, which is the loss of thy good
name. He is the true lover and pursuer of virtue, who in the followyng after
her, thinks upon nothing but her only. And although contempt in other
things be famous, yet most famous is the neglectyng and despising of fame in
the study of virtue, although I confess that unto valiant and noble mynds,
fame is not only dearer then gold, but much more precious then life it self.
Who so therefore neclecteth fame for the love of virtue, contemns this, it may
be thought that he will contemn any thing, which I would have thee well know
to be an excellent, but a very rare thing, forasmuch as the most part of them
that would seem to follow the study of virtue, when they have once taken
hold of the fame of it, do immediately wax so cold in the action thereof,
that it may easily be perceived, that they sought nothing else but only that
whereof they have taken holdfast.


Sorrow. Many do grievously diffame me.


Reason. More in old time spoke evil of Eabius, and many more grievously of
Scipio Africane, which turned to their great glory. That this fortune is common
unto thee with such worthy personagies, leave of to complain, for it has
happened unto very few, never in any respect to be touched with infamy. A man's
good name is a very dayntie thing, and is blemyshed many times upon small
occasions. And to be short, as there is nothing more clear then good fame, so
is there nothing more apt to be obscured, or ready to receive external
blemishes.


Sorrow. I am stained with grievous infamy.


Reason. This plague is most hurtful unto dread and reverend names, it has
not spared also the most holy and virtuous persons, whose Lord and master was
void of all manner of crime, notwithstanding in that he was slaundered and
defamed by the wicked, it is an argument that men must not hope to escape from
that, which happened unto God him self.


Sorrow. I am molested with sharp infamy.


Reason. For virtue not to be assaulted with envy, it is almost impossible: it
is sufficient if she be not therewith overthrown: and if glory be beaten
against slander, if so be it be pure and sound glory, it waxes the brighter
for the rubbyng.


Sorrow. I am vexed with bitter slander.


Reason. Common report being driven with the whirlewyndes of blind ignorance,
strikes the very tops of the highest things, but if it shakes not them, or if
it shake them, it overthrows them not. Take this for a certain token of
excellency in thee, in that thou art fallen among the tongues of the common
people, as if it were among so many dangerous rocks. For base names, and such
as in a manner creep low by the ground, do neither receive the light of
notable praise, nor yet the darkness of great infamy: most commonly that
which is contemned, is at quiet.


Sorrow. The common people give me an ill report.


Reason. It is well that thou art so ryfe in their tongues, and not in their
pens: the speech of the common people is sharp, but not permanent: things
that rise upon small or false causes, must needs be short, and when men have
barked yenough, they will then hold their peace: they that begin so fiercely,
are commonly the sooner weeryed.


Sorrow. I am troubled with the tongues of the common people.


Reason. How if thou had happened to light upon the style of some notable
Orator, or Poet? as many have done in times past, whom we see to be left
infamous unto posterity, through the eloquence of their enemy, as the noble
sygh of king Alexander, who envied at Achilles that he happened upon so noble a
Poet as Homer was: so fearful was this most excellent prince to incur the
displeasure of learned and eloquent men, least happily they should write any
thing sharply against him: although a man ought not to be quayled at the
speeches of slanderous writers, but rather their slander is to be refelled,
either with like sharpness of style, as did Cicero against Salust, and
Demosthenes against Aeschines, and Cato against innumerable, or else to be
resisted with notable boldness and courage of mind, more then ever Actor
expressed upon the Theater: and the like must be said unto that which
Vatinius aunsweared unto Caluus, when he had fynished his pleadyng, I am not
condemned, because he is eloquent. Howbeit now there is no danger, since that
the common people for the more part do continually prattle of some one matter
or other, but long it is not ere they leave of, being thereunto moved either
by will, or constraint. For a day will come, that shall put to silence these
charmyng and chyrpyng Grasshoppers, and make them glad to live at rest.


Sorrow. I am diffamed among the common people.


Reason. Endeavor that thou may retain a good name with thy self, and a
perpetual and true good fame among the better sort: As for this whereof thou
now complaynest, it will vanyshe away. You vain and fearful generation of
mortal men, what does this short and blind murmr of flatterers and
slaunderers touch you? There shall come some hereafter, that will judge more
freely and indifferently: And who are those judges, perhaps thou wylt ask
me? Ye can not know them, but they shall know you: I mean them that shall be
borne after you, who shall neither be moved with hate or malice toward thee,
nor be borne away with love, or hope, or fear of thee: If you would have
vpryght judgment given upon your doings, then tarry and expect those judges:
The time of their staying will not be long: they come a pace, and lo, they
will be here anon.


Sorrow. I have incurred infamy by my notable deeds and virtue.


Reason. There is a time wherein the love of loss is nooryshed, and increases
by travail, and, which is a strange matter to be spoken, geathereth deep
roots in a bitter and mischeuous soil: whereby it comes to pass, that a man
shall see those to be most desirous of factions, who have some time been most
grievously punyshed for the like: and this is a matter to to common and usual
in your cities. And therefore there is none that more loves justice or truth,
then he that has offered him self unto torments and death for the same. Do
thou therefore love virtue also, and embrace it more and more, for which thou
have lost thy good name, then which there is nothing more beautiful and
precious, for the which also thou susteynest infamy, which is no small
punishment, and contemnyng and refusyng all other things, see thou embrace
virtue only, which no man is ever able to take from thee, and say thus unto
her, All these things, O Queen, do I wyllyngly sustain for thy sake, thou
shall restore me again into my perfect estate, or truly at leastwyse thou
only shall be unto me in steed of al things, thou only noorishe me in thy
sacred bosom, and so shall I not only not feel the loss of my good name, but
not so much as the discommodities of my life.


Sorrow. I am commonly evil spoken of, yea in every corner.


Reason. Take it well a worth: The common multitude will make thee known, thy
virtue will make thee famous, and thy conscience careless.


Of shame procured by means of unworthy commendation. The xxvi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am reproved for praising an unworthy person.


Reason. That which is evil, many times springs from a good roter and good
and innocent persons, judge others to be such as they are them selves. Hereof
then it proceeds, that they are more ready to praise other, then reason
requires: and although I confess it be evil to praise an unworthy person,
yet to disprayse a virtuous man, is far more worse.


Sorrow. I have praised one that was unworthy.


Reason. If thou did it wittyngly, thou art blame worthy: but if through
ignorance, thou art to be excused. It is not so evil to be deceived, as to
deceive: for, to be deceived, belongs to a man, but to deceive, is the
peculiar fault of the deceiuer.


Sorrow. Another man's praise redoundeth to mine infamy.


Reason. Nay rather it was either thy fault, or thine ignorance: For, as there
comes no praise, so comes there also no infamy from another.


Sorrow. I am very sorry that I commended an unworthy person.


Reason. Take heed also that thou be not sorry for this often: Be not
ouerhastie to set thy self forth to praise or disprayse rashly, for men are
commonly greedy unto both: and to speak properly, this is a disease and a
certain ticklyng of the tongue, which is always clackyng, and can never
stand still: the brydelyng and refraynyng whereof, is reckoned amongst the
works of synguler perfection, according to the saying of the Scripture, Whosoever
offends not in word, be is a perfect man: In which thing ye are to to
often deceived. And alas therewhyle, that saying of the same Apostle is to much
verified, That no man tan tame the tongue, being an unquiet mischief.
Wherefore, it thrusts you forth headlong daily unto lying, whom afterward
your own sway pricketh forward, and next after that, a false opinion of the
things draws you farther. For there be some who with their very look or
speech do cover the vitiousnesse of their manners: which thing we have heard
of in Alcibiades, and have seen in many. There be some also that cloak their
virtues with a contrary veyle, whether it be by the nature of their
countenance, or the proper austeritie of their usual speech, or by some art or
study purposely employed, contrary unto that which the multitude commonly
desires. For as there are many that have faygned them selves good, so have
there likewise been some found who have counterfeited them selves to be evil,
whereby they might either avoid the pestilent air of humane favor, or escape
the hateful burden of temporal goods: which thing we read of S. Ambrose.
Hereunto are adjoined love and hatred, anger and envy, hope and fear, with
sundry other secret affections of the mind, and among these many that are
altogether unknown unto us: which are always enemies unto true judgment.
Add hereunto moreover, that the praise of the living, by the express word
of God, through the inconstancy of this mortal life, is hyndred of
continuance, how much more then discommendation? Hereafter therefore, become
slow to praise, but more slow to disprayse: for since each of them, as I
have said, is an evil error, yet is the last woorst.


Sorrow. I have erred in commendyng one unworthy.


Reason. By erryng men do learn, and often times one error withstandeth many
errors, and while men are ashamed to have erred once, then do they take
heed, that the like error take not hold of them. Thou have praised
unadvisedly, refrain thy tongue: let this commodity at leastwyse follow this
mischief.


Sorrow. I am ashamed and repent me, that I have praised an unworthy person.


Reason. Shame, and repentance, and sorrow, are certain ladders and degrees
unto amendment and salvation. There are few that can attain into the right
way, but by wandryng through many bie ways, and therefore we have seen many
who in their youth were servants unto voluptuousness, in their old age to
become friends unto virtue.


Of unfaithful friends. The.xxvij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Complain of friends.


Reason. What will he do of his foes, that complayneth of his friends.


Sorrow. I try my friends to be unfaithful.


Reason. Thou speak of an impossible matter. But to think that they were
thy friends that were not in deed, is not only not impossible, but a common
matter.


Sorrow. My friends are unfaithful.


Reason. All the world is full of such complayntes: and as for friendshyppe
and infidelity, they cannot agree. Who so begins to be unfaithful, leaves
of to be a friend, or rather, which I would sooner believe, was never any.
And forasmuch as all virtues are immortal, and all feignyng transitory,
faith is not taken away, but feygnyng.


Sorrow. I find untrusty friends.


Reason. These that are falsely counted thy friends, if now they first begin
to disclose their traiterous hearts, then may thou rejoice to behold the
end of thine error, but take heed in the mean while that the infection of
the disease take not hold on thee: but whatsoever they be, preserve thou the
faith of friendshyppe, and although not in respect of the undeserved, yet for
thine own sake that have deserved, be not infected with that plague, which
thou shall do the more willyngly, if thou do narrowly examine thy self how
much thou art grieved with their unfaithfulness. And many times the hatred of
vice, has been an earnest provocation unto virtue.


Sorrow. Undeservedly have I purchased the evil will of my friends.


Reason. Citizens are odious, fellows odious, coosyns odious, wives and
husbands odious, brothers and sisters are odious, and finally, the children
are odious unto their parents, and the parents to their children. And to be
short, there is no kinrede nor degree of friendshyp which cannot be infected
with hatred: Only sincere friendshyppe is free from this mischief. And
between this and the other, this is the difference, that all the other,
although they have hatred accompanying them, do notwithstanding continue, and
reteyne their names: but if hatred be joined unto this, or if love depart from
it, it can continue no longer under the name of friendship, for a friend can
no more be hateful, then love can be odious.


Sorrow. I suffer false friends.


Reason. If there be any hope of them, suffer them, until such time as they
become trusty, and love them heartily: For many with their luke warm love have
utterly quenched friendshyppe, or by small trustyng, have taught other
distrustinesse. But if so be thou do not profit, and all hope be laid a
water, then use Catoes advice, who in those friendeshyppes whereof a man has
no lykyng, wylleth him by little and little to ryppe them, and not sodaynely to
break them of, least that a double great mischief befall thereof, in that
thou have lost thy friends, and purchased enemies: unless peradventure some
more urgent cause, which will suffer no tarriaunce, do not permit thee to
follow this discrete counsel: which if it happen, it is to be counted among
the greatest troubles of friendshyp, but it must be borne with a valiant mind,
as all other chances, and place must be given unto necessity, and the time
oveyed: but this chance is scarce known unto true friendship.


Of unthankful persons. The.xxviij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Find many unthankful, which is a great vice.


Reason. To disprayse ingratitude were a needelesse matter: for all men's
speech do condemn it. There need no travail be taken in perswadyng that,
whereof all men are persuaded, and the opinion thereof most fyrmely grafted in
them. Some man places the chief felicity, and some whole felicity in virtue
only, and some in neither, but in pleasure, the enemy of virtue. There be some
also which hold opinion, that chastity is the most beautiful ornament of
this life. Other some there be that contemn this in them selves, and in others
they accounte it ridiculus, or truly very hard, and extreme paynful: which
S. Augustine, so excellent a man as he proved afterward, perceived in him
self, where as he says, that S. Ambrose syngle life seemed paynefull unto
him, which unto some other has not only seemed a tedious, but also a damnable
state of life. Hereof comes that example of Plato. who when he had long time
lived a single and chaste life, at the last it is read how that he sacrificed
unto nature to make an atonement with her, whom he thought he had grievously
offended by living in such order. It is strange, that so learned a man should
be of that opinion: but that he was so, it is out of all doubt. There be some
also that count fortitude to be the most excellent and sovereign virtue: to
receive wounds with bent breast, to stayne the field with gore blood, and
finally, to go unto death with a bold courage. Some there be that ascribe all
these things unto extreme madness, and judge nothing better then quiet and
dastardly idleness. There shall some come also that will esteem justice to be
the governor of humane affairs, and the mother of virtues: who shall believe
that religion is the way unto everlasting life, and the ladder to climb up by
unto heaven. There shall other some come likewise on the contrary side, that
shall count justice, cowardice, and religion, madness and superstition: these
are they of whom it is written, They are able to do every thing, who affirm
that all things appertain unto violent men. And not only in this kind of
violent men, and rauinous persons, but also among the multitude of learned men,
home great adversaries justice has, it may easily be perceived in the books
of Cicero, which he wrote of a common wealth. There be some that with great
and deserved commendations do extol the keepyng of faith and promises. There
be othersome also that say it is no deceit to break faith, but that it
proceeds from more knowledge, and a better wit. Which although it be the
common opinion and saying of the most part of men at this present, in
Lactantius it is namely ascribed unto Mercury, saying, as he reports it,
That it is no fraud to deceive, but craftiness: this is that worthy god of
wise dome and eloquence. To be short, there is no virtue so commendable, but
it shall find some dispraisers: as for thankfulness, there is no nation so
barbarus, no manners so savage, which do not commend it, and no man ever that
did not disprayse unthankfulness. For admit a man be a thief, a murderer, a
traitor, an unthankful person, he shall not dare excuse his fault, but deny
it: which although it be so, nevertheless there are innumerable unthankful
persons. Neither is there almost any one vice by so many condemned in word,
which likewise is by so many embraced in deed. What shall I conclude? Truly
that it ought to be condemned, not only in word, but chiefly in mind and
judgment, and of every good maneschewed in him self, and borne withal in
another, as other things whereof mankind has plenty, wherewith the wicked
do abound, and the good are molested Suffer therefore, and chose rather to
tolerate an unthankful person, then thy self to be one.


Sorrow. I find many unthankful.


Reason. Take heed there be no fault in thy self. For there are many, that
while they will seem to be liberal, they become boasters, and fault fynders,
which are an hateful kind of men, whose good turns do a man more hurt then
help him. And that is nothing else then to procure hatred by expense, which is
a mad kind of merchandise.


Sorrow. Having deserved well, I suffer many that are unmindful and unthankful.


Reason. Do thou grieve thereat? and would thou change condition with
them? Do not so I pray thee, where so ever the fault lie, let virtue be on thy
side.


Sorrow. I have many that are unthankful.


Reason. What would thou have me say to thee, that thou should leave to
do well, and hinder thy self for another man's fault? Nay rather, do thou
contrary, and where as thou have many, provide that thou may have mo, which
thou shall have if thou do good unto many. For there are always many
unthankful, but most at this day, and I fear me least that shortly it wi^be a
monster to find a thankeful person: In such forte daily all things impair,
and go back ward: Such is the importunacie of those that require them, and
the forgetfulness and pride of those that owe them, and yet notwithstanding,
men must not therefore leave of, neither must we scratch out our eyes because
the blind can not see, but rather the blindness of other ought to make us love
our eyes the more dearly.


Sorrow. I have found many unthankful.


Reason. Think with thy self, whether thou have been so unto many. One
unthankfulness punishes another, as also in other things, for oftentimes
one sin is punishment to another.


Sorrow. I have done good unto many unthankful persons.


Reason. It is better to do good unto many unworthy, then to be wanting unto
one worthy person. Go forward therefore, and lay not aside thy good manners in
respect of hatred toward the wicked, neither surceasse to do good unto
others, for that of some it is not accordyngly accepted: Perhaps hereafter
they shall know thee better, but if they do not, it shall suffice thee to know
God and thy self. It is no true virtue which is not sufficed with the reward
of it own conscience.


Sorrow. I have had evil luck by doing good to many.


Reason. Take heed that one man's fault hurt not another, and which is more
grievous, annoy not thee. Try others, and perhaps it will fall out more
fortunatly. Moreover, some that have been a long time unthankful, at length
when shame has touched their minds, have become most thankeful, and the lost
hope of them has been returned with great vauntage. And further, that which a
debtour has many times denied being required, one that has been no debtour,
has willyngly offered: there was never any good deed lost. Who so does wet,
let him think most of his own estate. Only virtue does good unto many, but
the greatest and chiefest part of virtue, returns upon the woorker thereof.
And therefore, although al men be evil and unthankful, a good man must not
cease to do well: for those things which he dispearseth among many, he
heapeth upon many, and is at leastwyse beneficial to him self, for not being
an unthankful person.


Sorrow. I have cast away benefits upon unthankful persons.


Reason. A covetous person will not stick to give sometime frankely: but
liberality is the greater, the less there is hope of recompense.


Of evil servants. The.xxix. Dialogue,
SORROW. I Am besieged with evil servants.


Reason. Now say thou truly that thou art besieged, for before time thou
seemedst to thy self to be furnished and adorned with them, but in very deed
thou wast besieged, not only with an army of thy familiars, but also of thine
enemies.


Sorrow. I am oppressed with unruly servants.


Reason. Thine own army fights against thee, which is an unpleasant matter.


Sorrow. I am besieged with proud servants.


Reason. And yet thou art constreyned to feed them that besiege thee, which
is an extreme necessity.


Sorrow. I am besieged with very evil, ravening, theeuishe, lying, and
unchaste servants.


Reason. What need thou to roll in so many terms of thy servant? Call
them servants, and then thou have said al.


Sorrow. I am besieged with servants, and what counsel do thou give me?


Reason. What counsel should I give thee, or what else should I say unto thee,
but the saying of Terence? Those things which have neither reason nor measure
in them, thou can never govern by advice. Notwithstanding, Senecas counsel
is well known concerning this matter: he wylleth a man to live familiarly,
gently, and courteously with his servants. But with what servants? To wit,
with those, with whom to live in familiarity will not engender contempt. He
adds moreover, that correction, not of words, but of stripes, must be
ministered, namely unto such as are deaf and sluggishe, and with a slow pace
contemn their masters gentleness. Moreover, that a master ought to admit
them unto conference and company with him in talk, in counsel, in feedyng. But
whom I pray you? Forsooth the saucie, foolyshe, drunken, untrusty, insolent,
which neither can well utter their mind, neither can give any good advice, and
which behave them selves slouenly at meat, such as are careless of their
masters health and life, living and good name, but are very diligent pursuers
of their own gluttony and sensuality. But he peradventure gave this counsel
for this cause, for yt he supposes that to be true in a servant, which before
he had spoken of a friend, If thou trust him, thou shall make him faithful. I
suppose that thou do not think, that friends are made of the best sort of
men, and servants of the woorst. Truly, if thou should think a thousand
year that a woolfe were a lamb, yet should he be a lamb never the sooner.


Sorrow. I am besieged with servants, what counsel would thou give me?


Reason. Never seek for that else where, which is in thy self. Thou shall
not be besieged longer then thou wylt thy self: neither should they now
besiege thee, but only as it happens in evil governed and unquiet cities,
that one part of the mind, like a faction of seditious citizens, favors the
besiegers. Would thou be delivered of this evil? Purge the state of thine
own mind. Chastise thy servants thou can not, neither by this advice of
Seneca, neither by any others. If thou list to amend thy self, no man can
forbid thee. Abandon pomp, cast of pride, and so shall thou either drive away
the hateful troop of thy servants, or else abate it.


Sorrow. I am besieged with many servants.


Reason. It is well, if noise and vain glory be only expected: but if
serviceableness or pleasure, there is nothing worse. Servants although they
be good, which a man may account a strange thing, yet there be few of them
that do good service: They fall together by the eats amongst them selves,
they murmr, they contend, one of them lookyng to an others hands: and in the
mean while, some one of them sittyng idelly, fouldeth and rubbeth his hands,
thynking it a great woorshyp to bear the countenance of a master, and
promisyng al things, thinks nothing better then to be idle. Of such we
speak now, who through a false profession pursuyng the delight of their idle
belly, do embase themselves unto humble service, not only voluntarily, but
also importunatly. They are an innumerable company, but of a vile condition,
who, being so many arts and occupations as there are, have betaken them selves
to the basest: namely such, whom not their own will, but the force of another,
and their own chance and service has drawn forth. And contrarywyse, as of
the other sort the number is smaller, so is there virtue more ple^tiful, and
their trustiness more approved. For it is one thing to serve willingly,
another thing to be constrained. These therefore being mindful of their calling,
to ye intent they may bear them selves indifferently in all estates, neither
lose their virtue together with their liberty, that which they do
vnwyllyngly, sometime they do it faithfully, which they are never able to do,
whom sleep, their belly, their throat, and greedy desire, being evil guides,
have led forth to service, wherein it is no marueyle if they follow and obey
their leaders, and do that which while they ensued, they have taken upon them
the base title of servitude. But contrariwyse, they that have had no such
thing to follow, ensuing the steps of nature and fortune, do many times,
being servants, make resemblance as if they were free men. And if he meant
those speeches of such, perhaps I might harken unto Seneca, with vnoffended
ears.


Sorrow. Many servants possess my house.


Reason. Then have thou much strife, much contention, and many conflyctes in
every matter. New faults shall be every day objected and purged, and thou must
sit as a judge between them. Of a master being made a judge, thou shall never
a whit be the more able to expel contention out of thine house, howbeit thou
may the contenders.


Sorrow. I am besieged with servants, without whom I cannot live, and what
shall I then do?


Reason. If the matter be so far proceeded with thee, that thou dare not
remain alone without thine enemies, provide for thy self by the scarcity and
baseness of them. Abandon the fairer, the brauer, and craftier sort of them:
abandon such from thy retinne, as delight them selves in their beauty, wit, or
family. Among few, and those dull and rude, thou shall live more safely, not
for that they be better, but for that they be not so bold, whom like as
serpents in winter, the restrained plenty of their poison, and the droupyng of
their vile slothfulness, has overcome and repressed Finally, this is the
conclusion, that yt which is only or especially to be expected in a servant,
is faith and trustiness. If in this respect thou prefer him any deal,
believe me, thou shall bye that small pleasure, whatsoever it be, with great
increase and vantage of other vices, for that faithfulness is very rare to be
found: but the next kind of remedy is fewness of them, of which I have
spoken, and also their baseness, which is not much better then the other, but
brings less boldness.


Of fugityue servants, The.xxx. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY servants are gone.


Reason. Whose presence was grievous, their departure ought to be acceptable.
There is nothing almost that displeases a man, whose contrary does not delight
him.


Sorrow. My servants are gone.


Reason. O that they would return, and that thou could behold with thine
eyes, that which thou have seen in thy mind, how many vices hang upon
them, how many kinds of wickedness, of deceites, of lying arts, of
mischeefes, of rauines, and theftes? And what should thou do other then
abhor their company, shut thy doors against them, and heartily rejoice that
thy house is so happyly rydde of so heavy burdens?


Sorrow. My servants are gone away altogether.


Reason. And together with them al grievous cares, troublesome heaviness, and
perpetual fear. Think with thy self how many bellies thou had to fill,
how many backs to clothe, how many wandryng feet to shoe, how many limie
fingers to wash, and then thou wylt say that thou art delivered of a great
charge.


Sorrow. My servants are run away.


Reason. And with them also hatred against their master, and contempt, and
grudgyng, and complaints, moreover cursinges, and secret banninges of thine
undeserved life: whose service, who is so ambitious, but will judge it rather a
gain, then a loss, to be without.


Sorrow. My servants are fled.


Reason. Who ever complained of the flight of his enemies? Julius Caesar is
accounted proud, for that he was sorry to behold his enemy fly, whom he
thought to have intercepted: and unto modest conquerers it suffiseth to see
their enemies turn the back upon them: and also the same Caesar at an other
time commanded that his enemies should be spared in the chase when they
fled, contentyng him self only with their flight. Do thou the like. And
although these thine enemies have deserved a more grievous punishment, let it
suffice thee that they be fled, and by their flight measure thou thy
victory, and learn that there is taken from thee the necessity of proceedyng
from farther punishyng them,


Sorrow. My servants are fled.


Reason. Can them thanks that they have done that wyllyngly, and of their own
accord, whereunto thou ought to have enforced them: the pain of expulsyng
cruel beasts is taken from thee, and yet thou complaynest, that they be run
away, who unless they had done so, thou must needs have fled thy self. They
are fled, who either must have been fled from or been driven away: now thou
remaynest a freeman, now thou art out of care, and master of thine own house.


Sorrow My servants are run away.


Reason. The master has authority to be judge over his run away
servants: dissemble now thy self to be a master, and use not thine
authority. If they had been good, they would not have run away, and to
loose them, since they are evil, is no loss, but a gain. It is more safe to
avoid venomous beasts, then to take them.


Sorrow. My servants have left me alone.


Reason. Thou art verily alone, and verily poor, if because thou would not
be alone thou have need of retinue of servants, as though thou had no
friend, no not thy self. But how chances it, that thy servants are
desirous to be without thee, and thou can not be without them? Beware that in
this respect thou be not more miserable then thy servants. But if perhaps
thy mind be not so much upon thy servants, as upon their price and value,
it is not thy fond desire, but filthy avarice that ought to be chasticed,
whereof we have alredye entreated sufficiently, whereas we spoke of the loss
of money.


Of importunate Neighbors. The.xxxi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have importunate neighbors.


Reason. Beware that thou be not more importunate unto them.


Sorrow. I suffer troublesome neighbors.


Reason. Opinion bears a great sway in all matters: magine in thy mind, that
they are tolerable, and they are so.


Sorrow. I have evil neighbors.


Reason. Many impute their own faults unto their neighbors: Other men's
offenses are more sharply surueyed, more exactly discussed, more severely
judged: there is no man that is not a friendly and gentle judge over his own
doings.


Sorrow. I suffer sharp and bitter neighbors.


Reason. In taste perhaps, and not in effect, for unto those that are proud and
disdainefull, sweet things seem bitter.


Sorrow. I complain that my neighbors are hard and proud.


Reason. Every man bears much with him self, but nothing with another:
hereof spryngeth great error, and continual cause of offenses. And many times
where the fault is, there first begins the complaint. How know we now,
whether thou seem hard, and froward, and intractable unto them, of whose
hardness thou complaynest?


Sorrow. I suffer hard neighbors.


Reason. Thou have a double remedy: patience, and flight. The first I allow
of, for that al hardness may be mollified by the art of sufferyng.


Sorrow. I cannot suffer so evil neighbors.


Reason. If by this means thou take no profit, who shall hold thee? get thee
away out of hand, for as they are grievous unto thee, so will they not follow
thee: cast from thee the burden which thou can not bear, and that enemy
whom by fightyng thou can not sustain, seek by flying to eschew: what
skylleth it by what path thou escape into safety? There is no way to be judged
hard, whereby a man may travail unto tranquillity of mind. And if thou have
often attempted it, and art never the near, know this, that it is thine own
fault, and perhaps also part of another. The greater sort of common
contentions, has on either side one accusyng another, among whom although the
one be more faulty, yet is neither of them without blame. For although that
man be termed a civil and sociable creature, yet if the truth be diligently
examined, there is none less so: and this saying of the Satyrike Poet is true,
That there is greater agreement among serpents and wild beasts, then among
men. For Bears, wild Bores, Tigers, and Lions, yea, Vipers, and Aspes, and
Crocodilles, and to be short, al living creatures, are sometime at rest and
quietness in their own kinds, man only excepted, who is never at quiet. For
one man always oppresses and vexes another, and by continual strife and
contention procures a restless life unto him self and his neighbor. For so
it happens many times, that where is most plenty of near neighbors, there a
man may se greatest distaunce of minds and goodwyll. Neighbors are seldom
without scouldyng and hatred, There is none of you, unless I be much
deceived, that spiteth at the kings of Arabia or India. Spite is bleare eyed,
she can not see far of.


Sorrow. I am beset with noisome neighbors.


Reason. If thou will be thoroughly discharged of this mischief, go hyde thy
self up in the wilderness.


Of Enemies. The xxxij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have enemies.


Reason. See that thou be friend unto justice, a greater defense then which,
there is none. True virtue treads underfoot, and despises the Threats of
fortune.


Sorrow. I have enmities.


Reason. Then wylt thou be the more circumspect, and the better known.
Enmities have made many famous, who should have remained obscure, if they had
wanted enemies.


Sorrow. I am beset round about with enemies.


Reason. They will be a bar, that pleasures which are the invincible enemies
of the mind, take no vantage of thee. Fortune has not so much given thee
enemies, as keepers, one mischief is driven away by another.


Sorrow. I am oppressed with enemies on every side.


Reason. They likewise are oppressed with their own affections: and there is
among them a revenger of thine, and that not one only: on thy side stand wrath,
fear, hatred, unquietness, and they have not yet made an end, but take
revenge on the trespass. Thus many times revenge goes before the offense, and
perhaps there follows none at all: they shall be armed, they shall labor, sweat,
be hot, pant, quiver, and peradventure none of all these shall touch thee. For
many often times by their extreme hatred, have hurt them selves, and not
others.


Sorrow. I am at contention with mine enemies.


Reason. And they also among them selves: and many times it is more safe to
strive against enemies, then against vices. He that hates another man, first
gives a wound to his own soul, and next many times unto his own body. For,
to much greediness to hurt and strike others, has laid forth many unadvised
and naked unto their enemies. Thus evermore the first part of al mischiefs
turns upon the aucthours thereof, and some time the last part, when many
times he remains unhurt, against whom the mischief was first prepared.


Sorrow. Wars rise against me on every side.


Reason. The people of Rome was never more famous and holy, then when they were
busied in many and great wars: Their peace was the beginning of their
mischief, for with it entered flattering lasciviousness, a pestilent enemy
unto virtue.


Sorrow. I have great enmity.


Reason. Great enmity many times has been the beginning of great friendshyp.


Sorrow. I have enemies.


Reason. Have also trustiness and mercifulness, as for other matters
whatsoever shall happen, provide that thou be their superiors in courtesy and
virtue: There is also right and justice to be used with a man's enemies, with
whom so behave thy self, that thou doubt not but that thou may be
reconciled into friendshyp with them. And know that this is more wholesome
counsel then was Biants, who wylleth a man so to love his friends, that he
remember also that they may become his enemies: which saying although it be
commended of others, yet neither I, nor Tullie do like of it. For in deed it
is a very poison in friendshyp: wherefore in hatred a man ought to think on
love, and not in love to think on hatred: and truly Aristotle's counsel in
his Rethorickes is far to be preferred before Byas advice: A man should not,
as men commonly speak, love as though he should hate, but rather hate as
though be should love. Whereof Arislotle writing, reproves Bias himself, and
also his subtyle and malicious counsel.


Sorrow. I have enmities.


Reason. But have them against thy will, and let a loving heart of peace dwell
always in thine armed breast, and so go to war that thou may seem to be
constrained thereunto, least happily humanity give place unto hatred, or least
thou study more for revenge, then for glory or health. Thou know that
Hanibal was more hateful to the Romans then was Pyrrhus, when as both of them
were enmities, and Pyrrhus first invaded Italy, but not to the intent to
destroy it utterly, as did Hannibal, but only to require it. We must conquer
by all the means we can, that in every action true virtue may appear, so that
it may seem that nothing else is sought for by war, then honest peace.


Of occasion lost to revenge. The.xxxiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost my wyshed occasion to revenge.


Reason. From whom sin is taken, nothing is taken, but much is added: for
certain things which men have, to be taken from them, is a gain, but to
withstand them, that they may not be had at al, is a greater vauntage.


Sorrow. I have lost the means to be revenged.


Reason. An happy loss, to loose that which may hurt thee.


Sorrow. I am prohibited of my hoped and wished revenge.


Reason. The chiefest point is to have a mind not to do evil, the next to be
prohibited.


Sorrow. I must of necessity loose occasion of reuengement.


Reason. If it be a notable kind of revenge, not to have a will to revenge, it
is an excellent necessity, not to be suffered to revenge. It is the chiefest
point willingly to embrace virtue, the next, to be constrained thereunto.


Sorrow. I am sorry that revenge is taken from me.


Reason. The time will come peechaunce shortly when thou may rejoice, and
that thou would not wyshe that it had happened otherwise: Many when they come
by occasion unto any thing, at length they begin to have will unto it, and to
love it, and their liking grows upon necessity, and when it begins to be
a will, it surceasseth to be a necessity.


Sorrow. I thought I could have been revenged, but I could not.


Reason. Not to be able to do evil, is a great power, and this quality is
proper unto the almighty.


Sorrow. Present revenge is fallen away from me.


Reason. Think that thou have let fall a snake out of thy hand, and take heed
that he creep not into thine hand again. There is nothing so coutrary unto a
man, as ungentleness. By this he surceasseth to be a man, which to be so, the
name it self declares: there is no sickness so contrary, no not death it
self: For death happens by the course of nature, but this, far contrariwise:
To show cruelty unto a man, is contrary unto the nature of a man, although it
were deserved: a man ought not to follow the motion of a wounded mind, and by
the remembrance of a private grief, to forgeat the instinct of the common
nature.


Sorrow. I shall be sorry for ever, that I was restrained from revenge.


Reason. Perhaps thou shall rejoice for ever: How often, think thou, after
enmity laid a part, and friendshyp concluded, have some abhorred their
friends in the midst of their embrasinges, thus thinking with them selves:
this man I wished at the Devil, and I lacked but little of bryngyng my wicked
desire to effect? O happy chance, to how good a part have thou converted my
cruel meaning?


Sorrow. I cannot be suffered to wreake my just wrath.


Reason. A man shall scarce find just anger: forasmuch as it is written, Man's
anger woorketh not the righteousness of God: and again, it is said by an
other, Anger is a short madness: It is best therefore not to be angry at all:
and next, not to revenge, but to bridle anger, that it carry not away the mind
whyther as it is not seemly: the third is, not to be able to revenge, if thou
would.


Sorrow. I have lost notable occasion to be revenged.


Reason. Pardon, which is more notable is left unto thee, and also
forgetfulness, which is most notable of all. The same made Julius Caefar
renowned among all Princes. Great and innumerable were this worthy Emperors
conquests, his triumphs most glorious, his excellency in chivalry
incomparable, his wit most excellent, his eloquence notable, the nobility of
his progeny, the beauty of his personage, the valor of his invincible mind,
surpassing: but when thou have heaped together all his commendations, thou
shall find nothing in him more excellent then his mercifulness, and
forgetfulness of offenses: which although it procured unto him the cause of
his death, so that the saying of Pacunius was justly song at his burial, It
was my fortune to save some, that there might some live to destroy me:
nevertheless since that he must of necessity die, in such a cause death was
in a manner to be wyshed.


Of the peoples hatred. The.xxxiiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. THe people hate me.


Reason. Then have thou the end of the multitudes favor, whereof I forewarned
thee, to wit, hatred for love.


Sorrow. The people hate me without a cause.


Reason. Thou woondrest that they hate thee without a cause, who before loved
thee without discretion, whereof this follows, that whereas modesty is
banished, there soueraignitie must needs reign.


Sorrow. The people hate me.


Reason. This beast is prompt to injury, and flow to duty: the commons love
is light, and their hatred heavy.


Sorrow. The people is angry with me.


Reason. If they love thee, they will applaude thee, but if they be angry, they
will seek thy destruction, wherein are two unequal things, danger and hope.


Sorrow. I am odious unto the people.


Reason. There is nothing more forcible then the multitude of fools, whereas
public fury pricketh forth the rage of every private person, and the rage of
every private person kindles the public franticknesse, and one of them
enforces another. And there is nothing more dangerous then to fall into their
hands, whose will stands for justice, and headlong outrage for discretion.


Sorrow. The people hate me.


Reason. I would they had not loved thee, no not known thee. The love of
evil persons ends with hatred: Both which are uncertain, and only
ignorance safe.


Sorrow. I am hated of the people.


Reason. A malicious people ought either to be appeased, or forsaken.


Of envy, passiuely. The.xxxv. Dialogue.
SORROW. MAny do envy me.


Reason. It is better to be envied, then pitied.


Sorrow. I am troubled with ye envy of my ilwillers.


Reason. And who ever was friend unto virtue, that wanted that kind of
exercise? Run over in thy thought al lands, al ages, peruse al histories, and
thou shall scarce find a man of any excellency free from this pestilence. I
mean not now to enter any discourse, the which may lead us far away from our
purpose, but if thou remember any thing that ever thou have read, thou can
not be ignorant of many by whose fellowship thou may not only conceive
comfort, but also vaunt thy self.


Sorrow. I am spyted at.


Reason. Forsake honors and public functions, leave of the occasion to be
spoken of among the people for thy stately pace, and proud retinue: Sequester
thy self as much as thou can from the eyes of many that are envious,
neither give occasion unto them to point at thee with the finger, either for
thy look, word, or gesture. The common people and malice dwell together in
the streets, and so for the most part does all wickedness: Certain enemies
are by no means better escaped, then by flight, and seeking corners.


Sorrow. Malice follows after me, although I fly and hide my self.


Reason. Take away the cause of evil, and thou shall take away al evil it
self. Be measurable in thy riches, and whatsoever thou have, that by the
excellent beauty and show thereof may inflame the minds of men and set their
teeth one edge, either cast it of, or keep it out of sight. If thou have any
thing which thou wylt not or can not want, use it modestly: that envy
which pride has provoked, humility will aswage. There are also certain
effectual remedies which do soon extinguish it, but they are worse then
the disease it self, to wit, misery, and an infamous life: Concerning one of
which I have said already, that misery only is without envy. And unto the
other appertains ye saying of Socrates: For when on a time Alcibiades
demanded by what means he might escape envy, Socrates answered, Live said
he, as did Thersites, whose life if thou know not, thou may read it in the
Iliades of Homer. Truly a scoffyng and perfect Socratical answer: for there
is no wisdom to forsake virtue to eschew envy, and better it were to be
Achilles with envy, then Thersites without it: although it be also well known,
that certain excellent men, to the intent to live at quiet, have for a time
dissembled both their virtue, and wisdom.


Sorrow. Many do envy me.


Reason. Thou can scarce escape envy but by cowardice or misery, and if thou
escape it by any of these means, thou shall fall into contempt, both which to
be free from, were a very hard matter.


Sorrow. I am ouerborne with the hatred of many.


Reason. There is, as some say, another means and way to tread envy
underfoot, to wit, by excellent glory, but this path is but little tracted, so
that many that begin to walk forward therein, do slyppe into that which
they would eschew.


Of Contempt. The.xxxvj. Dialogue.
SORROW. But I am contemned.


Reason. If it be justly, thou have cause, I confess, to be sorry,
notwithstanding thou must suffer it: but other wise, thou may laugh at it.
For there is nothing more ridiculus, nor that happens more commonly, then for a
wise man to be contemned of mad men.


Sorrow. I am contemned.


Reason. Touching this one word, some have said that four good things are
signified thereby: to contemn the world, to contemn no man, for a man to
contemn him self, and that he is contemned of other: of this last thou have
need.


Sorrow. I am contemned of many.


Reason. If it be of thy elders, suffer it: if of thine equalles, bear with
it: The first do use their authority, for, for the most part less things
are contemned of the greater: The other expose them selves to be contemned, and
seeing by none other means they can become thy superiors, they think to win
it by this means. As for thine inferiors let them alone, let them rage, and
regard not their contempt, which shall redowne unto their infamy, and thy
glory. Thersites contemned Achilles of whom we spoke before, and so did Zoilus
Homer, and Antonius Augustus, and Euangelus Virgil, and Caluus Cicero. And, as
we have learned in the Gospel, that which is greatest of all, Herod, being a
most vile and miserable man of all other, contemned Christ our Savior. But
what did this contempt either hurt the contemned, or avail the contemners?


Sorrow. I am contemned and scorned.


Reason. I know not what these laughyng games are, or what conceyte is in the
minds of common iesters, and so much the more, for that the cunnynger have
need of the less cunnyng, and the one of them scorneth at another.


Sorrow. I am contemned of others.


Reason. Examine thy self, whether thou do or have contemned other: This is
the manner of you men, to contemn and be contemned, and one to prosecute
another with mutual hatred and contempt, and yet you would be reverenced of
other, and your selves reverence no body: you go about to please GOD, whose
works do none of them please you, as they ought to please: concerning which
thing, our countreyman Cicero has spoken right nobly, if any thing may be
spoken nobly in the name of the Gods, It can not stand with reason, says
he, forasmuch as one of us contemns and despises another, that we should
require of the Gods that they would love us, and be friendly unto us. But
much more excellent is the saying of the Prophet Malachie, Have we not all
one father? has not one GOD created us? Why then does every one of you
despise his brother?


Sorrow. It greeueth me that I am contemned.


Reason. Although no man would be despised, and many would feign be feared,
yet is it much more safe to be despised, then feared. And therefore that
which Anneus Seneca says in a certain Epistle, It is as ill to be contemned,
as suspected. I do not allow. But I suppose rather that he said better in an
other place. That it is more dangerous to be feared, then contemned. And
therefore learn by the ancient saying of the wise, that these three things
are to be avoided, of which we have entreated in so many continual discourses,
which although they be all evil, yet out of all doubt this last is the least,
although the vylest of them, and yet every one has his peculiar remedy.
Hatred is appeased by courtesy, envy by modesty, contempt by the friendshyppe
of great personagies, and also by honest practices and virtue. There was none
more contemtible at Rome then was Brutus at the beginning, but afterward no
man more hyghly esteemed of. Atchiue then also some good and great enterprise,
by means whereof thou may not be contemned.


Of long expectyng a promised reward. The.xxxvii. Dialogue.
SORROW. THe promises made unto me, be late in perfourmance.


Reason. Why do thou complain of this alone, which is common with all men?
Nothing more debaseth a gift, then an hard grant, and a slow perfourmaunce.
But this is your manner, you would receive quickly, and give at leisure, unto
the one you be nimble, unto the other unwilling, hasty unto the one, and to
the other heavy. Here is a double root of ingratitude, and a double cause of
complayntes, while some are grieved with tarience, and other with to much
speed.


Sorrow. There be many things promised me, but nothing performed.


Reason. Great promisers ought to be smally trusted. Men's vanity is known,
their flattery known, their lying known. Has one man promised thee many
things? it is sufficient that he has promised thee, go seek another to
perform them, one man cannot do al things: this promiser has provided that
in the mean while thou should love him.


Sorrow. That is not performed which was promised me.


Reason. Of two sorts of covetousness, more mighty is that which holds
fast, then that which craves.


Sorrow. O, how many promises did such a man make unto me?


Reason. Either he mocked thee, or he was desirous to be beloved for a time, as
I said erewhyle: and perhaps while he promised thee many things, he
required some one thing of thee, which he thought to be well gotten for the
price of a great lie: for this understand, that they which are rich in
words, are many times poor in deeds.


Sorrow. O how many things are promised me?


Reason. If thou will credit me, such as promise many things thou shall not
credit.


Of Repulses. The xxxviii. Dialogu. e
SORROW. I Take it grievously that I have suffered a repulse.


Reason. Would thou then obtain whatsoever thou desyrest, so that nothing
should be denied thee? take heed that this desire of thine proceed not of
intolerable pride. It behooved thee to have thought on Pompeius the great, a
worthier then whom I know not if ever there were any, of whom notwithstanding
it is written, that he would have those things given him, which also might be
denied him. How many things do we know to have been denied to Emperors, being
most valiant and of high renown? and do thou take a repulse or twain so
heavily? To be short, how many things does God require daily at man's hand,
yet lacks God nothing, neither does he entreat us for any thing.


Sorrow. I cannot quietly take a repulse.


Reason. Why do thou arrogate to thy self the liberty of askyng, and
take from other authority of deniyng? Is it because, as often times it
chaunseth, that an unreasonable request, gives occasion of a reasonable
denial? Or is it because the repulse oftentimes was profitable to him that
craved, to whom otherwise it would have been hurtful if he had obtained?


Sorrow. I suffer a repulse wrongfully.


Reason. If thy repulse be wrongful, thy request was right and just, rejoice
then that the fault is an other man's, rather then thine.


Sorrow. I have a repulse where I deserved it not.


Reason. There are many that think they have deserved much, when in very deed
they have deserved nothing: From hence comes the grief of a repulse, from
hence proceed al complaynts, wherewith all the world and the whole life of man
is filled.


Sorrow. I suffer a shameful repulse.


Reason. There is nothing shameful but a fault: For what shame could that bring
unto thee, that was not in thy power to perform?


Sorrow. I have a repulse where I thought to have had none.


Reason. Thought is uncertain, but things are certain, and to be unable to
deny that which is asked, belongs not to a free man, but to a bond slave:
and to be unable to abide a repulse, is not the part of a citizen, but of a
Tirant.


Sorrow. I have a repulse of that thing which I desired and hoped for.


Reason. If men should obtain whatsoever they hope for or desire, they
should be al gods: but thou, to the end thou may avoid al displeasures
and greefes taken by repulses, learn to desire possible and honest things,
and not to have a mind to obtain whatsoever thy insatiable or foolyshe desire
lusts for, or vain hope shall put in thy mind.


Sorrow. I was not only repulsed, but an vnwoorthier was preferred before me.


Reason. How often do we see the unworthy to be preferred before the
worthy, and oftentimes the unworthy to be judged of as unworthy as them
selves, being severe judges in other men's matters, but in their own case very
favorable? There are many that will say they are unworthy, but there are few
which think so in deed.


Sorrow. I have a repulse of a small thing.


Reason. We do often times see small things denied, and great things
willingly offered. If the gifts of fortune shall be recompensed with repulses,
the balance will hang even, but you increase those by indignation, and
diminishe the other by forgetfulness and dissimulation.


Sorrow I was worthy, as I suppose, not to be repulsed.


Reason. I grant it be so, but do thou think that al things are granted
or denied, according to the worthiness of men? I would it were so, that the
hope of reward might make many moo good men, and the fear of punishment make
the fewer evil. But the case stands not so, for love, hatred, hope, desire,
and secret affection, have mingled together and disordred al things. Would
thou have fortune to change her common condition to wards thee only, and not
thou thy self to bend to wards the common course of man's nature?


Sorrow. How far vnwoorthier then I am, is my cosuter preferred?


Reason. And Lucius Flaminius, who for a notable crime had deserved present
judgment to be deposed from the order and dignity of a Senator, was
preferred before Scipio Nasica, a man accounted to be most worthy, as well by
the judgment of the Senate, as also by the whole voice of the common people?
How was Vasinius preferred before Cato, an obscure man, before a most
commendable senator, and that not only by the verdit of the people, his
friends, and his enemies also, but also in the whole volume that Cicero wrote:
what say thou in this case, even that they are grievous, and not new things
that thou suffer.


Sorrow. I hoped for much, I deserve not a little.


Reason. I told thee even now, that thou should deserve much, and yet al
things are not given through deserts. Do we not see, that to whom a thing is
once denied, yet the same perhaps is granted within a while after to the
self same man? which thing happened to the same Scipio of whom I speak: For
constant virtue many times breaks the force of repulses. To this bear
witness Emilius Paulus, Metellus Macedonicus, Lucius Numius, who took al of
them a repulse for the Consulshyp, and the self same men afterward were
adorned with most noble dignity, and triumphs: and of whom before they were
had in contempt, to the same citizens afterward they were a spectable: and
surely they had never atteyned unto those honors, if they had endeavored to
lament with grief the repulses of the people, rather then to overcome the same
with valiantness of virtue. Although Lucius Sylla, who in the end being
styrred up to eiuil dissension, stained his name with open cruelty, but
nevertheless was a most noble and renowned Citizen, had taken the repulse, not
only of the Consulshyp, but also of the Pretorshyp, afterward he atteyned to
the highest dignity in the common wealth, insomuche that he could not only
him self procure the Pretorshyps, Consulshyps, and Empires, but also bestow
them on other. A repulse ought not to take away hope, but to give it, to stir
up careful diligence and virtue, which be it never so sharp a thing, yet it
aswageth it, and if it happen that it does not so, yet it is not therefore to
be forsaken, least it should seem that it is embraced only for it own sake,
and it own end. To be short, these men have valiauntly sustained their
repulses, but Pub. Rutilius, hearing of his brothers repulse which he had
sustained in suing for the Consulshyp, soddenly fell down dead. Choose thee
now, whether of these thou had rather follow.


Of an unjust Lord. The.xxxix. Dialogue.
SORROW. THe common wealth suffers an unjust lord.


Reason. Perhaps it has deserved it, and that kind of myscheefe is a due
punishment for the other: and we see severe judges exercise justice, as well in
hell, as else where, and although it stands for a reason, yet sometimes it
makes have: and that is verified which is written, There is a God that
judges men on earth. There be some of opinion, that deuyls are made of men,
through their daily licentious offendyng, and liberty in sinnyng: which thing
is tollerablye spoken, for that the likelihood of wicked dispositions does
cause it, wherein a wicked man, and such a one as continually perseuereth in
wickedness, is almost equal with the devil. To which opinion, if it be
allowed, this saying will well agree. That through gods justice, one devil
oppresses an other. In which case of al other this is most miserable, that it
happens often times, that the giltlesse are punished among the wicked. And
that saying of Flaccus falls out many times to true, and to often, That many
times the opportunity that is necglectd in punishyng the adulterer, does bring
the innocent into danger: which thing without doubt, although unknown to us,
yet is it done not without the secret justice of God.


Sorrow. We suffer a cruel Lord.


Reason. Cruelty truly is an evil thing, and quite against the nature of
man, but it is profitable against vice, and unto the unbridled people abrydel,
and fear proceedyng from al sides: and it is more expedient for them to fear,
that know not how to love, how soever the case stand. There is no lord so
cruel, but that pleasure, the companion and daughter of prosperity, is more
cruel then he. Nothing can be worse for evil doers, then carelessness and
liberty. He that fears nothing, is nighest to destruction.


Sorrow. The unfortunate people suffers an unjust lord.


Reason. Believe me, there is no man amongst all the common people, more
miserable then a Tyrant: Which thing if thou doubt of, behold Dionisius. he
being a wicked man, yet not unlearned, what opinion he had of him self and of
his own tyranny, the hanging up of the sword, with the point thereof over
his friends head, does openly declare. The history is commonly known. The
people stands in fear of the Tiraunt, and the Tiraunt of the people, and in
such sort one stands in fear of the other, to their great grief. In this
point it differs, that the misery of the people does appear, but of the
Tiraunt lies closely hydden. Notwithstanding the wound that is covered with a
purple roabe, pincheth even as sore. Neither do fet^ers of gold grieve a man
any less, then fetters of Iron. And as his misery may consiste in filthynesse,
and smokynesse, so even in bravery and banketryng it is included. The garment
of a Tiraunt, on the outside is gold, but if thou turn it, thou shall find
all the inner side full of sharp prickelles. So thou may perceive that
Tirants do not altogether in their raging escape scotte free, or that the
oppression of the people is unrevenged.


Sorrow. We have a very unmerciful lord.


Reason. Lords would not be so plentiful, neither rule and rage so wide
abroad, unless the people were mad, and that every citizen did not regard
their private, more then the common wealth, pleasure more then glory, money
more then liberty, life more then virtue.


Sorrow. Our servile country suffers one lord.


Reason. Not one lord, but thirty lords at once, did that noble mother of
laws, Athens, suffer, which was the second light of al Greece.


Sorrow. Our country has one lord.


Reason. Yea, but Room had many: For who has not heard of the Caligulas, the
Neroes, and Domitians, the Commodoes, Heliogabales, Bascianes, and Calienes?
and that I may not reckon up all the shames of the Emvire, the Maximini, and the
haters of al godliness, the Iulian^, and Deci^. Assiria suffered Sardanapalus,
Persis Syrus, Greece Menander, and Asia suffered some that were called kings,
who were in deed very cruel tyrauntes, and unmerciful Dionisians. Sicilia
suffered Phalaris, Lacedemon abode Cleomenis, Agathocles and Nanides, whom also
the Argi did suffer, and therewith also the womanyshe covetousness of his
wife, who surpassyng her husband inscrapyng together, showed great tyranny
in her kind, after a strange sort. But whyther do I proceed? who is able to
reckon up either the new, or the old Tyrauntes? who in these days are so
many in number, and have taken so deep root, that what with their riches and
power of the people of the one side, and their manners and mad bedlemnes on the
other side, they can neither be numbered nor rooted out. Neither need you to
think that servitude is turned into nature any less with you, then it was
with the Egiptians and Medes, who had al their liberty suppressed and quite
buried: insomuch that the greater part of the people, if they have not a
Tiraunt, they will sue earnestly to have one, or else seek to bye one: so that
it seems your fathers were ashamed to be such ones as they were borne to be.
For you al, for the most part, being borne and brought up in servitude, as you
have cause to complain of the old grief, so have you no cause to find fault
with any new.


Sorrow. We are oppressed with the heavy yoke of a mighty lord.


Reason. The fable of Aristophanes the Poet is very profitable, which warns
us not to nouryshe up a Lion within cities, but if he be once nourished up,
that then we ought to obey him: for the mischief which comes of Tyranny by
nature, is not to be augmented by impacience, neither that power, which thou
thy self have let up, by thee to be violated: For seldom has it been seen,
that a Tirant has risen up among the people, without the fault of the
citizens. For it is an old saying, Eat that which thou have nourished.


Sorrow. We suffer an importunate lord.


Reason. If al power come from God, whether it be for the exercise of the good,
or punishment of the wicked, it is meet that thou should think thy self
subject to the power of God, and not of man: whose minister if he seem to be
severe, it may come to pass that through patience he may wax gentle. For there
is scarce any mind so cruel, but that through obedience and serviceableness it
will be calmed. To be short, whatsoever it be that oppresses, it ought to be
either suffered, or quite laid out of mind: For there is no mean beside
impatience, which, as I said, does not diminishe greefes, but increase them.


Sorrow. We have an evil lord.


Reason. You al have one enemy whom ye know well, and he being but one, has
many which he knows not, and therefore is in more dangerous state.


Sorrow. We have a very evil lord.


Reason. But he will not continue long, if the philosophers judged aright, who
said, That no violent thing can continue long. And truly, if thy country
have but one good citizen, it shall not very long have an evil lord.


Of an unlearned Scholemaister. The.xl. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have an unlearned Scholemaister.


Reason. Although the unlearned cannot make a man learned, and that the common
saying be true, That it is in a skilful man, to be able to teach: Yet a man may
become learned under an unlearned teacher, either by his own means, or else,
which seems more true, through celestical influence and inspiration. And
that I may use the words of Cicero, by divine instinte, without the which we
ought not to believe that any can be either learned or good* And this point is
not only grounded upon true religion, but also is agreeable unto the
aucthorities of gentyle philosophy.


Sorrow. I hear an unlearned Scholemaister, against my will.


Reason. But hear the heavenly Scholemaister wyllingly, who has given thee
ears, not these only which we see, but invisible ones within the mind. Here
him, who teaches man wisdom, as it is written. Who moreover, if he hold his
peace, what ever mortal Scholemaister he be, be he never so well learned, he
loses his labor.


Sorrow. I suffer impaciently an unlearned Scholemaister.


Reason. Either fly from him, and seek an other, or else return to thy self.
And remember though Cicero do many times scorn at Epicurus, Senica
notwithstanding counts him a notable fellow, who had not only not an
unlearned Scholemaister, but none at al, as he him self boastingly does often
repeat. Remember also what Saint Augustine writes of him self, whom it were
a sin not to believe in all matters, who as the same aucthour writes,
understood Aristotle's predicamentes, which are accounted amongst the most
hardest things: and also the liberal sciences, any one whereof to learn
perfectly of a Scholemaister is compted a hard matter. These I say did he
understand, and no man taught him. And last of al think upon Saint Bernarde, a
most excellent man for learning and holiness, who got al his knowledge, wherein
he excelled all other of his time, in the wooddes and fields, not by the
instruction of man, but by contemplation and prayer: neither had he ever any
other Scholemaisters (as he witnesses of him self) then Oaks and Beeches. If
these things have been done: Why may they not be done again? which unless
it had been so, what should the first men have done, who neither had any
Scholemaister, neither could find any? Therefore by woonderyng, by thynkyng,
by lifting up of the mind, and sharpening the wit, did they find out those
things which you with all your Scholemaisters do scarcely understand. Do
thou also some great matter, and distrust not to intermeddle thy self with
great exploytes: And if thou want a mortal, thou shall have an heavenly
scholemaister, on whom all other Scholemaisters do depend: He it is that has
made al things, both wits, and sciences, and masters.


Of an unapt and proud Scholar. The.xlj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have an unapt Scholar.


Reason. Thou loosest thy labor, thou plowest the sea sand, thou castest away
thy seed, nature is not altered.


Sorrow. Fortune has brought me a dull scholar.


Reason. Thou tillest a barren soil, unyoke thine Oxen, why do thou weery
thy self? Spare him and thy self, and since there are so many labors
necessary, and which cannot be avoided, to seek after needless trauayles it
is a folly.


Sorrow. I have a scholar unapt to learning.


Reason. If he be apt to learn virtue, hold him to that, and so have thou
taught him the best arts: But if he be capable of neither, let him alone, and
pour no licour into a leakyng Caske, which will not remain therein, and so
consume thy self with perpetual weariness: and thus persuade thy self, that
all that are, or that have been, or ever shall be excellent in virtue or
learning, are not able to stir up one wit, unless there be some sparks
within the mind, which being kyndled and helped by the Scholemaisters
industry, do conceive the commendable nooryshment of discipline: for otherwise
thou shall but puff and blow the ashes in vain.


Sorrow. I have an unruly and proud scholar.


Reason. Pride is an enemy unto wit, and whylest an insolent scholar
disdayneth to be holden under, and cares not to be taught, he will hardly
yield his hand to the Ferula, his mind to instruction, his ear to
reprehension, and his neck to the yoke.


Sorrow. I have a scholar puffed up with prosperity.


Reason. As swellyng of the eyes hurts the eye sight, so swellyng of the
mind troubles the wit, that there can be no entrance unto learning: all
pride ought to be repressed. Thou know how Alexander King of Macedonie,
when on a time he applied his mind to the study of the Mathematques, and there
were laid before him certain obscure Geometrical rules: being offended with
the difficulty of them, he commanded his scholemaister to teach him the same
more plainly. But what answered he? These things, said he, are a like
difficult unto al men: which he spoke to this end, to beat from him all hope
of his Princes prerogatyue. And truly it is so in deed, for as concerning the
disposition of man's wit, fortune has nothing to deal therein, and who so
desires to be learned and wise, let him quite forgeat that he is of power and
authority.


Sorrow. I have an ignorant, and a high minded scholar.


Reason. Thou saylest against the wind and the tide, hale in the sails and
go to shore.


Sorrow. I have an obstinate and a froward scholar.


Reason. Thou dooest not only dygge the sand, but also nooryshest up a
Serpent, and tyllest a venomous plant, yea, and teach an enemy.


Sorrow. I teach a slyffenecked scholar.


Reason. Thou syngest in a deaffe man's ear, but so the world goes, and some
are delyghted in great noyses, and some in quiet silence: The greatest sway in
all doings does custom always bear? Mark how still the Fysher is, and
how loud the Hunter, and the Scholemaister louder then he, yea then the
Raunger of a Foreste.


Sorrow. I have gotten an hard hearted scholar.


Reason. Thou may oftentimes reclayme the head of a Bear, sooner then of a
Man. What would thou more? It is set down in a fable how that the Wooolfe
and the Fox went to schole together, and ye Elephants have been learned: it is
no old wives tale, but a natural history. And so it may chance that this thy
scholar by study may alter and mollyfie nature. In my judgment the life of a
shepherd and of a scholemaister seems almost all one, and it is marueyle but
that both of them will be manered according to their living: The one of them
guides beasts, ye other boys.


Of a Stepdame. The.xlij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have a Stepdame.


Reason. Then thou have a father also. Thus goes the course of man's life, that
meery things are myxt with sorrowful, sour with sweet: and I wyshe that
sweet and sour, being thus equally mixed together, dwelled not here amongst
us.


Sorrow. I have an unjust stepdame.


Reason. Thou use Virgils term very aptly: but how much the more unjust she
is to thee, so much the more labor thou to be iuster then she.


Sorrow. I have a very proud stepdame.


Reason. It is the property of a woman to be proud, and therefore of a
stepdame: if two causes do engender one effect, there is no cause why thou
should and be amazed, but that thou should suffer, and therein thou shall
show thine own self both a good natural son, and also a good son in
law.


Sorrow. I have a very proud stepdame.


Reason. Pride is overcome by no means better then by lowlynesse.


Sorrow. I cannot abide my stepdame.


Reason. But thou must suffer thy father: If thou love him well, thou shall the
better abide her.


Sorrow. I have a wicked, and an importunate stepdame.


Reason. Be thou duetiful and pacient toward her: thou owe love unto thy
father, patience toward a woman, reverence to thy stepdame.


Sorrow. I have a malapert stepdame.


Reason. Do not commit, that her malapertnes be greater the^ thy duetifulnes:
There is nothing hard, nothing difficult unto duetifulnesse, the same aduanceth
men unto God, and plucketh down god unto men. As often as thy stepdame shall be
in her outrage, think not on her, but on thy father.


Sorrow. I have an injurious stepdame.


Reason. Women's injuries are better requited with contempt, then with revenge.


Sorrow. I suffer a grievous stepdame.


Reason. Thou say well, I suffer: For to faint, and not to be able to suffer
a foolyshe simple woman, is not the part of a man.


Sorrow. My stepdame hates me.


Reason. Love thou her, and it is Gods commandment, that we should love our
enimes: but to love, that thou should be loved again, is the counsel of
the Heathen Philosophers.


Sorrow. My stepdame hates me.


Reason. It may suffice thee if she love thy father, and it is not the duty
of a son to hate her that loves his father: but if she hate him, whom does
she not hate? For and if she love another man more then her husband, see that
thou be not he.


Sorrow. My stepdame hates me over much.


Reason. Perhaps the hate of thy stepdame is less hurtful then her exceeding
love: Dooest thou know the History of Phaedra and Hippolitus? Truly that
hatred which thou ought not to revenge, ought either to be pacified, or
avoided, or suffered, for there is none other means. Complaints oftentimes
do increase hatred.


Of the hardness of a Father. The.xliij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Suffer an hard father.


Reason. The hardness of a father, is many times profitable for the son:
cocklyng is always to be condemned* and the tongue is not only to be used, but
also there must be no spare of the rod, as the learned have given counsel:
And by these twain, is all the direction of young wits ordered, which if they
be used in vain, then to greater griefs we must give stronger medicines, as
banishment, and imprisonment, yea and moreover, according to the order of the
old Romans. extreme punishment, and death, which not only Consuls and
Captains, unto whom public authority gave jurisdiction over al men, but
also those private ancient and severe fathers, unto who^ only their country
gave them power over their children, have most extremely executed, as we read
in histories, among whom the severity of Cassius and Fuluius is most specially
renowned. Go thou thy ways now, and call thy father, that is to gentle, an
hard father.


Sorrow. I suffer an hard father.


Reason. What manner of son think thou did he suffer of thee when thou wast
a child, and likewise afterward when thou wast a young man? This is an hard
thing to persuade them in, that do very much please them selves: But believe
me, there is nothing more payneful then to suffer the unruly manners of that
age.


Sorrow. I suffer an hard father.


Reason. What if thou be an hard son? Hard things by hard things are more
effectuously mollified, and often times the scarre of a gentle Surgion is more
evil favored.


Sorrow. I have an hard father.


Reason. If he be a true father in deed he loves thee, and if he love thee,
he thinks upon the things that may profit thee, and not flatter thee.


Sorrow. I have an extreme hard father.


Reason. Those things that seem very hard unto thee, perhaps seem
profitable unto him, whose judgment is more certain, and affection more
incorrupt. Youth measures nothing but that which lies before their eyes,
ryper age foreseeth many things.


Sorrow. I have a very hard father.


Reason. See that thou be not hard unto him, so that whylest he resists thy
shame, thou disquiet his life with thine vnthrifcie demeanure.


Sorrow. My father is very hard.


Reason. He that neclecteth the good estate of his son, the same is to be
counted an hard father, although in show he appear very gentle: but he that
by advice and counsel draws his son the right way, prouokyng him forward
also, some times by word, and some times by deed, or else when he sees him
backwarde blames him, or unwilling compels him, and although in outward
show he seems somewhat sharp, yet is he not a hard father. The severity of
a father is commonly more profitable for the son then his gentleness.


Sorrow. My father is hard.


Reason. Zeal, sorrow, fear, and age, do excuse a fathers frowning.


Sorrow. I do paynfully abide an hard father.


Reason. What if that happen unto thee which has worthily happened unto many of
thy mind, to wit, that thou be constrained to abide the hardness of another?
What if it should chance thee thy self to begin to be the father of a
stubberne son? Then should thou know how pleasant a thing the yoke of a
father were, and how right is his authority: Now understand thou but only
one thing that delights thee, and in the same one thing thy judgment has no
delight of the mind, but is deceived with the delyght of the senses.


Sorrow. I have an hard father.


Reason. Admit he be hard, nature has made him thy judge, and not thee his:
which order the Ciuyl law follows, and is ashamed to see the sun to
correct and chasten the father? Thou ought to be ashamed to enterprise that
which the law is ashamed to license any son to do: suffer thou, and let
him judge of thee that begat thee, and brought thee up, commit thou the
judgment of him to other, and if thy father have not deserved true praise, yet
at the leastwyse reverence him with duetifull silence.


Sorrow. My father uses hard behavior.


Reason. The behavior of thy father is not to be blamed, but to be borne with:
There is no greater reproach to Alexander, then that he would seem to
attempt, I will not say to speak evil of his father, but envy his fathers
commendations: Thou ought either to speak worshypfully of thy father, or
else to hold thy peace altogether.


Sorrow. I have an hard father.


Reason. Thou have a mean to show thy love, to show thy honesty, to show
thy patience, and to show thine obedience. In all the world there is none more
just then the empire of a father, no service more honest then of a son. There
is nothing so much a man's own, as the son is the fathers, there can nothing
be more unjustly taken from him then his son: But you with a headlong and
intemperate desire, being borne to be subject, desire to be Sovereign, and
thus you both withdraw your selves from your father, and also usurp the
government which your fathers ought to baue over you, wherein is a double
mischief: Whereby it comes to pass, that the rashness of youth disturbeth
the duties of all things. Now hereof it proceeds, that when perhaps you
be restrained from this, then you complain of the sharpness of your father,
being worthy your selves, in your own judgment, that it should be lawful
for you to do all things, only in this respect, for that you be sons: and
ye have learned also to please your selves at lookyng Glasses, which you shall
then at length perceive, when ye begin to perceive how shamefully you have
wyshed for it before your time.


Sorrow. I have a rough father.


Reason. What if his roughness be fatherly? For the father owes a rough
carfulness unto his son, and the son a reverent duetifulnesse, obedience,
and humbleness unto his father. Concerning Manlius Torquatus thou have read in
Histories, and also in Marcus Tullius, that as he was very loving unto his
father, so was he bitterly severe unto his son, perhaps woorthyly blamed by
judgment of the common people for the one, but hyghly commended by vpryght
deemers for them both: such diversity is there in men's opinions.


Sorrow. I have an hard father.


Reason. To late it is or ever you know your good, O ye mortal men. But when
you begin to know it, then do you acknowledge it to much: and thus ye
loath the things that be present, and lament for them when they be lost. The
one of these tastes of to much pride, the other of over much humility, both
where ye ought to give thanks, and where you should give example of
patience, but in both ye complain, and in neither bear your selves
indifferent: is this your thankfulness toward God and men?


Sorrow. I have an hard father.


Reason. The time will come when thou shall sygh and wyshe for this thy father,
and shall call him, and he will not answer thee. And he that now seems unto
thee more hard then stone, shall then seem unto thee that he was more soft
then down.


Sorrow. I have an hard father.


Reason. Thou know not what it is to have a father, as long as thou have him.


Of a stubberne son. The.xliiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have a stubberne son.


Reason. It is meet, that thou that could not bear with thy father,
should suffer thy son, as being the heavier burden: For one sharp word
of the son irreuerently spoken by him that is proud, does more vex and
grieve the mind, then whatsoever hardness of a severe father. For the son
offers the injury in so dooyng, but the father does but that which is
right.


Sorrow. I have a rebellious son.


Reason. Impudently does he complain of the rebellion of his youngers, that
before time despised the just authority of his elders.


Sorrow. I have a stubberne son.


Reason. At length perhaps thou do now understand, what it was that thou
thoughtest of thy father that seemed so hard unto thee.


Sorrow. I suffer an insolent son.


Reason. If the fault be in his age, it will we are away with it. The
unbridled youth of many, in precesse of time, by strange increase, has been
converted unto thriftinesse.


Sorrow. I have a rebellious son.


Reason. Thou art not alone: For David, and Mithridates that was King of
Pontus, and Seuerus the Emperor of Rome, had all rebellious sons, and also
many hundred years after, the seditious mind of a young Prince, who stirred a
rebellion against the king his father, disturbed the common quiet of the Realm
of Britain, as the common brute goes: but every man bewayleth his own
mischaunces, and none the discommodities of an other, or the common calamity.


Sorrow. I have an ungodly and rebellious son.


Reason. A great part of the grief of a father is taken from thee, if thou
fear thy sons death.


Sorrow. I have a stouthful and a dastardly son.


Reason. Know thou not, how that the worthy Scipio Africanus had a son
very unlike unto him, which also did degenerate, notwithstanding he loved him
tenderly? And truly we ought to bear more affection, I will not say love,
unto him whom nature does less help. He has need of nothing that is rich
in virtue, the want whereof makes men very wretches, and so in consequent very
needy of mercifulness: and therefore thou for thy part, if virtue be not in
thy son, yet love him, because he is thy son: if not for that cause, then
for that he is a man: Lastly, if there be no cause at all why thou should
love him, them pity him. As severity belongs to a father, even so does
compassion.


Sorrow. I have a son of a most wicked life.


Reason. An unlucky burden, and so much the heavier, that as long as it is to
be suffered, it cannot be quite cast away: suffer, and as thou may amend it,
so shall thou either cure thy son, or at the least play the part of a father,
but this thou ought to do of duty, and wyshe the other.


Sorrow. My son is very ungodly, discourteous, and unreasonable.


Reason. If wantonness and pleasure be once grown unto knavery and myscheefe,
then is there a venomous beast to be driven out a doors, neither must we
regard where, but what is borne and sprung up: for you nouryshe up birds bread
in the wild wooddes, and ye kyl scorpions brought up at home in the house.


Sorrow. I have a very wicked son.


Reason. It is the part of a wise man to put a way dangerous things before
they do any harm at al. Let not the shadow of godliness deceive thee, no
godliness is due unto an ungodly person. A man may sometime find where it is
a kind of cruelty to be godly, but while there remains the least spark of
hope, always enclyne thy self unto mercy and remember that thou art a father,
and not a judge, and see thou forget not here that notable saying of Terence,
For a great fault, a little punishment is sufficient of a father.


Of a contentious brother. The.xlv. Dilalogue.
SORROW. I Have a contentious brother.


Reason. And what of him? then has he not thee an agreeyng brother, for
brotherly agreement, which ought of twain to make but one, is divided in
twain, so that you are made not diverse only, but quite contraryes: a grievous
mischief surely, but an ancient, which both the world and the head of the
world had in the beginning: For the infamy of the city of Rome is ancient,
but that of the world is of more antiquity, to wit, that it was embrued with
the blood of brethren. Therefore that which thou see between al cooples of
brethren, yea when there was but one coople only in the world, have no cause to
be amassed at it now among so many thousands.


Sorrow. I have a very contentious brother at home.


Reason. Do thou marueyle that to be in a great house, which has been in
the narowe room of one mothers womb? where as in time past (which was a
shadow of a greater misery) we read of brothers that were not only among them
selves contentious, but also together by the ears? Is it any strange thing
then that men, being armed, should do that which they that are unborn are
wont to do?


Sorrow. I find no favor with my brother.


Reason. Thou ought rather to have learned this long before in the schools,
than to have found it true in effect at home: things that are foreseen, are
neither complained of, nor woondred at.


Sorrow. I have an odious and contentious brother.


Reason. As for the most part there is no love more tender then the love of
brethren, so when it begins, there is no hatred more vehement, no envy more
unquenchable. Thus equality inciteth and enflameth their minds, when as the
shame of giving place, and the desire of superiority, is by so much the more
fervent, the more that the remembrance of their infancy together, or what so
ever else may seem to engender goodwyl, when as they be once digressed from the
right way, may procure hatred and disliking between them: in this respect
therefore, the heart burning of a rebellious nature, may be very well reclaimed,
namely by courtesy and gentleness. For there is no nature almost so rough and
uncivil, whom at length true and continual humility in words, and
unfeigned and gentle dealing in all matters, will not overcome and molifie. If
thou find this to be void and without force, or that peradventure thou thy
self can not enforce thy mind hereunto, whereby he may be honestly and
profitably constreyned, then before that the matter break forth unto utter
destruction, thou must use the last and extreme remedy, the root of the
mischief must be plucked up, and comunitie removed, which is the mother of
discord: wherein thou must demean thy self so courteously, that look how
much thou yeeldest of thy right, so much thou shall perceive to be added unto
thy virtue and fame. The sharp pricks of impious and proud desire, are by
nothing better rebated, then by virtuous and courteous liberality. That gold is
good, whereby the peace of family, and brotherly love is purchased. It is a
very ancient, and no less true saying, That these two pronownes, mine and
thine, are great cause of wars and disagreement, which if they were taken
away from out of the life of man, out of doubt men should live much more
quietly.


Of the loss of a father. The.xlvi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have last my father.


Reason. It is meet, that him whom thou complainedst of while he was present
with thee, thou seek him when he is absent, and yet not find him. There is
nothing more just, then in vain to wysh for the authority which thou have
contemned.


Sorrow. I have lost a good father.


Reason. It is well that he has left a good son behind him: rejoice for the
good old man's sake, unto whom at length that has happened which he always
wyshed for: who leaving thee in safety, is departed him self out of this
world.


Sorrow. I have lost a loving father.


Reason. A good son stands in dread of the chances of fortune for none
other cause, then that any calamity befallyng unto him, might strike his
fathers mind with sorowfulnesse: but now thou shall live more at quiet at
thine own peril only, he shall not any more be grieved with rumors of thee,
thine adversity shall not break him, thy sickness shall not weaken him, thy
death shall not kyl him.


Sorrow. I have lost a most loving father.


Reason. Thou must now begin to care for other, for he that was wont to care
for thee is gone. That tenderness that was showed over thee, repaye thou unto
another, it is seldom repayed unto whom it is due.


Sorrow. Poor wretch I have lost a loving father.


Reason. If thou know the reason and nature of love and tenderness, comfort
thy chance by remembrance of the time past: Thou did reverence thy father,
and as long as thou could, thou shewdst thy self always duetiful unto him:
thy father is departed, but thy duetifulnesse lives: otherwise. I confess,
thou had cause to be heavy continually.


Sorrow. My father by dying has forsaken me.


Reason. Take in good part the common course of nature, he is first gone that
first came into the world, neither has he forsaken thee, but is gone before
thee.


Sorrow. I have lost my father.


Reason. Thou know not what it is to leese a father, unless thou had
had a son.


Of the loss of a mother. The xlvii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost my mother.


Reason. Thou have yet another mother whom thou can not leese if thou
would, from the first thou came, and unto this thou shall return. The
first gave thee houseromth the space of a few months, the other shall give
thee lodging the space of many years. The one of these gave thee thy body, the
other shall take it away.


Sorrow. My most mild mother is dead.


Reason. But a most hard mother remains, who will keep thee and thy mother
whom thou bewailest in one besome, in whose womb she shall rest with thee, and
as we believe, bring you both forth again at the last day.


Sorrow. My good mother has forsaken me.


Reason. She made have, fearyng to be forsaken, and likely it is, that her
death was acceptable unto her, because she would not see thine, providing for
her security in that which always she most feared.


Sorrow. My good mother is dead.


Reason. She is happily dead, thou being a live, which being otherwise, such
are the affections of women, she would have died in sorrowful lamentation.


Sorrow. My mother is dead.


Reason. She must have died, and thou also, neither can thou complain of
death, nor of the order thereof.


Of the loss of a son. The xlviii. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUt I have lost my son.


Reason. Say rather and better, I have sent him before me, for thou shall
follow him quickly, and perhaps to day, and how know we whether this same
hour? There is no trust in life, since there is so great certentie in death:
shall follow him said I? Nay rather thou do follow him I would have said,
for thou folowest him continually: it is not permitted unto a man at any time
to stay his course in this life, but evermore he steppeth forth one step unto
death: a strange matter to be spoken, whether he be bound or at liberty, sick
or whole, walkyng or sitting, awake or sleepyng, he is carried forth toward his
end, much after the manner of them that sail in a ship, or sit and ride in
a wagon, and are carried forth a pace.


Sorrow. I am grieved with the lack of my son whom I have lost.


Reason. Qiuet thy mind, for thou shall find him whom thou desire ere it be
long: not to be able to suffer the want of a short time, is the part of a
child, or a woman: for unto a man there is no short thing difficult. Thou
know, I think, by what words Socrates in Plato, and Cato and Lelius in
Cicero. do comfort such desires and wantes. Although men surpass in virtue
and glory, yet in this hope do some far surpass other. Thou know moreover
of what mind Paulus Emilius, Cato him self, Pericles, and Zenophon, that was
scholar unto Socrates, and scholefelowe with Plato, and his equal, and other
innumerable, were for the death of their children: neither art thou ignorant
how he that was both a prophet and a king, wept for his child while it was
sick, but not when it was dead, thinkyng, that to lament and weep for things
unrecoverable, is rather a point of vain madness, then of true affection.
Among the number of which manly examples the Spartane woman shuffeleth her
self, whose name is not set down by writers, nor her saying semblably
commended, who hearing that her son was slain in battle, therefore, said
she, did I bear him, that he should not be afraid to dye for his country.
The virtue of Linia, and the elder Cornelia, is nothing inferior unto this,
but their names much more famous, of whom the first laid down her mournyng
so soon as her son, of most honorable birth, and that was like to have
aspired unto the highest degree of Empire, was once laid into the ground, but
never left of the remembrance of him: The other, having lost many children, yea
all that she had, whereof some she beheld slain by the people, and lying
abroad unburied, when as other women, according to the manner of that sex,
rued her state, and pitifully weepyng bewaled her woeful case, she answered,
that she was not unfortunate, but happy, for that she had borne such sons. A
worthy woman, that was not surprised with the present misery, but counted her
self happy for that which was past, who contrary to the common opinion and
custom of them that are in misery, comforted herself with her forepassed
felicity, and the remembrance of her prosperity wherein she had sometime
lived, and took it indifferently, although she had then lost it, and for that
cause only was worthy to have bad good children. Now she, being a woman,
remained wholly not once touched with the grievous and sharp wounds of fortune:
and thou, being a man, art overthrown by one only, do thou lament so
childishly?


Sorrow. I have lost my son.


Reason. If he were a duetiful son, there is no cause to fear his estate,
for he is well: But if he were wicked, thou art rydde of one that counted upon
thy death, and increased the infirmities of thine old age.


Sorrow. I have lost my son.


Reason. If he were virtuous, rejoice that thou had him: but if he were
unthrifty, be glad that thou have lost him, and in either case acknowledge the
benefit of nature, either for giving thee such a one, or for taking him a way.


Sorrow. Death has taken away my son before his time.


Reason. That is not done before due time, which may be done at al times.
Death has direct entrances into al ages, but into youth innumerable.


Sorrow. I have remained without a son.


Reason. And without trouble and fear. Now have thou none, for whose cause
thou shall spend the nyghtes without sleep, and the days in care, for whose
sake thou shall enter into long and inextricable hope, that shall think upon
thy hory hears, and wryncles, examine thy living, find fault with thine
expenses, and blame the staying of thy death, thou art in security and
quietness on every side, both which are a great commodity, although it be
made more bitter by the name of death.


Sorrow. I am cast down by the geeuous death of my son.


Reason. Have thou not heard what Anaragoras says? Have thou forgotten that
thou begattest a mortal creature? Or do thou perhaps lament, that he is
gone before, that should have followed? And although the life of man in many
other things be disordinate and out of course, yet death keeps his ordinary
custom, crooked old men stagger, and young men make have, and children run
headlong, and infantes at their first entrance into life are drawn to their
end: one man more slowly, another more speedily, one more ripely, another more
untimely, but every man must die: this is the conclusion of al. And in
whatsoever age of this life a man die, be it gently or sharply, he hastes
unto death.


Sorrow. I weep for the death of my son.


Reason. If thou would have wept at his death, thou should also have wept
at his birth, for then he began to die, but now he has done. But do not thou
lament for thine own and his most excellent estate: he left behind him a
perilous way to pass, but thou having him always before thine eyes, who now
is in security, have no farther regard of thy sweet burden, as Virgil
speaks, or of any other.


Sorrow. Al my delight to live, is extinguished.


Reason. A good son, I confess, is a great comfort unto his father, but
notwithstanding careful and grievous. And many times the sweetest things do
offend us, and the dearest do hinder us, and the most precious do oppress us.
And perhaps this thy son was some let unto thy mind, that would have
aspired unto greater matters. And now although thou art become more heavy, yet
since thou art at more liberty, be of good cheer: to gather good out of evil,
is the part of a wise man.


Sorrow. The death of my lonne has made me heavy.


Reason. But spend the residue of thy life that remains, in iolitie: thou
did live for him, now live for thy self.


Of the miserable fall of a young child. The.xlix. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Lament the miserable fall of my young child.


Reason. A man ought to lament for nothing that may happen unto mankind: al
things should be premeditated before, if they have not happened alredie: lament
not thy childs fall, but thine own vnskylfulnesse, and the forgetfulness of
thine own condition.


Sorrow. I complain of the miserable death of my young child.


Reason. There is no death miserable, which the death of the soul does not
follow, from which danger thy young child is free.


Sorrow. My child is dead by breaking his neck.


Reason. What skylleth it after what sort a man dye, so that he die not
dishonourably, and he can not die dishonourably, that dies without offenses.


Sorrow. My child is peryshed by breakyng his neck.


Reason. But Archemorus by the biting of a serpent, other some by suckyng milk
of a nurse being with child, other by sickness, the which for the more part
happen more commonly then, than in old age.


Sorrow. My young child is perished by breaking his neck.


Reason. Sodeyne death is to be wished of the innocent, and to be feared of the
guilty.


Sorrow. My child is dead of a fall from an high.


Reason. Unto them that dye languishingly, death often times seems the
sharper, and the panges the longer: for all pain, ye shorter it is, the more
tolerable it is.


Sorrow. My child is dead by breakyng his neck.


Reason. To stumble and fall, is proper to that age. Thy child has done that
which al do, although al peryshe not by casualtie: but do thou suffer him to
peryshe, for he must needs peryshe one day, and he is the more happily dealt
withal, for that he has peryshed before he was entangled in the euylles of
this life, which how manyfold they be, those that have proved, and
diligently observed, can tell. There is none that proves not in part, and
they that observe them not, lead forth their lives as it were in a dream,
which so soon as they awake, they have forgotten: Thine, infant died an
innocent, who perhaps, if he had lived, had dyed a very hurtful person.
Lament not that he is safe, he has escaped all the threats of fortune, and
has prevented death, which being deferred, would have prevented him.


Sorrow. A woolfe has devoured my child.


Reason. This now is the woormes complaynt.


Sorrow. A woolfe has carried away the body of my poor child into his den.


Reason. But the angels have carried up his blessed soul into heaven.


Of a son that is found to be another man's. The.l. Dialogue.
SORROW. ANd moreover (that which is more grievous then death) he whom I
thought had been my son, is another man's.


Reason. If you had a respect to the common father, then would you by the
counsel of the Comical Poet, think that there is no humane thing but may
happen unto you.


Sorrow. I have fostred another man's child a great while for mine own.


Reason. Nature wylleth a man to foster his own, and charity, to foster
another man's, so that thou repent thee not after the deed, but delight in it.


Sorrow. He that was counted my child, appears to be another man's.


Reason. There is opened unto thee a way unto a great and singular merit, if,
as thou have hitherto done, so thou continue hereafter, to keep him as thine
own. Truly that were a very gracious and acceptable deed before God. For
children are wont for the more part to contemn the mayntenance of their
parents, as a thing due unto them by right: and moreover, it were a point of
wickedness to love thy child that is borne of thee, and not to love man that
is created of God. Thus every way, both before God and men, thou shall purchase
unto thy self singular commendation and virtue, through another man's
wickedness.


Sorrow. I have nooryshed one for my child that was not so.


Reason. Thou nooryshedst him as thy child, and so nooryshe him still, if not
as thy child, yet as thy brother: For of all the people that are, or ever
shall be, or have been heretofore, there is one father, and one governor. Do
not dissemble through insolency, or through envy and hatred break of the
sacred bond of nature: for you be brethren one to another.


Sorrow. He whom I thought to have been, as I hear, is not my son.


Reason. Take heed of whom thou hear it, and whom thou trustest. For many,
being pricked forth by wicked prouocations, do of set purpose devise false
rumors: and other some by a certain slypprynesse and unbridled affection of
the tongue, do as well babble forth the things that they know, as that they
know not, and with like impudency utter whatsoever comes in their mind:
Howbeit, to determine precisely of a man's child, whether it be his own or
not, is an hard case.


Sorrow. I hear say that he that was called my son, is another man's.


Reason. Why dooest thou herein believe other rather then thine own wife,
since none knows it more certaynely then she? Truly she has given thee a
child, whom other go about to take from thee. Thou have heard, I think, how
that within the remembrance of our fathers there was a certain noble man, who
had to wife a gentlewoman of equal beauty and parentage, but of whose
honesty the report seemed some what to doubt: By her he had one most
beautiful son, whom when his mother upon a time held in her lap, and
perceyuyng that her husband syghed and was careful, she demanded of him what
was the cause of his heaviness? Then he syghyng again, I had rather, said
he, then the one half of my lands, that I were as sure that this boy were
mine, as thou art that he is thine. Whereunto she aunsweared, neither in
countenance nor mind any whit moved: Truly, said she, the matter shall not
cost so great a price: but give me an hundred acres of pasture, whereon I may
feed my cattayle, and I my self will resolve thee in this matter. Then he
answered, that it was impossible. But she sendyng for such Noble men and
Gentlemen as dwelt near hand, and causyng him to give his word for the
perfourmance of his promise, held up her young son in her arms, and, Is
this my child in deed, mine said she? And when they all answered, yea: she
stretched forth her arms, and delivered him unto her husband, and here,
said she, take him, I give him thee freely: and now be assured that he is
thine. Then all that stood by, brake forth in laughter, and gave judgment on
the woman's side, and condemned the husband by all their verdictes. Such
contentions and lamentations are thereto often among men, they be hasty to
marriage, yea slipperie and headlong: you think you shall never see the day
wherein you shall be husbands, that is to say, men, as though otherwise you
should never be men. Then being resolved in joys, or to speak more truly,
in madness, the first days of your marriage you spend in revel route,
feastyng and daunsing, among your weddyng solemnities, with pastimes, and
songs, and minstrelles: and the residue of your life you spend in suspicion
and braulyng. In both, you are to blame: For neither ought you in such sort
to love so doubtful a thing, neither to abhor so inseparable a thing, nor to
hate so lovely a thing, and by deceiptfull conjectures so to confound the
most sacred laws of the divine and humane house, and dissolve the most
entyre bonds of this life.


Sorrow. Yea, my wife her self has confessed that he is none of mine.


Reason. Thou tellest me this, as if it were some syngular matter, but it is
common: some confess so much while they are living, and some when they lie a
dying, among whom some have wylled to have it imparted unto their husbands
after their departure.


Sorrow. Mine own wife has con^essed unto me, that he is (...) my son.


Reason. Olimpias that was wife unto the renowned king Phillip of Macedonie,
confessed as much unto her husband, which might have tended unto the
destruction of her valiant son: and yet we read neither of tears, nor
sighs, nor complayntes among them all. Now hearken to a meery tale, but not
unfit for our purpose. Not far from the Ocean Sea shore, which lies right
over against Britain, not very many years ago, report goes that there was a
certain poor woman, fair and well favored, but a notable Harlot, who had
twelve small children, by as many several men, one of them but a year elder
then other. But being sick, when she perceived that the hour of her death was
come, she caused her husband to be called unto her, and, this is no time, said
she, now to dissemble any longer, there is none of all these children thine,
but the eldest only: for the first year that we were married I lived honestly.
It chanced that at the same time, all the children sat on the ground about the
fire eating, according to ye manner of the country. At which words the good
man was amazed, and the children also that heard their mothers communication,
whose fathers she reckoned al by name as they were in order of years: Which
thing the youngest of them all hearing, who was then but three years old,
immediately laid down his bread which was in his right hand, and the Rape
root which he had in his left, upon the ground beside him, and tremblyng
with fear, and holdyng up his hands after the manner of them that pray, Now
good mother, quoth he, give me a good father: And when in the end of her
speech she had told who was father to the youngest, to wit, a certain famous
rich man: taking up his bread and meat again in his hand, That is well,
said he, I have a good father.


Of the loss of a brother. The.Lj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost my brother.


Reason. Yet I hear no cause why thou should be very sorry. For Ovid says
to true, that there is seldom agreement between brethren.


Sorrow. I have lost my brother.


Reason. It may be that thou have at once lost both a brother, and an household
enemy. Lo, see then what thou have lost, an ill thing covered with a good
name.


Sorrow. I have lost a brother.


Reason. Perhaps thou have lost him that has wyshed thee lost, and that
always resisted thine attemptes. Brothers hatred has hyndred many from the
entrance unto great commendation.


Sorrow. I have lost a brother.


Reason. Thou have lost peradventure an heavy yoke, as oftentimes we have
seen it fall out, unto the tender years of thy children, thou have lost also
the enuier of thy life, the hynderer of thy glory, and also, which is evident,
the partner of thy patrimony.


Sorrow. But I have lost a virtuous and loving brother.


Reason. But a mortal one. Virtue is no defense to the body, but an ornament
to the mind, and a procurer of immortal glory, but as for the body she cannot
exempt it from the power of death, but rather thrusts it forward many times
thereunto before due time: but if he be left unto nature, good and had do
perysh a like, and most commonly we see the best men weakest, and the woorst
long lived, but none immortal.


Sorrow. I have lost a good and glorious brother.


Reason. If thy brother be dead, the glory, virtue, and soul remains in
safety, which only excepted, death consumes and destroys all other worldly
things with like violence. These therefore embrace thou, as if they were so
many sons of thy brother, and with these immortal good things, requite the
mortal evil: but if he have sons living, unfeigned duetifulnes shall make them
thine.


Sorrow. I have lost a good brother.


Reason. Thou should have employed him diligently, which if thou did
necligently, his death is not to be blamed, but thine own slouthfulnes. Death
has exercised his power, but thou have slacked thine opportunity.


Sorrow. Death has deceived me, for I thought not that he would have died so
soon.


Reason. All things that happen unto them that are unwilling, seem to come
quickly, but if they be wished for, they come but slowly.


Sorrow. I scarce thought that he could have died.


Reason. Vehement love bears with it self in all things, and promises it
self every thing, unpleasant thoughts, and whatsoever is noisome unto cast it
escheweth: insomuche as whosoever is in love, imagines unto him self that his
pleasures are in a manner everlasting: thou, since thou knew that thy brother
was borne, ought also to know that he was mortal, and therefore if thou
bewail his tymely death as some sudden matter, thou art much deceived, but if
as it were untimely, thou wast in a wrong opinion.


Sorrow. I knew that he was mortal, but I thought not upon his death.


Reason. Unwisely done, but this is your dissimulation: being mortal ye
think never to dye, when as you may chance to dye every day, and needs you
must dye one day: Yea rather it is the unchangeable necessity of the law of
your nature, that you can never be other then such as must oye, which
necessity must continually remain with you: but you dying every day, turn
away your senses from the things that are present, and your mind from the
end that will ensue. This is a common mischief, which what is it other then
wyllyngly to shut your eyes that they behold not the beams of the Sun, as
though it were hurtful as well to the light as it is to the eyes not to behold
it, and that that were as evident which you see not, and that as true which
you know not. Who is so blind that sees not this, or so blockyshe that
understands it not? The infyrmitie of the senses or understanding,
withdraws nothing at all from the truth of things. As for you, ye are
neither weak nor dull, but, wherein you cannot be excused, egregius
dissemblers, and very wise to deceive your selves, who with so great diligence
learn unprofitable things, and endeavor to be ignorant of necessary matters,
but all in vain: for they steal upon you though your eyes be shut, and invade
your minds that are desirous to be ignorant, and disquiet your memories that
are wyllyng to forget, and many things arise daily in the life of man, which
constrayne you to think upon them when you would not, and which do awake
your dissimulations, either by your private or foreign arguments: but I
confess, that death only at full confuteth all the follies of mortal
creatures.


Sorrow. I knew that my brother was mortal and should dye, nevertheless I
weep for his death.


Reason. The greater part of humane actions is superfluous: Why weepest thou
for his death? What does this weepyng avail him, or thy self, or any other?
Admit death be evil, which the learned deny, truly no man will deny but
that weepyng is in vain, for that which cannot be recovered. And verily, if
any thing might be termed wretched beside the vice of the mind, if there be
any thing in all the world to be wept for, it ought rather be lamented while
it is coming at hand, then when it is past: which that King conceyned right
well, of whom I spoke not long before.


Sorrow. I am grieved for the death of my good brother.


Reason. There is no affection more tender then a fathers, and therefore that
which is said of the death of a son, apply it thou to the death of thy
brother, and that which may be said of them both, is proficable in the death
of a man's friend, which loss although it be matched with the greatest, it
must be abydden, as of al other things: for all such things as appear unto
us grievous, are to be suffered by one and like courage of mind, although a
man would think that they would quite oppress him.


Sorrow. I have lost a most loving brother.


Reason. It had been worse if thou had lost a most hateful brother: For
the love of the one, and the remembrance of the other, is very pleasant.


Sorrow. I have lost a companion most pleasant unto me even from his tender
youth, I am now left aloue.


Reason. He is not a lone with whom virtue and honesty do remain, between
which twain death has not forbidden the Image of thy brother to be fastened
hard unto thy hart-stringes: so neither thy brother is lost, nor thou alone.


Of the death of a freende. The.Lij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost a freende.


Reason. If thou have loved virtue in thy freende as thou ought, truly she
is not lost nor dead: and therefore it is said, that true friend ship is
immortal, for that it is never broken, either by the falling out of friends,
or else by death it self: and thus virtue overcomes discord and all vice,
but she her self is never overcome by any thing.


Sorrow. I have lost a freende.


Reason. All other things when thou have lost them, thou have them not, but
when thou thynkest thou have lost thy friends and thy best beloved, then have
thou them most assuredly: For things which are present be delicate, I will
not say weerysome, yea and many times arrogant, and offended with very small
trifles, but the remembrance of friends is pleasant and sweet, having in it
nothing that is bitter or contrary to delyght.


Sorrow. I have lost a very good freende by death.


Reason. If thou complain of the loss of commodities, thou make accounte of
profit, and not of freendshyp. If thou complain of thy daily conversation
with him, remember how short time friends remain together, and how much
time we spend in cares, how much in syckenesse, how much in sleep and
pleasure, how much is spent in intercourse with strangers; how many heaps
of cares: Finally, what business, what studies, what leisure, and what
troubles sometimes of another man's, and sometimes of a man's own, and also the
continual and invincible necessity of manyfolde matters, from which no
prosperity is exempt, do withdraw some thing from our desired conversation:
how many seldom meetings, how short and careful abydynges, how sorrowful
departynges, how late returnynges, what stays, what impedimentes, what
deceiptes? With this and such like difficulties of life, and fetters of
freendshyp, which may easily be brought into a man's remembrance, thou may
understand how great a matter it is which death has taken from thee. For if
thou may this alone in freendshyp, which is the only perpetual and stable
foundation thereof, truly death could there take nothing away. Thou have
heard in Marcus Tullie, of Lelius comforting him self, how his freende
Scipio lives yet to him, how fresh he is in his mind, and that neither ye
fame nor the virtue of his friend any time dies. What forbids, but that thy
friend Scipio lives now unto thee? But you, because ye cannot be Scipioes or
Lelies, ye be not men neither, and for that ye cannot atteyne to ye highest, ye
despair of the mean, or contemn it, as though as in Poetry, so in virtue,
neither men nor the gods could aspire unto a mediocritie.


Sorrow. Death has taken away my friend from me.


Reason. Death is able to take away thy friends body, but as for friendshyp
and friend he is not able: For they are of the kind of things that are not
subject to death nor fortune, but to virtue, the which among humane things is
free only, and is able to give freedom unto whatsoever is subject unto her:
and as for a friend, he should not be of so great price if he could be so
easily lost.


Sorrow. I have remained without a friend.


Reason. If thou do ryghtly honor friendshyp, thou shall never lack old
friends, nor be destitute of new, yea such is the opinion hereof, that it
will purchase thee friends of thine enemies. There was nothing that more
reconciled Augustus the Emperor unto Herod, then for that he professed that
he was most friendly affected unto Augustus enemy, and that by means of him
he hated Augustus most extremely, for which cause Augustus judged him worthy
of his friendshyp, who with so great trustiness had honored the friendshyp of
his enemy: so great is the beauty of virtue and friendshyp, that we are
delighted therewith even in our enemies, and enforces a man to love him of whom
he knows himself to be hated.


Sorrow. My most faithful friend is dead.


Reason. Thou must bury him in thy remembrance, where he may secretly
remain with thee, and never dye altogether: Whom if thou have lost by any
other means then by death, then have thou not lost a friend, but a false
opinion of friendshyp.


Of the absence of friends. The.Liij. Dialogue
SORROW. I Am grieved for the absence of my friends.


Reason. It happens so many times: but he that has learned to take
indifferently the death of his friend, may somewhat more moderately bear his
absence, neither can the absence of a friend overthrow him, whom the death of
a friend could not overthrow.


Sorrow. My most dear friend is absent, my right hand, and my right eye.


Reason. Though he were so absent that he would never return, yet would I
say that there is nothing but a man ought to take it indifferently: but he will
come a gain, and thine integrity shall be restored unto thee.


Sorrow. My friend is absent, the one moitie of my self.


Reason. Horace the poet terms Virgil the one half of his soul, which
phrayse being afterward used of many, is now grown into a proverb. But if a
friend be not naturally only, but ciuilly also had in possession, wherein does
absence hurt frendshyp, but that wheresoever thou be, he may sit, walk,
talk, and confer with thee in pleasant and serious matters? For if ye saw
nothing else but what lies before your eyes, and only the things that are
present delited you, then should your sight be very short and narrow.


Sorrow. I am sorry for the absence of my sweet freende.


Reason. But you use rather to be sorry for the absence of beloved, then sweet
things. Hearken now unto that which will scarce enter in the common peoples
ears. It is a strange case, how ticklish and loathsome sometime is the
presence yea of men's dearest friends: many times men are offended at a small
matter, and those whom they love berie well, or whose presence they earnestly
desire, not only their friends, but also their brethren or children, for that
perhapes they are some hindrance unto their studies and business, they had
rather sometime that they were absent. In their absence there is nothing
bitter, nothing that greeueth our desire, but that they are away, which
notwithstanding thou can not deny to be pleasant.


Sorrow. The absence of my belooued friend greeueth me.


Reason. This is a common thing, I confess, among women and such as love
after a womanish manner, whose whole delight consists in the senses.
Notwithstanding, of these the poet spoke where he says, He that is absent,
hears and sees another that is absent. Which if it be so, why should not
also a freende see and hear his freende that is absent, unless peradventure
your eyes be more bright and clear to behold the visions of lasciviousness
then of virtue, or else there is more honor to be ascribed unto mad then chaste
love, which besides honest and quick thoughts, which no distance of place,
nor necessity of force can restrain to wander, and be conversant where soever
it pleases them, there is a provision made by the benefit of sendyng letters,
then which I know not whether there be any presence more acceptable. Marcus
Cicero was in Rome, whiles writing unto his brother. Quintus Cicero who as
deputy governed the country of Asia, when I read thy letters, says be, me
thinks I hear thee speak, and when I write unto thee, me thinks, I talk
with thee. And anon exhortyng him unto the excellency of glory, he says, that
he has found it very effectuous, in all his works and deeds to imagine unto
himself that his brother was present with him. I cannot tell whether he were at
Athens, or in some other place where Epicurus was present, whiles writing unto
his freende, So behave thy self in all matters, says he, as if Epicurus him
self beheld thee. Truly Anneus Seneca was in Campania, whiles by his letters
communing with his friend that soiourned in Sicilia, he exhorts him to
study, to dyne, and walk with him, which he could not do but in mind only,
and thereunto wanted neither the assistance of the eyes, nor of the ears, nor
of the hands, nor of the feet.


Sorrow. Mine eyes do greedily require mine absent freende:


Reason. I cannot deny, but that by absence there is some delight taken from the
eyes, but nothing from the mind, neither from the eyes in a manner, as I said
before, if it be true freendshyp. From hence it comes, that in the same Poet
we read and commend this saying, Pallas, Enander, they al stand before his
eyes. And Cicero him self also in a certain epistle, says, that he bears
not only in his mind his friend Balbus, who served under Caesar in France,
but also in his eyes.


Sorrow. My freende is absent.


Reason. Sometime a freende is not known, unless he be absent. As in all other
things, so likewise in freendshyp, great plenty dulleth the sense, and
scarcity sharpneth it. And if the schoolemaister of love says, that
intermission of love is profitable unto lovers, whose universal pleasures
consist in presence, why should not the same also be avail able unto friends,
whose whole delight is reposed in virtue, and feels no discommoditie in
absence, since it is present in every place? Do not therefore give over unto
desire, but embrace thy friend in thy remembrance, whom neither departure nor
death it self can take from thee.


Sorrow. I suffer grievously the absence of my sweet freende.


Reason. Suffer it only, and confirm the softer parts of thy mind with
present virtue. For this bitter absence, which thou now bewaylest, perhaps
in time shall make thy freende more dear unto thee, and his presence more
acceptable.


Of grievous shypwracke. The liiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have been tossed in a grievous shypwracke.


Reason. Thou tellest me of the shypwracke on the sea, but as for the wrack of
the mind thou speak nothing of it, as though there were any more grievous,
or common. There is the tempest of desires and affections, as if it were of
contrary blusteryng winds, which when the sails of your concupiscences and
hope are hoised and spread, bearing away the helm of the mind, and leesing
the ankers of constancy in the deep sea, drives you about unto al coasts,
and over al seas: that wrack it was that drove thee into this. Take away
desire, and thou shall take away this sailing for the most part, or at
leastwise the danger thereof: the same drives men not only into ships, but
miserably upon rocks, and death it self. And therefore, for the most part all that by their own seking perish in the sea, have first perished in the mind,
and were first overwhelmed by the waves of covetousness, before that they were
drenched in the surgies of the sea. For desire comes seldom without headlong
hastiness, and that which it will have, it will have it presently, al tariance
and the companions thereof costlinesse it hates, the same is the ready way unto
destruction, and the first cause of often shypwracke.


Sorrow. I am discomforted by a great shypwracke.


Reason. Thou have learned to pray unto God, to make vows, and promise many
things, of which although fear was the cause, yet since thou art arrived
again on the land, acknowledge thou that faith was the cause: God is not
mocked skot free, he hates the breakers of their faithful promises.


Sorrow. I have suffered a foul shypwracke.


Reason. None complain of shypwracke, but they that have escaped it. Rejoice
therefore that thou art safe, and more expert. The remembrance of dangers past,
is commonly delectable, as contrariwyse the memory of forepassed prosperity is
grievous. But how much would thou have esteemed in foretymes to have seen
the Triton gods of the sea, and the mountains of water foming, and the waves
up to heaven swelling, and the monsters of the sea swimming? Thou have now some
fearful tales to tell in the winter nights by the fire side, to make folk a
fearde withal, and to hold thine amazed family in admiration. Now therefore
thou know what is a poetical tempest, and that fear which thou would
scarce believe, is certaynely known unto thee, which thou have now well
gained, either by the fear of death, or loss of goods.


Sorrow. I have been in a dangerous shypwracke.


Reason. There is nothing learned without travail, this if thou be wise,
shall be a perpetual lesson unto thee, that heareafter thou never persuade thy
self to commit thy life unto the winds.


Sorrow. I have suffered a woeful shypwracke.


Reason. If this be the first, take heed thou fall not into the second: if it
be the second, then hold thy peace. For proper is the saying of Publius the
writer of scoffs: He wickedly accuses Neptune, that commits shipwreck the
second time.


Sorrow. I have scarce escaped in a terrible shypwracke.


Reason. I can not see why it should be more terrible to dye in the sea, then
upon the land, seeing men must needs dye upon the one of them, or why it were
better to feed worms, then to be bait for fyshes: but forasmuch as thou
have escaped, beware that thou commit not again thy life to a broken oar, or
a rotten boorde. Since thou art an earthly creature, learn to keep the earth,
and rather to affect heaven then the sea.


Of Burning. The.lv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have scarce escaped out of a burning fire.


Reason. Do thou then draw it unto the injury of fortune, that thou have
escaped? Let Alcibiades be moved, who could not escape out of ye hot burning of
his enemies: howbeit although thou have prevented the earthly, yet who is able
to gainesta^d the burninges that come from heaven? Let the Roman king Tullus
Hostilius, and the Roman Emprour Charus, answer me, whereof the one was
consumed with fire from heaven in the palace at Rome, and the other in his
tents near unto the river Tigris, if we may credit common histories.


Sorrow. Having lost al my goods, I have escaped naked out of the fire.


Reason. Whom I pray thee, would either Kias, as al men say, or Stilbon, as
Seneca will have it, have spoken such a word? who when his country was on
fire, being demanded, or rather reproved, for that he conueighed none of his
goods out of ye flame, as other of his neighbors did, answered in this
manner? Al my goods, said he, I carry with me. Woorthily, truly, whether it
were the one or both of them that spoke it: although such kind of speeches do
always sound most excellently out of the mouth of the first aucthour of them:
but omitting the aucthour, the truth of the saying is commonly perceived. For
the true goods in deed remain within, and cannot be taken from the owner
while he lives, neither when he is dead. For they cleave fast to the soul,
whyther as neither the right hand of fortune, nor of death is able to reach.
Thou being safe and sound, lamentest that thou have lost certain things,
which if they had been thine in deed, out of doubt they had been safe with
thee this day. For believe me, true goods do not peryshe. Gold is not more
precious then virtue, nor so good as it, although it be not consumed, but
purged by the fire.


Sorrow. A great fire has blasted me.


Reason. There was one Caeculus, I know not who, that sought the fame of
divinity by fire. In Virgil, a flame of fire taking hold of Iulus hair, gave
the first hope to their doubtful health. And for that Seruius head burned light
with fire, it was no poetical, but an historical abodyng of a kingdom. It is
well known that the founders of the Empire of Rome, escaped out of the flame of
Troy. To be short, the scriptures declare that Helias dyed by fire, and that
the Lord him self appeared in a flame of fire: so that it is not for naught
that bonefires are a token of mirth and rejoicing in your cities, which now is
a cause of thy heaviness.


Sorrow. My house is suddenly consumed with fire.


Reason. Yea, the temple of Diana at Ephesus was in old time set on fire, a
goodlier piece of work then which, that age never saw. And also the temple
of Jerusalem, that was dedicated unto the lord of heaven, was burnt, the
very enemies pitiyng it that set it on fire: and likewise in this our age the
laterane castle, for beauty the flower of the world, was twice consumed with
fire, an evident and plain token of Gods wrath, in my judgment: no strange
matter I confess, but terryble. And last of al, to say nothing of little
cities, fire has often touched Saguntum, and Numantia, and Corinth, and other
innumerable, yea and Rome it self was brought almost unto utter destruction:
And Carthage once, and Troy was twice destroyed with fire. Cities have been
burned, and we believe that the whole world shall be one day brought to naught
by fire. And do thou then complain that it dare take hold on thy house,
that shall consume both heaven and earth?


Sorrow. I had much a do to escape out of the fire.


Reason. Thou have escaped then, and art thou sorry for it? unless thou
had escaped, thou had held thy peace, but now being a live and ashes,
thou lamentest that ashes is extinguished.


Of great labor and traueyle. The.lvi Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am weeried with great labor.


Reason. There is no glory without difficulty. Al virtue dwells on high,
not easily to be atteyned, the passage thereunto is cragged, rough, and full of
stones.


Sorrow. I am ouerweerie with traueyle.


Reason. Traueyle is the ground of virtue, and rest of pleasures: there is
nothing commendable, nothing excellent, without traueyle: and therefore labor
was the foundation of Hercules praise. By nothing is Ulysses better known then
by traueyle: how wise soever he be feigned, if his wisdom had been idle, it
had been unknown. Labor advanced the Roman captains, the Scipioes and
Camillus, labor the Fabi^ and Curij, labor Fabricius and the Metelli,
labor also Pompeius the great, labor Hannibal, and labor also advanced
Julius Caesar unto honor: Labor made the Catoes and Marius famous, and
painful warfare ennobled Papyrius Cursor, and Possennius niger. To omit
philosophers and Poets, whose whole life what is it other then a famous and
pleasant traueile? what shall I say of artificers, whose glory what soever it
is, by what traueile they get it thou know, with what diligence, as watching
late, and rising early, they gain it: of which matter we read how that
Demosthenes was wont to complain, which truly may be no small provocation
unto them that deal in great matters, since that small things do so stir up
and sharpen the mind. And therefore peruse over al sorts of men, and whereas
there is much fame, there is also plenty of travail, and always labor is
beloved of the lovers of virtue, without which they cannot atteyne unto glory,
which they love and seek after.


Sorrow. I am continually exercised in labor.


Reason. Great labor avails not, unless it be continual: for why? the
glory that is won by labor, unless it be continual, will not seem great.


Sorrow. I am vexed with to continual labor.


Reason. To much and to little are taken in respect of the sufferers: unto a
slothful person al labor is to much, but none to much to the industrius.


Sorrow. Many labors grieve me.


Reason. They should not grieve thee, if thou were a man, but rather sharpen
and quicken thee. Would thou know what difference there is between labor
and pleasure? compare then Sardanapalus with Hercules, Sergius Orata with
Attilius Regulus, Apicius with Caius Marius.


Sorrow. Continual labor makes me lean.


Reason. Labor in that respect has been a remedy unto many, and has cleared
and abated those whom rest had infected and deformed: for it is evident that
labor cures the mind, withstandeth the sprynging of vices, and plucketh
then up by the roots. To be short, among the causes of the excellency of
ancient virtue and prowess to fore in elder times, are reckoned by writers on
the one side labor, and on the other poverty: and those troubles of the body
are to be wyshed, which cure the troubles of the mind.


Sorrow. My labor is payneful.


Reason. Virtue and labor are payneful, pleasure and idleness easy: things
that are like remain well together, but between contraries there is
disagreement.


Sorrow. My chance is to paynefull.


Reason. Thou take thy travail in toil a part. Know thou not that whiles
the godly in times past have risen out of their beds at midnight, in the
cold, watchyng and occupiyng them selves in prayer unto almighty God, the
whoremongers in the mean while, have accomplished their filthy pleasures? And
likewise while the soldier keeps watch and ward in the camp for the
defense of his country, and the captain in his tent for the enlarging of the
bounds thereof, and the student among his books, for the beautifiyng of the
same, the infamous baude takes his rest in his lodging among the thickest of
his graceless trulles: but which of these are in best case, there is none
that has in him any spark of honesty; that will make any doubt soon to
define.


Sorrow. I am urged with very paineful labor.


Reason. Be of good cheer, if so be the cause only of thy labor be honest,
thy labor is honest also, by means whereof thou shall be reckoned among
famous men. All that endeavor to rise unto glory, must pass through a
paynefull and narowe path, but to dishonor, the way is down hill, and easy to
be traueiled. To be short, whosoever is borne, is borne to labor and travail,
neither do I except herein the sons of kings. Labor and virtue are your
arts, not idleness and pleasure, unto which who so apply them selves, do
degenerate from the nature of men, and transfourme themselves into beasts


Sorrow. I am worn with grievous labor.


Reason. That labor which is grievous unto them that yield unto it, is easy
unto them that endeavor earnestly against it. Only endure it with a valient
mind, and arise against it, and compare the end with the present pain.
Labor has advanced many, and industry many, but never any became
glorious through slouthfulnes.


Of a painful journey. The lvii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Go a payneful journey on my feet.


Reason. Had thou rather then go upon the feet of another? But ye will not
work with the hands, nor see with the eyes, nor hear with the ears, nor
taste with the mouth, nor smell with the nose of another: What special matter
is this then, that only you take a pleasure to go with the feet of another?


Sorrow. I go on foot.


Reason. Came thou on horse back into the world, or thynkest thou so to
depart? Why then should it grieve thee so to continue in the world? But
needs thou must ride a cockhorse? O how simple was thy beginning, and how
poor wylbe thy end, and how proud are the times that are between, and in
so short a course how great forgetfulness of both extremities? neither do
you remember from whence you come, nor whyther you shall.


Sorrow. I am constrained to go a great journey on foot.


Reason. To be constrained, I confess, is an hard case, but he that is
wyllyng, cannot be constrained: disdain and repynyng increase the weight of
necessity, by patience and agreeableness of mind, the sharpness of
fortunes dart is rebated. Wylt thou not be constrained? then do that wyllyngly
which thou art compelled to do. Would thou have thy long journey made
shorter? then go with a good will.


Sorrow. I would wyllyngly ride, but I go on foot.


Reason. Is it not a great madness for one fourefooted beasts sake, the use
whereof thou know not how long fortune will lend thee, to forget the
benefit of nature? As many have done and still do, who upon the confidence
which they have in a vile, and unruly, and transitory horse, forget to go on
their own feet: unto these sorts of men what might one wish better then the
rich gout, that is to say, unprofitable feet, and many horses?


Sorrow. I will go a great journey on foot.


Reason. Thou shall go at thy pleasure, none shall carry thee beyond thy
prefixed place, none shall stay thee, none shall trouble thee, none shall shake
thee, none shall throw thee down, or iostle thee, thou have but one labor
upon the way, thy pain is only to go, thou have no business nor trouble with
thy bearer. Thou shall not be constrained to bridle and rain thy horse, to
spur and beat him, to water and litter him, to walk and rub him, to feed
him, to curry him, to anoint his sore back, or to feel his dry hoofes, or
handle with thy fingers the dangerous nails, or with staves to depart their
nightly conflictes, and to awake them out of their sleep, and always to be
careful and circumspect how these licentious cattayle use them selves
toward their neighbors, at leastwyse thou shall take thy rest in the night
season, for they that ride, do travail, and are troubled also in the night.


Sorrow. I go a long journey on foot.


Reason. Perhaps in shoes. For the holy fathers walked about the wilderness
upon their bare feet. The apostles, which were the messengers of Almighty
God, walked throughout al parts of the world, one into the East, another into
the Weast, another into the North, and another into the South, sometime they
went by water, and that but seldom, only when as the situation of the place
was such as they could not otherwise choose: but which of them, I pray thee,
have thou heard to have ridden on horseback, except S. John only? Neither
rode he ever more then once, and that but a little way, which was as Clemens
writes, and the Ecclesiastical history makes mention, when as he was stirred
forth with a godly have, to recover the soul of a lost and desperate young
man. And how should they ride, whose Lord and Master went on foot? He scarce
rode once him self upon a poor Ass, which was not long before he was hanged
upon the cross. But if these examples do ouerburden thee with incomparable
holiness, yet is it known well yenough that the Roman armies, which
vanquished the whole world, were for the most part of them footmen, who not
only carried their armor and weapon on foot, but also as much victual as
should serve them many days, moreover a kind of munition, whereby, when once
they were entered within their enemies bounds, they defended their camp in the
day times, and their tents in the night, against the invasion of their
enemies: whereupon our cuntreiman Cicero, in a certain place excellently
disputing of the Roman soldiers, when he had said that unto valiant men of
other nations their armor was no impediment, but in the manner of a garment,
yet this commendation he gave them above al other, saying, that unto the Roman
soldiers only their armor and weapons were not a garment, but stood them in
steed of their arms and shoulders. And when they had once put on those
warlike burdens whereof I spoke, then they thought them selves in deed to be
apparrelled. And least happily any man be deceived by the common custom of
speech, let it be known unto them, that by the name of soldiers or
seruitours, footmen are only signified, and that in many places of the Roman
history it may be geathered, that by this name they are distinguished from
horse men, although they do both sorts of them serve in the wars.
Wherefore, the remembrance of their labor and travail may breed thee no
small ease and comfort, not only being unarmed, and light, and trauayling on an
hard, though a safe journey, but also if thou were armed and heavily laden, and
faryng on foot in a dangerous path. For there is nothing more effectual unto
the beareyng of adversity, then to think that many have borne the same with
valiant minds. And a lofty mind wylbe ashamed that he only cannot do that
which in numerable could do before him. Which thought has not only been
profitable in labors of difficulty, but also in those pains and torments of
the body which seem to be most miserable, and specially in death it self.


Sorrow. A long and payneful journey do I sorowfully pass forth on foot.


Reason. There is nothing that so much eases a painful journey, and comfort
an heavy mind, as noble and sweet cares, which cannot harbor within the
heart, and keep company all the way long, unless it be with some good and
learned man. Hereunto if by chance there happen the pleasant society of some
meery and eloquent companion, the journey shall not only seem light, but short
also. Many have been so delighted with pleasant communication upon the way,
that they have felt no tediousness at al of the travail, and although the
journey were long indeed, yet have they complained of the shortness thereof,
supposing them selves not to have gone, but rather to have been carried. This
is also common among the wr^tie sayings of Publius. A pleasant companion upon
the way, is as good as a Wagon.


Of one years barrenness. The.Lviij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am oppressed with the barrenness of one year.


Reason. Plenty then will be the better welcome unto thee: every thing is best
known by comparyng it with the contrary.


Sorrow. My land has deceived mine expectation.


Reason. It is not thy land that has deceived thee, but thy wickedness and
greediness of mind: you promise your selves every thing to fall out as you
would have them, like proud fools, being worthy in your own opinion that
nature her self should be at your commandment. Who if she dare receive her
right, and fail once to satisfy the deep and bottomless whyrlpoole of your
covetous mynds, which nothing is able to fyl, then seems she unto you
strange, and covetous, and injurious. This is no righteous nor modest hope,
but the imaginations of an immoderate desire: ye feign that those things
shall come to pass which you would have, and if you mysse ought thereof, you
call it a loss: thy land keeps it old custom, and thou thine. For the
barrenness and fruitefulnes of the earth come by course, but your
covetousness is continual: You, being most partial interpretours of all
things, when as you ought to take the first thankefully and soberly, and the
second patiently and valiantly, the one you contemn, the other you bewail,
the one makes you proud, the other playntyffe.


Sorrow. My land which promised me better success, has deceived me.


Reason. You weery the earth with your oxen and plowes, and heaven with your
vows and prayers. The blowing of the wyndes, the opportunity of shewres, the
comeliness of the springyng trees, the beauty of the fields, the Wynters
dust, the Springs dirt, the Summer Sun, the rypenesse of harvest, all these do
draw your covetous minds into hope. And like as every flambe sets on fire
the dry stubble, and every wind blows abroad the loose dust: even so every
gain engenders hope to the covetous mind, and the least loss, not of
substance only, but also of hope, quite confounds him. But O you wretches,
moderate your unseemly motions, restrain your unmeasurable covetousness, and
chasten your crebulus hope, which has been frustrated by a thousand successes:
to what end do you look upon heaven and earth? Plentifulnesse comes from God
only. O ye mortal men, suffer him to work his pleasure, and behold you what is
done, and praise it. Let the workman work, and deny not unto God that
reverence which ought to be given to a man that is skilful in any science. Let
vessels of earth be ashamed to control the heavenly potter, but in voice
and mind give thanks unto him for all thing, who being privy of your
necessities, and not ignorant of your desires, relieueth the one, and
frustrateth the other: in both he is mercyful, and terrible in counsel over
the sons of men, insomuche as it is written of him, Put your trust now at
length, not in your fields, but in the Lord, work righteousness, and
inhabit the earth, and feed on his riches, and take pleasure in the Lord,
and he shall grant you your hearts desire: which, when you have once begun
to take delyght in him, cannot be covetous nor unjust. Lay forth your ways
before him, and trust in him, and he will bring it to pass. Cast your cares
upon the Lord, and he will noorishe you. Why do you think upon and love
nothing but the earth. O ye that were fashioned by the hand of God? Do not
contemn these sacred speeches as you were wont to do, pray not for rain, or
shyning, or any other weather agreeable to your appetite, put not your
confidence in the earth, but only in him that beholds the earth, and makes
it to tremble, who draws the moist streams out of the hardest rocks, who,
to be brief, has suffered thee to be deceived by the field, to the end thou
should put thy trust in him that never deceives.


Sorrow. I have lost much of my accustomed plenty.


Reason. That is only withholden, which either ye years going before did give
ouermuche, or the years following shall give hereafter. A little moderation is
sufficient. Covetousness increases by gain, and the more it has, the poorer
it is. Plenty is a great mother, a great nurse and favorer of vices: Suffer
somewhat to be diminished from thy evils, the less plenty thou have, the less
shall be thy pride, and the less thy licentiousness. Add hereunto moreover,
that this the default of thy land would be counted beneficial and plenty among
some, and thou thy self, if thou were accustomed unto scarcity, would judge
this to be plenty: so great a sway does custom always bear in discerning
matters, and has so great a force. What maruayle then is it now, if they
contemn moderate things, which are accustomed unto superfluous? then which
there is no storm greater to the overthrow of modesty.


Sorrow. I am grieved with unaccustomed barrenness.


Reason. Often times the plague of barrenness brings forth the more valiant
men, and the blessing of plenty more effeminate, and not only brings them
forth, but makes them such, and hardens or softeneth them that are borne
else where. Thus did Asia first mollify the French men immediately after the
Romans, and Babylon vanquyshed Alexander, and Capuariannes hardened the nature
of the Romans, and sharpened it as it had been a Whetstone. Since plenty then
has softened thee, let scarcity harden thee: Let thy land teach thee
sobriety, and let thy barren ground persuade thee unto that, whereunto thy
plentiful books cannot. There is no man that ought to be despised that
professes him self a teacher of profitable doctrine. Learn to live well:
Learn, I say, though thou be old, though thou be unwilling, yea though thou
disdain at it.


Of an evil and proud Bayliffe. The.Lix. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Suffer a proud Bailiffe.


Reason. If he be proud only, and not a thief also, it is well with thee.


Sorrow. I have an evil Bayliffe.


Reason. Bear him indifferently, for unless he be very evil, he is a good
Baylyffe.


Sorrow. I am grieved at my rude Bailiffe.


Reason. Thou would be more grieved at him, if he were soft and delicate:
Roughness and rudeness are terms proper for Clownes, for they toil with the
rough oxen, with rough plowes and harrowes, with rough spades and rakes, and
lastly with the rough earth it self, and what then should they be other then
rude and rough them selves? If he have no other fault but that he is rude, he
is Bailiffe good yenough.


Sorrow. I cannot abide an importunate Clown.


Reason. But thou must either abide thy Bayliffe, or else be Bayliffe thy self,
and determine to go dwell in the rude country where all things are hard and
rough.


Sorrow. I have an unruly husbandman, and without all civility.


Reason. None of these ought to be unthought upon of thee. So soon as thou
had land, thou should have forseene the manyfolde toils belonging
thereto, barkynges, and thy Bayliffes disdaynefulnesse. At what time thou
vauntedst thy self of thy fruiteful land, I told thee that husbandmen were
the last of all people whom justice departed from, when she forsook the earth.
If ever mankind should be revived again, I suppose, that they be the last
that shall find her. Thus they be gone before them whom they followed, and are
become of all evil men, the most wicked.


Sorrow. I have a very sharp Bayliffe.


Reason. Where as the truth him self said, that the earth should bring
forth unto man thorns and briars, that is to be understood of husbandmen,
who are sharper then any briars.


Sorrow. I have a very wicked Farmer.


Reason. Either learn to suffer the wickedness of thy Farmer, or else sterue
for hunger: For to change thy Farmer it shall not avail thee, seeing they be
all in a manner of one quality, saving that always the woorst comes last.


Sorrow. My Bayliffe is a Thief.


Reason. Now thou have spoken that which I looked for all this while: For they
are so adicted to stealyng, that the little which they get that way is more
sweet unto them, then whatsoever they gain by their true labor. But this
must also be borne withal, neither ought one to complain of that which is
common to al men. And truly although the Poet set down, that the Hyndes of
the Country were last of all forsaken of justice, as I have said twice
before: Notwithstanding it is well known, that the first man that was begotten
amongst you of the seed of man, was both an husbandman, and a murderer of his
own brother, that they may seem always to have been the worste kind of
people, over whom whiles thou thynkest, thou need not to maruayle that they
be Thieves also.


Sorrow. Through the fault of my Bayliffe, my Farm is destroyed, and untilled.


Reason. The like happens every day unto greater personagies then thou: and in
old time unto Anaxagoras, and Architas, who were both, I think, sorry for it,
but neither of them angry.


Of Theft. The.Lx. Dialogue
SORROW. THat little which remains, I can scarce defend from thieves.


Reason. Thy Bayliffe in the country has taught thee how to take this evil
with patience, which thou must show also in the cities.


Sorrow. Thieves do trouble me.


Reason. Against this mischief complaints do not avail, but punishments
are needeful: In the mean while, diligent watchynges does good, to him that
is circumspect. There be some that keep nothing, and accuse thieves, when as
the old Proverb says, that occasion makes a thief.


Sorrow. Thieves do besiege my entrye.


Reason. Shut to thy doors, lock them fast, open thine eyes, and look about
thee, if thou be necligent in so dooyng, then blame thy self. A thief seldom
hurts the circumspect. They may more justly complain that have no houses,
such as are certain people under the South and North poles, and therefore
among the Scithians. as thou see, it is written, there is no offense more
grievous then theft. And the reason is this, that if men there might rob
freely among the woods, what should remain to the owner?


Sorrow. Thieves steal my goods.


Reason. They would have them be theirs, and thou forbiddest not, think
therefore that thy necligence is punished, and that by this loss thou art
taught to keep thine own: profitable matters are not taught for naught.


Sorrow. Thieves do very much trouble me.


Reason. Truly they are an importunate kind of men, worthyly hated of all
that are virtuous, not only as pestilent, but also as vile persons. And know
this, that it proceeds of none other then a great baseness of mind, that
any man is drawn unto so vile a wickedness. And therefore not without good
cause Aurelius Alexander, who was a young, but a virtuous Prince, fell so much
in hatred of thieves, that as Helius Lampridius writes of him, if he had seen
any such, he had his finger ready to pluck out one of his eyes. Such was his
hatred against those that were infamous for Theeuery, that if by chance he
saw any of them, his spirit was so invaded against them, that immediately he
was provoked to vomit out choler, his face being so enflamed, that he could
not speak a word. Truly a notable disdain of a valiant mind, and a shameful
filthiness in the thieves. which was able so suddenly to move the stomach of
so high and excellent a prince, unto lothsomnesse and vomiting. Yea moreover,
when as on a time, a certain noble man being accused of theft, at lengh
through great favor of certain Ringes that were his friends, had obtained to
be sent forth to warfaire, and was immediately taken with theft again (for
they that are given to that vice, through custom are never able to leave it)
Alexander demanded of the kings which had preferred him, what punishment
there was for thieves in their countries? Whereunto when they answered,
hangyng, he caused him forthwith by their judgment to be hanged.


Sorrow. I am molested with thieves.


Reason. Circumspection and diligent heed taking, are good remedies against
thieves, but the best of al, is poverty. As long as a man has any thing that
they do like of, he can not well escape their hands, or eyes. Would thou be
out of the fear of thieves? be poor then.


Of robberies. The.lxi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am spoiled by thieves.


Reason. Although, as I suppose, it be written in the civil law, that there
is no thief worse then he that takes away a thing by force, yet
notwithstanding privy pilferers be worse in my opinion: These thieves do
work by craft, but those by open violence. And therefore after the opinion of
Cicero, these are likened to foxes, and those to Lions. And moreover these
thieves do spoil men of their goods, but they leave suspicion behind them:
But to be robbed by good fellows suffiseth in a manner, and they leave no
suspicion behind the^.


Sorrow. I have fallen into the hands of thieves who have left me naked.


Reason. Julius Caesar fell into the hands of thieves also, by whom he was not
only spoiled, but also taken prisoner, and set at a great ransom for his
delyuerie, even he that was afterward lord of all the world: although the
revenge which shortly followed, comforted him much in this adversity, which
is no small aswagement of injuries. Regulus, that was so often a conqueror, fell
into the hands of his enemies, who put him to a most cruel death, to the great
and grievous loss and danger of your whole Empire. Likewise Valerianus the
Emperor fell within the danger of his enemies: who, to the great dispargement
of the whole Empire, constreyned him to lead forth his old years in most
silthy and shameful servitude. Thou, if thou be nothing but robbed, give
thanks to fortune and the thieves that robbed thee, for leaving unto thee thy
life and liberty. For thieves have no greater benefit, then that which Cicero
makes mention of in his Philippikes, for that they can say they have given
them their lives, from whom they have not taken them. Take thou therefore this
thy fortune in good part, which is common unto these notable personages, and
many other famous men, which if it were compared with theirs, would appear
much more easy, and to be wished, and desire not to be more happy, then they
that are called the most happy of al men.


Of Coosinage and deceit. The.lxii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am deceived by coosiners.


Reason. Do thou marueyle at it? I should rather marueyle if by keeping
company with men, thou could escape unhurt. For what man is he that
deceives not another? Trustiness is bannished, and deceit bears the
soueraintie: and is this the first time that thou have considered this? Not
with so great study do the hunters lay suares for wild beasts, nor the
foulers set ginnes to take birds, as crafty coosyners seek means to deceive
the simple: Which if it were ever true, now is it most true in this your age.
A man may point with the finger unto masters of craft, and he is counted the
wysest, that is most cunning in deceyuing. Would thou therefore not be
deceived? Dye then, or avoid the company of men.


Sorrow. I am craftily circumuented, whereas I never feared it.


Reason. If thou had feared it, perhaps thou had not been so easily
deceived: and now think? with thy self, whether thou also ever deceyuedst any
man. For ye be al of you for the most part prone to deceive, and reason would
thou should take that with more indifferency at another man's hands, which
thou thy self have done before to another. But you consider not what ye do to
others, and cannot abide that which others do unto you, so that in all things
ye be most vniuft judges.


Sorrow. I have suffered a loss through the deceit of my freende.


Reason. Herein, as in many things else, thou art abused: for in freendshyp
there is no deceit. And in this point also ye be commonly deceived, supposing
them to be friends that are not, and by experiment ye easily find, that
freendshyp is a most inestimable and holy thing: so over curious ye are in
trifles, that by once banketting or communing together, you get a freende,
whom so soon as you have gotten, ye loose him, if that may be called lost
which you never had: And then afterward ye complain that ye are deceived by
your friends, and bring this slander upon freendshyp, that is giltlesse of
any such deed.


Sorrow. I am damnified by deceyte.


Reason. It has done many good that they have been deceived, hereafter thou
wylt be the waryer: some by the loss of a small thing, have avoided the
danger of greater matters.


Sorrow. A vile coosiner has deceived me.


Reason. Nay rather he has awaked thee, and sharpened thy wit, and has taught
thee to trust none but such as thou have tried, and persons of credit. I
would recite examples, whereby to comfort thy heavy chance, but that they
are innumerable. For who lives, and is not deceived? What ever myscheefe
befalls to man, is not so much as one man suffers by another: And for that
it is not possible nor needeful to reckon al, remember the history of
Caninius, in what sort he was once coosined by Pytius at Siracuse.
Nevertheless Caninius has wherewith to comfort him self, for that being a
knight of Rome, he was deceived by a stranger that was living, when as Augustus
Caesar that was Emperor of Rome, was deluded by a mean ritizen that lay a
dying. The history is well known, how that a certain man called Marius, who
through the freendship of the same Augustus had been advanced from the base
estate of a common soldier unto great honor and riches, was wont commonly to
give forth in speech, that he would make him only his heir, and leave al his
goods unto him, by whose means he had gotten all that he had: which thing
when as in words he had assured unto the Emperor Augustus him self, the day
before he dyed, he gave up his deceitful ghost, and at the length it was found,
how that in all his will he had not once made mention of the Emperors name.
Truly he well deserved to have his dissemblyng carckase drawn with an hook
into the river. Tiber, who at his very death was not afeard to deceive his
chief lord and benefactour.


Of a straight and narow dwelling. The.lxiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Owel to straightly.


Reason. A narrow house is profitable for many things, and amongst other
matters it is good against thieves, whereof thou complainedst erewhyle, for that
they can find no lurkyng corners in it, as the contrary may be verified of
large houses, that they deceive their owner, and are convenient for thieves. I
take an house to be little or large according to the number of the inhabitants,
and thou seem now to thy self to dwell in to little an house. But how much
more narrowly does thy soul dwell, and how much more filchily among blood and
matter, and other loathsome substance? and yet if thou myghtest have thy will,
thou would never have him depart from thence.


Sorrow. My house is narrow.


Reason. The house of claye does not pynche the heavenly soul with the
narrowness thereof: many times a little house has been capable of great glory,
when as in the mean time a great house has been replenished with great
infamy. The house conformeth not the mind, but the mind conformeth the
house: and therefore as the blind cottagies of the poor may be merry and
virtuous, so may the castles of princes, and palaces of the rich, be sorrowful
and dishonest. There is no house so narrow, but the greatness of the tenant
makes it larger, and meet to receive a great ghest.


Sorrow. My house is little.


Reason. King Enanders little palace received great Hercules: Julius Caesar that
was afterward lord of all the world, was borne in a simple tenement: Romulus
and Remus, that were the first founders of so great a city, were brought up in
a shepherds cottage: Cato dwelled in no sumptuous house: Diogenes soiourned in
a rouling tub: and Hilarion under a simple shead: the holy fathers lead their
lives in caves under the ground: and great Philosophers in little gardens:
mighty captains have lain in the open air, and under poor tents: but Caius
and Nero dwelled in gorgeous palaces: chose thee now with which of these
thou had leeuest dwell.


Sorrow. I have a narowe, and homely, and euil-fauoured house.


Reason. The walls are able to keep out thieves and the wind, and the
tediousness of the people, which is worse then any of them both, the roof,
cold and heat, sunneshyne and rain: as for the lofty towers, they are
dwellinges for fowls of the air, a large house serves for pride, a beautiful
house for lasciviousness, a stoared house for covetousness, but virtue
thinks scorn of no habitation, unless it be possessed with vices.


Sorrow. I dwell very narrowly.


Reason. Would thou that any house may seem very large unto thee? Then
think upon the narrowness of thy grave.


Of a prison. The.lxiiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am shut up in an unworthy prison.


Reason. Better is an unworthy prison, then unworthy liberty, and much more
better it is for a man undeservedly to suffer adversity for righteousness
sake, then through wickedness to abound in prosperity, although those ought
not to be termed euilles neither, nor these goods, but I speak as the common
people speaks, who judge pain to be the greatest evil, and pleasure the
greatest good thing.


Sorrow. I am shut up in prison.


Reason. Who is not shut up in prison? or who departs out of prison, but when
he dies? This is thy destinye, and the common destiny of al men: why then
should you commence peculier or new complayntes. For know this, since the
first day thou wast borne, yea and before thou wast borne to, thou wast
enclosed in prison, and hampered with fetters, by his commandment unto whom
all the compass of heaven is a little house: and if we will also believe the
greatest Poet, even in a dark and blind prison. The end of which prison, if
thou desire to be plausible and fortunate, thou shall not abhor the
narrowness thereof, neither punishments, nor death, nor what soever may
befall unto man, unto the pacient tollerating and contempt whereof, unless the
mind be prepared and armed at al points in whatsoever fortune, he wandreth in
a very perilous path.


Sorrow. I am shut up in a filthy and narrow prison.


Reason. There is no prison more filthy, none narrower then this prison of the
body, wherein thou take so great delight, and from which thou fear so
much to be dissolved.


Sorrow. I am deteyned in an inconvenient prison.


Reason. Prison has delivered many from instant danger, and the hands of
their enemies. Unto many the very entry of their prison has stand in stead of
a shield, and that which was profitable unto them at their entryng in, has
been hurtful unto them at their going out: insomuche that being certified by
the departure, they have confessed that to be profitable which they abhorred,
and that to be miserable which they wyshed.


Sorrow. I am holden in prison.


Reason. How know thou whether perhaps it be a prison, or rather, as it
is said, a place of safe keeping? How often has either the enemies swoorde,
or poverty more cruel then any foe, consumed those that have been loosed from
prison? How often have they repented of their escaping? and their
imprisonment, which they complained to be long, have they afterward lamented
that it was not perpetual: we have seen some that have lived in prison
sumptuously, but so soon as they have been set at liberty, they have finished
their poor and wretched life with a sorrowful end.


Sorrow. I lead a miserable life in prison.


Reason. Some have written books in prison, but thou framest complayntes
there. Some have learned good faculties in bands, but thou learnest to forget
patience.


Sorrow. I am kept fast in prison.


Reason. Some within caves and dens, and some have enclosed them selves
within the circuit of walls, choosing unto them selves voluntary
imprisonment, either for the love of God, or for hatred of the world, or for
loathsomeness of the common multitude, as did many holy fathers in the
primitive Church. Thou, if thou be not disposed that way, and desire an end
of thine imprysonme^t, stay a while, either man will discharge thee, or else
death, which caryeth a key of the prison door. There is one manner of
entrance, but sundry sorts of departing. Some have been let go upon pity,
some by the course of law, some through their own innocence, some by
negligence of the keepers, some for money, some by craft, some by breaking
prison, or undermining the walls, and some have escaped out of prison by the
freendly darkness of the night, and also since the memory of your fathers,
some have been set at liberty by earthquakes, and overthrowing of the prison:
and last of al, they that could find none other means, have been released
from imprisonment by death. And likewise no less diverse have been the euentes
of them that have escaped. Marius delyuerie from prison, brought him to the
Consulshyp: Julius Caesar's imprisonment among the pirates, transported him to
the Empire of the world. In this age certain have passed from prison to
lordshyps, and the cheynes which they have shaken from them selves, they have
laid upon other. Finally Regulus, and Socrates, and many more were not
extinguished in prison, as it was thaught, but rather by an honorable end
discharged out of prison. To conclude, the prison has sent some unto great
glory, some unto notable fortune, some to a kingdom, and many to heaven, but
al to the grave, for it never received any whom it has not again restored.


Of Torments. The.lxv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am unjustly tormented.


Reason. What would thou now say if it were justly? For there is no torment
greater then the torment of the conscience. If this be vpryght, contemn these
outward things, for thou have a comforter within thee.


Sorrow. I am tormented very unworthily.


Reason. Take compassion upon thy tormentour, he is more sharply tormented
then thou: for although the world cry out against thee, yet know this, that it
is a less evil to suffer, then to offer an imurie.


Sorrow. I am tormented.


Reason. A new lamentation for an old grief: wast thou never tormented
before: Among torments thou wast borne, among torments thou have lived, and
among torments thou shall dye: tell me now what new thing is befallen thee?
The kinds of torments are changed, but the torments them selves do not
surceasse. Examine the whole course of thy forepassed life, and recount what
ever day thou passedst over without torment. Perhaps thou may find
somthinges shadowed with false joys, but al things full of true torments,
whereof if thou judge exactly, thou will confess that there is no part of this
life void. Whereby it comes to pass, that some, not without just cause, have
supposed this whole life to be a continual punishment. But you nevertheless so
demean your selves, as though these Philosophical speeches concerned you not,
they stick in the entrance of your ears, they pearce not into the closet of
your minds: So that ye lament for every small grief of the body, but as for
the everlasting and deadly punishment of the mind, ye do not feel it: in the
first ye are impacient, but in the other without sense.


Sorrow. I am laid upon the wheel.


Reason. What skilleth it whether thou go up to the wheel, or to the bed to
be tormented? The tormentours knot shall wring thee, and put thee to pain: but
hear now one with the ague, another with the gout, another with a shrewysh
wife, another with his son, another with his lover, another with his riches,
another with poverty, another by the Physicians hand, another with the
schoolemaisters ferula, another with a naughty servant, another with a proud
lord, another is vexed with an infinite hope and covetous desire, another with
fear, that is more grievous then any tormentour. Search through the whole
state of mankind, and thou shall scarce find one man that lies not upon the
wheel: and being a thousand sundry sorts of tortures, do you fear none but
those that are made of wood?


Sorrow. I am tormented.


Reason. In the midst of thy torments comfort thy self, either with thine
innocence, or with justice: for if thou be unjustly tormented, thou have a
cause to rejoice, whereby thou have purchased experience to thy self and
others, and also a certain bryghtnesse is added unto thy virtue: the fame of
handled and advanced things is more renowned, and spices the longer they be
beaten the sweeter they smell, and most excellent wares are set a loft to the
view, that they may be seen the better. But if thou be tormented deservedly,
thou have thy remedy in thy hands: but clottered fylth is purged by fire and
difficulty, and a desperate sickness must have a sharp cure: who so is
weery of his disease, will not refuse any bitter thing, and he that is sorry for
his sins, will not eschew any punishment.


Sorrow. I am laid on the rack.


Reason. If without desert, thou have a mean to despise the cruelty of
another from an high: But if deservedly, when thou art plucked from the earth,
thou may the more evidently behold thine offense, and that which thou art
now sorrowful for the committyng, thou shall not be grieved for the sufferyng of
the punishment.


Sorrow. I am tormented.


Reason. Either thy virtue is tried, or thy vice punyshed: the one is often
profitable, the other always expedient. It is a good trial for the ryghteous
to suffer punishment, but there is nothing worse then to suffer the gyltie to
escape unpunished.


Sorrow. I am tormented.


Reason. Learn the way unto patience, and death.


Of unjust judgment. The.Lxvj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM condemned by unjust judgment.


Reason. There have been some ere now condemned by the sentence of one judge,
or by the testimony of a few witnesses, who have been often times acquitted
either by the voice of the common people, or by their secret judgment, or,
which is better, by their own conscience, or which is best of al, by Gods
own judgment. For the best appealyng is unto the eternal judgment seat of
the most just and high judge: and he it is that uses to reuerse the false
judgments of other by a writ of error.


Sorrow. I am condemned unjustly.


Reason. As the unrighteous are overthrown by justice, so are the ryghteous by
injury. Then, whereas is unjust condempnation, there the party condemned is
innocent: and there is no man so foolysh, unless he were stark mad, that
would have this be contrary, and had rather be condemned justly then unjustly.
There is none so fearful, unless he be too bad, but had rather be condemned
by an unrighteous doom, then acquitted. Which is by so much the better, by
how much oppressed justice is better then reigning ungodliness, and a good
mind to be preferred before good fortune, although the one abound with pain,
the other with pleasure: Yea, I will say more, by so much the better it is to
be justly condemned, then unjustly cleared, as it is worse to let a crime
escape unpunished, then to punysh it. For in this there is wickedness joined
with justice, a great good thing with a great evil: in the other, wickedness
matched with impunitie, which I know not whether it be worse then the
wickedness it self, for truly it is the very enemy of justice, and the
root of many mischiefs.


Sorrow. I am grieved with a most unjust judgment.


Reason. A mind that is founded upon a sure ground, and governed by an
vpryght conscience, has invincible shoulders: whereupon whatsoever mischief
be heaped, infamy or punishment, it will yield to no burden, but stands
vpryght by it own strength, but spetially sustained by the assistaunce of GOD.
There be some also with whose company, in this respect, it may comfort it
self, for like event, companions not to be despised. At Rome Furius Camillus,
and Liuius Salinator: at Athens Aristides and Melciades, with many other more,
among whom, whereat thou may marueyle, are Cicero and Socrates. Tell me now,
whether thou had rather be like one of these, or be such a fellow as
Publius Claudius was? There was none of al these, but he was a very good
Citizen, and famous in the Common wealth where he dwelt, and yet they were
condemned in judgment, and either sense into banishment, or thrust into
prison, or haled to death. But that most wicked varlet, who, amongst many other
notable crimes, was convicted of notorius whooredome, and for a bringer in of
corrupt religion, was by the general consent of all the Judges acquitted. Now, is
there any man that stands so much in fear of false infamy, that will not
rather prefer the condemnation and banyshment of his enemy Cicero, before
his unjust acquiting? But these are humane and common matters. If thou cast thy
eyes up higher, thou shall see the King of Heaven him self, with his most
dearly beloved retinue, who walked in the steps of their so excellent a
captain, ouerborne with false judgment: and as many also as afterward
followed him, who being of so great innocence and virtue as they were, yet fell
they into the whirlepoole and rocks of the same most corrupt sentence.


Sorrow. I am offended at false judgment.


Reason. There is one that shall judge thee, even he that ministers right to
them that suffer injury, who also says, Revenge is mine, and I will repay it.
He also, where thou think not, dwells within the heart of the Judge and
witness, where also soiourne great reuengers: for there is noe beast that
biteth so sharply, as does a man's own conscience.


Sorrow. I am hurt by an unjust judgment.


Reason. To use well offered injuries, is no small discretion, by means
whereof another man's wickedness has often profited an heedeful person,
whereas every man's unrighteousness always hurts him self, and never does him
good.


Sorrow. I am condemned unjustly.


Reason. Had thou rather then be justly condemned? For so did Socrates when
he was a dying answer his wife Xantippa, when as she womanishly lamented that
he should die an innocent. And although some be of a contrary opinion, yet is
it far better to be condemned without desert, then gyltie: For, in the one,
the punishment only is grievous: in the other, the cause of the punishment only
is grievous: in the other, the cause of the punishment also.


Sorrow. I am condemned by the vntust judgment of the people.


Reason. Look thou that the people should see that to be good in thee, which
they could never see in them selves, nor in any other? It is a great argument
of thine innocence, that thou art condemned of yt wicked.


Sorrow. The people condemn me undeservedly.


Reason. The same people also condemned, not him that had deserved nothing, but
yt had deserved excellently well, Canullus of who^ I spoke erwhile, and also
Liuius himself, and moreover Scipio surnamed Africanus, and the other
Cornelij, with such like, being men of so great honor, who^ they molested in
such sort, that they drove the^ into voluntary exile.


Sorrow. I am innocently condemned by the king.


Reason. And the determinations of Princes for the most part, are more tastyng
of revenge, then of justice: For whosoever shall happen to speak any thing
freely against the licentiousness of kings, and seem to take in ill part the
loss of the subjects liberty, he is by and by accused of treason.


Sorrow. But I am condemned by the Judges.


Reason. There is no living creature more venen: ous, then an unjust Judge.
When men are hurt by a Serpent, they are sorry, but they do not complain: for
the Serpent did but that which was his kind, although not that which was
pleasant to the sufferer. Truly they were Judges, who condemned those and also
Socrates. of whom I spoke erwhyle, and acquitted Clodius: of whom and them
which was the most unrighteous, it may be doubted. And therefore such people
as are governed by Kings and Judges, ought to propose with them selves in
their mind, to endure whatsoever hard fortune and injuries shall happen unto
them, and not to lament for them when they are once happened.


Of Banishment. The.Lxvij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am unjustly driven into vanyshment.


Reason. What, had thou rather then be justly banyshed? For, as touching
the heap of injuries whereof thou spakest, it is taken in the contrary part:
and now thou have justice to be thy companion, which shall be a comfort unto
thee in thy unjust banyshment, which forsakyng thine unjust Countrymen, has
chosen rather to follow thee into exile.


Sorrow. I am banyshed unjustly.


Reason. Has the king banyshed thee, or a tyrant, or the people, or an
enemy, or thou thy self? If the king, either thy banyshment is not unjust, or
he himself is not just, and so by consequence, no king. If a Tyrant, rejoice
that thou art banyshed by him, under whom good men are exiled, and Thieves are
set in authority. If the people, they use their old manner, they hate the
virtuous, among whom if this many headed Tyrant had found any like them
selves, they would never have banyshed him. Think not therefore that thou art
expulsed thy Country, but removed from the felloweship of wicked persons, and
that thou art not driven into exile, but received into the company of good
Citizens. If an enemy, acknowledge the lightness of the injury, for he has
not dealt extremely with thee: He that could take from a man all that he
has, and has taken but his Country, has left him hope. But if thou thy
self, the cause is, that falling into mislykyng of the people or Tyrant, thou
have chosen to depart, not only because thou would not be sorry, but also
vaunte thy self for preferryng the honor of thy Country. So that now thou
have not a miserable, but an honest cause, not of exile, but of absence,
hateful to the wicked, and grateful to the virtuous. Pythagoras voluntarily
forsook Samos, and Solon Athens, and Lycurgus Lacedemon, and Scipio Rome.


Sorrow. I am condemned unto exile.


Reason. Many have won credit by their banishment, not few there are whom
some sharp storm and injury of fortune has made known and notable: and
what lets thee, but that thou may be reckoned in the number of them who
have gained singular fame by sufferyng troubles, even as by knocking Flintes
together, fire is engendered?


Sorrow. I am driven into exile.


Reason. In histories thou shall perceive that thou have notable companions in
this accident, whose most honorable fellowship may not only deminish the
feeling of the grief, but also bring forgetfulness. Camillus was no less
regarded in his banishment, then if he had tarried at home, as famous an exiled
person, as he was worthy Citizen, who had brought into the Capital house of
Rome victories and triumphs, no less renowned for justice, then famous for
felicity, and being shortly after driven into banishment, in revenge of the
injury which he received, he saved his unthankful Country from destruction.
It is not easy, I confess, to find such another example of so notable a
banished personage: howbeit Rutilius and Metellus were so smally grieved with
their banishment, that when Rutilius was sent for home, by him whose
commandment not to obey was present death, rather choosing banishment, he
refused to return: either to the intent he would not in any respect disobey
the Senates decree and the laws of his Country, though they were unjust, or
else for doubt he might happily be banished again. But Metellus returned, with
the very same countenance wherewith he departed into exile. Unto these may
Marcellus be added, even the same younger Marcellus that happened in the time of
the last civil war, who being driven out of his country, retained not only
his ancient constancy and study of liberal sciences, but also applied them
more earnestly then before, and being free from public cares, with such
feruencie pursued the beautifying of his mind only, that he seemed rather to
have been sent to the schools of Virtue, then into banishment: which being
much more eminent in Cicero, was by the woorthynesse of his works, and his
great learning, made the more famous, whereby he found no small comfort, not
only in banishment, but also in prison.


Sorrow. I suffer banishment.


Reason. A short banishment will soon restore thee to thy Country, but a long
banishment will purchase thee another Country, so that they shall be banished
from thee, that would have banished thee from them, which is now already
accomplished, if thou have respect to the nature of the things, and not to the
opinions of men. For that is a very base mind that is so bound to one silly
corner of the earth, that whatsoever is out of that, it thinks it banishment:
whosoever bewayleth his exile, is far from that loftiness of mind which was in
him unto whom the whole world seemed to be a straight prison. Socrates being
demanded what Countreyman he was, answered, I was borne in the world. A right
Socratical answer: some other peradventure in that case would have answered
that he was an Athenian, but Socrates Country was that which is likewise all
men's, to wit, the world, not only this part which you commonly call the world,
which in deed is but the lowest part of the world, but Heaven it self,
which is more truly termed by that name. That is the Country whereunto you
are appointed, unto which if your mind do aspire, it will acknowledge it
self to be a stranger and banished in whatsoever part of the earth it remain:
For who will call that his Country, where he dwells but for a very short
time? But that is truly to be called a man's Country, where he may dwell
continually in rest and quietness: seek for this upon earth, and I suppose
thy seeking will be in vain. According to the law of nature, as it was given
unto men, and the limittes thereof prescribed, whilst you live here, every
land is your Country, wherein whosoever makes himself a banished man, is not so
sick in effect, as diseased in mind. We have not here any perpetual City of
abode, as says the Apostle S. Paul. Every land is the native Country unto a
valient man, says Ovid the Poet. To a man, every Country is his natural
soil, says Statius. With these speeches I would have thee armed, whereby thou
might be always one man, and either never or ever be in thine own Country.


Sorrow. I am commanded to go into banishment.


Reason. Go willingly, and then it shall be but a travail, and no banishment:
and remember that banishment has been unto some in steed of a departure, and
unto other some, in steed of a return: and there be some also that are never
in worse case, then when they be in their own Country.


Sorrow. I am enforcedly driven into banishment.


Reason. In couetyng to do that which thou art enforced, thou shall seem not
to be constrained. All violence is overcome by patience, and that surceaseth to
be violence, which is suffered willingly.


Sorrow. I must needs go into exile.


Reason. See thou do willingly, which thou must else do nillingly, and suffer al
thing meryly, that thou seem to suffer nothing heavily: so shall thou escape
the force of necessity, and all the Adamantine nails and chains that are
ascribed thereunto, and the loathsomeness and vexation thereof. But you covet
impossible things, and flee from the necessary, but both in vain.


Sorrow. I go into banishment.


Reason. Perhaps into rest, and peradventure under pretense of false misery,
lurketh true felicity, at leastwise thou shall now be safe from envy: make
haste, and take holdfast of glory that is entermedled with security. There is
nothing sweeter then honest and safe lurkyng, with which no streets of Cities
are comparable.


Sorrow. I am driven out of my Country.


Reason. Being driven away of the woorst, insinuate thy self into the company
of the best sort, and make it evident by good proofs that thy Country was
unworthy of thee, and not thou of thy Country. Let it perceive what it has
lost, and know thou how that thou have lost nothing: Let the evil Citizens
want the weerisomnesse, and also the hatred and suspicion of thy presence, and
let the good prosecute thine absence with love and desire, and with their eyes
and minds follow after thy departure: Let them be sorry for that thou have
forsaken them, and be thou glad for that thou art departed with company, and
think not upon thy return, neither desire to be with them that desire to be
without thee, and finally be not sorry that another has done that unto thee,
which thou ought to have done thy self: thou ought to have given place
to the envy of the people, and therefore to avoid the same, thou willingly
wentest into exile. Of this device I was the first aucthour, neither are there
wanting most famous ringleaders for an example, for thou know how that the
three most remowmed Scipioes did the like, and that with such constancy, that
some judged their Country, which was dispoyled of their presence, then which
it had nothing in it more honorable, to be unworthy of their ashes when they
were dead: and some likewise thought that the City deserved to be girded with
some infamous and taunting Libel: howbeit their names remain in everlasting
memory, so that they cannot be unknown to thee by report, and the faithful
testimony of all histories, whose names are, Africanus, Nasica, Lentulus.


Sorrow. I am sent into exile.


Reason. Nay rather to try thyselfe. Beware how thou behave thyselfe in thine
exile, if thou faint, then art thou a very banyshed wight, if thou stand
stoutly, thy banyshment will ennoble thee, as it has done many other before
thee, who passed inuincibly and honorably through difficulties, to the end
they might show the right way to them that came after. Let Tyrants rage, let
the people chafe, let thine enemies and fortune treat and fume: thou may be
driven away, taken, beaten, slain, but thou can not be overcome, unless
thou yield up thine hands, nor yet be despoyled of thine ornaments, by
means whereof whythersoeuer thou go, thou shall be a Citizen, and one of
the Princes of thy Country.


Sorrow. I go into banishment.


Reason. Go a pace, and depart in safety, thou know not howlong thy kings
arms be: there is no place too far of from him, he can defend thee in every
place, who defended thee in thy native Country.


Of a man's country besiged. The.lxviii. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY country is besieged.


Reason. Troy was besieged, syrus besieged, Carthage besieged, Jerusalem
besieged, Numancia besieged, Corinthus besieged, and all of them overthrown,
who then need to be ashamed of besieging? Yea, the city of Rome it self was
besieged, but at what time it had surceased to be Rome in deed. What shall I
speak of Capua, of Tarentum, of Siracuse, of Athens, of the Vehij, and other
petie cities and countries? Cities have also their peculiar destinies, and few
there are that have escaped the destiny of besieging. But continuance of time
is such an hinderance to the knowledge of things, that the citizens them
selves are ignorant of the chances that have befallen to their own cities:
thou feel the present besieging, but can not foresee that which is to
come, nor remember that which is past: for this is your manner, ye always
bewail that which presently aflicteth you ye are marvelously addicted to
your senses, after the manner of brute beasts.


Sorrow. I am besieged in my country.


Reason. I told thee thou bewailedst thy discommoditie, now might banishment
seem to be a wished thing, for that it is less hurtful to liberty, howbeit
neither of them both is hurtful: for if the liberty of the mind be true
liberty, though he be shut in, yet can he get forth, and though he be shut
out, yet can he get in, and be wheresoever it please him.


Sorrow. I am besieged in my country.


Reason. Priamus also, who was no subject, but a king, was besieged in his
own country, with all that his more famous then fortunate family. Antigonus
King of Macedonia was besieged at Argos, and Eumenes king of Pergamos. In this
age Robertus king of Cicile was besieged within the city of Ianua, who was
nothing inferior to any of the ancient kings, if so be true virtue makes
true kings respected: and do thou poor wretch lament for the case of
Kings and Princes? Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine were besieged both of
them within the compass of Millane. And lastly, the same Saint Augustine was
besieged within the walls of his own byshoppricke: at what time God taking
compassion on his tears, transported him from the earthly besieging, unto the
kingdom of heaven.


Sorrow. I am besieged.


Reason. And who, I pray thee, is not besieged? Some are besieged with sin,
some with sickness, some with enemies, some with cares, some with business,
some with idleness, some with riches, some with poverty, some with infamy,
and some with ouertedious renown. Yea, this body which ye love and make so
much of, as a most straight prison, compasses about and besieges every one
of you with a perpetual besieging. The whole world and circuit of the earth,
wherein ye chafe and keep a stir, and continually run forth like mad men
to war, wherein ye enlarge the bounds of your Empires and kingdoms with so
great ambition, so much of it as you inhabit, what is it other, as Cicero
says, then in a manner a certain small Ila^d, compassed about with that sea
which upon earth is called the Great, the Ocean, the Atlanticum sea, which
being so great in name, yet how small indeed it is, thou see. Ye are al of
you besieged on every side, and do thou complain that thou art besieged, as
if it were some new matter? Provide rather that as much as in thee lies, what
through thy strength and counsel, thou procure means for thy countreies
safety. Do this rather of the twain, and think upon Siracusian Archimedes,
that industrious old man: as for complayntes, will neither do thee, nor thy
country good.


Sorrow. I am besieged within mine own country.


Reason. Had thou rather then be besieged in an other place? I confess
truly that thou had rather so, and that more duetifully, to wit, that thou
being elsewhere besieged, thy country might be free. But as touching thy self,
seems it unto thee a small (...) comfort to abide whatsoever shall happen
within thine own country, that the place may aswage, as much as the adversity
greeueth?


Sorrow. I am pent up within the walls of my country.


Reason. Thou speak this, as though there were no greater narrowness or
penning up then within walls. How many of those that dwell in cities do so
ordinarily frequent the court and places of judgment, that scarce so long as
the whole year lasts, they once behold the city gates? But give this once
the name of besieging, then will they long to issue forth, and think them
selves shacled in most straight fetters, which effect is not wrought by the
besieging, but by opinion, then which there is nothing of greater force in ye
wavering of this your mortal life. This place requires that I resite a fable.
It is reported, that at Aretium there was of late days a very old man, that
never had trauayled out of the bounds of his country: the fame whereof being
brought unto the ears of the governors, for pastime sake they called the old
man before them, saying that by good proof they had found that he used
secretly to depart out of the city, and to have privy conference with their
enemies. Then began he to swear by all the saints, that not only not at
that time of the wars, but not so much as in the time of peace did he ever
pass without the walls of the city, from his birth unto that present hour.
But they on the other side feigned that they believed him not, saying that they
much suspected his fidelity toward the common wealth: To be short, they
commanded him upon a great penalty not to pass out of the city gates.
Howbeit, they say, that he was in such sort provoked by the impaciencie of his
forbidding, that the very next day following, which was never seen before, he
was taken without the walls of the city. Thus though the pride and
stubbernesse of your mind, ye are always carried away unto that which is
forbidden. And now thou complaynest that thou art shut up, and the whole city
is not bygge enough for thee, whom peradventure some little corner thereof,
perhaps some one house, might suffice, if thou were not besieged, as for the
most part it happens unto students. Moreover, it fortuneth that al besieginges
be but of short continuance. Ye have comfort ministered unto you both by the
place and time, only ye lack vprightnes of mind, which causes you to lament
and complain, which runs not by the nature of the things, but through your
own effeminatenesse.


Of a man's country destroyed. The lxix. Dialogue.
SORROW. But what say thou to this, that my country is utterly destroyed?


Reason. Did thou not hear the fortune of cities and countries which I
named not long since, and the like also in other without number? Alexande^ king
of Macedonie ouerthrewe Tirus, and Thebes, and Persipolis the chief city of
the Persian kingdom, and that thou may marueyle the more, at the suggestion
of one harlot: a great city depends but upon a tickle fortune. Agamemnon
rased Troy, Hanibal Saguntum, Scipio the younger Carthage and Numancia, Titus
Jerusalem, and likewise other, others. Rome none wholly overthrew, but old age
battered it, being aided by the civil dissentions. And what makes matter who
ouerthrewe it, for as much as we see it is overthrown? The fame of the
destruction of Millane is of later time, under Frederike, a barbarous and cruel
emperor: and did thou think that thy country was privileged from the
jurisdiction of fortune, unto whom great cities and mighty kingdoms are
subject? Has love so blinded thee, that thou should imagine one city,
because thou wast borne in it, to be immortal, when as the whole world it
self is transitory? Heaven and earth shall fail, the mountains and seas
shall be moved, and al things that were made of nothing, shall return to
nothing again: do thou then wonder or complain that thy country is come
to naught? Cities as well as men, as I noted a little before, have their dying
days, but they chance not so often as they do to men, for that there are
fewer cities, and they be of longer continuance, notwithstanding subject to
death: for not men only, but all other worldly things also are mortal, the
soul of man only excepted.


Sorrow. My country is fallen.


Reason. Perhaps it may rise again: for some are risen again that have
fallen, and the falling of some has been the occasion of their more fortunate
rising. For Saguntum and Millaine stand at this day in their ancient places:
but the next neyghbout city unto Millaine, which was the last of Pompeius
commendation, changed place, as some say, by the same varbarous hands, and
was destroyed about the same time: and so likewise were Jerusalem and
Carthage. Live therefore in hope: but if thy hope fail thee, and thou seppose
thy country be destroyed, beware least thou also fail and faint under
fortune: For worse is the overthrowing of minds, then of walls. A man ought
to show a manly courage, and not an effeminate mind: and although thou be sorye
for thy countries overthrow, do not thou semblably perysh with it, seeing
that thy ruin will nothing avail the common wealth: but rather endeavor to
reserve thy self and the residue of thy country folk, if there be any
remaining, unto some more fortunate time: in this case deeds are more
needful then lamentations, where also flight it self is commendable. Thou
have heard, how that unto Terentius Varro, through whose fault and rashness
the whole Empire of Rome was almost overthrown, thanks were commonly yielded
of al fortes of the people, for that he dispayred not of the common wealth,
which his college or fellow officer, a most noble gentleman who was in no part
of the fault, seemed to do. But if there be nothing else remaining, at the
leastwyse with Bias carry thou al thy goods with thee, although thou depart
stark naked out of the walls of thy peryshing country: and henceforth seek
after that country whose kingdom shall have none end. Whereunto when as at
last by the calling of God thou art once ascended, thou shall no more fear
beseeging, nor destruction, nor any of those things which are commonly dreaded
in your cities.


Of the fear of loosing in war. The.lxx. Dialogue.
FEAR I Fear to loose in war.


Reason. Then seek for peace.


Fear. I very much dread ouercomming.


Reason. A moderate fear procures heedefulnesse, but that which is vehement
engenders desperation, then the one of which there is nothing better in war,
and nothing worse then the other in all things.


Fear. I am shaken with great fear of battle.


Reason. What mischief fear brings unto them that are ready to fight, and
also heaviness, which proceeds of fear, Flaminius at Thrasumenus, Craslus
at Carras, and Pompeius in Thessalia, have proved, in which places and often
elsewhere, that saying of the Poet has appeared to true, Fear is an ^nluckie
south sayer in matters of experience.


Fear. I stand in great fear of the event of battle.


Reason. Delay then the time until hope may come: it is ill to go forward in
that from which the mind and dread do will to absteyne. There is commonly in
the mind a certain foreseeing faculty, contrary to the motion whereof I
would in no respect perhaps give thee counsel to attempt any thing. The
examples that might be alleged in this case, as well new as old, are without
number, whereof it suffices me to have cited three only of the most notable.


Fear. I fear the event of the instant battle.


Reason. Shake of thy timoriousnesse, which none knows better then thou thy
self: take heed that it be not the nature of the thing, or the want of power,
but rather cowardice that imagines this abodyng of evil success, unto whom
there is nothing not fearful and difficult. Wherefore if the same be burtfull
to thy glory, if to thy safetye, by the assistance of virtue it must be
repressed, and the mind awakened, to whom it must be declared, that oftentimes
the dangers are far fewer and lyghter then the fear, and that many times false
fancies of terrible matters do fly before the eyes, wherewith some have been
in such sort dismayed, that they have yielded up the victory to their
enemies, which they themselves had alredie wun with their weapons. For false
and vain fear, is nothing slower then true fear, but in this respect many
times the more vehement, by how much the error of them that are afraid,
imaginyng al things to be greater them they are in deed, dryueth them forth
headlong with sharper vehemency: and thus as the same Poet says, Hastiness
euylly governs al things. But if with none of these neither, thou can lift
up thy drouping mind, but fearfulness ouercomme thy valiencie, keep thee
out of the field: it is seldom well done that is fearfully done. If thou go
thus affected into the batrayle, there shall be one within thee that will fight
against thee, for the better part of thy self rebelleth against thee. Fear is
always an evil ghest of the mind, but a much more, worse companion in war.


Of a foolyshe and rash fellow in office. The.lxxi.Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have a foolyshe and rash fellow officer.


Reason. As thou have cause, I confess, to fear, so have thou cause also on
the other side to hope: for as this has ministered, unto some, matter of
calamity, so has it unto others, cause of great glory. The rashness of
Terentius Varro, procured death unto Paulus Emilius. But on the other side, ye
rashness of Lucius Furius and Minutius, purchased singular glory unto Marcus
Furius Camillus, and Quintus Fabius Maximus: the histories are well known.


Sorrow. I have an hasty and unconstant office fellow.


Reason. Be thou constant and modest. Virtue never shines more brightly, then
when she is compared with her contrary. Why should not thou rather modestly
rule him, then he rashly drive forth thee?


Sorrow. I have a very insolent fellow in office.


Reason. Have thou forgotten, how that unto the same Camillus, of whom I spoke
erewhyle, being Tribune of the people, with the authority of the Consul, his
five fellow officers that were equal in commission with him, at one time
willingly submitted them selves unto his government? This commodity brings
surpassing virtue, it purchases authority to the possessours, reverence and
shamefastnes to the woonderers at it: For thou shall by no means better
repress the insolency of thy colleagen, then by industry and virtue. By that
means thou shall bring it to pass, that he will be ashamed to be called thy
fellow, as was Minutius ashamed, and will either submit himself unto thee, with
more honorable consent, then if the people had made him inferior unto thee,
or at leastwise all the world shall see, that though he be equal with thee in
name, yet is he inferior in valor, and what soever is well done, shall be
counted thine, and what soever ill done, shall be judged his.


Sorrow. There is happened unto me a foolyshe and stubberne colleagen.


Reason. Some things are learned by their contraries. Scholemaisters are wont
to propose some foolyshe trysle unto their scholars that learn but slowely,
which when the myt of the learner refuses, it is the more easily withdrawn
unto the things that are true and worth the learning. There comes into my
mind a notable saying of an obscure fellow, when as not long ago the city
of Florence had changed the estate, which it does to often and willingly, and
the government of the commonwelth was committed to theauctority of the common
people, one of that insolent company which had long time continued in it, and
at length with grief had lost it, despising the baseness of his poor
neighbor that was an handicraftes man: And thou, said he, which neither art
learned, nor ever passedst out of the bounds of thine own country, leadyng
forth thy life always together with thy companions in tradyng of thine
occupation, how wylt theu be able to govern this so great and noble a city?
But he being nothing moved here with, What great matter will that be, quoth he?
As for you, there is no man ignorant what course you keep, and if we do every
thing contrary, we can not do amiss. O worthy answer, meet to have
proceeded from the wit of some learned man. Do thou likewise propose unto thy
self a contrary example in thy college, unto whom thou would be most
unlike.


Of an indiscreet and hasty Marshal of the feelde. The.lxxii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have an indiscreet and hasty Marshal of the feelde.


Reason. This is somewhat a more dangerous matter, I must needs confess. Ask
of your legions that were slain at Trebeia, at Thrasumenus, at Cannas, and in
many other places more. If thou look for remedy, leave uncertain warfare. But
if thou may not do so, nevertheless apply thou thy calling valiantly, and
diligently, so that thy valor may appear among the errors of thy captains,
and that the ruin of an other man oppress not thee, but that thou rather, if
there be any means at al, may bear up the common loss upon thy soldiers.
It is a difficult matter, I confess, but neither impossible, nor
vnaccustomable, which I command. For as the dastardlinesse of one Captain
has often times ben the destruction of many soldiers, even so sometime the
valiencie of one man, has saved the Captain and the whole army. But to the
end I be not longer then I ought to be: seek thou every matter in order
accordingly, for me it suffices to have recited the names and times. Publius
Decius in the Samnitike war, Calphurnius Flamina in the first punike war,
Africanus the younger in the third punike war, all the Tribunes of the
Soldiers, the defenders of their Captains and armies. But such and so great
may be thy prowess and good hap, that the infamy of another, may turn to thy
exceedyng renown. A doubtful matter truly, but yet the only mean in exte
ame necessity. And therefore, howsoever fortune have tossed and turmoyled
other, yet if thou wylt be ruled by me, thou shall not forsake to be governed
by virtue, neither in peace, nor in war, nor in life, no nor in death it
self.


Of unfortunate success in battle. The.Lxxiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUT I am overcome in battle.


Reason. Now fear is vanished away, and here after thou wylt begin to hope,
for as much as this is the succession of these affections. For hope and fear,
being of things to come, as there may be some thing to come whereof thou
may hope, so is that past now which thou fearedst.


Sorrow. I am overcome in a great battle.


Reason. Only be not overcome in mind: for if that once quayle, all is
marred. Thou remembrest, how Marcellus the next day after he was vanquished in
battle, returned into the field, and ouerthrewe his conqueror in a greater
conflict then he had been foiled in the day before* And Julius Caesar, being
put to the worse at Durachium, shortly after gat the vpperhand at Pharsalia in
an hot skirmishe. Many that have been overcome in battle, have gone away
with the better in the war: the courage of valient men is not daunted with
one days mishap, for such have not lofty only, but also long lasting valor.
If to day thou be overcome, to morrow thou wylt fight more warily. Unfortunate
battayles, like sharp and faithful Masters, do teach Captains experience,
and with stripes admonyshe them where they have erred; even so likewise are
Husbandmen by barrenness, and Carpenters by the fall of houses, and Horsemen
by the often founderyng of their Horses, and Sailors sharpened by great and
dangerous tempests: thus by erryng, men gain experience.


Sorrow. I am vanquished.


Reason. There is none vanquished, but he that thinks him self vanquished,
whose hope is troade under foot and extinguished, whose mind has laid down
the remembrance how to take adversity. Behold the Romans, and their
invincible minds at all times, but specially in the second Punike war, who
notwithstanding the treachery of their fellow nations, and so many
conspiracies of kings and countries, and so many unfortunate battayles, and
almost utter destruction, yet were they not vanquished: there was never any
mention of peace made among them, no sign of despair, and finally nothing else
was there among them, but altogether high and invincible consultation. Which
thing, what is it other, then by the virtue of the mind, to soften the
hardness of Fortune, and to enforce it to be ashamed of it self, and to love
thee? But at length, as meet it was, they rose aloft, and being a thousand
times overthrown, they floryshed the more, so that prowess and Fortune made
not only their enemies that were terrible unto them, but also the whole world
successively their subjects and vassals.


Sorrow. I am vanquished, I confess.


Reason. Now at length thou beginnest to know what Fortune is, and this
commodity have thou learned by fleeing: none almost learneth great matters for
naught. Many have learned better by experience, then by going to school, and
the dull head that could learn nothing of his school master by the ear, has been taught by the eye. There is no schoolemistres of humane things more
certain, then adversity, none more convenient to discuss and disciphre
errors.


Sorrow. I am overthrown with a great wound of Fortune.


Reason Arise, lie not still, greatness of the mind never more notably shows
it self, then in the wounds of Fortune. But now do thou know thy self, and
having sustained so great a stroke, understand how great thine own strength is.


Sorrow. I have lost my hoped victory.


Reason. If it were unlooked for, thou have won wisdom, but to say yt there is
no change in worldly things, it may not be hoped.


Sorrow. I am vanquished in war.


Reason. He that is overcome in battle, retains his liberty and life, but
whose is vanquished by vices, lofeth both, and he that yields thereunto, is
truly overcome in deed.


Sorrow. I am overcome.


Reason. How know thou whether that which was spoken unto Pompeius the
great, who was vanquished in battle in Thessalia, do also agree unto thee? It
had been worse that he had overcome: for as the more harm, so the less sin
has he that is overcome. A great gain, which some, not only wishing to be
overcome, but choosing also to die, have in heart preferred: and truly they
make a good exchange, who by the death of their body, seek for the health of
their souls: but many rejoice in their own harms, and are grieved at their
own good, such blindness possesses the minds of men.


Sorrow. I am overthrown.


Reason. This might happen unto thee, not for want of skill in the art of
warfare, but by fortune. Fortune never shows herself any where more to be
fortune, then in battle, as in other things she may do much, so in this, they
say, she can do al.


Sorrow. Being vanquished in battle, I am come away.


Reason. But thou art not therefore immediately naked. Marciall weapons may be
taken from the vanquished, but the true goods, which are the weapons of the
mind, they do still retain that seem to be overcome. For they, as well as out
of the fire and shipwreck, are brought away out of a lost battle: And not
those alone, which being hyd up in the mind can not be touched with any
weapon, but they also that in the conflict seem to be in the greatest danger,
and most exposed to the dint of the swoorde. And therefore not whosoever is
overcome in battle, is also spoiled of his Martial honor, although loosyng
his armor, and fleeyng out of the field, or that more is, leauyng his Carkas
dead upon the cold ground, he carry away with him the name of a worthy
Captain. For the Grecian histories report, how that Leonides at Thermopylae,
being not so much overcome, as weeried with ouercomming, was there slain with
his power, lying among the great heaps and mountains of his enemies: which
fame the Poet Virgil commends in Deiphobus: and in the Emathian sieldes, if
we believe Lucane, the unfortunate army stood in an uncertain array. And in
the last battle that was fought in Africa against Hannibal, it was not
possible that an army should be more orderly marshalled, nor fight more
courageously: which thing, as he that was conquered confessed of the
conqueror, so did the conqueror report of him that was conquered, being
either of them men of singular judgment in those affairs. And what shall we
say has he lost, who has lost neither the true glory of his art, nor the
assurance in conscience of his vpryght dealyng in that he undertook?


Of Civil war. The.Lxxiiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. WE are shaken with Civil war.


Reason. The name hereof is derived of Citizens, and thou art one of the
Citizens, take heed therefore, that thou be not one of the number of the
sticklers in this mischief, and to thy power thou be not void of blame: For
this is the manner of civil wars, one man enflameth and provoke another,
until all of them jointly have raised a public outrage, which public
outrage at length pricketh forth and thrusts headlong every private man
forward. For this common mischief never comes thus first to ripeness of it
self, although by increasing it infect, yea sometime overthrow an whole
City: but if thou would find the first original thereof, it is rooted in
the errors of private persons. and this is that therefore whereof I exhort
thee to beware, that thou also have not ben one of those that have mayntayned
the civil flame, either by ministryng matter to the fire, or by blowyng the
coals. For many do things, whereof shortly after they complain, and lament
their own deed, as if it were some wound inflicted by another man's hand. Many
have perished in their own fire. But if thou be gyltie unto thy self of no
such matter, duetifull and godly is the sorrow of a Citizen in the public
calamity, but he may conceive comfort of his innocence. Of all the mischiefs
that follow man, there is none more lamentable then sin, or rather as it
seems unto certain notable men, there is none other mischief at al.


Sorrow. We are vexed with civil war.


Reason. In the rage of the multitude show thou thy self a follower of peace,
which though it be to small purpose, yet advance thy self though alone in
the defense of liberty and justice: which although perhaps shall do thy
Country but small pleasure, yet shall it redowne to thy commendation: of
either of these, one City shall gene thee an example, to wit, Menenius
Agrippa, and Portius Cato, even the same that was the last.


Sorrow. The Citizens are together by the ears in implacable civil war.


Reason. If thou can do nothing thereto of thy self, labor others,
reprove them, entreat them, withstand them, chastise them, speak them
fair, beat into their heads the utter overthrow of the Common wealth,
which conteyneth in it the ruin of every private person, and seemyng proper
to none, appertains to all: To be short, seek to appease their minds, at
the one side with duty, on the other with terror. But if thou profit
nothing that way, make thy prayers unto Almighty GOD, and wyshe the wit and
amendment of thy Citizens, and the safety of thy Country, and in all points
fulfill the duty of a good Citizen.


Sorrow. The Common wealth is come to great extremity by civil war.


Reason. To the end that neither by civil nor external wars any thing
happen unto thee unlooked for, nor any chance oppress thee upon a sudden,
always recount this one thing in thy mind, that not men only, but al worldly
things also are mortal, the soul of man only excepted. And as in men, so
likewise in Cities and great Empires, there be sundry diseases and maladies,
some in the outward parts, and some rising within the body, among which are
mutinies, and fallinges away, and brawles, and discordes, and civil wars:
and moreover, that every one has a time prefixed which he can not pass,
which every day draws nearer then other, and although it be deferred for a
time, yet most sure it is that it will come. Where there stand now most famous
Cities, there sometime have stood rough and wild wooddes, and so perhaps
shall do again. It is a great folly for any City to hope for that of it
self, which Rome, the Lady and Queen of all Cities, could not attain. This
is the difference between the ends and decays of men, and of Cities, in that
the end of men, by reason of their innumerable and infinite multitude, and
shortness of life, is daily seen with the eyes: but of Cities, because of the
rareness of them, and their longer continuance, it is scarce beholden once in
many hundred years, and then with great wonder and admiration. This meditation
shall make thee more strong against all chances, as well public as private.
And to conclude, the same shall lay forth unto thee, though not a pleasant,
yet an indifferent way unto poverty, unto exile, and unto death it self, and
teach thee how that this mischief is peculier to thy Country, which is common
unto you all that be Citizens.


Of the disagreement of a waueryng mind. The.Lxxv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM troubled with the disagreeyng of my mind.


Reason. There is no war worse then this, no not civil war: For that is
between Citizens, but this with a man's own self. That is between factions
of Citizens in the streets of the Cities, but this is fought within in ye
mind, between the parts of the soul. And therefore, forasmuch as there is
a kind of war, which is counted more then ciuyll war, where not Citizens
only, but kinsmen also fight among them selves, as was between Caesar and
Pompei, of which it was said, Here brethren stood, and there was shed the
parents blood: Much more truly may that be so called, where not the father
against the son, nor brother against brother, but man against him self does
contend: during which strife, the mind has neither quietness, nor
security.


Sorrow. My mind is at variance, and distracted with diverse affections.


Reason. Away with that variance: begin to mind one thing. For till those
contrary affections, like seditious Citizens, mind one and the same thing,
never shall the mind be quiet and at peace with it self. But as the Ague of
bodies comes through contrary and corrupt humors, so contrary affections
engender the Ague of minds, the which by so much is the more dangerous, by
how much the mind is more noble then the body, and eternal death more
terrible, then the temporal: in each if a mean be observed, health may
notably be maynteyned.


Sorrow. My mind is at debate, and chooses not what it would.


Reason. Thou now tyest the cause of evil, and evil it self together,
supposing the same to be at debate, because it chooses not: But let it once
begin to choose, and the strife will quickly cease, I say let it choose to
will that good is, not evil, for else it will be so far from finding quietness,
that more and more it shall be disquieted. For vices can never agree together:
but where virtues are, there is peace and concord.


Sorrow. My mind is at dissension, being divided into parts.


Reason. Philosophers have destinguished the mind into three parts: the first
whereof, as the governor of man's life, heavenly, blessed, and next unto GOD,
they have placed in the head, as it were in a Tower, where quiet and honest
cogitations and wills do dwell: the second, in the breast, where anger and
malice boyleth: the third, in the nether parts, from whence proceeds lust
and concupiscence, the tempest of this sea is double: so thou see now what
thou have to do. Do as Menenius did, of whom even now I spoke, he persuaded
the common people to come under the government of the Senators, whose
profitable counsel they followyng, were brought from dissension to amity: so
he counsayled them, but if counsel will not serve, do thou compel thine
abject and base parts to obey the noble: For till that be brought about, never
look to be quiet in mind: And lacking quietness, surely man's life is
unsettled, and foolyshe, and tossed about, and uncertain, and blind, yea,
altogether miserable. Many in all their life time, know not what they would
have.


Sorrow. I am troubled in mind, and know not what I would.


Reason. Thou have more companions, troubled not once or twyse, but, as last of
all I said, all their life time. And truly among all that thou have said,
thou have not, and say what thou wylt, thou can not, almost show a greater
misery.


Sorrow. I am tossed, and diversely inclined.


Reason. To be in such a case, is a notable argument that the mind is not
well. For as a sick body tumbleth on the bed: so a sick mind knows not
what to stycke unto. Such are in a most miserable case. For better do I
conceive of him which stoutly persisteth in wickedness (for if he repent,
happily he will be as constant in well doing, as he was impudent in
naughtiness) then of a light brain, which carelessly neglects al counsel:
for if he at any time begin to do well, he is soon weerie, and will not
persiste, but remains altogether ignorant, so that we may well apply that
obscure saying of Seneca unto him: They which do not that they should,
consume the time without profit, for dooyng now that, now this, and never
continue in one, may well be said to do that they should not: albeit that
place may otherwise be applied.


Sorrow. I am oppressed with cares.


Reason. As though among the swellyng waves, the ship of thy life, being
void of counsel, and destitute of a Master, could escape shypwracke, if
thou do not while time serves ride in some quiet and safe Port, and there lie
at Anchor, before the tempest of the mind do ouerwhelme thee.


Sorrow. I am carried away, knowing not what to do.


Reason. And so besides the peryls of the mind, which are incomprehensible
and infinite, your looks are diverse and strange, like the mind, which as
Cicero writes, makes the same, and being in such a state, now merry, now
sad, now fearful, now secure, now swyft, now slow in gate, thou art a
notable garyng stock for all men, through the variety of such gesture, as was
Catiline. But once settle thy self to will, and do well: but otherwise, if
thou will that ill is, still shall thou be as thou art: For vice is always
variable. Settle thy self, I say, to will that good is, and then shall thou
find, as thy mind quieted, so thy looks stayed, and all thy gestures
uniform, unchangeable, either through hope, or fear, through joy, or grief,
which is a special part of gravity, seen in very few men, and hyghly
commended among the Grecians in Socrates, and in Lelius among your Countrymen,
and last of al in Marcus Antonius, and in Aurelius Alexander among your Princes.


Of a doubtful state. The.lxxvi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am in a doubteful state.


Reason. What is it I pray thee that thou doubtest of? Is it, whether mortal
men must dye, or whether transitory things are to be contemned, or that we
must not depend altogether upon prosperity? or whether destiny cannot be
avoided, and therefore must be tolerated, neither fortune bowed, but may be
broken? To all these the answeares are certain.


Sorrow. Being in a doubtful state, I know not what will become of me.


Reason. In deed perhaps thou may doubt where, when, and how thou shall
dye, but that thou must dye: that he can not dye an evil death, which has
led a good life, or to soon, which always has played the honest man, thou
can not doubt. Again, that he can dye out of his own country, who makes
the whole world his country, or but in exile, which desires to be in his
native country, except thou be unwise, thou can never doubt. Whence
therefore come these doubtynges? Perchance of fortune: but think thou she
wylbe faithful to thee, which with none keeps faith? Is it not more lykely
that she will keep her old wont, like the troublesome sea, now deceitful
with a feigned calmness, now with surging waves terrible, by and by
dreadefull with shypwracke? And yet had thou any experience at al, no place
should there remain for doubting. For albeit the euentes be doubtful: yet
virtue, which will make thee certain in the greatest vncertaynetie, is always
certain, unto whom when thou have given thy self, nothing shall be doubtful,
but al things foreseen.


Sorrow. I have a doubtful state.


Reason. But the same is not doubtful to God, and therefore content thy self,
and commit thee wholly unto him, saying, In thy hands I am, do with me as it
pleases thee: which thing spoken godly, lay fear aside, cast of doubting,
be no more careful. He knows what to do with thee, which knows al things.
With a little, but sure with a trusty bark thou cuttest the mighty sea. He is
a faithful, and most careful governor of thy salvation. What skylleth it if
the passenger know not the way, so it be known to the master of the ship?


Of wounds received, The.lxxvii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am vexed with most grievous wounds.


Reason. O how light should they seem, would thou behold the wounds of
thy soul. But such delicate bodies have most commonly insensible souls. Of
one part nothing, on the other ye are ready to suffer al things, and, which is
most wretched, ye never feel them.


Sorrow. My wounds trouble me.


Reason. The enemies swoorde pearseth the shield, not the soul. For she can
never be hurt, if so be she do not bereave her self of her own weapons. It
was said of a certaye man in a little, but sure a learned work, that no man
can be hurt but of him self, which I think to be a true saying, albeit many
mislyke the same.


Sorrow. I am mangled with most grievous and manifold wounds.


Reason. There is no wound more grievous then that which is to the death, but
there is but one such wound: and if but one that is most grievous, the rest
must needs be light. Caesar being goared with twenty and three wounds, had
but one deadly wound: and if we should grant them al to be deadly, yet could
he dye but once. And albeit many and deep are the wounds, yet but one effect
is there of them all: the often woundyng of a dead body, argues a blooddie
mind in the wounder, but increases no pain in the wounded.


Sorrow. With wounds I am weakened.


Reason. Would to God pride with all her sisters were brought low, and
humility admitted for a companion of the wounds, that we might find it true
which was written, Thou have humbled the proud, like a wounded person. It is
a good wound and profitable, which is a medicine to heal other and greater
wounds.


Sorrow. I am ougly in sight through my wounds.


Reason. Have thou forgot that young man of whom twyse in this our
communication we spoke? Hereafter should thou do that of thine own
accord, which now thou do lament to be done unto thee by another.


Sorrow. My face is disfigured with wounds.


Reason. The wound is not to be regarded so much as the cause thereof.
Wounds received in a lawful war, do woonderfully adorn the face. Fair is the
wound which a valiant man has gotten in a good quarrel, but much fayrer is
the death.


Sorrow. I am lame withal.


Reason. Thou remembrest, I am sure, the answer of Horatius Cocles, who after
he had borne the brunt of the whole army of the Tusca^e king upon the bridge
Sublicius, after a more valiant then credible manner, and escaped from his
enemies, the bridge being broken by his own countreymens hands, and leaping
into the river Tyber, though with some hurt unto one of his legs, which
thing, afterward suing for an office, was objected unto him, thus stopped the
mouth of his adversary: I halte not at al, quoth he, but such is the wit of
the immortal Gods, that every step which I make, should bring into my
remembrance my glorious victory: as noble an answer, as his exploite was
notable.


Sorrow. I have lost mine hand in fight.


Reason. If it be thy left hand, the loss is the less: but if it be thy
right hand, thou may do as did Marcus Sergius, a man of prowess, who
having in fight lost his right hand in the Punike war, made him one of Iron,
wherewith he went to many and blooddie battayles. But if that be not so
convenient, make thy left hand to serve thy turn in steed of a right. Thou
remembrest how Attilius, one of Caesar's soldiers in the Massilian war,
held with his left hand the enemies ship till he was drowned, when his right
hand was cut of.


Sorrow. I have lost both mine hands.


Reason. Where fortune has most liberty, there greatest virtue is to be
showen. The power of fortune may be withstoode by the prowess of virtue. Which
if thou have, thou art valient, though thou have never an hand. Call unto thy
mind Ciniger the Athenian, who when both hands were cut of, after the
Marathonian battle, being a great argument of his invincible courage, held
fast his enemies ship with his teeth, as well as he could, which battle was
the immortal fact of captain Melciades. Neither do thou forget that Soldier
of Cannas, who revenged himself on his enemy with his teeth when his hands
were maimed. For being in his arms, and deprived of the use of his hands, he
bit of his ears, and marred the fashion of his face before he would let go,
and so dyed, as he thought, gloriously. These are examples of cruel minds: but
the remedies which now I prescribe are more comfortable, and meet for mild
minds: And that is, remember thy body is a frail and mortal thing, and
speedyly also will forsake thee: when thou art wounded, or otherwise troubled in
body, be not moved, neither maruayle thereat, but having lost the ministry of
thine outward limbs, convert thy self into the inmost corners of thy soul,
there shall thou find some great thing to be said and done, and that thou
need neither hands nor tongue to help thee.


Sorrow. I am deformed with wounds.


Reason. I said ear while that if the quarrel were good, the wound is fair
which is gotten by fight, and the face is not deformed with filthy wounds,
but adorned with glorious marks: Neither are they scarres, but stars, nor
wounds, but signs of virtue fixed in the face. Cesius Scena, a captain of an
hundred in Caesar's army, a man of a woonderful courage, but of no vpryghtnesse
otherwise, was had in such admiration among his enemies, that they not only
kissed his wounds, wherewith he was torn and cut through a thousand fold, in
respect of his valientnesse only, but also conveyed his weapons and armor into
the temples of their Gods, as most excellent ornaments, and relics. If he,
being a wicked man, was so honored, in what price are they to be had, who are
as well virtuous as valiant?


Sorrow. I am extremely weak through my wounds.


Reason. Heal, ye wretches, those wounds which will stick by you for ever, if
in time they be not healed. Let earth look to them, which shall both cover,
and consume them, yea and make crooked bodies, which it receives, straight,
when it restores them again.


Sorrow. I am maimed, being so wounded in this, and in that part.


Reason. Thou stryuest about parts, but thou shall forgo the whole.


Of a king without a son. The.lxxviii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have a kingdom, but I lack a son.


Reason. Have thou not cares enough through the burden of thy kingdom, except
thou have the charge of a son also? The heavier your burden is, the lyghter
your heart, and sweet it seems to you when ye lie down with your load.
There is no public wayght so heavy, as a kingdom, nor no private charge more
weighty, though none so dear, as a son.


Sorrow. I lack a son to whom I may leave my kingdom.


Reason. Leave to thy subjects liberty, nothing is better for them to have,
nor meeter for thee to give. There have been some which in their life time,
and yet not without successors, have thought hereupon, as Hiero Siracusan, and
Augustus Caesar. How much better is it to do well unto many when thou may,
then ill unto one? And what is sweeter, yea better, then to live in freedom?
What woorser, yea more dangerous, then to be a king?


Sorrow. I lack a son to be heir of my kingdom.


Reason. Thou lackest matter to continue a tyranny. For what else are
kingdoms, but ancient tyrannies? Time makes not that to be good, which by
nature is evil. Add hereunto, that good fathers, commonly have ungracious
children, to succeed them. Examples hereof may be Hierome of Sicile, and
Iugurth Tyrant of Numidia, whereof the one through ambition, the other through
treachery, both to their destruction, violated the ancient amity which their
forefathers had many years kept religiously with the Romans. Have thou not a
son? Then thou have not him which shall overthrow that which thou have done:
thou have a people which will love thee, honor thee, remember thee, and
always thank thee for their liberty. Think that God has dealt more
graciously with thee, either in taking away, or denying thee a son, then in
giving thee a kingdom.


Sorrow. I am a king without a son.


Reason. Now reign more virtuously, and freely: many times the love of
children, draws away the mind from the love of justice. Thou have read how
in the great Island Taxrobane, which lies far beyond India within the East
Oceane, directly opposite to England, the king is chosen by the consent of the
people, and they take unto them the best man among al to be their king: neither
blood, nor good, favor nor profit, but only goodness brings to preferment.
Truly an holy and blessed election. Wouldeto God it were used in these parts
of the world, then should not ill succeed the good, nor the woorst the
wicked: then should not wickedness and pride come from parents to their
children in all posterities, as it does. And though the best and most vpryght
man with one consent of al be chosen, yet is he never allowed for king, except
he be both an old man, and without children, least either the heat of youth,
or the love of children, carry him away from the executyng of justice. So that
he which has a son, is never chosen: and after he is created king, if he
beget one, he is immediately removed from his princely authority. For the wise
men of that country think it impossible, that one man should have a diligent
care both of his kingdom and of his children.


Of a kingdom lost. The.lxxix. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY kingdom is gone.


Reason. Now it is a kind of comfort to be without a son.


Sorrow. I am cast out of my kingdom.


Reason. A good fall, thou sattest in a slypperie place, and now, being on the
plain, and beholding the perilous height behind thy back, thou wylt see how
that descendyng from the throne of royalty, thou art advanced to the rest of
a private life. And if there can be no pleasure nor happiness without
security, thou shall perceive, that somewhat more pleasant and happy is the
life thou now leadest, then which thou dyddest heretofore.


Sorrow. I am driven from my kingdom.


Reason. Thank him which was cause thereof: an hard thing for the ear to
hear peradventure, but surely comfortable to the mind it is that I bid thee.
For thou art driven from that, from which thou must needs depart, and that
which wyllingly thou should do, thou art enforced to do. That force which
should be wyshed, is not to be lamented. For who can either wyshe to be above
men, as a king, or myslyke that he is made equal to others, as a man? If it be
a goodly thing, and to be wyshed, to excel, then to excel in the most
goodlye thing of all, is exceedingly to be desired. Wherefore, to be free from
all laws and controlment, to excel in outward glory, to have abundance of
gold and precious stones, is to be a king, but virtue is the thing which
makes the prince, and this will any wordlyng easily confess. For who sees
not, that among men superiority is due unto humanity, not unto riches, which
only make a rich man, they cannot make a man civil, and so not better for
virtue, neither higher for authority? But this, among other of your errors,
aryseth from the desire of excellency, which being contented with it own
place, ye seek where it is not, not beholding the true event of things and
causes. For as among rich men, the rychest, among strong men, the strongest,
the fairest among the fair, and among orators the most eloquent: so certaynely
among men, the most humane does excel other.


Sorrow. I am fallen from the seat of royalty.


Reason. If thou dyddest fall without hurt, it is very woonderful: For
commonly they which so fall, leese kingdom and soul together. But if thy
soul be safe, mislike not, if thou be wise, thine exchange: For more quiet and
plesaunt is thy life now, then it was then. And that knew they full well,
which not constrained, but voluntarily forsook their Empire, left their
dignity of Popedom, which some have supposed to be above all other earthly
dignities: among whom Diocletian is most famous, who being called again to the
Empire, which of his own accord he had forsaken, contemned the wealth of the
world, and the slippery place of principality, so greedyly sought after, and
dearly bought with the blooddy murderyng of many, he abhorred, preferring his
pryuate life before the royalty of princes, and the base fruit of his own
poor garden, planted with his own hands, before the delicious fare of the
court.


Sorrow. I am thrust out of my princely palace.


Reason. Content thy self, many secret dangers thou have escaped, among
which erewhyle thou were held captyue, with strong, though golden, and sure,
though glorious fetters, and could not behold thy misery, being blinded in
mind: but now, through light of wisdom, may perceive the subtle place
of inconstant fortune. And what covetous carle is he, that would not choose a
poor soundnes of the most noble sense, rather then a rich blindenes? But no
less noble, yea without comparison, more noble is the sight of the mind, then
that of the body: rejoice therefore, that with a little loss of a transitory
kingdom, thou have attained for a small price a great thing, yea not one thing
only, for not only blyndnesse is departed from thee with thy kingdom, but
also thy liberty restoared, and thou thy self discharged of thy public
function.


Sorrow. I am put from my royalty.


Reason. Credit them which have experience: the royal robes, crown, and
scepter, are most heavy things: being lyghtened of so mighty, and manifold
a burden, cease to complain.


Sorrow. I have lost my kingdom.


Reason. Nay thou have escaped, and swymming away naked, have saved thy self
from drownyng: such men should cease complaining, and being restoared to the
land, ought to perform the vows that they have made.


Sorrow. I have lost the happiness of a kingdom.


Reason. If thou call it either a miserable happiness, or an happy misery, a
false felicity, or a true misery, I confess thou have done so.


Sorrow. I have lost my kingdom, my authority, my wealth and al together.


Reason. Thou ought rather to rejoice thereat, for they would have bereaved
thee of al ^oy, and destroyed thee.


Sorrow. I lack princely authority.


Reason. So do thou the cares and troubles incident unto kings, through the
hatred and weerysomnes whereof, some would have departed from their thrones, as
Augustus though modesty, and Nero through fear, others did forsake them, as
even now I said. They which cannot wyllyngly, (as the affections of many are
stiff, and will not be bridled) when they must forcibly do so, ought greatly
to thank both God, and man, bringing them to that estate, which exceedingly
they should wyshe and desire. The first wish of a good mind should be,
wyllyngly to embrace wise counsel, the second, to do so though
constrainedly. That full well knew the myghtie king of Siria Antiochus, who
being spoiled of al Asia beyond the mountain Taurus, sent great thanks unto
the senate and people of Rome, because they had unburdened him of an over great
charge, and brought him to a mean estate: Pleasantly truly, though but from
the teeth forward: but if from the heart, prudently and gravely was it spoken.


Sorrow. I am come down from my kyngly throne.


Reason. I said it was the point of a shameless pride, I will now add, the
part of wretchlesse madness, to forget our estate, to loath that we are, to
long to be such as we can never be. All men cannot be Kings, let it suffice
that we are men. They that greedyly embrace their kingdoms, do loath their
own humane estate, and would be counted as they are not, as it should seem,
which so desire their earthly kingdoms. Quiet your selves, ye wretches, let
them think them selves in good case, which have left of to be Kings. For as
the state of all men is hard, so most miserable is the condition of Kings:
their innocent life to labor, their wicked to infamy, each to danger is
subject, turn they how they will, they shall find extremities to ouerwhelme
them, and shypwrackes of their substance. To escape these things thou iudgest
it a misfortune, but sure never came such good luck unto thee, as when thou
wast most unlucky in thine own judgment.


Sorrow. It greeneth me, that another has my kingdom.


Reason. It was not thine truly, but Gods, and if he gave it, why either may
he not, if he will, take it away? or can he not, if he please, give it unto
another? But, besides the will of the bestower, which alone may suffice,
consider whether in thy self there were not causes why thou were berefte
thereof, as those which a certain wise man does express, saying, A Kingdom
is transported from one nation to another, through unjust dealyng, and
iniuryng, and reproachful words, and diverse double dealings.


Sorrow. I am no more a King.


Reason. Now art thou a man. For such is the pride of Princes, that they
blush to be called men, which our Savior was not ashamed of.


Of Treason. The.Lxxx. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY friends have betrayed me.


Reason. Nay thine enemies, I trow: For if they had been friends, they had
never betrayed thee.


Sorrow. My very familiers have betrayed me.


Reason. The name of a familer, is a doubtful word: For there is a familiar
freende, and a familiar enemy, then whom, a greater mischief is not among men.


Sorrow. They have betrayed me, whom I trusted most.


Reason. Seldom is he deceived, that never trusted. The greater of power a man
is, the less trust shall he find, and the more treachery. The myghtie man
must trust most, and many: Whereby it falls out, that as it is a common
thing to all men, so especially to Kings, to be betrayed, and none so soon as
they. Priamus was betrayed by his own subjects, so was Minos, Nysus, Oethes,
Agamemnon, Alexander, and before him, Darius: all these were betrayed, I say,
by such as they put most affiance in. Among the Romans, Romulus, Tarquinius.
Priscus, Seruius Tullus, African the lesser, and Pompey the great, and Julius
Caesar, and a thousand more, either kings, or in dignity higher then kings,
were betrayed in like manner. And what do I speak of such as have been
betrayed, as though now there were none such to be found? Who is there,
which both in great and little matters, is not daily betrayed, if he have any
dealings with men? Last of all, Christ was betrayed, and the King of Heaven
was not without the misery of earthly kings.


Sorrow. Those whom I trusted, have betrayed me, I am touched nearer with their
treachery, then with mine own discommodities.


Reason. That is well said, and godly: For so African also, whom very lately I
mentiond, as Cicero does report, says, That not so much the fear of death,
as the flattery of his friends, did trouble him. And yet with neither
should thou be too extremely touched. For inasmuche as it falls out, that
the betrayer gets gain, with the loss of credit, and he that is betrayed,
damage with a good name: choose whether thou would have of these twain.


Sorrow. The traitor has deceived me.


Reason. The greater hurt is not thine, but his. He has betrayed thee, but
has cast away him self: he has pricked thee, but has wounded himself: in
spoylyng thee, he has slain him self. For perchance from thee he has
plucked, either thy kingdom, or thy wealth: but from him self has he plucked
his soul, his fame, the quietness of conscience, and company of al good men.
The Sun shyneth not upon a more wicked thing, then is a Traitor, whose
fylthynesse is such, that they which need his craft, abhor the
craftesman: and others, which would be notorious in other sins, shun the
shame of this impiety.


Sorrow. I am betrayed.


Reason. Happily it will cause thee to beware against another time: For so it
falls out. Many admonished sometimes by light matters, learn how to deal
more wyselie in greater affairs.


Of the loss of a Tyranny. The.Lxxxj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost my Tyranny.


Reason. If it be a gayning loss, to have lost a kingdom, how much more
profitable to have lost a tyranny? For albeit, as we said before, speaking of
a king without a son, all kingdoms well nygh were governed by Tyrants, yet
through continuance of time they have gotten through, and forgetfulness of
men, have put on the bail of justice, so that the unrighteousness of a
tyranny, and Tyrants, are odious now a days.


Sorrow. I have laid away my tyranny.


Reason. A burden to the Common weal grievous, to thy self dangerous, to no
good man profitable, hurtful to many, odious unto all men, have thou laid
away.


Sorrow. I have put of a tyranny.


Reason. Be not naked: put on righteousness, modesty, thryftinesse, honesty,
godliness, mercy, and love, which are most goodlye ornaments, and may be
atrayned without any money, only with a wyllyng mind: garments they are for
good men, either unknown, or abhorred of ungracious Tyrauntes, who, being
bedecked with Pearls and Purple, are altogether naked, in respect of
humanity and virtue.


Sorrow. My Citizens have driven me out of my tyranny.


Reason. They have taken unto them their liberty, which was due unto them,
and have given thee thy life, which thou ought to have lost for vsurpyng
the same. Thou owe thy life unto them, who owe naught unto thee but malice.
And thus unkindly thou complaynest, when reason would, thou should give
thanks. But this is an old wont, that he complayneth, which has done the
miurie, and he which sustained the same, does hold his peace.


Sorrow. I am berefte of the tyranny, which along while I have enjoyed.


Reason. They were thy subjects, which might peradventure better have been
thy governors. Thou countest it an injury to have thy long tyranny to be
cut of: when in very deed the end of thy tyranny, is the beginning of
their prosperity, and the entrance of justice, the expulsion of injury. And
if it were shameful, that many should peryshe for the pleasure of one: it
should be joyful to consider, but extreme impudency to complain, that
such misery is come to an end.


Sorrow. I am thrown down from the tyranny, which I have possessed this
many years.


Reason. If thou had voluntarily come down, it had been better: but if
thou had never assended thereunto, it had been best of all.
Notwithstanding, by any means to come down, it is good, because it is
expedient and just: and better is a forced equity, then a voluntary cruelty.
Harken I pray thee, how an ungodly Tyrant, being in Hell, exclaymeth unto the
tormented souls, Learn to do justice, when ye are warned. Harken also unto
me alive, exhortyng the living, Learn to do justice, though with compulsion.
Let not this my most necessary and profitable admonition, uttered in due time,
be contemned: the other was out of time, and made too late: For in vain is it
to learn that, which cannot be put in practice. Assuage now your swellyng
minds, and put away your proud and cruel desires to reign, though not
before, yet now at the length, after that you have lost your authority,
cease to be Tyrants, and wyshe not that which ye cannot attain. Show forth
thus much shame, if you cannot justice, that, having changed your manners, and
put on a new habit of the mind, and made rycher through the loss of riches,
the world may see, that as much as ye have forgonne of goods, so much ye
have gotten goodness. Have ye never heard, how that not only the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, GOD Almighty, from whence is all power both in
Heaven and Earth, does, at his good pleasure, both extend, and restrain his
lyberall hand, for causes just always, though secret sometime: but one
earthly King, contrariwyse does put down another, and one Tyrant oppress
another, and one nation destroy another. And never came this saying of the
Prophets complaynyng unto your ears, He shall geather the captivity together
like Sand, and shall triumph over the Kings, and laugh Tyrants out of
countenance? Frame your minds to Fortune, or according to the divine pleasure
of Almighty GOD rather, and take heed of that ridiculous and fylthy example
of Dionisius, of al Tyrants the most detestable, of whom it is reported, that
being banyshed from his native Country, he kept a school, and so exercised
his cruelty upon children, when he could not upon men. A cruel nature,
obstinate in wickedness, void of virtue, and far from reason.


Sorrow. It greeueth me greatly, that I have lost my tyranical authority.


Reason. How would it trouble thee, to have lost a lawful possession, now
that thou art so grieved that thine usurped authority is gone? How would it
vex thee, to have forgonne thine own: which take it so heavily, now that
thou art berefte of that, which was not thine?


Sorrow. I can not choose but take it grievously, that I am thrown down from
my tyranny.


Reason. Way the cause, and it will trouble thee the less. The very name of
Tyrants, has made many to fall: notwithstanding, it is well known by
experience, that the most part have deservedly been, and are daily thrown
down from their dygnities. In the Politikes of Aristotle, thou may read,
how that many Tyrants have peryshed through the abuses of their wives. Which
being understood, either actiuely or passiuely, is true, that is, through the
injuries offered, either by Tyrants unto other men's wives, or by the wives of
Tyrants to others. Of the first, thou have for example, not only Tyrannies,
but also the Troiane, and Roman Kingdoms. Of the second, thou have Agis, a
Tyrant among the Lacedaemonians, who having himself made a pray of the men his
subjects, set his dear wife to spoil their wives, which was not the least
cause of hastenyng his destruction. But Aristotle, who flourished in the days
of Alexander the great, and lived not till this Tyrant reigned, could never
know him: albeit in those books, not without wonderful admiration, I find
the names of Hiero, and Gelo, but consyderyng the course of times, I cannot
conceive how he should know them.


Sorrow. Neither have I oppressed other men's wives, nor my wife iniuried any,
and yet am I driven from my tyranny.


Reason. Some time the most hurtful, think them selves innocent. But many
causes besides, as great, there be, wherefore Tyrants are put down: as pride,
which Historiographers obiecte to Julius Caesar, for that he rose not up to
the Senate, when with great obeysaunce they approached unto him: but that, in
these days is counted no cause. Cruelty also is another, which caused
Merentius, as it is written in Virgil, to be punished, and brought Caligula,
Nero, and Domitian, to their death. Envy likewise, which was the greatest
torment, says Horace, that ever the Tyrants of Sicile found: which if it
were so in his days, I warrent thee, at this present it is no less. Last of
all, the greatest decay of Tyrants, and most common, is covetousness. And
therefore other things touch but certain, and this all: The other trouble
certain Citizens, but this the whole people. Pride and Envy, reign among
Tyrants them selves, cruelty rages among few: but covetousness among all.
Cruelty sometime ceasseth and is diminishes, but covetousness increases
always, and watches. Therefore, they which desire to bear rule over the
people, ought above all, to shun this vice, together with the shame and
suspicion thereof. For nothing makes a Tyrant so odions, nothing is more
unseemly for a Lord, or Governor. Other vices many times hyde them selves
under the cloak, either of magnanimity, or of justice, but this one vice
puts not of the baseness and misery of the mind. And contrary to the
common custom of man's error: as nothing is in deed more vile and miserable,
then covetousness: so nothing is to be deemed more vile and miserable. And
therefore, they which are gyltie hereof, are judged most unmeet of all men to
bear honor, and authority. Men disdain to be under the government of him
that is subject to covetousness, and that he has no right over the body,
they think, which can not use well the rule that he has over his own coin,
who thinks it also lawful to bereave men of their lives, I say not of their
money, and yet dares not so much as touch his own treasure. Therefore the
most ready and right way to security and quietness is, not only not to
wyshe to bear dominion as a Tyrant, but also not to desire to rule as a king.
For what is more foolyshe, more paynefull, or more perilous, then for a man to
heap the burdens of the whole people upon his own and only back, who is
too weak peradventure to bear his own? But the familiarity with the mortal
enemy, and the perverseness of opinions, does not permit to choose that
which is better. The next is, to have in mind the lesson of Aristotle, which
is, that a man show him self to be not a Tyrant, but a favorer of the Common
wealth. He must, says he, seem to gather the incomes, and offerynges, the
better to dispose, and use them, if need do require, for the defense of his
Country in the time of war: generally he must behave him self, as the
keeper and Chamberlayne of common things, not of his own: And again, He must
repair, and adorn the City, as a Steward, not spoil it as a Tyrant: And
again, He must behave him self not as a Tyrant, but as a King, careful of
the public welfare, and love a mean estate, not sumptuousness. By these,
and such like (as Aristotle would, and I do like of) the authority
continues: this only I add, that he be such a one in deed, as Aristotle
says he should seem to be: For dissimulation, be it never so cunningly and
wittily used, can never be long hyd from the sight of some among many whom it
touches. Enter now into the consyderation of thy self, see whether thou have
offended in any of these points, and cease both to complain, and marvel. For
that a Tyrant being subject to these vices should be cut of, it is not, but
that it should continue, it is marvel. To conclude, both Kings, and al
Tyrants, and as many as are of power, if they desire to reign a long time,
should diligently have in mind that saying of Cato in Liuie, Avarice, and
riotousnesse, have brought al great Empires to destruction.


Sorrow. Now my dominion is gonne, I am no better then a private man.


Reason. Thou were an enemy of Citizens, thou art now made a fellow citizen,
learn ciuilicie, and confess the benefit of a mean estate. Both more
honestly, and more safely, among good Citizens, then above all Citizens, thou
may live. Now thy state is more quiet, thy life more secure, without fear,
without suspicions, without watches, without sword: among which euylles, I
know not what sweetness of life can be hoped for.


Sorrow. My tyranny being lost, I must live as an other common and inferior
person.


Reason. Choose, whether with lamentations thou wylt exasperate thy fotune, or
asswade it with patience: for verily, if thou would demand of thine own
mind, and not of the confuset noise of the multitude, and consider things
past in silence, thou should find, that thou art released, and escaped from
many euylles. Now may thou live insafetie and quietness, and dye in peace,
neither imbrewed with blood, nor drenched in poison.


Of Castles lost. The.Lxxxij. Dialogue.
SORROW. MY strong Castles are taken from me.


Reason. Till now, some seed of tyranny remained: which is utterly gone, thy
Castles being lost. It is not enough to cut of a poisoned bough, unless it
be plucked up by the root. He that trusts to his Towers, reasseth not to be
a Tyrant.


Sorrow. My Castle on the Hill, is taken from me.


Reason. In all places, Castles are the fetters of freedom: but on Hills,
they are after a sort as Clouds, out of which, your pride may rattle and
thunder down upon your Subjects: therefore, to be spoiled of these, is no
lamentable thing, but rather to be wyshed. For among those things which the
common people call goods, some things there are, wherewith good, and modest
minds also would be detayned, and prycked unto unlawfulness. Which motions,
if thou can not withstand with the assistaunce of virtue: it were better to
be without the causes of euyls, then by having such things, to be allured
unto wickedness.


Sorrow. I have lost a most strong castle.


Reason. Thou call it most strong, but the event proves it to be but weak.
But to speak as it is, in deed thou have lost a thing for use vain, for
keeping troublesome, unprofitable for thy self, and to al thy neighbors
hurtful. Now shall thou begin both to sleep quietly thy self, and to suffer
others to take their rest by thee.


Sorrow. My safe Toure is overthrown.


Reason. How that could be safe which is destroyed, think with your self.
But I will show thee a well fenced and most safe Castle, and yet it has neither
wall nor turret, nor troublesome provision of things: would thou live
safely? Then live verteously, for nothing is more safe then virtue. And to live
well, I count not to live proudely, daintyly, galantly, but justly, soberly, and
modestly. Thou have need neither Castle, nor Tower, which make thee not
secure, and quiet, but careful, terrible, and troublesome. And what pleasure is
it to be feared, and not to be loved? Never heardest thou of that saying of
Laberius, common in every man's mouth? Needs must be fear many, of whom many
stand in fear. This did he utter against Julius Caesar, but more ryghtly may
it be spoken against others, both inferior to him for power, and more horrible
for their cruelty? I see nothing, why so many should desire to be feared. For
gratis no man is feared. For both he stands in fear himself, and more
dangerous is it for one to fear many, then for many to be afraid of one. It it
not better that none do fear thee, and thou no body, then for many to fear
thee, and thou many? For these things cannot be severed, and always by fear
is engendered fear. Would thou have a reason hereof? Ovid the Poet gives it
thee: Whom a man does fear, says he, he would have come to destruction: and
Ennius before his time said, Whom men do fear, they hate, whom any does
hate, he wysheth to be destroyed. Many feared thee in thy Castle, and so
dyddest thou fear many. But thou wylt say, whom did I fear? But who is he
that fears not al men, when he begins to be feared, especially them which
fear him? For Cicero following Ennius. Does say, They which will be feared of
them, whom they should fear, must needs be in great fear. I many times
repeat one thing, for so does the matter require I should, neither do ye
mark, being blind in this, as in other things, that while ye contend to be
above al, ye are under al. What is more vile then fear? So al your endeavor
ends on the contrary part.


Sorrow. I have lost my Castle which I loved so well.


Reason. Love another which thou shall not leese. Wall thy mind about with
good intentions, thy lyte with good actions: Place prudence and fortitude
before thy gates, justice and modesty in the turrets, humanity and clemency
about upon the walls, set faith, hope, and charity in the mids of the
castle, let providence be planted on the top of the hiest tower, a good name in
the circuit of God and men, embrace love, banyshe fear, reverence the
worthy, ouerpasse the rest without either honoring or abhorring them: so
neither shall thou fear any, nor any fear thee, and more safely shall thou
live in the house of humility, then in the tower of glory. This Castle will
none invade, this will none, neither can they bereave thee of, by this shall
thou draw the wicked to admiration, the good to love, and to imitation. O how
easy a matter were it to lead a quiet and good life, if ye would not
disquiet and make the same troublesome, both to the destruction of your selves
and others? For all that ye do, is to the overthrow of your selves and your
neighbors. And tell me, to what end serve these your Castles, but to the
disquietyng of your selves and others, that neither you at any time can be
quiet, but that also, like spiders that lay wait for flies, ye may insulte
over them which pass by you. All other creatures content them selves with
their caves and nestes, man alone, then whom nothing is more proud, nor
fearful, seeks Castles, and buyldeth bulwarks.


Of old age. The.lxxxiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am waxen old.


Reason. Thou desire to live, and yet art sorry that thou have lived, is not
this the matter?


Sorrow. I am old.


Reason. Thou wentest every day forward, and art thou amazed that thou art now
come to thy ways end. It had been more strange, if thou had never come to
the place whyther thou wast always going.


Sorrow. I am old.


Reason. How can it be otherwyfe, but that by living thou must wax old, and
by going forward thou must go on a good way? Did thou think that thine
age would go backewarde? Time, as it is swyft and tarreth not, so is it also
irreuocable.


Sorrow. I am become an old man very soon.


Reason. I told thee that time passes a way, and now thou begynnest to
believe it. It is strange to hear, not only what difference there is between
the opinions of diverse men, but also of one man only. The young man when he
thinks upon his age to come, judges it very long, which the old man when
he looks back into it, thinks to have been very short. Things to come
seem always longer then the present, being either in deed as short or
shorter: which the nearer they draw to an end, the more vehement always,
natural motion grows to be.


Sorrow. I am old.


Reason. Thou may rejoice if thou art not waxen old among vices, or if thou
art amended now at the last: for then thine old age is good and profitable,
and no small argument of Gods favor toward thee. Thou remembrest the
communication which Caesar had with the old Egyptian, and proves by his
old age, that he had not lived unthankful to the gods.


Sorrow. I am become an old man.


Reason. A very few among many are able to say so: for of so many thousand
thousands as are borne, how many are there that atteyne to old age? And of
them that do, how many live out the lawful time that they may be called old?


Sorrow. I am very old.


Reason. It is a miracle to meet with a very old man, specially if a man
think with him self, with how many dangers on steps he has passed to that
age. The great rareness of old folk, is a great argument of the manyfolde
chances of this mortal life.


Sorrow. I am old.


Reason. Thou have run an hard and dangerous race, it were marueyle but that
by this time, being weerie and desirous to rest, thou were glad to see the end
so nigh.


Sorrow. I am soon waxen old.


Reason. The course of your life is sometime short, sometime very short, never
long, always hard, rough and uncertain, the last part whereof is old age,
and the end death: what cause have thou here to complain alone? Art thou
waxen old? By this time then thou ought to have fulfilled the duties of
life, and now rest thy self, seeing thou art come to the end thereof. That
traueiler were worse then mad, that being weerie and weakened with his long
journey, would be content to go back again. There is nothing more
acceptable to them that are weerie, then their Inn.


Sorrow. I am aged.


Reason. The toils of thy life have been pleasant unto thee belike, if thou be
sorry thou have passed them.


Sorrow. I am an old man.


Reason. If thou had a delight to live, lo thou have lived: what needs
thou must do, thou have fulfilled. And who is so mad that wylbe sorry for the
doing of that which he wyshed, unless he perceive that he wyshed a miss? or
rejoices not, yt that is done already, that might not be left undone, nor be
done, without great travail? And therefore on every side thou have cause to
rejoice, whether thou have obtained thy wyshed desire, or accomplyshed thy
necessary and payneful duty.


Sorrow. I am in years, and old age has chased away the delites of the body.


Reason. Enjoy the pleasures of the mind, which are as many, and truly more
permanent, and do never depart but when the soul departs, to her they
cleave, her they follow. But bodilye pleasures, when they come they bring
offense, and when they depart they leave behind them cause of repentance,
shame and sorrow Rejoice that thou art discharged and free from them, and give
thanks to thy deliverer for bringing thee out of the hands of thine enemies,
and causing thee do follow thy duty, which thou had deferred and
neglected.


Sorrow. I am old, and want mine accustomed pleasures.


Reason. Accustom thy self then to new, for old age has it proper
pleasures, which when thou have tasted, thou wylt loath those which thou have
lost, and if thou might, even rufe to return unto them.


Sorrow. I am old, and gray headed.


Reason. The reverend hoarie hears of a virtuous old man, carry with them
not only more authority, but also honest delight, then all the filthy
pleasures of young men, neither be thou grieved at the changyng of their
color. For whose senses are so corrupted, or judgment blinded, that he would
not rather behold baskets full of white Lilies, then hutches full of black
coals? And if he were to be transfourmed, had not rather be made a white
swanne, then a black crow?


Sorrow. I am old, and the filthy wrincles have furrowed my face.


Reason. The forrowed land brings forth the ranker corn, and the life that
has been well instructed, yields the ryper and pleasanter fruit in old age.
If the wrincles of thy face offend thee, frame the countenance of thy mind
unto more comeliness, which will never be deformed with wrincles, nor altered
with years, but rather increase by continuance, and to be short, will do thee
more honor, if thou neglect it not.


Sorrow. I am old, and become so wrincled and evil favored, that I scarce
know my self.


Reason. I told thee at the beginning of this: Now thou wylt have less
desire to look in a glass, and less please thine own (perhaps) but much
less the eyes of wanton women, whom to have a desire to delight, I cannot
easily determine whether it taste of greater vanity, then lasciviousness. But
they that seek for trustiness, for constancy, for gravity, for wisdom, do
hope more assuredly to find them among these wrincles, then where the forehead
and cheeks be plain, and smoath, and soft.


Sorrow. I am aged, and the sweetest part of my life have I left behynd me.


Reason. Nay surely the sowrest: for those things that are most wyshed for,
are not always best. Many have desired their own hurt, which they would not
do were not the saying of the Satirike Poet true, There are but few that can
discern the true goods.


Sorrow. I am old, and my pleasant days are past.


Reason. The days in all times are much one and like, but men's minds do
vary, yea one mind disagreeth from it self. Hereof it comes, that the
madness of youth on the one side, and the impaciencie of old age on the
other, have in such sort disturbed the judgment of this life, that that is
counted good, which is evil, and that most excellent, which is woorst of al.
As for the days, they are of them selves al good, for as much as the king and
creator of al worlds is good. And although some days be hot, and some
cold, some dry, and some moist, some cloudy, and some clear, some
troublesome, and some calm, yet if thou have a respect unto the beauty of the
whole world, and the course of nature, they be al good. But if they be
referred unto you and your judgment, they are almost al of them evil,
sorrowful, doubtful, heavy, troublesome, careful, bitter, plaintile,
lamentable, full of adversity. Among these thou tellest me a tale of certain
pleasant ones, I know not what, which whiles they were present were heavy,
and not without their complaints, and nothing makes them now seem: pleasant,
but that they are past, and the desire thou have that they should return,
makes them dear unto thee, and the rather, for that perhaps they have carried
away with them some things whereby thou set no small store. A fool
commonly loves nothing but that he has lost.


Sorrow. I am waren old, but O that my young days would return again.


Reason. O no less foolyshe then vain wyshe, as thou meanest: but if thy
understanding were of higher matters, then were it not void, for it will surely
come again one day, and according as it is written. Thine youth shall be
renewed, as is were the youth of an Eagle.


Sorrow. I am old, and my good time is past.


Reason. As every age is good to the good, so is it evil to the evil livers,
unto both sure it is, but short, and very near to the end, when as the godly
shall be rewarded for their virtue, and the wicked punished for their sins.
Which is then this good time whereof thou speak, which is evermore hard and
fleeting, but only in respect that it leads to eternity? Otherwise if there
were any thing sweet in it, the swyftnesse thereof in passing away may seem
to abate it: for who can taste a thing well as he is running? When Darius was in
flight, a draught of foul and stinking water seemed most sweet unto him:
Thirst, as Cicero thinks, but as I judge, fear, had corrupted his taste.
Alexander that banquished him, followed hard at his heels: and swift time
likewise pursues you apace. The years run away, the days follow headlong
one upon another, the hours have wings, and slyt swyftly, and death stands
before your eyes, neither can ye return when ye are stayed, nor stay when ye
are driven, nor pass further when ye are prevented. Of this way then that is
beset with so many dangers, and subject to so many terrors, what part thereof,
I pray thee, can be good? But I understand your meaning: you call that a good
age which is most apt unto shame and licentiousness: For this is your manner
of speaking, to term that good which is most agreeable to your affections, be
those your affectitions never so evil. So does the thief call the chain good,
which he prepares for the true man's neck, and the Tirant his citadel, which
he builds to bereave his subjects of their liberty, and the witch her
pestilent poisons. which she mingleth to infect poor innocents, and the
murderer his blade, wherewith he entendeth to commit slaughter: and so
likewise do you call that age good, which is most convenient for the things
that you desire. And therefore, among al them that lament the loss of their
forepassed days, ye shall not find one to lament his childhood or infancy,
which in deed were the best parts of this life, if to be best, were to be
farthest from old age: as ye hold opinion. No not the middle age, nor old
age, which begins but now, and is yet to be counted green old age: but it
is youth, youth, that ye require, the most dangerous and woorst part of al your
life O say ye, the pleasant days of five and twenty years, where are ye
become? which ye speak, that your ancient filthiness may be known unto al
men, how well ye like of them without repentance, secking for nothing else then a
convenient time for them.


Sorrow. I am old, why should I not sigh with that king in Virgil that said, O
that Jupiter would restore unto me my forepassed days?


Reason. But we hear not that ever Socrates, Plato, Fabius, or Cato, samented
for any such matter, and yet they were old men: but I confess that it is a
more rare thing to find a wise man, then a king. And therefore if king Enander
had been a wise king, that same sigh of his, should not be doubtless so
commonly frequented of our old men now adays. Foolish old men do sigh, and
with heaviness of mind call back for their youthful days, but al in vain:
which they go about to revoke, not only with their secret wyshes, but also
with bootelesse medicines, and cunning woorkemanshyp, to alter the course of
unbridled nature. In which point Hadriane the Emperor, very pleasantly
skoffed at a certain grayheaded sire, unto whom he had denied a suit. And when
he saw him come again to renew his former request, and in the meanewhile had
dyed his hoarie hairs into a black color, he repelled him with this
answer: No, go thy ways, quoth the Emperor, for I have denied the same
alredie to thy father.


Sorrow. I am aged, O that I could wax young again.


Reason. Erewhyle I told thee, that thy youth would return, and now I say
it is returned. If thou might so casily obtain thy wysh in all things, thou
should wyshe for nothing in vain. The poor man wysheth for riches, the
bondsman for freedom, the deformed person for beauty, the sick man for
health, the weerie for rest, the banished, to be called home: but he that
deserves the true name of an old man, cannot wyshe for his youth again, for
that is a very chyldishe desire.


Sorrow. I am waxen old, alas why has my pleasant youth so soon forsaken me?


Reason. It is soon gone that is pleasant, and that comes always to
quickly that is payneful. But it is a vain thing to wyshe for that which
cannot be had, and annoye in the having, and would hurt if it returned again.
Leave of now thy sighing, for whilst thou continuest in this mind, thou may
soon become grayheaded, but never an old man: For the desire to be young man
old man, what is it other then the very chyldishnes of old age?


Sorrow. I am old and crooked.


Reason. Behold the earth, and think from whence thou came, and whyther
thou shall: For from thence thou came, and thither thou must go again.
Nature puts thee in mind both of thy beginning and ending. To the intent
thou should not go astray, the common passage is showed unto thee, into
which since thou art entered, look down upon it diligently: the manner is, for
blind men to be lead on their way by the hand.


Sorrow. I am soddenly waxen old.


Reason. Nay rather by small and small, creepingly, slowly, softly, but that
when men think upon nothing, al things seem to happen suddenly unto them, as
contrariwyse, when they mind all things, nothing comes unlooked for. And if
old age were a thing to be lamented, then should men lament all the days of
their life, for through them, as steps, they trace unto that.


Sorrow. Alas, I am old.


Reason. O inconstancy of desires, unto this dyddest thou specially endeavor
to attain, unto this dyddest thou most covet, and that thou should not
reach thereunto dyddest thou much fear, and now that thou art come to it,
thou lamentest, which were a monstrous and incredible matter, but that it is
now usual among you. All would feign come to old age, but none will be content
to be old: but rather ye count old age misery, and to be called old, an
injury, as if it were a reproach to be aged, which none may judge so, but they
that think it a shame to have lived: of which sort, I confess, the number is
not small, from whom notwithstanding, I would have thee exempted, to the end
thou may be the better for our communication. Otherwise, good counsel can
never sink into the heart, although it be abundantly poured into the ears.


Sorrow. I am waxen aged at length.


Reason. They that have sustained losses on the land, on the sea, in war* and
by gaming, immediately perceive their harms: but thou only awakest in the
end, and beginnest to complain, when as the end of all complain^es is at
hand.


Sorrow. I am old.


Rea on. It is the part of a ^oole, never to think upon old age, but when it
is come: For truly, if thou had foreseen that it should have come, or
perceived it coming, thou should with less grief behold it present.


Sorrow. Alas, I am now an ag^d wight.


Reason. Lament not for it: thou have fulfilled an hard charge, thou have
passed through a rough and ragged journey, and finished an unpleasant Comedy.
And therefore now after the manner of such actions, thou should clap thy
hands, and cry plaudite.


Sorrow. I am an old man.


Reason. Have thou forgotten, how that of late days, one that was very
familiar with thee, expressed the effect hereof ex tempore, not as a new
saying, but as comparable unto any in times past? For when a certain freende
of his said unto him, I am sorry for thee, for I perceive thou waxest old, I
would thou were in as good estate as when I knew thee first: he answered
suddenly, Seem I not unto thee foolysh enough, but that thou must wysh me more
fool then I am? Take no care for me, I pray thee, for that I am old, but
rather be sorry for me yt ever I was young. O how much understanding is there
contained in this short answer, which none can conceive, but he that has
tastes the commodities of this age, and remembers the miseries of ye other?
Rejoice therefore in thine own felicity, although it be also true, that often
times good happens unto men against their wylles, and evil vnwished for.
Doubtless, unto a good man that loves veriue and hates fond affections, one
whole day of this age, which thou mislikest of, is more acceptable, then an
whole year of retchlesse youth.


Sorrow. Alas, I am aged.


Reason. If thou continue in this mind, it may be truly said of thee, which is
verified of ye common people, that thou art not so much wretched now thou art
old, as that thou liuedst miserable, that so fondly thou complaynest thereof,
now at the very end of thy life. Leave of your complaints now at length, you
whining generation, and willingly yield to the necessity of nature, since
there is nothing to be lamented, that her immovable law has determined. For
what is more natural for a man that is borne, then to live until he be old, and
when he is old to dye? But you, being forgetful of your estate, do eschew
them both, and yet of necessity you must taste of the one, or of the both. And
if ye would escape them both, then must you have abstained from the third, and
believe me, not have been borne at all. As soon as your bodies are grown into
years, let your minds wax old also, and let not the old Proverb be
evermore verified in you, to wit, That one mind, is able to consume many
bodies. Suffer without grudging your body and your mind to continue together to
the end: as they came in, so let them depart out of the world together, and
when the one draws forward, let not the other draw backwarde. Your dallying
is but in vain, you must needs depart, and not tarry here, and return no
more, which may seem unto you but a small matter, in consideration of the
immortality of your souls, and resurrection of your bodies, which you look
for, above such as either look for but the one, or for neither. In vain, I
say, ye strive against the stream, and go about to shake of the yoke of man's
frayltie, which ye undertook when ye were borne.


Sorrow. I am old, and the strength of my body is decayed.


Reason. If the force of thy mind be increased, it is well, and thou have made
a good exchange: For there is no man ignorant, unless he lack a mind, that
greater and better exploites may be achieved by the strength of the mind,
then of the body. But if the strength of the mind, as oftentimes it happens,
be deminished through slothfulness, then have thou, I confess, lived
unprofitably, which is thine own fault, and not thine ages.


Sorrow. I am old, and I cannot follow my business.


Reason. If there be any thing to be done by the mind, by so much the better
an old man may do it, by how much he has the more experience and knowledge
in things, and is less subject to passions, and his mind more free from all
mischiefs and imperfections: as for other matters, old men can not deal in
them, neither becomes it them to busy them selves that way, who have alredie
laid all bodyly labor aside. But if they continue in it, and will not be
withdrawn, then do they renew the ancient rid: culus example of a Roman
old man, who being commanded by the Prince to surceasse from labor, for that
his impotent old age at the one side, and his great riches on the other,
required the same, he was as heavy and sorrowful, as if he had mourned for
some freende that was dead, and caused all his household semblably to mourn: A
strange old man, that abhorred rest as a certain resemblance of death, when as
in deed there is nothing more convenient for an old man, then rest, and
nothing more unseemly, then a labouryng and carkyng old man, whose life ought
to be a pattern of all quietness and tranquillity. Thou may learn
moreover of the Philosophers, what, and how pleasant a thing it is, for
virtuous old men to live, as they term it, in the course of their forepassed
life, which notwithstanding, the greatest number never accomplishe^h, but
dies before.


Sorrow. My years are quickly gone, and I am become old.


Reason. Your beauty, health, swiftness, strength, yea all that ever ye have,
passes away: but virtue remains, never geuyng place to old age nor death.
In this most assured good, ye ought at the beginning to have stayed your
selves, which at the end to do, I confess, is more difficult, but there is
no age that refuses the study of virtue, which the harder it is, so much
the more it is glorious. Many have scarce learn^d of long time, in their old
age to be wise, and know them selves, and yet better late, then never which
although it be but smally profitable now at the last cast of the life, and at
the very point of death, yet do I judge it well bestowed upon that one hour,
to be passed without horror and fearfulness, if so be it were not exerc. sed
in all the whole life time before. For neither was he borne in vain, that
dies well, nor lived unprofitably, that ended his life blessedly.


Sorrow. I am old, and at deaths door.


Reason. Death is at hand alike unto all men, and many times nearest there
where he seems furthest of. There is none so young, but he may dye to day,
none so old, but he may live another year, if nothing else happen unto him,
but old age.


Sorrow. I am thoroughly old.


Reason. Thou art rather thoroughly ripe. If Apples could feel and speak,
would they complain of their ripeness? or rather, would they not rejoice,
that they are come to the perfection for which they were made? As in all other
things, so likewise in age, there is a certain ripeness, which is termed
old age: the same that thou may see truly to be so, the age and death of
young men is called bitter, and is bitter in deed: contrary unto this
bitterness is ripeness, which being commended in Apples, and al mauer
fruits, is most commendable in man. Not that I am ignorant, that many fruits
do wither before they wax ripe, but that is not the fault of the age, but the
peru^rsenesse of nature, not of all, but of many, I mean in men, who being
borne to that which is good, do stoutely endeavor to the contrary. And
therefore, if there be any drop of noble juice in thee, thou ought now to
be ripe, and withour all fear, to attend until the hand of the mower cut
thee down to the ground. That is not death which thou fear, but the end
of troubles, and beginning of life: not death, I say, but an hard end of life,
whereunto few arrive in a calm tide, but all for the most part naked,
weepyng, and wrecked on the sea. In the mids of thine old age, taking in
hand an easy vtage toward thine end, thou shall be brought by a prosperous
gale, through the troublesome surges of worldly affairs, into the calm port
of security. Now is it time for thee to run a ground, and moare up thy weerie
bark upon the shore, and whyther so ever thou turnest thee, to think upon
thine end. This shall thou find more profitable for thee, then as fools use
to do, to blame good age, and nature, which is a most gracious mother.


Of the Gout. The.Lxxxiiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am vexed with the loathsome Gout.


Reason. Know thou not the nature of old age? It comes not alone, but most
times brings an army of diseases and sicknesses with it.


Sorrow. I am grieved with the paynefull gout.


Reason. Thou art troubled in the extremest and most vile parts of thy body:
what if it were near thy heart, or head?


Sorrow. The gout so greeueth me, that I cannot go.


Reason. The wandering mind of man, needs to be restrained with a bridle.
One man is kept under by poverty, another by imprisonment, another by
sickness. Fortune playing with thee, hampereth thee by the feet: This is not
the gout, but rather fetters, and therefore learn to stand still.


Sorrow. The gout makes me unfit for affairs.


Reason. Unfit I think in deed to run, to leap, to dance, to play at
tennice: do thou think that thou wast borne unto these pastimes? But if
thou be so ignorant, know this, that thou wast horn unto greater matters,
which thou may very well accomplysh, if thy head do not ache, nor thy heart be
sick. Thou may apply the study of the liberal sciences, ensue godliness
and virtue, keep floelitie and justice, contemn this frail body, and the
transitory world, hate vices, love virtues, honor freendshyp, help thy
Country by counsel and advice: These are the duties of a good man, and
herein what can fetters hinder thee?


Sorrow. I am weakened with the gout.


Reason. Perhaps thy disease will not suffer thee to fight against thine
enemies, but it will against vices, which is as paineful and common as war.
And what know we, whether this bodily pain, against which thou fightest, be
laid upon thee, for the exercise of thy mind?


Sorrow. I can not stand upon my feet.


Reason. See then what hope thou have to conceive of the residue of the
buyldyng, when thou perceiuest the very foundation to be so weak? watch and
take heed, that the fall oppress thee not at unawares: make ready thy packes,
and prepare thy self to flight.


Sorrow. I am marueilously troubled with the gout.


Reason. This disease, as it is commonly reported, uses to accompany rych men.
Lo, thou have an other remedy, be of good comfort, for either the sweetenes of
thy riches shall assuage the sharpnes of thy grief, or ye bitterness of thy
poverty drive it away: and so thou shall either find comfort, or an end. If
these fail thee, that will come at length, which shall not deceive thee, which
is also the end of al troubles and aduersiue.


Sorrow. I am oppressed with the pain of my feet.


Reason. If thou wylt have remedy, thou must either be poor in deed, or at
least wise live poorly. Poverty, which is ye true purifiyng of men's bodies, as
some say, has delivered many from this infirmity: and some have been cured by
frugality or sparing, which by an other term I may call volu^tary, or fained,
or imagined poverty. Thou have seen some cured by perpetual abstinence from
wine. Thus it happens, that pain with pain, and one nail is driven out with
an other, as says the old Proverb. There is no payneful malady cured without
pain. And moreover, if thou wylt be at one with this sickness and many other,
thou must proclaim open war; not only against wine, but also venerie. But
what do I? I promised remedies for the mind, and not for the body, and yet
notwithstanding, I suppose, I have taught thee the only cure of this disease.
If thou like it, use it: if not, the use of fomentations otherwise framed, will
not deceive thee: For patience is the most effectual, and present, and many
times the only remedy in adversity.


Sorrow. The pain of the gout has made me crooked.


Reason. Then art thou unable to go, and less meet to take pain: but not
unfit to do other things, not only apparteyning to thy private householde,
but also concerning the Common wealth, yea, and if need so require, of a
Kingdom or Empire. Wherefore, this only saying of Septimus Seuerus, Emperor
of Rome, is very famous and notable: who being an old man, and much subject
to the gout, when he had bewrayed the conspiracy of the nobility, that would
have made his son Emperor, while he was yet living, the aucthours of this
sedition, and also his some, being apprehended, and standing all dismayde,
trembling and shaking before his seat, looking for nothing but present death:
Seuerus lifting up his hand to his head, At length, quoth he, Ye shall
understand that it is my head, and not my feet that do govern.


Sorrow. I am marvelously, poor wretch, tormented with the gout.


Reason. Do not be wayle only the grief and sharpnes of things, but if there
have any pleasure or sweetness happened unto thee by them, think upon it,
whereby thou may comfort thy self in this adversity. Among all the evil
conditions of the common multitude, this is not the least, that as they are
whining and impatient in adversity, so are they forgetful and unthankful in
prosperity, then which there is nothing more injurious. For why? for example
sake, who is able with indifferent ears, either to hear the Emperor Seuerus,
of whom we spoke erwhyle, complain of his gout, or Domitian of his baldness,
which he took very grievously, or Augustus when he was old, of the
weakness of his left eye, or Julius Caesar of his fear in the night season,
and troublesome dreams, or, to be short, other very happy and honorable men,
in such sort complaining of one default of nature or other, if a man may so
term it, or injury of fortune, that they might seem to be unmindful of
their Empire, and riches, and conquestes, and so many and great commodities,
and yet to remember that they were men, for whom in this life to look or hope
for perfect and sound felicity, is but a mere madness. To mingle the sweet
with the sour, is a peculiar medicine against the gout, and a common remedy
against all diseases, which thou shall find to be very effectual, and wylt
confess to be good and virtuous counsel, if thou follow the advice of that
godly old man, who once attained unto great prosperity, and afterward tasted
extreme adversity: who by means of the benefits which he received at Gods
hands, learned to take all affliction in good part, although that same hand
can neither make nor give any evil: but he had only a respect unto the common
opinion of men.


Sorrow. The gout keeps me down in my bed, as if I were bound with knottes
that can never be undone.


Reason. While thou lies, thy mind may stand up, and survey the whole heaven,
earth, and sea.


Of Scabbes. The.Lxxxv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am grieved with paynefull Scabbes.


Reason. I marvel now no longer, if thou take in ill part those that be greefes
only, seeing thou also bewailest that wherewith there is some sweetness
mingled.


Sorrow. I am vexed with the grievous scab.


Reason. Some say, that it is wholesome to be scabbed. But for that I will not call
so woeful a thing by so good a name, I term it a token of health, or the way
leading to health. It is but a gentle thing, for that it is not long in coming
forth, whose issuing is sometime joined with no small tickling.


Sorrow. The dry scab molesteth me.


Reason. Thou need now no clock nor watch, for the same will awake thee in
the night, and call thee up unto thy necessary and honest affairs. For there
is none so slouthful, whom the payneful scab will not styr up, and make wakeful.


Sorrow. I am vexed with scabbes.


Reason. A base disease, but which has a noble cure: labor, pain, heat,
bathes, watching, diet, these are medicines against scabbes. If these will do no
good, thou must flee to the remedy of patience, which in all diseases is the
most profitable salve.


Sorrow. I am troubled with the paynefull and fylthie scab.


Reason. I deny neither of them. And whereas Publius said, that the sore feet
of one that had the Gout, were a paynefull rest, so on my word may thou
say, that a pair of scabbed hands, are a grievous business. But what wylt
thou say to this? The loathsommer the disease is, the comlier is the patience?
And how if out of a small discommoditie, thou reap great profit? This is one
of the things, that especially engender a contempt of this body, then which
is nothing more necessary for mankind.


Sorrow. I am al over infected with scabbes.


Reason. That thou art al scabbed, I think it be too true, and I stand in
great fear thereof: But perhaps this is more then thou would have said. For
thou meanest it of thy whole body, but there is an other kind of invisible
scabbe in your minds, to wit, covetousness and sensuality, and a certain
vehement uching to revenge and complain, which the more it is scratched, the
more it rages. This itche ye neither feel, or crave to have cured, so much
is your care less over your souls, then ouery our bodies.


Of watching. The.lxxxvi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Cannot sleep.


Reason. Watch then, and rejoice that the ryme of thy life is prolonged: For
between sleep and death there is small difference, but that the one lasts
but for a time, the other is perpetual. And therefore I cannot tell whether it
be not said properly enough, that sleep is a short death, and death a long
and everlasting sleep.


Sorrow. I have lost my sleep.


Reason. It must be provoked again, not by force, but by fair meanss. If thou
think to procure it, it will not be constrained. Go some other way to work,
give rest to thine head, and trouble not thy mind with cares, and it will come
unlooked for: when the mind is loose, and the body weerie, sleep will came
stealyng on.


Sorrow. My sleeps are often broken of.


Reason. Do as it is said Augustus Caesar was wont to do: when thou wakest
out of sleep, have some about thee to renew it again by readyng or tellyng of
tales. But if it be long of earnest and urgent cares, lay them aside, and
sleep will come: of which sort of cares Virgil speaks where he says, that
good cares do break sweet sleeps.


Sorrow. I can take no rest in sleep.


Reason. Neither shall thou then be terrified with dreadfuldreames, nor
surprised with suddeyne fear in the night. And although Aristotle hold
opinion, that the visions which wise men see in their sleep, be good, and
true in deed it is: Nevertheless, the one of these, who was nothing inferior
unto him in wit, but of greater aucchorine, and the other in all respects his
equal in holiness and patience, whom I mentioned erewhyle, endured great
extremity and trouble in their dreams. What others have fealt and suffered,
every one is priute unto himself, and can call his own bed to witness, of the
illusions and troubles which he has susteyn^d. Truly the one of these was
wont in his latter days to be terrified in his dreams, as it is written of
him. The other I made mention of not long since, where I entreated of rest and
quietness: who among other troubles of this life, complayneth of his suddayne
frightyng in sleep, and the terror of his visions and drcames.


Sorrow. I sleep not so well as I was wont.


Reason. Then thou lyuest longer then thou wast wont: for thus the learned
say, that as sleep is death, so watchyng is life.


Sorrow. Sickness has driven away my sleep.


Reason. Then health will bring it again.


Sorrow. Love has bannished my sleep.


Reason. Thou speak one thing twyse: For love is a sickness, and the
greatest sickness that is.


Sorrow. Fear has bannished away my sleep.


Reason. Security will reuoake it.


Sorrow. Old age has taken away my sleep.


Reason. Death approchyng will restore it.


Of the unquietness of dreams. The.lxxxvii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am disquieted with dreams.


Reason. If that be true which a certain wise man says, that dreams do
follow great cares, which is also confirmed by your writers: then cut of the
cause of the mischief, abandon cares, and dreams will vanish away, To what
purpose serve your manyfold cares, which are to none effect in so short a
life, whereof in the beginning I promised to entreat, and to declare that it
is bootlesse to forment it, and make it troublesome, and through your own
folly to disquiet your rest with dread^full dreams? Will ye overcome gods
providence with your own counsel? and do ye not perceive how your madness
and cousultations of that time, which is not only beyond your judgment, but
also your knowledge, are laughed at from an high? Neither do ye hacken unto
Horace, exclayming and crying out, that God of purpose does close up and hyde
the issue of the time to come, with the darkness of ignorance, and does laugh
him to scorn, if mortal man make have and run beyond that which is right
and lawful. Ye spend all your time upon your own destruction, being sorrowful
for the time past, careful for the time present, and fearful and tremblyng
for the time to to come, and ye gather unto your selves your hands full of
these superfluous and vnnessary cares, worthy of your deserts: by watchyng ye
bring unto your selves labor and pains, and by sleeping, dreams. But if
peradventure, that be true, that either the nature of man, or else sin
constrayneth the mind, being free and void of cares, to be disquieted with
dreams: is it not also as true, that when a thousand dreams are seen, yet
perhaps not one of them is true? Sins that we are then deceived with either of
them, it is better to be disquieted with dreams, then to be pleased and
delighted with them, and to dream of hurtful and unpleasant things, then of
sweet and pleasant. For the deceit of a sorrowful dream is joyful, and the
appearance of a merry and a cheareful dream, sorrowful.


Sorrow. I am weeried with dreams.


Reason. Despise all this foolyshnesse, and thou shall take thy rest. If thou
can not do that, then comfort thy self with those companions which have
suffered the like: namely with these twain of whom I told thee even now,
when thou dyddest complain of watchyng.


Of Importunate renown. The.lxxxviii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am more famous and better known then I would.


Reason. Do thou despise that, which the greatest captains, and Princes,
the Philosophers and Poets have wyshed for? For what is meant by so many
labors, what is pursued with so great wars and studies? And the most
excellent Artificers do intend nothing else. This does Phidias show in the
image of Minerua, the which work of all that ever were wrought with the
hands of men, I have placed and accounted as chief, or surely amongst the
cheifest, upon the which when he was forbidden to write any thing, he did so
ingraue his own countenance upon the buckler of the image, that it might both
be known of al men, and also could by no devise or policy be plucked from
thence, unless the whole work should be dissolved. He only wyshed to be
known for the reward of his labor, for if any man should say, that
artificers do not intend and think upon their renown, but only respect their
money, I would peradventure grant it in the common sort to be so, but in the
most famous and best, I deny it. There are many tokens and arguments of this
thing, for they do so persist and continue at their work, yea with the loss
of time and other hindrances, and they dispyse gain, to the end that nothing
may deminishe their credit and good name. The noble constancy of these four
Artificers, has especially proved this to be true, who being called to come to
that most renowned work, which Artemisia Queen of Caria with great cost and
charges caused to be set up in the memorial of her husband, when as the Queen
her self dyed in the mean while before the work was finished, at whose
hands the reward and price thereof was looked for, yet they continued and
went forward on their work with one consent unto the end, intendyng nothing
else now but their own fame and reputation, and a continual remembrance of the
deed. Therefore al men desire honor and renown: and do thou then look
above al other, to purchase them with small trouble and grief?


Sorrow. Yet truly, I also desire to be famous amongst my posterity, but I
refuse it of those which are of my time and age.


Reason. Why so, when as this is greater, and by so much the harder matter,
since envy does interrupt and infert the fame of those that are present.


Sorrow* Because amongst those that are absent, there is true and perfect glory,
none stirs or strives against them, no man withstandeth them: but amongst
those that are present, there is both gaynesaying, and hartburnyng, and labor:
For great labor is the preserver of great same, as one very aptly and fitly
says.


Reason. Thou art either to nice or else to sluggyshe, which would hope for
any great and notable thing, without labor and pains, when as for the least
and smallest things, so many labors are to be sustained.


Sorrow. I truly do not refuse labors, but it is weerisonmesse, and
loathsomeness, that I hate. For who can abide daily to be visited, to be wayred
upon, and compassed about of the multitude, to be sued unto, and to be
disquieted and troubled, and in the mean time careless and necligent of him
self, to spend whole days, and a great part of a short life, upon other, and
to let his own necessary affairs lie undone, and so to serve another man's
pleasure, and not his own turn? The which inconvenience and trouble, if it
had happened at the first, I had never atteyned unto this fame which does now
much molest me. But now it is time for me to restrain the notable endeavors
of my mind, and to stay my excellent affairs it were not now inconvenient and
out of season.


Reason. Truly I do not deny that to be so as thou say, and though it be
hard in deed, yet is it tolletable, yea to be enuyed, and yet to be wyshed
for. But howsoever t^ shall be taken in thine opinion, it is almost inevitable:
For what way is there to eschew it, unless it be either by pride or
slothfulness? Whereof the one shall drive away the honest desire of those that
gladly secke unto thee, and the other will utterly extinguish it. If there be
any other remedy at al, it is the fliyng of cities, albeit if it be true
renown, flight will not serve, for fame follows her possessor whyther soever
he shall go, and wheresoever he shall remain, she will be with him. He that has
been famous in the cities, shall neither in the country, nor in the wooddes,
leave of to be renowned, the brightness of fame cannot be hidden, it shyneth
in the darkness, and draws the eyes and minds of men unto it euerywhere.
Have thou not heard of Dandanus, a most famous old man of the Brachmans, how
he was often visited by Alexander of Macedonie, even in the farthest desattes
of the Indians? and likewise of Diogines Ciuicus, who was frequented also by
the same king, even unto his tubbe, which he used for an hospital, to be
removed and tumbled at his will? Have ye not heard that Scipio Africanus was
visited, in his filthy, forsaken, and baren village of Literne, by those quiet
and gentle thieves, for the honor and reverence of his virtue, and that he was
accompanied by the chief captains of his enemies beyond the seas? Have thou
not heard also, how Titus Liuius was followed unto the farthest parts of
France, and far from the uttermost confines of Spain. unto the city of Rome.
Lastly, have thou not heard how that the holy fathers were resorted unto as
far as the innermost and fearful dens of the wilderness, by the Roman
Emperors? I speak nothing of Solomon, but rather demand what visitations any
famous man ever wanted? Friends and acquaintance are delighted with mutual
communication and talk together: and strangers are recreated only with the
sight, and beholding one another. For the presence of noble and renowned men,
is a pleasant and delectable thing, the which none tastes, but he that
enjoys it: this do not thou call payneful, but I grant it to be difficult,
marie therewithal to be also glorious.


Sorrow. I am worn and consumed away with renown.


Reason. If thou wylt cast away this fame, virtue also is forsaken, from whose
root it spryngeth: But yt thou wylt not do so, then is it needful that thou
bear this burden with a patient mind, unto the which many could never aspire
with all their study, cost, and charges, al their life long: And thou
peradventure have attayued thereunto. Suffer therefore thy self to be seen of
those that would not desire to see thee, unless they did love thee, and thy
good name.


Sorrow. Many bring me into renown every where, even unto my grief and
loathsomnes.


Reason. What then, had thou rather to be despised, and counted an abject?


Sorrow. Innumerable men do honor me, even unto my great pain and grief.


Reason. Acknowledge then the gift of God: he does honor thee, to the end he
might both provoke thee to honor him, and also that it might repent thee that
at any time thou dishonouredst him: For all honor, and every good thing, what
soever is done of man to man, is of God.


Sorrow. Immoderate honor, and continual visitation, is a very troublesome
thing.


Reason. I grant this also: but love and reverence, which are the roots of
this trouble, are very sweet and pleasant: if thou wylt apply the taste of thy
mind unto these, they will begin to savor well, which now do thus disquiete
thee. Temper therefore the bitter with the sweet, and not in this only, but in all things whatsoever this present life brings, wherein thou shall not easily
find honye wherewith gal is not myngled, and more often the bitter exceeds
the sweet in quantity.


Sorrow. I am weeried with to much renown.


Reason. That truly often times happens, whereof we have also known, that
worthy and divine Vespasian, triumphing to have complained, when as he was
grieved with the solemnity of the glorious shows, blaming him self which
had so baynely desired a triumph in his old age, which was neither due to
him, nor of his auncetours hoped for. And although renown it self, be not to
be wyshed for of it own nature, yet it is to be borne withal, and loved, the
causes whereof are virtue and industry: neither are those to be forsaken at any
time, to the end thou may want this: for honest labor, is a thing much
more glorious, then sluggysh rest and quietness.


Sorrow. I am much offended with those that salute me by the way.


Reason. Thou have the Philisopher Crispus a partaker also of this grief. Nay
rather, whom can thou find at al, besides those that take pleasure and
delight in the common blastes and flatteries of the people, as the Poet Maro
speaks? Yet that noble man has complained hereof, I believe, for that he saw
how the common and sudden salutation of the peop^^ did trouble his mind, being
always most earnestly given to study: for such a one he is reported to have
been, and as he him self says, was therewith welnigh brought to his death. But
there is nothing whereof thou should now complain, that which thou did
wysh for, has happened unto thee, that is, that thou might be known unto the
common people, otherwise thou should not lie so open to the meetinges of
those that salute thee. Thou might have hydden thy self, thou might have
taken thy rest, thou might have rejoiced and delighted thy self in thine
own bosom, as they say, the which some do define to be the best kind of
life. But you would feign be known and famous in great cities, and therwithal
be both idel, free, and quiet, which is nothing else then to wi^h that ye might
remain immovable in a ship, in the great tempest and waves of the sea.
Lastly, it is the part of a proud and arrogant person, not to be able to suffer
patiently ye speech of his friends that reverence and obey him, seeing that
the reproaches of your enemies are to be suffered patiently.


Of sorrow conceived for the evil manners of men. The.lxxxix. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am sorry for the eu^l manners and conditions of men.


Reason. If t^^u be moved with love tow^rdes them, I praise thee, but if with
anger and indignation, I praise thee not. For what apparteyneth it unto thee,
what other men; manners are, so that thou thy self be good? Do thou now
first of all perceive the conditions of the common people? Or else do thou
think that thy life has provided to little business for thee, unless thou
have a care over the lives of other men, and so thou take that in hand, which
neither art, nor nature has been able at any time to bring to pass, wherein
thou may hope for nothing, but pains and greefes? Yet these have been the
studies and cares of certain philosophers, of whom one going forth into the
common assemblyes, did always weep, and the other on the contrary part,
evermore laughed at men's manners, and neither of them without a cause: howbeit,
that which the one did, tasted of compassion and godliness, and that which
the other did, of pride and insolency.


Sorrow. Who can abide these unruly and deceitful dispositions, and qualities
of men?


Reason. I had rather that thou should be dishonested by force, thou
would then abide them if it were necessary. Thou that can not suffer
others to be deformed, and out of order, yet suffer them to be apparelled as it
pleases them, and be thou apparelled as it likes thee best, and so thou shall
well revenge thy self. For honest qual^tyes do no less offend wanton eyes,
then dishonest behavior, the sober and modest beholders. Let them therefore
join pleasure with their affairs, but mingle thou honesty with thy matters
The light is no where more acceptable then in darkness, and virtue in no
place bryghter then amongst vices. Why therefore do thou complain, seeing
other men's filthiness shall increase thy coomlinesse?


Sorrow. Who can endure patiently these diseases of man's mind, and cheefely
these that are envious?


Reason. Leave the envious men to them selves, thou need require none other
formentor for them, for they sufficiently afflict them selves, both with their
own adversity, and are consumed away with others prosperity. Men ought not
therefore to pity those that faint and languyshe of their own free will,
seeing the diseases of the mind are not so infectious, as those of the body,
for they go not unto those that would not wyllyngly have them: but a noble
heart, is rather inflamed unto virtue, with the mislykyng and hatred of vices.


Sorrow. Who could suffer so much pride and insolency?


Reason. Humility is so much the more acceptable, by how much it is
besieged with greater pride.


Sorrow. Who could suffer so many deceiptes, so many crafts of covetousness?
or who could bear with so many kinds of lusts and desires?


Reason. Eschew those things that do displease thee woorthyly, and take
heed that others do not condemn that same in thee, which thou myslykest in
them.


Sorrow. Who could abide this kingdom of gluttony?


Reason. Sobr^etie is most beautiful amongst those that are moderate: Where
all are of equal goodness, there none excels other.


Sorrow. Who could abide patiently so many lies?


Reason. If thou be offended with lies, endeavor thy self to speak the truth.


Sorrow. Who could bear with so many tyrannies every where?


Reason. Neither weapons nor riches, can deliver thee: only virtue is free.


Sorrow. I hate all the world.


Reason. It behooves thee rather, to have pity on the miserable, then to hate
them, unless, as I have said before, they are miserable of their own
accord. But leave unto the world the manners thereof, and do thou study to
reform thine own, and cause men's eyes that are fastened upon others, to be
turned upon thee: so shall thou both escape grief, and also, when thou can
not amend the world, at leastwyse thou shall redress thy self, which is a
thing that thou can, and ought to do. Thus is there then no cause
wherefore thou should think thy self to have been borne in vain.


Of small greefes of sundry things. The.XC. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Utterly hate the troublesome noise and cries of diverse things in
Cities.


Reason. Then make much of the wooddes, and quietness of the country: those
things which cannot be escaped, why should thou go about to avoid?


Sorrow. I am weery with the strife and contentions of the common people.


Reason. As long as thou do give ear to the common sort of people, thou
shall never be at rest.


Sorrow. I am much troubled with the noise of the common people.


Reason. Esteem not the words of the commonaltie, for almost whatsoever it
speaks, it is either nothing, or else false. But if thou can not avoid al
their noise and disordered voices, hear them notwithstanding, though none
otherwise then as the bellowyng of Oxen, or the bleatyng of Sheep, or the
roaring of Bears: for what are they other, then the voices either of came or
wild beasts?


Sorrow. I am sore troubled with the terrible outrage of the common people.


Reason. Imagine in thy mind, that thou hear the sound of ouerflowing
waters, which fall upon rocks: persuade thy self, that either thou art beside
the Well Gorgia, where a most clear River flows out of a most horrible den
with wonderful noise: or where as the gulfes of Reatis, which the River Nar
carries into Tyber, do fall down from an high hyl: or whereas the River Nilus
powers down violently, to those places which are called Catadupa, as Cicero
says: or where as Hister, as in like manner it is reported, rusheth into the
Sea ^uxinum: or to be short, where the steep rocks of Liguria do accord to
the flowynges of the Mount Aetna, when as the South wind waxes fierce: or as
the crooked and wrested Charibdis, agrees with the barkyng Silla in Sicill
whyr^epooles. Eustome will bring to pass, that thou shall hear that with a
certain pleasure, which thou now iudgest to be most tedious.


Sorrow. I am vexed with the barkyng of Dogs.


Reason. He that has learned to suffer quietly the brawlyng of the common
people, can not myslyke the barkyng of Dogs, for there are neither so many
other kinds of Dogs, neither are they so mad and furious.


Sorrow. An unruly Horse, that is always neyghing, an unfaithful Servant,
that is evermore froward, are not only grievous and troublesome unto me, but
also dangerous.


Reason. I have told heretofore, what I did think of both those kinds of
creatures, and I am still of the same opinion: I add hereunto somewhat, to the
end therefore thou may avoid the grief and trouble of thy Horse, if
nothing else can help thee, then become a foot man: and that thy Servants
may agree and yield unto thee, thou shall bring it to pass, when thou
accountest him not worthy to be lamented, whom thou art well able to lack.


Sorrow. I am annoyed with Flies.


Reason. Take heed, least that through the annoyance of Flies, thou be made a
Fly in deed, and that thou thynkyng a Fly to be created of any other then of
GOD, thou come into the power and jurisdiction of him that is called the prince
of Flies: the which we read to have happened unto one that was grieved with the
like distress, the aucthor whereof is S. Augustine, who expounding that most
famous and notable beginning of John's Gospel, says, That the Fly, the Gnatte,
the Caterpiller, the Shearnbub, and the Caterpiller, and all such tyke
Vermin, were not created without just and good cause of him, who saw all
things which he had made, that they were very good. And if so be there were
no other cause, yet this one would suffice to abate the pride and hautinesse
of men's minds, as it were with these weapous. For GOD could have sen: unto
the Egyptians, Lions, Tigers, or Serpents: but he sent rather these small and
base creatures among them, to the intent both his heavenly power, and their
earthly frayletie and corruption, might be the more manifestly known.


Sorrow. I am disquieted with Fleas.


Reason. Take thy rest in wholesome and good cogitations, think that no evil
can happen to a man besides ^inne: For not only these gentle things, but also
those that seem most hard and grievous, have profited many. What dooest thou
know, whether if the Fleas should go their way, too much sluggishnesse or evil
lusts would succeed, and set upon thee? Believe that it is well with thee in all
things, and it shall be so.


Sorrow. I am overcome with the continual battle that the Fleas make with me
in the night.


Reason. Why art thou then proud, thou shadow and dust? Why art thou then
hautie and lofty, thou base clay? For being overcome with Fleas, thou
contendest against GOD, thou untamed and most foolyshe creature.


Sorrow. I am tormented with Fleas.


Reason. Wylt thou offend men, to defend thy self from Fleas? Thou being the
most noble creature, and far superior, set upon that most vile and base
beast, and being the meat of Fleas, thou deuourest men, the king of al
creatures.


Sorrow. I am tormented with Fleas.


Reason. Al earthly things, were made to obey and serve man, some to feed
him, and some to apparel him, some to carry him, and some to defend him, some
other to exercise and teach him, and some also to admonish him of his estate,
and last of all, some to delight him, to ease and recreate his mind, being
weeried with affairs, and certain also to rule and bridel his harmful and
dangerous delights, and with wholesome grieffes and troubles to work within
him a contempt of this life, and also a desire of a better. If this life were
void of cares and troubles, how much, I pray thee, would death be feared? or
how much would this life please mortal men, when as, being full of sorrows and
afflictions, it so delights them, which then it would much more do, if
nothing were to be feared? For neither the sweetness of life is always
profitable to him that lives, nor the pleasure of the way to the traveler:
and it is expedient sometimes, that some hard and paynefull accident happen by
the way, that the end may be the more desired.


Sorrow. The night birds, with their mournyng tunes, are odious unto me.


Reason. As I suppose, it is not the Nyghtingale, which as Virgil says,
weepeth all the night, and sittyng upon a bough, begins her sorrowful song,
and fylleth all the places abroad with her careful and grievous complayntes.
For mournyng is sweet, and verses are delectable, and complayntes are
pleasant. Peradventure the mourneful Shrychowle disturbeth thee, or else the
imfamous Owl, which is not only ill spoken of, by means of his own most
hateful song, but also by the wrytynges of the Poets: which notwithstanding,
how much they have been esteemed for joyful divination and coniecturing of
things to come here in fore times. Thou may read in Josephus, although they
be both ridiculus, that is to say, either to conceive hope or fear thereby.
For the sad countenance of this byrd, and of many others, and also his
sorrowful song, which are both natural, they do not so utter, to the end to
declare or foreshewe any thing thereby, but because they do not know how to
sing otherwise. Give unto them the voice of a Nyghtyngale, and they will mourn
more sweetly: but now they obey their own nature. As for you, ye endeavor
by dotyng, to constrayne your nature unto your superstitious desires.


Sorrow. The Owl that sytteth all the night long in the next Turret, is very
offenciue unto me.


Reason. Thou have heard, how that there was an Owl that woonted to disquiet
Augustus in the night: And whom, I pray thee, will he fear to trouble, which
disquieted the Lord and ruler of all the world?


Sorrow. The Myse disturb me in my Chamber.


Reason. What can thou tell whether they were bred in the same Chamber,
wherein thou now lie as a stranger? and therefore they may more justly
complain of thee, who being a new come gheast, disturbest them in their
native soil. But to leave iestyng, there is one reason of them all. This is
the cause that your life is troubled by them, that you might learn to wyshe
for the life to come: and that your minds might be settled there, where there
are neither Myse, nor Rattes, nor Thieves, nor Spiders, nor Moathes, nor
losses, nor any other tediousness of life to molest you.


Sorrow. The croakyng Frogs, and chirping Grasshoppers, disquiet me.


Reason. Imagine that they prepare comfort for thee, and then it shall be
comfort. A man's opinion alters any thing as it lust, not changing that which
is true, but governing the judgment, and rulyng the senses. There was a
certain man of late days, who dwelling in the country, used to go abroad
with as many stones and libbets as he could bear, both in the day time, and
also rising in the night, to drive away the Nyghtingales from singing: but when
that way he profited nothing, he caused the trees about to be cut down, to the
intent that being disappoynted of their green and pleasant harbors, they
might be enforced to depart: but when they notwithstanding continued their
singing there, he him self at length was constrained to forsake the place, for
that he could not sleep, nor take any rest there. Nevertheless, he could
abide to lie upon the banks of the Brooks that ran hard by, to hear the
nyghtly croaking of the Frogs and Toades, in the fennes and moors, whose
most uncertain noise, he used most greedily to listen unto, as it had been the
most delicate harmony of Vialles or Virginalles: truly a very strange and
savage nature in men, and scarce worthy to be reekoned among the number of
men, being also in other manners answerable perhaps unto these which thou
have heard, yet not so mad in other vulgar affairs: which example is now
come to my remembrance, that thou may perceive how great a stroke opinion
bears in all things.


Sorrow. I am grieved with the noise of Frogs and Grasshoppers.


Reason. They do it not truly to grieve thee, but they use the common
benefit of nature. But the same offends your proud impatience, as all other
things do, whatsoever is done or said otherwise then is pleasant unto your
eyes and ears. But that I may refer the folly of your error unto the
ancient fables, think now, either that the Frogs do renew their old
complaynte, and call upon Latona their revenger, in their hoarse voice, or
that the Grasshoppers do with joy repeat the name of Titonus, in their
schriching tune, and therefore thou may suffer them to plie their business,
and plie thou thine own. Why are ye offended with the innocent living
creatures, being always injurious to nature, and in the mean while, perceive
not how much more greater the greefes be, wherewith ye torment one another? I
speak nothing, neither of the spoylers of Cities, nor of a thousand other
means of iniuryng, of dooyng violence, and of deceyuyng, whereof all the
streets and feeldes are full. I speak nothing of Thieves, that are dispersed
over all quarters of the world, nor of murderers with their rough and craggie
bywayes, by means of whom the greater part of the earth lies void from
trauaylers, and the most beautiful syghtes of the world lie hydden from men's
eyes, which is now a matter winked at, and grown to strength through a most
wretched custom. Who is able with condign complayntes to set forth, or with
convenient words to utter the heavy weight of humane slothfulness, for
that also even in civil and quiet countries, as a man would say, lawful
Thieves be found every where, who spoil and rob the careful wayfaryng man,
that is broken with travail, and weeryed with grief, both of all his wares
and money, I know not under the color of what most unjust right? Whereby it
is now come to pass, that that which was wont to be most pleasant, to
wander over all the world, the same in some places is now a most dangerous
matter, and in all places chargeable and paynefull. Thus your Princes, and
Fathers of their Country, yea, your patience, and your public liberty, are
for a small price become contemptible. What shall I speak of your vain
watches, of your privy walkynges, and all other things full of sundry kinds
of suspicion, and how the use of learning, which is the only comfort in a
man's absence, is forbidden? Which thing, for that it can not be remedied, must
be suffered with a valiant mind. Howbeit, as he does not refuse to suffer the
works of nature, who by this time ought to have learned to suffer so many
insolences, so many cruelties, so many cruel outragies, so many rapines
committed by men: the same man also shall soon perceive how injuriously dame
nature is daily torn in pieces for small tryfles, seeing that one man is
constrained to suffer so many bitter and grievous touches at another hands.


Sorrow. I am plagued with extreme heat.


Reason. Stay a while, for the sharpness of Winter is coming apace, which
will abandon this tediousness.


Sorrow. I am sore vexed with c^^de.


Reason. Behold, Summer makes haste, that will take away the bytternesse
thereof.


Sorrow. I am grieved with cold.


Reason. There is scarce any discomm^ditie to be found, for which nature has
not provided a remedy. And many times there be sundry remedies found for one
grief: these things followyng keep away cold: the house, clothes, meat,
drink, labor, and exercise. There is seldom any overcome with cold, unless
before he be overcome by slothfulness. I am ashamed to reckon up fire among
the remedies against cold, which is a great argument of humane idleness. It is
nothing so easy a matter, with a wet lynnen cloth to draw away water that is
mingled with wine in an whole Hoggeshead, as it is to separate sluggardes from
good husbands at a good fire in the Winter season, thither run all they that
have neither blood, nor courage of mind: a man may then behold, if he have a
delyght to see it, our youth, to the intent they would seem fair, to deforme
them selves against the fire, by making their bodies naked from the navel
downwarde: for whom how much were it more honest and seemly to cover their
privy parts, then by scorching their thyghes and buttockes against the flame,
to annoy the senses of the standers by, with their loath some stynke.


Sorrow. At one time I quake, and at another I sweat.


Reason. I easily believe thee, for I know thy manners, and whiles thou art
speaking, I will tell thee what comes into my mind. The history is but new,
and short: In France there was a father and his son apprehended for treason,
and judged to be executed, according to the manner of the country, by standing
in a Caudron wherein they should be boiled to death. Now it was winter, and
when they were both put naked and bound into the cold water, the young man
began to quake, and chatter his teeth for cold: but when once the water began
to wax hot by means of the fire that was made under it, then began he also
by grievous lamentation and weepyng to declare his impacience of the heat. But
on the othersyde, the old man persisting immovable in both, and lookyng upon
him with a stern countenance, Thou son, quoth he, of a most vile whore,
can thou abide neither cold nor heat? A saying truly, perhaps of an
evil, yet of a constaunt and valiant mind, and well deseruyng that the
speaker thereof, should leap unhurt out of the deadly Caudron: But most
convenient for your youth to learn, then whom there is nothing more effeminate
nor tender, who in the Summer do curse the sun like the Atlantes, and in the
winter season woorshyp the fire as do the Caldees.


Sorrow. The snow molesteth me.


Reason. Those that be nice do also loath delicate things: Howbeit some have
counted it a most beautiful matter to see snow fall without wind, and truly
if there be any thing fairer then snow, yet verily there is nothing whyter.


Sorrow. We are troubled sometime with to much heat, and sometime with to
much cold: at one time with overmuch drought, and at another with to much
rain.


Reason. Some say that Alexander was most impatient of heat, and no marueyle,
for he could not endure prosperity nor adversity: and contrariwyse, they say
that Hannibal could indifferently away both with heat and cold: Why do not
thou also take unto thy self some one part, though it be of unlike praise? He
could suffer both well, and can thou endure neither? This good does pleasure
bring you at the beginning, which does soften you, and make you effeminate,
and as I may truly say, geld your minds, so that you dare not only not abide
your enemies swoordes or death, but also not so much as the ayryal
impressions. I cry still, but always I cry in vain unto you, for that I
cry unto deaf folks. Leave unto nature her own office: she does nothing
without the counsel of the most highest. You ignorant fools, there is not one
drop of water that falls upon the earth more or less then is expedient: and
although that every particular man's lust be not satisfied, yet is there
general provision made for the safety of all men.


Sorrow. I am grieved on the one side with dirt, on the other with dust, here
with clouds, there with winds and thunder.


Reason. The diversity of the earth follows the diversity of heaven: moist
air breeds dirt, and dry air dust, so likewise by moving of the air come
wyndes, of vapors clouds, of winds and clouds, tempests and thunder are
engendered. Who so knows the causes of things, and shows him self obedient
unto nature, shall not bewail the consequence of effects. And although there
be great question among some, concerning the wyndes: nevertheless does not the
air (that is moved with no wind) seem unto thee in a manner half dead? in
so much that some (not unaptly,) have termed the wind a soul, or a spirit?
As for dust, thou see how that among men of valor, it is counted sweet:
which also virtue only has by diverse operation, caused that as much may be
believed also of dirt. Thunder and lyghtnyng, with such other like forcible
motions of heaven, what be they other then the threats and warninges of the
most mercyful God? Who truly unless he had loved man, would not threaten
him, but stryke him, seeing that he never lacks many and just causes to
stryke him in deed. That these things apparteyne unto the terrif^yng of men,
but specially of those that rebel against God, not only the Poet, who was
skylfull of the secrets of nature, does signify, but also the Prophetisse,
which seemed to be privy of Gods counsel says: The adversaries of the Lord
shall fear him, and he shall thunder upon them from heaven. O ye the
adversaries of the Lord, stand in fear of the true thunderer, labor to come
into his favor, that being reconciled into freendshyp with God, ye fear
nothing but to displease him. Do ye this rather, and leave complaynyng.


Sorrow. I am sorry for this dark and cloudie weather.


Reason. No tempest continues long, and after fair weather come clouds, and
after clouds fair weather comes again, and one of them immediately follows
another, and that which is so short, should be suffered without complayntes.


Sorrow. I am offended with the clouds.


Reason. This offense is a certain kind of warnyng, namely that hereby thou
may make provision against darkness, which is now but transitory, since
thou take it in so ill part, least happily thou be constrained to endure
everlasting darkness.


Sorrow. I am troubled with fire from heaven, with hayle and storms.


Reason. These and such like, make unto an wholesome fear, or if ye contemn
them, unto revenge. Hear this one thing: Fire, Brymstone, and the breath of
storms, are the portion of their cup. Hear also another saying: Fire, hayle,
famine, and death, al these make to revenge.


Sorrow. I am frighted with tempests of the sea.


Reason. Do not herein accuse nature, but either thine own folly, or
covetousness: for who constrayneth thee thereunto?


Sorrow. I am molested with dark clouds, and contrary winds.


Reason. Thou wast borne in darkness, and in darkness shall thou dye, and
lyuest between the wyndes of contrary tempests: learn to suffer that at
length, which thou always suffer perforce.


Sorrow. I am shaken with thunder and lyghtnyng.


Reason. Herein there is more then weerisomnesse. In the first truly a great
fear, contemned of none but of some fools: but in the second, is death. And
therefore some have judged, that none complain of lyghtnyng but such as want
experience. And, who is so mad, I pray thee, unless he be to far gone, that
stands not in fear of them both, seeing that among the ancient Romans,
which were a most valiant kind of people, it was provided by an ancient
statute, that there should be no assemblies of the people holden to choose
officers, or otherwise, whiles Jupiter thundered from heaven? Howbeit unless
this fear tend to the amendment of life, it is unprofitable. For what can
fear avail, where there is no redress of the thing feared? Wherefore, the
matter must be thus applied, that although it thunder and lyghten by natural
causes, nevertheless it must be judged to be a warnyng from him, who being
tied unto no causes, is him self the fountain and cause of al causes. To this
end therefore does he thunder in heaven, that thou should live well upon
the earth, and driuyng away forgetfulness, acknowledge the wrath of God, and
do that at leastwyse for fear, which thou ought too do for love. Complain
not a like of good and evil things, it is expedient for you, believe me, that
it thunder often, and it is left in writing unto posterity, that it thundreth
very often the same year wherein the assured adversary of God and al
godliness, ( Domitian the Emperor) died: not that ye should cry out as he
did, Let him now strike whom he lust: but that ye may appease the wrath of God
with penitent tears, and humble prayer.


Sorrow I am grieved with the conversation and mirth of drunkardes.


Reason. That wine makes glad the heart of man, and that Bacchus is the geuer
of mirth, although David and Virgil had never spoken it, very experience makes
it known. And although yt likewise be true, which not so eloquent, but a more
holy Poet spoke, The flowyng of a river cheareth the city of God: yet is there
more fervent joy and joyful gladness, as the Philosophers term it, in a few
caskes of strong wynes, then in many streams of running water which are
contained within the ryuers: and I confess, that there is nothing more
lamentable then the mirth of drunkardes, and nothing more vain then typlers
and Tauerners, whom Cicero very well calls the dregs of cities: which
notwithstanding a man must suffer, or else he must forsake cities, or otherwise
fly from the market and place of judgment, or at the leastwyse from the
streets and haunt of Tauernes, even as he would do from so many rocks.


Sorrow. I am oppressed with resort and importunate concurse of citizens.


Reason. It is a savage and unnatural wyshe, to seek thy countries
desolation, that thou thy self may live at liberty: For the very same
cause, as thou know, in the old time was the sister of Appius Claudius
punished, and she that was last celebrated among writers for an innocent: and
truly as this is an ungodly wish, and deserves punishment, so to avoid the
weerisomnes of thronges and cities, and it (occasion so require,) to depart
awhile out of the way, is a point of modesty, and frequented of the wise.


Sorrow. I am grieved with a long suite, and slow judgment.


Reason. To what end was daying of matters devised, but to end strife, and to
remedy the slacknes of judgment?


Sorrow. I am worn with woeful and troublesome strife.


Reason. Thou have used apt and convenient terms for thy self: For where
strife and contention is, there can be nether joy, nor quietness. Thou, if
thou wylt live out of strife, avoid the cause of strife. Covetousness
engenders contention, and nourishes it when it is engendered.


Of an earthquake. The.xci. Dialogue
SORROW. I Am afraid of an earthquake.


Reason. This is, I confess, a great discommoditie of dame nature, and not
without cause abandoned of al parents, which although it be more grievous, yet
for that it happens but seldom, the rareness thereof may stand in some
steed of a remedy. Many times the sorrowful countenance of heaven foretells
an earthquake at hand, but precisely there is no token nor forewarnyng
thereof, although it be reported that Pherecydes foretold of one to come by
drynkyng a draught of water out of a well. Moreover against the threatenings of
heaven, caves under the ground perhaps do yield some succor, the like
whereof we read was Augustus Caesar's den, into which he fled for fear of
thunder, which is yet seen at Rome in the way Flaminia, and keeps the
aucthours name unto this day: but from an earthquake no flight can serve, no
lurkyng places can prevail. For poor man (that is made of the earth) whyther
shall he fly out of the earth? or what shall become of him if the heaven thunder
over him, and the earth tremble under him, unless perhaps some will advise him
to go to the sea, which is also partaker of the variety of heaven and earth,
and also unquiet by it own motion?


Fear. Thou tellest me no remedies as thou wast wont to do, but amplifiest
the dangers.


Reason. I supposed thou would think so, and doubtless so it is in deed.
There be some things that may be dissembled, and extenuated in words, that
although by report they have seemed grievous, yet in effect they may appear at
one time tolerable, at another contemptible: and truly this whereof I now
entreat is such a one, as by it own force it refuses the arguments of man's
eloquence, but one comfort, as I have said, is the seldomenesse thereof. Thou
have seen welnygh an whole age without any earthquakes, during which time
there is no doubt but that there have dyed innumerable, who in all their life
time, though they have heard the name of so terrible a matter, yet never were
made afearde with the sight thereof. But who is not moved when he hears or
reedeth, either those ancient histories, or these of latter time, the memory
whereof is extant, either in the books of histories, or yet ryfe in the minds
of men that saw them, when as long sense upon one and the self same day, both
the city of Rhodes was shaken with an horrible earthquake, and also new
Islands rose up from the bottom of the sea, and moreover twelve ancient cities
in Asia were overthrown, and some also swallowed up into the earth. After
that, the same mischief raged also in Achaia and Macedonia, and last of all in
Campania, the most bewtiful part, I say not of Italy only, but also of all the
world, much about Senecas time, who makes mention thereof among his natural
questions, when as by the same most cruel outrage Herculaneum and the Pompe^j,
which are most famous cities of those quarters, yea and Naples it self, was
not a little molested, as thou may read. Shall I prosecute all examples
touching this matter? Truly that were an infinite work Of late days thou
might have seen the Alps, which reach unto the clouds and divide Italy
from Garmanie (who as Virgil says, do never move) to stir and quake, and in
many places to be overthrown, and immediately after, the queen of al cities
grievously shaken, even to the utter subuerting of the towers and churches
thereof, and also some laid flat with the ground. And not long after this, as
it were for a continuance of the misery, it is well known how that the best
and most fertile part of al Germany, namely the whole valley of the Rhine was
shaken, and upon the shore thereof standing the city of Basile, and also
castles and fortresses, to the number of four score and upward, utterly
overthrown. Truly an horrible matter, were it not that death were the most
terrible of al terrible things. Who so has learned not to fear that, will
fear nothing, and as the Poet Horace says excellently well, If all the world
should fall, though the pieces thereof struck him, he would not be a fearde.
For what skilleth it whether a little stone fall upon thee and brain thee, or
the most mighty mountain Apeninus crushe thee, to death, so thou be slain by
any of them? or the whole world break and fall upon thee, seeing there is but
death in neither? Unless perhaps some will count that death to be the more
honorable, which is procured by the greater instrument. Wherefore to conclude,
this is the sum of mine advice, forasmuch as we have also set down some
remedies against lyghtnyng, and all other mischeefes are relieved either by
resistyng or giving place unto them, and it falls out contrariwyse in this,
that neither flight avails, neither wit nor force can prevail, it were good
above al things to lay away the fear of death, which only makes al things
dreadeful: which thing to do, I confess, is very hard in deed to speak,
but yet not impossible to do. And forasmuch as there is no time nor place free
from this heavy chance, men ought to prepare and arm their minds with all
patience against whatsoever may happen, either by course of nature, or by
fortune, at al times and places, which cannot possibly be done, unless there
be also adjoined the love of virtue, and fear of vice. To conclude, seeing
that not only the heavens are in continual motion, and the elements threaten
you round about, but also the earth, upon which you tread, which also was
hoped to be without al danger, and a most assured rampire, is sometime shaken,
deceives, and puts in fear her inhabitants, I exhort you to flee with
your minds up to heaven, and among al these shakinges and quakinges of things
and men, to repose al your hope in him, who looks down upon the earth, and
makes it to quake, of whom it is written, I am the Lord, and I am not changed.
Whosoever fasteneth upon him the footestepes of a devout mind, is safe and
sound, and shall never be moved himself, nor stand in fear of any earthquake.


Fear. I cannot choose but be moved and feared with earthquakes.


Reason. Can thou remoone al thy hope and mind from the earth? Do so, and
thou shall live out of fear, and stand vpryght whether that shake or fall. For,
to repose assured trust in a quaking and unconstant thing, is a great folly.


Of the plague far and wide raging. The.xcii. Dialogue.
FEAR. I Am afraid of the plague, which rages far and wide.


Reason. In this also is nothing else but the fear of death, which being cast
of, thou have purchased perfect security, which fear ought not only to be
laid down of valiant minds, but also never be admitted: for what is less
the part of a man, then to fear common things?


Fear. I am afeard of the plague.


Reason. Forasmuch as thou must needs dye, what shall thou loose or gain by
dying of the plague, but that thou shall dye with more company? but if thou
escape, that thy life be the sweeter unto thee, since that thou art delivered
out of so great a danger, if so be it be danger, and not nature to dye: for the
plague sweepeth not away al, which if it had been so, there should none have
escaped this last great plague, a more sorer then which there was never any
since the beginning of the world. But many escaped, who it had been better
they had dyed: whereof it comes, that as thou now see, the world is
pestred with these kinds of dregs as it was wont to be, which never any
plague nor death is able to consume, they are so clodded and baken.


Fear. I fear the plague.


Reason. Say rather as the truth is, thou fear death, whereof, for that I
see thee so prone unto complaints, I purpose to entreat before I make an end
of this book: For, this only exepted, wherefore should thou abhor the name
of the plague, seeing (as I have said) it is rather a kind of comfort to die
with many?


Fear. I stand in dread of the plague.


Reason. If it be a certain kind of love and charity toward mankind that
draws thee hereunto, I have cause to commend thee: for there is nothing more
besettyng a man, then to take compassion upon the miseries of men. But if it be
for thine own sake only, I may justly blame thee: for wherein can the plague
hurt thee that art a mortal man, but to bring thee to that whereunto thou must
needs come? unless perhaps thou count this among the discommodities thereof,
not to be solemly mourned for, which happens unto them that dye so, and thou
count them more happy, who are recited by Virgil to assend most bewailed of
their friends up into heaven.


Of sadness and misery. The.xciii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am sad.


Reason. A man must consider for what cause he is sad or merry. These, as many
things else, may be termed indifferent matters, which upon small occasion may
be made good or bad. For sadness for sin is good, so that it join not
hands privily with desperation: and joy for virtue and the remembrance of good
works done, is commendable, so that it set not the gate wide open to pride:
and therefore the causes of these affectes must be first considered, least
happily disprayse possess the place of commendation: and therefore weygh thou
now what cause thou have to be sorrowful.


Sorrow. I am heavy for the misery of this life.


Reason. The felicity of the life to come shall make thee merry: for this life
is not so miserable, which in deed is most miserable, as the other is happy
and glorious.


Sorrow. I am heavy.


Reason. Of this mischief there are as many roots, as there are things which
you term adverse and miserable, of many of which sort we have alredie
entreated, and for that I perceive thee to be ready to complayntes, we have
likewise hereafter much to entreat of. Some times a man shall perceive no
apparent cause at all, neither of sickness, nor loss, nor injury, nor shame,
nor errors, nor of any sudden rumor of such like matter, but only a certain
pleasure to be sorry, which makes the soul sad and heavy. Which
mischief, is so much the more hurtful, by now much the cause is the more
unknown, and the cure more difficult. And therefore Cicero wylleth men to flee
from the same with all their might and maine, yea with all their sail they can
make, as from a most dangerous rock of the Sea: whose counsel in this, as in
many other things, I like well of.


Sorrow. The thinking of the present misery, makes me heavy.


Reason. That the misery of mankind is great and manifold, I do not deny,
which some have bewailed in whole great volumes: but if thou look to the
contrary part, thou shall also see many things, which make this life happy
and pleasant, although there be none hitherto, so far as I know, that has
written of this matter, and some that have taken it in hand, have given it
over, for that whiles they have been in the very course of their writing, they
have perceived how wrong a match they have undertaken, and that the argument
has fallen out to be much more barren then they first supposed: and the
rather, for that the misery of mankind appears to be evident, and the
felicity thereof seems to be very small and hydden, so that in discourse of
disputation, it requires a deeper displaying and examination, then that the
incredulous sort are aable to conceive. And now out of many matters to
geather one sum together, have not you great cause to reoyce? First, for
that you are the image and likeness of GOD your Creator, which is within in
the soul of man, your wit, memory, providence, speech, so many inventions,
so many arts attendyng upon this soul of yours: and next, how many
necessities do follow this your body, which all are comprehended under the
most singular benefit of GOD: also so many opportunities, so many sundry
shows and kinds of things, which by strange and marvelous means do serve
to your delyght: moreover, so great virtue in roots, so many juices of
herbs, such pleasant variety of so many sorts of flowers, so great
concord of smelles, and colors, and castes, and soundes rysyng of contraries,
so many living creatures in the air, upon the land, and in the sea, seruyng
only to your use, and created only to do man pleasure. And unless you had
of your own accord voluntarily fallen under the yoke of sin, you had now
been governors over all things that are under heaven. Add hereunto moreover,
the prospect of the Hills, the opennesse of the Valleys, the shadowie Wooddes,
the cold Alps, the warm Shoars. Add also so many wholesome Streams of water,
so many sulphurious and smookyng Lakes, so many clear and cool Fountaynes, so
many Seas within and round about the earth, so many confines and bounds of
Kingdoms, which are every day changed, and some most assured for their
immovable stabilitie. Add lastly some Lakes, as bygge and broad almost as the
Sea, and Pondes lying in bottomes, and Rivers falling down headlong from the
tops of Hills, with their brinkes full of flowers and pleasant herbs: And
the bedchambers of the shoares, and Meadows green, with runnyng Streams, as
Virgil says. What shall I need to speak of the foming Rocks that lie upon
the soundyng shore, and the moist Dens, and the Fields yellowe with Corn,
and the buddyng Vineyardes, and the commodities of Cities, and the quietness
of the Country, and the liberty of Wildernesses? And also the most glorious
and bright spectacle of all, which is the circumference of the starrie
Firmament, that continually turns about with incomprehensible swiftness,
wherein are fastened the fixed Stars? Likewise the wanderyng lyghtes, which
you call the seven Planettes, And especially the Sun and Moan, the two most
excellent lyghtes of the world, as Virgil terms them, Or the most glorious
beauty of Heaven, as Horace speaks of them? By these consist the fruits of
the earth, by these the strength and force of living creatures, of these also
depend the variety of seasons, by these we measure the year, the months,
days, nyghtes, and spaces of times, without which this life could not be
other then weerisome and tedious. Hereunto moreover, there is given unto you a
body, which although it be frail and transitory, yet notwithstanding in
show is imperious and beautiful, fashioned vpryght, and convenient in
contemplation to behold the heavens. Again, the immortality of your soul,
and a way prepared for you unto heaven, and an inestimable merchandise bought
for a small price, with other matters also, which of purpose I have deferred
to the end, for that they are so great, that of my self I was not able to
comprehend them, but only through the benefit of faith: likewise, the hope
of rysyng again from death, and taking up of this body, after that it is
rotten and consumed, to be quickened again, and made lively, and bright
shynyng, and impassible with great glory and majesty: and moreover, that
which surpasses not only the dignity of man, but also of the Angels, the
nature of man so united to the nature of GOD, that GOD himself became man, and
being made but one person, comprehended perfectly in himself the two natures,
and was both GOD and man, to this end, that being made a man, he might make
man a GOD. An unspeakable love and humility in GOD, exceedyng felicity and
glory unto man, all manner of ways an high and secret mystery, a
wonderful and comfortable society, which I know not whether any heavenly
tongue can express, but sure I am, no mortal mouth is able to utter. Does
the state of mankind seem unto thee by this means but smally advanced, and
the misery thereof but a little relieved? Or what, I pray thee, could man, I
say not hope, but wyshe or imagine better for his own commodity, then to be
made GOD? And behold he is GOD. What remains there more that you might wyshe
for, or desire, or invent, or think upon yet greater then you have alredie
obtained? Truly, at what time the divinity and Godhead humbled himself to
work your salvation, although he could, yet would he not take upon him any
other then the body and soul of man, neither would he impart the union of his
Godhead unto the shape of the Angels, but of men, to the end that thereby
thou myghtest understand, and rejoice, how dearly thy Lord and GOD loves
thee. For by this means, as S. Augustine says notably, has he revealed unto
those that are in the flesh, which are not able in mind to discern the
truth, and are altogether lead by the bodyly senses, how high a place man's
nature possesses among al creatures: Yea, over and besides all this, he, who by
this marvelous and merciful vouchsafeing preferred you before the Angels, set
Angels also over you, to keep and defend you, that by all means he might
declare your excellency above all other creatures. For S. Jerome says, That
your souls are of such estimation, that every one at their first creation,
has an Angel appointed unto him, for his defense and safegarde. Truly GOD
has a fatherly, and more then a fatherly care over you: and a little to wrest
the saying of the Satyrike Poet, He loves man more dearly, then his own
self. What place for sadness and complayntes is there left among these
blessings? Wherefore, it is not your nature, but your fault, that makes you
heavy and complaynyng.


Sorrow. The baseness of my birth, the frayltie of my nature, and nakedness,
and poverty, and hardness of fortune, and shortness of life, and uncertainty
of my end, do make me heavy.


Reason. Of purpose ye seek matter to make your selves sad, when as ye ought
otherwise to endeavor to the contrary, that ye might rejoice in honest
gladness: But I know your custom, ye be very dilygent to procure your own
harms. And therefore, concerning the baseness of thy birth, or deformity of
thy body, whatsoever is amplified upon that ground by the wit and invention
of any, when as the general resurrection shall come, which men of vpryght
faith do undoubtedly look for, shall not only be taken away, by the
woorthynesse of the gloryfying of the bodies, but also be diminished by the
present beauty, and the singular Majesty wherewith GOD has endued man, above
all the works of his hands: For, wherein can the baseness of birth
disparage the dignity of man? Do not tal and spreadyng Trees which grow
upon filthy roots, cover the green fields with their pleasant shadow? Do
not the rankest Corn spryng from most filthy dunge? and yet so vile an
increase of so excellent a thing is not contemned? You are the corn of GOD,
that must be cleansed upon the floor of his judgment, and be laid up in the
barn of the great Master of the household, although your original come from
the earth, and in some part it be excellent, and of an heavenly nature: but let
it be what ever it will, and be the increase never so difficult, yet the last
restyng place thereof is Heaven. What shall we say unto the nakedness and
imbecilitie of the body, and the pynchyng want of many things, which are
ascribed unto the reproach of man's estate? Are they not supplied by the
assistaunce of sundry arts, and manifold provisions, so that they may be
rather applied unto the glory of man, then to his misery? Which appears to
be true, in that dame Nature has provided for all other living creatures that
want the use of Reason, a thycke hyde, claws, and hair to cover them withal:
but unto man, she has given only understanding, to be a mean to find out
all other things withal, to the end that the brute beasts might be in
safety, by means of an outward defense, but man by his own inward
purueyance: and the first should have as much as was borne with them, and no
more, but man, as much as he could by experience of living and meditatyng
with him self, compass by his wit. In like manner, if a Master give any
vaintie meat unto his Servants and Hindes, he deuideth unto every one his
portion by him self, but unto his wife and child he gives none, so that the
Servants must have no more then that which was given them, but the other may
take as much as they list: thus is the one sort stinted, and the other are at
their liberty. Thus then, when these other creatures wax bald, either by
means of old age, or manginesse, or have sore eyes, or fall lame, we see they
have none other remedy, but that which is mnistred unto them by men: but man,
being of himself naked, is clothed and beautified, and if need require, is
also armed with his wit: and if he chance to fall lame, or be weak, then he
rides upon an Horse, or sayleth in a Ship, or is carried in a Couche, or
leaves upon a Staff: To be short, he assayeth all means to help and ease
him self, yea though he have lost some lym, he practices to make him self
legs of Wood, hands of Iron, nose of Wax, and providing against all
mishaps, if he wax sick, he helps him self with medicines, and with diverse
sauces he quickneth his dull taste, with medicines for the eyes he clears the
dullness of their sight, in which thing ye have devised more wisely then did
your forefathers, who, Anneus Seneca writes, used to occupy vessels of Glass
full of water, which is a game very delectable unto nature, who is a pleasant
and sweet mother, in that she restores that unto her child, which she took
from him, and when she has made him sorry, she comfort him again. Yea,
over and above this, the Horse, the Ox, the Elephant, the Camel, the Lion, the
Tiger, the Parde, and all other beasts, of what strength so ever they be, when
they are once old, are no longer regarded, and when they be dead, they are no
more heard of, they yield unto old age, and give place unto death: only
virtue, which is proper unto man alone, makes him that is endued therewith,
honorable in his old age, and glorious at his death, and not being able to
extynguyshe him, transporteth him over unto felicity. To be short, there are
some living creatures stronger then man, some swyfter, some quicker of sense,
none more excellent in dignity, none in like sort regarded of the creator.
Unto the head he has given a Sphericall figure, and as it were the form of a
Star. And whereas all other living creatures look down toward the
ground, he made man to turn his face vpwardes, and to behold the heavens, and
to lift his countenance toward the stars, as it is notably said of Ovid.
although it were spoken before by Tully, He gave him eyes, he made him a
foreheade, in the which the secrets of the mind should shine, he has given
also reason, and speech, he has given weeping, he has given laughing, which
are significations of secret and hid affections, although some do draw
them to an argument of misery, because hasty weeping, is late laughing. For
as soon as he is borne, he weepeth by and by, and laugheth not before forty
days are expired: that thing especially this wise creature does prove, which
is skillful of things to come, not the end, which I account happy through the
governance of virtue, but rather difficult, for that he is entered into travel
and the garboyle of present pains. To conclude, whatsoever strength is in all
other creatures, whatsoever swiftness, whatsoever opportunity, whatsoever
commodity, it wholly serves to the use of man. He brings the wild headed
Oxen to the yoke, and forces the fierce Horse to be bridled. The Bears, that
are to be feared for their claws, Boares for their tuskes, and Hearts for
their horns, he has made them to garnyshe man's Table. The Linx, the Fox, and
an infinite number more creatures of that sort, because they were not to be
eaten, he has reserved for the use of their skins and hide. He searches the
seas with nets, the wooddes with Dogs, and the skies with fowls, and with
whom has man nothing to do? He has taught such beasts to understand man's
voice, and to be obedient unto him. Thus of every natural thing, there is some
commodity gotten. Thou have not the strength of an Ox, yet thou make him to
draw. Thou have not the swyftnesse of an Horse, and yet thou make him run.
Thou can not fly so well as a Gosehauke, and yet thou make him fly for
thee. Thou art not so bygge as an Elephant or a Camel, yet thou make the one
of them to bear a Turret, and the other a burden. Thou have not the skin of
a Bucke, nor the pelt of a Lamb, nor the case of a Fox, yet these have them
for thee. Is this answer then of a certain Roman Captain, improper unto
them that say you are destitute of these things, to wit, That a man would
not have these things, but had rather govern them that have them? And thus
much have I spoken breefely, partly like a Philosopher, and partly like a
Catholic. Touching the grief of the mind, for so the Philosophers do term
it, the better to expel it, and purchase tranquillity thereunto, it avails
to know what Tullie has disputed of the first, in his disputations upon the
third day in his Tusculans: and of the second, Seneca in his book which he
wrote, of the tranquillity of the mind. For whilst I make haste unto other
matters, and draw toward an end, I shall not have time to comprehend all
things that I would: For the present, it is sufficient that I have bound up
the wound, and showed thee the Physicians of the mind, whose help thou
may use, if these things be not sufficient. Now as touching those three
things, whereof thou complaynedst last, I have not thought them worthy the
answearyng, for as much as of the roughness of Fortune, wherein the greater
part of this our second book of talk has been, and shall be spent, both the
very shortness thereof ought to mollify and diminishe the sharpness it
self, and nature also does appoint an uncertain end of life, that it may
seem always to be at hand, or not very far of.


Of the Toothache. The.XCiiij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am tormented with the Toothach.


Reason. Thou may see what trust there is to thy intrayles, when as thy bones
do fail thee.


Sorrow. My teeth begin to be loose.


Reason. What hope is there in the soft, since that thy hard and strong
limbs do quail?


Sorrow. I am sick in my teethe.


Reason. Man is a feeble and frail creature, in whom such things as seemed
to be most strong, are weak.


Sorrow. I am troubled with a great pain in my teeth.


Reason. And those things which are appointed for the ornament and chief
strength of the mouth, thou see them to be turned into a cause of grief,
that thou may perceive how long the conioynyng of this mortal frame will
remain.


Sorrow. I have now lost a toothe or twain.


Reason. Now may thou then consider, how much thou art bound unto GOD for
so many great good gifts, since to lack the fewest or the least thereof, thou
would think it a great grief and a lamentable loss: a right worthy
punishment for thine ingratiude. A servant that has refused his masters
present lyberalitie, when the time is once past he is sorrowful, and that which
he would not perceive for his gain, it is meet he understand to his loss.


Sorrow. I am quite unarmed of my teeth.


Reason. Being now unarmed, thou shall wrestle with pleasure, thou shall eat
less, thou shall laugh less, thou shall byte more bluntly at an other man's
good name. The closure of the teeth being broken, will cause thee to bridle thy
tongue being ready to speak. And if chastity cause not thy old wanton
affection to restrain from unlawful kisses, then let shame restrain it.


Sorrow. Now has old age broken my teeth.


Reason. She has used her liberty: give now thanks unto nature, who has
suffered thee to use that her gift till thou were old, for that she takes it
away many times from them that are young: as from one amongst you of late
days, the myghtiest of al kings, who even in his lustye youthful years
lacked almost al his teeth: but though he suffered this great infirmity of
youth, yet afterward as he reported him self, he was comforted with a notable
sharpness of sight in his old age, and also (whereof he makes no mention)
with a wonderful quickenesse of wit and courage: which is a profitable example
unto al men that are affected with any discommoditie either of nature or age,
that they lament not al things, or term every slackenesse of gods lyberalitie
an injury, but aswage the grief of benefits lost with them that art saved,
sharp things with the gentle, sower with the sweet.


Sorrow. Old age has taken away my teeth.


Reason. If age should not take them away, death would. Look into ye graves
full of dead bones, where thou shall see teeth sticking in dry rotten skulles,
which at the first do show terrible pale, and gryn fearfully, but if thou
pluck them a little, thou shall find them loose and easy to fall out, and in
this case neither the number, nor the strength, nor comeliness of them,
avails any whit at al. We read that ye daughter of Mithridates king of
Pontus, had double rows of teeth above and beneath. Prusias son to the king
of Bithinia, in steed of the row of his upper teeth, had only one tooth (that
is to say) one bone yt was match with his neither teeth, reachyng from the one
side of his iawe unto the other, which strange thing was neither uncomely, nor
unprofitable. But Zenobia ye queen of the East amongst al other commendations
of her beauty, is commended exceedingly for the surpassing comeliness of her
teeth, for that when she either spoke or laughed, it seemed that her mouth was
full rather of bright pearls, then of white teeth. But if thou search now the
graves of these also, thou shall find no special thing at al there, for death,
which is indifferent unto al men, has dispersed and consumed al. Ye love your
bodies and mortal members over much, and ye despise your immortal souls and
virtue more then ye ought, being blind and unequal discerners of things.


Sorrow. Now I am quite without teeth.


Reason. Now then art thou without toothache, yea and without any succoure of
them, thou have no use of them at al. Thou must grind thy meat paynefully
without teeth, and unless thou wylt dissemble with thy self, thou ought to
remember that thou have a journey shortly at hand, to go thither where as
there is nothing at al eaten, but where men live only with joy and the
everlasting food of the soul.


Of pain in the legs. The.xcv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am troubled with a pain in my legs.


Reason. In all buildings, that is the most dangerous fault which happens
in the foundations. For as touching al other defaultes how ever thou repair
them, this brings ruin: and therefore at this present there is naught else for
thee to do, but immediately to depart out of this ragged Inn.


Sorrow. I am troubled with the pain of my legs.


Reason. The cause of this sickness, as also of many other more, for the most
part ryseth from no whence else but from your selves: and therefore that which
came from you, by good right comes back unto you again, seeing thou have
forgotten the counsel of the wise man, which says, Let thine eyes go before
thy feet: and I suppose that that first argument of an other wise man may well
agree hereunto, and be accordyngly applied, Ye cannot stay your selves, nor
look unto your feet, but like blind men ye run headlong hither and thither,
groping after your way. What marueyle is it then, if thou stumble sometime, at
a stone, and sometime at a block. This sure is very strange, that you will lay
your faults upon giltlesse nature. Yea moreover, ye have a great delight to be
thrusting in amongst a company of mad iades, so that oftentimes ye bring away
the print of a horse show upon you. Do not thou think that that which is
spoken by Tullie unto one, belongs welnigh unto al men? These mischeefes
(says he) thou foolish fellow, have thou brought wholly upon thy self. And so
it is truly: deceive not your selves, the harm which you suffer for the most
part, is of your own doing, for which afterward ye be sorry. Thou, if thou
had remained at home, that is to say, with thy self, thou perchance ne had
this grief, ne found any cause of these thy complayntes. It is nothing
injurious that a wandryng life and an unstable, should be molested with diverse
discommodities.


Sorrow. I am tormented with the pain of my legs.


Reason. If thou have given the occasion to have pain, rejoice to be punished
for the fault: if not, comfort thy mind that is innocent. And if thou be sorry
that thou have a grief, yet rejoice that thou art without blame. Howsoever the
matter goes, in all thy grief set the shield of patience against the sharp
dart of pain, which is a perpetual document in all matters of perplexity, then
the which there was never yet any medicine more wholesome.


Sorrow. I am woonderfully grieved with the pain of my legs.


Reason. The physicians will give thee counsel that thou shall lie still, and
move thee from thy bed: and truly they do wisely therein, to give thee
counsel to do that after thou have taken harm, which thou should have
done before, but I will speak no more of their counsels, thou thy self shall
learn to thy own cost, how their counsels are to be esteemed of.
Notwithstanding, I will give thee that advice which they use to give, but in
another respect: For they suppose that they are able to restore thee easily to
thy health when thou art sick, by applying fomentations and other remedies,
whiles they endeavor to defend ye part affected from the confluence of spirits
and humors, whyther thou stand or go. For my part, I would wish thee while
thou lie in thy bed, setting al other cares aside, and aswaging thy greefes
by laying thy self easily in thy couche, after that thou have taken order for
thy bodily health, to think some thing of thy grave, and how, and where thou
shall lie hereafter: and to examine the condition of thy present estate, and to
make thy self so familiar with death before he come, that when he is come,
thou do not fear him. For it is death only, that is able to deliver this
mortal carckase from al infirmities.


Of Blyndnesse. The.xcvi. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost mine eyes.


Reason. O how many loathsome things of life also have thou lost? How many
foolyshe toys of fond sight shall thou not see?


Sorrow. I have lost mine eyes.


Reason. Of the face perhaps, not of thine heart. If they remain good enough,
al is well.


Sorrow. I am blind.


Reason. Thou shall see the sun no more, but thou have seen it, and thou
remembrest what manner thing it is: or if thou have not seen it, as it has
chanced unto thee the more hardly in that respect, so the desire of a thing
unknown, shall grieve thee ye less.


Sorrow. I lack eyes.


Reason. Thou shall not see heaven nor earth, but to see the Lord of heaven and
of earth, ability is not taken from thee: this sight is much clearer then that
other.


Sorrow. I am condemned to perpetual blyndnesse.


Reason. Thou shall not see from henceforth the wooddie valleys, the ayeriall
mountains, the florishyng costs, the shadowy dens, the silver sprynges, the
crooked ryuers, the green meddowes, and that which they say is of al things
most beautiful, the portraiture of man's countenance. Thou shall neither see the
heaps of dunge, the ouerflowyng Iakes, torn carkases, nor whatsoever else by
filthiness of sight offends the stomach and senses.


Sorrow. I am deprived of mine eye sight.


Reason. If there were none other commodity in this discommoditie, in that
thou shall not behold these games of enormious and deformed iestures,
blindness were to be wyshed: which although I have oftentimes confessed
before to be a wyshed thing, yet do I deny that it is to be wyshed, for as
much now, as in times past, there is no hope left thee to run away: whyther
soever thou turnest thy self, the kingdom of madness is a like, and a like
exile of virtue: in which state to lose a man's eye sight, is a kind of flight
and comfort.


Sorrow. I have lost my sight.


Reason. And the beholding of women's faces. Rejoice therefore that those
wyndowes be shut up at the which death entered in, and that the passage to many
vices is closed up: covetousness, gluttony, ryotousnesse, and diverse other
plagues, have lost thereby their servants and retinue, for look how much of
thy soul was taken away by these enemies, so much persuade thy self that
thou have gained.


Sorrow. I have lost mine eyes.


Reason. Thou have lost evil guydes, which lead thee into destruction. It is a
wonderful thing to be spoken: often times it chances that the lyghtest part of
all the body, brings the whole soul into darkness? Endeavor thy self to
follow the spirit that calls thee unto better things, and harken unto the
truth, that cries in thine ear. Seek not for the things that are visible,
but for the invisible, for the visible things are temporal, but the invisible
everlasting.


Sorrow. I lack mine eyes.


Reason. Thou have lacked many faults, if thou had lacked thine eyes ever:
but now let virtue and blyndnesse stop many mischiefs to come, and those
that are past alredye, let them be done away by sorrow and repentance: and
mourn not because thy blyndnesse shall open the eyes of thy mind, but perhaps
thou may racher mourn for that it is deferred.


Sorrow. I have lost the light of mine eyes.


Reason. Retain the true light of the soul. They which have lost one of
their eyes (as they say) do see the better with the other. Which if it be so,
what should I think but that if thou have lost both, thou shall see very
clear with thine other two, and then shall make that saying of Tirecias the
blind Poet to be thine own, God has blind fold the face, and turned all the
light into the heart. Thou may account thy self unhappy and blind in
deed, yea quite without eyes, if thou have lost this light also, which that
it is so in deed, thy complayntes make me to suspect, for it greeueth a man
most to lose that, where of he has no more.


Sorrow. I have lost the eyes of my head.


Reason. Purge then and make clean those which thou can not loose, and
seeing thou have lost the outward eyes, turn thee unto the inward: There,
believe me, and not in the outward eyes, remains that filicitie which ye
seek for.


Sorrow. I see no light with mine eyes.


Reason. Learn to rejoice, yea even in darkness. Have thou quite forgotten
the answer of Antipater the philosopher, some thing wantonly, yet properly
spoken? Whose blyndnesse when certain freendly wenches did lament, he
answered merrily: That sleep which ye have a nyghtes, seems it no pleasure
unto you? Truly this was pleasantly and breefely answered. For there are many
joys and pleasures in the dark, as well as there are great pains and greefes
in the light. But I am only to exhort thee unto honest matters.


Sorrow. I complain for the loss of mine eyes.


Reason. If thou were to put them to an evil use, thou ought rather to
rejoice that the instruments of mischief are taken from thee: but if thou
meanest to use them well, there is no cause why thou should so lament for a
thing comely to sight only: for thou have lost that which was nothing at al
needeful, either toward godliness, or any holy purpose. God looks not into
the members, but into the mind: offer unto him thy soul pure and whole, whom
when he has received, whatsoever remains he will take in good part, for he
that gave the soul, has kept back nothing unto him self.


Sorrow. I have lost my bodyly eyes.


Reason. If thou endeavor to come to heaven, be of good comfort with Didimus,
whom, being blind from his infancy, and continuing in his blyndnesse even unto
the end, the holy man Antonius coming to visit, and perceiving him now being
old, still to exercise him self in virtue and godliness, bid him be of good
comfort, and not to be moved any thing at al, in yt he had lost his eyes, which
were common to flies, mice, and lizerdes, as well to him, but rather to rejoice,
for that those eyes which are common to him with the angels, were safe and
sound. A notable saying of Antonius, worthy to come from the scholar of ye
heavenly schoolemaister. But if thou aspire unto ye fame of liberal studies,
then behold Homer and Democritus, of whom the one, as the report goes of him,
while that he spoke those his wonderful and divine oracles, saw nothing with
his mortal eyes, but in mind was as quick of sight as Linceus. The other,
because he would not see many things, which (is he thought) did hinder his
eyes from seeing ye truth, plucked out his own eyes: whose fact, whether it
were praise worthy or no, I will not dispute, but surely he had folowers. But if
perhaps thou conceiuedst in thy mind to behold some picture or sculptare of
Apelles, or Phidias woorkemanship, I can not then deny but that thou have lost
something: unless it be again, from a low beginning to be constrained to
advance thy mind aloft to higher matters.


Sorrow. I am made poor, and unprofitable through blyndnesse.


Reason. Why do thou, blind man, forsake thy self? For Tiresias, of whom I
spoke before, being blind of sight, was famous for prophesiing. Did not
Diodorus the stoike, better known by means of his familiarity with Cicero
then for his own sect, aswage the grief of his lost sight by the benefit of
hearing: when as day and night, as the same Cicero writes of him, there were
books read unto him, in which kind of study he had no need of his eye
sight? He applied at one time both the study of philosophy and music, and
that which a man would scarce think could be done without eyes, he exercised
the practice of geometrical descriptions, and causing lines to be drawn by
other men's hands, he discoursed on them by his own understanding. Caius
Drusus had no eyes, but he had such skill in the civil laws, that his house
was every day full of troops of ciuilians: they could see better the way to ye
court then he could, but he could see better the way how to carry away the
cause, and therefore they sought the asistance of the blind guide. But the most
famous of all that ever were renowned for blindness, was Appius Claudius, blind
in deed, and so called by name, who being oppressed with blindness and age,
was not only commonly known of the people by giving of counsel when there
happened any doubt in law, but also by his authority and wisdom ruled the
senate, and governed the whole common wealth. Thou, as soon as thou art
deprived of one sense, by and by castest away all the residue, yea and which is
more, thy mind also: none otherwise then if one that is moved with impacience
for a small loss, should cast away desperately both his life and the instrument
belonging to the same.


Sorrow. I am blind, and I cannot tell where I go.


Reason. But thy guide does see, whether he be the mind, or some one that
uses to direct the steps of the blind, by whose leadyng thou shall not only
find ye right way, but also attain unto the chief degree which concerns the
noble despising of life, and the most excellent acts of worthy virtue: and
unless the strength of the mind do fail, the loss of sight cannot hinder
any notable exployte. Thou remembrest what Sampson in the scriptures, and in
the civil wars described by Lucan in Massilia, what Tirrhenus does upon the
sea, wherein if there be less credit to be given to poetical report, yet
remember that, which is more assured and fresher in memory, which being done
in thy time, thou myghtest have seen it with thine own eyes: to wit, how
John king of Boheme, being son unto one king of the Romans, and father to
another, who reigned immediately one after the other, had always weak eyes,
and at the latter end of his age fell blind. Now since the war which was
between the King of France, whose part he took, and the King of England, are
more then. 42. years, when as being in that most sharp conflicte in which
both the Princes were in person, and understanding that the worse began to
fall on the side whereof he was, he called unto his captain with a loud voice,
saying, Direct me quickly toward that part of the army where the king of our
enemies stands, and the greatest force of his whole army. Which when they
sorowfully and fearfully had done, setting spurs to his horse, he pricked
thither with all his force, whyther as they that had eyes durst not follow him
that was blind not scarce with their sight: Whereas encounteryng the most
valiant front of his enemies, fighting not only valiantly, but also terribly,
he was there flayne, they that overcame him both wondryng at his valor, and
commendyng his manhood. I tell you of a thing known unto all men, and which
(except it be written) is like to peryshe through oblivion. And I pray you,
what did it hinder the glory and renown of this valiant gentelman, that he
lacked his sight? but that whom virtue and nature had made wonderful,
blyndnesse should make men to be amassed at him.


Sorrow. I am blind.


Reason. I will begin to jest, unless thou leave complaining: for what else
could blyndnesse bring unto thee, if so be thy strength remain, then that
which Asclepiades (being blind) says of him self, to wit, that thou walk
with one boy waytyng on thee more then thou wast wont?


Of the loss of hearing. The.XCvij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Have lost my hearing.


Reason. Behold, thou have one passage for tediousness stopped. Many things
that are tedious, are drawn in at the eyes, and many at the ears, and many
loathsome things pearce into the mind by both ways, for the auoydyng whereof,
blindness and deafness are to be desired a like. Notwithstanding, these have
their discommodities, as almost al other mortal things: neither do I deny,
but that there is some painfulness in them, but more dainty then patience,
and not comparable to virtue. Where, what the proportion is between these
discommodities, it is no easy ma^ter to g^e^sse, saving, that the first is
more dangerous, and this other more ridiculus. For they that are thick listed,
seem in^^ manner to be out of their wits, but they that are blind, are
reputed more miserable, and therefore we saugh at the deaf, and pity the
blind: but a wise man contemns both, and weighs not what other think, but
what the thing is in deed.


Sorrow. I have lost my hearing.


Reason. Then have thou escaped flatterers whysperyng, and slaunderers gyrdes,
a far differyng, but a like evil: saving that it is somewhat more manlye to
give care unto foul speech, then unto flattery: For in the one, so metyme is
a mediume, in the other, is always poison. Wherefore, the first cures often
by bytyng, but this enfecteth always by tyckelyng: and truly, worse is
feigned love, then open hatred.


Sorrow. I have lost my hearing.


Reason. Now that Art which is reported to have auayled Ulysses, either
nature, or some chance has given unto thee, in that thou have safely passed
the singyng of the Sirenes with deaf ears, whereby thou ought to account
thy self happy. For how many dangers that ways might have passed into thy
mind? How many errors, and finally, how many troubles might have entered
into thy head?


Sorrow. I have lost my hearing.


Reason. I believe thou shall not hear the Nyghtingale, neither the harp, nor
any other kind of instrument: Nay that more is, thou shall not hear the
braying of Asses, the gruntyng of Swine, the howlyng of Wolfes, the barkyng of
Dogs, the rooryng of Bears, the ragyng of Lions, the crying of Children, the
chyding of old Wives, and last of all, that which is worse then all these,
the immoderate loud laughing of Fools, and their unmeasurable weepinges and
outcries, and the sound of their most confused voices, then the which there can
not possibly a more unpleasant noise be heard.


Sorrow. I lack my hearing.


Reason. Thou art delivered from manifold deceytes. Men are deceived by
nothing more often, then by words: and a deaf man is out of al danger
thereof.


Sorrow. My ears are waxen dull.


Reason. That part of the body is a dangerous part, and especially to Princes,
who thereby being puffed up with the vain blastes of flatterers, do burst
many times therewith, to their utter destruction, to the no small laughter of
the whole people.


Sorrow. My hearing is dull.


Reason. If thou be restrained from talkyng with other, then talk with thy
self, being mindful of the saying of Tully. He that can talk with him self,
has no need of communication with an other: Although a dumb man also may
talk with other, to wit, by readyng and writing. For he that reads,
talks with his auncetours: and he that writes, speaks to his posterity,
Moreover, he that reads the books of heavenly Philosophy, hears GOD
speak unto him, and he that prays, speaks unto GOD. In both these kinds
of communication, there is no need either of tongue or ears, but only of
eyes, and fingers, and a devout mind. Herein therefore, as in many other
things else, let us embrace the counsel of our country man Cicero, to the
intent, that as the blind may comfort himself with the use of his ears, so
may the deaf with the help of his eyes. Thou therefore, if thou can not
hear men speak, read the books which men have written, and write thou
books, which other men may read: behold moreover the heaven, the earth, and
seas, and live in silence in contemplation of the creator of them all. Hereunto
this thy deafness will not hinder thee, but perhaps avail thee much.


Sorrow. My hearing fails me.


Reason. By what tunes of numbers Diapente, or Diapason consists, or by what
other proportions they are handled by the Musicians, a deaf man may
understand well enough. And although he have not with his ears the tune of
man's voice, or the melody of the Vialles or Organnes, but understand well in
his mind the reason of them, doubtless he will prefer the delyght of his
mind, before the pleasure of his ears. Imagine that he do not know these
musical proportions, and that a deaf man be unskillful in Music: yet if he
know the proportions of Virtue, and exercise him self in them, it is well,
herein his deafness will not hurt him. For it is much better to be good,
then to be learned: and if a man be abundantly learned and wise, he is
abundantly good: but he that is evil, is also a fool and unlearned, although
in book learning he be the most skylfull under the Sun.


Sorrow. My hearing fails.


Reason. It is well that this chanced not unto thee before thou receauedst thy
faith, which is gotten specially by hearing, which faith now thou
possessest. Whereof complaynest thou now, or what seek thou more? If thou
hear not the singyng of men, nor of birds, then incline thine heart unto
heavenly songues, and apply thine inward ear to GOD wards.


Sorrow. I hear not.


Reason. Then think and speak to thy self, If I hear not what men say,
either to me, or of me, I shall hear what the Lord GOD says unto me. They
often times talk of discord: but he ever speaks of peace.


Sorrow. I hear nothing at all.


Reason. Many being very desirous of silence, have been weeried with long
iourneys and travail, to the intent that in some secret places, and bye ways,
they might find that which they sought for. That which is paynefully sought
for by others, thou have it with thee in every place wheresoever thou go.
Now learn to use thine own commodity, and remembering the noyses and
tumultes that are past, begin at the last to be delyghted with silence.


Of the lothsomnesse of life. The.XCviij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am wonderful weery of my life.


Reason. A mischief sprynging out of the premises, then which, I know not
whether there be any othermore dangerous: for, it is most grievous of it
self, and the next neighbor and ready way to desperation. Against which
mischief by name, there has been order taken in your Churches, to pray for
assistaunce unto the blessed Saints of heaven, who being discharged of this
earthly weerisomnesse, and bands of the body, do now rest in the joys of
heaven in everlasting felicity. I doubt not, truly, but that some of them are
at rest in deed: but as for those your prayers unto them, I count them vain
and foolyshe.


Sorrow. I am compassed about with much lothsomnesse of life.


Reason. All things that are loathsome, ought to be abandoned with gladsome
thoughts, with good hope, with the comfort of friends, with readyng of
books, and with variety of honest delyghtes, and pleasant exercises, and
expellyng of sluggishnesse, but especially b^ patience in all things, and long
sufferyng, which is invincible. Ye ought not to prevent the natural end of
your life, either for the hatred of the present state, or the desire of the
future, neither (to be brief) for any fear, or hope, whatsoever: which
certain fools and miserable wretches have done, who while they have sought
means to avoid poverty, the troubles of this life, and pains temporal,
have fallen into eternal: Let our countreyman Cicero speak what he lift, who
in his book of Offices excuses the death of the latter Cato. Let Seneca say
what he will, who woonderfully extolleth and commends the same, and also
disputes in many places, how that in certain cases a man may violently
destroy him self. But the other opinion of Cicero is much more true, and
commendable, wherein he says, That both thou, and all godly men, ought to
retain their souls within the prison of their bodies, neither to depart out
of this humane life, without his commandment, by whom it was given, least
happily ye should seem to refuse the calling whereunto he has assigned you.
Yea moreover, think that this was spoken unto thee from heaven, to wit, that
unless God, whose temple is all this which thou beholdest, shall discharge
thee out of the wards of this body, thou can have no entrance hither. And
to conclude, take heed, lest that through any weerisomnesse of this life, thou
so think of death at any time, that thou suppose it lawful to thee to hasten
it, or so esteem of any joy, that it be able at any time to overthrow thy
heedelesse mind upon a sodden.


Of heaviness of the body. The.XCix. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM heavy of body.


Reason. Thou might complain hereof, if thou had been borne to fly
like a bird, and not rather as a man unto manhood.


Sorrow. My body is heavy, and vnwyldie.


Reason. Leave this complaynte to Roscius and Aesope. Thou, if thou can
neither bend thy self round in a little compass, or slide down out of the
top of the air by a rope, what matter is it? Walk thou soberly with honest
men, contemn gesticulation and dauncyng, which belongs to players. As
gravity becomes a wise man in all his deeds and words, so also is it
convenient that he use it in his gate, with great modesty.


Sorrow. I have a heavy body.


Reason. This heaviness was wont to be one of the companions of old age, lest
happily he that had lost the first, should exclude the second: although many
times, this heaviness be found not to be so much the companion of old age,
as of nature, whereof it comes, that we see young men dull and heavy, and
old men quick and nimble. But oftentimes under a heavy body, is contained a
light mind, and under a light body, abides a heavy mind: but if a certain
proportion and equality, both of body and mind do meet together, that is
not to be despised.


Sorrow. The weight of my body is exceedyng great.


Reason. Though invisible, yet no less is the weight of the mind, and
firmness thereof: set the one against the other, and there shall be nothing
heavy.


Sorrow. I am drowned with the weight of my body.


Reason. Fleet then again by the lyghtnesse of thy mind, and drive it away,
and in laboryng study, taking in hand many and hard matters, both to the
exercise of thy mind and body, and the banishyng of all pleasures. Drive away
idleness, procure thy self business, despise lusts, bate slothfulness,
love carfulness, cast away tenderness, follow hardness, have a delyght in
difficult things, and with continual persistaunce, use thy self to moderate
diet in meat and drink, and to short and careful sleep, little sittyng, and
seldom lying.


Sorrow. I am payned with the weight and greatness of my body.


Reason. Another is troubled with the contrary, some with one thing, and some
with another. No man leads his life without traueyle, but every man knows
his own, and either despises, or is ignorant of an others grief.


Sorrow. My body is much grown unto mole.


Reason. If man's name, for that he is a mortal creature, be derived from the
word Elumus, which signifies the earth, the must man needs be oppressed with
much earth. Notwithstanding, his earthly nature cannot so ouerwhelme the
heavenly, but that it will arise, unless it show it self deaf to virtue,
and quick of belief unto evil, perswadyng pleasure.


Sorrow. A heavy body oppresses my soul.


Reason. Pluck up thy mind, and with great endeavor sustain this grievous
burden, and think with thy self, that heavenly minds do oftentimes break
forth out of the burden of the bodyly mole, and attain unto wonderful
highness.


Sorrow. I am ouerborne with the burden of my body.


Reason. Although nature cannot be overcome, endeavor nevertheless with all
diligence, that thou increase thy strength every day somewhat, and abate thy
burden.


Of great dullness of wit. The.C. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUT I am heavy and dull witted.


Reason. This grief is something troublesome, but it may be much diminished,
if thou apply thy self diligently thereunto.


Sorrow. But I am of a slow and dull wit.


Reason. What, thynkest thou that thou art able to help this grief with
repynyng and mournyng? this matter is to be remedied far otherwise. Thou must
abstain from too much sleep, from letcherie, from meat, from wine, from
vain fables and tales, from taking occasion of excuses, and yeeldyng too much
unto sluggyshnesse, which through thy fault is now grown into nature. But
thou ought rather to watch, to muse, to sigh, to blow, to strive, to
contend, to rise, to stir up the strength of the mind, to advance thy
courage, to put away heaviness, to abandone stouth, to abstain from
pleasures, and earnestly to apply thy book. There is nothing so heavy, but
that earnest applying will lift it up, nothing so hard, but it will make it
soft, nothing so dull, but it will make it sharp, nothing so slow, but it
will prick it forward, to be short, there is nothing so deeply hydden nor so
secretly laid up, but it will fetch it forth, nor so deadlye a sleep, but
that it will make it.


Sorrow. I am slow of wit.


Reason. Such as say that quickness of wit is a commendation, I am sure
will affirm that slowenesse of understanding is an infamy. Yet had I rather
have a slow wit and a modest, then one that is hasty and furious: for as in
the one there is no hope of great glory, or of abundance of riches, so in the
other there is danger of grievous errors, and fear of shameful reproach:
For it is a great deal more tolerable for a man to become inglorious, then
infamous.


Sorrow. I am slow of wit.


Reason. That which men wont to complain of in rydyng of dull Horses, provide
thou for thy self, to wit, spurs and reigns, and herein thou shall take
no occasion of excuse, but rather thou have matter ministered unto thee of
labor. There are some that think a thing should be left of, if it will not
come to pass by and by: but do thou stay, be earnest, and do thy endeavor.
Difficulty does provoke a courageous mind, and labor nourishes it: therein
does it contend cheefely, and esteems of that thing most, wherein it finds
most resistance. Thou read how Socrates was made wise by study, and
Demosthenes eloquent by industry, and the like has chanced unto many: there
are not many that attain to a notable name: report of things done, commonly
is less then the desert.


Sorrow. I am dull of wit.


Reason. Therefore thou have no hope left thee of profityng, but have found
the need of diligence. It is so much the more glorious to be advanced by
learning, then by nature, by how much it is better to do good of set
purpose, then by chance.


Sorrow. I am altogether dull and weak witted.


Reason. If thou can not study for learning, yet apply virtue. There is
none but have wytt enough to attain unto her, wherein there is no sharpness
of understanding required, but only a good will: To the gaynyng whereof, some
have supposed that learning profits nothing, yea, some hold opinion that it
hyndereth not a little. And therefore certain, forsakyng their studies, have
withdrawn them selves into Wyldernesses, and their ignorance in learning,
has stand them in the steed of excellent knowledge, of whose sentence, it is
hard to give judgment. But of this whereof we are assured, accept this my
last counsel: Let no man deceive thee, neither the woonderyng of the common
people, nor the voices of fools move thee: for it is a higher matter and of
more safety to be ennobled by virtue, then by learning. And therefore
experience teaches, that the one of these is always to be wyshed, and the
other most times to be feared. But when the light of learning is added unto the
virtue of the mind, that truly is an absolute and perfect thing, if there be
any perfection at all to be accounted of in this world.


Of a slender and weak memory. The.Cj. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUT I have a slender and weak memory.


Reason. This is also an other infamy of old age, as false as the residue,
which thou may correct by the means of study.


Sorrow. My memory fails.


Reason. Take heed lest it decay utterly, and help it while it is faylyng
with continual exercise: Use it as men do Walls that are ready to fall
down, make Buttresses in places where there is need, and defend the weak
sides, by adding plenty of strong shores.


Sorrow. My memory is slippery.


Reason. Bind it fast with diligence and cunning: industrye helps al
defaultes of wit and memory. Diligence suffers nothing to peryshe, nothing
to be diminished. This is that which can preserve Philosophers and Poets
(being very old men) in a fresh floryshyng wit and style: this is it also
which manteyneth in the ancient Orators a strong voice, and valiant sides, and
a firm memorte: Which, if it were not so, Solon had never waxen old, and yet
learned somethyng daily: and being at the very point of death, when as his
friends sat talkyng about him, seemed in a manner unto them to be risen from
death to life: Neither had Chrisippus finished in his extreme old age, that
wyttie and profound volume which he began being but a very young man: Neither
had Homer at those years set forth that same his divine and heavenly work:
Neither yet Simonides, of the age of fourscore years, with such youthiy
feruencie of mind, but with aged rypenesse of discretion, descended into that
his Pyerial contention: Nor Scocrates in the fourscore and fourteenth year of
his age, accomplished that his fervent and wonderful work: Nor Sophocles well
near an hundred, being the flower of all tragical writers, had finished his
tragidie called Oedipus: Nor Cato, that was above fourscore and ten years
old, with no change of voice, or alteration of strength, or default of
memory, either would have defended him self in an heinous accusation, or
accused most famous Orators of his own accord in open judgment.


Sorrow. I have an untrusty memory.


Reason. Then trust it not, call it often to an account, whatsoever thou have
committed unto it, require it speedely, and that which thou should do to
morrow, do it to day, it is not good to defer: and thus if thou can, wrest
good out of evil. The faith of a fellow brcedeth flouthfulnesse, and falsehood
procures diligence.


Sorrow. I have almost no memory at al.


Reason. Such is the state of man's condition, that he which remembers fewest
things, has the less cause of complayntes, in which case there is no
amendment nor place of profitable repentance, what else remains then, then the
help of oblivion?


Of lack of eloquence. The.cii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Lack eloquence.


Reason. Thou lackest one of the instruments to get hatred, acknowledge the
benefits of nature, which instrument as it has taken from thee a great power
over doubeful suitors, so has it taken no small prerogative of fortune from thy
self, for many have perished through eloquence. If thou doubt of this, ask of
the princes of both eloquence: for as touching the briefer sort of Orators, al
histories are full that for this cause they have peryshed in every place: Among
whom he is most nearest unto danger, that is most excellent of fame, and best
known. There are some unto whom the obscurenesse of their name, has been the
castle of their defense. But admit that they which are eloquent be out of
danger, yet never want they travail. In all the world there is nothing so
vain, for which so many labors, so long watchynges are willyngly undertaken:
this flickering breath so exercises men's minds, as though there were some
virtue in their words.


Sorrow. I have no eloquence.


Reason. But thou have much security, which perhaps thou should not
have, if thou had much eloquence: for many had lived more safely in their
life, if so be they had lived not so eminent in fame.


Sorrow. I have no eloquence at al.


Reason. Then see that thou have some wit, some innocence, some virtue: For
eloquence belongs but to a few persons, but virtue unto al. Let not the
notable rareness of Poets, or of Orators, which is more geason, draw thee
away: yea rather behold how suddenly I change my mind, if rareness allure
thee, follow this, for it is the way unto it. It is a beauie case, that as
there is nothing more better then virtue, so there is nothing more rare.
Eloquence it self, which I said belongs unto few, is much more
frequented then virtue: so stands the case, that that which al may use, al
do neglect, and that which very few can atteyne unto, all men desire, all
men do practice.


Sorrow. I am void of words.


Reason. Apply thy mind unto deeds: For in toordes there is breath, and
labor, and speech, and in deeds, quietness, virtue, and felicity.


Sorrow. I cannot speak.


Reason. Many that know little in a matter, will take much upon them. Set a
fool on horseback, or one that has no skyl to ride, and thou shall have
much a do to get him down a gain: let shame at the length put thee to
silence, if nothing else will cause thee to hold thy peace: and though thou
know not how to speak that other may hear thee, yet learn to hear other
men when they do speak. There is no less cunning to hold a man's peace then to
speak, although to be silent it be a more safe and easy matter.


Sorrow. I cannot express that which is in my heart.


Reason. If thou have a good understanding and art endued with an high and
magnifical sense of the mind, and have not thereunto a pleasant voice and
reedie tongue, be contented: Assaye not often to do that which has but evil
success with thee. What is there then to be done? Use that good which thou
have, not only indifferently, but also merrily: leave that unto another man,
which is another man's, and spend not thy speech, nor weery not thy tongue in
vain. Suffer, I say, other men to speak, and understand thou, for so much as
there is a more secret, and delicate pleasure in the meditation of the mind,
then in the utterance of the tongue, being both of longer continuance, and also
having in it more quietness, and less envy.


Sorrow. Shame restrayneth me from speaking before many.


Reason. It is well known, that this has chanced unto men of great
estimation, for want of audacitie, and not by the default either of yt tongue
or wit. That which thou refusest to speak before many, do it before a few, and
in the presence of one: and although I confess yt the open speeches be most
famous, yet can thou not deny but that private talk is more sweet. If thou
can not do so neither, then return to thy self, common with thy self, as I
have admonished thee before, and awake yt domestical talking companion: for he
is always present with thee, he will not lie in wait for thee, he will not
mock thee, he will not envy thee, he will not loath thee, he will not look for
any exact or laboursome eloquence of thee, he is pleased with familiar talk,
and enterrupted speeches, yea and ofttimes when thou have said much, he is
contented that thou hold thy peace. Learn thou to content thy self with his
presence only, who takes no regard how, but what thou speak, or rather what
thou would speak. Learn to build up a most honest theater, even in the
midst of thine heart. Learn, not to seek after the pomp and glory of men,
but of the truth, and to rejoice oftetimes without any noise of the people,
and let modesty despise that, which perfect eloquence does most times clean
extinguishe. To be short, learn not to live to the show, learn not to speak
with pride, then the which there is no greater mischief in the whole life of
man to be found.


Sorrow. I have an impediment in my speech.


Reason. Do thou lament that thou have some thing like as Moses had, being
so worthy a man as he was, and so familiar with God? But if thou look into
old hystories, or mark the examples of latter time, and in these days, how
many good men shall thou find that had impedimentes in their speech, and how
many wicked that were very eloquent? So are there very few unto whom both
these have happened, to wit, singular eloquence, and excellent virtue.


Of loss of the tongue and speech. The.ciii. Dialogue.
SORROW. WHat say thou, that I have lost both my tongue and my speech also?


Reason. What if thou have found securicie and rest? How many does the tongue
beat down and overthrow that are gyltlesse of doing any harm? It is a
foolyshe pleasure, but truly very common of some that would seem to have done
that which they neither do, nor can do. He lied that said he had stayne the
king of the Israelites and his son, and yet being innocent of the deed was
punished for his lie, when he had escaped the danger of the battle. How great
labor it is to speak, to answer, to faigne, to lie, to smooth up words, to
wey sentences, to bethynke how and what to speak, and sweetly to beat the
air, for so they desire a voice, and after what sort thou ought to move,
not ouly thy tongue, but also thy whole body, for even unto this point there is
one part of Rethorique does reach: how when thou musest, thou must look
down on the ground, which hand, and also whether thou must thrust it
forth, with which foot thou must stamp on the ground. Is not (think
thou) this finenesse troublesome enough, and to take the pains to learn some
indifferent sight in music, that thou may thereby sound thy words the
more sweetly? is it not in very deed then a labor to speak, and a quietness
to hold a man's peace?


Sorrow. I can speak to no purpose.


Reason. Those things which I said in the lack of eloquence, may more aptly
be repeated in the loss of the tongue. Then since thou can not speak, hold
thy peace, and that which necessity byddeth thee to do, do it wyllyngly.
Which thing, they that can speak might do many times more profitably, and
repeat them often that they have not done so. Hold thy peace, I say, and
think not that thou sustaynest any loss: think with thy lelfe secretly, and
speak with thy self in priuitie, which to be better then to speak in open
assembly, they that are eloquent cannot deny.


Sorrow. I am fallen dumb.


Reason. If Cicero and Demosthenes had been dumb, they had lived longer, and
dyed a more gentle death.


Sorrow. I have quite lost the use of my tongue.


Reason. And the custom of lying, and the arts of deceyuing, and the
instrument of purchasing enmity and infamy: for many are become more infamous
for their tongue, then for their deeds. There is no part of the body reedier
to hurt, and harder to bridle. Therefore, not without cause (as some great and
rare matter) uttered he those words, who said, I will look unto my ways
that I offend not with my tongue. Which when a certain holy man, who came to
the study of divinity had heard, is reported to have departed away, and that
he would hear no more thereof. And when as, after a long season, his master
marueylyng, demanded of him why he had been so long absent from his study
which he had begun: he ausweared, that the very first word had given him
enough to do, and that he could not fulfill that one point by any his labor or
traueyl whatsoever. See thou despise not this government nor bridle, which is
offered unto thee either by nature or fortune, but wyllyngly yield thy self to
be ruled, and spurn not against thine own destiny.


Sorrow. I have lost my tongue.


Reason. Now keep thou with all diligence that which the wise man wylleth thee,
to wit, thine heart, and being called from two careful watchynges unto one, and
discharged from the one moitie of thy labor, thou may the more easily keep
a few, and more warely guard precious things.


Sorrow. I have lost my tongue.


Reason. In a certain few men this is a noble and excellent member, but in
the greater sort of the people, very pestilent and noisome, and a great deal
better that many had wanted it. Which is not only seen to be true in a
servant, in that the Satirike Poet says, The tongue is the worst part of an
evil servant, but also in many free persons, unto whom nature has given
nothing worse then their tongue. Wars, deceites, adulteries, and al kind of
abuses (for the most part) should surceasse, did not the tongue cast abroad and
nouryshe their evil seeds.


Sorrow. I have lost my tongue.


Reason. If an evil one, thou have gained much: For it is great riches, to be
poor in wickedness. Who so has not these, is borne rich, but who so loses
them, is made rich, and his living being increased with a new reuenewe, has
found that by loosing, which he had lost by findyng. But if thou have lost a
good tongue, I say again keep thy heart. Thou have lost that wherewith thou
might please men, keep that wherewith thou may please God: unto whom if
thou can not speak with thy tongue, yet talk unto him with thy heart. For if
it be written of the wicked, Lying lyppes are in their heart, and with their
heart they have spoken: why are not godly lyppes in the heart of the ryghteous,
that they also may speak in their heart, whereas are the ears of God? And that
is true, which the same man wrytech in an other place, My mouth is not hydden
from thee, which thou made in secret. For there is no thought, be it never
so secret, that is hidden from God, neither hears he less them that speak
softly, then those that cry aloude: yea, he hears no clamor, be it more or
less, before the clamor and crying out of the heart, for he harkeneth unto
none but that, and he is delited with silence. This clamor, did he that was
first a keeper of sheep, and afterward a most famous shepherd of the people
of God, restrain within the closure of his lyppes, who deserved to hear the
voice of God saying unto him, Why cryest thou unto me? He spoke not, but he
cried, yea he spoke, but it was with the heart. And like as he that hears God
is not deaf, so he whom God hears is not dumb.


Of want of virtue. The.ciiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. But I am without virtue.


Reason. An hurt in deed, a just sorrow, saving that al other wantes may
happen to be either natural, or casual, or violent, but this doubtless is
voluntary. For other are either in the body, or in the wit, or in the memory,
or in the speech, or in some outward thing one or other, al which happen not
according as a man would wyshe, but as every man's fortune chances: but this
only consists in will, which every one guydeth and disposes at his own
pleasure. For a man can require none other good will of another man, then he is
disposed to show whose will it is, whereby he wylleth this thing or that thing.
Otherwise, as defectes happen unto men, of strength, or of speech, or of
riches against their wills, so should of their wylles also: neither should
virtue deserve reward, nor vice merit punishment. But now, not a will unto
you to do this or that, but a liberty to chose this or that was given you at
your birth, which being applied unto that which is good, makes you good, but
converted unto evil, makes you evil. The same may you use as you lust, and
if you lust ye may use it well, which doubtless is the gift of God, as if ye
abuse it, it is a great peruersitie of the wyller: but it cannot be otherwise
chosen, but that a good will is the root of virtue, as an evil will is the
root of vice. And thus there is none that suffers a want of virtue, but he
that will, for that the greatest and cheifest part of virtue consists in ye
will.


Sorrow. Yea I would have virtue, but I cannot get it.


Reason. Many there be, that think they would have that which they will not,
and that they would that which they will: thus every one deceives him self,
and endeavors to persuade not only him self but others, that he is desirous
of good, neither persuades any more easily how delectable true virtue is,
since that the false opinion of virtue so much deliteth, that it is pleasant
unto him to deceive the people, and his friends, and moreover by them to be
deceived.


Sorrow. I know that I would feign, but I cannot be good.


Reason. Admit it be so, it suffices not to have a will, unless thou have
also a desire, and that not indifferent, but vehement. But you most greedily
desire your own harms, and coldly your commodities: whereby it comes to
pass, that there be many rich, but very few good. For what marueyle is it,
if your fervent intention attain sooner to the thing ye wyshe, then your slow
will?


Sorrow. I would be good if I could.


Reason. Endeavor, for thou may, and if thou would unfeignedly, begin now,
but eschew slothfulness. For if the smallest things be not ^^gotten for
naught, what may thou hope of virtue, then which there is nothing greater,
nor higher among the affairs of men? Imagine not of her as of a step out of
the way from cares, but as of the ready and only passage unto felicity. Be at
leisure unto her, and follow after her with all thy force and possible might of
thy mind, and apply not some part of thy leisure unto her, as if it were unto
some certain exercise, but as unto that which is the ordinary duty of
life, which will make thee blessed, and that thou shall want nothing. Employ al
thy time, and thy whole study, which thou have often bestowed upon most vile
things, and call to thy remembrance that more wholesome and effectual (then
fine) saying of Marcus Varro in his book of Satires: If thou had says he,
bestowed the twelfth part of thy pain in the study of Philosophy, which
thou have employed in ouerseeing thy baker that he might make thee good bread,
thou had ear this time been good. Which I would have thee to understand
thus, not that thou acknowledge thy self to be indebted for thy health unto
the earthly Philosophy, which promises a continuance by frequentation of the
actions, which how much it is to be credited, they that have experimented do
know: but rather unto the heavenly wisdom, which is a most excellent
preserver, and also the counsayles and aids of virtue, and the health which
thereby is purchased: and thou must also acknowledge with duetiful confession,
and a thankful mind, that to be true which is written, No man can live
continually, unless it be given him of God. And this is a point of wisdom,
to know whose gift it is, which, think to be spoken unto thee by name, and
it may be likewise applied unto all virtues.


Sorrow. I desire very much to be good, but I am not.


Reason. Whether thou do earnestly desire or not, the effect will prove:
Continuance is a token of a fervent good will. For whether virtue be the free
gift of God, (and truly that heavenly geuer scarsly bestows it upon any but
such as constantly desire it, and earnestly require it in hearty prayer:) or
whether in so great a matter any part of humane wisdom be of force, truly so
weyghtie a thing requires both earnest intention, and long and continual
exercise. For that which is gotten by study, comes not suddenly, so that,
which way so ever thou turn thy self, thou ought to have a perseueryng
mind. Wherefore, omitting and neglecting all other things, apply these
matters, which thou shall the more courageously, if thou bear in mind, and
have always written before thine eyes, that to this end, and none other, thou
came into this earthly habitation, and that this one thing is required of
thee, that by the steps of virtue, thou clymbe up to heaven, and that
whatsoever thou do else, is either needelesse, or hurtful.


Of covetousness. The.Cv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM troubled with the pricks of covetousness.


Reason. Thou namest them well pricks: for there are certain pricks of
desire in the gettyng of riches, and goods when they are gotten are very
thorns, for so he terms them who cannot lie: Worthy riches, which
trouble men both in the gettyng of them, and when they be gotten. But if thou
consider thine own carkas, if thy nature, if the shortness of thy life, thou
shall perceive that thou art grieved with vain cares, and couetest much, but
lackest little. And moreover, how that whylest thou gapest after gettyng more,
thou have no regard of that which is alredie gotten, and so after a manner,
leesect that which thou should seek after, then which, there is nothing
more foolyshe.


Sorrow. I am urged with the desire to get much.


Reason. And yet thou perceyuest not, how that the time wastes, and thy life
also passes away, while much is gotten. And thus a great perplexity happens,
while ye seem to abound in life, and to want wealth, and while that want
passes away, there comes another, and when ye abound in wealth, ye want
life. Of this was not that wise man ignorant, whereas he speaks of the
sparer that said, I will seek rest unto my self, and will now eat alone of
my goods: And he perceyueth not how the time passes away, and how he leaves
all that he has, when he dies, unto other. And in another place he says, He
that heapeth up riches together unrighteously, gathers for other, that shall
riotously consume his goods. O terrible saying, which we see yet to be true
every day before our eyes, but notwithstanding nothing profiting the minds of
the covetous. And again he says, There is nothing more wicked, then a
covetous person, nor more ungodly, then to love money. And to the intent thou
may perceive how all things agree in the truth, as Aristotle says,
behold how the Heathen Philosopher, agrees with the Ecclesiastical wise man,
Men ought, says Cicero, to eschew the desire of money: for there is no sign
so great of a base and a vile mind, as to love money.


Of envy and malice. The.Cvj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Do bear envy.


Reason. The above named affection wyshed well unto thee, but this means
evil unto other, and by so much is this worse then that, and malice more
discommendable then covetousness Very well therefore says the same wise man,
of whom I spoke even now, The eye of the malicious is wicked, but the eye of
the couetouse is never satisfied.


Sorrow. I am tormented with envy.


Reason. Tyrants of Sicile, found no greater torment then envy, as says
Horace the Poet: which is now translated, by means of a pestilent Southern
wind, unto your Tyrants and Princes.


Sorrow. I am vexed with envy.


Reason. Thou dooest both offend, and art also punished by present and ready
justice.


Sorrow. The prosperity of my neighbor, breeds envy within me.


Reason. Truly I believe thee: But there is none of you that enuieth at the
king of the Parthians or Persians, nor any of them that enuieth at you. The
time has been, when ye envied one at another, for that your Empire was so
great, that you were borderers one on another. But suffiseth it ye not to be
grieved with your own euylles that are so many, but that other folks
prosperity must also afflict you, and make you altogether mad and miserable?


Sorrow. I spite at my neighbors.


Reason. A common matter, malice is bleare eyed, and can not see far of:
Neyghbourhood and prosperity are parents unto envy.


Sorrow. I envy at other men's good estate.


Reason. If thou be envious, thou must needs also be base minded: of all
vices, there is none more sluggyshe then envy, it can not ascend into high
minds, neither is there any more wretched, and therefore all other presuppose
some good thing, although it be false, but this is only nourished with euyls,
and grieved with good, and suffers that evil it self, which it wysheth to
others. And therefore I like well of the saying of Alexander King of Macedonie,
to wit, That malicious men are nothing else, but their own tormenters: Truly,
a grave saying, of so light a young Prince.


Of wrath. The.Cvij. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUT I am angry.


Reason. I have promised comfort against adversity, and not against vices: as
for these, they are not casual, but voluntary, and in your own power, who
then shall constrayne thee to be angry?


Sorrow. I am angry when I am offended.


Reason. Perhaps he whom thou blamest for offendyng thee, complayneth that thou
have offended him: the offenses are not so great, as is your insolency
marvelous.


Sorrow. I burn with wrath.


Reason. Then art thou mad: And wrath, says Horace, is a short madness; but
many (through evil custom and impatience) do make it a long madness. For
Ennius says, That anger is the beginning of madness, seeing that unto many
that give them selves over unto it, it makes an end both of their madness
and life also. For as the plague (whereof we disputed before) even so this
likewise, although it trouble other, yet does it most torment the possesser
thereof: so that I marueyle the more for what cause it should seem unto some,
to be (I know not how) sweeter then honey: revenge perhaps may have in it
some taste of cruel and savage pleasure, but surely anger has nothing in it
but bitterness.


Sorrow. I am angry for injuries.


Reason. There was never any almost so hastily disposed, that would be angry
for nothing, unless perhaps it were Caelius the Senator, the angriest man
that ever lived, who when as his client agreed with him in all points, and
confessed whatsoever he required of him, yet cried he out (being angry)
saying, Say somewhat contrary, that we may disagree. A wylfull man truly:
how would he have borne injuries, that could not bear gentle speech?


Sorrow. I am angry, for that I am provoked by offense.


Reason. On this side men commonly offend very much: they pick quarrelles,
and seek occasions, and in those causes, for which they may justly be angry,
their wrath exceeds measure. In all offenses there is some excuse alleged,
and the excuse it self is an offense: but thou, because thou art not obeyed as
a God, art wroth, and GOD him self is every day provoked in words and
deeds, but is not always angry. As for you, ye draw every overthwart
word, be it never so small, unto some heinous crime of life and death,
wherein you show your selves to be an impacient generation.


Sorrow. I am angry with them that have deserved it.


Reason. If of thee, it is ill done, if of the Common wealth, and it be not
done in anger, but for the love of Justice, it is very well: and to speak
breefely, that saying of Tully is precisely to be kept, to wit, that anger be
far of, with which nothing can be ryghtly and discreetely handled. And
therefore the saying of Archytas Tarentinus is woorthyly commended, and also
the deed of his freende Plato, of whom the one, when being wholly occupied in
the study of learning, he saw his goods destroyed and wasted through the
negligence of his Baylife, turnyng him self toward him: truly (quoth he) I
would punyshe thee according to thy desert, unless I were now angry with
thee. The other being offended with his servant, did not let him go freely as
Archytas did, but committed him unto one of his friends to be punished,
fearyng lest that the vehemency of anger should enforce him farther then
reason would require. These and such like examples, ought to moderate men's
anger, lest happily, as commonly it chances, it drive them headlong into
infamy, and destruction.


Of Gluttony. The.Cviij. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM molested with gluttony.


Reason. I said erwhyle, that I take those things in cure only, that happen
unto men against their wylles: for who will heal them that are wyllyngly sick
and diseased?


Sorrow* I am vexed with gluttony.


Reason. Properly spoken in deed: for there is nothing so vile, that makes
you so careful. It is wonderful and sha^^efull to think, whereunto the
disposition of mankind, which was created unto higher matters, does incline
it self, since that forsakyng the coasts of the land, ye go about to
search out the see^e^e tractes of the Sea and Air. Ye have veuised Ne^^es,
and Hooks, and Byrdlime, and Snares, and Hawks also ^e ^aue ^aught to come
and go at your commandment, and to pray for your pleasure, and for nothing
else, but to serve your throtes, which you cloy not only with fyllyng, but
also with ouerburdenyng, and by sundry means you oppress your slender
belly, by too much followyng the greediness thereof, for which hunger were
much more convenient, but sobriety most profitable above of all other
things: when as ye ought rather to give some rest unto that filthy and
miserable paunche of yours, and to leave some quietness unto the Wooddes,
Clouds, and Rivers. But thus goes the world, and this is the manner,
specially among Noblemen, these are the arces which sometime being liberal,
are now become Handicraftes, which ye apply: and they that were wont to be
Generalles of Armies, and Philosophers, and Gouerners of Cities, and Fathers of
their Country, are now become Hunters, and Faulkoners, that thou may
understand, how that there is now no hope of salvation remainyng. That is
ascribed unto Nobility, which is gluttony, or rather plain vanity. This
mischief is by noneother means better beaten down, then by a certain noble
disdain and indignation, and by vpryght consideration of the thing it self,
either by little and little, as Cicero lyketh it, or suddenly, as Aristotle
thinks it good. It avails very much to think upon the end, which being a
general rule in all vices, yet is it most effectual in this vice, and also in
letcherie.


Of sluggyshnesse of the mind. The.Cjx. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am sluggyshe in doing of business.


Reason. What marvel, if after so diligent study of gluttony, sluggyshnesse
of the mind do follow the heaviness and ouerburrdening of the body?


Sorrow. I am grieved with dullness of mind.


Reason. This dullness springs from an imperfect will, but so soon as thou
shall begin to bend thine endeavor, it will grow to an earnest desire and
courage, which being very ill unto many things, is most commendable unto
virtue.


Sorrow. I am slouthful, and sluggysh to rise unto any good works.


Reason. There is a certain dullness in the mind, and also a courageous
feruencie engraffed in a part of the mind, which feruencie will be set on
fire, and dullness shaken of, by consyderyng the swyftnesse of time in passing
away, which is so great, that there is no mind, be it never so swyfte, that
is able to measure it: and also the surpassyng beauty of virtue, which is so
lovely, that if it could be seen with the bodily eyes, as Plato says, it
would rauyshe men woonderfully with the love thereof. Therefore, let love on
the one side, and fear on the other stir thee up, for both of them are very
effectual: for neither he that loves, neither he that hates, can commonly be
dull and sluggyshe: and yet notwithstanding, ye rise in the night time unto
divine service, wherein ye pray that hurtful sleep and sluggyshnes oppress
you not: there is no place for sleep nor sluggyshuesse, when as death frayeth
you on the one side, and virtue on the other. For who could ever be slothful
and careless in great dangers, or great aduauncementes? Whenever thou haft
respect unto these, courage will resort to the mind, and sleep will fly from
the eyes, when ye think with your selves, how much imperfection remains
within you, and how much time ye have spent in idleness: whereof when men
have no consyderation, we see how they spend long ages unprofitably, and
hear old men wonderyng and amazed to say: What have we done here these many
years? We have eaten, drunken, and slept, and now at last we are awaked too
late. The chief cause whereof is this sluggyshnesse, whereof thou complaynest,
which in time ought to be driven away by the pricks of industry, and the
bridle of foresyght, least that by ouerlong staying, thou be carried away with
the multitude, unto a dishonorable end.


Of Letcherie. The.Cx. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM shaken with the vehemency of Letcherie.


Reason. Letcherie is begotten by slothfulness, and brought forth by
gluttony: what marvel is it then, if the daughter follow her parents? As
for gluttony and letcherie, they are common unto you with beasts, and that
they make your life more beastly, then any other thing, wise men have so
judged: and therefore although there be many mischiefs more grievous, yet is
there none more vile.


Sorrow. I am carried away with Letcherie.


Reason. Whyther I pray thee, but unto death, both of the body and soul, and
infamous ignominy, and too late, and perhaps unprofitable repentance? Go
thy ways now, and follow her that carries thee away unto such ends.
Think upon the miserable and notorious chances of innumerable, not only
private men, but also Cities and Kingdoms, which partly by sight, and partly
by hearesay, but specially by readyng, ought to be very well known, and then I
suppose thou wylt not give thy hand unto this vice to follow it. Hear what
the best learned have judged, and written concerning this matter, Pleasures,
says Cicero, being most flatteryng Ladies, do wreast the greater parts of
the mind from virtue. To this end, says Seneca, they embrace us, that they
may strangle us, which none otherwise then Thieves that lay wait for
traueylers upon the way, and lead them aside, to murder them, ought to be
avoided. Wherein it shall much avail, if whosoever shall feel him self
infected with this mischief, do imagine that most excellent sayeing of Scipio
Africane in Liuie, which he spoke unto king Masinissa, to be spoken unto him
self: Vanquishe thy mind, quoth he, and take heed thou do not deforme many
good gifts with one vice, and corrupt the beauty of so many desartes, with a
greater fault then the cause of the fault is. The which shall be done the
more easily, if a man do think earnestly upon the vileness, fylthinesse,
shortness, and end of the thing, and also the long reproach, and the short
time, and how perhaps the pleasure of one brief moment, shall be punished
with the repentance of many years, and peradventure with everlasting
damnation.


Of Pride. The.Cxj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I AM lyfted up with pride.


Reason. Earth and ashes, why art thou proud? Can thou that art oppressed
with the burden of so many mischiefs, be lyfted up with pride? Who if thou
were free from them al, and were lyfted up by the wings of al virtues, yet
were al thy good gifts defiled with this vice only: For there is nothing more
hateful unto God, then pride. By this fell he that was created in most excellent
estate, by which thou being a sinner think to arise. If it happened so unto
him for this one thing, what do thou think will befall unto thee, in whom
this wickedness is joined with other vices? Thou have heaped a naughty weight
upon thy burden.


Sorrow. I am carried with pride.


Reason. Why should thou be so, I pray thee? Do thou not remember that
thou art mortal, that thou wearest away every day, that thou art a sinner, that
thou art subject to a thousand chances, and in danger every day to uncertain
death, and finally, that thou art in wretched case? And have thou not also
heard the most famous saying of Homer, The earth nourishes nothing more
wretched then man? I would feign know which of these does most cheefely
prick thee forth unto pride, whether the imbecilitie of the body, or the
whole army of sickenesses, or the shortness of life, or the blyndenesse of
the mind, which continually wauereth between most vain hope and perpetual
fear, or the forgetfulness of that which is past, or the ignorance of that
which is to come and present, or the treachery of enemies, or the death of
friends, or continuing adversity, or flytting prosperity? By these and none
other ladders ye ascend unto pride, by these ye rise to ruin. All other
dangers wherein men do walter, have some excuse, although it be unjust: but
pride and envy have no color at al.


Sorrow. I am sorry that I am proud.


Reason. To be sorry for sin, is the first degree to salvation. And as it is
the nature of pride to lift up, so is it of humility to be sorry and submit it
self, which thou shall do the more easy, so soon as thou turnest thine eyes
earnestly upon thy self: which being so, I am not minded, neither ought I to
heap up unto theeaucthorities written in books against vices: This only
shall be sufficient, that thou know, that so soon as ever thou be disposed
unfeignedly, al these matters will surceasse immediately, and whenever, as they
say, thou shall blow the retreat, and retire to thine ensigns, as touching
this present mischief. This one thing I will say moreover: that pride is a
sickness of wretches, and fools: for doubtless they be such that be proud,
otherwise I am sure they would never be proud, neither is it written without
cause in the book of Wisdom: That all that are foolysh and unfortunate, are
proud about the measure of their soul. And truly, if they were wise for their
souls health, their mean were to abase their estate, knowing their own
imbecilitie. For so thou read it written in the same book: He that is a
king to day, shall dye to morrow. And when a man dies, he shall have serpents,
and beasts, and woormes for his inheritance. The beginning of pride is to fall
from God, for that he forsakes him that made him, and forasmuch as pride is
the beginning of al sin. Thou know al other things, which being
diligently weighed, thou shall perceive how foul a monster a proud man is.


Of Agues. The.cxii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Burn with Agues.


Reason. This heat will end in process of time, or else with cold: which ever
of the twain it be, it is well.


Sorrow. I am grieved with agues.


Reason. All this motion against nature, is of more vehemency then
continuance, and of these twain it always does the one, either it cleanses
the body, or sets the soul at liberty.


Sorrow. I am holden with Agues.


Reason. Stay a while, thou shall not long be holden: for either thou shall
soon be discharged thereof, or set at liberty: and either of them is very
good.


Sorrow. I am sick of an Ague.


Reason. Thou shall be at quiet anon: nature strives with death, attend the
end of the battle, for the hour draws nygh, which shall either free thee
from thy sickensse, or discharge thee from al.


Sorrow. I burn with the Ague.


Reason. It is less harm for the body to burn then the foul, whereof thou
made thy last seven complayntes: and how if the scortching of the one, be
medicinable for the other? Finally, how much more better is it by a short cast
of the euyles of this present life, to be put in mind of the everlasting
punishment, to the end that men may study to avoid infinite bitterness, who
so grievously sustain the sharpness of a few hours, and by these troubles
learn to fly them, from which neither the Physician, nor herbs, nor the
critical day, nor death can deliver them?


Sorrow. I try with the Fever.


Reason. The woormes meat is roasted: suffer thy self to be burned for other,
for whom other meats have been so often times burned, and take aduisement of
the punishment. Many euyles have stood in steed of remedies: a small grief in
the present time has often given men occasion to provide for greater to come,
and that which was paineful becomes profitable. Happy is that short
burning, which is the cause of eternal joy.


Sorrow. I am molested with the Ague.


Reason. Now shall thou be an vpryght judge of prosperous health. For you men
being an unthankful generation, cannot acknowledge the gifts of God, unless
they be lost, or surceasse.


Sorrow. I am sore vexed with a greiuous ague.


Reason. Ye cannot long continue together. No man can burn long: For either
thou will shortly forsake thine ague, or else thine ague will leave thee.


Of the pain of the guts, and Trance. The.cxiii Dialogue.
SORROW. I Suffer the pain of the guts.


Reason. Begin to hope, for there can happen now nothing more grievous unto
thee. For like as it is the beginning of sorrow, to come to the uttermost
degree of pleasure, so likewise the extremity of sorrow must needs be the
beginning of pleasure. This is the law of contraries, that the one spryngeth
from the end of the other.


Sorrow. I am tormented with the Iliake passion.


Reason. It is, I confess, an hard kind of comfort, that a man can suffer
nothing more bitter.


Sorrow. I am vexed with the Iliake passion.


Reason. Who so is sorry and fears, is in wretched case: but fear, which is
the one half of misery, is taken from thee on every side: for whereof, I pray
thee, need he to be afeard, who hops for death whereof above al things men
stand most in dread?


Sorrow. I am martyred with the pain in the gu^tes.


Reason. While thou lyuest learn to dye, and that which must be done but once,
assay thou to do often, and then at length thou shall do that more safely once,
which thou have assayed to do so often: for that which thou do then,
shall be no strange thing to thee. The pain in the guts, is much like unto
death, saving that death is shorter and easier, so that he that can bear that
pain valiantly, unless some other fear come between and alter the case,
shall much more valiantly endure death.


Sorrow. I am torn in pieces by the iliacke passion.


Reason. The vehemency of the pain promises an end: for there is no man
long a dying.


Sorrow. Yea, the very pain drives me into a sound.


Reason. The long pains of feauers thou passest over with one breathyng.


Sorrow. I feel how I am fallen into a trance.


Reason. A man shall scarce perceive when it is coming: for it comes
suddenly, and when it is come, it presently depriueth the understanding of all
force.


Sorrow. I begin to faint.


Reason. O, happy art thou, that shall pass over so assured and hard a thing
without sense.


Sorrow. I fall often times into a trance.


Reason. Thou returnest often from death to life.


Sorrow. I fall very often into a deadly trance.


Reason. Thou can not fall into that twyce. For none dies more then once: and
which should be the best kind of death, there was sometime disputation among
certain learned and notable men, at which was Julius Caesar in presence, for
empire and learning a most excellent personage: who also in his latter time, as
some write of him, used many times to faint suddeynly, which question he in
this manner determined, concludyng, that a suddeine and unlooked for death, was
of all the most commodious. Which opinion, although unto godliness and true
religion it seem very hard, notwithstanding every one that wise is, but
specially godly, and studious of true religion ought so to live, that nothing
may befall unto him soddenly and unlooked for, and if any such thing happen to
the mind, that the soddennesse thereof hurt it not, but profit also the body.


Of sundry pains and greefes of the whole body. The.cxiiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am grieved in all parts of my body.


Reason. If thy mind, which is the gheast of the body, be not grieved nor
troubled, it is well: whatsoever happens unto the poor cottage thereof, shall
redownde (I hope) unto the safety of it.


Sorrow. I am vexed in all my body, which is a grievous pain.


Reason. The Stoikes say, that among al humane things, only virtue is good.
And although others be of another opinion, yet this is the more true and manly,
as seems unto me, and many more: whereof it follows, that whatsoever is
contrary hereunto, is a vice: whereby it comes to pass, that although the
pain of the body be most grievous, yet it is not evil.


Sorrow. Alas poor wretch how I am tormented, and thou disputest, and al are
but philosophical fables.


Reason. Thou show thy self to be a wretch, if it were but in this point
only, for that thou call the rules of man's life, fables.


Sorrow. These things are plausible in the schools, and famous in books, but
they are not able to enter into the rack, or to clymbe up into the beds of
the sick, they be spoken and written, more easily then practiced.


Reason. Yes truly, they be profitable against pain, and sickness, and
death, but not unto al, for that they cannot sink into all men's minds, and
truly unto those that will give no credit to them, they can do no pleasure.


Sorrow. Alas I am tormented, and thou disputest.


Reason. This thy sorrow must needs be long, or vehement, and therefore
requires either easy, or short patience.


Sorrow. Alas, alas, I am cruelly vexed.


Reason. If thy pain be extreme, then must it needs be short, and therefore
lament no more, for it must needs either go away from thee, or set thee
packing: set thy doors wide open for either liberty, and remember in the
mean while that it is a valiant and manly thing to bear humane chances with
indifferency.


Sorrow. It is a goodly matter, I grant, in words to speak it, but truly I
think to do it, impossible.


Reason. It is not the impossibility of the things, but the dayntinesse of
men that causes innumerable to forsake virtue, and will cause many hereafter,
whiles every hard thing is refused as impossible. Thus virtue perysheth, whose
subject is a certain difficulty, but that which is honest.


Sorrow. We be men, and no gods, and poor dying bodies are not able to abide
the force of pain.


Reason. That men's bodies are frail I cannot deny, but yet not so frail but
that they have strength enough to bear al adversity, were it not that the
infirmity of your minds were much greater. This is it which forces out of
men unseemly houlynges, and womanish and effeminate voices: For (I pray thee)
why should thou think that impossible for a man, to do, which thou see
that in old times men could do, and did also?


Sorrow. Alas, I am now called away agaynt unto hystories, and in the very
midst of the pains of my grief, being scarce myndeful of my self, I am
revoked unto the remembrance of ancient examples.


Reason. Does not then the remembrance of most excellent men, who valiantly
sustained the like, bring great ease and comfort in all adversity?


Sorrow. I know it well, but thou can allege unto me but few whom I may
imitate: thy advise is glorious, but to high for man, and above his capacity.


Reason. Why say thou above man's capacity? Seeing they are not the reasons
and examples of gods, but of men, which I lay before thee.


Sorrow. Of men in deed I grant, mary but of few, whose rareness is such, as
almost they are none at al: and I can see but small difference between the
Phoenix and Chimera: but I follow them which say that Chimera is nothing, for
among some it is an hyl in Sicil.


Reason. As though that the Phoenix were laid before thee to immitate, and not
almost an whole army of men, who the rarer they be found, so much the more
worthy they are, whom thou should covet to be like: whosoever neglects to
follow rare men, shall never be rare man him self.


Sorrow. I perceive how thou would have me be one of a few, but I am one of
many.


Reason. I had rather almost that thou were no body, then to be one of many: I
cannot determine whether it were better not to be at al, then to be a fool:
for to be one of the greatest number, and to be a fool, is al one.


Sorrow. I know that there is nothing worse, then not to be at al.


Reason. Thou know not how ill it is to be somewhat, nor to be what thou
ought to be.


Sorrow. Thou speak this, although that must needs happen to al, which by
chance befalls unto one, which thou would have to be applied unto al.


Reason. Thou say ill, to happen, for veriue comes not by hap, but
altogether by deliberation and election, and is gotten, not by chance, but by
study. Neither do I draw that unto al which chance has given unto few, but
that which virtue has given to many do I draw unto one, being wylling to
draw it to all, but I am weeried even in one.


Sorrow. But al men cannot do all things.


Reason. That this is not only a poetical, but also a shepheardly speech, I
know very well: but I would that thou should have a power or a will to do
that which al cannot do, which now thou can, and I desire that thou
would have a will to do it.


Sorrow. Alas, why do thou disquiet me poor wretch, is it not sufficient
that I am vexed with pain?


Reason. I go about rather to procure thy quietness, and to take away this
torment from thee, which I shall be never able to do alone, unless thou set to
thine helping hand.


Sorrow. Phy, phy, what is that which thou say that I am able to do? Can I
otherwise choose then feel the pain which I feel? or deny that to be evil,
which in deed I find to be very ill?


Reason. The first I will not require at thy hands, for nature gaynesayeth it:
the second, that I may not obtain, it is not nature, nor truth, but only
error yt withstandeth.


Sorrow. Out alas, to what purpose serve these foolyshe discourses which you
call philosophical? I know certainly, that pain is no infirmity of the mind,
but of the body: I know that pain is anotheer thing from falsehood: to be in
pain one thing and to steal another: these things, yt thou may teathe me
no new matter, yea though thou add nothing unto them, are of the^ selves I
know a great evil, and also that pain is of it self evil, I know well enough:
ye means and way how to know which thing to be so, I do not want, but rather
how to suffer, or most of al to drive it away. For I know very well, and I
would I knew not so much, what pain is.


Reason. And I know also that pain is a bitter thing, cruel, horrible, sower,
sharp, contrary to nature, odious to the senses, but which notwithstanding
may not only be made sweet by the assistance of virtue, as Epicurus said,
dissendyng from him self, but also be lenified and rebated, and also the
greater vehemency thereof, if the mind be armed with true virtue, either be
fealt more tollerably, or in a manner not be fealt at al.


Sorrow. Armed or unarmed, I sustain most cruel pain, and profess that it
is a very evil thing.


Reason. I would wyshe rather to hear some other profession of thee.


Sorrow. If we be again called back unto plausible and fair things,
magnifical words do delight the ears, but true speeches the mind: and what
if the bodily grief be greater then the patience of the mind?


Reason. What if there be no delites nor greefes of the body, nor afflictions
whatsoever ouerth wharting, that are comparable to the strength of the mind?
What if in all conflictes, if so be that it wyllingly gave not over, but with all force and unfeignedly resisted the adversary, it always had the upper
hand, and departed the conqueror?


Sorrow. What if it happen, that unto the intollerablenesse of the pain, there
ve added some farther grief, as filthiness, loathsomenesse, and shame of the
disease? What if the foul leprosy have invaded the corrupt and wretched
carckase? In this case what will thy talk avail me?


Reason. Very much truly, if thou reject it not, for it will discover thee
unto thy self, who seeing al things, yet see not thy self: It will also
cause thee to remember yt this thy poor carckase is made of the earth, and so
mortal, not ayreal and eternal. Neither ought thou to maruayle, or take in
ill part, if corruption enter upon her own earth, and the substance of man
depart unto it own natural place, if also the mind, and most excellent matter
whereof man consists, unless they rebel, be disposed and directed unto
felicity is and everlasting perpetuity, and the viler substance subject to
death, and capable of al kind of misery. Therefore, whether it be the
leprosse, or falling sickness, or whatsoever can happen more loathsome or
grievous then any of these, thou must think assuredly, that there is no more
fallen upon this vessel of misery, then that which the potter that made it,
appointed unto it from the beginning, against whom the vessels of Clay are
warned not to murmur, although he have made some of them to honor, and some to
dishonor, but all frail and mortal.


Sorrow. Shall I then, by thine advice, bear this leaprosie without murmur or
complaint?


Reason. Yea truly, by mine advice and counsel: to whom if thou can prove,
that thy murmur and complaints do any whyt profit thee, or assuage thy
grief, then will I change mine opinion, and suffer thee, or rather exhort thee
to do them both. But if repinyng and complaints be nothing else, but an
increasing of the mischief, what shall it avail thee to heap the sickness
of the mind, upon the infirmity of the body, and by lamentyng to make thy
self more miserable, and him more sharp against thee, who beholds the
trauelles of men from an high, and consydereth their patience to requite it
with remedy or reward? Is it a small comfort against all plagues and
afflictions of the body, or because thou bewaylest this one by name, against
this also, to know that the leprosy is an infirmity of the skin and
color, not of the good estate or integrity of the senses and limbs, as we
know S. Augustine holds opinion, and natural Philosophers do not gaynesay.
But admit that it pearce the skin, and tearyng the flesh, enter into the
very intrailes, as we read it did unto Plotinus the great Platonike? Truly
into the soul it can not enter, unless it self consent thereto, which being
in good health, it will no more regard the outward shape and look of the
body, then will a sound and healthful ghest be moved, to see the outward
walls of his Inn where he lodges, to pyll and be rough, by reason of wind
and weather. Yea, moreover, the leprosy takes him that is infected therewith,
from among the common people, and continual conversation with such men, whose
company to avoid, they ought to refuse no pains whatsoever, nor to crave
aid thereunto of any whosoever: but to be short, in brynging the body into
great lothsomnesse, it delyuereth the mind of as much altogether.


Sorrow. Alas, how should I believe one that prayseth the vilest things?


Reason. They are not the diseases of the body, but the vices of the mind,
which are the vilest things: neither do I therefore praise the leprosy,
because I commend equanimitie and patience: and I exhort thee also, not to
take in so ill part and so lamentably thy private hap in humane affairs,
seeing that it is common unto thee, with the mighty Emperor and great
Philosopher Constantinus, and Plotinus, of whom we talked erewhile. And last of
all, it is convenient for thee to lay before thine eyes, how that the Lord
hates not the Leprosy, but sin, yea the very same Lord that is Judge both
of men and angels, of whom it is written: The evil dooer shall not dwell
near unto thee, nor the unrighteous stand before thine eyes: Yet did be not
nevertheless abhor, nor flee from the Leprous, but frequented their houses,
and kept company with them at feasts and banqueties.


Sorrow. Thou ouercommest me with words, and pain in deeds, wherein I give
no credit unto the triflyng of Philosophers, but to mine own senses, and what
they tell me I know well enough.


Reason. First, the gravity of the whole body of Philosophy is not
overthrown, in respect of the triflinges, as thou truly tearmest them, of
certain Philosophers, which in deed I can not excuse nor deny: which
Philosophy, both in this whereof we now entreat, as also in many other
things, is only the undoubted rampire in earth of a troubled mind. And
lastly, there is nothing more absurd among them that love me, then for them to
seek after the truth by the deceiuable judgment of the senses: for the
truth ought not be sought by the senses, but by wit and study.


Sorrow. Alas, why do thou vex me, and add weariness unto my pain? Gene
me rather some remedy, for neither thou, not yet Philosophy her self, as
much as she makes for thee, shall ever constrain me to confess that I feel
no yt, which I feel in deed.


Reason. The delicate and loothing patient must some time be obeyed, and now
and then he must be suffered to use that, which of it self being hurtful,
becomes profitable by means of his longing for it. And so am I content like
wise to suffer, that if sickness, if punishment, if offense, if affliction be
euylles of the body, which of the Stoikes seem to be called discommodities,
that the pain which rises thereof may appear to be, and to be ryghtly called
evil, and if thou wylt have it so a great evil to: but yet such an evil as
may be overcome by virtue, and that I may no longer stand in contention of the
word, our freende Cicero shall reconcile us well together. For I do not
deny, says he, but that pain is pain in deed: for else, why should
Fortitude be required? but I say, that it is overcome by patience, if so be
patience be any thing at all, but if it be nothing, to what end are we
garnished with Philosophy, or why are we made glorious with her name? Thus
much says Cicero. Much more also in the same place, is by him divinely set
down against this inconvenience or mischief, in the second days disputation
of his Tusculane questions, comprehendyng the discourses of five days in
equal number of books, which place I thought good to point out unto thee,
for that it is very effectual unto that, whereof thou stand now in need,
especially patience, and courage of mind, which being empayred and lost, false
opinions of the common multitude creep in, and lamentations unmeet for men,
break forth.


Sorrow. Now thou layest thine hand nearer my grief, teaching me where I may
find those things, which unto me, being in this case, will I trust, be better
and more convenient, then the brutishe and stony opinions of the Stoikes:
although also in trustyng, I distrust. For whiles being greedy of remedy, I
repeat often unto my self the same place, the better to endure the pain,
nevertheless I shall be never able of my self, neither by the help of Cicero,
nor any other to find sufficient ability there unto.


Reason. This distrust I do not discommende, but rather praise: let no man
trust much to him self, but in all difficulties, seek help not of man, but
of GOD: howbeit, not in such sort, that he believe that there shall come
Angels down from heaven armed, to deliver him. GOD sometime perhaps
favors wicked men, but as for the slothful, he never helps them. If thou
would seem worthy of succor, do as much as in thee lies, to stir
up, to advance, and to arm thy mind, which being done, bring him forth
into the feelde against the Enemies.


Sorrow. The residue, I suppose, I understand what thou meanest: but this one
thing I demand, which be these weapons of the mind, whereof thou speak?


Reason. This is well: Now I conceive some hope of thy welfare. In the
sharpness of matters to weep, is womanyshe: but endeavor against a thing, to
resist it: to seek counsel and help, is the part of a man, and effectual
to prevail. The weapons of the mind, and the skyll and policy in fighting,
are many and diverse, according to the diversity of the enemies. Neither is
there any duty in Philosophy more profitable or holy, then to entreat of
these, which as I suppose, do more appertain unto you, then to know what
the Planettes do, what the aspect of Jupiter promises in a nativity, what
Saturn threatens being in conjunction with Mars, what qualities Mercurius the
wanderyng interpretour takes from the father and brethren, what he boroweth of
every one that he meets, what is the cause of showers and heat, whereof
come earthquakes, by what power and force the deep Seas do swell: and not to
know from whence the cold, heat, swellyng, quakyng, and weakness of the
mind proceed, and by what means the heat may be tempered, the swellyng
assuaged, the quakyng and weakness strengthened and confirmed. In which
practice, although Aristotle do laugh and gybe at Socrates, yet perhaps,
afterward he changed his mind, and followed the same study not a little. But
these matters are commonly to be found dispearsed in the writings of the
Philosophers, wherewith to furnyshe the ignorant were over tedious, and too
long a matter for this brief discourse, and unto the skylfull superfluous, who
needs not to be taught, but only admonished.


Sorrow. I know it is so, neither demanded I of all things, but only this
one, what weapons thou would specially minister unto me, wherewith I might
encounter this mine enemy Pain, against whom I now fight?


Reason. Hereunto can I not answer thee better, nor brieflyer, then does
Cicero. For he asks the question as thou dooest: And what weapons, says he,
are these? He answeareth immediately, Earnest endeavor, Confyrmation, and
Inward communication.


Sorrow. Discourse, I pray thee, upon every one of them: for I have read them
many times heretofore, howbeit I am afearde, lest it happen unto me, as it does
unto many, who when they read any thing to them selves, thynk that they
understand all, but when they come to utter them selves before other, then
perceive they that they understand nothing. And therefore tell me, if you
please, what is this earnest endeavor?


Reason. This appears sufficiently, if thou proceed a little forward in
Ciceroes own words: but that thou shall not seem to ask any thing of me in
vain, I will declare the same another way. There be many things like in the
minds and bodies, and as there is no force of the body so great, so likewise
is there no strength of the mind of such power, which with a sudden and heavy
burden will not quayle and bend. See that they be evermore provided, and
ready, least they be both overthrown by their own greatness, but that when
need shall require, they be found prepared: for many times a very valiant man
has been sore afearde, at the sudden meetyng of a mighty enemy. Give thy
mind space to refresh it self, and to show forth it own strength in the
present danger, and then shall it receive the assault of the enemy with
security. The Champions that are ready to combat at the exercise called
Caestes, make ready their arms, and set their neck and shoulders unto the
burden, and by bending their strength, they show the more valor in the fight,
and having prepared them selves, they bear yt weight more easily, under which
if they went slouthfully to work, they might happen to fall more dangerously.
In like manner, whenever there appears any great difficulty, the mind must
be bent against it, which if it be thoroughly done, it shall become conqueror
over all extremities: otherwise incredible it is to be spoken, how soon a
sluggyshe and unprovided mind is overthrown by a small occasion. This is that
same earnest endeavor of mind, whereof Cicero speaks, or whether thou
had rather have it termed an Intention of the mind, for both these
words have but one signification, indifferently, as thou feast used by him,
and derived both from one word.


Sorrow. I perceive, and hear thee gadly, but what is Confirmation?


Reason. I will show thee: In the minds that are most valiant, there are some
points of distrust to be sound joined with other laudable affections, and
although they be truly persuaded, yet false matters sound about their ears,
and such a multitude of populare errors assemble them selves to vanquishe the
castle of their mind, that it is an hard matter for it to keep upright
judgment. For sometime there comes upon it a certain dullness, and
sometime a doubting whether those things be true or not, which are commonly
reported by men of great learning and holiness, concerning the virtue of
patience, of the cumlinesse of honesty, and the bryghtnesse of glory, or
rather that which is disputed by others, and liked of the common people: to
wit, that the best thing that can be, is to be out of pain, that there is
nothing worse then pain, and that pleasure is the end of all, whatsoever is
good: also, that as for the first, they are the sayings but of few, but these
the speeches welnigh of al men, whereof some times the noise is so great, that
these few voices of those that do exhort, can not be heard, and the keepers
of the Castles being made afearde, forsake their charge, and provide for them
selves by flight. In this case, the mind which is doubtful and uncertain to
which side to turn, ought to be rescued with a fresh force, that it fall not
from it ancient persuasion, as sometime did Dionisius Heracleontes, who when
on a time being overcome with pain, he had rejected yt opinion of his
Schoolemaister Zeno, concerning pain, he deserved to be mocked of his
Schoolefellow Cleantes Let him not, I say, forget, but resist, and keep his
feet within the steps which he has possessed, understanding what is a true
thing in deed, and what shadowed: neither let him be afearde of Bugges, nor
moved at outcries, assuring him self, that pain is nothing but
dastardlinesse, which dastardlinesse, as also pain, and death, and al
difficult things may be overcome by virtue. In this opinion let him continue
fixed and immovable, being ready valiantly to suffer that for virtue sake,
which is terrible unto many to think upon, which could never be done by any
man that had not loved the most singular beauty of virtue, above the
glittering of gold and precious stones, above the gleming of women's faces, or
any other thing that may be desired. By this confirmation of the mind, both
false opinions, and needless fear is weakened, and the sharpness of pain
aswaged. And many times that comes to pass, whereof Cicero speaks, that
like as in battle the Soldier that is afearde, and throws his weapon from
him, when he sees his enemy coming, and by runnyng away, falls into
danger, where, if he had stood to it, there had been none at al: even so, the
very imagination of pain, discomforteth a dastardly mind, which if it had
been armed and furnished with virtue, should have escaped in fafetie, and gone
away conqueror over pain, and have fealt almost no grief at al. For by
patience not only the strength of the mind is increased, but also the
sharpness of pain diminished, and almost consumed to nothing: Whereby it
comes to pass, that in most horrible pains, some have borne them selves
vpryght and immovable, and othersome have been meerie, which could not have
been so, unless the mind being turned from feelyng the pain, had put on the
same firmitude and constancy against it, whereof we nowespeake.


Sorrow. I begin to understand thee: but proceed to tell me what is the
inward speech.


Reason. That also will I tell thee. It is a valiant mind, which
indifferently despises pleasure and pain, and will not yield awhitte unto
eythet: but when it perceyueth it self to be in danger, and besette round
with emmies, then takes weapon in hand, and going forward, and animating it
self to the conflict, talks much with it self, and with it own God:
although Cicero, either knew not this last, or knew not how to do it truly,
not for lack of wit, but for want of grace. Verily, then such kind of
talk whereof I speak, there is none more effectual, either to the obseruyng
of comlynesse, or enflaming the strength to the ensuing of those things, whereof
we have entreated, or to the brynging of our purpose to a wyshed end.
Nevertheless, there must not one sort of words be used, both against the
flatteries of pleasure, and the threats of pain, but diverse, as it is an
easy matter in either case for the skylfull, to discern which are those
flatteries, and which the threats, and how far inferior they are unto
virtue. But because we entreated but of the one of them, I will also allege
one example, but truly a notable one, by means whereof, thou may be the
more perfect in all the residue. And what is then this inward speech, which
is required in pain? Thou remembrest what words the Poet Lucan makes
Pompeius the great to use, among the swoordes of the murderers: but because it
is but a speech feigned by the Poet, according to the quality of the person,
and expressed according to the greatness of the man, in such words, as
might seem agreeable to the valor of his mind, being in that case: therefore
will I let that pass, and recite another true and new example, which many,
that are yet alive in this age, them selves have seen. It is of the same
courageous and invincible ancient Samnite, who, when at the commandment of
him, whose name it were better to suppress in silence, he was drawn in a Cart
naked about the City, sittyng between two Tormentours, who with hot glowyng
tongues teared his flesh from the boones on every side, and the people wept to
behold so miserable and heavy a spectacle, he with dry eyes, and grave
constancy of voice speaking unto him self, said: What do we, O my soul? Be
of good comfort, I pray thee, and do not faint, neither be angry, nor
afearde: although this be paynefull for a time, it shall not continue long, but
be profitable, doubt not, for our everlasting salvation, and this punishment be
more grievous unto him that commanded it, then to thee that suffer it. Lift
up thy self, O soul, and abandon al fear, put thy trust in GOD, and anon al
shall be at an end. By which words, how great a boldness he gathered to him
self, and engendered the like within the hearts of the hearers, it is
incredible to be spoken: how great courage with compassion, constancy,
security, patience he procured to himself and others. Although, if it were
diligently examined, this whereof we speak, is no inward, but an outward
speech, for that, as I have said, it was outwardly heard of many, yet this and
such like words may be spoken by other in silence, and perhaps were spoken so
by him also, for sometime he held his peace, and sometime he brake forth into
these words which I have recited. Moreover, this inward speech may be
understood another way: when as a man regards from whence it comes, and
not whither it is heard, as I suppose it verified in this man, when he spoke
with him self: but of one that in his pains and dangers commoneth with God,
there is no example more notable, then first of Job, and secondly of
Theodosius: The one being strooken by the hand of God, and full of botches,
with what after a manner chiding liberty does he call upon God, and erect him
self unto him with a fervent and complaining devotion? The other, with how
small a train being beset round with an innumerable army of Barbarians, with
what ardencie and sighs did he call upon God as if he had been present? Thou
have heard the history.


Sorrow. I have heard in deed, and remember it will, and by examples I
understand what thou meanest, and I give Cicero hearty thanks, from whose
three small graynes I have reaped three great ears of corn, from which by
due tillage and husbandyng there may be gathered a great harvest.


Reason. True it is in deed, for the words of the learned are very
fruiteful, and as it were withchylde, they contain more matter then they show
for, insomuch as thou seemedst unto me to have forgotten thy pains and
plaintes as long as I talked with thee. Whereby thou gatherest, that an earnest
imagination of an honest thing, whereupon the whole mind is bent without with
drawyng unto any other matters, may procure great releife unto al manner pain
and greeuousnesse.


Sorrow. It may be as thou say in deed, howbeit I am very far from that
health of mind which thou pretendest, and I am greatly in doubt whether pain
may be aswaged, or taken away by them al, or whyther they be words that do
only fyl the mind, and delight the ears, but nothing at al appease gr^ese.


Reason. Words, I confess, cure not the body, unless ^eraduanture
enchauntmentes, and old wives charms deserve any credit, nevertheless they
cure the diseases of the mind, whose good health verily either extinguisheth
or appeaseth al bodily pain. If there were no patience, learned men would
never have disputed so much of it, neither so many arguments hereof should
have taken so firm hold fast in their minds, eyes, and ears. How many
representations of things do thou retain in memory, how many examples
have thou seen or read, how many histories have thou perused, in which it is
not proved, but manifestly declared, that this is so as I say: and that if al
sense of pain be not quenched through patience, which I hold opinion may be
so, and oftentimes has been found so, yet that the conquest is gotten over
pain, and valor procured thereby to endure it manfully? What had Gneius
Marius in him more then thou have, who was a man altogether void of learning,
but rych in martial virtues: was not he likewise made of flesh, blood, and
bones? What more had Mutius, and Pompeius? What Zeno, Theodorus, and Theodatus,
Possidonius and Anaxarchus with others innumerable, whereof some being of a
servile degree, but of merueilous nobility of mind, sustained al kinds of
punishmente and tortures, not only with courage, but also with pleasure? And if
ye would convert your minds and memories unto your own country folks, ye
should find among them very boys and girls which have suffered that with
joy, which you being men cannot abide without tears, and complayntes. But
now I perceive, how that I have stayed upon a matter of al other, as ye say,
most difficult and sharp, longer then has been my custom to do, wherefore I
think it meet to make an end, seeing that if virtue cannot mitigate pain,
it were folly to expect to aswage it with words.


Sorrow. Alas, thou vrgest me at the one side, and pain vexes me on the
other, and I know not which to credit.


Reason. Credit the noblest: wherein this will also much aueile thee, to
think upon that most excellent and glorious light of the world, him I mean,
who in him self united the nature of God and man, who endured so many and
great torments for thy sake, that those which thou sufrest in respect thereof
are but easy, yea sweet, and to be counted a play. They that follow this
kind of remedy shall perceive that the Philosophers knew nothing.


Of Madness. The.cxv. Dialogue.
FEAR. I Am afeard least overmuch pain make me mad.


Reason. Withstand it by wholesome and pleasant thoughts. Some through
manifold passions and affections that are not good nor sound, do open the way
unto madness, and at length fall into perfect fury, like as the Philosophers
hold opinion that contrariwyse an assured habit or custom of virtue is
gained by often frequentyng the actions thereof.


Sorrow. I am afeard of a frenzy.


Reason. If it be like to come through some vice of the mind, arm it with
virtue which is the proper armor thereof: but if of the body, thou must ask
counsel and succor at the hands of the Physicians, which are the governors
of men's bodies. But if so be that thou have none near unto thee, or if they
that profess that science be unskillful in thy disease, then will I prescribe
thee this one rule, to use abstinence, and flee all excess. It is no less
well known then ancient, how that the holy fathers build their bodies with
virtue, wherein it much avails both the body and mind to bridle Leacherie
and Gluttony. Many have been overthrown by leacherie, many oppressed by
surfeite, many consumed with sleep, many drowned in drunkenness, and many
through the feruencie and outrage of their life, and the furious
lycentiousnesse of their mind, have fallen into stark madness.


Fear. I doubt, least naturally I fall into a frenzy.


Reason. That which nature brings may be hard, but not miserable: for why,
it wants offense, which is the root of misery. And seeing thou have the
grace to foresee it, follow this advice, that if madness cannot be eschewed,
yet at the leastwyse it may find thee in good and perfect estate of soul. For
if thou begin to wax mad being an innocent and without sin, then shall thou
dye an innocent, or recover an innocent. There is no age, no holiness, no
wakefulnesse that so well preserves innocence as madness does, look in what
case it takes a man, in the same it leaves him.


Fear. I am afearde to be mad.


Reason. Art thou a fearde to have great personages, Kings and Queens to be
thy companions? Do thou disdain Hercules and Ajax, Hecuba and Cassandra:
and in another kind, Lucretia and Empedocles?


Fear. I am afeard to be distraught.


Reason. That distraught persons have used to prophecy of many things to
come, we have heard say, in such sort that no wise man could do the like,
to such excellency has this vagarant and furious frenzy atteined. And this
was the cause, why the Grecians termed that Mantice in their tongue, that is to
say, fury, which you in yours call Diuinatio prophecy.


Fear. I abhor the force of madness.


Reason. We have seen the sober sorrowful, and the mad merry, although deceived
in their opinion: yea error also has it peculiar delites.


Fear. The fear of being mad, molesteth my mind.


Reason. Some have sought after rest from labor by counterfeit madness, but
true fury indeed will procure true rest and quietness.


Of Poison. The.cxvi. Dialogue.
FEAR. I Fear poysonyng.


Reason. Abstain from eating and drynkyng commonly abroad, or thou carest not
with whom, use the diligence of thine assured friends about thee, suspicious
persons expel out of thine house, drink no thick wynes, nor troubled drinks,
eschew puddinges, sausages, froyses, and al manner confected and mingled
meats, be wary in thy feedyng, use temperance, and eat not to hastily. Flee
greedy deuouryng, which has cast away many both by this way, and by other
kinds of death. While thou sit at the table let thy hand be slow, thy
eye quick, thy mind swyft, and mindeful of the danger, and let not thine own
eyes, and mind only be attentive, but use also the diligence herein of thy
friends and servants. Great circumspection preuenteth great dangers, and he
that is careless may soon be overtaken.


Fear. I stand in fear of poysonyng.


Reason. I have taught thee a busy medicine: but wylt thou hear the easiest
of al? Be poor, and thou shall not need to stand in hear of poysonyng. For
the mean degree is not in danger to this mischief, but is the mother of
security, and expulser of al terrors, and the most effectual and present
remedy, which being denied unto none, is enforced upon some against their
wylles: The same is of no less virtue, then easy to be had, and doubtless
very safe to be used, although in the woorkyng somewhat rough and unpleasant.
The virtues hereof are these: It represseth the swellyng of the mind, it
cleanses malice, it purges anger, and cures the insatiable dropsy and desire
to drink and have, the the more aman has and drynketh, and the causes of al
dangers it plucketh up by the roots. Your riches are full of deceitfulness and
fear, they fear cups as well as swoordes, and dishes no less then darts:
there is neither your table, nor your house, nor your chamber, nor your bed
void of danger. Al things about you are uncertain and suspicious, and
threaten unto men present death: as Virgil speaks in a tempest, and may be
verified of you in a calm, and all this is long of your sweet riches which ye
love so entirely. As for poverty, saving that it is slaundrously reported of
by the common people, and for the very name odious unto them, al things are
safe in it, and if ever the vain glorious desire to be magnified by the
multitude should fail, altogether pleasant, sweet, quiet, and be wyshed.
But learn at length, you earthly creatures, to eat and drink in glassen and
earthen vessels, if ye will eat and drink in safety, for poison is mingled in
cups of gold and precious stone. O covetousness, how far wylt thou
proceed? Yea, poison is in love with gold and precious stones, against which
most wretched plague, neither the electuarie of Mithridates king of Pontus, nor
of any other, be he never so cunnyng, is more effectual then is poverty.


Sorrow. I have drunken poison, death swymmeth now in my entrails.


Reason. When thou have once persuaded thy self that thou must dye, which al
men must needs determine that remember them selves to be mortal, what skylleth
it whether thou dye by thirsting or drynkyng, or whether imbrued with thine
own blood or with wine? In this kind of death thou shall have great
personages that have been drynkyng fellows with thee of this confection, to
wit, Alexander, Hannibal, Philippomenes, Mithridates, Claudius him self,
Theramenes, and Socrates.


Of the fear of death. The.cxvii. Dialogue.
FEAR. I Fear to dye.


Reason. Herein thou ought not to fear, but to muse: which musing of thine,
if it began now first in thee, then has it not grown up with thee from thine
infancy. But if it come upon thee but by fittes, and is not continual, then
have thou lived unwisely. For this most excellent and profitable advice of the
Poet Horace, ought most firmly to be engraffed within the very marrowe of thy
bones. Between hope and care, and between fear and anger, think every day
to be the last that thou shall live: that thou may be such an one as he
speaks of in an other place. He shall lead his life merrily and under his own
government, who is able to say every day, I have lived: Let to morrow be fair
or foul while I am busy, I do not care. And this forsooth is that, which the
Philosophers do so much commend, to live the forepassed life, whereof I have
spoken in an other place.


Fear. I fear to dye.


Reason. Thou should have feared also to be borne, and to live. The entrance
into life is the beginning of death, and life it self is the passedge to
death, or rather more truly a very death in deed. By living either thou
wentest toward death, or rather, according to the judgment of the wise, thou
beganst every hour to dye. Why should thou then be afeard of death, if
death have either daily accompanied thy life, or of necessity do follow it?
The first of these the learned only do understand, the other the common people
do perceive: for what soever was borne, dies, and what soever dies, was borne.


Fear. I am afearde to dye.


Reason. Fear thou to dye, that art a reasonable mortal creature, as the
Philosophers do diffine thee? But if thou were verily the first, I suppose thou
would not fear the second, for that these two natures being joined in one,
do fully accomplysh the substance of man, to wit, reason, and death. The one
concerns the soul, the other the body, but want of reason, has brought in
the fear of death.


Fear. I fear death.


Reason. Nothing ought to be feared, which the necessity of nature imports.
Who so hates or fears the things that are natural, must needs hate or
fear nature it self. Unless perhaps it be lawful to commend and embrace the
one part thereof, and to condemn and despise the other, then which there is
nothing more insolent, not only in men toward GOD, but also in one man
toward another. And therefore, either thou wholly receyuest or reiectest thy
freende, least if thou reap that only which is sweet, thou seem to be a
partial judge and lover of friendshyp.


Fear. I abhor death.


Reason. If there be any evil in death, the same is increased by the fear of
death. But if there be no evil in death, the fear thereof is a great evil: and
it is a great folly for a man to procure, or increase his own harm.


Fear. I detest the very name of death.


Reason. The infirmity of mankind, has made the name of death infamous. But
if men had any courage of mind, they would no more fear death, then they
would al other things that come by course of nature. And why should thou
more fear to die, then to be borne, to grow up, to hunger, to thirst, to
wake, to sleep. Whereof this last is so like death, that some have termed it
the cousin, and some the image of death. And that thou may not call this
manner of speech either a poetical color, and a Philosophical quirke, Jesus
Christ the truth it self called the death of his friend, a sleep: and art
thou afeard to do that once, wherein thou take pleasure every day? This
inconstancy do the learned wonder at, and also reprove.


Fear. These things are common and usual among the Philosophers, and bring
delight while they are heard: but when they leave soundyng, fear returns.


Reason. Nay rather it remains: for if it were once gonne, it would not
return again: and moreover there is a certain fear of death naturally
ingraffed within the hearts of the common multitude. But it is a shame for a
learned man to have the feelyng but of the vulgar sort, whom it becomes, as
I said erewhyle, not to follow the steps of the greater part, but of a few.
And concerning that which thou speak of Philosophers, I much merueyle,
that since you learn the precepts of saylyng of sailors, and of husbandry of
husbandmen, and also of warfare of warriors, ye refuse to take advice how to
direct your life of the Philosophers? And seeing you ask counsel of Phisitious
for the cure of your bodies, why do you not resort also to Philosophers for the
saluing of your minds, who if they be true Philosophers in deed, they are
both Physicians of your minds, and the instructours of this life? But if they
be counterfeites, and puffed up only with the bare name of Philosophy, they
are not only not to be sought unto for counsel, but to be auayded, then whom
there is nothing more importunate, nothing more absurd: of whom this age is
much more full then I could wyshe, and much more destitute of men, then I
would it were. And therefore, seeing there is nothing else to be expected at
the hands of them that are now present, but meare toys and trifles: yet if
there be any thing alleged by them, which either they have found out them
selves, or borrowed of the ancient writers, that may aswage thy grief, do not
reject it, nor say as do the unlearned, this thou had out of the
Philosophers. For then will I answer thee with Cicero: I thought thou would
have said, of whores and bawdes. And to say the truth, where should a man
fish or hunt, but where fishes and wild beasts are, in the waters and
wooddes? Where is gold to be dug, or precious stones to be gathered, but
where they grow? For they are to be found in the veins of the earth, and
upon the shoares of the sea. Where are marchandizes to be had, but of
merchantes? Where pictures and images, but of paynters and keruers? And last of
al, where wylt thou expect Philosophical sawes, but at the Philosophers hands?
Which, although they lie hyd up by them in their treasuries and were first
found out by them, nevertheless the same are set open and expounded by other,
and that paraduenture more plainly, or more pithily, or more breefely: or
lastly disposed in some other order and method promising like hope unto all that hear them, but bringing success unto few. For such is the force of
order and good joining, as Horace very well declares in his Poeticalles, that
one matter being diversely told represents a greater grace unto ye mind of the
hearer, yea though it be a common thing that is told, such novelty may be
added unto that which is old, and such light unto that which is evident, and
such beawtie unto that which is fair: which I have not now uttered, as
lackyng some other place more convenient thereunto, but because thou
ministredst occasion at this present. For I would not have thee, do, as it is
the manner of blind and ignorant pride, to disdain vulgar and usual things
which thou have heard once, and never understood.


Fear. I yield unto thee, for I see that thou art very ready in these
admonitions, although far from effect to me wards: for I fear death yet
neuerthelatter.


Reason. There be certain things in name and opinion of men greater then in
effect: certain afar of, have seemed terrible, which at hand have been
ridiculous. It were no wisdom to believe the inexpert: there is not one of
these defamers of death that can speak any thing to the purpose, for being
inexpert, he can learn nothing at all, neither can he be instructed in any
matter by one that is inexpert also. Ask a question of a dead man, and he will
answer nothing, and yet it is he that knows the truth. They will babble
most, that know death least, and prophecy most vaynely of it, wherein they
have least skyll. Whereby it comes to pass, that by some, death is made the
most manifest thing, and of othersome, the most hydden secret, and this
coniecturall case is diversely tossed in suspicion. But in doubtful matters, it
is good to cleave to the best opinion, and to hold that, which shall make the
mind rather merry then dumpyshe.


Fear. My soul fears death.


Reason. If in respect of it self, that fear is vain, for that the soul is
immortal: But if in respect of the body, it is a thanklesse pity, to be
careful of it enemy. But if it fear to be dissolved, it is to much in love
with it own prison and bonds, which were but a very foolyshe affection.


Fear. I am troubled with the fear of death.


Reason. All fools are afearde to dye: and noe marueyle, for all their
felicity is in their body, which doubtless is by death extinguished. And
therefore, not without cause, good men are sorry to hear of their end, and
heavy to behold it. For this is the nature of man, that he can not live
without desire not to be unhappy. It becomes a learned man, who makes no
other account of his body, then of a vile Drudge and fylthie Carcass, whose
diligence, and love, and hope, and study, is wholly reposed upon his mind, to
esteem of the death of this body none otherwise, then as of his departure in
the morning, out of some unpleasant and noisome lodging.


Fear. I can not choose but fear death.


Reason. Thou may refuse to fear the departure out of this life, if thou
can hope or wyshe for the entrance into an other: For hereof it is that the
same fear ryseth. And although there be commonly diverse causes alleged of the
fear of this departure, nevertheless they vanishe away, when the hope of that
other life is laid before the eyes.


Fear. I dread death.


Reason. The dread thereof is specially engendered by the lack of meditating
thereon, and the sudden necessity of dying, which in a learned and wise man
is most shameful, but specially in an old man, whose whole course and order of
life, if he be learned and wise indeed, ought to be a continual meditation of
death, Which if it seemed so unto the ancient Philosophy, what may it now
appear unto your new devotion, which is the high Philosophy, and the true
wisdom? Consider the manner of them that are commanded upon a sudden to go
some far journey, how sad and careful they are to make up their carriage, and
how they complain at their departure, and in a manner, repine that they had no
longer warning before: so that as soon as their backs are turned, they think
upon necessaries, which they have forgotten, and are discontented therewith.
Now, there is no way longer, then to dye, none harder as they say, none more
noisome for Thieves, none more obscure, none more suspicious, nor more
uncertain, which though it wanted al these, yet is it vnreturneable. By means
whereof ye ought to be the more diligent, least happily ye forgette any thing,
for that when ye are once departed from hence, ye can no longer do as they
that occupy other trades, or undertake whatsoever other journey, that is to
say, commit such things by their letters or messengers unto their friends to
see unto, as they them selves have left forgotten. For ye are not able to send
any message back, nor to stay in the place where ye were, nor to return
again. Ye must needs go hence, it is not possible for you to return: ye
must needs go thither, Soldiers, from whence it is not needful that ye
come back again. Thus in Seneca said the Roman Captain to his men, and
thus also says your Captain to you. And therefore seeing ye must needs
depart and come no more, and that the necessity of your journey is very
certain, but the hour of death uncertain, this is your only remedy, to be
always ready in mind, to answer when ye are called, and to obey when ye are
commanded, and when all things are disposed in good order, at your Captains
first commandment, to go forth on you journey courageously, which ye must
needs take in hand either willingly, or in spite of your beardes. This me
thinks, should very much abate your fear and pain of death, and make you
not only careless, but also desirous to depart hence. Otherwise, if ye be
unprovided and take no regard, the same may befall unto you, which Cicero
once truly in his Epistles prophesied unto his freende Brutus: Ye shall be
suddenly oppressed, believe me freende Brutus, quoth he, unless ye foresee and
make provision. And so truly it happens in deed, I say, unto all that use no
forecast in that which is like to happen unto them hereafter. And seeing
providence in all things is very necessary, yet is it specially to be
regarded in those things which can be done no more but once, wherein one
error suffices: for wheresoever the foot slyppeth, there is an end.


Sorrow. Now do I very much abhor death.


Reason. Things deeply rooted, are not easily plucked up. I know well, as I
said, that the fear of death is engraffed within the minds and senses of
men, specially of the vulgar sort. As for the Philosophers, they account death
neither good nor bad, for that they reckon it a thing of it self neither to be
wyshed nor feared, but number it among things indifferent, which in respect
of those that enjoy them, some time they term good, and some time evil.
Which thing I perceive well to be lyked of one of your religion, who said,
that the death of sinners was evil, but of the Saints and virtuous men most
precious.


Sorrow. I fear death, I hate death.


Reason. From whence this fear and hatred of death comes unto men, verily I
should much merueyle, were it not that I knew the daintiness of your
minds, whereby ye nouryshe and increase this and such like degenerate kinds
of fear. Dooest thou not perceive, how that the greater part of men are
afearde of the very name of death? Which, what is it other, then to abhor
your own nature, and to hate that which ye are borne to be, then which,
there is nothing more vain among men, nor more unthankful toward GOD. How
many are there which with grief do hear that name, which ought always to
beat upon the inner ear? Without the which, there is no man that can think
upon him self: for what should he think him self to be other then a mortal
creature? As often as a man turns back into the consideration of him self,
does not the name of death presently come into his mind? But ye abhor that, as
though death would force in at the ear, and ye turn away your minds, and
strive to forget that, which will by and by compel the most unwilling of you al,
to have it in remembrance. For lo, ye refuse to think upon death, which not
long after, ye must of necessity both think upon, and also suffer, the insult
whereof, would a great deal the more easily be borne, if it were thought upon
before: but now that both of them are brought to a narrow point together, the
one of them exasperateth ye other. For every thing that is unthought on and
sudden, shakes the soul. It is as much folly to covet a thing in vain, as
to be desirous to avoid that which thou can not, and they are both of them
the more foolish, by how much it had been the more hurtful that thou had
obtained that, which thou desire. But there is nothing more hurtful amongst
all the mischiefs of this world, then to forget GOD, a man's own self, and
death, which three things are so united and knytte together, that they may
hardly be plucked asunder: but ye will seem to be mindful of your selves, and
unmindful both of your beginning and ending. Thou may mark them, that upon
some occasion set all things in order in their houses, how there is scarce
any that dare say, when I am dead, but if I dye, as though that were in doubt,
then the which there is nothing more certain. Neither is this saying, If I
dye, plainly pronounced, but rather if any thing happen unto me otherwise then
well: which what I pray thee can it other be, then the self same thing that
has happened unto all men, or shall happen both unto them that are now alive,
or that shall be borne hereafter? Unto whom as there has happened sundry kinds
of life, so shall there lykwyse befall diverse kinds of death, but one
necessity of dying. The same do thou covet to escape, which neither thy
Fathers, neither the Kings of nations could ever escape, nor ever shall.
Deceive your selves as much as ye list, even so shall it happen unto you, as it
does unto them that wink against the stroke of their enemies weapon, as though
they should not feel the danger which they see not: ye shall be stricken, ye
shall dye, ye shall feel it: but whether it shall happen unto you either blind,
or seeing, it lies in your hands. Therefore desire to dye well, which thing
also, unless ye do live well, is in vain. Wysh therefore, I say, and
endeavor your selves, and do what lies in you: commit that which remains
unto him, who unto those whom he brought into this life of his own accord,
not being thereunto required, will not stretch forth his hands when they
depart out of it again, unless he be called on and desired. Wyshe not, not to
dye: for it is not only an impudent and an arrogant, but also an unfruitful
and a vain desire. Accustom your selves, O ye mortal men, unto the laws of
nature, and yield your necks to that yoke which can not be avoided. And if ye
love your selves, love that which ye are borne, not because ye would that ye
had not been borne: for it is not meet that Nature should obey you, but you
her.


Fear. I have long assayed in vain, to cast away the fear of death.


Reason. I muse thou should so long assay a matter, whereunto thine own
voluntary thinking ought to bring thee. To think so much upon so small a
danger, is a great shame, if so be it may be called a danger, or not rather an
end of all dangers, to dye: a great shame, I say, it is, for a man so long to
continue in the fear of so small and peeuishe a peril, and so many years to
live in fear and suspense, for the event of breathing one poor hour. But
would thou have the most present remedy against this evil, and be
delivered from the perpetual fear of death? Then live well: a virtuous life
despises death, and many times desires it: and to be short, it is the end of
all terrible things. For labor, pain, sorrow, adversity, infamy,
imprisonment, exile, loss, war, bondage, lack of children, poverty,
oldeage, sickness, death, all these unto men of valor, are nothing else, then
the school of Experience, and the feelde of Repentance, and the exercise
place of Glory.


Of Voluntary murdering a man's own self. The.Cxviij. Dialogue.
FEAR. I AM determined to do violence unto my self.


Reason. At one time to fear a thing, and at another to wyshe for it, this is
all the constancy that you have. Erwhyle, womanishly thou fearedst death, and
now unmanly thou seek the same: tell me, I pray thee, what sudden chance
has chainged thy mind?


Fear. I am enforced to do violence unto my self.


Reason. If thou be enforced, then is it not voluntary violence, although it
be said, that a constrained will, is a will: yet truly it is no free will,
neither that will which properly takes the name a volendo, of willing. But I
would feign know, by whom thou art enforced. Whosoever is unwilling, may have
violent hands laid upon him, but thou can do thy self no violence,
unless thou were willing thereunto.


Fear. There are great causes that enforce me to be willing to die.


Reason. They be great in deed, I coufesse, if they enforce thee, but they
could not enforce thee, if thou were a man. But there is nothing so weak,
that it can not overthrow the delicacie of your minds: and hearken now
whether I can not directly gheasse these causes: anger, disdain, impatiencie,
a certain kind of fury against a man's own self, and the forgetfulness of
his own estate. For if thou dyddest remember that thou were a man, thou
would also know that thou ought to take all worldly chances in good
part, and not for the hatred of one small evil, or rather no evil at all, to
be willing to fall into the greatest evil of all.


Fear. By reason of extreme misery, I am constrained, to lay violent hands
upon my self.


Reason. It is not extreme misery, neither are they the greatest euylles that
oppress thee, but this is the most extreme of al other which now enrageth
thee, to wit, desperation: against which only, when as all other euylles have
their peculiar remedies, there is no medicine that can prevail. And which be
these that thou call ex^reame euylles, but only labor perhaps, and
trouble, and pouer^ie? For these are they, whereof the Poet Virgil entreats,
saying: These without cause procured their own death, and hating this light,
powered out their own souls. Of whose too late repentance, he adds
immediately: How glad would they now be, returnyng into this world again, to
abide poverty, and suffer all troubles and adversity? Are these so great
euyls, whereof the first all good and virtuous men endured with a valiant and
indifferent mind, and some more over did wyllingly choose it, and thereby
became glorious and rich in the everlasting riches? That the world is meet
for men, we read in Salust, and that man was made for that intent, we find it
written in the holy and afflicted good old man. But you, being of al creatures
the most unquiet, if things fall not out according to your covetous desire, or
letcherous lust, ye think that ye have just cause to kill your selves? So
delicate and hasty headlong is your lasciviousness, that upon the least cause
that may be, ye are not only angry with Fortune, but also with your selves;
and farther ^icking against GOD himself, ye scour your blasphemous^ ^^ithes
against him, as though every thing wherein your Lord and God fulfylleth not
your mind, were an heinous injury against you.


Fear. I am so oppressed, with great euylles, that to choose A would dye.


Reason. For the loathsomeness of thy life, perhaps, which is a familiar fault
among all fools For unto the wise, every kind of life is pleasant: the happy
life they accept willingly, the miserable life they endure patiently, and
although in the things themselves they take final comfor^, yet are they
delyghted in the exercise of patience: for there is nothing more acceptable,
nor more s^^e^e, then verity. The same is that which asswageth greefes)
amendeth what is anusse, mo^^fieth that which is hard, mit^igateth their
which is sharp, si^^otheth that which is rough, and l^uellech that which is
vne^^en. In consyderation hereof complainte or (...), and hasty headlongnesse
has an end, and to be brief, there is nothing more glorious nor quiet, then
a wise man's life. As for these tears, and greefes of the mind, these clouds
and troublesome storms which drive the bark of this life upon the rocks,
they spryng from folly only.


Fear. Impaciencie of sickness makes me desirous to dye.


Reason. Thy desire is fond and proud. Let the Lord alone, to dispose of thy
body, according to his own determination and good pleasure. Wylt thou look
to have more authority over thine own buyldyng, whereof thou have made
neither Timber nor Stone, and wherein there is nothing thine, but only ye
buylding, and wylt thou not give likewise sembleable liberty unto the Lord
and maker of all the world, who in the same has not only created the
spirit, the flesh, the blood, and the bones, but also heaven, the earth, the
seas, and all things that are therein, of nothing? Say not within thy self,
My body is grievously tormented with pain. For thou have received no dominion
ever thy body, but only a use thereof for a certain short time. Thynkest
thou thy self to be Lord and Master over this thine house of Clay? Verily,
thou art but a stranger, he that made all, is Lord of all.


Sorrow. With exceeding pain I am constrained to be desirous to die.


Reason. Perhaps this pain is laid upon thee for thine experience, which if
it be troublesome and grievous unto thee, then may it be profitable: but if
intolerable, then can it not long continue. Attend the commaimdement of the
Lord that detayneth thee, and answer when thou art called, and not before.
Thy day is appointed, which possibly thou can not prevent, nor yet prolong.
Howheit, many have prevented it in deed, and going about to avoid a small and
short grief have cast them selves headlong intoirreuocable and everlasting
torments. This opinion has had great defenders. First Anneus Seneca, who so
constantly and often falls into the mentionyng thereof, insomuche that it
seems unto me that he feared, least it should not appear to be his ^^b^e,
and makes me sometime to wonder, bow so cruel a^ opinion could enter into
the heart of so worthy a man. And to ^et that pass, which it were too long
to recite, in a certain Epistle unto Lucilius: If, says he, the body be
vnfytte for the ordinary and convenient actions* why should not a man set the
greened soul at liberty? And immedialy after a few words between: I will
leap, quoth he, out of this rotten and ruinous buyldyng. But O Seneca, thou
say not well, and with one evil saying have disgraced a great many good
sayings. For thou ought to abide, and not to depart: let thy buyldyng fall
down, that thou be driven out of doors before thou depart.


Sorrow. I cannot suffer the things that are like to happen unto me, I had
rather dye.


Reason. Perhaps for some death which shall be inflicted upon thee by an enemy,
which being valiantly undertaken can not be shameful, but voluntarily procured
by thine own hand, cannot but be reprochful and ignominious, for that it is
contrary to the commandment of the most high Lord, against which nothing
can be well done.


Sorrow. I had rather dye, then to see the things that are like to happen
shortly.


Reason. It is not the part of a man, not to be able with open eyes to behold
both faces of fortune: it is the part of a woman, to turn away the eyes in
fear. What is the thing that troubles thee so much, that nothing can help
thee but death only? Is it thine own, or thy friends, or perhaps the
adversity of thine afflicted country? As for the first two, they are but
gentle: for fortune is not so strong, but virtue is able to withstand it the
third is godly, but the love thereof is fainte and slouthful. For the bondage
and captivity of a man's country, and the government thereof in manner of a
Tirannie, is rather to be repelled by death, then avoided by steppyng a side.
For the first is the part of a man, but this tastest of womanyshe imbecillitie.
Which thing notwithstanding the same Seneca does woonderfully extol in the
death of Cato in that same his peculiar opinion, whereof I spoke erewhyle. But
Cicero thinkyng it sufficient to excuse him only, abstaineth from commending
him. For he says, that unto Cato that was a man of such wonderful gravity,
and perpetual constancy of nature, it was better to dye then to look the
Tyrant in the face: whom Brutus notwithstanding beheld, and thought it better
to make him away by kyllyng him, then by kyllyng him self. Which how well or
ill it was done, I do not now dispute. But so in deed he did. As for Cicero,
while he excuses Cato, he forgets his own more commendable opinion, which
long before he had set down in his sixth book De republica, of a
commonwealth, which is after this manner following: whiles that he brings in
Publius Scipio Affricanus the younger dreaming, how that he talked in heaven
with his father and graundfather, and hearing them speak of the immortality
of the soul, and the felicity of the other life, made him desirous to dye,
and brought in his father by and by reproving the same his fond and
unprofitable desire, in these words. It may not be so, quoth he: for unless
God, whose church all this is which thou beholdest, do loose thee out of these
bonds of thy body, thou can have none entrance hither. For men were created
for this cause, that they should behold the globe which thou see in the
midst of this temple, which is called the earth. Wherefore, good son
Publius, both thou, and also al virtuous men, ought to keep your selves within
the custody of this your body, and not to depart out of the life of man
contrary unto his commandment, by whom that life was given unto you, least
happily ye seem to forsake the vocation whereunto God has called you. Do not
these words of Cicero sufficiently reprove Cato. that is excused? And
truly, if thou were appointed by some earthly Prince or Captain to keep a
place by defense of arms, thou would not dare to depart from thy charge
without his license, which if thou should do, doubtless he would take it
in ill part. How then would the heavenly Emperor take it, thynkest thou,
unto whom so much the more obedience ought to be given, by how much God is
greater then man? There was of late days one Stephanus Columnensis, a
gentleman of ancient virtue, who if lie had lived had not only been famous in
this age, but also in remembrance of al posterity. The same Stephanus being
besieged by a mighty enemy of his, unto whom he was in power far unequal,
committed the defense of one turret, wherein there seemed to be most danger,
unto one of his captains, of whose trust he was assured. This turret being
undermined and secretly shaken by the enemies, so that it was in danger of
falling, when as the residue of the garrison perceiving so much forsook it, and
persuaded him also to come down and provide for his safety, since it was
bootelesse to tarry, but unto him self very dangerous or rather present
death: I will not come down, (said he) unless he call me away who set me here.
Which being reported unto Stephanus, who also was very careful for the
gentleman, and came running in bast to call him away, the turret being shaken at
the very foundation, fell down immediately with great noise. Thus that trusty
defendant was miserably slain, whom his lord and master being scarcely able
to find out among the rubbishe and ruynes of the turret, buried him with great
sorrow and lamentation, and while he lived had a dutiful care over him, and in
his common speech always advanced his faith with worthy commendation. What I
mean by these words, I think thou know. Such a keeper ought thou to
be of thy body, which is committed unto thy keepyng by God, as he was of his
turret, which was commended to his charge by his lord and master.
Notwithstanding, I am not ignorant, how that the death of Cato was much
commended by many of that age wherein he lived, and very glorious in the common
opinion of men. And that saying of Julius Caesar is well known, who being
conqueror and making have unto Vtica, where Cato had slain him self, and
hearing report of his death: Cato, quoth he, enuyed my glory, and I envy his
death. Doubtless it seemed some excellent thing, which so great and glorious
a personage envied at.


Sorrow. Then what should let me to follow the death of a wise man that was
envied at by so great a person, and excused, and commended of the wise, and to
eschew the innumerable distresses of life by a voluntary death? Truly I had
rather dye.


Reason. Beware that thou be not carried away with the vain hope of hynges. For
there be some inferior in eloquence but superior in sense, which neither
commend nor excuse this death of Cato, but sharply reprehende it. Among whom
Saint Augustine, a most sharp searcher after the truth, disputes, that this
was not the cause of the hastenyng of his own death because he would not line
under the empire of Caesar, together with his son: forasmuch as he him
self was the cause that his son fled to Caesar, and in hope of safety
submitted himself to his mercy, wherein he was not deceived. Which if he had
thought to have been a shameful thing, would he not have delivered his son
from it as well as him self, either by poison, or by sword, or by some other
kind of death whatsoever? Seeing that Manlius Torquatus is commended for
killyng his own son, for that he had given battle to his enemies and
vanquished them, but contrary to his fathers commandment. Neither can it be
said, that it is a more shameful thing to be conqueror over a proud enemy,
then to be subject to an arrogant conqueror. Why then did he think Caesar
worthy to grant life to his son, who thought him unworthy and envied at
him that he should grant life unto himself? And to conclude, he finds that
only envy was the cause of his death, which Caesar him self did not
dissemble, as we said erewhyle. For what could he other fear, or why could
he not abide him to be his prince, by whom not long before he was banyshed the
senate, and committed to prison? So that he that slew not him self in so great
and present an injury, why should he now slaye him self for a vain fear,
or false opinion of pride, or cruelty? What terror was there expressed in
Caesar's face, that he should seek to avoid the same by death, who not only
of all men, but of al Tirantes and Princes was the most gently and merciful?
For although Cato had never seen any more myghtie, yet truly in that age had
he seen many more cruel, but truly never saw he any more merciful. And
therefore ryghtly says another excellent writer, famous both for credit and
eloquence: It seems unto me, says he, that Cato sought an occasion to dye,
not so much to escape Caesar's hands, as to follow the decrees of the Stoykes
whom he immitated, and by some notable deed to leave his name famous unto
posterytie. What harm would have happened unto him if he had lived, I do not
perceive, For such was the clemency of Caius Caesar, that in the greatest
heat of the civil wars, he would seem to do nothing else but to deserve well
of the common wealth, providing always for the safety of Cicero, and Cato.
Lo, behold another cause of his death beside envy, to wit, a vain folly,
both which were far unworthy of the person of Cato, and yet neither of them
sufficient to prevent a man's own death.


Sorrow. I had rather dye, then live thus.


Reason. How know thou, whether this life which seems grievous unto
thee, be desired of many, or envied of the most? But your impatiencye makes
all things more grievous.


Sorrow. I desire to dye.


Reason. As from the fearful to force the fear of death, so to wreast from
the desperate the hatred of life, is a hard matter. Nevertheless this is the
effect of our remedy, to bear this life with indifferency, and to look for
death valiantly.


Of Death. The.cxix. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Dye.


Reason. Now thou art come to the last cast: now can thou neither fear
death nor wyshe for it, of both which thou have alredie wearied me in many
discourses next before written. Hereafter thou shall neither be in sorrow nor
in pain, neither be subject to the defaultes of the body, nor mind: neither
shall thou be wearied with the tediousness of any thing, nor with sickness,
nor with old age, nor with deceites of men, nor with the variety of fortune,
al which if they be evil, then is the end of evil, good. Not long since thou
complaynedst of al these, and now thou find fault with the end of them:
beware that thou seem not injurious, for being sorry for the beginning of a
thing, and the endyng of the same.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Thou shall walk the way of thy fathers, or rather the broad and
worn way of thy predicessors: had thou rather that there should happen
unto thee some peculiar accident, I wot not what? Go forward on thy way, thou
need not be a frayde of going amiss, thou have so many leaders and
companions of thy journey.


Sorrow. Alas I dye.


Reason. If there be any that has cause to weep when he dies, he ought to be
ashamed to have laughed when he lived, knowing that he had cause at hand and
always hanging over his head full soon to make him weep, whose laughter,
doubtless, was not far disioyned from weeping.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. He is not to be suffered, that be waileth the estate of his own kind.
Thou should not dye unless thou were mortal. But if thou be sorry because
thou art mortal, thou have no cause to complain, when thou surceasest to be
that which thou wast against thy will. Thou should have lamented at the
beginning when thou beganst to be that which thou would not: but now thou
ought to rejoice, for that thou begynnest to be immortal.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Al these that lately stood about thy bed, and moreover all that ever
thou have seen, or heard or read of, and as many as ever thou wast able to
know since thou wast borne, as many as ever heretofore have seen this light,
or shall hereafter be borne in all the world, and to the worlds end, either
have or shall pass through this journey. Behold in thy mind as well as thou
can, the long troops of them that are gone before, or of those that shall
follow hereafter, and also the number not small of thy companions and coequales
in years, who dye with thee even at this present: and then I think thou wylt
be ashamed to bewail a common case with thy pryuate complayntes, when as among
so many thou shall not find one whom thou may envy at.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. This is to be impassible, and to go about to shake of the yoke both
of fortune, and death: a double great good, which no prosperity can give unto
any living creature. Think with thy self, how many and how great cares,
how many paynefull traueyles there were remaining yet unto thee if thou
lyuedst I say not an infinite life, but the space of a thousand years, when as
there is allotted unto thee a life but only of one days space: wherein if thou
make an indifferent estimation, thou shall perceive the toils and
wearisomenesse of this short, transitory, and uncertain life, and also thine
own greefes and vexations which thou have sustained.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. In such forte ye bewail death, as though life were some great
matter, which if it were, then were the flies, and emmotes, and spyders,
partakers of the same. If life were always a commodity, then were death
evermore a discommoditie, which sometime is found to be a great benefit when
as it delyuereth the soul from intolerable euyles, or discharges or else
preserves the soul from sin that is to come, which is the greatest evil of
all. But as virtue is only a great thing among you, so if this life be
considered by it self as it is, it is the stoare house of innumerable
miseries: for the shuttyng up whereof whosoever is sorrowful, the same takes it
not well that euyles do surcease, and hates quietness: and he that coueteth
the same, it must needs be that he covet the end of a payneful and
troublesome life. Then if there be noneother end of toils and euyles, why
do thou weep for it? That day is now at hand, which if it were
prolongued, thou would wyshe for it, and perhaps such is the world, the
power of fortune so great and her chances so variable, that thou have
oftentimes alredie wished for it.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Nay rather thou departest out of an earthly and transitory house,
unto the heavenly and everlasting habitation, and thy foot being upon the very
thresholde thou art sorowfully and vnwyllyngly plucked away, and carefully thou
look behind thee, I wot not wherefore, whether forgettyng thy fylthynesse
which thou leauest behind thee, or not beleeuyng the great good unto which
thou art going. And truly, if as I said before, which notable men have also
auerred, this which you call life be death, then it follows that the end
thereof which is death, be life.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Thy king sets thee at liberty, now the bands and fetters are
broken, which it pleased your loving father to make mortal and transitory.
Which I knowing to be specially apperteyning unto his mercy, as Plotinus
holds opinion, and it is confirmed by your writers, I see not whereof thou
have cause to complain.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Thy king calls thee: an happy messenger. But thus it is, it comes
unlooked for, and vnluckely, that happens unto men against their wylles.
Consent thereunto, and then shall thou begin to perceive how well thou art
dealt withal. Then shall thou, reputyng with thy self thy departure out of
this prison, and the other euyles of this life which thou fear, and
prophesying of the commodities which death brings, after the manner of
Socrates swan that could divine of heavenly things to come, and was therefore
consecrated to Apollo, die singing, though not with thy voice, yet in thy
mind. And unless, which God forbid, ye heavy weight of thy sins not
cleansed nor forgiven do overmuch press thee down, do thou that in thy mind,
which it is read that the emperor Vespasian did in body, rise up when thou
art a dying, and think it unmeet to dye lying, neither in this respect
ascribe thou less unto thee then he did to himself, although thou be not a
prince as he was. For death respects no auctorytie, it knows not princes
from other men, and is a notable mean to make al estates of one calling after
this life. There was nothing that Vespasian might do, but it is lawful for
thee to do the like, yea and I trust thou have somewhat more of the grace of
God then he had if thou do not refuse it: not for that thou art better then he,
but because thou art more happy in respect of ye free goodwyl and love of God,
who has granted to the little ones, and revealed to the unlearned, those
things which he denied to the mighty, and hyd from the wise. Add moreover,
that it is more profitable and easy for thee to arise. For his endeavor
required bodily strength, which sickness weakeneth and death quite
extinguisheth: but thou have need of noneother then the strength of the mind,
which oftentimes increases the nearer that death is at hand.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Why do thou tremble in safety, and stumble in the plain, and stay
upon the side of a sheluing downfall? I will not here bring into thy
remembrance what the Philosophers do dispute in this point. For there be many
things which the troublesomnesse of him that lies a dying, and the shortness
of the time will not suffer to be done, and therefore it ought deeply to be
engraffed and rooted in thy mind whatsoever the ancient Philosophers have
disputed concerning this matter. For as they hold opinion, rare prosperity
specially toward a man's end, is able to make al remedies against adversity
and hard fortune, void and to no purpose: but as touching those things which
are alleged against death, they be always profitable and necessary, which
no casual but the natural and invincible necessity of dying makes to stand
in full force and effect. Among diverse other, truly Cicero gathers together
many sound reasons and persuasions, in the first days disputation of his
Tusculan questions, whereof I made mention a little before: which unless thou
have already learned in times past, I have no leisure now to teach thee,
wherein he concludes, that whether he that dies, seem to be in prosperity
or adversity: nevertheless, forasmuch as generally the whole state of
mankind is equally subject to the darts and insultes of Fortune, it is to be
supposed, that by death he is not delivered from good things, which
doubtless he shall find to be true, whosoever shall give him self to the
deep consideration of worldly affairs. Wherefore, by death he finds him
self aduauntaged and not hyndered, and thynking continually thereon, when it
comes he makes account thereof, as of the messenger and servant of his
delyuerer: and when he is once past it, and looks back upon it, he
beholds, as it were out of a Window, how he has escaped the deceites of the
world, and the prison of this flesh. The very same sense does Cicero follow
in his disputation, that whether the soul dye with the body, or be translated
to some other habitation, that either there is no evil at al, or very much
good in death. Sharply truly among his own Countreifolke at that time, but
among your Philosophers now adays, yea and your common people, a thing nothing
doubted of: and truly I believe, neither vnperswaded unto Cicero himself, of
whom we have so much spoken: which opinion most frankly he has declared in
many and sundry places, although he applied him self unto the want of faith in
him, with whom he communed, or the distrustinesse of the time in which he
lived. But in few words, thus persuade thy self, that thy soul is immortal,
which not only the whole consent of your na^ion, but also the most excellent of
all the Philosophers do, and have defended. Repose no trust in the death of the
soul, whose nature is such, that it cannot die, and think not that there
remains no evil after death, because there shall be no soul to suffer it. But
forasmuch as the creator of the soul is gentle, and loving, and merciful, he
will not despise the work of his own hands, but will be near unto them that
call upon him faithfully. Unto him let your prayers, unto him let your vows be
directed: let the uttermost of your hope depend upon him, and let your last
gasp end, in calling upon his name. Depart quickly, fear nothing, dame
Nature that is the most loving mother of al other mothers, has made no
horrible thing, it is the error of men, and not the nature of the thing, that
ought to be provided for, that causes death to seem dreadful. If thou harbor
any great attempt in thine heart, or go about any excellent and high matter,
despise the base and low speeches and deeds of the raskal multitude, but have
them in admiration, whom to imitate is the perfect path unto true glory. Among
our Countrymen truly, of such as have dyed merely and happily, there are
innumerable examples. But if we search rather after such as are of more
antiquity, we shall find many that have not only taken their death valiantly,
but also hastened it: which deed in Marcus Cato, Marcus Cicero blames, and
Seneca commends, as we said erewhile. As for you, ye like well of neither, but
woorst of the second, for that it is more tolerable to excuse an error, then
to commend it. But I reiecte them both, because, as for to answer when a man
is called, and to obey with reverence, is praise worthy: even so, without
license of the General, to depart from the watch and keeping of the body, is to
be counted high treason, and worthy to be punished, either with cruel
banishment, or with extreme torment. Of purpose I repeat some things again
and again, to the end they may take the deeper root: for all these matters,
as I suppose, are sufficiently discoursed in our communication going immediately
before.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Rather thou payest tribute of thy flesh, and yeeldest thy duty unto
Nature, and anon thou shall be a free man: and therefore, do that willingly,
which of force thou art constrained to do, and as one that is a very good
exhorter unto death says: Have a desire to do that, which thou must needs
do. There is no counsel more profitable, yea, there is none other counsel
at all in time of necessity: Whatsoever a man does wyllyngly, is made the
more easy and tolerable, and if a will be adjoined, it surceasseth longer to
be a necessity.


Sorrow. Lo, I dye.


Reason. Lo, the Lord tarrieth for thee. Make have unto him, do neither
stumble nor stay, lay away all dread and suspicion, thou art not more dear to
thy self, then thou art to him: and who will distrust when he is called by his
freende and lover? Perhaps hereafter thou wylt merueyle, why thou fear
that, which rather thou ought to have wyshed for. Now when thou art at
liberty, thou shall know many things, which when thou wast in prison, thou
could learn by no study. Insomuche, that unto them that are desirous to
know the secrets and mysteries of things whereunto your eyesyght can not
pearce, by means of the mortal veil wherewith you are compassed round about
(for such verily is the natural desire of man, but woorking most fervently in
the studious and learned sort) there is nothing, as I judge, better then death,
nor that brings a man more compendiously unto his wyshed purpose.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Nay rather thou sleep, and being weary of this life, as I suppose,
thou take now thy rest.


Sorrow. I dye.


Reason. Depart into everlasting rest, for now thou beginnest to live. A good
death is the beginning of life.


Of Death before a man's time. The.Cxx. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUT what say thou unto it, that I dye before my time?


Reason. None dies before his time: but all have not one time limited them
alyke, but rather as the noble Poet writes: Each man's day stands prefixed: unto
which when he is come, then has he attained to the end. And because men can
neither return again, nor stay where they are, they must needs pass away.


Sorrow. I dye before my time.


Reason. That might be true, if thou dyddest owe a death against a certain
day, but the good and pure detter owes it every day: and therefore let him
look every day for his creditours calling upon him, and always have that in a
readiness which he owes. For he is continually in det as long as he has a
mortal body, he need not to borowe, nor to take upon usury, he has that at
home which he must pay. Yea whyther so ever he goes, he carries with him,
and has that as it were in his hand, wherewith to discharge him self, which
when he has paid, he is then no longer indetted to Nature, nor to any of the
heavenly bodies, as the Poet Virgil says. Therefore leave of this complaynte:
that can not be required before the day, which is due every day: but rather
give thanks, for that for the payment of this det thou need neither
entreating, nor yet to have great riches of thine own, nor pawn, nor usury,
which were the last words that ever that valiant unknown Spartane is
reported to have spoken, most worthy in deed to have been known, even at
that time when he was led to execution, whereunto he went without fear, and
courageously, by the loss of his life to satisfy Lycurgus laws.


Sorrow. I dye before my time.


Reason. I understand not what it is to dye before your time, unless it be
meant, as the common speech is, before it be light, or before the day break,
which is a time most fit for the exercises of the mind and soul, which now
thou art giving over. But in any other signification, who is he that dies
before his time, when as in deed that is every man's day wherein he dies, and
none other?


Sorrow. I dye before my time.


Reason. Neither before thy time, nor after thy time, but even in thy very time
shall thou dye: unless thou take that for thy time which thou thy self, not
Nature nor Fortune, has prescribed. But in truth, as thou can not dye
before thy time, so can thou not live after it.


Sorrow. I dye before my time.


Reason. Who is he, unless he were mad, that will complain that he is
loosed from his fetters, and discharged out of prison, before his time? Truly
he had more cause to rejoice, in mine opinion, if this happened sooner then his
expectation, but certaynely it happens not, nor it can not happen so, for every
thing has it own time. This was the appointed time of thine end, there did
he constitute thy bounds, who brought thee into the race of this life: If thou
complain of this end, thou may likewise as well complain of any other.


Sorrow. I dye soon.


Reason. Thou wast soon borne: he dies not soon, that has lived till he is
old. And if thou had not lived until thou wast old, then remained there
another part of complaint. Howbeit, if old age be the last portion of a man's
life, he must needs be first old whosoever dies. But when I speak of old
age, I mean it as the common people usually take it, for an heapyng up of many
years together, which, not as other ages, has no end but death only.
Concerning the beginning whereof there is great variety of opinions, but in
consideration of the strength of those that grow old, and in respect of their
bodyly health, and the ability of their minds, easy enough to be reconciled.
To be short, this is the conclusion of all, that either thou surceasse to find
fault with the hastiness of death, or to mislyke the troubles of a long life,
which come by the deferryng of death. But you being at contention within your
selves, are neither willing to dye, nor to wax old, when as ye must needs
do both of them, or at the leastwyse one of them.


Sorrow. I might have lived longer.


Reason. Nay truly, thou could not: for if thou myghtest, verily thou
had lived longer: but thou would say, I would feign, or I hoped to have
lived longer: for the minds of mortal men are so desirous of life, and so
ready to hope, that in either I easily agree with thee. But if thou wylt say,
I should or ought to have lived longer, for that perhaps thou see some
that have lived longer in deed, as though of duty thou myghtest claim
longer continuance also, I can not yield unto thee. For some dye late, and
many more soon, but none at all that dye never: between these there is no
mean appointed, but all men are generally subject unto one law, and all owe
obeysaunce to the soueraingtie of death, albeit some are taken away by one
means, and some by another, and that at diverse times and ages: thus of one
thing, there are manyfolde means, and sundry times. And therefore, let every
one with indifferency attend his own kind of death and dying day, and not
through the greediness or lothsomnesse of life, do as the unskillful and
ungrateful sort are wont, complain and be disquieted about the laws of
Nature.


Sorrow. I have lived but a small time.


Reason. There was never any lived so long, that thought not that he lived but
a small time, and truly it is but a short time in deed that men live here.
And therefore, if ye be desirous to live long, seek after that life, wherein
ye may live for ever, which although it be not here, yet is it purchased here.


Sorrow. I have lived but a short time.


Reason. Admit thou had lived longer, had thou then lived any more then
a short time? The terms of this life are unequal and uncertain, but this
one thing is common to them all, that they be al short. Put case a man have
lived eyghtie years, what has he more, I pray thee, then he that has lived
but eight years? Examme thy self diligently, and look into thine own
estate, and let not the madness of the common multitude deceive thee: what
more, I say has he that has lived longer, unless perhaps ye account cares,
and troubles, and pains, and sorrows, and weerisomnesse for a vantage? Or what
more should he have, if he lived eight hundred years? There is somewhat more
in deed, I confess, in hope and expectation: but when both times are expited,
believe me, thou shall find nothing, whereby thou might make account that
thou have lived more happily.


Sorrow. I dye, when as I thought to have done good.


Reason. What, dydst thou think to have done somethyng, which thou have not
done? So perhaps thou would always have thought, had thou lived never
so long. There be some that always think to do well, but they never begin.
But if thou have begun once to do well, doubt not to go forward, although
death prevent thy work before it be brought to a wished end: which although
peradventure in the blind judgment of men, it may seem to be some prejudice
unto thee, nevertheless it is to be despised, for that in the sight of the
infallible surueyer of all things thou loosest nothing, but thy reward shall be
full and whole, as well of thy deeds, as of thy thoughts.


Sorrow. In the mids of all my preparation, I dye.


Reason. This fault is not in death, but in them that dye, who then begin to
weaue the most short web of their life, when it is a cutting of: which unless
it were so, men should not so often be prevented by death, not having first
accomplished the duties of life, but rather when they had fulfilled and
accomplished them, would then begin to live, than which truly there were no
life more sweet. Which sweetness notwithstanding, not so much the shortness
of life, as the slothfulness of them that live, takes away from men: who
therefore count no life long, because how long soever the time be, they never
live, but are evermore about to live. And when they be once come to be old
men, wavering among new devices how to live, with a swift end they prevent
their slow beginning.


Sorrow. I dye, even while I am preparing great matters.


Reason. This happened unto many greatmen, and almost to all. Men are deceived in
many things, specially in death, which there is none but knows that it will
come, but they hope of the deferring of it, and imagine that to be far of,
which, God knows, is hard by them: which both the shortness of life, and
swyftnesse of time, and the power of fortune, and the variety of humane
chances wherewith they are beset round about, needily constrayneth to be so.
And O most wonderful blindness, for that what ye ought to hope of your
selves, at leastwyse ye learn at length by others. But thus the case stands,
your minds hardly can enter into bitter cogitations: and therefore while every
one promises him self very long life, and either the age of Nestor or as
Cicero says, the fortune of Metellus. and finally while every one supposes
him self to be dame Natures white son, while they be busy about the
beginning, the end comes upon them, and while they are in consultation of
many things, death sets upon them at unawares, and cutteth them of in the
mids of their endeavors.


Sorrow. I dye in my green age.


Reason. If there be none other commodity herein, at leastwise there is
provision made hereby, yt thou shall not languish in thine old years. For
although that old age be not grievous, as Lelius says in Cicero, and we also
have disputed before, nevertheless it takes away that greenesse, wherein he
says, that Scipio flourished at that time, and thou likewise reportest now the
like of thy self. Hereafter perhaps many shall wish for thee, but none shall be
weery of thee: which thing in a long life although it be governed by virtue, is
an hard matter to be found.


Sorrow. I die a young man.


Reason. Thou know what thou have suffered already in thy life time, but what
thou were like to suffer hereafter, thou know not: and believe me, whosoever in
this so variable and rough kingdom of Fortune dies first, deceives his
companion.


Sorrow. I am hyndered by death, so that I can not end the things that I
began.


Reason. And tustly in deed. For ye be evermore a dooyng the things that ye
ought to have done, and yet there is nothing finished: this is the cheifest
thing that makes your death grievous and miserable unto you: but if the
things that thou begannest were such, that without any negligence in thee
thou could not finishe them, it suffiseth thee that thou hadest a good wylt
hereunto. But if through slouthfulnes thou have put them of from time to time,
let it displease thee that thou have neglected them. If this peradventure be
the pretended cause of thy lamentation, yet in truth there is nothing but a
vain lengthening of life, and a deferryng of death wyshed for thereby,
although it will not be long, but at length, though late, thou wylt be ashamed
of this vulgar wyshe. But, O ye mortal men, how greedy soever ye be of life,
hearken unto me: I demand of you, the exercise of Virtue being laid aside,
what is this life other, then a slack and unprofitable tariance, which how long
so ever it is, can not be other then very short? Wherefore I like well of the
saying of a certain good fellow, of whom S. Augustine makes mention: whom
being in extremity of sichnesse, when as his friends comforted him, saying
that he should not dye of that disease, he answered: Though I shall never dye
well. yet because I must dye once, why should I not dye now?


Sorrow. I dye, my business being unperfected.


Reason. If thou call to mind those that have been most famous for wisdom, or
other notable exploites, the most part of them have dyed, leauyng their works
unfinished: unto very few it has happened in this life, to bring to perfect
end their conceived and undertaken attemptes. But thou, since that after the
common manner of men, thou have thrown thy self into these difficulties, and
that which is past can not be called again, take hold of this only way and
mean, eftsoons to advance thy self: not lamentably and vaynely to look
back upon many imperfecte things, but manly to go through with that only
which remains, that is to say, to dye well.


Of a Violent death. The.Cxxj. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUT I dye a violent death.


Reason. Every death is violent unto thee, if thou dye unwillingly, but if thou
dye wyllyngly, there is no death violent.


Sorrow. I dye a violent death.


Reason. If the strength of life be taken away, what skylleth it whether it be
by an ague, or by the sword? And so that thou depart freely, what makes it
matter whether the doors of thy bodily dungeon do open alone, or be broken
open?


Sorrow. I dye violently.


Reason. There are many kinds of deaths, and but one death only, which
whether it be violent or not, it lies in his hands that dies: the greater
force overcomes the lesser, and consent quite extinguisheth it. A wise man
comes thus instructed, that look what he cannot withstand, he consents
unto it. But perhaps thou wylt say: do thou counsel me then to consent unto
him that kylleth me? Verily, some have not only consented unto them, but also
given them thanks: yea, there was such an one found, as wyllingly excused
the ignorance of his murderers, and at the very giving up of the ghost, prayed
for them. But I am not she that command thee to agree unto the fact of the
bloody butcher or cruel executioner, but only unto the invincible necessity
of destiny, which who so obeys not willyngly, shall be brought thereunto by
force.


Sorrow. I dye by mine enemies hand.


Reason. What, did thou suppose then that thou could dye by thy friends
hand, which cannot possibly happen, but unwittingly?


Sorrow. I dye by mine enemies hand.


Reason. So shall thou escape thine enemies hands. For while he pursues his
wrath, he provides for thy liberty, and abateth his own power, and has
authority over thee no longer.


Sorrow. I perysh by the hand of mine enemy.


Reason. It is better to peryshe under an unjust enemy, then under a just
Prince. For in the one the murderer is culpable, and in the other the
murdered is not gyltlesse.


Sorrow. I am slain by the hand of mine enemy.


Reason. What, does it touch thee more with what hand, then with what swoorde
thou art dispatched? We speak not of the hand, but of the wound. Howbeit,
Pompeius in Lucane seems to wyshe that he might be slain by Caesar's own
hand, as a comfort in his death: and also in Statius Capaneus comfort
Ipseus, and in Virgil Aeneas Lausus. and Camilla Ornithus. for that they were
slain by their hands.


Sorrow. I dye by the sword.


Reason. This fortune is common unto thee with the greatest men, forasmuch as
most part of the worthiest men that either have lived in most blessed estate in
this world, or are now most holy fainctes in the everlasting kingdom, have
dyed by the sword: whom al if I would undertake to rehearse, I should play the
part rather of a long historician, then of a short admonisher.


Sorrow. I peryshe by the sword.


Reason. Diverse diversely have come to their end: some by the halter, some by a
fall, some by the Lions claws, some by the wild boares teeth: many have wanted
a sword, being desirous to have ended their lives with a weapon.


Sorrow. I am slain with a sword.


Reason. How know thou whether thou should escape to fall into greater
destruction, and that this death which thou think to be most miserable, be
the eschuyng of a greater misery? I told thee before, how that Plotinus, who
next unto Plato was the second glory of Philosophy, was strooken with a
pestilent leprosy. But I recited not unto thee, hoowe that Euripides, who
immediately after Homer was the second light of Greece for poetry, was torn
in pieces by dogs. Lucretius, who among your country Poets was next to the
chief, of whom Virgil was not ashamed to borowe so much as he did, drinking
of a slabbersauce confectioned amorous cup, fell into a sickness and extreme
madness, and in the end was enforced in dispatche himself with a sword for
remedy. Herod king of Judea, dyed being beset with an army of foul and
loathsome diseases, so that the more compendious and short way of diyng might
be by him envied at, as doubtless I think it was. Hadrian that was Emperor
of Rome, being overcome with the pain and tediousness of his sickness, was
wylling, if it had been lawful, to shorten the extremity of his grief, by
dynt of sword. It is reported, how that in our age there was a great
personage consumed by woormes, that issued out of all the parts of his body,
and another in like manuer devoured by myse. Among so many mockeries and
infirmities of man's body, who is so weak, that if he might have his choice,
would not rather desire to dye by the swoorde?


Sorrow. I peryshe by fire.


Reason. Some that supposed the soul to be of a fiery force and ^atur^, have
thought that to be the most easiest kind of death.


Sorrow. I am consumed with fire.


Reason. Thy body by this means being delivered from the worms, will not
putrify.


Sorrow. I am ever whelmed in water.


Reason. A feast for the fishes, and for thy self a place of burial, large,
clear, and notable. And what makes it matter, whether thou render up thine
earthen carcass to the earth, or to the sea?


Sorrow. I dye in the sea.


Reason. Not where, but how a man dies, makes to the purpose: every where a
man may dye well, and euerywhere ill. It is not in the place, but in the mind
that makes the death happy or wretched.


Sorrow. I peryshe in the sea.


Reason. I know that many are persuaded that it is miserable to be drowned in
water, for that the ethereal and burning spirit seems to be overcome by his
contrary: but as I said before, the place makes nothing, but it is the mind
that makes all unto the misery. And therefore I like very well of the answer
of a certain sayler I wot not what he was: of whom when on a time one
demanded, where his father dyed: he answered, upon the sea. Then demaundyng
farther the like of his graundfather, and great graundfather, and great great
graundfather: receiving the same answer concerning them al, at length he
inferred, and art not thou afearde then, quoth he, to go to sea? The sayler
answered dissemblingly: I pray thee, quoth he, tell me also where thy father
dyed? In his bed, answered the other. And where likewise thy graundfather?
Even he, said the ocher, and my great grandfather, and great great
grandfather, and al my auncetours dyed in their beds. The sayler answered:
art not thou then afeard, quoth he, to go into thy bed? Trimly answered
truly, and somewhat more then saylerlyke. Concerning the death therefore, let
nature look to that which made men mortal, and as touching the kind of
death, the place, and time, let fortune use her discretion.


Sorrow. I dye by poison.


Reason. I told thee whilere, what notable companions thou have herein,
whereas I entreated of this matter only. The sword is a princely death, but
most of al, poison. And to conclude: it is a very ridiculus matter, when thou
have determined of the death, to be careful of the instruments.


Of a shameful death. The.cxxii. Dialogue.
SORROW. BUt my death is shameful.


Reason. It is not the kind, nor quality of the death, but the cause of the
punishment that makes it shameful.


Sorrow. I dye reprochefully.


Reason. No good man dies ill, no evil man, well. It is not the pomp of
buryal, nor the attendance and waiting of servants and officers, nor the rich
garments, nor the spoils of the enemies, nor the shieldes and swoordes turned
down and dragged after, nor the whole family mournyng for their master, nor
the howlings and outcryes of the common people, nor the wife drenched in
tears, nor the children with duetiful compassion resolved in sorrow, nor the
chief mourner, who soever he be, holdyng down his head, and walkyng before
the corpse attired in black, and woefully be dewing his face with stoare of
bitter tears, nor lastly the orator or preacher in commendation of him that
is to be buried, nor the golden images and pictures wherewith to furnyshe the
sepulcher, nor the titles and styles of him that is dead, which being engraven
in marble shall live until such time, as though it be long first, death also
consume the stones themselves: but it is virtue and the famous report of him
that has deserved well, and needs not the brute of the common multitude, but
which shows it self in it own majesty, and not which the headelong and
blind favor of men, but rather a long continuance in doing well, and an
innocent life has procured, and also the defense of truth and justice
undertaken even to the death, and moreover a valiant mind and notable
boldness even in the mids and thickest of deaths sharpest threatninges,
that makes the death honest and honorable. Against which most honorable
death, what place remains there for reproach? Or how can he die shamefully
that dies in such manner: yea, though there be prepared against the body in
slavish sore whippes and rods, and torments, and halters, and axes, yea,
high gallowetrees and wheels set upon the tops of posts, and carts with
wild horses to tear the limbs of the body insunder: add moreover, fire and
faggot, and gridirons set upon glowyng coals, and caudrons sweatyng with hot
scaldyng oil, and the sharp teeth of cruel wild beasts whetted with hunger:
and lastly hooks and other engines to drag withal the mangled carcases about
the streets, or whatsoever other villainy or reproach may be devised, or the
living or dead body be put unto: the death, I say, may happily seem cruel,
but shameful it cannot be: but rather many times the crueller it is, the more
glorious it is. And therefore neither the outward preparance for execution, nor
the thronging of the people, nor the trumpets, nor the terrible looks of the
hangmen and tormentours, nor the wrathful voice of the Tirant, are any thing to
the purpose. But turn thee into thy self, there seek and awake thy self,
and with all the force of thy mind that remains, arm thy self against the
present extremity: withdraw thine ears from the odious noise, turn away
thine eyes from the pomp and preparation for the execution, and secretly
gather together thy spirits and comfort thy soul within thee, and examine
the things themselves and not their shadows. And if thou be able with full
sight to behold death in the face, I suppose thou shall fear neither sword,
nor axe, nor halter, nor poisoned cups, nor the hangmen dropping with goare
blood: for why, it is a vain thing when thou contemnest thine enemy, to be
afeard of his furniture or ensigns.


Sorrow. I am condemned to a shameful death.


Reason. It happens manytymes that the accuser is infamous, and the witnesses
dishonest, and the judge obscure, and the party accused very noble: and often
the death is commonly accounted reprochful, and he that dies, honorable and
glorious. And to speak nothing of any other, for that there have been to many
such already and to much unworthy of that end, what death was there ever
more shameful then the death of the cross? Upon which the most excellent and
glorious light both of heaven and earth was hanged, to the end that
thenceforth no state or condition of men whatsoever, should judge it to be
reprocheful. And forasmuch as there is nothing higher then the highest, in
this example only I make an end. Virtue alone is able to make any kind of
death honest, and there is no death that can blemishe virtue.


Of a suddayne death. The.cxxiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. But I dye to suddeynly.


Reason. It is not long since, if I forget not my self, that thou say thou
wast old: I marvel then how there can be any death suddayne to an old man,
who unless he doat or be mad, has death evermore before his eyes. For, since
there is this wholesome counsel given to al ages, that they persuade themselves
that every day is the last that they shall live, it is most specially
convenient for old age to think every hour the last of their life. And not
only not to hearken unto that which is written by Cicero: There is no man so
old, that thinks not to live one year longer: but not so much unto that
which Seneca says, one day longer.


Sorrow. I dye suddaynly.


Reason. In this case what shall I answer thee other, then repeat that, which
that most mighty personage, no less in wit then great in fortune, answered,
scarce one whole day, when he disputed thereof, before his death, as
prophesying of the truth thereof by reason of the neerenesse of the
experience. Who pronounced, that a suddayne and unprovided death was most to be
wyshed. Which judgment seems to be dissonant from that religion which
teaches to pray with bowed knees unto GOD every day, to be delivered from this
kind of death. Neither do I like of this opinion, where there is otherwise
choice and liberty: but thou must in other manner persuade thyselfe, for I say
not that it is such a death, as thou ought to wyshe for, but such an one as
thou may well endure. For this is a clear case, that unto a wise man and one
that foreseeth a far of al things that are like to ensue, there can nothing
happen unlooked for. Whereupon it follows, that death cannot come unto him
unprovided for, whose life was always provident: for how should he be
negligent in the greatest things, that was wount to demurre in small, yea, the
least things? And in all worldly things, what can thou show me that is
greater then death, or comparable unto it?


Sorrow. I dye most speedily.


Reason. So that the death be not unthought upon, the speedier, the easier it
is: and if there be any pain in it, it is very short, and the speediness
thereof preuenteth the feelyng of it, and so that is taken away from death,
which is most grievous in death, to wit, the fear of death.


Of one that is sick out of his own country. The.cxxiiii. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Am sick in a strainge country.


Reason. What skylleth it whose country it be, the sickness thou art sure is
thine own.


Sorrow. Thou mockest me, I am sick out of mine own country.


Reason. He that is out of his own country, is surely in some other: for none
can be sick or whole out of al countries.


Sorrow. Thou seek delays in words, but I am sick out of my country.


Reason. In this misery thou gainest this one commodity, that thou have none
to trouble thee, nor to lie upon thy bed, not thine importunate wife, nor thy
son, who would both be careful for them selves, and careless of thee. How
often think thou, has the wife to her husband, and the son to the father,
and one brother to another, when they have lien in extremity of death thrown
a pillowe over their mouths, and helped to set them packyng, which a stranger
would not have done, nor have suffered to be done by others? Many times there
is most love where it is less looked for: and there none that are about thee
wylbe glad of thy sickness, or wyshe for thy death. And shall I tell thee the
cause why? There is none there that looks for thine inheritance: none commit
any wickedness, but they are moved thereunto by hope or desire, which
quietness wherein thou art now, would not have happened unto thee in thine own
country. For many under the color of goodwyl would flock about thee, and
gape after thy burial: which conceit, unless I be much deceived, is a second
sickness to him that is sick already, when he shall perceive himself beset
round about, at the one side with woolfes, and at the other with ravens which
in their minds come to pray on the carcass.


Sorrow. I am sick out of my country.


Reason. How know thou that? Perhaps thou returnest now into thy country:
for the readiest and shortest way for a man to return into his country, is to
dye.


Sorrow. I am sick out of my country.


Reason. O the needelesse always and vain cares of men, and fond complayntes:
as though out of a man's own country his ague were fiercer, or his gout more
intolerable? All this which seems evil, consists in your own will, and
lies in your own power, like as other plagues and mischeefes do, whatsoever a
false opinion has engendered in your minds.


Of one that dies out of his own country. The.cxxv. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Dye out of my native country.


Reason. Does this happen unto thee, being a traueiler, or a banished man? For
whether thou made thine aboade in this country for study sake, or for
religion, thou have cause to rejoice that death has taken thee in an honest
deed, or in a just condemnation, and thou ought to take it not only
valiantly, but also willingly. For the wickedness of an unrighteous person is
by no means better purged, then by wyllyng and patient suffryng of punishment.
But if it be long of the injury of some mighty enemy, nevertheless thou
must not be sorry for it: and as for banishment, I suppose, we have disputed
sufficiently of it already.


Sorrow. I dye out of my country.


Reason. This I said even now, is to return into thy country, there is no
streighter path, nor readier way. Have thou forgotten hudemus of Cyprus that
was familiar with Aristotle, of whom Aristotle himself and also Cicero
writes? Who, on a time being very sick in Thessalia, dreamed that he should
recover very shortly, and after five years expired, return into his country,
and that the Tyrant of the same city, where at that time he soiourned, whose
name was Alexander Phaereus, should dye shortly. But when after a few days,
being restored unto his despaired health, and the Tyrant slain by his own
kinsfolk, thinking his dream to be true in all points, at the time limited
he looked also to return into his Country, at the end of the fyfth year he
was slain in fight at Syracuse: and this said the Interpretours of dreams,
was the means of the returnyng into his Country, that there might be no part
of the dream false. What mine opinion is concerning dreams, I have declared
elsewhere already, and now I have uttered what came into my mind of this
returnyng into a man's Country.


Sorrow. I am compelled to dye out of my Country.


Reason. When I entreated of exile, then said I, which now I repeat again,
that either none or all dye out of their Country. The learned hold opinion,
that every part of the world is a man's Country, specially to him that has a
valiant mind, whom any private affection has not tied to the liking of this
place or that: and othersome call that a man's Country where he is well, and
lives in good case. And contrariwyse, some say, that a man has here no
special Country at all. The first is a common doctrine, but this last a point
of higher Philosophy.


Sorrow. I dye far from my Country in which I was borne.


Reason. But that is more truly thy Country, where thou dyest. The same shall
possess thee longer, and not suffer thee to wander abroad, but keep thee
within it for a perpetual inhabitaunt for ever. Learn to like of this
Country, that will enfranchize thee into it self, wheresoever otherwise thou
were borne.


Sorrow. I must dye, and be buried far out of mine own Country.


Reason. Those heavenly and divine men likewise, whom one age, and the self
same middle part of the world brought forth, are dispersed over all parts of
the world, as well in their deaths as burialles. Ephesus keeps one, and
Syria another, and Persis another, and Armenia another, and Aethiopia another,
and India another, and Achaia another, and Rome othersome, and the farthest
part of Spain another: nevertheless it is reported, that some of them after
their death, were carried away and translated from the places where they dyed,
unto certain Cities of Italy: I speak of the earthly part of them, but as for
their spiritual part, doubtless it is long since that they possessed the
kingdom of heaven.


Sorrow. I must needs dye out of my Country.


Reason. What shall I speak of men of a meaner degree? One that was removed
first from Stridon, Bethleem and afterward Rome received, France another from
Pannonia, and Parris another from Athens, and Rome another from Greece and
Spain, and Millaine another from Rome living, and the same when he was dead
Sardinia from Africa, and shortly after Ticinum from Sardinia: two most bright
shining streams of the East, march in merits, and joined in mind, and near
in body. Who they be that I speak of thou know, and therefore in making
have, I ouerpasse many things. But that thou may not want also an example
of the third sort: Cyprus received one from the land of Palestine, and
Campania another from Nursia: Spain this one, and Italy that other, and
Bononie one, and Padua another.


Sorrow. I understand well all that ever thon meanest, notwithstanding
unwillingly do I dye far from my Country.


Reason. And truly I understand the very cause hereof: to wit, for that the
most sacred spirits and minds which always have their affections fixed in
heaven, have no care at all of their earthly Country, which care thou have not
yet laid aside, but truly believe me, if thou hope after heaven, thou must
needs lay it aside indeed. Nevertheless, I will entreat of others that were
lovers of virtue, and mindful of heaven, and yet not through their love of
heaven, altogether forgetful of the earth. The boanes of Pythagoras of Samos,
Metapontus did cover. Cicero, whom Arpine brought forth, and Rome did nourysh,
the bay of Caieta saw dead. Pliny, whom the river Athesis washed when he was
an infant, the ashes of the mount Veseuus covered when he was old. Mantua
brought Virgil into the world, Brundusium, or as other some write Tarentum
plucked him away, and now Naples holds him. Sulmo framed the Poet Ovid, but
his exile in Pontus disolued him. Carthage, as it is reported, brought forth
Terence the Comike Poet, but Rome taught him, and Arcadia buried him. Apulia
sent forth Horace the Poet, and Calabria Ennius, and the Province of Narbona
Statius, and Vasconia Ausonius, and Corduba the three Annei, or as some say,
four, to wit, the two Senecaes, and Gallio, and the Poet Lucan. And al these,
and over and besides Plautus of Arpine, and Lucillus of Arunca, and Pacuuius of
Brundusium, and Iuuenal of Aquinum, and Propertius of Vmbria, and Valerius of
Antium, and Catullus of Verona, and Varrus of Cremona, and Gallus of Forli, and
Actius of Pisaurum, and Cassius of Parma, and Claudianus of Florence, and
Persius of Volaterrae, and a thousand more has Rome received, and for the most
part buried, only Titus Liuius of Padua, with much adoo was restored unto his
Country to be enterred: and so contrariwise, Rome has bread many that have
dyed, and ben buried in other places. The whole world is in manner of a narrow
house fouresquare, wherein men pass from one extremity to another, and in the
one is life, and in the other death. Men of valiant courage esteem of it for
none other cause, then for the variety of the use thereof, as it were to go
out of a cold bath into a stone, or to chaing out of a winter chamber into a
summer lodging. This chaing and variety, namely, to be borne in one place, and
buried in another, is common among al men, specially the more noble fort.


Sorrow. I know it is so, yet I dye sorowfully out of mine own Country.


Reason. Thou should dye no more merrily in that Country, which thou call
thine: but ye give your selves over to tears, and seek causes to lament and
be sorry, as if ye took pleasure in them. But if the examples of holy,
learned, and discrete poverty can not discharge thy mind hereof, which is
infected with the errors of the vulgar multitude, I will allege them that
have been more fortunate, in proouing that this which troubles thee has
happened to the most famous Captains, Dukes, Kings, and Emperors, so that I
will see whether thou wylt refuse that fortune which may befall to a man.


Sorrow. Whom thou wylt speak of and allege, I know well enough: but what
need many words? I am sorry to dye out of my Country, and the place
increases the grief of my death.


Reason. I perceive thou refusest to be cured, yet will I proceed, but with
how good effect, that look thou unto: as for me, it shall suffice to utter the
truth, and give thee faithful warnyng. Alexander was borne at Pella, slain
at Babylon, and his ashes buried at Alexandria, a City called after the name
of the founder. The other Alexander was brought up in the Princes Palace of
Epirus, and drowned in the River Lucanus. King Cyrus was borne in his Kingdom
of Persis, and slayine and mangled in Scythia. Rome, and the whole Roman
Empire had in admiracion Marcus Crassus, and Pompeius the great: which as it
was able to bear the greatness of them while they lived: so if Fortune had so
suffered, it had been sufficient to have received their ashes: but the one was
covered with earth in Assyria beyond Euphrates, the other overwhelmed in the
Channel of the Egyptian stream. Unto the latter Cato, the City of Rome gave
both beginning and name, but Vtica brought both end and surname. The Cornelii
Scipioes, Rome procreated, most noble and profitable members of the
Commonwealth, by whom it had been often saved and adorned: whom notwithstanding
their destinies so dispersed, that those two which are called the great, were
entombed both in Spanish moulde, and the elder Africane at Linternum, and
Nasica at Pergamus, and Lentulus within Scicil, dwelling al in several and
disioyned graves. Of all this number, only Asiaticus and Africanus the younger
lie buried at Rome, who perhaps had lain better in any banishment whatsoever:
for the first was punyshed by imprisonment, the other by death. And thus many
times it happens, that a man may live better, and dye better, in any other
place, then in his own Country, and lie nowhere harder then at home. The
three Deci, although the common report make mention but of twain, dyed
valiantly out of their own Country, the Father fyghting with the Latins, the
Son with the Hetrurians and the Nephew, as Cicero adds, with Pyrrhus; To
what purpose should I now rehearse in order as they come to my mind,
worthy Captains and Princes, which were all borne at Rome, and dyed
elsewhere? Africa beheld Attilius Regulus how much the more cruelly, so
much the more gloriously dying, both for the preseruyng of his Country, and
also of his faith and credit with his enemy: and in the next war followyng,
Cortona saw Caius Flaminius, and Cumae Paulus Aemilius, and Venusia, Claudius
Marcellus, and Lucania, Tiberius Gracchus lying dead: it was the fortune of
none of these to dye at Rome. Two noble Gentlemen of great hope and expectation
in the Roman Commonwealth, were cut of in the very flower of their youth,
Drusus and Marcellinus: who although they returned both into their Country,
yet dyed they both far from their Country, Drusus in Germany, and
Marcellinus in Baion. And tell me now, are thou prouder then Tarquinius, or
myghtier then Sylla? Yet the first of these dyed a bannished man at Cumae, the
other being a great Lord, gave up the ghost at Puteoli. What shall I speak of
men of meaner degree? Augustus Caesar, who was called Father of his Country,
dyed out of his Country at Nola in Campania. Tyberius, that was unlike in
Manners, but equal in Empire, deceassed at Misenum in Campania. Vespasian and
Titus, two most excellent Princes, as it well became the father and the son,
dyed in one Village, yet without of the City of Rome* though not far. But
^raian, being borne in the West part of the world, dyed in the East. Septimus
Seuerus came but of a base parentage in Africa, and had a proud Empire at
Rome* and was buried at York in England. Theodosius that was borne in Spain,
and dyed at Millain, Constantinople received: which City also had in it
before, the founder thereof being of the same name, but borne in another place.
What shall I need to recite others? Lycurgus, who fled from Sparta, Creta
received, which long before had seen King Saturn bannished out of his
Kingdom, and flying from his son, and heard how he hyd him self in the
confines of Italy, and was there buried. A poor grave of Bithynia, covers
Hannibal the light of all Africa. Theseus, Themistocles, and Solon, the three
Diamondes of all Athens, were so scattered by Fortune, that the first was
buried in Syria, the second in Persis, and the third in Cyprus, in far
unfit Graves for so worthy Carcasses. The day would sooner fail me then
matter, if I should stand to report every example. But my purpose was not to
weerie thee with Histories, but only to instruct thee.


Sorrow. I understand thy meaning: and I confess, that all these, and as many
more as thou can reckon, dyed out of their Countries in deed: but I deny
that it was with their wylles, but rather I suppose to their great grief.


Reason. Whereby speak thou this, but only for that all fools judge other
like them selves, and think that to be impossible for others to do, which
they them selves can not attain to. And perhaps thou have hearkened to the
old proverb: It is good to live abroad in strange Countries, but ill to dye
there: when as in deed they are both good, so that they be orderly done, with
patient forbearyng, and comeliness: but both evil, if they be ill handled,
lamentably, and without discretion. I will tell thee that which thou wylt
marueyll at, and is quite repugnant to the old proverb: If there be any just
occasion to complain of the cause, I had rather impute the same to the living,
whom perhaps in some respect it may concern, then him that lies a dying, who
has now no regard of any place, seeing that he is upon departing from all
places.


Sorrow. Somewhat thou moouest my mind, nevertheless I am yet desirous to dye
in my Country.


Reason. The will of man, unless it be bridled by virtue and wisdom, of it
self is wild and vnreclaymed. And if thou consider of the matter deeply,
thou wylt confess, that none of all this appertains unto thee, seeing that
thou thy self can remain here no longer, nor thy boanes retain any sense
after thy deceasse to discern where thou myghtest have lain harder or softer,
and also unto that place whyther thou departest, which had been the shorter or
easier way. When Anaxagoras lay a dying in a far foreign Country, and his
friends demanded of him whether after his death he would be carried home
into his own native soil, he answered very finely, saying, that it should
not need: and he added the cause why: for that the way to Heaven is of like
distaunce from all places. Which answer serves as well for them that go
down to Hell, as for those that go up to Heaven.


Sorrow. I would GOD I might dye at home.


Reason. If thou were there, perhaps thou would wyshe thy self in another
place: persuade thy self so. Learn to do that dying, which thou ought to
have done living. An hard matter it is for you, O ye mortal men, to bear
your selves vpryghtly, ye are so dayntie and faultfyndyng, evermore making none
account of that which ye have, and always judging best of that which ye want.


Sorrow. O, that I might dye at home?


Reason. Peradventure thou should see many things there, that would make
thy death more grievous unto thee: for which cause think that thou art
removed, to the intent that all other cares being set apart, thou myghtest
only think upon GOD, and thine own soul.


Of one that dies in Sin. The.Cxxvj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Oye in sin.


Reason. This is neither Natures, nor Fortunes, but thine own fault.


Sorrow. I dye in sin.


Reason. First, who enforced thee to commit sin? And next, who forbydde thee
to bewail it when it was committed? And last of all, who lets thee from
repentyng, though it be late first? For unto the last gasp the spirit and
mind is free.


Sorrow. Whiles I am dying, I carry my sins with me.


Reason. Beware thou do not so: lay down that venomous and deadly carriage,
while thou have time, and there is one that will take it away and blotte it
out, according as it is written, and will cast it behind his back into the
bottom of the Sea, and will abandon it as far from thee, as the East is
distant from the West. If thou neglect this hour, when it is once past it will
never return again. Whith quality, although it be common to all hours, that
always they pass away and never return, yet many times that which has been
omitted in one hour, may be perhaps recovered in another: but yet the
neglectyng of the last hour of a man's life is irrecurable. And therefore, as
some report it to be found in the secret disputations of the soul, the errors
of this life, are as it were soft falls upon the plain ground, after which,
a man may soon rise up again: but the sin unto death, is compared unto a
grievous fall from some high and craggie place, after which, it is not possible
to arise any more, the hurt therein taken is so great, that it can not be
salued. Wherefore, help thy self now while thou may, and call to
remembrance, not only what your own writers say, but also what Cicero
counsels, who in his work de Diuinatione, of Divination, disputing of
those that are dying: Do thou cheefely, quod he, study to win commendation,
and think that they which have lived otherwise then they ought, do most
bitterly repent them of their sins. What, I pray thee, could be uttered by
any man more religiously or profitably, if so be that be followed which is
commanded, and thou repent thee, though it be late first? A difficult and
dangerous matter it is truly to defer the time, which has deceived very
many, who wittingly and willingly put of the clensing of their souls, which
can not be done too speedily, from day to day, and always adiourne it unto
their latter time, in which being suddenly taken short, and amazed with the
neerenesse of death, they leave all undone whatsoever they determined.
Concerning which matter, forasmuch as your writers have said very much, it
shall not be impertinent to hear what the Poet Virgil says, who is an
external witness, with what words he reprooueth this slothfulness and
negligence in repentance, which to come forth of his mouth is wonderful,
whereas among the infernal Spirits he brings in him to be a Judge, whose
vpryghtnesse and equity is very famous. Who, as he says, Examineth the
Ghostes, and punishes them, and constrayneth them to confess their deceiptes:
and also if there be any such, that while they lived upon the earth, rejoiced
in vain theft, and differred to repent them thereof until they dyed, which
was too late. And albeit this be so dangerous as I have declared,
notwithstanding there is nothing more perilous then Despair, neither has ye
enemy of your salvation found out any thing more hurtful to your good
estate. For all other mischeefes are assuaged by their peculiar remedies, but of
al eulles this is the greatest and last of all, which if it take hold of the
soul when it is departing, then is there no place left for recovery. The same
therefore always, but specially in the end, ought most earnestly be resisted,
for that then it uses to urge most sharply. And now there is no time left
for thee, wherein by staggeryng or trifling thou reject wholesome counsel
concerning thy salvation. From this let no fear drive thee, nor the shame and
sorrow of differringe withholde thee: it is better to awake late at night, then
not at al, and what soever is ill differed, is worse omitted.


Sorrow. I dye without al hope.


Reason. Thou say ill: rather pluck up hope again, and lay it to thy heart,
and embrace it, coll it, and keep it with the arms of thy soul.


Sorrow. My sin is exceedyng great.


Reason. N^mans sin can be so great, but Gods mercy is much greater.


Sorrow. Who is able to forgive so many sins?


Reason. Who think thou, but he only, at whom his enemies woonderyng,
contended among themselves and demanded: Who is this that forgeueth sins
also?


Sorrow. Who is able to merit forgiveness of so great sins?


Reason. None truly can deserve, nor never deserved: nevertheless it has
freely been given to many, and shall be given hereafter, so that it be craved by
faith and reverence. There were some that went about to persuade Constantinus
the Emperor, that there was no forgiveness of great sins. But that this
doctrine is false, it appears not only by your writers, among whom the
remission of sins by baptism and repentance is well known. but also the like
report, though false, was among the Pagans: toward the curyng of whose
diseases that medicine was then without effect, for that the heavenly Physician
was not yet come. And therefore, unless the soul could have been cleansed
from sin, and the iniquity thereof washed away, that same most grievous
sinner at the first, and afterward most gooly man, had prayed full often in vain.


Sorrow. The remembrance of my sin, cutteth of my hope.


Reason. The remembrance of sin ought to bring sorrow and repentance into the
mind, but not take away hope. But ye are to much in extremities on al sides:
In sin burning, after sin key cold: In sinning ye rejoice, and in
remembryng sin ye despair. Many euerywhere offend in hope of pardon, and on
the otherside, not few when they have sinned despair of forgiveness, and
both fortes are deceived. And I would give them counsel, for the first sort at
the beginning to abandon that hurtful hope, and for the second to retain
fruitful assuredness.


Sorrow. Death dryueth me forth headlong that am laden with sins: what shall
I do?


Reason. What other then that which thou should have done ere this? That is
to say, with speed lay down thine unhappy burden, whereof being lyghtened
thou shall go plainly, and not run headlong. Thou shall go, I say, not
stouping nor stumblyng, but with vpryght and steadie steps, and a good hope.
Go to then, defer no longer time, nor distrust not: for there is one if thou
do heartily entreathym, that will take it from thy shoulders, and has taken away
heavier then this, unto whom there is nothing heavy nor difficult. And
although that long delay do want excuse, yet late amendment deserves
commendation, for that it is better to amend late then never. Be of good
cheer, and pluck up thy heart: a few godly and fervent tears have called
many back even from hell gates. He stands freendly at thy beds head, who
not only answered the infected that he would cleanse him, but also commanded
him that had been buried four days, to rise out of his grave. And now
likewise he attends to see, if thou wylt be cleared and raised up again,
being as loving and merciful at this present as he was then, and also as
myghtie as ever he was. It lies yet in thy power in what state thou wylt dye,
thou may yet depart without sin, not that thou had none, but that
henceforward it shall not be imputed unto thee. And although that Plinius the
younger hold opinion, that over sins that are past, God has no power at
all, but only to make them be forgotten: nevertheless he has also the might
to take them a way, which that most curious man did not perceive. And
therefore, although that which is done cannot be undone again, nevertheless
the sin that sprang by the doing may be in such sort taken away, that it
remain no longer, so that it come to pass according as it is written: Sin
shall be sought for. and not be found. Not that the power of man is such, that
he can lose himself from the bands of sin, but in that unto the godly, and
well disposed will of man, and his coutrite heart, the present asistance of God
is never wanting.


Of one dying, that is careful what shalbecome of his inheritance and children.
The.Cxxvii. Dialogue.
FEAR. WHat shall I hope of mine inheritance, and children?


Reason. Thine inheritance shall have owners, and thy children their fortune.


Fear. What shall become of my great riches?


Reason. Think not that thine heir will think them to great. There were never
any riches so great, but they seemed to little in some respect. But concerning
these let her look unto them, who tumbleth and tosseth your goods which ye
esteem so deerly, hither and thither most vncertaynely.


Fear. What will my children do?


Reason. When their earthly father has forsaken them, the heavenly father will
receive then into his protection, who will not leave them as thou do, nor
make them Orphans and fatherless children. But he will nouryshe, and instruct
them from their youth so that they show themselves willing to learn, and not
forsake them unto their old years and crooked age, no not to their death and
grave. God is the hope unto man when he is borne, and not his father, though he
were a king. It is not good buylding upon the sand, but upon the rock: for all
hope in man is short and transitory. And therefore thy children being deceived
by the hope which they reposed in thee, will put their trust in God only, and
sing with the Prophet David: My father and my mother have forsaken me, but the
Lord has taken me up. The seeds and sparks of good nature and virtue that
have appeared in many children, have been quite extinguished by their parents
to much cockling: like as on the contrary side, loss of parents, and
poverty, have oftentimes driven away the childrens deintinesse.


Fear. What will become of my riches?


Reason. They will return from whence they came, (that is to say,) unto
fortunes hands: and from thence they shall be dispersed from one to another, and
never tarry long with any. For they are of a flitting nature, and cannot abide
in one place: And that not without a mystery. For some have thought, that money
cannot tarry in a place because of the roundensse and the rollyng form of the
coin, which some merrily have said, to be a token of the slipperinesse
thereof, which partly I cannot deny. But I am of opinion, that if it were
three or four square, it would tun away as fast, I mean concerning the
continual passing of riches, whose nature is always to slyp and fly away, to
hate coffers that have but one lock, to be delited with sundry and often
possessours, either to the intent to avoid rust, or else by their currantnesse
and runnyng about to circumuent very many, or lastly to contend with their
owners in inconstancy. Seeing therefore tha: thou lie now a dying, cast of
that care which unto the living is superfluous. But rather if thou dye rich,
acknowledge how that there is seldom any rust found in fortune, and now
that thou art departing out of this life, fly riches which are not profitable
for thee, nor necessary for any. But if thou be poor, depart forth upon thy
journey light and without burden: whether thy riches be very great, or
indifferent, or very small, or none at al, heretofore they belonged very little
unto thee, but henceforth they shall apperteine unto thee nothing at al, but
this much only, that thou may perceive, that he that was poorer then thou,
lived in more quietness then thou, seeing that these troublesome and paynefull
helps of life, or whether thou list rather to term them torments, do make
thy death more careful.


Fear. What shall become of my children?


Reason. Thy name shall live in them, if they be good, and if that be any
comfort in death, thou shall not seem wholly to be dead. For in their
countenances, and actions, and gesture thy friends will think and also rejoice
that thou art restoared unto them. But if they be evil, thou have cause
willingly to forsake them, and those whom thou thyselfe could not correct
nor tame, thou shall deliver them over unto the world and fortune, to be
corrected and tamed. And do not thou now dying lament for them, that will
nothing at al be grieved at thy death, and perhaps are sorry that thou diedst
not sooner.


Sorrow. But what shall become of my goods?


Reason. Fear thou, that when thou have left them, they shall find no owner?
They are looked for, they are wyshed for, they are valewed already: neither
ought thou to be afeard so much for the neglecting of them, as for the
striving for them. But this is one thing, they shall now surceasse to be thy
goods any longer, but whose they shall be next, why do thou look upon thy
children? It cannot possibly be known, nor it must not: it suffiseth thee to
know that they were once thine, if ever they were thine indeed, and not
rather hers, that is the lady and mistress of goods that pass away, and
generally of al wordly things, whose name is Fortune. But having been thine so
long, that is to say, being but a short time in thy disposition, it is now
high time for thee to depart, and to leave them to others. Let them now learn
to be at others commandment awhile, and to keep their accustomed chainge,
unless thou wylt dye so ambitiously, as some fools have also done the like,
and have thy money buried with thee in thy grave, which may one day redownd to
the commodity of them that dig graves hereafter. But rather now at length
cast from thee al care of the earth and metalles, and repose thy cogitations
upon heaven, and thine own estate.


Fear. My goods fly from me.


Reason. Did thou think that they would tarry, when thy life passed away,
and when thou thyselfe wast continually carried hence?


Fear. What shall become of my goods, when they leave of to be mine?


Reason. What did they before they were thine?


Fear. Leaving behind me so great riches as I do, I depart naked.


Reason. Naked thou came into the world, and naked thou must depart again,
whereof thou have no cause to complain, but rather to give thanks. In the
mean time, thou have had the use and occupiyng of an others goods: there is
nothing taken from thee that was thine own, but only the goods of another
required again at thy hands when thou may occupy them no longer. For
honest guestes when they are departing away, do willingly restoare the vessel
and stuff which they borrowed of their host.


Fear. Alas, of al my riches I carry not thus much away with me.


Reason. Carry away as much as thou broughtest, or if thou lust, as much as
any king does.


Fear. What will my young children do?


Reason. If they live, they will grow up and wax old, and walk their own
ways, and try their own fortune, and pass through their own troubles: in
the mean time they shall abide in Gods protection: and perhaps when thou wast
young thou liuedst likewise without a father.


Of one dying, that is careful what his wife will do when he is dead.
The.cxxviii. Dialogue.
FEAR. WHat will my well-beloved wife do, when I am dead?


Reason. Perhaps she will marry again: what is that to thee?


Fear. What will my dear wife do?


Reason. Being discharged from thy yoke, either she will yield her neck to
another, or live at large, or else rest herself after her weariness, and seek
only how to pass forth her life quietly.


Fear. What will my most loving wife do?


Reason. Do thou ask what she will do when she has escaped from thee, and
know not what she did when she was under thy subjection? The greater sort of
mortal men, being ignorant what is done at home in their own houses, hearken
what is a doing in heaven, and the farthest parts of the world. Truly, what
shall become of thy wife after thy departure, let her self or her next
husband look to that, since that care appertains no longer to thee
hereafter.


Fear. I am afeard, lest after my decease my wife marry again.


Reason. Some there be that marry, their old husbands living. Thus did
Herodias among the Hebrews, Sophronisba among the Africanes, and Martia and
Liuia among the Romans, although their husbands consent and commandment do
excuse these two last recited: and wylt thou only bind thy wife from
marriage? Yea, there are but few that live faithfully toward their husbands,
and will thou require that thy wife continue her truth to thy cold and
senseless ashes? If she have lived faithful to thee unto the last day of thy
life, then has she accomplyshed the duty of a true and trusty spouse.


Fear. I am afeard that my wife will marry again.


Reason. That she first married perhaps thou should have feared more: that
belonged to thee, but her second marrying shall apperteyne to another. But this
is your common trade, ye contemn the things that ye ought to fear, and fear
the things that ye ought to contemn, esteeming of nothing justly as ye ought.
Thou en^redst the combat of the married bed without fear, not forethinkyng
what danger thou passedst into, and art thou afeard now least another should do
the like?


Fear. I would not, I confess, have my wife marry again.


Reason. For a woman of exact and perfect chastity, I grant, although she be
permitted by law to marry again, yet were it better to abstain: but most of
al to eschew perilous widowhood. There is moreover some such time and occasion,
that a woman is not only excused, but also enforced to marry again. For it
is an hard matter for a fair woman to live alone chastely.


Fear. My sweet wife will marry another husband.


Reason. There are but few women found, yea among them that are counted
honest, that even while their present husband is living, do not determine in
their mind who shall be their next. My husband, say they, is a mortal man, and
if he chance to dye, shall I marry next for virtue, or nobility, or love, or
eloquence, or beauty, or person sake?


Fear. My wife will marry again.


Reason. Not thy wife verily: for death will make that she shall not be thine.
And no merueile though it part man and wife, which dissolueth the bands
whereby the body and soul are knyt together.


Fear. My wife will marry again.


Reason. The wives of the Roman Captains, and Dukes and Emperors have also
married again, and therefore take in good part this fortune which is common
to thee with thine auncetours.


Fear. My wife will marry again.


Reason. The Roman Captains and Princes did marry wyddowes also, and so did
the most godly king David take to wife two wyddowes, that had been the wives
but of mean persons: and it may so happen that one greater then thou may
marry thy wife, unto whom resign this carfulness, seeing thou go thither
where there is no marrying at all.


Fear. My sweet wife will marry another man.


Reason. If she marry a better, rejoice at her prosperity whom thou louedst.
But if to a worse, be glad yet, for that she will think more often upon thee,
and hold thee more dear. For there be many that have learned to know and
love their first husbands, only by their second marriages.


Of one dying, that is careful what will become of his country after his
deceasse. The.cxxix. Dialogue.
FEAR. WHat shall become of my country after my death?


Reason. All good men have but one country, and all evil men another: take
heed now into which of these two countries thou will be admitted a
countreyman. As for a third country there is none, but only an Inn and a
place of passage, a thoroughfare.


Fear. What will become of my country?


Reason. That country which thou go unto, continues always in one estate:
and this which thou now forsakest, as I have oftentimes said before, is not
thy country, but has rather been thy place of banishment.


Fear. What will my country do after my deceasse?


Reason. This is the peculiar care of kings, to think what will become of
their kingdoms and dominions after their death: the like whereof thou read
there rested in the heart of the great king of Assyria, or of the most mighty
emperor of the Romans. This care exceeds the calling of a private person.
But since now even at thy very end thou art so affected, that thou lust to
term that stoarehouse of misery, and hospital of pain and sorrow, wherein
thou have passed forth the swyft time of thy life, in great trouble,
adversity, and heaviness, by the name of thy country, and art desirous to
know what it will do, I will tell thee: it will do as it did, and as other
countries do. What is that, thou wylt say? It will be troublesome, disquiet,
dissentious, and studious of innouations: it will follow factions, chainge
lords and governors, alter laws, and both these many times for the worse,
seldom for the better, spurn against the best and most noble subjects,
advance the unworthy, banishe the well deserving, esteem of the pillars and
poullers of the treasury, love flatterers, hate them that speak the truth,
contemn the good, honor the myghtie, woorshyp the enemies of it liberty,
persecute the defenders of the Commonwealth, weep sometime and laugh without
cause, esteem of gold and precious stones, reject virtue, and embrace
pleasures: these are the manners and state of your Cities and Countries. There
is none but may most assuredly prophecy unto thee of these matters, unless he
be such an one as has always led a rural life, or entered into Towns with
deaf ears, and dim eyes.


Fear. What will befall unto my Country after my deceasse?


Reason. Why art thou careful, and troubled herewith? Whatsoever happens to
thy Country, thy house shall be free from burning, thieves, and overthrowing.
Whether the year fall out to be pestilent, or else to be dear or plentiful,
hot or dry, haylie, snowie, or raynie, frostie, or otherwise moist and rotten:
yea, the birds of the air, and wild beasts of the wooddes, the Caterpiller
and Chaffer: finally, earthquakes, and raginges of the lea, dearth of
victualles, invasions of enemies, or civil wars, none of all these are able
to touch, or concern thee hereafter.


Fear. O, what shall be the estate of my Country, or to what end shall it come?


Reason. To what other, think thou, then that the greatest city and state
that ever was or shall be is come unto? to wit, dust, ashes, rubbysh, scattered
stones, and a name only rem^yning? I could prove this to be true by
innumerable arguments, but thou know the matter sufficiently. To be short,
there is nothing apperteining unto man that is everlasting, no worldly thing
permanent, but only the soul of man, which is immortal. Enclosures shall fail,
sowed lands shall decay, buildinges shall fall down, all things shall come to
naught, and why art thou grieved and vexed in the mind? If thou be in heaven,
thou wylt both despise this, and all other worldly things. But as for them
that go down into hell, casting of al charity, it is to be intended that they
hate both God and men, and also all the works of God and man.


Of one that at his death is careful of his fame and good report. The.Cxxx.
Dialogue.
SORROW. WHAT will men speak of me when I am dead?


Reason. An unseasonable care: thou should have provided for this in thy
youth: for look what a man's life is, such is his fame.


Sorrow. What will they say of me?


Reason. What shall I answer thee, other then that which the most learned and
eloquent Marcus Cicero says? What other men shall speak of thee, let them
see to that them selves, but they will speak notwithstanding: howbeit, all
their talk is comprehended within the narrow bounds of these regions which
thou see: neither was it ever continual of any, but is extinguished by the
death of men, and forgetfulness of posterity.


Sorrow. What will they speak of me, that shall be borne herafter?


Reason. I would tell thee otherwise then Cicero does, if I thought that any
thing could be better uttered then is by him. And what skilleth it, says he,
if thou be spoken of by them that shall be borne hereafter, seeing there now
remains no fame of them that were borne before thee? One thing he adds
moreover, which perhaps at that time was doubtful, peradventure false, but now
very sure, and most true without doubt: Who, says he, were as many in number
as you are now, and truly better men to. For who is he that doubts, but that
there will never come so good men, as there have been? Thus al things wax
worse and worse, and tend every day toward their final ruin. A merueilous
care then it is which thou have, to stand in fear of the speeches of those
whom thou know not, and are thy youngers, as not living in ye same age with
thee, seeing thou now contemnest the judgment and words of excellent men of
thine own time, and acquaintance.


Sorrow. What fame shall there be of me when I am dead?


Reason. Far better then while thou live, when envy once holds her peace.
For envy and malice seldom last longer then a man's life: and as virtue is the
root of glory, so is envy the cutter down of it: and as the envious hand
being present, hinders the growth of it, so when it is taken away, it
restores the increase of true commendation. And therefore unto many, as the
entrance into their graves has been a bar unto envy, so has it ben the
beginning of great glory.


Sorrow. How long will my fame continue?


Reason. A long time perhaps, as you call long. But that all things may not
only be long, but also everlasting, virtue alone is able to bring that to
pass, and specially Justice, of which it is written: The just man shall be had
in everlasting memory: Which meaning also your country Poet expressed as well
as he could, where he says: But by men's deeds their fame to stretch, that
privilege virtue geues.


Sorrow. What fame shall I have after my deceasse?


Reason. What skilleth it what it be, which shortly shall be forgotten or
contemned? What shall the breath of men apperteyne unto thee, when thou thy
self shall be without breath? For one that breaths to be nourished and
delyghted with the wind and air, it is no meruaill: but for a dead man to be
so, it is a wonder.


Sorrow. What shall be said of me when I am dead?


Reason. No goodness, be sure, unless thou have deserved it, but much evil
peradventure not merited: and perhaps little, or nothing at all. For in many
things fame is a liar, but in the most a true reporter, otherwise it could not
long continue. For truth is the foundation of continuance, and as for a lie,
it is weak and transitory.


Sorrow. What fame shall I have after my death?


Reason. Such as thy life was before and at thy death. Concerning this matter
therefore, let the time to come, but specially the time present look to that.
And thus persuade thy self assuredly, that what report and fame a man is
worthy to have after his death, it is no way better discerned then at his
death: when as in deed, which is a strainge thing to be spoken, many that have
lived all their time obscurely and without glory, death only has made famous.


Of one that dies without Children. The.Cxxxj. Dialogue.
SORROW. I Die without children.


Reason. For that cause thou ought to die the more willingly, and with the
more expedition to go forth on thy journey, for that thou have nothing
behind thee, to stay thee or call thee back. The greatest grief which they
that lie a dying have, surceaseth in thee, which rises upon the sorrow and
compassion of leaving their children, specially when they be young and need
the asistance and counsel of their parents, being at those years destitute of
advice, and subject unto injuries, and many other casualties.


Sorrow. My children, whom I wished and hoped should have lived after me, are
gone before me.


Reason. Then have thou some, to whom thou art desirous to go, and from whom
thou art not willing to depart, which is no small comfort unto thee.


Sorrow. Bitter death constrains me to dye without children.


Reason. If thou think this to be so miserable a matter, what cause have thou
either to die now, or heretofore to have lived without children, seeing there
is such choice of young Gentlemen, and towardly youths, among whom thou may
choose and adopt thee sons, who perhaps will be more loving and obedient unto
thee then thine own natural children, descended of thy flesh and blood: for
they come unto thee by chance, but these are elected out of many by exquisite
judgment? The other were thy children before thou knew them, but these thou
knew, chosest, and louedst before thou made them thy children. And
therefore, the one sort of them will wholly impute it to nature, that they are
thy children, but the other to thy special good liking. Whereby it has happened
many times, that the succession by adoption has been very fortunate unto the
heirs, in which kind not only mean inheritances, but also whole Empires have been committed in trust. Thou know how Julius Caesar wanting issue, adopted
Augustus to be his son, and Augustus again adopted Tyberius almost against
his will. And likewise afterward, how Nerua adopted Vlp^us Traianus, and he
Elius Hadrianus, and be again Antonius pius, and he likewise took unto him
Marcus Aurelius to be his son: which Marcus, I would to God he had more
happily adopted any other, then vnluckely begotten his son Commodus,
commodious to none, but discommodiouss to the whole world, the only disgracing
of so good a father, and one among a few of them that were no small shame and
reproach to the Roman Empire, and also a most apparent argument how much
adoption is more fortunate then procreatio^. For whereas the first princes had
in order one after another reigned long time and in happy estate, this man
forsaking the sleppes of so many his auncetours and predecessors, having
defiled the Commonwealth with his short and filthy government, or rather
tyranny, at last came to a miserable, but for his desartes a worthy end, the
whole contempt and mockery of the common people being turned upon him. But
long before al these, Scipio that was the son of Scipio Africanus the great,
adopted unto him self to the honor of his family, the second thunderbolt of
the Punike war, and hammer of the city of Carthage, by special ordinance
appointed to that purpose, that ye same city which the grandfather had shaken,
the nephew should overthrow, as Florus the Historician says, being translated
from the stock of Aemilia, into the family of Cornelia, no small glory, and
confess, and yet the last of them both. Hereby thou see, that neither thou,
nor any Prince can lack a son, or rather that which is best of al, they that
are good can not lack a good choice: which if it please thee to make, perhaps
it will give thee such an one as thy wife will not bring thee the like, and being
losed from the bands of marriage shall possess the desired effect and end of
matrimony: In such sort does the law provide for the defectes of Nature.


Sorrow. How shall I now dispose of my house, since that I die without children?


Reason. Do not refuse this great occasion of well deserving and commendation,
which is now, as it were thrown into thy lap: and that which thou determinest
to bestow upon thy children, who peradventure would be unthankful for it, or
wickedly hoorde it up, or else as it is the custom of either sort of these, to
convert it to ungodly uses, or rather in very short time or waste and consume
al most prodigally, employ thou more co^mendably, more profitably, and more
durably. Attalus that was king of Pergamus, by his testament made the people of
Rome his heir, not being poor nor needful of it, who also were sshortly
after corrupted with the wanton wealth of Asia. But I will tell thee of another
people, to whom thou may leave thy goods. On the one side of thee stands
a route of thy friends and kinsfolk, at the other a rabble of poor people,
out of both which thou art permitted to adopt children. The one sort of these,
when thou art gone, will deteyne the sweet remembrance of thee in their
minds, the other prevent thee with their godly prayers unto the place whyther
thou art now passing: insomuch as, look what thou bestowest upon them here,
thou shall receive an hundred fold there, which is a large interest, and a most
assured provision for them that are upon the point to pass that way.


Sorrow. I die without a son.


Reason. What if thou had many: would thou then chose one of them to be
the keeper of thy house and money, which shall be thine no longer? Or would
thou appoint one of them to be thy Champion in the conflict and pangues of
death, being him self also mortal? or else to wait upon thee to thy grave?
for farther none of all thy friends will follow thee, more then Metellus
friends followed him. The way is but short from the death bed to the grave:
and what skilleth it whether thou lie alone here, or there? These are but
frivolous and vain causes truly, to wysh for sons: and if in them moreover,
as the vulgar speech is, thou hopedst to have thy name preserved and
continued, thou wast also vulgarly deceived. For doubtless, for the most part
such is the obscurenesse of the children generally to be found, that they are
not able to beautify nor to keep up their fathers name. But the rare nobilite
of the sons, as always it makes the sons them selves honorable, so for
neerenesse sake sometime it covers and obscureth the parents, even as the
Sun does the lesser Stars: which is in none seen more evidently then in
Julius Caesar's father, whom his sons bryghtnesse made almost unknown. And to
be short, whosoever reposeth the trust of his name in his son, he puts a
slender and slipperie substance into a rotten and cracked earthen vessel, and
which is more foolysh, that is none of his own: a thing truly more accounted
of among the common multitude, then of the learned, and yet contemned of
neither: Howbeit this hope were more commendably and assuredly laid up in
their sound and incorruptible vessels, to wit, in their own virtue, notable
deeds, and learning.


Sorrow. I dye without children.


Reason. Thou have none to divide thy care upon, thine attendaunce is fixed
only on thy self, so that thou may depart with more readiness and
liberty, respectyng thy self, and considering thine own estate, how
miserable or happy thou shall die. And further, thou die not in an
uncertainty whether thy misery be augmented, or felicity abated by the
dishonor or virtue of another. Although some others be of another opinion, to
accord with whom I find my self more wyllyng: notwithstanding it has seemed
true for the most part unto Philosophers of great skill that the fathers estate
concerning misery or happiness, is varied by the event of the children.
Truly it is a weak good thing that streatcheth unto fortune that shall befall
hereafter, and depends upon another estate. Which opinion if we do admit,
what may be concluded thereon thou know: for it is out of al doubt, that
many had departed in more happy estate, if they had dyed without children.


Of one dying, that fears to be thrown forth unburied. The.Cxxxii. Dialogue.
FEAR. I Shall Be thrown forth unburied.


Reason. Enuiest thou the birds, or the beasts, or the fishes? And if thou be
afearde of them, take order that thou may have one appointed to keep thee,
or a staff laid by thee to drive them away from thy carcass.


Fear. Thou do jest at my misery, for truly I shall feel nothing.


Reason. Why then do thou fear that which thou shall not feel? If thou
could feel it thou would like well of it: for to bury one that feels,
is to kyl him.


Fear. I shall lie unburied.


Reason. If the earth press not thee, thou shall press the earth: and if the
earth cover thee not, heaven will. Thou know the old saying: Him heaven
hides, that has none other grave. And very well known is this other most
common speech also: To lack a grave is but a slender loss: so slender a loss
indeed, that there is none more slender.


Fear. I shall lie unburied, which is a woeful thing to be spoken.


Reason. I know not what to be spoken, but truly in effect a very trifle: and
believe me, it is much more tolerable for a man to be thrown out of his
grave, then to be turned out of his bed, or apparel.


Fear. I I shall lie unburied, which is a filthy sight.


Reason. Filthy perhaps unto others, but nothing at al unto thee. It is the
general opinion of al learned men, and experience also confirms no less,
that all manner of burial was devised not so much for the dead sake, as for
the living. Which to be true, the outward show and representation of Tumbes
and graves does evidently declare, which within side being evil favored and
horrible, do enclose their tenant within rough and rude rubbish, but on the
outside are wrought with great cunning and cost, where the workmen for the
most part deck them forth to the view with carved pictures of marble, and
statues of gold, and arms beawtifully depainted.


Fear. I shall lie unburied, which is a loathsome thing to behold.


Reason. Have thou so little business to do of thine own, that thou must
meddle with other folks matters? Let them look to that whom the matter
concerns, as for this loathsomenesse, thou shall not see it.


Fear. I shall be left unburied, which is a miserable case.


Reason. Yea, Pompeius the great as worthy a personage as he was, lay
unburied: or rather lay not still, but was overwhelmed and tossed with ye
surging waves. Neither do I think thee to be so mad or foolysh, that in thine
opinion he should have been made the more happy if he had been buried: as his
companion Marcus Crassus was never awhit the more unfortunate, in that there
was none present to cause him to be enterred. In all other things they were
almost equal, saving that Crassus head, as it was most meet for him yt was of
al men the most rych and covetous, being more heavy then gold, was preserved,
but nevertheless both of them to be contemned and reprochfully dealt withal.
Unless perhaps their third fellow be more happy, for that he was set up to
be seen upon the head of a most lofty and bewtifull Colossus, ouerlookyng
there the tops of the highest churches and steeples: whom perhaps I may
confess to have been in war more fortunate, but in burial I must needs
deny it. So that I may say, that the same stone is bewtified by him, but made
nothing the happier. For what happiness can this be in him that has no
feelyng, or as a man would say, in one stone not covered with another? For if
it were otherwise, that a grave or Tumbe made a man fortunate, who were more
happy then Mausolus?


Fear. I shall lie unburied.


Reason. Both Paulus Aemilius, and Claudius Marcellus had lain unburied, had
not their most deadly enemy dained them of a grave, the rather, as I suppose,
in admiration of their virtue, and in respect of his own honesty, then moved
with any remorse of duty or conscience, whereof there rested no one jot
within that man's heart. In somuche, that I think they hated their graves when
they were enterred, and if they might have had their liberty, would rather
have chosen to have lain unburied. Cyrus also that was king of Persia lay
unburied, and neither that, nor yet his Scythian bottle were any reproach unto
him at all, but rather their cruel and savage manners, by means of which he
sustained that most foul ignominy, and shameful injury. But why do I now
gather together so many several naked corpses, with Roman emperors, and
foreign kings, that were bereaved not only of the last and wished solemnity
of their graves, but also of the vain honor belonging thereunto: and farther,
which more is, that were torn and plucked in pieces, and thrown about in
mammockes, that a man would judge it an envious matter to have lain with an
whole carcas: seeing that there are co^uersant in our minds and memories the
miserable massacres of whole nations dead, and as a man may say, the whole
world unburied? For why, with king Cyrus of whom I spoke erewhile, there were
two hundred thousand Persians slain: and also with Crassus, sixteen most
valiant and flourishing legions: and at the overthrow at Cannas, above
fourscore and five thousand citizens of Rome and their confederates: and six
and fifty thousand Carthagiens, Spaniardes, Ligurians, and Frenchmen at the
river Metaurus, together with their Captain: and again at Aquas Sextias,
which is the proper name of the place, two hundred thousand Germans not far
from the Alps, Marius being General in both places, which were but an hundred
and fifty thousand as some writers do report, but they that say least of al,
not above threescore thousand Cimbrians, which lay there unburied. Moreover,
at Philippi the aides of al confederate kings and nations, and the flower and
strength of the Italian youth, as it pleased the majesty of the gods so to
deal, wanting the honor of burial, made fat the Aemonian fields, and filled
the paunches of the wild beasts and carren crows. What shall I say of the
Carthagien fleet that was utterly destroyed at the Islands Egates? Or of the
Massilian navy that was discomfited at their own very havens mouth, and
within the sight of their faithful country? And (that I may not evermore dwell
in discourse of the Italian toils and miseries) when the whole Athenian power
by sea was drowned before the city of Syracuse, what grave or burial had they?
I passover in silence Salamina and Marathon, with three hundred thousand
Persians whith many. I let pass the conflictes of the Hebrews, of the
Scythians, and Amazons, the battayles of the Arabians, Parthians and Medes. I
ouerslyp the conquestes and slaughters that Alexander king of Macedonie made in
the East among the naked and unarmed people there. I speak nothing of al such
kinds of plagues, whereby it is a woeful case to here, how many worthy and
dearly beloved carcases have been most pitifully defiled, spoiled, and made
away. Neither over and besides this, of the incursion of serpents and wild
beasts, by whose suddeyne invasion Dicaearchus teaches, as Cicero reports,
how that certain whole kindreds and nations of people have been destroyed. Nor
of tempests, and daily shypwrackes: for as for those that peryshe by fire,
there is no man will say that they need any grave. I omit civil furies and
outrages, and domestical broils and contentions, of which it is said: That
cyuile war can scarce grant a grave to the captains: which may be much
more truly veryfied of foreign battayles. Neither stand I upon the ruins of
cities and towns, as namely, Troy, Jerusalem, Carthage, Corinth, Numantia,
Saguntum, with many other more, wherein the most part of the citizens being
overthrown by the fall of the walls and buildinges, were buried with their
cuntry. Last of all, I ouerslip earthquakes, by means whereof many men that
were overwhelmed, had the whole womb of their mother the earth to receive them
in steed of a sepulture. Which being in old time, as also of late days an
ordinary mischief in diverse places, yet never raged any where more
notoriously then in Asia, whereas it is reported, that there were twelve cities
by horrible gapynges of the earth devoured in one day. These many and great
matters have I to this end^ recited, that I might take away from thee this
ridiculous fear, who dreadest the loss of a grave nore then death is self:
and take grievously that this thy poor carcas should want that, which it
is manifest so many thousand worthy men and valiant warriors, and which is a
more heinous matter, holy Saints, have lacked.


Fear. The earth is denied me when I am dead, which is a very hard matter.


Reason. This is not hard, but thou art tender that can be hurt, and yet
feel nothing.


Fear. The earth is denied me when I am dead, which is an unworthy thing.


Reason. How so? Art thou then due to the earth, or the earth to thee? Perhaps
the earth may be denied thee, but not thou the earth. Some chance
peradventure, or injury of the enemy may deprive thee of thy grave: but thou
that came from the earth must needs return thither again: which thing
since the Lord thy God has forewarned thee of by his own mouth, cannot be
false.


Fear. The earth shall not cover me in her bosom.


Reason. But thou shall cover her with thy nakes body: and what shall this
apperteyne more unto thee after thy death, then it does at this present, what
is become of the paringes of thy nails, and clypping of thy hair, and the
blood that was let out for some fever or other disease, and also of the pieces
of thy chyldrens coats, and infantes mantles, and swadlebandes when thou wast
in thy tender years? Have thou forgotten the gallant answer of Theodorus
Cyrenaeus in Tullie: whom when Lysimachus the king threatened to hang up, upon
the galous, as I take it: These terrible things, quoth he, threaten unto thy
gorgious courtyers: as for Theodorus, he cares not whether he rotte aloft or
upon the ground. And if the earth receive thee not into her bosom, yet shall
she entertayne thee upon her face, whereas the grass shall cloth thee, and the
flowers deck thee being glad of such a guest, and the rain moisten thee, and
the sun burn thee, and the frost freese thee, and the wind move thee: and
perhaps this is a more natural mean, whereby the body which is framed of the
four elements, may be resoued into so many again.


Fear. I am left unburied, which is horrible to be heard.


Reason. This horror consists in opinion, and not in truth, forasmuch as
some have thought it an horrible matter to be covered with earth, and very
fair to be consumed with fire, as we know your a^nce^ours were persuaded.
Among some it was counted an honorable death, to be torn in pieces by dogs
and wild beasts. Concerning this point there are innumerable customs and
manners among nations, which being curiously gathered together by Crispus,
Cicero has abridged. Thou shall lie upon the bare ground: but another shall be
pressed with a great rough stone, another covered with rotten cloddes, another
flit weliring dead in the water, another as he hangs be driven with the wind,
beaten with the hail, torn by the ravens and crows: and to be short, they
that have been perfumed with odours, and clothed with purple the woormes shall
consume them. And that more has he that is covered with marble and gold, over
him who weeping in the Poet, says: And now the surges drench me, and the
winds beat me against the shore? Although he also, following the sway of the
common error, abhors to be covered with earth. Unless perhaps thou do
likewise condescend to fables and old wives tales, thinking that the souls of
them that lie unburied do wander an hundred years about the banks of the
hellish lake: which toys truly a sound and religious mind utterly rejects.


Fear. I am denied a grave in my native soil.


Reason. If thou have a turfe left thee in thy natural country, thou art in
case, that Phocion, as great a man as he was, may envy at thee: whom being a
citizen of Athenes, and having otherwise deserved thereof then I doubt me thou
have of thy country, the unthankful city bannished out of their confines
when he was dead: a strainge kind of cruelty.


Fear. I shall be cast forth unburied.


Reason. Se to thine own business, and leave this care unto the living.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, by Rychard Watkins. 1579.

A Table of the matters contained in the first book of this work.
OF Floorishyng years. Folio. 1. Of the goodly Beauty of the Body. Folio. 2.
Of Bodyly health. Folio. 4. Of Restored health. Eod. Of Bodyly strength. Folio.
5. Of Swyftnesse of body. Folio. 6. Of Wit. Eod. Of Memory. Folio. 7. Of
Eloquence. Folio. 8. Of Virtue. Folio. 10. Of the opinion of Virtue. Folio. 11.
Of Wisdom. Folio. 12. Of Religion. Folio. 14. Of Freedom. Eod. Of a glorious
Country. Folio. 15. Of an honorable Family. Folio. 18. Of a fortunate
Beginning. Folio. 20. Of Sumptuous fare. Folio. 21. Of Feasts. Folio. 23. Of
Apparel and trimming of the Body. Folio. 26. Of Rest and quietness. Folio.
27. Of pleasant Smelles. Folio. 29. Of the sweetness of Music. Folio. 30.
Of Daunsing. Folio. 32. Of playing with the Ball. Folio. 34. Of playing at Dice
and Lottes. Eod. Of prosperous playing at Tables. Folio. 35. Of Iesters. Folio.
37. Of the games of Wrestlyng. Folio. 38. Of sundry Spectacles and Shows.
Folio. 40. Of Horses. Folio. 42. Of Hunting and Haukyng. Folio. 44. Of great
retinue of Servants. Folio. 45. Of the magnificence and beautifulness of
Houses. Folio. 47. Of strong defenced Castles, Eod. Of precious household
stuff. Folio. 48. Of Precious stones and Pearls. Folio. 49. Of Cups made of
Precious stones. Folio. 53. Of Engrauinges, and Seals in Precious stones.
Folio. 56. Of Pictures and painted Tables. Folio. 57. Of Statues and Images.
Folio. 58. Of Vessels of Corinth. Folio. 60. Of store of Books. Folio. 61.
Of the fame of Writers. Folio. 64. Of Maistershyppe. Folio. 66. Of sundry
tytles of Studies. Folio. 67. Of Tytles of Business and Affairs. Folio. 69.
Of Tytles of Wars W^^^cuyre, and Chiefetayneshyp, Folio. 70. Of the
Fr^^^dshyp of Kings. Folio. 71. Of the abundance of Friends. Folio. 72. Of
Friends not known, but by report. Folio. 74. Of one only Faithful Freende.
Folio. 75. Of Plenty of Richesse. Folio. 77. Of fyndyng of a Gold mine. Eod.
Of the fynding of Treasure. Folio. 78. Of Usury. Eod. Of Fruitful and well
tylled Land. Folio. 80. Of Pleasant green walks. Folio. 81. Of Flocks and
heardes of Cattle. Folio. 83. Of Elephantes and Cammelles. Eod. Of Apes, and
other beasts of Pleasure. Folio. 84. Of Peacockes, Chickins, Hens, Bees, and
Pigions. Eod. Of Fyshe pondes. Folio. 85. Of Cages of Birds, and of Speaking,
and Singing Birds. Folio. 87. Of the worthiness of Marriage. Folio. 89. Of a
fair Wife. Folio. 90. Of a fruitful and eloquent Wife* Folio. 91. Of a great
Dowry. Eod. Of Pleasant Love. Folio. 92. Of the Birth of Children. Folio. 96.
Of a Pleasant young Child. Eod. Of the excellent Favor of Children. Folio.
97. Of the valiencie and magnificencie of a Son. Folio. 98. Of the Daughters
chastity. Folio. 99. Of a good Son in Law. Eod. Of Second Marriage. Folio.
100. Of the Marriage of Children. Folio. 101. Of Nephues. Folio. 102. Of Adopted
Children. Folio. 103. Of an excellent Schoolemaister. Eod. Of a notable
Scholar. Folio. 104. Of a good Father. Folio. 105. Of a most Loving Mother.
Eod. Of Good Brethren, and Loving and Fair Systers. Folio. 106. Of a good
Lord. Folio. 107. Of the Clearenesse of the Air. Folio. 109. Of Fortunate
Saylyng. Eod. Of wyshed Arriving at the Haune. Folio. 110. Of coming forth of
Prison. Eod. Of a quiet State. Folio. 111. Of Power. Folio. 113. Of Glory.
Folio. 114. Of Benefits bestowed upon many. Folio. 115. Of Love of the people.
Folio. 116. Of Inuadyng a Tyranny. Folio. 117. Of a Kingdom and Empire.
Folio. 119. Of a furnished Army. Folio. 123. Of a well apppoynted Navy. Folio.
124. Of engyns and Artillarie. Folio. 125. Of Treasure laid up in store.
Folio. 126. Of Revenge. Eod. Of hope to Win. Folio. 129. Of Victory. Eod. Of
the death of an Enemy. Folio. 130. Of hope of Peace. Folio. 131. Of peace and
Truce. Folio. 132. Of the Popedom. Folio. 133. Of Happiness. Folio. 134. Of
good Hope. Folio. 136. Of expectation of Inheritance. Folio. 138. Of Alchimie.
Follo. 139. Of the promises of wise men and Soothsayers. Folio. 140. Of Glad
tidings. Folio. 143. Of Expectyng a man's son, or farmer, or wife. Eod. Of
Lookyng for better times. Folio. 145. Of the hoped coming of a Prince. Folio.
146. Of hope of fame after Death. Folio. 147. Of Glory hoped for by buyldyng.
Folio. 148. Of Glory hoped for by keepyng company. 149. Of Manyfold hope.
Folio. 150. Of hoped quietness of Mind. Eod. Of the hope of life Everlasting.
Folio. 151.
The Table of the matters contained in the second Book of this work.
OF the deformity of the Body. Folio. 162. Of Weakness. Folio. 164. Of
Sycknesse. Folio. 165. Of a base Country. Eod. Of Baseness of Stock. Folio.
166. Of a shameful Birth. Folio. 169. Of Bondage. Folio. 171. Of Poverty.
Folio. 174. Of Damage sustained. Folio. 175. Of Thynne fare. Folio. 178. Of
Original poverty. Folio. 180. Of the heavy burden of many Children. Eod. Of
Money lost. Folio. 183. Of Suertishyppe. Folio. 187. Of Loss of time. Folio.
188. Of Unfortunate p^a^ing at Tables. Folio. 190. Of Her unto whom one was
assured, judged unto another. Eod. Of the loss of a man's Wife. Folio. 191. Of
a Shrewyshe Wife. Folio. 193. Of the stealyng away of a man's Wife. Folio. 194.
Of an unchaste Wife. Eod. Of a barren Wife. Folio. 197. Of an unchaste
Daughter. Folio. 198. Of Shame coming from an other. Folio. 199. Of Infamy.
Folio. 200. Of Shame procured by means of unworthy commendation. Folio. 202.
Of Unthankful Friends. Folio. 203. Of Unthankful persons. Folio. 204. Of
Evil Servants. Folio. 206. Of Fugitive Servants. Folio. 107. Of
Importunate Neighbors. Folio. 208. Of Enemies. Folio. 209. Of occasion lost to
revenge. Folio. 210. Of the peoples Hatred. Folio. 211. Of Envy, Passiuely.
Eod. Of Contempt. Folio. 212. Of Long expectyng a promised Reward. Folio. 213.
Of Repulses. Eod. Of an unjust Lord. Folio. 215. Of an Unlearned
Schoolemaister. Folio. 216. Of an Unapt and proud Scholar. Folio. 217. Of a
Stepdame. Folio. 218. Of the hardness of a Father. Eod. Of a stubburne Son.
Folio. 220. Of a contentious Brother. Folio. 221. Of the Loss of a Father.
Folio. 222. Of the Loss of a Mother. Eod. Of the loss of a Son. Eod. Of the
miserable fall of a young Child. Folio. 224. Of A son that is found to be
another man's. Eod. Of the loss of a Brother. Folio. 226. Of the death of a
Friend. Folio. 227. Of the absence of Friends. Folio. 228. Of grievous Ship
wrack. Folio. 230. Of Burning. Eod. Of Great labor and Travail. Folio. 231.
Of A payneful Journey. Folio. 232. Of One years Barrenness. Folio. 234. Of An
evil and proud Bayliffe. Folio. 235. Of Theft. Folio. 236. Of Robberies.
Folio. 237. Of Coosynage and deceit. Eod. Of A straight and narrome dwelling.
Folio. 238. Of A Prison. Folio. 239. Of Torments. Folio. 240. Of Unjust
Judgment. Folio. 241. Of Banyshment. Folio. 242. Of A man's country Besieged.
Folio. 245. Of A man's country Destroyed. Folio. 246. Of the fear of loosyng
in war. Folio. 247. Of A foolyshe and rash fellow in office. Folio. 248. Of
an indiscreet and hasty marshal of the Feelde. Eod. Of unfortunate success
in battle. Folio. 249. Of Civil war. Folio. 250. Of the disagreement of a
waueryng mind. Folio. 251. Of a doubtful State. Folio. 253. Of Wounds
received. Eod. Of a king without a Son. Folio. 254 Of a kingdom Lost. Folio.
255. Of Treason. Folio. 257. Of the loss of a Tyranny. Folio. 258. Of Castles
lost. Folio. 260. Of old Age. Folio. 262. Of the Gout. Folio. 267. Of Scabbes.
Folio. 268. Of Watchyng. Folio. 269. Of the unquietness of Dreams Eod. Of
Importunate renown. Folio. 270. Of Sorrow conceived for the evil manners of
men. Folio. 272. Of Small greefes of sundry things. Folio. 273. Of an
Earthquake. Folio. 279. Of the plague far and wide ragyng. Folio. 280. Of
Sadness and misery. Eod. Of the Toothache. Folio. 284. Of pain in the
Legs. Folio. 285. Of Blyndnesse. Folio. 286. Of the loss of Hearing. Folio.
289. Of the loathsomeness of Life. Folio. 290. Of Heaviness of the body.
Folio. 291. Of great dullness of wit. Eod. Of a slender and weak Memory
Folio. 292. Of lack of Eloquence. Folio. 293. Of Loss of the tongue and
speech. Folio. 294. Of want of Virtue. Folio. 296. Of Covetousness. Folio.
297. Of Envy and Malice. Eod. Of Wrath. Folio. 298. Of Gluttony. Folio. 299.
Of sluggishenesse of the Mind. Eod. Of Le^cherie. Folio. 300 Of Pride. Eod. Of
Agues. Folio. 301. Of the (...) e of the guts and Trance. Folio. 302. Of
Sundry pains and greefes of the whole body. Folio. 303. Of Madness. Folio.
309. Of Poison. Folio. 310. Of the fear of death. Folio. 311. Of Voluntary
murtheryng a man's own self. Folio. 315. Of Death. Folio. 319. Of Death before
a man's time. Folio. 322. Of a violent Death. Folio. 324. Of a shameful Death.
Folio. 326. Of a sudden Death. Folio. 327. Of one that is sick out of his
own Country. Folio. 328. Of one that dies out of his own Country. Eod. Of
One that dies in sin. Folio. 332. Of One dying, that is careful what shall
become of his inheritance and children. Folio. 334. Of One dying, yt is careful
what his wife will do when he is dead. Folio. 335. Of One dying, that is careful
what will become of his country after his deceasse. Folio. 336. Of One that at
his death is careful of his fame and good report. Folio. 337. Of One that dies
without children. Folio. 338. Of One dying, that fears to be thrown forth
unburied. Folio. 340.
FINIS.

