AN HONORABLE PRESIDENT FOR GREAT MEN.
BY AN ELEGIECALL MONVMENT to the Memory of that worthy Gentleman Mr. JOHN
BANCKS, Citizen and Mercer of LONDON, aged about 60. years, and Dyed the 9th
day of September. ANNO. DOM. 1630.
FAME come and wait upon the Funeral Hearse
Of Noble worth; and let this weeping Verse
Charm all those Eyes which spent a brinie Tear:
Let none weep more; but read what is written here.
Fame dry their Eyes, and bid them all rejoice
For Rich and Poor all with a general voice
Spend their best breath, to tell the World that he
(Whose death deserves this sad solemnity)
Was One, a Tun of Dyamonds could not buy
The Jewels which he wore: Humility,
Religion, Judgment, Wisdom; Poor Men's Prayers
Which half the way to Heaven, made him Stayres
Should any weep for such a man that is dead?
Interred with Fame, his Soul to Heaven fled?
Not a Tear more: But bid the great Ones learn
To do like good, that they in BANCKS discern
Bid them peruse the Index of his deeds,
And every one discreetly as he reeds
Observe and quote in the Margent of his heart
The best of them; that when their souls must part
From their dead bodies; They may so work in them
The World may say; they lived and died good Men
But above all his Merit, My Pen is bound
To laud his worth (whom Fame has so renowu'd)
Much more then any: For the Legacies
Bequeathed to Rich and Poor at Obsequies
Of dead Testators, are but customary
But the bequest I treat, is full of glory.
As long as Time has being shall not dye
This first borne famous Gift and Legacy.
Let the World know, he has remenbred those
The great Ones do forget; and to disclose
His Goodness in it, Censure You that read
This Eligie; Although JOHN BANCKES be dead
He shall for ever live. The Artillery
Shall fame his Gift to all Posterity.
Nine times Ten Ponnds this Gentleman did give
LONDONS Arttillerie, that such may live
And flourish in that noble Schole of Arms
(Where Is taught the Gaurd of Princes from all harms)
Twenty Pounds to Feast, and other Twenty more
To purchase Arms; and Fifty to the Store,
The Stock, the Treasury, or to the Banck
BANCK fits it well; if there were more to rank.
He was a Soldier, though that honored age
Denied him with his Iuniors equipage;
Therefore his love we honor: Behold and see
The Glory of this sad Solemnity.
The Warlike Music, Drum and Fife are clad
In black, there beating Dub a Dub all sad:
Muskets (Retrorsum) and their rests do weep,
The heads of Pikes do the like Clangor keep
Captain, Leiftenant, Ensign, and the rest
All with dejected Countenances pressed
To direful Mourning: Thus are Soldiers friends
Like royal Princes brought unto their Ends.
FINIS
Mariscallus PETOVVB composuit.

