THE WAY TO HEAVEN: SHEVVING, 1. That Salvation is only in the Church. 2. What
that Church is. 3. By what means men are added to the Church. 4. The Author,
or Efficient of this addition. 5. The time and continuance of that work. 6.
The happiness of those that are added to the Church.


By John Phillips, Bachelor of Divinity, and Pastor of Feuersham in Kent.

Isa. 30.21. This is the way, walk in it.

LONDON, Printed by FELIX KINGSTON. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, THE MAYOR, and the IVRATS his BRETHREN: AND TO THE
COMMVNALTIE of the Town and PORT-LIMME of FEVERSHAM in KENT, I. P. wishes
happy society with the heavenly Jerusalem, here, and in heaven.
Right Worshipful, and Beloved,
Happiness, is the common object of every man's desire; so that, as Seneca
says, Seneca de vita beata, l. 1. c. 1.
Viuere omnes beat volunt; There is not a man that would not be happy. But
there are two obstacles that hinder the attainement of this desired Happiness.
One is, as he says well, Sed ad peruidendum, quid sit, quod beatam vitam
efficiat, caligant: Their sight is so dim, that they cannot perceive, what
that thing is that makes a man happy. The other is, Si via lapsus est: If a man
miss of the right way. In which case; Ipsa velocitas maioris interualli causa
fit: The faster he runs, the farther he is out of the way: Therefore this
wise Heathen man does give good counsel; Decernatur it a que and quo tendamus,
and qua: We must look both to the end whereunto we aim, as also to the way,
whereby we may attain unto it.

For the course of the world is utterly against reason, Pecorum ritu se qui
antecedentium gregem, pergentes non qua eundum est, sed qua itur: That men
endued with reason, should imitate the brute and unreasonable creatures, which
follow one another, though it be out of the way: as if men should go on, not
considering what way they ought to go, but what way is usually gone of others.
But this is, non ad rationem, sed ad similitudinem viuere: not to live
according to reason, but according to example, not like men, but like Apes.

Ioh. 14.6.
Now our good Guide, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: and therefore a
better Instructor then the wisest heathen, has directed us Christians, both to
the end, and to the way, leading unto that end, which is true Happiness in
deed, and consists in the fruition of God, Psalm. 144.15.
by the means of saving knowledge and grace in this life, Ioh. 17 3.
with the rest of the Church Militant here in earth: as also by inioyning his
glorious presence with the Church T^iumphant in heaven: So that, if we follow
his direction, we shall know, and quo, and qua, both whither, and by what way
we must go, to attain true felicity; here below, Aug* de Ciu. Dei. l. 19. c.
27.
as S. Augustine says, by faith, and hereafter above, by sight.

And this is the scope, which I have propounded to my self in this Treatise,
that I might not only by lively voice, say, This is the way, walk in it; but,
as it were, by the hand, lead you in the way: for I am obliged by the bond of
duty, as being your Pastor, and you my flock, both to pray for you, and to
direct you, the best I can, in this heavenly course. Which, as I have carefully
endeavored to do amongst you, by the space of almost twenty years: so I wish
I may with good success happily continue, to our mutual joys, through Gods
blessing: For I can truly say with the Apostle; Romans 10.1.
My hearts desire, and prayer to God for you, is, that ye might be saved; and
with the Prophet Samuel, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, and
cease praying for you: but I will show you the good and right way.

Give me leave then, I beseech you, to stiree up your Christian minds, to an
unfeigned desire and endeavor to enter into this way, tending to life and
happiness. In worldly benefits we would not have others to go before us: why
should we not have as great, nay greater care of heavenly things? Our Savior
vpbraided the chief of the Jews, Mat. 21.31, 32.
for that Publicans and Harlots went into the Kingdom of God before them. And
what a shame is it, as S. Augustine says, V^ simplices Idiotae rapiant nobis
Coelum, and nos cum nostra scientia mergamur in infernum? That simple Idiotes
should snatch heaven from us, and we with all our knowledge and learning should
be plunged into hell? Oh let us not do our selves so great aniniurie. It is
the property of worldlings, who live not according to faith, as S. Augustine
speaks, Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 19. c. 17.
to angle for all their peace and prosperity, in the sea of temporal profits,
whereas the righteous live in full expectation of the glory to come. Which that
you may also do, take for your furtherance, this weak help in good worth;
use it, and peruse it, I hope you shall find your labor well bestowed.

The occasion of this Work, was the interring of our neighbor, Master Edward
Lapworth, Doctor of Physic: It is for the method and matter, the very same,
that was then publicly delivered by lively voice, but is now, not only
amplified, by access of those things, that the strictness of time would not
then permit; but is also further enlarged into a convenient Treatise; the
weight of the matter, and fitness of these times so requiring.

If any desire to know the reason of the publishing of it, I must ingenuously
confess* it was never liberally intended on my part, but rather extorted and
wrung from me: for had it not been for a furious and ouer-hasty Midwife, that
drew it out of the womb by violence, this Embryon had never seen the light.
Yet when I did call to mind, Judge. 14.8.
That Samsons Lion had honey in it, so that, out of the eater came forth
meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness, I did willingly set upon
this Work, hoping that by the blessing of God, some wholesome food, and sweet
repast might issue out of these bitter beginnings, to the refreshing of the
hungry soul.

But to leave Parables, and to speak plainly: This Gentleman deceased, was
noted of all that knew him, to be inclined to the Romish Religion. At the
Funeral, I took occasion to speak something of the deceased, which either of
simple misprision, or sinister acception, was misconstrued, and by some
officious hearers, carried as news to such, whose ears are patent, and gates
wide open to receive the talebearer. Hereupon the poor Predicant was rated,
as if it had been a Schoole-boy, by some austere Pedantee; and yet the Censor
had nothing to object, praeter auditum, but only by bare hearsay: not one
auditor obiecting any thing against the Teacher; but some godly and
well-minded, showing their acceptance, did give him thanks for his labors.

Now, forsooth, the criminations or faults objected, were these:

1. That the deceased party was commended, being accounted a Papist, yea, and
a seducer. The truth is, there was not so much as one word of commendation
given him, whereat Momus himself might cavil (as the i^dicious and ingenuous
Reader may here see by the simple truth faithfully related) unless any will
be so censorious, as to tax S. Paul for saying, as the truth was. Act. 28.2.
That the Ba^barians were courteous, and showed them that had suffered
shipwreck, no little kindness.

That it is said, he was noted to be a Papist, who ever denied it? The
proposition was not, that he was no Papist, but (according to the Doctrine of
our Christian reformed Churches) That a simple-hearted Papist, not holding the
whole mystery of Romish iniquity, but only erring in some less points, which
overthrow not the foundation, may upon repentance in general, of sins known
and not known, find mercy with God, relying upon Christ alone for salvation.

Where it is said, That he was a seducer: I have my self charged him with it;
but he was so far from maintaining that bad office, that he did in excuse of
himself affirm, That he knew no cause, why any man should count him a Papist,
unless it were for keeping the Kings laws, in abstaining from flesh upon
Fridayes, and such like times. I call God to record, I do the man no wrong,
but testify herein the very truth; and did expastulate with him, that if the
conscience of the Kings Laws did so prevail with him in that, why it should
not also cause him to come more often to the Church, the reason being the same
for both; whereunto, his answer was silence.

But for the matter of seducing: It makes not a man by and by a settled
Professor in his Religion, because he labors to draw others unto it: for we
see by experience, that if any conceive well of a Religion, and begin to
entertain it, though they be as yet but very Nouices, they will presently
seek to induce others to the same: this may appear by those that were
Conuerts to the truth, Ioh 1.41, 45.
as Andrew and Philip, and the like, whom as Apes these Errants imitate.

2. Unto the former, another aspersion was added, which did touch the whole
Ministry, and was urged with no little spite and clamor, viz. That any man,
be he never so vile, for a Cloth and a fee, shall as his Funeral be commended
and extolled to the heavens. If any be guilty of this crime, let him bear his
own burden; for my part, I have learned with Elihu, not to give titles, Job
32. 22.
lest my Maker should become my destroyer, for thereis a woe denounced against
them, Isa. 5. 20.
that speak good of evil, and call darkness, light.

It is well known, that for diverse years I did utterly abstain from speaking
any one word of the dead, but only applied my self to the instruction of the
living; insomuch as it grew distasted: yet never did I abstain, as holding is
unlawful: for I know there is very good use of it: 1. That the virtues of the
godly may be propounded for imitation: that we might be followers of the
Saints, who through faith and patience have inherited the promises. 2. That the
perseverance of the faithful, being made known, we may with the ancient
Church, as is noted afterward in this Treatise, Reu. 2.10.
sing laud to God, that being faithful unto the death, they have received the
Crown of life. 3. That if any having lived scandalously in open sin, but,
through the mercy of God, by the means of his afflict^ng rod, are recovered,
and brought home with the Prodigal, the Congregation being made acquainted
with it, may glorify God, that has given them repentance unto life, and with
the Angels, rejoice at the conversion of a sinner. 4. That upon any
extraordinary accident, men being suddenly surprised by death, their example
propounded, may be a monitory to the living, that they may take it to heart,
and profit by it. These and the like, are good occasions of the Teachers
Discourse in this kind. And upon this ground, I have endeavored to avoid
scandalum datum, the giving of any offense, keeping my self always in the
mean, or middeway, between both extremes.

3. A third crimination, or fault objected, and that with no little asperitie,
was, that even the very profane should make a scoff of it. And what did they
say? Why, forsooth, being upon their Ale-benches, they call for another Pot,
deriding the Doctrine of Gods Mercy and Patience, Isa. 22.12, 13.
in that he calls not all at once, but some even at the eleventh hour. Did
not the wicked do this, 2. Pet. 3.3.
even at the very preaching of the Prophets and Apostles, yea, of Christ
himself? Can any pretend piety, and take part with such impiety, taking it
up, and casting it as dung in the face of God himself? for it is not Moses,
but God, against whom men open their foul mouths: and the contemptuous usage
of the poorest servant of Christ, he counts as a despite done to himself,
howsoever men slubber it over.

4. A fourth crimination was, that I should show so much respect to one, that
was a noted enemy to my self. But be it that he was so; Mat. 26.50.
I have learned of my Master, though he were my enemy, yet to call him
friend. Could he be a greater enemy to me, 2. Sam. 1.23, 24
then Saul was to David? yet see how David gives him his due praise, in his
mournful song upon the death of Saul and Jonathan.

5. The next objection was, that his not coming to Church was excused, for
that his memory was decayed. In this point I cannot tell whether I should blame
more, the reporters laesum ingenium, or laesam memoriam, his want of wit, or
his want of memory: for what reason is there to think, that a Papist should
refrain coming to Church, because he cannot remember what he does hear? when
in truth he would willingly be there stark deaf, or learn the Art of
oblivion. But the truth is, that the failing of his memory was spoken of in
the beginning; his not coming to Church, in the end of all the speech, and
almost the last point of all, and it was applied only to his faculty, wherein
I said he did practice with good liking* till through weakness his memory
began to fail.

But the substance of the speech which I now come unto, will clear all. You
may therefore please to understand, that the Sermon being ended (according to
my usual manner) I took occasion to speak somewhat of the party deceased;
not by way of commendation or excuse, in regard of his Religion, which I had
before taxed for many errors; but only by way of application of one special
point in my Sermon; which was, that in a corrupt Church some may be saved,
holding the foundation, though taynted with diverse errors of less moment: and
so consequently in the Romish Church; provided, that they hold not the whole
Mystery of that Iniquity, nor by any doctrine or practice overthrow the
fundamental grounds of Faith and Religion. This I did apply to the person of
the Gentleman deceased, charitably deeming him to be in the number of these,
and that (as I did take it) for good reason.

The effect of my speech concerning him, was digested into these two branches:
His faculty; and his Religion. For the first* I did only touch it in a few
words, showing, that he did practice the Art of Physic with good and
commendable acceptance, till such time, as through weakness, his memory
began to fail: that he was very courteous, and ready to afford his best
help, specially to Scholars, as I could testify of mine own certain
knowledge; and not wanting therein to poor neighbors, as I had partly seen
with mine own eyes, and near dwellers to him could testify.

Touching his Religion, I did endeavor to express my charity, with our
Christian reformed Church, that all men might see the difference between
Christian and Antichristian Religion. They cast down headlong into hell, all
that consort not with them, in dependence upon one Head, The Roman Bishop, we
charitably and hopefully conceive, that in the midst of them, notwithstanding
their error of that dependence, yet many have been, are, and shall be saved,
the Lord having his thousands among them that never bowed their knee to Baal.

My reasons why I did so charitably judge of his estate before God, were
briefly these: 1. First, I showed that he was not infected with the whole
Mystery of Iniquity, nor did appear to be obdurate and obstinate that way;
because in our Christian families where he came, he was known to join with
them in Prayer. 2. In conference and dispute about Religion, every man that did
converse with him, can testify his unskillfulness and weakness that way:
wherein his disabilitie of answer was supplied usually, with these or such
like euading speeches: God send us all to heaven. The Son of God be good to
us, etc. 3. He protested to me, that he was never at the most solemn part of
their Romish Religion, that is, The Mass, nor did ever know what it meant.
This confession was not long before his death. 4. His skill in the Vtensils and
Vessels of their Religious service was so little, that he did not know a
Chalice, but would pleasantly tell of his mistake, taxed by a Gentlewoman,
better skilled in the trade then himself. 5. My self reading to him a Sermon
of S. Bernard, wherein the Father vehemently inueighed against the Court and
Prelacie of Rome, and demanding of him, Whether Luther or Calvin, or any of
our men, could more plainly and more powerfully speak against such impiety,
he did, as a man convicted, admire it, as strange to him; for he ^aw there was
no deceit, inasmuch as it was read to him in his own Book. 6. He ordinarily
(though not so often as was fi^) resorted to Church, and communicated annually;
excepting the last year, or little more before his death: and that was upon
occasion of the Princes going into Spain; which made many befoole themselves.
7. Last of all, in the shutting up of his life, near his end, my self praying
with him, he did show his consent, by erecting both his hands up to heaven, and
after the Prayer ended, by giving me his hand cheerfully and willingly of his
own accord.


If these be not sufficient arguments to induce my charity toward him, judge
you: And tell me, I pray you, whether such a speech, so charitably uttered,
need to flee the light, and be glad of the covert of darkness; or not rather
with boldness come into the light, as now it does, that it may be approved
of God, and discreet good men.

That I may not with too much prolixitie offend your patience, I will now draw
to an end; entreating your courteous acceptance of this token of my sincere
love unto you. It is indeed many ways due unto you of right, but especially in
regard of your love and kind respect showed to me of late; that whereas for
the space of above ten years, I constantly continued the weekly lecture upon
the Market day, having no recompense for that pains, but only Master William
Sakers Legacy of five pounds per annum, it has pleased you, upon due
consideration, to augment it to a convenient stipend: which good Work was
first well begun by Master Reginold Edwards, and that not only motioned by
word, but seconded by his liberal act, in contributing most largely to so good
a purpose. And whereas voluntary contributions, depending only upon the Donors
free disposition, are in like manner as Charity it self, subject to wax
cold; it was not only very kindly toward me, but exceeding prouidently, for
the better continuance of so religious a work, propounded by Master William
Thurston to the whole Corporation, and by their general consents condescended
unto, that the stipend should ever hereafter be paid out of the Chamber. Of
which pious Work, I commend to the world, this Monument, in the just praise,
both of those Prime Motors, as also of you all, who were the Concomitants and
Adinuant causes of that so good and needful a furtherance of Gods Religious
service; desiring the Almighty to bless you all, and to give you the comfort
that religious Nehemiah had in the like case; that with him, every one of you
may be able to say unto God with joy and confidence; Neh. 13.14.
Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds, that
I have done for the House of my God, and for the offices thereof.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, JOHN PHILLIPS.

THE WAY TO HEAVEN.
ACTS 2.47. And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.


THere is nothing more fit, not better beseeming a Christian mind, at such
times, and upon such occasions as this, when our mortality is set before our
eyes, then to consider seriously with our selves, what shall become of us after
this life* that seeing our passage out of this world by death is inevitable, we
may, before our departure, learn here upon earth, how to live for ever in
Heaven.

This heavenly lesson is here taught us in this short and sweet text: which
that I may open unto you, and in opening it, may set open Heaven gate to every
faithful soul, you shall understand, that these words are The conclusion of a
memorable History, concerning the prime and first gathering together of the
Christian Church, by the Apostles, after the glorious Ascension of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

Know therefore, that to the end, that so great a work, as the converting of
the whole world, consisting of many Nations, and different languages, might the
better be effected, our blessed Lord did, Luke 24.49.
according to his promise, send the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, Act. 1.4, 5.
enabling them to speak to every Nation and people in their own tongues, Act.
2.4, 11.
that all countries might be taught to know and worship God in their own
language. And for the greater encouragement of the Apostles, it pleased God to
give such a blessing to these beginnings, that about Three Thousand souls were
converted at the first Sermon of Peter. Act. 2.41.


Now to show that this blessing ceased not there, but that it continued still,
and shall continue to the end of the world, it is said in the shurting up of
this History, That the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.

These words offer unto us at the first view, four remarkable observations.

The first is, The way to salvation; and that is, by being added to the Church.
The second is, the Efficient or Author of this addition* and that is, The Lord
God. The third is, the time and continuance of this work, and that is, (...),
daily, or from day to day. The fourth is, the happy end of such as are added to
the Church, and that is, Salvation. They all, and they only, are such as shall
be saved.
In the first observation, that I may complete the whole doctrine of it, three
things are to be considered. 1. That the way to salvation, is by the Church.
2. What that Church is, where salvation may be had. 3. By what means, and how
men are to be added to the Church, that they may be saved.

No salvation but in the Church.
Touching the first branch, it must be known and believed of all that desire
salvation, that the Regia via, the King of Kings high way to heaven, is the
Church: without which Church, there is no salvation.

Demonstrated 1. by Noah's Arc.
That I may demonstrate this truth, cast but your eye upon the Arc of Noah,
wherein was most lively figured, the Church of God. A type, twice alleged by
Saint Peter, to this very purpose; to show, that salvation is, and only is in
the Church. And therefore he urges against such as made defection from the
Church, 2. Pet. 2.5.
Genesis 7.23.
that God spared not the old world, but did bring in the flood upon the world
of the ungodly, that is, upon those that were out of the Arc, out of the
Church.

Again, Baptism being the Sacrament of our entrance into the Church of
Christ, he does parallel it, and compare it with the Arc, 1. Pet. 3.20, 21.
intimating thus much, that as only those eight souls were saved in the Arc
by water: so there is no hope of salvation, Ephesians. 2.12.
but only in the Church; the solemn entrance whereinto, is ordinarily by
Baptism.

We know, that the head is the fountain of life, By the proportion of the head
and the body.
sense, and motion to the whole body and every member of it, but yet only to
that body, whereof it is the head; even so it is between Christ and the
Church; Christ is the head, the Church is the body, Colos. 1.18.
Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
and every true Christian is a particular member of that body: 1. Cor. 12.27.
Ye are, says S. Paul, the body of Christ, and members in particular. Now as
the head does naturally perform the office of a head to the body, and to it
only: so Christ does impart the Divine influence of saving grace only to his
Church. Therefore the Apostle, speaking of Christ, Colos. 2.29.
says, That from the head, all the body by joints and bands, having
nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the increase of God;
Ephesians. 4.16. Ephesians. 5.23.
and having affirmed, That Christ is the head of the Church, he immediately
infers upon it, Greg. in Ps. 5. poen. Istud est corpus, extra quod non
viuificat spiritus.
and he is the Savior of the body. This is that body, out of which the Spirit
gives no life.

This Position, That salvation is to be had only in the Church, is not
obscurely noted, by those sacred similies, so frequent in Scripture, By sacred
similies.
where the Church is resembled to a House, to a City, to a Mother, to a Vine.

To a House. Of a House.
So does S. Paul call it, The house of God, which is the Church of the living
God. 1. Tim. 3.15.


It is likened to a House, As it is taken for a building.
in a two fold sense: first, as the word is taken properly for an edifice or
mansion, and building to dwell in, consisting of foundation, walls, and roof:
thus S. Peter terms the faithful, 1. Pet. 2.5, 6.
lively stones built up a spiritual house; and Christ, the corner stone. Saint
Paul calls them, 1. Cor. 3.9, 10, 11.
Gods building; himself* and other Ministers, Gods builders; and Christ, the
foundation: for (says he) other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid,
which is, Jesus Christ; and he tells the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.20.
that they are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.

As therefore the safety of a House stands in the strength and firmness of
its own foundation, which gives support to it, and only to it: even so
salvation and freedom from eternal and utter ruin, belongs only to the
Church, the House of God, built so firmly upon the Rock Jesus Christ, Matthew.
16.
that the gates of hell cannot prevail against it.

As it is taken for the inhabitans.
Again, it is compared to a House in another sense, the word House being taken
for the inhabitants: so it is to be understood, when S. Peter says, 1. Pet
4.17.
that Judgment must begin at the House of God, that is, with the godly, with
the righteous, as he plainly interprets himself. And the Apostle to the
Hebrews, calling the Church, Christ's own House, says of himself, Heb. 3.6.
and the rest of the faithful, Whose House we are. Now the Church and every
member of it is called, The House of God, and of Christ, because he does dwell
in their hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
as a householder in his house. More expressly elsewhere in plainetermes, Mat.
24.45.
the Church is called; The Lords family, Ephesians. 2.19.
or household; The Domestickes, or household of God; The household of faith: Gal.
6.10.
The Ministers are called, Stewards, that rule over the household; Luke 12.42.
and Christ himself, The Lord of the house.

As then the Master of a family provides only for his own house, all
necessaries for maintenance and sustentation of life: but not for others, or
other men's families, except it be in the case of charity: So God, though in
his gracious Indulgence, as a Creator to his creatures, he be good to all;
Psalm. 145.9. Psalm. 36.6.
he preserves man and beast: he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on
the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. Mat. 5.45.
Psalm. 73.1.
Yet in a peculiar manner he is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart. 1. Tim. 4.10.
He is the Savior of all men, but specially of those that believe. This
household of faith only, does he save eternally: they only, having God for
their Father, the Church for their Mother, Christ for their elder Brother,
regenerated by one and the same immortal seed of the Word of God, nourished
with one and the same sincere milk, partakers all of one Bread, and drinking
all of one Cup. Therefore S. Peter says of himself, and the rest of this
family, 2 Pet. 1.3.
That God, according to his Divine power, has given unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has
called us to glory and virtue. None then can look for life and salvation, but
they that are of Gods household; who alone can truly say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 119.94.
I am thine, save me.

The Church is likewise resembled to a City or Commonwealth: 2. Of a City, in
two respects.
Thus it is set forth in a vision to Saint John, by the name of the Holy
City, Reu. 21.2, 10.
new Jerusalem; That great City, Heb. 12.22.
The holy Jerusalem: So again it is called, The City of the living God, The
heavenly Jerusalem.

It is compared to a City in two respects; that is to say, Defense, 1. Defense.
and Privilege.

We know, Number. 32.17.
that Cities are places of refuge, to defend the inhabitants from the force of
enemies: Ier. 4.5. and 8.14.
So is the Church to the true members of it, the only place of eternal
safety. Therefore it is, that the faithful in their triumphant Song, do to
the praise of God sing in this manner: Isa. 26.1.
We have a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.
And the Prophet Joel foretelling the state of the Christian Church, Joel 2.32.
says, In mount Sion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance. So that in this
heavenly City, entered into here upon earth, is our only security of
salvation; without it, there can be no safety at all. Hereupon Saint
Augustine alluding to those words of the Psalm, Psalm. 147.12, 13.
Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Sion: for he has made fast
the bars of thy gates. Aug. de Ciu. Dei, l. 19. c. 11.
When (says he) the bars of the gates are fast, as none can come in, so none
can go out; intimating thereby, that they that belong not to this City of
God, the Church, but remain without, cannot have the benefit of Defense, but
lie open to eternal ruin: whereas on the contrary, they that are so in it,
that they are also of it, can never be surprised by any enemy, but may sing
comfortably with David, Psalm. 31.21.
Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his marvelous kindness, in a
strong, or fenced City.

2. Privilege.
Again, Cities or Commonwealths have their privileges, immunities, and
freedoms, wherein the Citizens and Freemen only are interessed. To this
purpose, that Father cites the definition of Scipio, Ibidem c. 21.
in Tullie de Rep. Respublica, est res populi. That is: The weale-publike, is
the peoples wealth. Or thus, The commonwealth, is the wealth or welfare of
the Commons. It is so with the Church. Therefore of this immunitie and
freedom* the Apostle speaking of the Catholic Church, Gal. 4.26.
says, Jerusalem which is above, is free: and telling the Ephesians, Ephesians.
2.12, 13.19
that before their conversion, they were without Christ, and were aliens from
the commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers from the covenant of Promise,
and had no hope, and were without God in the world: he says, But now in Christ
Jesus, ye which were far off, are made near by the Blood of Christ: and
afterward adds these words; Now therefore ye are no more strangers and
Forreiners, but Citizens with the Saints; meaning hereby, that they had now,
being entered into the Church, attained unto the immunity and freedom of the
City of God. But wherein consists this freedom? Among other privileges, it
does mainely and principally consist in freedom from sin, and condemnation
for sin: Hence it is, that S. Paul assures the faithful, Romans 6.14, 22.
That sin^^ shall have no dominion over them, and that being freed from sin,
they have their fr^^ie in holiness, Romans 8 ^.
and the end everlasting life. Again, that there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus. By this it is evident, that the privilege of
eternal life and happiness, is the peculiar right of the City of God, the
Church.

3. Of a Mother, in 2. respects.
It is also likened unto a Mother. So says the Apostle, That Jerusalem which is
above, is the mother of us all. This semblance stands in two things. Gal.
4.26.


1. By conceiving and bearing.
First, the Church, as a Mother, does conceive and bring forth children to God,
by the immortal seed of the Word of God, 1. Pet. 1.23.
in the Ministry of the Church: whereunto S. Paul alluding, Gal. 4.19.
says to the Galatians, My little children, of whom I travel in birth again,
until Christ be formed in you.

Secondly, 2. By nourishing.
the Church, as a Mother does, after her children are borne and brought forth,
feed and nourish them with the sincere milk of the Word of God, 1. Pet. 2.2.
out of her two breasts, Aug in Ep. Ioh. tract. 3. Est matter Ecclesia, and vbera
eius, duo testamenta diuinarum Scripturarum.
the sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; and as they grow in
strength, gives them not only milk, but also strong meat.

As therefore no man can live the life of nature, but he must have a mother,
by whom he must be conceived and brought forth into the world; and must
withal have convenient nourishment for preservation of life: Heb. 5.12, 14.
So no man can live the life of grace here, and the life of glory for ever,
unless he be borne of his Mother, the Church, and nourished in it, to
everlasting life. To this purpose is that noted saying of an ancient Father:
He shall never have God for his Father, that has not the Church for his
Mother.

The Church is again compared to a Vine, 4. Of a Vine.
as we may see by the complaint of the faithful unto God in the Psalm, Thou
have brought a Vine out of Egyp^, Psalm. 80.8, 12.
etc. why have thou then broke down her hedges? And by Gods complaint
concerning his Church: Isa. 5.3, 4.
O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me
and my Vineyard: When I looked that it should bring forth grapes, it brought
forth wild grapes. Our Savior Christ, under the Parable of the Vine,
describes the Church, likening himself to the body or stock, and the members
of his Church to the branches. I am, Ioh 15.5.
says he, the Vine, ye are the branches. It is inferred upon the words going
before; noting the due proportion between the Vine and the Church* Verse. 4.
As the branch, says Christ, cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide
in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. This he further amplifieth
in these words; Verse 5*6.
He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for
without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as
a branch, and is withered, and men gather them and cast them into the fire, and
they are burned. All this imports thus much, That unless we be ingrafted
into Christ, the true Vine, and so become lively branches in the body of the
Church, we can have no hope of life and salvation: Aug. E^. 50. ad Bonifa^.
For, says S. Augustine, out of this body, the holy Ghost quickneth no man.

Reasons that salvation is only in the Church.
This Doctrine, of salvation in the Church only, is not only thus illustrious
by the bright-shining light of so many Divine Similitudes and Parables, but is
also warranted by evident and invincible reason, grounded upon the Word of God.

It only is the pillar of saving truth.
1. It is a Principle undeniable, That there is only one saving truth. And
therefore the Apostle says, that all men whom God will have saved, he will
have to come to the knowledge of the Truth. 1. Tim. 2.4.
Now this truth is no where to be found, but in the Church of God. Hence it is,
that the godly are termed, Isa. 26.2.
The righteous nation, that keep^th the truth. And S. Paul styles the Church,
1. Tim. 3.15.
The pillar and ground of truth. And for this cause, the Spirit whereby the
Church is guided, is called, The Spirit of truth: and it was promised by our
Lord Christ, Ioh. 16.13.
that it should come and guide the Church into all truth. If then there can be
no salvation without the knowledge of the truth, and no saving truth but only
in the Church, it consequently follows, That there is no salvation out of the
Church. All saving graces are only in the Church.
2. There are certain graces, that accompany salvation, which are the peculiar
of the Church of God; they may be all included in these four, that is, the
grace of Election, the grace of Vocation, Heb. 6.9.
the grace of Justification, and the grace of Sanctification; all which,
jointly and inseparably have their period and end in Glorification.
This we may plainly see, by that golden chain of man's salvation, in the
Epistle to the Romans, whereof not one link can be broken by the greatest
power of hell: Whom God did predestinate, Romans 8 30.
says the Apostle, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also
justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

That these graces are concomitant to salvation, and the peculiar of the
Church, is not only manifest for the general, by this golden chain, never
worn of any but the faithful: but it will more evidently appear, if we
examine the particulars.

As for Predestination and Election, Election.
whereby God does choose men to salvation of his free grace and mercy,
without any merit in man; it is so proper to the Church, that S. Peter calls
it, 1. Pet. 2.9.
A chosen generation, A peculiar people. S. Paul says of the Church, Ephesians. 1.4.
that they are the chosen of God in Christ, before the foundation of the world;
acc^rding to the good pleasure of his will; to the praise of the glory of his
grace. Our Savior, distinguishing the sound members of the Church from
hypocrites, Ioh. 13.18.
such as Judas, says, I speak not of you all; I know whom I have chosen: And
of the faithful, he says, Ioh. 15.16.
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you.

Then to be a sound member of the Church, and to be Elect, is all one: and not
to be Elect, though in the Church, is no benefit to salvation. Therefore Saint
Luke having said in our Text, that the Lord added to the Church such as should
be saved, Act. 13.18.
says afterward in equivalent phrase of speech, that as many as were ordained
to eternal life, believed. To this accords that saying of S. Gregory,
speaking of the Church; Within these limits, Greg. Mor. l. 28. c. 6. Intra has
mensuras, sunt omn^s electi, extra has sunt omnes reprobi, etiamsi intra fidei
limitem esse videantur.
says he, are all the Elect, without them are all the reprobate; yea, although
they may seem to be within the bounds of faith. No marvel then, though S.
Peter aduising the faithful to secure their own salvation, does counsel them
to do it, by giving diligence to make their Election sure.

Touching Vocation or calling, I mean, effectual calling, the effect of
Election, whereby God does convert the souls of men to himself, 2. Pet. 1.10.
calling them out of the society of the world, Vocation*
into the Communion of Saints, 1. Pet. 2.9.
as it were, out of darkness into light* it is also such a property of the
Church, that it cannot possibly be separated from it. Therefore the Church is
said to be, Romans 1.6.
The called of Jesus Christ: and to be those, Romans 8.18.
who are the called according to the purpose of God, Heb. 3.1.
and partakers of the heavenly vocation.

Now that it is a companion of salvation, is evident, by that exhortation of
the Apostle, 1. These. 2.12.
exciting the faithful, that they would walk worthy of God, who has called
them unto his Kingdom and glory: where we may see, that Glorification is the
terminus ad quem, that is, the end whereunto tends the calling of Gods
people. And that they shall never fail of this end, 1. Cor. 1.9.
he secureth them by the fidelity of the Caller: God, says he, is faithful,
by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
1. These. 5.24.
And again, Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. And
therefore the Apostle, speaking of graces that accompany salvation, and by name
of effectual vocation, the fruit of election, does confidently assure the
Romans, Romans 11.29.
that the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. A Text so clear for
the inseparabilitie of Gods effectual calling, and consequent salvation; that
our Rhemish adversaries, who every where catch any thing, that may but seem to
make for themselves, or against us, Rhe^. on Romans 11.29.
are here, upon this verse, constrained to be mute, and say nothing, but only
leave a Blanke.

Justification.
Come we now to Justification. It is a word of great variety for the
signification of it; but we need trouble our selves with no more but this one
distinction. It is either that, whereby we stand just before God: or that
whereby we are declared to be just before men. The former is properly
Justification: the latter is called, Sanctification. Yet both are sometimes
included under the name of Justification: as we may see by that golden chain
of the Apostle, before cited: Romans 8.30.
Whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified: otherwise the chain had been imperfect, and had lacked a maine
lincke, without which, Glorification could not follow. This distinction of
Justification before God and before men, is grounded upon these words of Saint
Paul, Romans 4.2.
If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before
God: and it does fitly reconcile Saint Paul and Saint James, the one speaking
of Justification before God, which we have now in hand: the other, of
Justification before men, or Sanctification, which we shall touch in the next
place.

Now concerning Justification before God, we are to consider, both what it is,
that it is proper to the Church, as also that it is a necessary antecedent of
Salvation.

Justification then, What Justification is.
is an action of God, whereby he pardoning all sins, imputes righteousness
to every true believer, out of his free grace and mercy, for the only merit
of Jesus Christ.

The branches being many, require distinct explication.

1. It is an action of God. It is an action of God.
So much intimates the Apostle; Who, Romans 8.33.
says he, shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
justifies. 2. It consists in the pardon of sins. It stands in the pardon
of sins.
To this purpose the same Apostle alleges the Psalm. As David, says he,
declares the blessedness of the man, to whom God imputes righteousness
without works; Romans 4.6, 7, 8.
saying, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. 3. It is a mere
imputation of righteousness, It is a mere imputation of righteousness.
out of man, in Christ Jesus alone, that does cause a man to stand just in the
sight of God, and not any merit of works in man himself: Romans 4.6.
for, as was said before, to constitute a blessed man, God imputes
righteousness without works. This imputed righteousness, not inherent in us,
but out of us, in Christ, is expressly noted by Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 5.21.
where he says, That Christ who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. Mark here two things, Aug.
de verbis Apost. Sermon. 6. Vidite duo, iustitiam Dei, non nostram: in ipso, non
in nobis.
says Saint Augustine, The righteousness of God, not our righteousness: In
him, not in us. So then, look how Christ was made sin for us, in the same
manner are we made the righteousness of God in him: But Christ was not made
sin, by infusion or inherencie of sin, but only by imputation. So we, that
we may be saved, must be justified, not by our inherent righteousness, which
at the best, is imperfect; but by the imputed righteousness of Christ, who of
God is made unto us, 1. Cor. 1.30.
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. It is imputed to
faith only.
4. This righteousness is imputed to every true believer: for it is faith only
whereby we apprehend Christ with all his benefits, as we may see, if we compare
together, Faith, Hope, and Charity: Faith, like a hand, receives and lays
hold on the object, Ioh. 1.12.
Christ; therefore S. John makes receiving of Christ and believing in him, all
one. Hope only expects and looks for the accomplishment of that which
faith believes, Romans 8.25.
and with patience waits for it. Charity distributeth her good things to the
benefit of others. Hence it is, that faith only is said to justify, because
it is the only isntrumental cause of our justification, in that it alone does
apprehend Christ, Act. 13.39.
by whom we are justified. Romans 3.28.
Scriptures for this are plentiful; Bern. Sermon. 1. de annun^. Sic enim
arbitratu^ Apostolus gratis iustifi a^i hominem per fidem.
From all things, says Saint Paul in his Sermon at Antioch, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by Christ, every one that
believes, is justified. And disputing the question of justification, he does
thus determine it; Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, It
is of mere mercy.
without the deeds of the Law. This, says Saint Bernard, is the Apostles
meaning, that a man is justified freely by faith. Romans 3.24.
Bell. de just. l. 5. c. 7. Propter incertitudine^ propriae iustitiae, and
periculum inanis gloriae, tutissimu^ est, fidu^iam tota^, in sola Dei
misericordia and benignitate reponere.
5. Our justification is of Gods free grace and mercy: This the Apostle
avouches, That all men are justified freely by his grace. A truth so evident,
that it has obtained the Adversaries ingenuous confession: For the
uncertainty of our own righteousness, says Bellarmine, and the peril of
vaineglory, it is most safe to repose our whole confidence in the sole mercy
and favor of God. Thus, even our Adversaries being witnesses, our Christian
reformed Religion directs men the safest way to heaven. It is for the only
merit of Christ.
6. It is for the only merit of Jesus Christ: therefore the Apostle having
said, That we are justified freely by his grace, adds, Beda in Ps. 87.
Christi mors, nostra vita est, eius damnatio, nostra iustificatio.
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And venerable Bede says, That
Christ's death is our life, his condemnation, our justification.
Thus we see what Justification is, now that it belongs only to the Church,
and is a concomitant of salvation, our Creed may teach us, where we are
directed to believe, as special privileges of the Catholic Church, the
forgiveness of sins, and the Resurrection to life everlasting. And the
Apostle says, Tit. 3.7.
That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life. Where we have in one text, both the persons, to whom
Justification does belong we, says the Apostle, that is, the Church and
faithful people of God: and the inheritance of eternal life following.

The last grace accompanying salvation, Sanctification.
is, Sanctification. It is a grace of God, whereby a man being justified, is in
every part of soul and body renewed by the Spirit of God, 1. These 5.23. Romans
6.2, 4. Col. 3.10. Ephe. 4.24.
no more to live in sin, but to walk in newness of life. It is in a word,
the renewed image of God, consisting in knowledge, righteousness and true
holiness. You may see it in the lesson, that grace teaches all her children,
Tit. 2.11, 12. and 14.
which is, To deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, being zealous of good works.
Justification and sanctification differ in four points. 1. Justification is
before sanctification in nature, though both be together in time: for as the
branch must first be in the Vine, before it can by virtue of the sap bring
forth fruit: Ioh. 15.4.
so a man must be first in Christ, by faith, before he can be a new creature,
and so bring forth the fruit of holiness. 2. Justification is without us, in
Christ, as was said before, but Sanctification is within us, inherent, and
infused by the Spirit of God. 3. Justification, is that whereby we stand
absolved, and made just in the sight of God, but by Sanctification we are
only declared to be just. 4. Justification does quiet the conscience, by
reconciling it, Romans 5.1.
and making it at peace with God, for, being justified by faith, we have peace
toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. But Sanctification cannot do so,
because our best actions are imperfect, and in regard of their defect stand in
need of pardon. Psalm. 130.3.
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?

Now, that Sanctification is also the Churches peculiar, hear the Apostle,
showing the difference between men out of the Church, and such as are in it:
speaking of their profaneness before their calling, he says, and such were
some of you: 1. Cor. 6.11.
but telling them of their change, he adds, but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified. It is therefore the style or addition of the Church. Unto the
Church of God, says Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 1.2.
which is at Corinth, To them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be
Saints. And we believe in our Creed, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion
of Saints. That it does accompany salvation, Heb. 12.14. Romans 6.22*
is more then manifest: for without it, no man shall see the Lord: but being
^reed from sin, we have our fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life.
Therefore we must know, that sanctification is such a necessary antecedent,
though no meritorious cause, of Salvation, that notwithstanding no man shall be
saved for the merit of it, yet no man can be saved without it: because true
saving faith, the isntrumental cause of our justification and salvation, Gal.
5.6.
works by love, and can be no more without sanctity and good works, then
fire can be without heat, or water without moisture.

To conclude then, if there be no salvation without election, calling,
justification, and sanctification, and none of these to be found, but only in
the Church of God, it follows necessarily, that there is no salvation out of
the Church.

The 3. Reason is, That the means of saving grace is only in the Church.
3 There are certain means appointed of God, to work and increase saving
grace, which if they shall be found to be the Prerogative of the Church, it
cannot be denied, but that there only Salvation is to be had: for in reason,
the end cannot ordinarily be attained without the means leading unto it. Our
Savior telling the woman of Samaria of the Water of life, Ioh. 4.11.
she answered him, Sir, you have nothing to draw withal, and the well is
deep, from whence then have you that Water of life? Indeed the well is
profound and deep from whence we must fetch the everliving Water: and the
woman's reason may teach us, that we had need of instruments and means to
convey it unto us. The means are 1. The written Word of God.


Now the means to effect and perfect man's salvation, are the written Word of
God, called, the Scriptures: the ministry of preaching the Word: the two
Sacraments of the new Testament, and prayer. That these are means, see first
for the Word written, Romans 15.4.
what Saint Paul says to the Romans: Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope. To this purpose is that commendation of
Timothy propounded for the imitation of all the faithful, that from a child
he had known the holy Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.15.
which are able to make him wise unto salvation. Therefore our Savior advises
to search the Scriptures: Ioh. 5.39.
for in them, says he, ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me. Preaching.
Touching the Ministry of Preaching, it is called by the Apostle, Romans 1.16.
1. Cor. 1 18.
The power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes. The Sacraments,
they are the seals of the righteousness of faith; The Sacraments.
and so consequently of salvation. Prayer, is that to which the promise is
made, Romans 4.11.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, Prayer.
shall be saved.

That these are the prerogatives of the Church, Romans 10.13.
it is out of question. Romans 3.2. Psalm. 147.19, 20
For to them are committed the Oracles of God, and he shows his Word unto
Jacob, says the Psalm, his statutes, and his judgments unto Israel. He has
not dealt so with any nation.

As for the Ministry of preaching, God has committed it to the Apostles, and
the succeeding Pastors of the Church. 2. Cor. 5.18, 19.
God, says the Apostle, has given unto us the ministry of reconciliation,
and has committed unto us the Word of reconciliation. 1. Cor. 12.28.
Again, That he has set or ordained them in the Church, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
and not elsewhere, and that for the gathering together and edifying of the
Saints, to continue to the end of the world.

That the Sacraments are the Churches proper right, is manifest: For to whom
do the Seals belong, but only to them that are within the covenant, whereof
the Seals are the effectual signs and pledges? And of whom is it said, Go
and baptize them, Matthew. 28.19. Act. 2.41.
but of those, which join themselves to the Church by believing? Or to whom
was it ever spoken, but only to the Church, Mat. 26.26, 27.
Do this in remembrance of me: eat ye, drink ye all of this, etc.

Touching Prayer, they only can pray, that have true saving faith: Romans 10.14.
for how shall they call upon him, says the Apostle, in whom they believe not?
and none can invoke God aright, that cannot truly and with confidence call
God Father, which none can do but they that are led by the Spirit of God,
which Saint Paul calls the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8.14, 15.
whereby we cry Abba, Chemnic. exam. parts. 3. p. 179. b.
Father. This therefore is the Prerogative of the Church: by which they are in
Scripture, as by a proper note distinguished from all others, Act. 9.14, 21.
Romans 10.12. Psalm. 14.4. Math. 6.7. and 15.8. Math. 4.10.
both profane, that pray not at all: hypocrites, that babble with their lips,
but their hearts are far from God; and the superstitions, that invoke
creatures, with confidence to be heard of them. Thus the Apostle describing
the Church, among other notes, sets it forth by this, 1. Cor. 1 2. 2. Tim.
2.22.
that they are such as in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord: and again, that call on the Lord, out of a pure heart. Now then, if the
invocation of God, Psalm. 145.18.
and of him alone, and that in truth, be not an essential property of the
Church, and as the Logicians call it, proprium quarto modo, proper to all and
every member of it, to them alone and at all times: how can it distinguish
them, as the Scripture does, from all others? Then we see, that the means of
Salvation being only in the Church, Salvation it self is there only, and not
elsewhere to be found.

The 4 reason is, because the Church only have Christ for their Mediator.
4. To shut up this Doctrine in a short sum, it must be granted of all, that
none can be saved, that have not Christ for their Mediator and Advocate; for
other there is none, as there is none other but one God. So says the Apostle,
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
1. Ioh. 2.1, 2. John. 17.9.
And that he is only the Mediator of the Church, we may take it at his own
word: I pray for them, I pray not for the world: but for them which thou have
given me: for they are thine. And S. Paul speaking of himself and the rest of
the faithful, says, that Christ is at the right hand of God, Romans 8.34.
and makes intercession for us. Thus by a cloud of witnesses, is this divine
truth confirmed, That out of the Church there is no salvation.

Use.
1. Gross therefore and absurd is that Liberti^e opinion, That any may be saved
in any Religion, leading an outward civil life; the Turk in his Mahometisme,
the Jew in his Iudaisme, the Heathen in his Paganism. They may as well say,
that in the Deluge a man might have been preserved out of the Arc, upon some
tree, or house top: or that a limme separated from the body, or a branch cut
off from the Vine, can live.

2. This also discovers the fearful and damnable estate of those, who never
regarding Church or Religion, content themselves as mere naturals, and
worldlings to enjoy the world. Heb. 12.16.
These Esauites had rather with their father Esau, please their palate with a
little meat, then enjoy the heavenly blessing. They gaze upon the Arc with
the old world, they wonder to see such pacing unto it: Aug. d. Ciuit. Dei. l.
2. c. 23.
nay, as S. Augustine speaks, They murmr and eat their galls, to see the
people flock unto the Church, to those pure solemnities of Christ: where both
sexes are so honestly distinguished by their several places: where they may
learn how well to lead their temporal lives here, that they may become
worthy of the eternal hereafter. These profane ones have their eyes so blinded
by the god of the world, 2. Cor. 4.4.
that they cannot see any other heaven, but the world.

3. A caveat is here given to all Schismatic spirits, who for exter^all
things, as matters of order and ceremony merely adiaphorous or indifferent,
separate themselves from the society of the Church, like some foolish and
furious Nauigator, who in his voyage, upon every occasion of discontent, casts
himself over board, presuming to be safe enough out of the ship. Let such
know, that though God in his mercy may save the simply-seduced, as being of his
invisible Catholic Church, yet the road way is, to be joined with some
visible orthodox congregation.

4. This calls all men, with a most forcible inuitement, even as ever they
desire to be saved, to enter timely into this straight gate, Matthew. 7.1^. Exodus
12.38.
that leads unto life. Many of the Egyptians and other strangers, when they
saw the great works God did for his Church, and in what safe and happy
condition the people of God were in, over they were; they left their own
country alliance, and friends, and joined themselves to the Jews. Mark 10.28.
Thus should we do, forsake all and follow Christ, leave all societies, for
the communion of Saints: for as the Dove found no rest for the sole of her
foot, Genesis 8.9.
but was feign to return into the Arc again: so let a man compass the whole
world, yet shall he never be able to find rest to his soul, till by entering
into the Church, he take Christ's yoke upon him. Matthew. 11.29.
Let him with Solomon, try all things under the Sun; pleasures, riches,
honors, and what the world can afford, he shall at the last be driven to cry
out, Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.2 and 12.13.
and conclude when all is done, He are the end of all, Fear God, and keep his
commandments, for this is all of man, Iunius in Eccl. 12. Sine quo totus homo
nihil est nisi vanitas.
all his duty, and all his dignity: and without this, all that a man is, or
has, is but mere vanity. So much for the first branch.

What that Church is.
The next point to be considered, is, What that Church is, where salvation is to
be had. A very necessary question for these times, wherein we live: in regard
there is not a sect or faction in all the Christian world, that does not
challenge the name of the Church to it self.

The name of the Church is not sufficient.
But we must know, that there is nothing more childish then to boast of the
name of a thing, when the thing it self is wanting. We have a maxim in Logic,
A nomine ad rem non valet consequentia. To argue from the name, to prove that
the thing is so, because it is so named, is an argument inconsequent. Reave. 2.9.
Our Savior ^e^s the Church of Smyrna, that there are that say, they are
Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. Reave. ^.1.
And to the Church of Sardi he says, I know thy works: for thou have a name
that thou art alive, but thou art dead. Reave. 3.15.
The Church of the Laodiceans was, of all the rest of the Seven Churches, in the
worst condition (being neither cold nor hot) as we may see, in that our Savior
gives them not any one commendation at al, as he does to the rest of the
Churches, giving them their due praise, notwithstanding he does withal tax
them for their errors: no doubt to this end, both to show his detestation of
luke-warmenesse, and that where luke-warmenesse in Religion is, there is no
goodness to be expected. Yet these Laodiceans, as f^rre as they were from the
true zeal of Religion, did notwithstanding boast themselves to be rich, and
lack nothing; whereas indeed they were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. It is therefore a very silly and simple part, to take men at
their bare word, as our seduced Romanists do, in so weighty a matter as
Religion is. The men of Berea are commended, for that they searched the
Scriptures daily, Act. 17.1^.
whether those things were so or no, even which Paul himself taught. And it is
recorded to the praise of the Church of Ephesus, Reu. 2.2.
that they had tried them, which said they were Apostles and were not, and had
found them liars. And indeed, it is verity that we ought to look for, and not
suffer our selves to be carried away with words and shows. For whosoever is a
good and true Christian, Aug. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. Quisquis bonus ve^usque
Christianus est, Domini sui esse intelligat, vbicunque inuenevit veritatem.
says S. Augustine, must know, that wheresoever he shall find truth, it
belongs to his Lord.

Let us therefore search into this truth, that so we may find out the true
Church where salvation is to be had.

The Greek word is (...); it does signify a company, an assembly, The meaning
of the word.
or congregation of people called together: and is sometime taken for civil
meetings in Towns and Cities, or humane societies: Act. 19.32, 39.
sometimes for Ecclesiastical assemblies, and meetings of the Church and
people of God, as in our Text, and every where is Scripture, and
Ecclesiastical writers. It is also vulgarly used for the place where the
congregation does meet to perform Religious service, but improperly and
abusiuely, Valla l. 4 c. 47. Multi Ecclesia, nescio quo iure, aedes s^cras
app^llant, cum coetum hominu^ signifi^ot, non loca.
and is therefore reprehended by Laurentius Valla; Many, says he, call sacred
Temples by the name of the Church, but I know not by what right, for indeed the
word does signify a congregation of men, not places. Which I would entreat
you the rather to note, because our Adversaries in their Rhemes Testament,
Rhem. on Ephesians. 5.23.
do with such spightfull words traduce us, for translating Congregation,
rather then Church. Cam^^^a^. 3. Audito i^^ Ecclesi^^ nomine, hostis ^xpalluit.
They would make the world believe, with their Bragadochio Campian, that the
very name of the Church, is a Scar-crow to Protestants.

They might have moderated their sharp censure, considering that the
Translation was answerable to the propriety of the Greek word: or they might
have opened their eyes, 1562.
and looked into our Book of Articles, published twenty years before their
Rhemes Notes did see the light: Art. 19, 20.
or they might have seen, if they had not been wilfully blind, that in our
Book of Common Prayer, the word Church is ordinarily used in every passage; in
our Prayers and Collects, in the administration of our Sacraments, in the
celebration of Matrimony, in the confession of our Faith, at every meeting of
the Church. By all which evidences, it may appear, how far the Church of
England is from any distaste of the name of the Church. But indeed they had
their answer long ago, D. Fulke against Rhemes.
that their Note is false and foolish, and that the Translator rather used the
word Congregation, then Church, to avoid ambiguitie: but after the people were
taught to distinguish of the word Church, and to understand it for the
mystical Body of Christ, the later Translators used that term, not that the
other was any corruption, or the later any correction, but to declare, that
both is one.

The name of the Church is diversely taken.
Leave we the word, and come to the thing and matter it self. The Church, out
of which there is no salvation, is set forth unto us in a diverse Notion: not
that there is any more then one true Church, For the elect, known only to God.
but because that one Church is considered in a diverse respect, and is in the
parts of it of a different condition. The name of the Church comprehends
sometimes the whole company and congregation of the faithful, Aug in Ps. 56.
Qui ^uerunt ante nos, and futuri sunt post nos, vsque ad finem seculi.

Aug. Enchir. c. 55 Templum Dei est Ecclesia Sanct^, sc. vniuersa in coel^ and
in terra.


that ever were, are, or shall be to the end of the world: within this Notion
are included, not only that part which is Militant in earth, but that also
which is Triumphant in heaven, yea, the very Angels themselves. Therefore it is
said, that by Christ, God has reconciled all things unto himself, and set at
peace, through the Blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the
things in heaven. These are the elect, Colos. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.4. 1. Pet. 1.2. 2.
Tim. 2.19.
invisible, known only to God in the judgment of verity and certainty: The
Lord, says the Apostle, knows who are his: and known to men, only in the
judgment of Charity; as we may see by the same Apostle to the Thessalonians,
distinguishing the sound members of the Church from the counterfeit; 2 These 2
13 Romans 2 ^8, 19.
But we ought to give thanks always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the
Lord, because that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation.

In a second Notion, For the outward professors of Christianity mixed of good
and bad.
by the Church, is understood the society of those which make external
profession of the truth, being a mixed company, consisting of good and bad. And
in this acception, it is taken sometimes for the general ^ompany of professed
Christians, Mat. 22.10.
living in any one or more ages: thus we call the prime Christians in the
Apostles time, and the near adjoining ages, wherein the assemblies continued
Orthodoxe and sound in the faith, The primitive Church. For particular
congregations.
Sometimes also the name Church, is given to particular Congregations, being
members of the Universal, is, The Church of Rome, The Church of Corinth, The
Church of Ephesus, And in them sometime for the Pastors.
and the like. Again, in particular Churches, the name of Church is sometimes
given to the Pastors, as where our Savior says, Tell it unto the Church. Mat
18 17.
Sometimes to the people, Sometime for the people.
as may appear by Saint Paul's charge given to the Elders of the Church of
Ephesus: Take heed, says he, unto your selves, Act. 20.28.
and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Sometime for
both Pastor and people.
Sometimes the name Church includes both Pastors and people, as in the
Revelation, where it is said, Reu. 1.4, 20.
To the seven Churches, which are in Asia, is meant both the Angels or
Ministers of those Churches, and the Candlesticks or Churches themselves, as
afterward it is expounded: Reu. 2.7, etc.
In this sense is it so often said, Let him that has an ear, hear what the
Spirit says to the Churches. These distinctions, as hereafter we shall see,
are of great use for the clearing of many necessary truths.

And first of all, from hence we may derive the true definition of the Church,
whereunto they must be united that ever look to be saved. It is out of all
controversy, that such must be of the number of the Elect, (according to the
first Notion of the Church) as has been showed before, upon the point of
Election, being the first grace, and fountain of all other graces accompanying
salvation. But yet because the Elect are not subject to the eyes of men, but
are only known to God, the sacred Scriptures direct us every where to the
visible Church, according to the second Notion: for whomsoever God does elect
unto the end, those he does appoint unto the means tending to that end.

Such therefore as desire salvation, must join themselves to the visible
Church, by the ordinary way and means of Effectual calling, Justification,
and Sanctification; all which Graces express themselves visibly to the eye of
the world, by their effects and properties, causing the faithful to shine as a
light in a dark place.

The definition of the visible Church.
Let us come then to the definition of the visible Church: which I cannot better
commend unto you, then in the words of our Church of England; and it is this:
The visible Church of Christ, Article 19.
is a congregation of faithful men, in the which, the pure Word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's Ordinance,
in all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.

Where we have the essential parts of a true definition: namely, The general
and common matter, whereof the Church is materially constituted; in these
words, A congregation of faithful men. And the difference, whereby the Church
is formally distinguished from all other societies, partly in the former words,
partly in these words following, viz. In the which the pure word of God is
preached, and the Sacraments duly ministered, etc.

To open the definition more distinctly and plainly. We call the Church, A
congregation of faithful men, to distinguish it, both from Civil and Profane
societies, that are without; as also from Hypocrites and unsound members, that
are within the Church, but not of it.

Again, we say, that the Church is a congregation of faithful men, in which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments duly ministered, according
to Christ's ordinance: to distinguish the Orthodoxe and true Church, from
Heretical assemblies, which maintain doctrine against the foundation; as also
from Idolatrous and superstitious societies, who serve not God aright,
according to his will revealed in his Word, but after the inventions and
Traditions of men: concerning whom, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.9.
Christ alleging the Prophet, says, In vain they do worship me, teaching
for Doctrines, the commandments of men.

We add further, In all those things, that of necessity are requisite to the
same; both to meet with will-worshippers, as also with Schismatic
conuenticles, who make every externe and indifferent ceremony, an essential
part of the worship of God, and therefore fly the assemblies of the most
Orthodoxe Churches, for such external rites, as if they were gross Idolaters,
and not lawfully to be communicated withal.

From this definition thus explained, we gather three remarkable points,
carefully to be noted of all, that laying aside all prejudice and partiality,
desire to be rightly in^ormed, in what Church they may find salvation.

1. That it is wheresoever the society of the faithful may be found, and is
not alleged or tied to any one particular place or person. 2. That it is to be
discerned from all others, by the purity and soundness of Doctrine; and by the
due administration of the Sacraments. 3. That it admits nothing as of
necessity to salvation: or as an absolute and necessary part of Gods worship,
that is not consonant to the Word of God, and according to Christ's ordinance in
the same.
Touching the first point, The Church is the society of the faithful, not tied
to any place or person.
that wheresoever the society of the faithful is, there is the true visible
Church, and is not locally or personally tied to any: let Saint Peter, the
prime Bishop of Rome, as they call him, determine it: Of a truth, says he, I
perceive, that God is no accepter of persons: but in every nation, Not to Rome.
he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted with him. Act.
10.34, 35.
Here is no one Africa, in it no one Cartenna, no one person or order of
Bishops, whereunto the Church should be tied. Here is no Italy, no one Rome,
no one Pope or succession of Popes, challenging an allegation or dependence of
all Churches upon it: but where true faith and the fear of God is, there is
the Church of Christ.

This was revealed to S. John in a vision: where we may see, R^u. 5.^.
that the Church is the company of the redeemed, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation. He received no revelation concerning any one
eminent place above all others, upon which all other Churches and their members
should depend, as their Oracle: only this was showed unto him by vision, Reu.
17.1, 2, 18.
that, that great City, which then reigned over the Kings of the earth (and
that we know was Rome) was resembled to a woman, called, The great Whore, by
whom the Kings and inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the
wine of her fornication. If our Romists like this, let them take it and make
much of it, we envy them not.

When the Apostles converted any to the Faith, did they direct them to any
particular Country, City, or Church of note, and namely, to Rome, as whereunto
they must of necessity be united, or else there was no salvation for them? If a
man in this case of conscience, being troubled in mind, should demand of a
Jesuit or Seminary; What he should do to attain everlasting life? his
answer would readily be this; You must be reconciled to the Church of Rome.
But if S. Paul were asked the same question, as sometime he was by the
Iaylour; what would be his answer? Surely none other but this: Act. 16.30, 31.
What must thou do to be saved? Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved, and thy house.

When so many souls, with pricked and perplexed hearts, cried out to the
Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Did S. Peter salve their sore
consciences with the Balm of reconciliation to Rome? No, no: Rome had then no
Christian being: but he unites them to the Church of the faithful, by calling
them to repentance and faith, and to enter into the Church by Baptism. Act.
2.37, 38.
Repent, says he, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, etc. The visible Church then, whereunto, whosoever will be saved, must
be reconciled, is the Congregation of the faithful, of what nation, or
Country, or condition soever they be: For, Gal. 3.28.
says the Apostle, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor
free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
Wherefore our blessed Lord has left us in this case, Mat. 18.20.
a sure rule and stay, whereupon the Christian soul may safely rest; ^anis.
Catech. In vno capite ac rectore vniuersalis Ecclesiae, vicario Christi
scilicet, ac Diui Petri Successore. Bellar. de Eccl. l. 3. c. 2.

Sub regimine, etc. praecipue vnius Christi in terris vicarij Romani Pontifi^is.


and it is this: Where two or three, says he, are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them.

Absurdly therefore have the Romish faction coined a new definition of the
Visible Church, wherein they make the most formal and essential part to be
this, namely, to be under the regiment of one head and governor of the
Universal Church, the Vicar of Christ on earth, and S. Peter's Successor, to
wit, the Bishop of Rome, so that without adherence unto, and dependence upon
this head, they admit no man to salvation.

The grosenesse of this conceit may appear by these evidences. Reasons why the
Church is not tied to Rome.


1. Thus to define the Church, in this manner, as they do, is most illogicall
and unreasonable: for a true and perfect definition requires, It is against
the definition of the Church.
that it be constituted solely of causes materially and formally essential
unto the thing defined; so that the one can never exist without the other. But
it is far otherwise with the true visible Church: Esolis causis esse^tiam
constituentibus.

Oc^ham dial. part. 1. l. 5. c. 23. Extra Ecclesiam R^manam potest esse salus,
quemadmodum post assension^m Christi ^uit salus, antequam Romana Ecclesia
inch^ar^tur.


for that both was, and might be defined, and thousands of souls united unto
it, and saved in it, before ever the Church of Rome had any being in the world,
as has been showed before in part. How many famous Churches were planted by
the Apostles, that never cast the glance of an eye toward Rome? as Corinth,
Galatia, Ephesus, and the rest of the seven Churches of Asia? How many thousand
souls converted, that never heard of any such universal head, or so much as
the name of Rome? And indeed what should let, but that they may be saved,
without any such respect, which have the graces of faith and repentance, Acts
2.28.
and are entered by Baptism, to to which the promise is made, in the general
commission. Go ye, Mark. 16.15, 16.
says our Lord, into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature:
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Again, if there were such
necessity to be united to the Sea of Rome, upon pain of damnation, how came
it to pass, Bellar. d. Council. l. 2. c. 5.

Romano Pontifici, etc. aduersabatur, Martyrio postea co^oratus.

Et ibidem. Nec tamen eius retractatio vnquam inuenitur. Bellar. l. 3. de
^ccles. mil. Subesse Romano Pontifici est de necessitate salutis.

Greg. l. 4. ep. 32. Nomen nouum, S^elestum, Nomen singularitatis. and ep. 34.

Quod qui tenet, est praecursor Antichristi. See ep. 60.


that S. Cyprian (as our Adversaries themselves confess) in a Council of
fourscore and seven Bishops opposed himself against the Pope, and being cut
off from communion with that great Head, yet died a blessed Saint, and was
honored with the crown of Martyrdom, dying out of that communion, and as
Bellarmine says, never found to make any retractation?

Or, if to adhere to this one universal Head, be a matter of so great
consequence as they make it, that the salvation of all men depend upon it, is
it credible that it should be so unknown to Gregory the Great, that he
himself being Bishop of Rome above five hundred years after Christ, should
renounce it, with so many titles of disgrace in one Epistle? He calls it a name
of Nouelty, an impious name, a title of singularity: and, that he which takes
it upon him, is the forerunner of Antichrist: with many more disgraceful
terms given to that proud and pompous title elsewhere. Besides, how can that
be a perpetual and essential part of the Churches definition, which was not
known in the Christian world so many hundred years after Christ: but as their
own learned Historians confess, was obtained of Phocas the Emperor, by
Boniface the third, who was the second Pope, that succeeded after S. Gregory?
Boniface the third, says Platina, Platina in in vita Bonifacij. 3. Greg. l. 4.
ep. 60. Nullus praedecessorum m^orum, Pontificum Romanorum vniue^salis Episcopi
nomen sibi assumpfit.
obtained of Phocas the Emperor with much importunity, That the seat of S.
Peter should be styled and taken of all, for the head of all Churches. Where
then was this head before? S. Gregory himself will satisfy us. None, says
he, of my predecessors, the Bishops of Rome, did ever assume or challenge to
himself the name of Universal Bishop. We see then how unreasonable it is,
that dependence upon the Sea of Rome, should be essential to the definition of
the Visible Church, and of necessity to Salvation, as they would make their
blindfold followers believe.

2. Again, No Scripture requires it.
it is manifest, That, as S. Augustine speaks, in those things, that are
apertly and plainly set down in Scripture, we may find whatsoever does
concern faith and good life. Aug. d. doct. Chr. l. 2. In his enim quae aperte
in Scriptura posita sunt, in u^niumtur illa omnia, quae continent fidem,
moresque viuendi.
Now let us search the whole Book of God, from the first of Genesis, to the
last of the Apocalypse, and we shall not find so much as one word, either of
prophecy, precept, promise, or president, to countenance any such necessary
adherence to Rome. How then can this be so main a point of faith, as the
Romanists would have it, that has not so much as one express Scripture to
ground it self upon?

3. And is it indeed, It is in no Creed.
so weighty a point of Christian belee^e? In what Creed, I pray you, may we
find it? I am sure it is not in the Apostles Creed, unless they find it in
some thirteenth new-coyned Article of their own.

There is only the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, which for
the visible and Militant part of it, is all one in effect with our definition,
viz. That the visible Church is a congregation of faithful men; Saints by
calling, as Saint Paul speaks. In the Nicene Creed, there is only added, by
way of explication, the word Apostolic, (I believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church) to show, against the Heretics of that time, that that was
the only true Catholic and Orthodoxe Church, which continued in the Doctrine
of the Apostles. As for Athanasius in his Creed, he makes Catholic Religion
to consist in the true Catholic faith and belief of those things that are of
necessity to salvation, not all^ging the believer to repose himself upon any
one place, as Rome, or Constantinople, or the like; but places him that shall
be saved, in the Congregation of the faithful. And good reason; for he knew
well that Arianisme had possessed all places, yea Rome it self; and had
infected the head, even Liberius himself, the Bishop of Rome; as is not only
witnessed by the Fathers, as Athanasius, Hierome, Hillarie, Augustine: but is
also acknowledged by their own Romish Doctors, Cardinals, and Historians,
though Bellarmine and Baronius would gladly faigne some excuse for him.

Because Rome is but a particular Church, as others are.
4. Moreover, it must be considered, that Rome is, and ever was (when it was at
the best) but a particular Church, and member of the universal, as other
Churches are: and therefore can no more challenge the dependence of other
Churches upon it, then they can subject it to any of them. See how clearly and
fully S. Paul, writing to the Romans, speaks to this point: Romans 1.5, 6.
where, telling them, that he had received grace and Apostleship, for obedience
to the faith, among all nations; among whom, says he, ye are also the called
of Jesus Christ: He says not, above whom, as giving Rome primacie over all the
rest, but among whom, as conioyning them in fraternity with other Churches,
and them with it.

Because it is subject to error, as well as others.
5. Lastly, we must know, that Rome is not only a particular Church, but is
also subject to error, as well as other Churches. This the Apostle intimates
by that severe Caveat, which he g^ueth to the Church of Rome, among other
Gentiles: Romans 11.20, 21, 22.
Be not high minded, says he, but fear. For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed, lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the
goodness and severity of God; on them which fell, severity: but toward
thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness: otherwise thou also shall
be cut off. Here we see, that Rome has no more immunity from error then
any other Church, no, no more then the Church of the Jews; Rome, no more then
Jerusalem; and that God does tie himself to none, but with condition; If they
do answer his goodness to them, with perseverance and continuance in his
goodness, and care of correspondent duty to him. Therefore our Church of
England has well added in the Article of the Church, these words, viz. As the
Church of Jerusalem, Article 19.
Alexandria, and Antioch, have erred; so also the Church of Rome has erred,
not only in their living, and manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of
faith.

A catalogue of Romish errors.
Here it will not be amiss, out of the manifold errors of the Romish Church,
to give instance in a few, as a taste of the rest. I will inroll them in a
short Catalogue, and they shall be only such, as no man that will be a Roman
Catholic, can avoid, but must upon pain of damnation, in his order and
place, believe and practice. The very naming of the errors may be a sufficient
co^uictio^, they are so palpably gross.

1. They deny the reading of the holy Scriptures in common to Christian people;
Error.
which is not only an error, but the cause of all other errors: Preface to
Rhem. Test. Mat. 22.29. Ioh. 5.39. Col. 3.16. Deuteronomy. 6.6. and 11.18. Act. 17.11.
as our Savior told the Sadduces, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures.
And this they do, contrary to the express command of Christ, Search the
Scriptures: contrary to the exhortation of S. Paul, Let the word of God dwell
in you richly: contrary to the usual practice of the faithful in all
antiquity, both Jews and Christians: contrary to the very end and use for
which sacred Scriptures were written, Romans 15.4.
as the Apostle tells the old Romans, Whatsoever things, says he, were
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we, through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope. Yea, and contrary to the
general judgment of the Orthodoxe Fathers of the Church: The Scripture being,
Greg. l. 4. ep. 40. Quid est aut^m Scriptura Sacra, nisi epis^ola Omnipotentis
Dei ad creaturam suam?
as S. Gregory said well, nothing else, but an Epistle of Almighty God to his
creature.

2. They attribute such eminency of power to the Pope, over all souls subject
to him: that in a blindfold obedience they must be at his b^cke, to believe
and to do as he will have them: therefore they style him, The supreme Judge in
causes of faith and manners; Error.
and stick not to say, Satis est, si is legem tulerit; Bell. l. 4. c. 1. de
Poul. Romans Summus Index in causis fidei and morum.
It is sufficient, if he say the word: and are so impatient of control
herein, that no man must dare to say unto him, Curita facis? Why do thou
so? though his fact were too odious to name. An error, not only impious in
Religion, but pernicious in any civil State: for hereby, not only his
prohibet, forbidding, shall keep men from Gods true worship and service; but
his iubet, commanding, shall arm them against their Sovereign; as we know,
it has done here in England. Far were the greatest Apostles from assuming
to themselves any such absolute power; their voice was, Romans 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. And again, Gal. 1.8.
Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, let him
be accursed. Therefore they must needs be strangely bewitched and possessed
with error, that can believe that a sinful man should have a privilege above
Apostles and Angels.

Error.
3. Their whole fabric and form of Religious service, and public worship of
God, being in an unknown tongue to the people; what is it, but a notorious and
intolerable error? For take to heart, I pray you, and think seriously, what a
lamentable condition that people is in, that stand bound all the days of their
life, to resort to a Church, where, in their most solemn Liturgies, Masses,
and Service, they understand not one sentence, to their souls comfort. The
whole Volume of sacred Scripture, and examples of both Testaments are against
it. 1. Cor 14.11, 14.22.
S. Paul in confutation of it, bestows a large Chapter, O^^g^^. ^els l. 8.
Graeci Graecis, Romani Romani^, si^gulique precentur propri^i lingua^, etc.

Cyp. de O^. Dom. n. 22. Quomodo te audi^^ a Deo pustul^s, cum te ipse non
audias? Caict. 1. Cor. 14.17. Melius a^ edificatione^ Ecclesiae est Orationes
publicas que audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua^ communi Clencis and po^ulo.
quam dici Latin.


proouing, that it is not only unfruitful, but barbarous, and a fearful
note of Gods judgment upon a people. They have not an ancient Orthodoxe
Father, to father this error: among them you shall hear these voices
sounding, Let the Greeks in Greek, let the Romans in the Roman tongue, let
all in their own language pray and praise God. Again, How can thou, says
S. Cyprian, desire to be heard of God, who do not understand thy self? Nay,
our Christian reformed Churches have this happiness, that among the Romanists
themselves, there are of chief note, that ingenuously confess, that it is
better, and more to edification, that public Prayers be in the vulgar and
common language, known of the people, then in Latin. Let us bless God then,
that has vouchsafed us the better part, and pray, that he would open their
eyes, that are thus blinded with error, that they may take part with us.

4. That foul error, of Idolatrous adoration of Images, in common practice
among them, how expressly contrary is it to the Commandment of God? Error.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, 2. Com. Exodus 20.4. Leu.
26.1.
nor the likeness of any thing, etc. thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them. An error, whereof they are so consciously guilty in themselves,
that in their Catechismes, and confession of their penitents, they commonly
leave out that Commandment. And their professors being charged with this
error, are so ashamed of it, that they in plain terms deny that they do any
such religious service to Images; therein indeed denying their own Religion,
and incurring the curse of their Trent Council: Council. Trid. de Imag. Eisque
debitu^ honor^^, and veneral^onem impertiend un.
which anathematizeth all those, that hold against their Decree herein,
namely, That duc honor and worship ought to be given to Images. But does not
their real practice cross their verbal excuse? for if they do not worship
Images, why do they perform so many religious services unto them? they veil,
and bow down unto them, they set up before them, lights in honor of them,
they offer up incense and other oblations unto them, they expand and spread
forth their arms before them in Prayer. What can they do more, for outward
service, to God himself? This Idolatrous practice is not only condemned in
sacred Scripture, as expressly as Blasphemy, witchcraft, murder, adultery, or
any other sin, and avoided of all the faithful of both Testaments; but is
renounced as impious by the Fathers, for many ages after Christ; affirming
Images in the Church, to be contrary to the authority of the Scriptures: Epiph.
Ep. ^n Ecclesia Christi contra autoritatem Scriptura^u^ hominis pendere
imag^nem.

Lactan. l. ^mag. l. 2. c. ^9. Non est dub^u^t, qui^ Religio ^^lla sit,
vb^cunque sim^la^^um ^^l.

Greg. l. 9. ep. ^. Adorare ^^^o imagines, omnibus mod^s deuita


that there is no Religion, where an Image is. And S. Gregory about 600. years
after Christ, forbids utterly the adoration of Images: only allowing the
Historical use of them, as we do at this day: whereby we may see that this
foul error had not as yet in so long time possessed the Sea of Rome.

5. Their Priests in the Mass offer up a propitiatory sacrifice, both for the
quick and the dead, and their blind followers are bound so to believe, and do
both pray and pay to be had in his m^mento. Whereas all propitiatory
sacrifices have their period and end in Christ, who is the end of the Law, and
the only Sacrificing Priest, in the Gospel, being a Priest for ever, according
to the order of Melchisedech. This Sacrifice is only one, Error.
and once only offered, and that by himself alone: and therefore is called,
The offering of the body of Jesus once for all: Heb. 10 10, 12, 14.
and this Man, says the Apostle, after he had offered one sacrifice for sin,
for eu^^ sat down on the right hand of God, For by one offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. How sacrilegious then and
blasphemous is that daily propitiatory sacrifice of theirs? where is their
warrant for it? seeing Christ ordained no sacrifice to be offered by any
sacrificing Priest, but only a Sacrament, commemoratiue to be administered by
the Pastors of the Church, and received, together with them, by the people.
Where, in the Gospel, can they find the calling of a Sacrificing Priest? The
Commission is only, Go, teach and baptize; and the subject of their teaching,
must be no other thing, but that which Christ has commanded: other ordinary
Priesthood our Lord ordained none, but Pastors and Teachers. The name Sacrifice
we deny not to the Sacrament, but with the Fathers, we call it a Sacrifice for
diverse good respects: and namely, because (as the Master of Sentences says, L.
4. Did. 12. In Sacramento recordatio fi^ illius, quod factum est semel.
out of S. Augustine and S. Ambrose) It is the remembrance and representation
of the true Sacrifice, offered upon the Altar of the Cross. As for any proper,
real, and propitiatory Sacrifice, we may see by this, that it was not known
in Peter Lumbards time, about twelve hundred years after Christ, and therefore
is far from being truly Catholic.

Error.
6. Their Transubstantiation, which they oblige every Christian soul to
believe, not only upon pain of their faggot fire, but of the fire of hell:
tha^ is, that after the words of Consecration, there cease to be the
substance of Bread and Wine, and that there remain only the outward accidents,
show and sh^pe thereof; under which, the very body and blood of Christ is
substantially and corporally enclosed. How directly contrary is it to the
express words of Christ, in the first Institution? For our Lord Jesus, after
the consecration and blessing, testifies the elements to remain in their
substance, calling them by their right names, Bread, and The fruit of the Vine.
1. Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
The like does S. Paul, and that often in one short Context. It is an error,
indeed against common sense: For let the senses of sight, smelling, taste, and
feeling report, if there remain not the substance of Bread and Wine after
consecration: insomuch, that if a man have sufficient quantity of them, he may
well, for a proportionable time, sustain nature, with no other food; which
could not be, if there remained nothing but the externe accidents, and mere
show of Bread and Wine. It is against the nature of a true body, which is, to
be only in one place, at one time, and that in his due dimension and
substance. Now we know and believe that Christ is true man, in all things like
unto us, sin only excepted; and therefore to make him to be without
dimension, in so many hundred, nay thousands of places at one instant, does
manifestly imply a tacit denial of his humane nature. It is against our
Christian Creed, where we believe, that Christ (leaving the world, in regard
of his bodily presence) ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God, and from thence he shall come to judgment: which S. Peter aptly
interprets, in these words; Act. 3.21.
Whom, says he, the heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of
all things. But there is no one evidence, more apparently conuincing this
error, then if we consider, that at the institution of the Sacrament, Christ
sat visibly before the Apostles, that they might plainly see with their eyes
where his true body was. And withal did expressly signify unto them, that he
spoke not simply of his body, but of his body crucified, and blood shed; which
as yet was not then done: Luke 22.19.
This, says our Lord Christ, is my body, 1. Cor. 11.24.
which is given for you: or as S. Paul relates it, which is broken for you.
Mat. 26.28.
Again, of the Cup, he says, This is my blood of the new Testament, Mark.
14.24.
which is shed for many: adding also for the clearing of all doubt herein, the
commemoratiue use of the Sacrament, which evidently confuteth all carnal and
corporal presence: This do, says he, in remembrance of me, that is, of me
crucified: For, says the Apostle, as often as you shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come.

Now whereas he calls the bread his body, and the wine his blood, it is
according to the usual manner of Scripture; speaking every where of
Sacraments, it calls them by the name of those things, whereof they are
Sacraments. Thus Circumcision was called the Covenant, Genesis 17.10, 11.
because it was the sign and seal of the Covenant. Romans 4.11.
So the Paschall Lamb is called the Passcouer, Exodus 12.11.
because it was the sign of the Passcouer. 1. Cor. 10.4.
It is said in the same sense by Saint Paul, that the rock was Christ, because
it typically and sacramentally represented Christ. Thus the ancient Fathers did
speak and think of the Sacrament. The Lord doubted not, says Saint
Augustine, Aug. c. Adima^t. c. 12. Non enim Dominus dubitauit di^^re, H^c est
corpus meum, cum signum diret corporis sui.
to say, This is my body, seeing he appointed it to be the sign of his body.
Yet forasmuch as our Romish adversaries harden themselves in their error, upon
a conceit they have entertained, that we hold Sacraments to be only bare and
naked signs: it must be known for their conviction, that it is but a mere
slander, which they take to be true, upon the bare report of their guides,
without so much as either hearing or reading what we hold. The truth is, we
hold no such thing, neither is the question between them and us, whether
Christ be substantially present in the Sacrament, but de modo, concerning the
manner of his presence. They say, by conversion of the bread into the very body
of Christ: so that whosoever eats ye consecrated bread, eats carnally the
very body of Christ, whether it be man, beast, or vermin that eats. We,
according both to Scripture and Fathers, teach, that Christ is pabulum mentis,
non dentis, food for the mind, not for the mouth: and is as truly received
of every true believer, as the bread and wine it self. Article 28.
Our Church of England is in no point more clear and plain then in this:
affirming, that such as rightly, worthily and with faith receive the same,
partake of the body and blood of Christ. And withal determines and de modo,
and de medio, both of the manner, and of the means, in these very words: The
body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly
and spiritual manner. And the means whereby the body of Christ is received and
eaten in the Supper, is faith. Yea and Calvin himself, at whom their spite is
most, and whom they most sca^dalize in this matter, does so plainly deliver
the truth herein, Bellar. de Euchar. l. 1. c. 1. Vere in cana datur nobis
corpus Christi. Substantia^ corporis Christi pa^^untur an mae nost^ae. Non ergo
est vacuum aut inane signum.

Eras. in 1 Cor. 7 Bellar. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23.

An^^ Lateranense Concilium non fuisse dogma fi^ici.


with us, that Bellarmine is constrained to confess, that Calvin teaches,
that the body of Christ is truly given unto us in the Supper. That our souls
are fed with the substance of the body of Christ, and that it is not an empty
and vain sign. But for the full conviction of this error, the nouelty of it
may be sufficient: for it is so far from any Catholic antiquity, that
Erasmus affirms transubstantiation to be but a late definition. And their
own subtle Doctor Scotus auerreth, that before the Council of Laterane it
was no Doctrine of faith. Which was above twelve hundred years after Christ:
for that Council was held in the year of our Lord, 1215.

7. Upon the former error depends another, and that is, the adoration of the
consecrated Host. For upon this false ground, that there remains no more
substance of bread and wine, Error.
but the very body and blood of Christ by conversion, they prostrate themselves
before it, and worship it, as God himself, with that kind of religious
worship, which they call latria, peculiar only to God. And this they do, not
only in the use of the Sacrament, at the elevation or lifting up of it by the
Priest, to that very purpose: but to the same end, they make reservation of it,
and use circumgestion, or carrying of it about in open shows and processions;
contrary to the express institution of Christ, who ordained no Sacrament extra
vsum, Tulli. 3. Nature. Quem tam ame^t^m esse putas, qui illud quo v^s^atur Deum
cr^dat esse?

^uerr. in 12. Metaph. Arist. Quoniam Christi^ni manducant deum, qu^m ad^rant,
sit ani^ma mea cum Philosoph^^.


out of the use of it: nor ever said, This is my body. This is my blood, but
with an Edite and bibite: Eat ye and drink ye: so that they can pretend no
bodily presence out of the use of the Sacrament. And in it, as has been
showed before, there is no conversion, or transubstantiation. And therefore the
adoration must needs determine and rest in the creature: and so is none other
but a mere artolatrie: or bread worship, and abominable Idolatry. The very
heathen could say, Who is so mad, as to believe, that to be God, which he does
eat? And indeed this madness has made the heathen abhor Christian Religion,
and in contempt of it to say, Seeing Christians do eat the god whom they
worship, let my soul be with the Philosophers.

Error.
8. Their private, or solitary Mass, wherein the Priest only does participate,
the people as in a Theater gazing and looking on: which they so highly extol,
and make the most eminent part of their Religion, and public service: consider
we it seriously, and we shall find it without all ground and warrant of Gods
Word, nay, ex diametro, directly adverse and opposite to Christ's ordinance. For
our Lord in the Supper did ordain a communion of many together, not a solitary
eating and drinking of one alone by himself. Mat. ^6.^6, 27
His mandate is, Take ye, Eat ye, Drink ye all of it. And Saint Paul
accordingly calls the Sacrament, The communion of the blood of Christ, 1.
Cor. 10.16, 17.
The communion of the body of Christ: And yeldeth a reason, from the
correspondence between the elements and the Communicants. For says he, we
being many, are one bread and one body: for we are all partakers of that one
bread. And this goodly Mass is so far from having any acquiantance with
antiquity, excepting only the name, Greg. dial. l. 2. c. 23.

Si quis non communicate, det locum.


that it was not known in S. Gregory's time, so many hundred years after
Christ. For then the voice of the Deacon openly in the Church was this:
Whosoever does not communicate, let him depart.

Error.
9 Their dry diet, in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: wherein they deprive
the people of the Cup, how sacrilegious is it, and injurious to the people? In
the prime institution, our blessed Lord gave this express charge, Math. 26.27.
Drink ye all of it. Mark. 14.23.
And S. Mark notes their answerable obedience. And they all, says he, drank
of it. And S. Paul faithfully reporting the institution, and according to the
practice of the Church, often repeateth, as well the receiving of the Wine, 1.
Cor. 11.28.
as of the bread by the people: and so exhorts, Let a man, says he, examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this Cup. Here, we
may see, was no dry feast: here was no lame Sacrament, like theirs, hopping
upon one leg. Nay it is a truth so evident, that it is by their own
Cassander ingenuously confessed, Cassan. consult. art. 22.
that for the space of a thousand years since Christ, in the Roman Church it
self, it was ordinarily dispensed to every member of the Church in both kinds:
Id quod ex innumeris veteribus tam Graecorum, quam Latinorum testimonijs
manifestum est.
and that, says he, by the testimonies of innumerable Ancients, both Greek
and Latin.

10. Their invocation of Saints, offering up unto them as solemn and set
prayers, as to the sacred Deity it self, what is it, but a manifest
derogation, and robbing of God, even of his peculiar right, Error.
which is, to be the sole hearer of the prayers of his creatures? O thou, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 65.2.
that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. For we must know, that it
is the act of an infinite Majesty, at one instant to hear the manifold variety
of petitions of all men upon the face of the earth, yea and to know the very
thoughts and desires of every heart, prayer being principally the act of the
heart. Upon this very ground wise Solomon takes for granted, that all prayer
ought to be made to God only; Hear thou in heaven, 1. King. 8.39.
says he to God, thy dwelling place, and forgive, and do, and give to every
man according to his ways, whose heart thou know: for thou, even thou only
know the hearts of all the Children of men. Again, prayer to Saints wants
that threefold prop, that must support every true and acceptable service to
God, that is to say, Precept, Promise, and Pattern. For Invocation of Gods
name, we have express commandment, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me. And our Savior commands, that when we pray, we should direct
our prayers to Our Father in heaven. Luke 11.2.
We have also a sure word of promise, Ioh. 16.23.
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. Romans 10.13.
And, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. We have
no such precept, no such promise, to warrant, and encourage us to invoke the
Blessed Virgin, S. Peter, S. Paul, or any or all of the Saints. Again, for
prayer to God only, we have express pattern, both per^onall, in all the
Fathers from the first Adam, Genesis 4.26.
in the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Psalm. 22.4, 5.
and prime Orthodox Fathers of the Church, who did suffer Martyrdom, Ephesians. 3.14.
for this very point, That God only in Christ is to be adored, Phil. 4.6.
and called upon. We have also a real pattern, Chemnic. exam. pars 3. page 194.
in that Heavenly Manual of prayer and praise, the Sacred Psalter or Psalms
of David: together with the set forms of the faithfuls prayers recorded every
where in Scripture: and all directed to God only: not on pattern of prayer to
Saints. Eccius Enchrid. Vt refert chem. exam. pars 3 page 184.
This is ingenuously confessed by their own Eccius and other Pontificians, that
invocation of Saints has no warrant in sacred Scripture: not in the Old
Testament, because the Fathers were then in Limbo: nor in the new Testament,
lest the Gentiles should return again to their old Idoll-worship: and le^t
the Apostles should be charged with arrogance, as be speaking beforehand their
own glory, and worship to be done to themselves after their death. Cassander
ib. Hoc enim tutius esse existimo. Hofmeister. ibid. ex Aug. de visi^. infirm.
l. 1. c. 2.

Tutius and iucundius loquor ad meum Iesum, quam ad alique^ Sanctorum, etc.


Nay more, they confess, that it is the safer and better way to call upon God
only in the name of Jesus Christ. And one of them, out of a work ascribed to
Saint Augustine, concludes the question thus: More safely and more sweetly do I
speak, in prayer, to my Jesus, then to any of the Saints.

The story of George Duke of Saxony is herein memorable. Lying upon his
deathbed, the Monks like Locusts swarming about him, and beholding his agony,
exhorted him; one, to invoke the Virgin Mary; another, to call upon the
Angels; another, to pray to these and these Saints, for help in that
extremity: but a Noble man, one of his familiars, standing by, directed his
speech to the Duke in this manner: Ibid. p. 180.
Your Highness, says he, was wont in your politic affairs, to take up this
proverb: To go the direct way, without ambages or circumstances, is the most
compendious course. Why then should your Highness, in this most dangerous
passage, go about the furthest way, and not rather go the direct way unto God
himself by Christ, Ibid.
who both will and can certainly help? Erasmus among other his pleasant
conceits, does merrily glance at this error, reporting a story of one at Sea,
where (as their manner is) every man in a wrack, flies to his Saint, as it
were his Tutelar God. There was one, says he, among the rest, when he saw the
present and imminent danger, and that there was no delaying; in the midst of
his distraction, thought with himself, If I should pray to S. Nicholas, it is
uncertain whether he hear me, and it may be he is busy in hearing and
dispatching other petitioners; or if not so, yet it may be, that he cannot have
so speedy access to God, to mediate for me, as my present necessity requires:
I will therefore, says he, take the safest and surest course, and go the
direct way to God himself, by Christ, because it is written in the Psalm,
Psalm. 50 51.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And in the Hebrews, Heb. 18.
Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, Aug. de unit. Eccl. cap. 3.

Non audiamus, Haec dico, Haec dicis: sed Haec dicit Dominus. Aug. ad Paul. ep.
112.

Nolo authoritatem meam sequaris, vt ideo putes, tibi aliquid necesse esse
credere, quonia^ a me dicitur.

Aug. ad Crescon. l. 2. c. 32.

Quod in ijs diuinarum Scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum laud eius
accipio: quod autem non congruit, cum pace eius respuo. Gratian. did. 8.
christus non dixit, Ego sum consuetudo, sed, Ego sum veritas, etc.

Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas erroris est.


and find grace to help in time of need. If any stumble at this; that some
Fathers are alleged, to countenance this error, let him remember that of S.
August. We must not hearken to, This say I, This say you, but, This says the
Lord. And distinctly, first of himself, he says, I would not have you follow
my authority, that you should therefore think any thing necessary to be
believed, because I say it. And of other Fathers, what he held, may appear by
that which he writes of S. Cyprians Epistle, viz. That it has no authority to
bind him. For, says he, I do not hold Saint Cyprians Letters to be Canonical
Scripture, but I examine them by the Canonical: and what I find thereunto
agreeable, I embrace with his praise; what is not consonant, by his leave, I
will leave. This is the true profession of a Doctor, concerning the Scriptures,
at his inauguration! Quod tenet, teneo: quod respuit, respuo: What the
Scripture does hold, I hold: what it does reject, I reject. If any harp upon
the long custom of this error in the Christian world, let him consider, as one
says well, that Christ said not, I am custom, but I am truth. And that custom
without truth, is but an old error, or, the antiquity of error. Which, like an
old sore, is so much the worse, and more incurable, the older it is.

11. Their prayer for the dead, to deliver them out of that fearful and
hell-like torment in Purgatory, wherein they are made to believe, they lie
boiling as in a fiery furnace: What an antithesis and plain opposition is
there between the Word of truth and this gross error? We know, and are
assured by the Word of God, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses, and
purges us from all sin. So that there is no need of humane purgatiues
either for venial sins, Error.
or for temporal punishment of sins mortal. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
For our Lord Jesus assures the faithful departing this life, Ioh. 5.24.
that he that hears his Word, and believes, is passed from death unto life:
and that they that die in the Lord, Reu. 14.13.
are in a blessed estate, and rest from their labors. Yea, the poorest Lazarus
that dies in the faith of Abraham, is immediately in his precious soul
conuaied by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luk 16.22, 25.
there possessed of heavenly joy, not afflicted with hellish torment. This may
be a sufficient conviction of this error, that there is not one sentence, not
one word, not one syllable, no not one letter in the whole volume of Canonical
Scripture, Chry. Ser. 3. ad Philip. Fideles, possquam hinc dis^esserunt, bea^os
esse, etc. Dionys. A^eop. Hierar. c. 11. Propinqui eius, qui mortuus est, etc.
cum qualis est, beatum esse ducunt, quod ad victoriae sinem peroptatum
per^^nerit* and victoriae Authori gratias agunt cum cantu.
favoring prayer for the dead, as being in any such misery after their
departure; Nay, that there is express Scripture to the contrary. The Fathers
were far from any such conceit, who held that the faithful deceasing, are
in a blessed condition, having obtained their desired end of victory, and
beholding the Lord Jesus face to face. And that the friends of the deceased,
counting him happy, give thanks to the Author of the victory with a song. See
here the difference between the ancient Fathers, and the now Romanists. They
held the faithful deceased in a blessed and joyful estate: These count them
to be in misery and torment. They congratulated their happiness: These condole
their torments. They gave thanks for their attained victory: These pray and
pay to free them out of their conceited captivity. In a word, They did sing for
joy: These howl and cry for doleful sorrow.

Error.
12. Their daily devotions, which we see in their Primers, Rosaries, and
Manuals, what are they for the most part but Fardles of blind superstition?
for besides that they are, in most passages, directed to a wrong object,
worshipping the creature, in stead of the Creator, and so changing, as Saint
Paul says, Romans 1.25.
the truth of God into a lie: they have withal this foul blot of
superstitious vanity, that whereas God will be served by weight, they serve
him by number: whereas he requires serious, weighty, and judicious devotions,
framed according to our present wants, ^ King. 8.38.
as we may see in all the religious prayers of the Saints in holy Writ; they,
directed by their blind guides, (like a Horse in the Mill) perform a
superficial, slight, and Circular service, placing virtue, and religious
effect in the very number of their prayers, in saying so many times over, a
certain number of Pater-nosters, Aue-Maries, Credoes, and the like. Read their
books, Hora Sarisbur. fol. 58.
and they will tell you, that for 3. Aue-Maries, said three times over every
day, at three several hours, and at every hour thrice, is granted three
hundred days of pardon. Again, for saying before the Image of Pity, five
Pater-nosters, five Aues and a Credo, Ibid. fol. 68.
are granted thirty two thousand, seven hundred and fifty five years of
Pardon. A multitude of these fopperies you may find every where in their
superstitious devotions. And to further these numerall prayers, there was at
the last found out a new trick, the invention of Beads. Polid. Virg. l. 5. c.
7.
When men, says Polidor Virgill, began to number and reckon their prayers, as
though God were in our debt, for often begging of him, there were devised by
one Pe^rus Heremita a Frenchman, certain beads, about the year of our Lord,
1090. The nouelty of this superstition is conviction sufficient. But the shame
of it is, that in the judgment of him that cannot err, it is so far from
Christian piety, that it is no better then flat Heathenisme: therefore our
Savior, upon that very ground, does warn all Christians to avoid such vain
repetitions. Math. 6.7.
When ye pray, says he, use not vain repetitious, as the Heathen do: for they
think that they shall be heard, for their much speaking, which is, we see, in
the Lords account, but vain babbling. A lively pattern of a Papist and a
Protestant, for the manner of Religious devotion, we may see in the priests of
Baal, and the Prophet Elias paralelled together; the one continue from morning
till noone, and from noone till Evening, 1. King. 18.26.
with Audinos, Audinos, O Baal, Hear us, O Baal, hear us, etc. with much
cursitation, and stirring, as the Romish fashion is: The other, that is, the
good Prophet Elias, a true pattern of piety, 1. King. 18 36.
and sound Religion, reverently and humbly addresseth himself to call upon
God, praying in a short, but yet a sweet and heavenly manner, according to the
present occasion. Read the Story, and admire the difference.

Error.
13. To be brief: concerning auricular confession, that is, that every man do
confess all his mortal sins, with all the circumstances, once every year
at the least, and that privately to a Priest, at the least in vote or desire,
yea, and that also of necessity to salvation; it is utterly without either
rule or example of Gods Word; and this want of Divine authority, is ingenuously
confessed by many of their own Authors. Mald. sum. q. 18. ar. 4.
The confessions we find in Scripture, are either unto God only: or if unto
men or before men, it was in these cases; Psalm. 32.5.
1. Before Baptism, at the entrance into Christianity; as in those that were
baptized by John Baptist. Mat. 3.6.
2. In a case of free and voluntary testification of their sound conversion,
Act. 19.18.
as it is said in the Acts: Many that believed, came and confessed, and showed
their works. 3. In case of some grievous sin, lying heavy upon the
conscience, as in the example of David's confession to Nathan the Prophet. 2.
Sam. 12.13.
4. In case of public scandal, Ios. ^.19.
to give glory to God, and satisfy the congregation, as in the example of
Achan. 5. In case of private injury done by one man to another, whether Priest
or private man, Iam. 5.16.
as it is in S. James: Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for
another. In all these we have not one confession, after the Romish stamp, to
be made of necessity to a Priest of all sins, and that anniuersarie, at the
least once a year.

Error.
14. Their placing of Religion in the distinction of meats, S. Paul has
branded with the note of error, doctrine of devils, and deep hypocrisy,
Prophetically foretelling it to be a mark of that Antichristian Apostasy that
should befall these later times: 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3.
Now the Spirit, says he, speaks expressly, that in the later times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
devils: speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with a hot
iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and know
the truth.

Error.
15. Their violent laying hands upon themselves, by whippings, to make
satisfaction, and procure acceptance with God, has no ground in sacred
Scripture, unless they think the example of those Priests of Baal a good
warrant. Indeed I must needs say, they went beyond our Romanists; for they used
Knives and Launcers, these but Whips; they did lance, these do but lash.

16. Their extreme unction, Error.
with which they shut up, and end their Romish race in this world, is as
unwarrantable. For whereas they have but two only texts for it, they both
fail them, as their own Doctors ingenuously confess. Those Scriptures in S.
Mark and S. James, Mark. 6.13.
speak only of anointing with oil, Iam. 5.14.
for the miraculous curing of the sick; Cassan. l. consult. art. 2.

Bell. l. 1. de vnc. ext. cap 3.

Caiet. in Iac. 5.


but they use anointing to no such end, but only when men are irrecouerable,
and ready to depart out of this life. These instances may be sufficient for a
taste of Romish errors, being the most usual, and common to every one that
will be a professed Roman Catholic.

Thus we have opened the first branch of our definition of the Church, showing
that the true Church, is the company of the faithful, of what nation or
country soever: and that it is not tied to any person or place, no not to
Rome: Because many thousands were saved that never knew it, and before ever it
was Christian: Romes authority over others is in no Scripture, in no Creed: it
is but a particular Church, and member only of the Universal, as others are:
and subject to error as well as others.

The second branch of the definition of the Church, Sound doctrine, and due
administration of Sacraments, the notes of the Church.
is, That it is discerned from all other societies, by soundness of Doctrine,
and due administration of Sacraments.

Touching Doctrine, it is the eare-marke of Christ's sheep, My sheep hear my
voice. It is that whereby the faithful are directed to try the true Pastor
from the Impostor, Ioh. 10.27.
the Orthodoxe from the Heretical. For doctrine.
Ye shall know them by their fruits. Mat. 7.16.
Therefore S. John counsels, not to believe every spirit, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
but to try the spirits, whether they are of God: and charge the elect Lady
and her children, 2. Ioh. 10.
thus; If there come any unto you, and bring you not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him, God speed. And this charge he did ground
upon a Divine rule of trial, in the words immediately going before; Verse. 9.
the rule is this: Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father and the Son. And lest any should think it strange, that the
trial of Doctrine should be required of private Christians, our Savior puts
it out of doubt; showing not only that it is and ought to be so, but directs
how it may be done: Ioh. 7.16.
for, having said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: Two rules to
discern doctrine.
He gives them a double rule, which being observed, they may discern of
Doctrine; the one concerns the Hearer, the other the Teacher. The rule
concerning the Hearer, Concerning the Hearer.
is; If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be
of God, or whether I speak of my self: that is, If a man in humility and
sincerity of heart seek to be informed in the truth, and as God from time to
time shall reveal it unto him, makes conscience to put in practice that which
he shall hear: and as Theophylact says, shall embrace virtue, Theophylact.
in Io. c. 7. Voluntatem autem Dei facit, and qui Prophetas, and Scripturas
scrutatur.
and not suffer himself to be a slave to envy, and hate truth before he know
it; such a man shall be able to discern of Doctrine; but yet with this
prouiso, which there Theophylact well inserteth, viz. That this is one main
part of doing the will of God; namely, to search the Prophets and Scriptures.

The Teacher.
Touching the second rule, which concerns the Teacher, it is this: He that
speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: Ioh. 7.18.
but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true. A good
parallel, distinguishing exactly the false Teacher from the true; the one
seeking his own, the other Gods glory. 1. These. 2.5, 6.
By this rule, we desire all men sincerely and without prejudice, to judge
between us and our Romish Adversaries. Look with an indifferent and
impartial eye, into the doctrine and practice on both parts: you shall find
that all their doctrines and courses, wherein they differ from us, aim
altogether at the extolling of nature, man's works and merits, with a glance
still at the magnifying and enriching of their Roman Synagogue: whereas we,
with our blessed Lord, make the scope of all our teaching and practice, the
glory of God, and the praise of the all-sufficient merit of Christ.

This direction of our Savior, is sufficient alone of it self to prove, that
the Doctrine is the right trial of the Church, and Pastors of it. But besides,
we find the Congregation of the faithful, described in the Acts of the
Apostles, by this very note, Act. 2.42.
that they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine. And the Thessalonians
are commended, that they received the Word of God, not as the word of man;
resting upon the bare authority of the Teacher, 1. These. 2.13.
but, as it is in truth, the Word of God. They that rested upon men, under the
name and color of the Church, and chief governors of the Church, Mat. 27.1.
the chief Priests and Elders of the people, did crucify Christ: whereas they
that examined the Doctrine by the Word of God, Act. 17.12.
did believe. If therefore ye will approve your selves to be the Disciples of
the Gospel, Athan. in incar. Dom. Si discipuli estis Euangeliorum, per
Scripturas incedite.
that is, true Christians, ye must walk, says Athanasius, by the rule of the
Scriptures. It is sound Doctrine then, grounded upon the Word of God, that the
Christian soul must rest upon, for the discerning of the true Church: Aug.
con. Petil. l. 3. c. 6. Sieve de Christo, sieve de eius Ecclesia, sieve de
quacunque alia re, quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque, etc.
for, whether it be concerning Christ, or concerning his Church, says S.
Augustine, or touching any other thing pertaining to faith and life; If we, or
an Angel from heaven teach any otherwise, then that which ye have received in
the Scriptures, let him be accursed. As for the Sacraments, that they are also
discerning notes of the Church, I need here to say nothing, in regard that it
has been sufficiently showed before, that they are so peculiar to the Church,
that the one cannot be without the other.

Concerning the third branch of the definition of the Church, The true Church
admits nothing as necessary to salvation, that is contrary to the Word of
God.
That it admits nothing as necessary to salvation, or as an absolute part of
Gods worship, that is not according to the Word and Ordinance of Christ. This
fully completeth and perfecteth the definition of the Church, which must be as
pure in her Religion, and worship, as she is sound in her Doctrine: that there
be no mixture of man's invention with Gods Ordinance; for in the service of
God, the hypothesi^ or condition of the Prophes must ever hold good: 1. King.
18.21.
If the Lord be God, follow him: but if Baal then follow him: God will have all
or none. Isa 29.13.
He cannot abide that his f^are* that is, his religious worship, should be
taught by the precepts of men: and therefore accounts it vain worship, and
mere lost labor, Mat. 15.9.
when the commandments of men are taught and held for Doctrines, and, as it
were, rules, and principles of necessity to be observed. This must be
seriously considered, for the better meeting with two adversaries, which do
assail truth on both sides, with their different extremes. Bell. de Sacr. l.
2. c. 30. Ceremoniae receptae, etc. sine graui veccato o mitti non possunt;
quum habe ant vim etiam spiritualem, and sint pars diuini cul^as, adeoque
meritoria.
The one, is the Romanist; who hold that the ceremonies of the Church may not
be omitted, without grievous sin, inasmuch as they have spiritual virtue,
and are parts of Divine worship, and withal are meritorious* And they father
this conceit upon the power which they attribute to the Church, to institute
suo iure; that is, by her own right, such Ceremonies: and therefore to make
their followers pliable, they teach them as a main principle of their
Religion, that they must obey with equal respect, in regard of salvation, the
Mothers precept, as well as the Fathers Mandate: but they never consider, that
the true Church is an obedient wife, Ephesians. 5.24.
and will not in any thing contradict the will of her heavenly Spouse.

The second sort of adversaries, are our Separatists, who for every externe and
indifferent ceremony, make as great combustion and stir in the Church of
God, as if some main Article of Faith were called in question. Call. in Mat. 5
9 Eos ertar^, etc. qui ^cco doctrinae obtrudunt hominum mandata: vel qui inde
petunt regulam colendi Dei.
They must be entreated to consider, that the Text does not simply condemn all
commandments of men, but when they are taught for doctrines, and rules of Gods
worship, as Calvin speaks: The doctrine of our Church might give them
coment, being the same with all the rest of the reformed Churches, namely, That
it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing contrary to Gods written
Word: Article 10.
and that besides the same, it ought not to enforce any thing to be believed,
for necessity of salvation. Whereby they may, if they will open their eyes
without prejudice, see of what nature the Ceremonies of our Church of England
are. And so much for the definition of the Church; by which we may see, what
that Church is, to which we must be joined, if ever we look for salvation;
that is, the society of true believers.

But for the better understanding of the state of the Church, Considerations
concerning the Church.
diverse things are to be considered, which give more light to the Doctrine,
and more full satisfaction to such as desire unfeignedly to know the truth
hee^ein.

The first consideration is, Consideration.

It is only one.


that the Church is only one; though different in time, as far as from the
beginning to the end of the world; distant in place, as remote as East from
West; North from South* nay, heaven from earth: distinct for people, being of
all Countries and Nations. For, as has been said before, it is the society
or congregation of the faithful of all ages. This voity of the Church, is
noted in the one Arc of Noah; Genesis 6.
in Salomons Dove, My Dove, my undefiled, Cant. 6.9.
is but one: in the wheat field, in the draw net; in one flock, Mat. 13.24, 47.
one fold, Luke 12.32.
under one Shepherd: in one Bride and Bridegroom: Ioh. 10.16. Ioh. 3.29.
in one body, united to one Head, Christ: For, says the Apostle, by one Spirit
are we all baptized into one body. 1. Cor. 12.13.
This consideration does second that which has been said of the Church; for
it does evidently euince, and prove, that there is no necessi^ie of being
united to this or that particular Church, a^ Rome, or the like, so long as a
man is of the number of the faithful, wheresoever dispersed; for as S. Paul
disputes, 1. Cor. 12.14, 15, 16.
The body is not one member, but many. Is the foot not of the body, because it
is not the hand? or the ear, because it is not the eye? So we may truly say,
Is this or that National or Provincial Church, no Church, because it is not
dependant upon Rome? Are they that are baptized into one body, and united to
Christ Jesus by one faith unfeigned, no members of the mystical Body of Christ,
the Church, because they are not incorporated and reconciled to Rome? If the
body, though it be bu^ one, yet is not one member, but many: then reason will
teach us, that every member has his proportionable nutriment, life, and motion
from the head, without any dependence one upon another.

Consideration.

It is Catholic.


The second consideration is, That it is Catholic or Universal; and that, in
respect of time, place, and persons; because there is, ever was from the
beginning, and ever shall be to the end of the world, a company, more or less,
of true believers: because the Church is not confined within the limits of any
one Country, as in the time of the Jews, but is spread over the whole world:
and because it consists of all sorts and degrees of men; Re^. 7.9.
of all nations, kindreds, people and tongues, as it is in the Revelation. So
that to be of the Catholic Church, is to hold and believe as the Church of
the whole world ever did, and constantly does hold and believe. Therefore it
was, that in the ancient Church, when Heresies and Schisms sprang up, those
that did clea^e to the truth, Aug. Epist. 48.
had given unto them the name of Catholic, excommunione totius orbis, Quia
communicant Ecclesiae toti orbi diffusae.
for their communion with the Church of the whole world; not for their
communion with this or that particular Church. Whilst the Romish Church does
assume the title of, The Catholic Church; calling it self, Catholicam,
Apostolicam, Romanam, being as other Churches, but a particular Church; what
does it, but expose it self to the laughter of the whole world? for what
concordance is there between general and particular? or with what sense can
it be called, The Universal particular Church? And yet they make their
credulous followers believe, that they cannot be of the Catholic Church,
unless they communicate with their particular Roman Church; clean contrary
to the name and nature of the word Catholic.

Consideration.

It is visible.

Bell. de Eccl. l. 3. c. 2.


The third consideration is, that the Church is visible, and that in all ages:
but it must be known how, and in what sense it may be truly said to be always
visible; According to the Romish Tenet, it is said to be visible, and palpable,
as some eminent State, Monarchy, or Common wealth, as Rome, France, or Venice,
conspicuous in flourishing pomp to the eye of the World, so that it may at all
times be sensibly discerned. But, alas, this conceit is a mere golden dream,
and senseless dotage: for let an ingenuous mind, awaked once out of that
slumber, look seriously into the Word of God, and consider the state of the
Church in all ages; he shall find for his satisfaction, that the Church has
been oftentimes obscured, captiuated, persecuted, and so far from being
acknowledged, that it has been accounted, of the world no better, then
Schism, and Heresy: and the true Professors of it prosecuted, as malefactors,
for their soundness, as both the Prophets, Christ himself and the Apostles
were, by the corrupt members of the visible Church, bearing the chief rule. To
this effect the Prophet Esaias did complain, Isa. 1.9. Isa. 8.18.
that in his time the Church was but a small remnant: and those howted at like
Owls, being as signs and wonders in Israel. Romans 11.3.
The complaint of Elias is, that he was left alone. The faithful were glad to
be hid in caves, and fed with bread and water by religious Obadiah. 1. King.
18.4, 13 Heb. 11.37, 38.
And as it is in the Epistle to the Hebrews, They wandered about in Sheeps
skins, and Goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
world was not worthy: they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in
dens, and caves of the earth. The prophecies of the Christian Church foretell
as much, both for outward persecutions, and open apostasy, under one eminent
Head, 2. These. 2.3, 4.
called, That man of Sin, who should take upon him to oppose and exalt
himself above all that is called God, challenging the chief sovereignty in
the Temple or Church of God. Reu. 12.6.
In S. John's Vision, the Woman, the Church, was constrained through persecution
to fly into the wilderness. Luke 18.8. Mat. 24.9, 12, 24.
Our Savior foresheweth, how hard it should be to find faith on the earth.
How the faithful should be afflicted, killed, and hated of all Nations: That
iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax cold: And that the
cunning impostures of false teachers, pretending the name of Christ and the
Church, should be such, and so specious, being seconded also with miracles,
that if it were possible, the very elect should be deceived.

Vi^cen. Li^in. c. 6. Ariano^um venenum, non iam (...) ul^ quandam, sed ^ene
orbem tut^m contaminauerat.
Where was the flourishing visibility of the Church, when the poison of
Arianisme had infected almost the whole world? O which time, Saint Jerome
wri^eth, Ecclesiae nae^e^ fuiss fere obrutam: That the ship of the Church was
almost sunk. And this some of our Romish adversaries confess, both for the
time of Arian heresy; and in the days of Antichrist. Then, that we may not be
seduced, and carried away with flourishing shows, we must know, that the
Church, though it be always visible, yet it is not always alike visible: it
is not always in pomp, and eminent estate: he that in the time of Christ
should so ^aue looked for the Church, would sooner have io^ned himself to the
Jewish Synagogue, then to the society of Christ, and his Apostles. We must not
therefore look so much to the multitude, and outward flourish, as seek for
the truth, though it be but in a few, and those never so obscure* For it is not
of necessity, that the Church be always discerned and acknowledged of the
world* but it is sufficient for the visibilitie of it, that it never fails to
be visibly seen and acknowledged by the professors themselves: for this must
ever hold in the Church, in the midst of all disturbances, Mat. 11.19.
that Wisdom is justified of her Children.

Consideration. Some are more pure, some more corr^pt.
The fourth consideration is, That in the visible Church, some particular
Churches are more pure, some more corrupt then others; as the Church of Corinth
and Gala^ia and some of the seven Asian Churches were more infected with error
th^n other Churches* Under this head are to be observed diverse remarkable
points, and very necessary for our present use.

Here observe.
1. That in a corrupt Church, sometimes the greatest member, That the greatest
and chief are not always the best.
and among them the Chiefest for eminency and authority are most corrupted.
Thus it was in the idolatrous times among the Jews: All the chief of the
Priests, and people, transgressed very much, after all the abominations of the
Heathen, 2. Chron. 36.14, 16.
and polluted the House of the Lord. They mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his Word, and misused his Prophets. Ioh. 1.11.
It was so at the coming of Christ. He come unto his own, and his own
receiu^d him not. Nay, they rejected him. Act. 4.11.
This, says S. Peter, is the stone, which was set at naught of you builders.
The master builders were the chief destroyers: the prime governors in the
Church, the greatest enemies of Christ, Vnic. Lir. ib. Capto prius omnium
Imperatore, etc.
and Christianity. Thus for a time did the Arian faction prevail against the
true Church, having gotten the Imperial Throne to countenance them, by means
whereof they did sway all things at their pleasure. And thus it has been a
long time, and continues to this day in the Church of Roman so that, Leo. ep.
8^. Ecclesiae nomine armamipi, and contra Ecclesi^m dimicatis.
we may well say to them with Leo, Ye are armed with the name of the Church,
and yet ye fight against the Church. This may advise us, that the truth of
Religion is not tied to multitude and greatness. 2. That whereas many
excellent privileges and comfortable promises belong to the Church, That the
promises and privileges belong only to the good part.
we must know that the sound and good part only, and not the corrupt, is
capeable of those benefits. I dare not, says Saint Augustine, speaking of the
prerogatives of the Church, understand this, but of just and holy men. Aug.
con. Don. l. 5. c. 27. Hoc intelligere non audeo, nisi in justice and sanctis.
Therefore S. Paul does tie the privileges to the true Israel of God, the
Children of the promise. And S. Peter, the promises, to them that are
effectually called. By this we may see, both that the chiefest and most
eminent, yea and the greatest number in the Church, Romans 9.4, 6, 8. Act. 2.39.
if they want true saving grace, have no right to the privileges and promises
of the Church, though they live in the midst of it. And again, the poorest
member of the Church, that is a true believer* shall sustain no prejudice, to
hinder his happiness, by being mixed with the wicked: Math. 3.12. Romans 3.3.
But the wheat shall be gathered into the Lords garner, the chafe cast into
the fire. That a corrupt Church may keep and convey to post^rity, the
Scriptures, the rule of faith, and the Sacraments.
For, says the Apostle, What if some did not believe? Shall their unbelief
make the faith of God without effect. 3. That a corrupt Church may keep, and
convey to posterity the Canon of ^^aired Scripture, the form of knowledge, and
rule of faith* and ^holesome doctrine and Sacraments in a general manner: and
yet overthrow all, by some particular opposite doctrines, and superstitio^^
practices, to the loss of their own salvation, that so hold and practice. In
the greatest deprauation of Religion by Idolatry in the time of the Jews, it
was so. The Book of God, though it lay dusting and out of use, yet by the
providence of God it was kept. The Sacraments, specially Circumcision, was in
use even in corrupt times, and hypocrites much gloried in the outward
circumcision, as we may see by the reproo^es of the Prophets and Apostles. Acts
15.21. Rom 3 2.
The Jewish Synagogue at the coming of our Lord kept these Oracles, and that
for us, Aug. in Psalm. 56. Codicem portat Iudaeus, vnde credat Christianus.
though they thought not so. The Jew, says Saint Augustine, carries the
Book, whereby the Christian may believe. Yea, they did teach many things for
the matter very sound, and therefore sitting in Moses Chair, by teaching Moses
doctrine, Math. 23.2, 3.
Christ would have them so far at least to be heard. But yet for all this,
mark what the Lord Jesus says of them, Math. 5.20.
Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Math. 15 9.
And again, In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts.
Hereupon, some in a corrupt Church may be saved.
Hereupon it follows, that by reason of these means, there may be in a
corrupt Church, some that may preserve faith and true Religion, for the
substance, as did Zachary the Priest, and Elizabeth his wife, Old Simeon,
Nathaniel, Joseph and Mary, and many more. And upon this ground, we of the
reformed Churches think and judge charitably of our forefathers that lived in
those blind and dark times of Popery, and of such as yet remain among them,
or are entangled by them, upon conceit of their common claim of the only
Catholic Church: we, I say, judge charitably of them, though they detrude us
all into Hell. For thus we deem of their state before God: That as in the
times of Apostacy and falling into Idolatry among the Jews, the Lord had a
remnant: Romans 11.4.
he reserved to himself 7000. which never bowed the knee to Baal: He had in
the Church of-Pergamus, even where Satan's throne was, Reu. 2.13.
those that kept his Name and denied not his Faith: and that in the heat of
persecution, Reu. 3.4.
he had a few names in Sardis, which had not defiled their garments. So we
doubt not, but God ever had, has at this time, and shall have to the end,
many, in the very midst of the Papacy, that do not know the whole Mystery
of Romish iniquity, but in simplicity of heart lay hold upon Jesus Christ, and
him alone, for their salvation: They see, according to that light they have,
many corruptions and enormities, bewail them and shun them, as far as their
strength and measure of knowledge and grace will permit. These, we say,
holding the foundation, though they may build upon it the hay or stubble of
some errors and superstitions (not destroying the foundation) may be saved,
through the mercy of God in Christ pardoning their sins of ignorance and
error, upon their general repentance. We may see the like in the Church of
Thyatira, Reu. 2.24, 25.
there were many that had not that learning (as the false teachers in their
vainglorious bragging termed it) nor did know the deepenesse of Satan; but
did hold fast the maine truth, though in much weakness: and all that God
requires of them, is, that they be constant in that. In the same manner the
Lord speaks to the Church of Philadelphia, Reu. 3.8.
Thou have a little strength, and have kept my Word, and have not denied my
Name. For God does not so much look to the measure and quantity of grace, as
to the sincerity and soundness of it.

Many godly and learned among them did not by and by, upon the sight of some
corruptions, leave and forsake the society of the Church of Rome:
Oecolompadius, Capito, Melancthon, and Luther himself; nay, some of them
continued in the outward communion of the Romish Church till their dying day,
as Erasmus and others, who thought well of the cause or matter of Reformation,
but did not approve Separation, being carried away with the main stream of
the name of Church, and Mother Church. No marvel therefore, if among us, we
have of meaner learning, or of the simpler sort, that so harp upon that
string, that they have no ear to hearken to Christ's Pipe. It is no new thing,
to see a child mistake, and cry out after a stranger in stead of the own
Mother: so, why may it not be, that some in their simplicity may fall into
such a misprizion, as to take the Romish Synagogue to be their Mother Church,
being indeed not so much as a sound member of it, but as a disease, a Pest or
Gangrene in the body?

It is apparent then, that in a corrupt Church some may be sound, and so be
saved: and this we hold of the Church of Rome, as corrupt as it is: for our
Lord would never have said of Spiritual Babylon, Reu. 18.4.
Come out of her, my people, if he had none there. And let not our Romanists
brag of this our ingenuous confession, and play upon it, the better to seduce
the simple: for in truth, in stands them in no more stead to patronize their
impieties, then the Fathers approouing of the Baptism of the Donatists and
other Heretics, did countenance their Heresies. For what is the chafe the
better, because it is acknowledged that there is some wheat hid amongst it? We
do not say absolutely, there is salvation to be found in the Romish Babylon,
but, in the midst of so great confusion, there may be salvation for some.
There is great difference between possibility of salvation, which may be in a
corrupt Church; and infallibility, which is ever without doubt in the true and
Orthodoxe Church. Is any so simple, as to commit his whole estate into a Ship
full of leakes, whereof there is just cause of doubt, whether ever it shall
safely arrive at the desired Port; when he may transport it in a sound and safe
vessel? Genesis 7.13.
Noah and all his, if they will not perish in the Deluge, Genesis 19.15.
must get into the Arc. Lot must not tarry in Sodom, if he will be safe and
free from the common judgment. The people of God must, for this very cause,
Reu. 18.4.
come out of Spiritual Babylon, both for the danger of infection, by sin;
and destruction, by means of her plagues. Where therefore the doctrine is
Orthodoxe and sound, the religious worship, service, and Sacraments, for the
truth and substance of them, the very same with the prime Churches, and best
antiquity, as it is this day (blessed be God) in our Church of England, and the
rest of the reformed Churches, there is the surest and safest repose for the
Christian soul: in this society there is infallible certainty of salvation:
but in an Apostaticall and corrupt Church, as the Roman Church now is, it is
not so, though yet God may reserve a remnant, Jude 23.
pulling them, as it were, out of the fire: And that, with this Caveat, That
they tarry not in Babylon.

Thus we have seen, that salvation is only to be found in the Church: and
what that Church is where salvation may be had.

Now let us come to the third branch: By what means men are added to the
Church.
that is, by what means, and how men are to be added to the Church, that they
may be saved.

The means are expressed in this context, The Word preached.
and are these three: The Word preached: Faith to apprehend it: And the
Sacrament of Baptism to seal and confirm it. Act. 2.37, 38, 41. Act. 18.8.
This is all required for the admission of any into the Church: to hear,
believe, and be baptized.

The Ministry of the Word, is the main Ordinance of God, Ephesians. 4.12.
for the gathering together of the Saints, appointed of God to that end, Mat.
28 20.
and to continue in the Church to the end of the world. 1. Pet. 1.23.
Therefore it is called, The incorruptible or immortal seed, whereby we are
regenerated and borne again; and The Word of Truth, Iam. 1.18.
wherewith we are begotten of God, to become his dear children, and The first
fruits of his creatures: Romans 1.16.
yea, it is, as S. Paul calls it, The power of God unto salvation. Therefore
when God would have any converted to the faith, Act. 8.29, 35.
he sends them this means. Philip is commanded to join himself near to the
Chariot of the Eunuch, that by his preaching the Eunuch might be joined to
Christ and his Church. Act. 10.5, 6.
S. Peter is sent for to Cornelius, to teach him and his the way to heaven by
Christ. S. Paul must tarry at Corinth, to teach Word of God among them: Act.
18.10.
For, says the Lord, I have much people in this City. And indeed, the
converting of souls is a great work; and great works had need of potent and
mighty means: therefore it pleases God to use his powerful Word, which, as
the Apostle faith, 2. Cor. 10.4, 5.
is mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, and casting down
of imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ.

This calls the Teacher to a serious consideration of the weight of his
Calling, and a conscionable regard to discharge it; he is put in trust with
the precious souls of men, for whom he must give account unto God. He is
made Gods Steward, Heb. 13.17.
and therefore must be faithful. He must not keep away the Bread of life
from Gods family. 1. Cor. 4.2.
The word of reconciliation is committed unto him: 2. Cor. 5. 19.
Yea, necessity is laid upon him, so that, were he as great as S. Paul
himself, 1. Cor. 9 16.
yet woe be unto him, if he preach not the Gospel.

This consideration, that the Ministry of the Word is the means of our life:
O what esteem should it cause that sacred Calling to be of among men! How
beautiful should their feet be, that bring glad tidings of peace! How amiable
their presence, Col. 1.28.
that present us to God in Christ! What have we, or what can we give to them,
proportionable to the good we receive from God by them, being instrumentally
the very Saviors of our souls? 1. Tim. 4.16.
Who can open the mouth, or lift up the hand despightfully against such, to
whom hell it self is constrained to give this applause: These men are the
servants of the most high God, Act. 16.16.
which show unto us the way of salvation?

The neglect of hearing the Word, nay Recusancy and contempt, must therefore
needs be a heinous sin, whatsoever salve of excuse may be laid upon it. Heb.
2.2, 3.
For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward: how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation, offered unto us in the Ministry of the Gospel of
Christ? Such men as thus reject, and put the Word of God from them, if we will
believe the Apostle, pronounce a direful sentence against themselves; for by
the very act of neglect, Act. 13.^6.
and contempt of the Word, they judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life.

Then how careful ought we to be, to attend upon the ordinance of God in the
Ministry of his Word? 2. Cor. 1.18, 21
Let the preaching of the Cross, be to the profane world, to them that perish,
foolishness: but says the Apostle, Unto us that are saved, it is the power of
God. For so it has pleased God, by that which vain men set so light by, even
by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. Let every soul
therefore, that would be partaker of the grace of life, neglect no good
opportunity of hearing. Consider, that life eternal consists in the
Knowledge of God in Christ, Ioh. 17.3.
and as all Learning, so heavenly Knowledge must enter into the heart by the
ear, the sense of hearing being the organe or instrument of learning. Set
down then this resolution in thy heart, with the faithful in the Psalm; Psalm.
85.8.
I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints: but let not them turn again to folly.

The second means of entrance into the Church, Faith to apprehend grace
offered.
is by believing. This must follow hearing, and go before Baptism: for
without faith, neither is the Word of force to us, nor we fit for Baptism.
Heb. 4.2.
The Word preached, says the Apostle, did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it. And the Eunuch desiring Baptism, is told by
Philip, that he must first be a believer: Act. 8.37.
If thou beleeuest, says he, with all thy heart, thou may. Look into the
examples of all that ever were added to the Church, if they will be sound
members, they must believe, nay, they cannot so much as be admitted into the
outward society, but they must at least profess faith, Act. 8.13.
yea even Simon Magus himself. Thus Chrispus believed on the Lord, with all
his house. Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. And so
of all the rest of the Conuerts to Christianity. And there is great reason for
it: for no man can be added to the body of the Church, to become a sound member
of it, but he must be united to the Head Christ Jesus, Ephe. 4.15, 16.
in whom all the members grow up into a complete body. Now we are united unto
Christ by none other means, Ephesians. 3.17.
but by faith, whereby he dwells in our hearts.

Again, What is the Church, but a company of believers, a congregation of
faithful men? Therefore unless a man believe, he cannot be of that society.
Besides, the Word is the bread of life, the food of the soul: so that as
natural food cannot sustain nature, unless it be received into the body and
digested; no more can the Word, be a Word of life to the soul, except it be
apprehended by faith. It is a saving Word only to them that believe. 1. Co.
1.21.


They therefore that hearing, believe not, are in the same, or rather worse
condition, then they that hear not at all. For sins of knowledge, are
greater then sins of ignorance, and the means, not profited by, does
aggrauate the sin. Yea the sentence is fearful: Mark. 16.16.
that He that believes not, shall be damned. And the very same word that is by
unbelief so rejected, shall judge the incredulous (that receive it not by
faith) at the Last day. Ioh. 12.48.


This should mouingly persuade every Christian Soul to mix the Word with
faith: considering, that as the means of uniting to the Church, on Gods part,
is the lively voice of his Word preached, so on man's part the effectual means
is faith. Nay, God for our greater encouragement has promised to his, both the
means, and efficacy thereof. For the means, see the Prophet Esaias: Isai.
30.20, 21.
Though, says the Prophet, the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the
water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any
more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers: And thine ears shall hear a word
behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it. And as for the efficacy,
God has bound himself so to assist his outward ordinance, that his inward
working grace shall concur with it: Ier. 31.33.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, says
the Lord.

This also may be a touchstone, to try us, whether we be indeed united to the
Church of God, or in outward show only: for we see evidently, that none are
incorporated into the body of Christ, but the true Believers. And who are those
true believers? Take these brief notes of them.

1. A true believer does rely only upon the mercy of God in Christ, whose
mercy he does so account his al sufficient merit, Psalm. 73.25.
that he professes unfeignedly that he has none in heaven but the Lord, and
none on earth but he. 2. The true Believer lives no longer in the former
course of his ignorance and sin, he walks not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, becoming, by the power of the death of Christ, dead to sin. 3. The
true Believer does express his faith by his works: knowing that it is not
idle, but works by love. 4. The true believer is constant in his way of piety
and virtue, that he may attain to the end of his faith, the salvation of his
soul: for he knows well, that he cannot receive the Crown of life, unless
he be faithful to the death.
The Sacrament of Baptism is the third means of entering into the Church: The
Sacrament of Baptism.
for the covenant being propounded in the Word, and accepted and embraced of
the believer by faith, is ratified and confirmed by the Seal of Baptism; and
so salvation, as by a deed under hand and seal, is effectually conuaied unto
us. Therefore Baptism is called by S. Peter, 1. Pet. 3.21.
The like figure, which now saves us, because it is not a naked or bare sign
of our regeneration and salvation but an effectual seal, organe, and
instrument, to convey, and as it were, to set the very stamp and Character of
Saving grace upon the soul of every faithful Christian. Hence is that of S.
Ambrose, Amb. de voc. Gent. l. 1. c. 5.
Origo verae vitae, veraeque iustitiae in Regenerationis posita est Sacramento,
etc. The original of true life, and of true righteousness, is grounded in the
Sacrament of Regeneration. Suitable to this Antiquity, is the modern doctrine
of our Christian Church. Article 27.
Baptism (says our Church of England) is not only a sign of profession, and
mark of difference, etc. but is also a sign of regeneration or new birth,
whereby, as by an instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly, are grafted
into the Church, etc. Yea, Calvin himself is so plain, for the efficacy of
the Sacrament, and to show that it is not a bare sign; Romans 6.3.
that he proves out of the Epistle to the Romans, Quod per Baptismum, Calu.
Inst. l. 4. c. 15.. 5.
Christus nos mortis suae fecerit participes, vt in eam inseramur: That by
Baptism Christ has made us partakers of his death, that we may be ingrafted
into it. And immediately after, in the very next words he says, Qui Baptismum,
ea qua debent side accipunt, vere efficaciam mortis Christisentiunt. They that
receive Baptism with such faith as they ought, do truly feel the efficacy
of Christ's death, even as the young graffe receives sap from the stock into
which it is set. And afterward he calls Baptism, Tit. 3.5.
with S. Paul, Lauacrum regenerationis and renouationis: the Lauer or washing
of regeneration and renouation: Noting thereby the force of Baptism.

Calu. Inst. l. 4. c. 16. 17.
Again, Calvin in another place defending the Baptism of infants against
Anabaptists, and speaking of the state of infants in Baptism, says, Eos vt
viuificet, sui participes facit: That Christ, to the end he may make infants
capable of life, he makes them partakers of himself. And a little after he
takes away this Anabaptisticall objection: Quomodo regenerantur infantes, nec
boni nec mali cognitions praediti? How can infants be regenerate, say the
Anabaptists, seeing they know neither good nor evil? Whereunto Calvin
answers, Opus Dei, etiamsi captui nostro non subiaceat, non tamen esse
nullum: The work of God, though it be not subject to our capacity, yet it does
not therefore cease to be.

Thus we see, that Baptism is an effectual means of our entrance into the
Church of God. They are therefore worthy of severe reproof, who either out of
error, vnderualuing the excellency of this Sacrament, or through negligence,
conceiting there is no such necessity of it, do sinfully omit and defer the
seasonable use of Baptism. Such must suffer themselves to be informed in the
truth, and know, that there is as express a mandate for Baptism, as there is
for teaching, hearing, praying, or any other pious or moral duty. He that
said, Mat. 28.19, 20.
Go and teach, said also, Baptize them. The Apostle did not simply say to those
whom he directed in the way to salvation, Act. 2.28.
Repent ye, but withal he adds, and be baptized every one of you, for the
remission of sins. And it was according to the Lords charge given in the
Apostles commission: which is, that they teach me^ to observe whatsoever he had
commanded them. So then though it be not of that absolute necessity, that
infants dying without it, when it cannot conveniently be had, should be
damned, according to the Romish bloody position: yet seeing there is the
necessity of precept, men must take heed of neglecting so weighty a duty. If
the Jew for the neglect of Circumcision was to be cut off, Genesis 17.14.
how shall the Christian be excusable? Heb. 2 3.
How shall he escape for the omitting of so great a Sacrament?

Thus we have seen the means, The Author or efficient, by whom men are added
to the Church.
whereby men are added to the Church, The Word, Faith, and Baptism: the next
point is, The Author of this addition; and that is, The Lord: The Lord added to
the Church such as should be saved. The Rhemists add the Pronoune, Our Lord,
as their usual manner is, contrary to their vulgar Latin Edition, which yet
they pretend in their Translation exactly to follow. It is in truth a gross
abuse of the sacred Text, to add so many hundred Pronounes, more then ever God
made; and yet cavil at our Translation, for turning (...), into the word
Congregation, whereas it is the most proper signification of the word. But it
is worth the noting, to observe how they are constrained sometime to translate
The Lord, and not Our Lord, seeing in themselves the absurdity of it: as in
Matthew, where it is said, Mat. 22 24.
The Lord said unto my Lord: there they leave out the Pronoune, perceiving how
odd and harsh the tone would be, to translate it, Our Lord said to my Lord.
These Pronounists do so glory in the phrase, that it is become a
distinguishing note of a Romish Catholic, insomuch that if any will symbolize
with them, he must speak in their language, as some, to please them, do.

To come to the point, It is the Lord that does add to the Church such as
shall be saved. Genesis 9.27.
God must persuade Iaphet: it is he that must enlarge him, that he may dwell in
the tents of Shem. Ioh. 17.6.
He gives unto Christ such as are ordained to life; otherwise there is a
plain impossibility of our union with Christ and his Church. For our Savior
does peremptorily affirm, Ioh. 6.44, 65.
that no man can come unto him, except the Father draw him; and except it were
given unto him of his Father. The means without this efficient cannot be
effectual. 1. Cor. 3.6, 7.
Paul planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase: without whom, neither
he that planteth is any thing, neither he that waters. Act. 16.14.
God opened the heart of Lydia, before she could profitably attend to S. Paul's
preaching. If his Spirit do not inwardly coworke with the outward voice, it
shall but beat the air in vain.

The reason is evident: for man's deadness is such, that he can no more move
toward heaven, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
so much as one step, then a dead man can rise of himself.

Nay, there is in the corrupt nature of man, an opposite disposition and
willingness to remain in the state of sin, like Lot, to linger in Sodom: so
that there is naturally a reluctation and striving against the work of Grace:
which remaining in the regenerate in part, causes them, that they cannot
always do the good that they would.

Again, the work of conversation and regeneration is a miraculous work,
greater then the work of creation, and therefore requires a divine power to
effect it. In the first Creation there was no let: God said the word, and the
creatures had their being instantly: but in the work of Regeneration there are
many obstacles, Satan, the world, the flesh: not that any thing can hinder the
effect of Gods omnipotency, but in respect of us.

This confuteth the error of freedom of will to good in man by nature;
whether wholly as the Pelagians held; or in part, as our Romists maintain. The
right Christian and Catholic verity is, with S. Paul, by a negative, to
exclude nature, and extol grace, 1. Cor. 15.10.
whereby nature of nilling, is made willing. For it is God that works in us
both to will and to do. Phil. 2.13.
Nos volumus, sed Deus dat vt velimus. We will, says a Father, but God does
give us that power to will.

Is any man partaker of this grace, is he drawn of God, has the Lord added
him to his Church? Let him give his Name the praise, 1. Tim. 1.13.
and confess with the Apostle, that he has obtained mercy. For indeed it is a
great mercy of God, to be taken out of the slavery and bondage of Satan, and to
be put into the Lords service, Romans 6.22.
which is perfect freedom, and has for the end, everlasting life.

To conclude this point; Does any desire to be sincerely united unto the
Church of Christ? Let him go to the Fountain of this grace, and cry with them
in the Song of Solomon, Draw me, Cant. 1.4. Psalm 86.11.
we will run after thee. And with David, Unite my heart, to fear thy name.
And with the Prodigal, O Lord, make me as one of thy household servants.

The time of this addition to the Church, The time and continuance of this
addition.
is here said to be daily, or from day to day: it shall not fail, to the last
day, nor time be any more, when the number of the elect is once complete.
Math. 24.22.
Yet it is not so to be understood, as if the increase of the Church should be
always apparent, and in a flourishing eminency, as our Rhemists upon this
Text would have it: for we know by the Word of God, that there must be
Apostasy and falling into error, in these last times, as was said before.

The consideration of the time is of excellent use. It shows the patience of
God, 2. Pet. 3.9.
in waiting so long from day to day for our conversion. 1. Pet. 3.20. Genesis 6.3.
It was great to the old world, when the long suffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, by the space of 120. years: but it was nothing to the time of
the Gospel, from the first, to the second coming of Christ. This advises us,
to take special notice of the day of our visitation. For through the tender
mercy of our God, Luke 1.78.
the dayspring from an high has visited us. Have we the light? Let us walk
in it, while we have it, and pray the Lord to send it, to them that sit in
darkness.

Again, let us not rashly censure, nor uncomfortably despair of those that
are without: The Lord adds to his Church daily: therefore let us, while there
is time, both hope, and help forward the work of God. Math. 20.3.
All are not called in in the prime of the day, but some at the third, some at
the sixth, some at the eleventh hour. He that is to day, with Saul, a
persecuter, may be to morrow a Convert, and profess that which before he
persecuted. We say, He runs far, that never returns. But know, that none
can outrunne God, when he will fetch him home to himself.

The happiness of those that are added to the Church.
To close up this matter in brief; See here in the last place, the happiness
of those that are added to the Church: it is in one word, Salvation; being made
the servants of God, and becoming of his family, which is the Church, They
have, says the Apostle, Romans 6.21.
their fruit in holiness, and the end, everlasting life. They are kept by the
power of God, through faith, 1. Pet. 1.5.
unto salvation. They are safe in the Arc, whilst the world of the wicked
perish in the Deluge. They are in the little Zoar of Gods Church, Genesis 19 22.
Psalm. 144.15.
out of the danger of the fire of Gods wrath. Happy are the people that are in
such a case, yea thrice happy are they that have the Lord for their God.

What can allure us to be of this society, if this motive of eternal
happiness prevail not with us? Men desire to be free of those Corporations,
that have great immunities and privileges: then know, that no city can
compare with the heavenly Jerusalem: no society comparable to the Communion of
Saints.

How profane then and blasphemous is the conceit of wicked worldlings, Mal.
3.14. Job 21.14.
that say, It is in vain to serve God: and what profit is in Religion and
religious walking before the Lord: and count the proud and wicked, like
themselves, the only happy men? What a lamentable thing is it, that the god of
the world should so blind their eyes, 2. Cor. 4.4.
that they should not see their own misery, and the contrary happiness of Gods
people, Luke 16.23.
till with the rich Glutton, it be too late?

As for those that have their part in this happiness, let them go on
cheerfully, 1. Cor. 15.58.
abounding in the work of the Lord: forasmuch as they know, that their labor
is not in vain in the Lord. 1. Pet. 1.3, 4.
Let them from the bottom of their hearts, say, Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to his abundant mercy, has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for us. Amen.

FINIS.

