An Epitaph on the death, of the Right honorable and virtuous Lord Henry
Wrisley, the Noble Earl of South hampton: who lies interred at Touchfeelde in
the County of Hamshyre, the 30. day of November 1581. and in the 24. year of
our most drad and Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England,
France and Ireland Queen. etc.
YOu noble Peers refrain,
Your courtly sportes a while:
Cast on your wailefull weeds of woe,
Dame pleasure do exile.
Behold a platform plain,
Of death, fit for the Grave:
Who late inioyed a living Soul, as you this season have.
His birth right noble was, honor beset him round:
But Death amidst his lusty years, has shrind him in ye ground.
When time is come he waightes, according Gods decree:
To conquer life, respecting not the mightiest in degree.
Entreaty cannot serve, Death seeks no golden gift:
For from his reach no potentate, to fly can make the shift.
The Glass run forth at large, the hour fully spent:
To share life's thread a sunder he, by mighty Jove is sent.
The dance of Death no King, nor Kayser but must trace:
The Duke, the Earl, the Lord and knight to him must yield a place
The aged old, the middle sort, the lusty youth in prime:
To live on earth cannot enjoy, the certentie of time.
For as time has no stay, but fleeteth every hour:
So is the life of mortal men, compared to a flower.
Whose beauty known to day, to morrow fades quight:
And vanishes, as though thereof, Man never had ye sight,
So fickle is our state, we fading Flowers be:
To day alive, to morrow dead, according Gods decree.
Of life no Charters given, to any worldly wight:
Oh who can say that he shall live, from morn unto the night.
He that at first gave life, of life will bear the sway:
And when him lykes, as pleases him, will take this life away.
Since he works all in all, and rules as seems him best:
Lets learn that earth we are, and earth to claim her own is pressed.
The perfect proof whereof, apparently is seen:
By this good Earl, whose lusty years, did flourish fair and green.
But in a moment changed, and withered like the haie:
Bereft of life and honor great, and coutched close in claie.
Yet though he senseless lie, South hamtons Earl by name:
Yet death in him lies dead no doubt, by means of noble fame.
For whilst on earth he liu'de, to virtue he was bent:
And after wisdoms lore to hunt, he gave his frank consent.
In Justice was his joy, and justly he did deal:
As they can tell that for his aid, had cause for to appeal.
The widow poor oppressed, he carefully did shield:
And to the Orphane in his right, did daily comfort yield.
The needy poor he fed, with Mutton, Bread and Beeffe:
His hand was never slack to give, the comfortless relief.
The naked back to cloth, he ever ready was:
No needy poor without reward, from this Earls gates could pas.
His House keeping right good, there plenty bare the sway:
No honest man forbidden was, within his house to stay.
His faith brought forth sweet fruit, the Lord God to delight:
And made him as a servant good, accepted in his sight.
Unto his tennauntes poor, this Earl was ever kind:
To work their weal, he carefully did always yield his mind.
Inhaunsing of his rentes, did he enlarge his store:
He always had a care to help, and aid his Farmers pore.
His servants weal to work, no time he did forbear:
To do them good that well deserved, his zeal did still appear,
On God his heart was set, in Christ his hope, did rest:
And of the mighty Lord of hoastes, this noble Earl was blessed.
To Prince he was most just, to country always true:
The fruits of love and loyalty, in him all states might view.
In wedlock he observed, the vow that he had made:
In breach of troth through lewd lust, he ne would seem to wade
Thrice happy thou, of God and man belou'de:
That ever soughtst to make a peace, where discord striffe had moved.
Though thou from us begone and taken hence by death:
Among the sons of mortal men, thy praise shall live on earth.
For as thy life was just, so godly was thy end:
Not on this world, but on sweet Christ, thou always did depend
And as in health his name, thou reverently did praise:
So in his fear in sickness thou, did spend thy lotted days,
This world thou heldst as vain, thy life thou thoughtest no loss:
In hope of Heaven and heaueuly bliss, you deemst al things but dros.
This houering still in hope, to heaven thou tookst thy flight,
where with thy Christ the Iueller, of joy thy heart is pight.
And he in extreme pain, when anguish did abound:
To give thee comfort from above, was ever ready found.
Amidst his mercy he, though justice wrought thy smart:
Even like a loving savior, did always take thy part.
When Satan, sin, and death, about thee round were set:
To pray for thee most earnestly, he never did forget.
And like a Soldier just, by faith thou foughtst the Feelde:
And armst thy self against all thy foes, to whom you woldst not yield
But so did keep the fort, that all thy foes did fly:
And like a lamb in Jesus Christ, preparedst thy self to die.
Of Court thou take thy leave, thy Prince thou bidst fare well,
for whose estate thou praydst to God, her enemies to quell.
The Noble Peers each one, with heart thou bidst adue:
And praiedst that they to glad her heart, may loyalty ensue.
Of all thy loving friends, thou take a fynall leave:
And unto God most constantly, for comfort thou do cleave,
Thy noble children thou, right lovingly do bless:
To Servants all thou give adue, they may thee not possess.
From them thou do prepare, thy passage straight to make:
And unto Christ with cheareful voice, thy soul thou do betake
Who with outstretched arms, receives it to his grace:
And with his saints, in glory great, appointes the happy place.
Thy friends thy loss lament, thy Children wail and weep,
To see their Father and their friend, in Clay enclosed deep.
Thy servants streme forth tears, they wring their woeful hands:
to see that all to soon of life, death has desolued the bands,
His Tennants all do mourn, their smoking sobs abound,
And to the skies the needy poor, their pitious plaints resounde.
Their foster friend from them, by death they say is hent:
whose want in Court and town each where, both old and young lament.
But tears are spent in vain, though they suppose him dead:
He lives in Heaven where Jesus Christ, with glory crowns his head.
And thus right noble Earl, thy last adue receive:
To thine avail behind thee thou, good name and fame do leave.
Which so shall conquer death, that death in thee shall die:
and more the Sons of mortal men, to heave thy praise to sky.
Omnis caro fenum.
(quod) John Phillip.



