A FAMOVSE Cronicle of our time, called Sleidane's Commentaries, concerning
the state of Religion and common wealth, during the reign of the Emperor
Charles the fifth, with the Arguments set before every Book, conteyninge the
sum or effect of the Book following.

Translated out of Latin into English, by Ihon Daus.

Here unto is added also an Apology of the Authoure.

CHE SARA SARA.
blazon or coat of arms

To the right honorable, and his singular good Lord, Fraunces, Earl of
Bedford, Lord Russel, one or the Queen's highness, most honorable privy counsel.
Ihon Daus his daily orator, wishes health, peace, and co^solatio^. In Christ
Jesus, with thincrele of honor and digntiy.
Among all other writers, that compile Books for the knowledge and
instruction of others (right honorable and my singular good Lord) they in my
opinion) deserve best of the commonwealth, which commit to wrytinge, stories,
whereby men may learn by thexamples of others set before their eyes, how to
guide and govern their life, what things to embrace or eschew, and to judge by
matters past, what shall be the consequent, and end of things to come. For which
cause the most eloquent orator Cicero calls an history, the mystres of
ma^ners, the guide and light of life, the sercher out of virtues, and driuer
away of vices, with many such other like goodly titles, which he attributes to
the same: And certainly if there were ever any story written: whereof men might
reap fruit and commodity, or worthy to be had in hand, and practiced in the
common use of man's life, either for the worthiness ofihargumente, which is
concerning the state of religion, and common wealth, or for the report of
things done lately of fresh memory: it is this same work of Sleidane. For he
treats not only of thenterprises of men, with the casual chances of things
that happen. But climing higher, and auauncing the mind of man up unto heaven,
constrains the same to marvel at the wonderful providence of the living God,
touching the government of the Church: And induces men to wonder at the
unsearchable counsel of God almighty, who has preserved the same in somany
troublesome storms, and tempests full of pearil and danger. And as
concerning the author, the diligence and fidelity that he has used,
deserves doutles to be highly commended of all men: for so much as he, having
more respect to the common wealth, than regard to his private commodity, has
wholly imploid him self to consecrate the best and most excellent matters that
may be to everlasting memory. It is said how Thucidides was so desirous of the
verity, and so doubtful and scrupulous in writing of his story, that he gave a
great some of monye, even to his ennemies, to have the truth of matters, and to
know how all things went. Assuredly the same may we say also by Sleidan: who
(as he him self confesses) not content to go by hear say, or by common
report of people, has fished for the certenty of his Story out of common
records, or at the least by report of men worthy credit, and herein has
spared nether cost nor pain. For although he has written many things which
he him self has seen in Germany, France, Italy, and other places, yet must
he of necessitye be helped herein with the eyes and ears of many, to compact
an history of so many several nations, and places so far distante one from an
other. Seeing therefore that this story of Ihon Sleidane is compiled of matters
of so singular and excellent perfection, worthy of perpetual memory. J have
thought it expedient for sundry causes to present your honor with the same.
And that as well for the great good will and zeal that your good Lordship
bears toward lerninge and christen religion, and common wealth of your
native country. As also for the place and dignity, to the which (by the
judgment of al me^) you are most worthily called, considering how it shall be
neither unprofitable nor vnnedeful for your honor to understand the state of
other realms and common welthes, with the tormoils of the church in the same,
which things do here abundantly and sufficiently appear. And to thend it may
be easily known, in what place every matter may be found, I have set before
the beginning of every book, the some or argument containing the most matters
comprised in the same, most humbly beseching your honor to accept this simple
translation, dedicated to your good Lord ship, and written for the vtility of
our common country, into your honorable tuition, that through your good
Lordships authority, the tongues of evil speakers being repressed and put to
silence, all others that are disposed may receive commodity and profit by
readinge of the same. For doutlesse a more profitable book than this is, has
not ben setforth in thenglish tongue now of many years. Thus the living God
preserve and increase you in honor, and so replenish your noble mind with the
light and grace of his holy sprite, to persuade and treat with the Queen's
highness most honorable in such wise, that all things there condescended and
agreed upon, may wholly redownd to the glory of Gods holy name.

The Kalendes of August, Anno. 1560.
The. Translator to the Book.
GO forth my painful Book,
Thou art no longer mine:
Each man may on the look,
The shame or praise is thine.
But seek thou for no praise,
No thank nor yet reward:
Nor each man for to please,
Have thou no great regard.
The labor has been mine,
The travel and the pain:
Reproaches shall be thine,
To bear we must be fain.
Yet has my study been,
To profit others mo:
Some men thereby to win,
And trust it shall be so.
For as to pleasure many,
I have been ever glad:
Right so to displease any,
I would be loath and sad.
But if thou please the best,
And such as be of skill:
I pass not for the reast,
Good men, accept good will.
Thou might with me remain,
And so eschew all blame,
But since thou would so feign
Be gone, go in Gods name.
To the most excellent Prince Augustus, Prince Electour, Duke of Saxon,
Lantzgraue of Turing, Marquis of Meissen, high Mareschall of thempire, his
singular good Lord, Ihon Sleidane wishes health.
Diverse authors (most excelleut prince) have setforth unto us many and sondrye
alterations of kingdoms: And God him self would that we should be taught these
things, as it were with his mouth long before they should come so pass.

And of those four great Monarchies of the world, of their great
aulteration and succession, he taught us by the Prophette Daniell. Whose
Prophecies for the most part of them, are already made euidente and
manifest unto us, with a certain knowledge most pleasant and full of
consolation. And of the alteration and contention that should be about
Relygion and Doctrine, both the same prophet has spoken before, and S. Paul
coming after him prophecieth also manifestlye. But in what sort the same
shall be, it is setforth and declared by mo than one or two. How be it the
alteration that has chanced in this our time, is most notable of all others.
The Romain Empire, which should both be the last, and also much greater then
the rest, the prophet said should be divided, and brought from that huge and
unmeasurable great quantity, to a right small thing, as it is now manifest,
which only consists within the limits of Germany, and has been many
times in great hasard and danger, partly by reason of domestical evils, and
partly through the factions of forain enemies. But at the length God has
given us such an Emperor, as a more mighty has not been these many hondreth
years: For unto him have descended most ample realms and provinces: which as
they be most rich and welthy, so also be they most commodious for the doing
of things in sondrye places both by sea and land. And like as he him self
excels in power all other Emperors of Germanye, that have been sense the
time of Charles the great, so also, by reason of the things that have chanced
in his time and government, is he most famous and notable. But among all
other things, the alteration of Religion has the chiefest place: which with
the beginning of his reign took her original. For at that time, when the
Emperor Maximilian departed out of this present life, that matter had not ben
in hand above.xiiii. months: but what time the Princes electours chose this
manne Emperor, in a manner the self same time Luther being provoked came
forth to reason the matter, and disputed openly with Eckius at Lipsia, and
than fell men to their study on either side. Wherefore thempire of this man
ought to be considered dilligentlye, and waied with the memory of former times.
For god has at every time stirred up certain great princes more no table tha^
the rest, when either the state of religion or common wealth should be altered, of
the which sort was Cirus, Alexander of Macedonie, Julius Caesar, Constantine,
Charlemaigne. Also Ottous of Saxony, and now he, of whom we speak, Charles
the fifth. And certainly this alteration is of such sort, whereof we now make
mention, that no man, that knows the thing perfectly, can thinck theof
without great marvel and wonder. For the beginning was full small, and in manner
to be contemned, and one man alone sustained the malice and violence of all the
world: And yet might he him self have been appeased and quieted, in case his
adversaries would have, taken the condition, which at the beginning he offered
them. For he promised to keep silence, so that they would do the like: But when
they refused that, and prescribed him a recantation, and herein perseuered, and
he said, that unless they could first show his error, he could not chaung
his opinion, the dissension increased, and the matter was brought before the
counsel of thempire, and now is come to such a great manner, as we se. And by
what means it came so to pas, what thing the Bishops of Rome, what, the
universities, what Kings and Princes have at tempted, how he him self has
pleaded his own cause, before the emperor and counsel of princes, how diverse
men of excellent learning, have joined them selves with him, how the matter
again has been debated in thassembles of thempire, how means of reconcilement
have been assaid, how oftentimes the Bishops of Rome have been in hand with the
Emperor and other Kings, how often they have put them in hope of a reformation
and of a counsel, what persecution and burning there has been, what leagues and
conspiracies have hen made, how this same religion has been setforth, not only
in Germany, but in other places also, how diverse have revolted, and others
remained constant, what tumultes, wars and battles have risen by this
occasion: these I say, so great and sundry things to leave unspoken, and not to
commit them to memory by writing, I think there is no man, but would judge it
blame worthy.

Moreover it is not to be passed over in silence, what was the state of the
common wealth, during this man's Empire, by the space now of six and thyrty
years, what wars he has kept, what commotions and tumultes have been in the
mean season, and what things have chanced in all realms and provinces.
Nevertheless, thordre that in this argument shall be observed, hereafter shall be
declared. For like as this Emperor reigns over most large and ample
dominions, so has he had also most strong and puissant enemies. Wherefore the
matters have been wonderful great, that have chanced in this our memory, and
duringe the reign of this Emperor. And therefore certain years past, diverse
worthy and well learned men, when they chanced to talk of such matters, began to
persuade with me, that whosoever had chanced in these dais, especially,
touching the cause of Religion, I should put in wrytinge: And here unto did
exhort me, not for that I could do this best, or for that there were not others
much more mete for this purpose, but because they saw me delight much in that
same kind of exercise, and therefore supposed, that through acerten natural
inclination to the thing, I should not bestow my time and labor amiss: I my
self doubtless, who knew well enough, what a dangerous sea I must enter into,
and how that case required an other manner of man, endued with a greater wit,
and eloquence: Albeit, I was almost in despair, that I could bring the thing to
pass, yet vanquished by their auchority, which had that opinion in me, I
determined to assay the thing: And beginning from the time that Luther began to
inuey against the selling of pardons, and brynging the matter still unto the
disputation of Lipsia, appointed by Duke George, that same, that I had so
composed, I sent unto them that were my setters on, at Woormes, where that
time was the counsel of thempire, ten years past, to read and peruse over. They
afterward by their letters, and by mouth also did more importune me, that I
should proceed: but not long after there chanced a sorrowful time to Germany,
when there arose war, which as it was a great let and hindraunce to study and
learning, so did it also disturb and let all my purpose and doings. For nether
could I proceed, as I desired, and many times must I tarry, and make delay: but
so sone as I was relieved from those evils, and especially those iii. years
paste. I imploide all my study and travel herein, and never reasted, till I
came to thend wished for. And surely this work is made chiefly and principally
concerning Religion, nevertheless for observing an order, I thought good also
to put in polliticke matters. Now as touching the whole narration, after what
sort that is, every man by reading shall easily perceive. Nothing becomes an
history better then truth and sidelity. And doubtless I, least any man should
find lack in me in this behalf, have traueled diligently: For I have written
nothing by light reports or by hear say, but I have compiled my work of
public records, which I have gathred up dilligently, of the verity, whereof no
man nodeth to dout. I had also the aid and help of a worthy and noble man,
lames Sturmie, who has been occupied in public and weighty affairs these
xxx. years and mo to his commendation, who of his gentleness shewinge me
friendship, when I sometime doubted and sticked fast on the rocks and shelues,
he as an expert sailer, many times brought me again into the right course and
void of dangers, and the most part of the work, he red over at my request,
before his sickness, whereof he died, and admonished me diligently of such
things as were nedeful. Here is also much mention made of foreign matters,
especially french and English. And therein have I also followed the same order,
and have put in nothing, but that which was tried and certainly known, and the
French matters for the most part I my self have seen, in these.ix. years that I
dwelt there. For diverse executions and burnings, whereof is mention made, again
many decrees made, and actions commenced by the divines of Paris, against
certain ministers of the Church, and shortly after articles of religion
setforth, and factions of the court, chanced at the same time, when I was in
those parties, but warlike matters, and such other like affairs, I do not
omit, for that I might in no wise do. Yet have I not professed to to treat of
them expressly. For as I said a little before, this labor was purposed chiefly
to the cause of religion. Therefore would I have the reader warned, that when he
shall come unto such places, he look for no long discourse of those affairs.
For nether is it mine intent, and they may read it in other men's works, which
have taken in hand to write of that part, so much as herein shall be wanting. An
other thing that I said is to be observed in a history, is fidelity or
vprightnes, that is to wit, that nothing be told of affection: which although
it some very hard, because it is of few performed, and albeit that perauenture
I shall not persuade all men, that I have been dilligently ware of the same, yet
I require them instantly, that I be not burdened with any suspicion before
there be cause. This work of mine, is wholly compiled, as I said, of public
records, collected with great diligence, whereof also a great part was
setforth in print before, partly in the Latin, partly in the vulgar, some in
Italian, and some also in French. And it has many orations, and demands, and
answers, and diverse accusations and consutations also: All these things I
recite plainly, simply and truly as every thing was done: For neither I add
to any thing of mine own, or speak mine own judgment, but leave that to the
reader free, neither use I also any color of Rhethorick, nor write any thing
in the hatred or favor of any man, I frame my style only, and use mine own
words, that the speech may be always like and equal, and I bestow each thing
in his place, as they followed in order. In those first years Bishop Leo and
Adrian spoke many things bitterly against Luther: from whose wrytinges, as I
take away nothing: so likewise do I add nothing unto Luthers answers, neither
make I their complainct worsse, nor yet his defense better. The Bishops that
succeeded the^ Clement and Paul, and this man especially, when Luthers dostrine
was now spread abroad far and near, making digression from his person, have
inueyed most spitefully against princes also and cities: Here I follow the same
order, and throughout the whole volumne keep the self same trade. Wherefore I
beseech the reader, that he lay a part all disliking, and know first the
matter it self, and tender my labor, which has surely been very great, with
their good will and favor. For certainly unless the same causes, which moved me
to write at the first, had not eftsoon allured me to proceed, and devour all
tediousnes, I had long since forsaken my enterprise, when there appeared so
great variety and much a do: but my stomach and strength came to me, first,
because I supposed, that the same should concern the glory of God, who had
opened in this our time his omnipotency, and wonderful counsel: And again the
common vtility moved me. For even in Germany few remember the things past, and
forain nations know no certenty at all, and many men's minds disposed to
dislikinges, thinck far otherwise of many matters than they ought.
Furthermore I had a respect to posterity, if at the least wise my wrytinges
may abide light and continuance: besides this also, many things of the like
fort are by others put in writing, nether truly nor modestly. And there is one
of our nation, that setforth a book vi. years since at Mentz, most full of
lies and slanders, trisling and railing words: And in these last years past
came forth two tomes at Florence, the author whereof handles in deed, in most
larg and ample wise the history of his time, but wherso ever he speaks of
Germain matters, especially concerning Relegion, he bewraieth the disease of
his mind: For the things be untrue, false, and sclaunderous, what so ever he
writes, as it may be evidently proved. I omit here so many Orations,
Epistles, Prefaces, which are setforthe in ^rinte, when they touch these
matters, they do handle all things not only of hatred and malice, but swerve
also most far from the truth. For these causes I say, I thought good to
proceade, and not to permit that the order of acts done should be untruly set
out, either for this present age, or else for the time to come. For in this kind
of thing, what is more vile or les to be suffered, tha^ that the same things
which should make the reader more expert, should with false tales and lies be
depraved. Assuredly the Magistrate ought to foresee that nothing be done herein
licentiously.

And this fault is used in our days, that very many of those writers, seek
to pike a thank, and whilst they ind^uour to please and gratifye one man,
they deserve evil of many, and induce mo into error. Doutlesse I for my part,
which yet I would should be spoken without ostentation, am so affected herein,
that if I knew there were any thing in this work untruly wrytien, I my self
would scrape out the same, and frankly warn the reader, that be should give no
credit to it. But I trust assuredly, that no untruth can be objected to me.
For what study, pains, and diligence I have taken these certain years, that I
might know each thing exactly, both many good men can witness, and as I trust
also the thing it self shall declare. Notwithstanding, although I comprise
those things that have chanced in this Emperors government, al be it he be
yet alive, and has the government, although many things mo, yet may fortune
in his days, yet for so much as these former acts do challenge the first,
chiefest and greatest part unto them, I would not that the same should be longer
wanting, so many learned men, not only of Germany, but also of foreine nations
instantly requiringe me, that I would gratify them herein. There be coming
doubtless most grievous commotions, and wonderful alterations. Which thing
also the holy Scripture does nether doubtfullye nor daroklye Prognosticate,
and the present state of things does plainly signify, so that such as will
apply their mind here unto, shall not want matter to write of: but, the same
cause that moved me to write, that is public vtility, the self same
persuades me now also, that some things as I have written, and be comprised
in these xxvi. books. I should suffer to come abroad into others men's hands.
And this my labor and all my pains taken, I will dedicate whole unto you, moosie
excelient Prince, which are descended of that noble house and family, which
fyrsto gave harborow and refuge to this Religion, whose father did earnestly
embrace the same, whose brother for the education of youth in true Religion and
learning, employed a wonderful substance, whose father in law for the self
same cause has a famous name among kings. And for so much as you also walk
in these their fotesteps, to your great commendation, this work which I hope
will profit many, I trust will be to you also not unpleasant. The living God
preserve your highness, safe and healthful.

Given the.x. Kalends of April, in the year of our Lord. 1555.
The first Book The first Book of
The argument of the first Book.
THe Pardons granted by Bishop Leo, Luther reproves by preaching and writing
of proposicions and Letters, sent to Tharchbishoppe of Ments, the which are
first unpugned by Frete Tckell and Eckins: and after by Siluester Prier as, and
Hogestrate. Upon this the Pope sends Cardinal Caietane, taduertise The Emperor
Maximilian, and to cite Luther to Rome: but Fridericke Duke of Saxon found the
means, that Luther answered Caietane at Auspurge. The Cardinal what with
threatenynges, and what with thalligations of decrees, mainteyneth thauthoritie
and supremacy of the Pope. Luther at his depertynge thence, set by an
Appellation. Caietane solliciteth by letters the Duke of Saxon, but in vain,
which the Pope perceiving, publishes a new remission of sins by pardons.
And to win Duke Fridericke, sends him a golden Rose. In the mean time
dies Maximilian, and great suite and mean was made taspire unto thempire:
which in fine Charles of Austriche achieved, and word was sent him into
Spain. The golden bulle, and laws of Thempire are here recited. Erasmus
commends Luther. And at the same time that the disputacion was at Lipsia,
Zwinglius preached at Zuricke, and (as Luther had don) resists a perdoner
there one Samson agraye Friar.

THE Bishop of Rome, Leo, the tenth of that name, a Florentine borne, after
the usurped auethoritie of his predecessors, which he pretended to have over
all Churches, had sent forth into al realms, under his Bulls of Lead,
indulge^ces and pardons, wherein he promised clean remissyon of sins, and
everlasting salvation, to all such as would give money for the same, for the
leuiyng whereof, he sent his Collectours into all Provinces, who gathered
together, and heaped up great treasures in all places, but specially in in
Germany. And affirmed their doings to be good, both in words and writing
(which pardons the Papists call by an old accustomed term, indulgences)
Grauntyng moreover for money, licenses to eat whitmeat and flesh, on days
prohibited:

The same time was Martin Luther an Augustine Friar, and professed divinity in
the University of Wittemberge, who being not a little tickled with the
preachinges, and fond books of these collectours, for that he saw, how the
simple people believed the things to be true, that they bragged of, began to
admonish men to be more ware and circumspecte, and not to bie their
marchaundise so dear: For that the same, which they bestowed upon such trifles,
might be much better employed This was in the year of our lord a thousand
five hondreth and seuentene. And to the intent he might work the thing to more
effect, Luthers letter to the B. of Mentz.
people should be so far abused as to put the whole trust of their salvation in
pardons, and to think that what wickedness so ever they had committed, it
should by them be forgeuen: And that the souls of them that were tormented in
Purgatory, so soon as the money were cast into their box, should straight
ways fly up into heaven, and feel no more pain: he shows him how Christ
commanded that the Gospel should be taught, and that it is the propre office
of a Bishop to see that the people be rightly instructed. Wherefore he puts
him in remembrance of his duty, and prays him that for the authority
which he bears, he would either put those prattelinge pardoners to silence,
or else prescribe them a better order in teachinge, lest a further inconvenience
might grow upon the same, as doubtless there will do, unless they be
inhibited. The cause why he wrote unto him, was that for so much as he was
also Bishop of Maydenburg, the care of al such matters B. of Mayde^burgs charge
belonged unto him. And with these letters he sent certain questions which he
had lately set up at Wittenberg there to be disputed, to the nombre of four
score and fiftene: In the which he reasons much of purgatory, of true
penance, of the duty of charity, and of their indulgences Luthers. 95
questions at Wittenberge.
and pardons at large, and inueigheth against their out rageouse preachinges,
only of a certain desire to boulte and try out the truth. For he provoked all
men to come to that disputation, that had any thing to say, and such as
could not be there present, he desired to send their minds in wrytinge,
protesting that he would affirm nothing, but submit him self and the whole
matter to the judgment of holy church. Nevertheless he said, how he would
not admit Thomas of Aquine, and such other like writers, but so far forth
as they be Luthers exception.
consonaunt to holy Scripture, and decrees of the ancient fathers. To this the
bishop answered not a words. But shortly after John The B. of Mentz clence
Tecela Friar Dominick, set up other conclusions at Franckford, quite contrary
to those of Luthers, wherein he extolleth the supremacy of the Ihon Tecell ft.
do. concl. at frankford.
Bishop of Rome, with the fruit of his pardons and other like things, in so
much as he compares him with Peter the Apostle, and the cross which he
commands to be set up in churches, with the cross that Christ suffered
upon. But where as no man of the contrary part would repeare to the disputacion
at Wittenberge, and the questions were such as many were destrous to read:
Luther wrote a long exposition of the same, and sent them first to Hierome,
bishop of Braundenburge, and to one Stupice Provincial of the Austen Freres,
desiring him to cause them to be sent to the bishop of Rome: And he him self in
the month of June wrote unto Leo the tenth, partly complaining of his
pardoners Luters letters to Pope Leo.
on him for the same matter, but affirmyng that they did him wrong: For he was
enforced, by reason of the fond Sermons and books of the Collectours, to set
up certain questions only for ye matter of disputation, which he would now
more plainly declare: beseching him to give no credit to sclaunderous reports:
alleging that Duke Frederick Duke Fredericks wisdom
the Prince electour of Saronie, was a man of such wisdom and honor, that in
case such things had been true that his adversaries reported of him, he would
not have suffered his country to bear such an infamy: And that the
university of Wittenberge was of like consideration, and so submitted unto him
both all his works and his life also, not refusing death if it should seem
good unto him. For whatsoever should proceed from him, he would take as an
oracle that flowed from Christ him self.

Among others of Luthers adversaries. John Eckius wroote a Echins book
against Luth.
little book against him at the same time. To the which Luther answers
that he neither brings Scripture for him, nor any thing out of the ancient
Doctors, but certain dreams of his own, received of scoolemen by an
vnallowable evil custom.

After Eckius, one Siluester Prierias a freer Dominicke, master of Siluester
priers dialogue.
the holy palace (as they term it) wrote against him a dialoge with the
preface to Leo the tenth right stoutelye: saying that he would prove whether
Luther be so invincible that he can not be confuted or vanquished: For if he
can answer this, the^ will he set forth greater things with most exact
diligence. Then speaks he unto Luther, exhorting him to amend, and before he
comes to his disputation, he propounds certain Themes, that the Bishop of
Rome is head of the whole Silue. priers Themes.
church, and that the church of Rome is the first and chiefest of all
others, and can not err in matters of faith and religion. Neither that the
general counsel can err, where the bishop of Room is present. Moreover that
the holy Scripture takes all his force and authority of the church and
bishop of Rome, as of a most certain rule. And he that believes other wise to
be an heretic. This foundation ones laid, he begins to debate the matter.
Afterward does Luther Luth. answer to Sil. priers.
make answer to ye same book: And in his preface to this Siluester says that
he wo^dreth at his questions rather than understands the same. Then taking of
him example, for the defense of his cause, puts forth also certain themes,
but such as are taken out of holy scripture, wherein he shows that we ought
not to give credit to every doctrine of man, but to way every thing exactely,
and to embrace that thing only, which is consonaunt to gods word: And none
other doctrine to be received, but that which is left us by the Prophets and
Apostles, Scriptur and choldewriters only to be also wed.
although it have never so goodly an appearance: Nevertheless thautoritie of
those writers which were next after them to be allowed, but for the rest to be
well ware what they write. And as concerning the indulgences, that it is not
lawful for the Collectours to inuente any newedeuise herein, but to follow
in the same the order of the Canon Iudulgences to be used after the Canon law.
law. After this he obiecteth that he alleges no testimony of scriptur, but
recites only the opinions of Thomas of Aquyne, who treated in a manner of al
things, at his pleasure without thauthoritie of scripture. Wherefore he
rejects both affirming that he does the same, not only by the commanndement
of saint Paul, but of S. Austen also. Emo^gs the Ciuilians it is commonly
said, that it is not lawful to pronounce The Ciuilia^s use of citing.
any thing, but after the prescript of the law: Much less in divine matters
ought that thing to be suffered that is spoken without the testimony of
scripture. It is S. Paul's precept, that such as be appointed to instruct the
people, should be furnished, not with Syllogismes or sundry decrees of men, but
with wholesome and sound doctrine, left us by godly inspiration. But for so
much as many have contemned this precepte great blyndnes has been induced,
and an innumerable sort of unprofitable questions has flowed over the world.
What time he has thus made his way he comes to the confutacion, and about
the end thereof says, how he is nothing affrayed of his manasinge words which
are set forth for a bravery: For albeit he should dye therefore, yet Christ
lives and is immortal, unto whom all honor is dew. And therefore if he
list to come to a further trial in this matter, he must fight with stronger
weapons, or else his author Thomas and he are like to goo by the worse. Again
this Syluester writes Luther an answer, and says it deliteth him much,
that he submits him Silut. prier. second answer to Luth.
self to the judgment of the bishop of Rome: wyshing also that he spoke it
with his heart unfeignedly. Luther had charged him with ambition and fllatterie,
but he purges him self thereof as much as he may: And defends right stoutly
the doctrine of Thomas, affirming it to be in such sort received and approved
by the church of Rome, that it ought to be preferred above all other
writings: And blames him sore, that has spoken of so worthy a man so
irreverently: accomptyng it an honor to him self to be called a Thomiste:
Notwithstanding he says how he has red other men's works also, which
shall hereafter appear. After this preface he sets forth a little book:
wherein he commends exceadinly the authority of the bishop of Rome, in so
much that he clearly prefers him before all counselles and decrees,
affirminge that all the strength of Scripture depends upon his authority.

This Thomas coming of a Noble house, gave him self wholly to learning. And
leaving Italy went first to Collyn, and after to Paris, and proved best learned
of al men in his time, writing diverse works in the which he treated of
matters of divinity and Philosophy. He was a black friar, the disciple of
Albertus Magnus. When he was Thomas of Aquine. Albertus magnus scollar.
dead John bishop of Rome the.xxii. of yt name; made him a saint; about fifty
yea^res after he left his life. He was a great mainteiner of the bishop of
Romes authority. For he attributed unto him the supremacy over all other
bishops, kings, and churches universal with Thomas of Aquine a salt.
both Jurisdictions as well sacred as civil: affirming it to be a necessary
thing unto salvation, that all men be subject unto him, that he has full
authority in the church, and that it appertains to him to call Thomas of
Aquin gives authority to the Pope.
counsel, and to confirm the decrees made there: Moreover he says how men
may iustlyappeale from any general counsel. Finallye he ascribes unto him
all things: only this he excepted that he can not make new articles of our
faith, neither abolishe those which are left us by the hands of the Apostles
and ancient fathers. Of iudulge^ces and pardons, he wrote very much also. And
in granting of the same makes the bishop of Rome a great Prince, he died (as
it is said) in 1274. Thom. of Aq. died.
the year of our lord, athousand two hundredth three score and fortene. And is
commonly called thangelical doctor, for the subtlety of his wit.

This book of Syluesters, Luther answers only in an Epistle Luth. second
answer to Siluester prier.
to the reader, saying it is so compacte altogether of lies and terrible
blasphemies of Gods holy name that it should appear that the devil himself
was the aucthour thereof: Wherefore if the Bishops and Cardinals be of the same
opinion, and that such doctrine be taught at Rome the seat of Antechrist.
Rome, then is it no longer to be doubted of, but that Rome is the very seat
of Antechrist. Then happy is Greece, and happy is the land of Greece and
Bohemes happiness.
Boheme, yea fortunate are all those that have made a diuorcement with her, and
miserable are they that have to do with the same. Wherefore unless the bishop
will see him punished, and compel him to recante, he Lut. his forsaki^g of
Rome.
protests that he will dissente from him. And not only forsake the church of
Rome, but also to take it from henceforth, as a most filthy synke, and puddell
of all wickedness. For there be daily invented new praises for the Bishop of
Rome, such as the like have not been heard of, for this subtle end and
crafty polycie, that a lawful counsel should take no place: And therefore do
his flatterers prefer him above al counsels, and affirm that the
understanding of all Scripture must be fetched The cause wh^ ye By. of Rome is
extold.
at his hand, as of a most certain judge. Wherefore if they hold on their
madness, and with their iuggelinge castes mock all the world after this sort:
other remedy is there noone, but that the civil magistrate must se them
punished: Thieves and murderers, and such other malefactors, are punished with
death, but it were a great deal more Princes of necessity must reform To.
right, that these which are much more hurthfull enemies to the common wealth
should with the common assent and travel of men be supsuppressed. For the
bishop of Rome is in the same state that al other me^ The bishop of Rome bound
as other to Gods commandment.
be, and is no less bounden to the observation of Gods commandments, than
is the poorest man living. And such as teach otherwise do the greatest injury
that may be to the divine majesty.

At the same time also James Hogestrate a blackfreer, wrote against Luther full
bitterly, exhorting the Bishop of Rome to fire and James Hogestrate wrote
against Luther
sword: whom Luther aunswering in very few words reproves his cruel and
bloody mind, scoffing merely at the man's ignorance, and admonishing him so to
proceed: for that it is the chiefest way to win true fame, what time a man is
blamed of unlearned and evil men: but at Bishop Leo his hands he says, he
looks for better things Whilst these matters were thus handled on either
part after the manner of scoleme^, The Emperor Maximilia^ calls an assembly
at Ausputg, Thassembly at Ausputge by Maximilian.
whether also Leo the tenthe sends afterward his Ambassador, Thomas
Caietane Cardinal. At this assembly were present all the seven Princes
electours, so called because they have the authority to elect and create
The Emperor. They treated here of war against the Turk: For Solomon Emperor
of the Turks, having lately subdwed the Sultane, had conquered all Syria and
Egipte. Wherefore the Cardinal made an exhortacion, promysing in his masters
name The treaty of war against the Turk.
the treasures of the churthe to be employde upon this war. And required
herein the aid and assistaunce of Maximilian as defendoure of the church. At
this self same time Leo the tenth created Albart Archebyshop of Mentz
Cardinal. And in this assembly commands Caietane to consecrate him with
the ceremonies and rytes accustomed: Albert archb. of Mentz mabe Cardinal.
Which thing being done accordingly, The Emperor leadeath home the new
Cardinal from the church, and sends him presents, that is to say a
Princelyke horselitter, with horses, and many rich and costly hangynges. And
the Bishop of Rome gave him also an hat set with gold, pearl, and precious
Iwels, and a swoorde with a gylt skabarde. For the most part of all the
bishops in Germany be as well Civil as Ecclesiastical Magistrates: Howbeit
it was thought that The cause of his Cardinalship.
Leo preferred him to this dignity, to theude that the church of Rome might
have a defendour in Germany, such a oue as was both in nobility of birth and
in authority also right famous as the like unto this man could not be found
there. For besides that he was of the noble house of Brandenburg, in that he
was archebyshop of Mentz, he was the chiefest of all the Princes electours, and
as it were consul for ever. And albeit that all bishops are bonde^ to the
Bishop of Rome, yet such as are made Cardinals be much more bonden.

Maximilian being advertised of the controversy of Luther, in the Maximilians
lettre to Pope Leo concerning Luther.
month of August writes his letters to the bishop of Room, signifiyng that
he has heard in what sort Luther has reasoned many matters, and preached
also some things that seem to be heretical: And he is the more sorry for that
he defends his doctrine styfly, and has very many favorers of his opinion,
emonges the which there be diverse of high estate, he exhorts him therefore
that he for his high authority that he bears, would abolyshe all such Idle
and unprofitable questions, and inhibite all sophistical contencions of
words, for so much as they that apply their study that way do not a little
hurt the christian common weal. Where as their intent is only, that the thing
which they have learned, should be praised and received of all men, alleging
that in time past there was great diligence showed in appoyntinge ayt preachers
to the intent ye al Sophistical contention might be eschewed, howbeit this
order by little and little fell into contempt, so that it is no marvel that
such as should have taught others, have oftentimes erred the^ selves: And this
to be the cause thereof, for so much as the ancient writers, and interpretours
of holy scripture have now a long time been laid a side, and filled more full
of lies. It may be imputed to them also that so much contention is raised in
these our days about matters of learning, and this last daungerouse
controversy now about pardons. Certainly the weightines of the thing
requires a remedy betyme, lest the disease run to far: for in delay is
danger. What so ever he shall determine therein, the same will he allow, and
see that it shall take place throughout all parts of Thempire. There was
mention made before how Luther and Syluester wroote one against an other. Now
had he being in office at Rome, so aggrauated Luthers matter, that Leo cited
him tappeare at Rome, Luther is cited to Rome.
and that under a great penalty: Afterward the.xxiij. day of August he
writes his letters to Caietane his Ambassador in Germany, signifiyng how he
is aduertysed that Luther holds certain opinions that be wicked and against
the judgment of the church of Room, which is the maistres of faith and
religion: And that he of a fatherly love desirous to repress his rashenes,
has given in commandment to Hierome bishop of Ascula, unto whom this thing
properly apperteyneth to somone him to Rome, that both he might answer to
matters that he is charged with, and might also make a declaracio^ of his
faith. The bishop of Ascula executed his commandment: But he did not only
comme to any amendment, but stubbernly persistinge in his heresy, did set
forth much more pestilent works than he did before, to the great grief and
vexation of his mind: wherefore let him find the means, that he may be
brought to Auspurge, and herein requiring the aid of the Emperor and Princes
of Germany, and wha^ he is brought thither that he be apprehended, and sent to
Rome: wherefore if he repent of his own accord, and desire remission of his
offense, than let him be pardoned and restored to the church, which is never
wont to exclude a true penitent if not, let him be excommunicated. He
commands moreover that all men shall obey these his letters, and they that
shall do otherwise, if they be ecclesiastical persons, he confiscateth all
their goods and promotions, and therewith takes away all hope and
possibility to obtain any more hereafter: And others that be in civil office
to be deprived of al honors, offices, and other commodities and finally to
want christen burial. But unto all those that shall do him faithful service
herein, his pleasure is they shall have either that common and full remission of
sins, or have also some reward given the^. And to this precept he byndeth
all men (the Emperor only excepted) but in no wise wylleth that any other ma^s
fredome or privilege should be of any force herein. The same day also he writes
to Frederick Duke The Popes letters to the duke of Saxo^
of Saxon, who was the same time at Auspurg, how that emonge other ornaments
of the house of Sarony, this was ever propre unto it, greatly to favor
Religion: wherefore (he says) it is not like, that any of that noble family
should so far degenerate from his elders, as to maintain any man that would
impugn the same: notwithstanding he hard daily grievous co^plaintes of Martin
Luther, who bearyng him self highly on his princes favor, and forgetting both
his order and profession, does many things wickedly against the church,
regarding the authority of no man: and albeit he doubts not, but that he
braggeth of his Princes favor falselye, yet he thought it good to write unto
him herein and to admonish him, that being ever myndefull of his own honor
and dignity of his ancestors, he might eschew not only the crime it self,
but also the lest suspicion of the same: for (he says) he is well assured
that he teaches many wicked and pestilent heresies, which he and the master
of his palace have dylygently noted: and that same is verily the cause, why he
has cited him to appear at Rome, and written to Cardinal Caietane his
Ambassador, what he would have furthermore done in the matter, and for so
much as this is a matter of Religion, and does appertain properlye to the
church of Rome to examine every man's faith, he requires him and
nevertheless charge and commands him that being requested here unto by
his Ambassador, he do his endeavor, and bring to pass that Luther may be
delivered into his custodye, wherein he shall both do GOD high service, and
also the thing that shall be to him self and to all his family right
honorable. And in case there shall be found no fault in him. When he shall
be examined at Room, he may return home safe and sound, but in case there
be found Crime worthy punisheme^t, than shall the duke which would no longer
suffer such a pestilent fellow be clear of al blame: And for his own part he
was of such cleme^cie yt neither would he oppres an innococent, nor exclude out
of his favor one that were willing to amend. Thus sought he all means
possible to oppress Luther. The The Popes letters to Gabriel veneius.
same year moreover he wrote unto Gabriel, provincial of Thaustine friars,
that he should spedely seek the redress of Martin Luther a friar under his
jurisdiction, who sows new opinions in Germany, and quickly to quench the
flamme newly kyndled, lest in process of time taking force and strength it be
paste remedy and so set all on a fire. For this disease increases daily,
neither is there any thing so much to be feared as delay. Therefore he must
apply this thing with all study, labor, devise and diligence, for so much
as he has authority over him.

When Luther perceived him self to be cited to Rome, he labored much to have
his matter heard in Germany before some indifferent judges, and in a place not
subject to injury. But when he could by no means bring it to pass, the
university of Wittenberge in their letters The university of Wittenberg
writes for Luther.
to the bishop of Rome, written the.xxv. of Septembre, gave him a maruelouse
good report both of his life and learning. They say, how he is cited to Rome
for certain questions, howbeit by reason of sickness and danger of his life he
is notable, they beseech him to have none other opinion of him, than of a good
man. He propownded certain things to dispute of only and not to determine,
which his adversaries have interpreted in the worse part, and have
exasperated ye matter: They proteste, how they will admit nothing against
the church, and being requested of Luther, they could not but give him this
testimony, to the which they beseech him to give credit. With these letters
they send others also to Charles Meltice a German, and Chamberlain to
bishop Leo, unto whom they declare how Luther without any of his deserts was
brought into great hatred with the bishop, in so much as being cited to Rome,
he could not yet find so much favor that his cause might be herd in
Germany. They say how they be so affected not only toward religion, but also
toward the holy church of Rome, that in case there were any crime or wicked
error in Luther, they would not bear with him, but he is a man of such
learning and honesty of life, and has so well deserved of them and of the
whole university, that they can not fail him in this case. Neither would Duke
Frederick being so faithful and witty a Prince, unless he judged him to be an
honest man, suffer him so long unpunished. Wherefore they require him, that
through the favor and estimacion yt he has with the bishop, he would bring to
pass, that some indifferent judges might be appointed him not at Rome, but in
Germany: And they doubt not but that he will declare him self like a Christen
man and a good divine, and that he has not rashely or without cause sought the
occasion of strife. And this they require him the more earnestly for so much
as they have conceived a greater hope of him, that he which is a Germain him
self will naturally for the country sake, in so honest a matter, be helpful
to an other German that is in a manner oppressed and in danger of his life.
Besides this intercession of his friends, Duke Frederick devised so with the
Cardinal at Auspurge that Luther should not need to travail to Rome, but
should come and pleed Luther is called to Auspurg
his cause before Caietane there. Who coming thither in the beginning of
October, remained there three days before he spoke with the Cardinal. For
after Duke Friderick was gone homewarde, he was advised by his friends not to
come in the Cardinals fight before the Emperor Maximilian had granted him a
saufe conduicte, which obtained, he was gently received of the Cardinal, who
said, that he would not contend with him in disputacion, but friendly appease
the controversy. And according to the Bishops of Rooms commandment he
propounds two things: first that he should come to ame^dement, and revoke
such errors as he had published: secondlye that from henceforth he abstain
from such wrytinges as disturb the tra^ quillitie of the church: Hereunto
does Luther make answer, that he is privy to no error, but if he has erred
in any thing, he desires His conferens with Cardinal Caietane.
it may be showed him wherein: There the Cardinal charge him that he
affirms in his questions, how the merits of our savior Christ, consiste
not in the treasures of pardons, which sentence (says he) is against the
decree of Clement the syxte: Moreover that unto those that come to receive the
Sacrament, faith should be necessary, whereby they might be assured that their
sins were forgeuen, neither is this true (says the Cardinal.) Luther
answered, how he had read that decree of the Bishop, and showed what his mind
is touching the same, and where as mention was made of Thomas of Aquine, he
affirms that the authority of Scripture is to be preferred far above him:
Than the Cardinal extolling the Bishop of Romes authority, prefers him
above all Scriptures and counselles, recityng how the counsel which had
determined the contrary was abrogated, he condemns also Gerson of Paris, and
the favorers of his opinion. Contrariwyse Luther denies the authority of the
bishop to be above the counsel, alleging emonges others the divines of Paris
to be of his opinion. After long disputacion, where as they could not agree,
Luther asks some deliberation: The next day he retourneth. And in the
presence of the Secretary and certain other witnesses, and four also of the
Emperors counsel, he protests that he bears all dew reverence to the holy
church of Rome: And if he have spoken any thing against the same, he will not
have it ratified: Howbeit for as much as he is admonished and commands to
forsake his errors, and to abstain from henceforth, he supposes that he has
spoken nothing that swarueth either from holy Scripture, or the opinions of the
ancient fathers, the decrees of the bishops, or also from right reason. Yet
will he not deny but that he may err and be disceiued, for so may every man:
And therefore he commits the hearing to the lawful and holy church,
referryng the whole matter to the judgment of the same: And not that only, but
he will also render a reason of his doctrine in any place: If this may not
suffice, he will make answer in writing to such arguments as may be brought
against him, and will not refuse to stand in judgment herein of the
universities of Germany and Paris. The Cardinal charged him again, as he had
done the day before, with the decree of Clement, as though it made much for
him: In fine he permits him to deliver up a writing, theffect whereof was
this. What time he set up his questions, and after wrote an exposition of the
same(...) had red the decree of Clement before, but his mind was not therewith
satisfied: For although it be established that the decrees of the Bishop of
Rome should be as well received as the voice of Peter the Apostle: Yet ought
this so to be taken, in as much as they be consonaunt to holy scripture, and
agreeable to the decrees of the ancient fathers. There is no doubt but the
voice of Peter is sacred and holy, yet was he soore rebuked of Paul, neither
could his doctrine be received tofore the consent of the Church (which was
than at Jerusalem) had establyshed it: The words of all men may be heard,
but all things must be referred to the words of Christ, who only can not be
disceaued: That decrees is against sondrye places of Scripture, and that was
the cause which he at that time brought in the same question, and afterward
was not affraied to make an exposition to the same. Ever since that time he was
fully resolved to stire up no further disputation concerning that matter, but
rather to hear the opinion of others: but now, albeit he had lever be
instructed of others, especially of the Bishop of Room. Yet for as much as he
is constrained of necessity to defend his own, he will prove and do the best
he can to make the same decree and his questions to accord. When he had made
this preface before him, he goes to the matter if self, and by a certain
exposition made, shows how that decree makes for his purpose, but yet so as
he would neither that the Bishops authority, nor his own estimation should
be thereby infringed. After this he comes to the second part of his
accusation, and alleging for his purpose, many places of Scripture, declares
plainly, how it is faith that makes us just before GOD. Wherefore he desires
him to deal favorably with him, and show him his error. For the force of
things which he had alleged out of the scriptures, was so much, that he
believes them to be sufficiently grounded upon their own truth, which he can
not forsake, for so much as we ought rather to obey God then me^. And therefore
he requires that may be released of the hard burden of recantynge, for he
came not in to this contencion upon any arrogancy or desire of vayn glory:
Yea he would wyshe for nothing more than that the truth might be opened, and
that any man else might bring that were moore learned and godly: her of he
beseched him, yt he may not be compelled to hurt his own conscience. The
Cardinal received this writing offered unto him by Luther, and when he had red
it, esteemed it lightly: yet he promised to send it to the Bishop of Rome. Than
he urged him much to recant, And unless he so do, he threateneth him with
the punishment appointed already by the bishop: And also commands him out of
his sight and unless he amend his manners, to come no more in his presence.
After this threatening, which was the.xvij. day of Octobre, Luther wrote unto
him gentle letters full of good will and duty. For Caietane after he had thus
chidden Luther, and sent him away, wrought secretly with John Stupice
Prouincial of the Augustine freers, that he should induce him to recant of his
own accord. Wherefore Luther in the same letters makes mention what Stupice
did with him: verily omitting nothing that becomes a faithful and friendly
man to do: he gives him thanks for his benevolence toward him which he
perceives well by the talk of Stupicious, whereby doubtless he was much
comforted, so that now he would gratify no man more rather than him: he
grants that he was over quick, and had to little regard to the Bishop of
Rome his authority: How be it the same is to be imputed to the importunity
of the Collectours: he desires to be forgeuen this fault, and promyseth to be
more modeste hereafter, and affirms also that he will in his sermons satisfy
the Bishops request And as concerning indulgences he will speak no more thereof,
so that his adversaries may be likewise commanded to silence. How be it to
revoke his sentence already taught and defended, he can not with a safe
conseience, till such time as by the testimonies of holy scripture he be
condemned of error. He therefore requires that the hearing of the matter may
be referred to the Bishop of Rome: for there is nothing ran do him more
pleasure than to hear the voice of the church. When the Cardinal would make
none answer to these letters, and had manased him in words, through the
counsel of his friends, he departed thence two days after leaving behind him
an Appellation to be openly set Luther appeleth.
up about the time of his departure. And or ever he went, he wrote again to
the Cardinal: that he has done what he was able, how he came on foot being
sickly a long iournaye to Auspurg, to the intent he might declare his duty
toward the Bishop of Rome: And now having little monye left, and being loathe
to be longer chargeable to the house of the white freres (his host) he is
driven to return, and the rather for that he can not abide his sight, and
has forboden him his presens. Wherefore all his freindes in a manner had
counseled him, to appeal from him to the Bishop him self, which he would
not have done, but by the advice of his freindes, And chifely because that he
supposes that Duke Friderick had also rather that some appellatio^ were made,
than that any thing should be rashely or unadvisedly revoked. The appellation
was made much after this sort. How that same question touching Indulgences,
has been diuersely handled of many, but never thoroughly determined: And that
in such doubtefull questions, it has been always lawful, namely for
Divines, to reason: which thing also he did at the self same time, when
certain clamorous Pardoners, did not only write and teach rashely and
vncircumspectlye, but also polled the people exceadingly, and yet did he this
not to affirm any thing, but to try out the truth: he committed also the
whole controversy to the judgment of learned men, and even to the Bishop
of Rome, but his Pardonars have invented such sclaunders against him, and have
complained so sore to the Bishop, and brought the matter to such pass at
the last, that the matter was committed to the Bishop of Ascula and Syluester
Prierias: by who^ he was cited to Rome: but for so much as both these were
suspected, the one of the^ also unfit to be judge in such a matter: Moreover,
if he should have gone to Rome no man douted but he should have been in great
danger of his lif: And last for that he was commanded by his prince to remain
at home: for these causes, and also for such fear as may come upon the most
constant man living, he had desired duke Friderick, to bring to pass, yt the
hearing of the matter might be referred to some skilful and fit men in
Germany, in a place not suspected, nor subject to injury. Wherefore the Bishop
of Rome has committed ye whole matter to his Ambassador Cardinal Caietane,
which doubtless was done at the instaunce of his adversaries, which knew
already the mind and will of the Cardinal. And all though he might (not
without just cause) be suspected: yet did he obey, but the Cardinal by and
by at the first metynge commanded him, to revoke his works: whereunto he
answered, that he would iustifye that, that he had done, either in present
disputation, or by writing. And yet would submit the whole matter not only to
the universities, but also to the judgment of the church of Rome: But he,
with all these things being nothing satisfied, commanded him still to
recante. And where he could not bring on the same, he threatened with grievous
punishment both him and others also, that were of his opinion. Therefore where
as he finds him self sore grieved with such preiudices, he does appeal
from the Bishop of Rome not well infourmed in this matter, to the Bishop yt
shall be better instructed in the same. And this he protests openly.
Furthermore that same decree of Clement is to be found in that part of the
Cannon law, that is called extrauagaunte. There Clemente appoynteth the year
of Iubile, which Boniface the eight had ordained every hundredth year, to be
now every fiftithe year, and speakinge of the benefit of our savior
Christ, he The welspring of Pardons.
says, how that one drop of Christ's blood had been sufficient to have
redeemed all man kind, wherefore the overplus he has left as a treasure with
Peter and his successors to dyspose and distribute upon penitente persons
that confess their sins like good Stewardes, and so to releue them from
Temporal punisshemente dew unto them for their sins. Moreover and beside,
the merittes of the Uirgin Marie, and of all Saints, belong unto this place,
(says he) so that the matter and power of remyttynge sins is unmeasurable.
Wherefore upon this decree Caietaine groundeth the authority of pardons. But
Luther says how that there was nothing committed to Peter and his successors
besides the keys and ministration of the word, wherein Christ commands
that through the trust in him the remission of sins should be showed to the
beleuers: And this to be the true sense and meaning of Scripture. And if the
decree of Clement mean thus, he can be content: otherwise he can not allow the
same. And that which is spoken moreover of the merits of Saints, is wholly
against the holy Scriptures. For men what soever they be can not only not do
more than they ought, but also not so much as they are bounden, neither are
they saved by their own merits, but by the sole and mere mercy of God: for
all men must pray daily, that God the father will forgive us our offenses, and
that he stand not in judgment against us lest we be damned. Touching that
which the Cardinal infers for the authority of the Bishop of Rome, thus
stands the case. It was enacted in the fourth and fifte syttyng of the
counsel of Constaunce, that the Bishop of Rome him self should obey the
decrees of the Synod. The same was afterward established and repeted The pope
under the Coun.
in the seuententh and eyghtenth syttting of the Counsel of Basil. But whereas
Eugenius the fourth would not come to the Counsel at Basil, although he were
oftentimes warned and cited thither, he pronounced the same to be frustrate,
and called an other at Farrare, whither came John Paleologe the last Emperor
of Greece save one, and with him Iosippe the Patriarche of Constantinople, and a
number of Bishops in the year of our Lord M.CCCC.xxxvij. And from Farrare
they removed to Florence where as by the consent of the Greeks, it was decreed
among other things that the church of Rome should have the supremacy, and
yt the bishop of Rome was the successor of Peter, the prince of thapostels, and
the true vicar of Christ, the head of ye whole church, ye father, and doctor of
al christians, and that to him was committed by Christ the full power to feed
and govern the church universal. This is the decree whereby Caietanus would
prefer the Bishop of Rome before, and above all general Counsels. For six
years before, when he was yet no Cardinal but master of the black Frieres,
he made an Oration in the second sitting of the Counsel Laterane, whereof we
shall speak hereafter, and inueiyng much against certain Cardinals that
had forsaken the Bishop of Rome, he taunteth by the way the Counselles of
Costauntz and Basil, for that the fathers at the same tune took to them selves
authority over the Bishops. Wherefore (says he, it was well done of
Eugenius, that he suppressed that faction, and suffered not his authority to
be diminished. This oration did Julius the second (in whose favor these
things were spoken) command to be recorded. And Caietane was made Cardinal
by Leo Gerson of Paris.
the tenth. Gerson of whom we spoke, was a Divine of Paris right famous, and
wrote diverse worckes: he was present at the Counsel of Constans, and in
books written he commends hyghely the decree whereby it is agreed that the
Bishop of Rome should be subject to the Counsel. And says how the thing
is worthy to be written in all Churches and public places, for a perpetual
memory. For he says they be pestilent Flatterers which bring this Tyrranny
into the Church, as though the Bishop of Rome ought neither to obey the
Counsel, nor be judged by the same, as though the Counsel should take all his
force and authority of him, as though it could not be called, but at his
pleasure, as though he were bounden to the observation of no laws, nor none
account might be taken of his doings: certainly these monstrous sayings
must be utterly rejected which are against all laws equity and reason. For
all the authority of the Church depends of the general counsel, and it
is lawefull to appeal from the pope unto it: and those which inquire whether
the Bishop of Rome or the Church be greater, make as wise a question as if
they should ask whether the part be more, or the whole, for it aperteineth to
the counsel, to constitute, to judge, and to depose the Bishop of Rome, as
lately it was declared at Constaunce, for where as some seemed to doubt in Pope
John is deposed.
the matter, and attributed ouermuche to the Bishop, this question was there
determined, before John the three and twentieth was deposed from his Seat.
These and many other things writes Gerson to to the same effect. And
therefore is he now rejected of Caietane. He died in the year of our
Lord.M.CCCC.xxix. And the university of Paris holds the same opinion, and
includes the unmeasurable usurpation of the Romish Bishops, as it were with
in these bounds: and but a few months before that Luther wrote of
Indulgences, the same Uniuersite appealed from Leo the tenthe for abolyshyng of
a law which was very profitable for students in France, and opened the way
to promotion.

After Luthers departure from Aspurge, the Cardinal writes letters to ye Duke
of Saxony the five and twentye day of October, signifiynge how Luther in deed
came to Auspurge, but spoke not with him Caietan writes to ye duke of Saxony.
till he had obtained themperours safeconduit He marueileth greatly that so
little credit is given to him. After much treaty about the matter, he, of a
certain fatherly love admonished Luther to amend. And albeit he waxed more
stubberue, yet did he devise with Stupice and others, a way of reconcilemente:
And that in such forte, as neither the Church of Rome should lose her
dignity, nor he his estimation. And whereas there was a good foundation of this
thing already laid, they went preuely away, first Stupice and after Luther,
which chanced much contrary to his expectation. Luther pretends that he
treats of these matters only by the way of reasonynge and of disputation,
but in his sermons to the people he affirms all things which may in no
wise be permitted: for so much as his Doctrine both swarueth from the
church of Rome, and is also very parnicious: as it is certainlye to be
proved. Wherefore he does admonish him to regard his own honor, and his
conscience, and either to se^d Luther to Rome, or else to banishe him his
country. For it can not be that so pestilent a thing should long continue:
neither is there any doubt but they will proceed in judgment against him at
Rome, and that he has according to his duty signified to the bishop the
whole matter and the clokynge of the same. He prays him therefore to give no
credit unto such as commended Luthers doings, neither to suffer so great an
evil to spot and blemishe that noble house of Saxony, like as he had
oftentimes promised. To the which Epistle exhibited The dukes letters to the
Cardinal.
the ninetene day of Nouembre, Duke Frederick makes answer the eighte day
of Decembre, that he promised to send Luther to Auspurge, which being
performed, they can require no more of him, And that he promised him likewise,
to let him friendly depart. And now that he would drive him to recante before
his matter were heard, he can not a little marvel. For there were diverse
well learned men as well in other parts as in his Country, which did not
condemyne his Doctrine: And such as were his adversaries, were blyneded with
Avarice, and corrupted with filthye lucre: but in case his error had been
detected, than would he which seeks both the glory of God, and the
safetye of his own conscience, have done all ready herein the duetye of a
Christen Prince. And therefore where he writes that process shall pass
against the said Luther at Rome, that is beyond all his expectation: And
when he desires moreover, that either he should be sent to Rome or else
into exile, it is not lawful for him so to do: First, because he is not as
yet detected of Heresye. Secondely, for because that the same should be a
great loss to the University of Wittemberge, which he had lately founded,
whereof Luther was a certain light, and an ornament. Unto whom he sent his
letters, that he might read them. And he offers him self (as before) to be
ready to dispute the matter in any indifferente place, and to be judged by
any indifferente hearers, or else to answer the matter in writing: Which
request, because it is reasonable, and for so much as he will defend none
error wyllyngly, he thinks it meet to be granted him, that at the length
it may appear, wherefore he should be accounted an Heretic, and what he him
self might chieflye follow. For like as he will maynteine no error
willyngly, and as he would be very loathe to swerve from the Church of Rome:
even so can he not condemn him for an Heretic tofore he be detected of
error. Now Luther who had seen the Cardinales letters, (as before is said)
wrote again to his Prince immediatlye that where as he went not to Caietaine
before he had obtained the Emperors saufeconduit, it was done by the advice of
his freindes: And that the Cardinal would have had him to recante such
things as he had written touching Pardons and faith to be necessary in the
Sacraments: for the first he did not much pass: but to deny the other,
wherein consists the effect of our salvation, he might in no wise co^se^t:
After he declares what places of scripture the Papists do deprave and wraste
into a wrong sense: he recites also what was done every day, and how at the
length the Cardinal began to threaten him: undoubtedly he wishes for nothing
more, than that it might be showed him wherein he erreth. But in case they at
Rome shall refuse to take so much pain for so poor a man as he is, at the
least wise let them write hereof to the Duke him self or to Themperor, or to
some great Bishop of Germanye: or else appoint somwhere a free disputation:
which things all they have denied him hitherto. And if they will thus
persevere, than is it easy to be judged, whether the fault be in him: or in
them. And where they exhort him to cruelty, he ought not to be persuaded by
their words. For they that will seem to note errors, might much more easily
send them in writing into Germany, tha^ he to his great charges and present
danger of his life, travail to Rome, there to understand his errors.
Finally whereas he boasts, that judgment shall pass against him at Rome,
unless he either come thither or be exiled, he refuses not to be an exile:
although he knows full well, that he can be in no place safe, having so many
adversaries liynge in wait for him: Moreover it should be great grief unto
him, that any man should for his sake incur any danger. Wherefore lest they
should attempt any thing, he will depart out of the limittes of the whole
country, whither soever it shall please God to lead him: Wherefore he gives
him thanks, and prays for his prosperous health: And reioyseth to him self
that it has pleased God, that he should suffer some thing for the glory of
Christ's name. The^ did the University of Wittenberge in the month of
Nouembre The University of Wittenberge writes for Lut.
write unto the Duke their favorable letters in Luthers behalf. Now they
understood by Luther (of Cardinal Caietanes letters) both what his request
was, and also what offer Luther made him at Auspurge: where Luther therefore
requires that his error may be showed him, and submits him self to the
holy Church of Rome: They beseech him, that he will see to it, that they do
him no open wrong, but show him if he be in error, the way, out of holy
Scripture. He him self hops well in the gentleness of Bishop Leo, but he
fears lest his adversaries so flatter him, that they will abuse him and the
name of the Church. For albeit the Duke did not accomplish the Papists
requests, but seemed rather to defend Luther, as tofore it may appear: yet
had he never read any of his works nor as yet heard him preach, as he him
self witnesses in letters written at Auspurge to Raphell Riare a Cardinal,
who for old acquaintance had frindely admonished him, that he should not take
upon him the defense of Luther. Whilst these things were in doing, Leo,
fearinge some alteration, establissheth his Indulgences with a new decree, New
pardo^n
saying that this is the doctrine of the Roman Church, which is the
maistres of all others, that the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of Peter, and
Christ's Uicare, has authority to grant this so great a benefit, in such
sort as they shall profit, not only the quick, but also the dead in
Purgatory. And this doctrine must all men receive and believe, unless they
will be sequestered from the Fellowship of holy church. This decree he sent to
Caietane, that it might be published unto all men: who following his
commandment, publisshed the thing at Lintz a town in Austriche by the River
of Danubye or Tonoware, and in decembre sends out copies to the Bishops of
Germany, commanding them in Leo his name, under a great penalty, that they
should immediately set it forth every man in his Dioces, and commanded it to
be reverently kept and observed. But Luther perceiving by the Cardinals
letters, that sentence should be given against Luther appealeth from the Pope
to the Counsel.
him at Rome, puts up an new appellation the.xxviij. day of Nouembre,
wherein was contained that he would not diminishe thauthoritie of the Bishops
of Rome, thinking rightly much less dissent from the Church: notwithstanding
for so much as the Bishop is in the same state that other mortal men be in,
it may be that he may err and offend, neither ought this to be attributed
unto him, that he alone cannot err nor be disceiued. He proves this by the
exemple of Peter, who, for that he erred in sound doctrine, was sharply and
openly rebuked of S. Paul: But and if the authority and riches of the
Bishop of Rome be so great, that he may command and do what he list, and
cares for no man, than such as think they have wrong at his hand, have
only one remedy left them, that is to appeal. After he recites how he was
inforsed through the over much asperitie of Cardinal Caietane, to appeal to
the Bishop of Rome, in whose humanity he had thought to have found some
favor, for as much as both he offered most reasonable conditions and promised
to do al things (the error being taken away.) But now sins that this
Appellation is condemned, the offers despised, lookynge for no more help nor
health at the Bishops hand, as he might learn by the Cardinals letters
written to the Duke of Saxony, being brought through extreme necessity, he
appealeth from the Bishop of Rome to the next general Counsel, which by all
means ought to be preferred before him.

After this the Bishop of Rome sends Charles Meltice his Chamberlain The
Pope sends a golden Rose to the duke of Saxony.
into Germanye, to present Duke Fridericke with a golden Roose, which the
Bishop yearly is wont to consecrate, with many Ceremonies, and great pomp
and solemnity. And after as a token of singular freindship to give it unto
some man. He wrote also to Degenart Phesfinger a noble man of the Dukes
counsel, praiyng him also that he would further his suite to the Duke his
master, that Luther (the child of Satan) might be punished, that the noble
house of Saxony might not through him be blemished. And to the same effect
also he wrote to George Spalatine, whom the better to persuade, he said he was
wholly given to pluck up euillwedes out of Christ's field. And after the same
sort, wrote his vice Chauncelour also to degenart, desyring him to move Duke
Fridericke to the imitation of his ancestors, that he commit nothing unworthy
their famous memory.

Wha^ Meltice was come into Saxony, and had exhibited his Rose, he followed his
suite right stoutly. Which thing once known, Luther Christ only excepted,
there is nothing in this world more excellent: He besecheth him, not to
credit his enemies: And of Pardons he will make no further mention, so that
his adversaries may be likewise commanded to keep silence: He will also
admonish the people in his Sermons, to think well of the Church of Rome,
that they do not ascribe unto it the avarice of others, nor yet follow his
example, who, through the Impudency of his adversaries was enforced to treat
it irreverently: briefly to do all things for a quietness, so that no error
or false parswasion remain in the minds of men.

Before Meltitius came into Germany, The Emperor Maximilian The death of
Maximilian.
was departed out of this life in Austriche, the vij. day of Januarye. That
time were Princes Electours, Albert of Mentz, Herman of Collon, Richard of
Treuers, Archebyshoppes: Jews the Palsegraue, Fridericke duke of Saxony,
Joachin Marquis of Brandenburge: the kingdom of Boheme had Jews king of
Hungry. These being called to an assembly by the Archebyshop of Mentz after
the custom of the Empire, in the month of June, met at Franckefourt, a town
by the River of Moene, all, except the king of Boheme, who sent thither his
depute Ladislaus Sterneberge. The Archebyshop of Mentz begins an oration,
who speaking much of the weighty importance of the thing, exhorts them unto
concord, declaryng by many examples, what an heap of euilles the dissension of
the Princes Electours had brought into Germany within their fathers memory:
And that they should now be all of one mind and consent, it is so much the
more requisite, for that the greater danger ha^geth over them by the Turk and
others, which seek the spoil of Germanye. Two did aspire to the dignity of
thempire, Charles Archeduke of Austriche who had three years before succeeded
Ferdinando king of Spain, his graundfather on his mothers side: And Fraunces
the French king, which four years past had vanquisshed the Heluetians at
Marignane, and possessed the Dukedom of Millan. And the king of Spaines
Ambassadoures were comen already to Mentz, which is five miles from
Franckefurt: And the French Ambassadors stayed at confluence, a Town of the
Archebishoppes of Treuers, where the Rhine and Moselle mete. From whence either
party by letters and messagers commended each their prince to the Electours
with the best reasons they had to persuade: Especially the French me^ who
perceived their cause to be less favored, for that they differed from the
Germans in language, laws, and manners. They sent therefore to the Heluetians,
praiynge them to further the matter to the Princes, who notwithstanding did
clean contrary, exhortyng them not to chose him but some one prince of
Germany. And the Swises also wrote to Leo the tenthe, praiynge him that for
as much as it was his part to inueste and confirm the Emperor being once
chosen, he would se that it should not be given to any foreine Prince. And he
answered that he heard say there was one labored for it, that might not have
it by the law: for the kings of Naples are tributaries to the Bishop of
Rome, and have promised their faith, not to covet the Empire, but to be content
with the one or the other: and that he has admonished the princes hereof
already. He meant in this tale Charles of Austriche: for he favored more the
French king ever syns he subdewed the Heluetians, and led away Maximilian
Sfortia Duke of Millan captife into France, which was the year of our
Lord.M.D.xv. about the Ides of Septembre, The swisses banquished.
with whom in Decembre folowinge he met at Bonony, and there made a perfect
league of amity with him. Touching the kingdom of Naples, thus it stands.
What time Manfredus the Bastard son of the Emperor Fridericke the second
made war against the Church of Rome, Clement the fourth Bishop of that
name in the year of our Lord M.CCCCC.xv. to thentent to repress him, did
that, which his predecessor Urban the fourth was about to do: And sent for
Charles the Earl of Gaunte and of the Province in France Kings of Naples pay
tribute to Rome.
into Italy, and made him king of Sicilie and of Naples, yet under this
condition, first, that for such a benefit received, he should pay yearly to
the church of Rome forty thousand Ducates: Moreover that he should at no
time sewe to be Emperor, nor yet take it upon him being offered freely. When
the Princes were comen to consulte, the Archebishoppe (after he had talked
severally with Fridericke Duke of An oration of the Archebyshop of Me^iz.
Saxony, whose Authority was very great) begins the matter, which, he
says is divided into three questions. Whether that Fraunces the French king,
or Charles the king of Spain, or else some Germane be chosen Emperor.
Touching the French king (says he) I suppose we are prohibited both by our
laws and our oath also, whereby it is provided that the dignity of the Empire
should not be alienated to strangers: And I think there is no man that
doubts but that he is a foreine prince: And albeit that were no let, yet were
it not for the commune weal. For he seeks all means to enlarge his kingdom,
he has joined to it Millan, he will attempt the same in Germany: he will
war upon Charles, whom he hates: yea and has proclaimed it already,
Germanye shall be tormoiled with vprores, and we ought to forese, that we
stir up no Civil wars. If he invade Austriche, as suerly he will do, shall
we leave them in the Breres? has The Emperor Maxilimilian deserved thus of us,
and of the Empire. And if those countries be over run, how long think you
shall our liberty continewe? We may not trust their fair promises: for
oftentimes couetousnesses and ambition carry away men headlonge from doing
their dewtie. In times paste, there were many noble houses in France. Which
now be but few in nombre: for the king in manner has all in his own
hands: They say, he is a stouce prince: the more like to bring all to a
Monarchy, but we seek to maintain this present state of nobility, he
promises great aid against the Turk: which in deed is a thing to be wished
for, that Germany might join with France and Italy: but first he will bend
his power against the house of Burgundy, and war upon Flaunders and Naples,
and shall we aid him in these enterprises? And least any man should say, I
prophesied of dreams and doubtful matters, he is now in leuying his army.
Forasmuch therefore as we are let by our laws, oath, and love of our
native country, I protest and judge him unmeet to be elected. And now to the
rest of the parties: I suppose that some of you thyncke it unmeet that Charles
should be chosen, because Spain is so far of, and that through his absence,
it should not go well with Germany, either for the Turkishe war, or for
civil dissentions. Which things I do not only grant to be true, but also,
when I consider depelye, I am so moved, that in manner, I quake for fear: for I
way this also: If the emperor, at any time come into Germany in displesure,
and bring with him the Spaniardes, we shall be in danger to lose our liberty. I
consider moreover that it may be, that the Spaniards will hardly at any time
restore unto us again this dignity of thempire. And, if by their force and
power they recover Millan, they will keep it hereafter to them selves: So that
almost it seems better, to create one of our own nation that is fit for it,
after the example of our elders which passinge over foreine Princes have
chosen an inhabiter of the contrie. This will not I deny, but the state of that
time was the^ far otherwise and the world a great deal better. But now if
the Emperor be of small power, think you that Austriche and other countries
will obey him? Or if the French king war upon Charles, as without doubt he
will do, either in the low country or in Italy, shall he give them the
lokyng on? or shall our new Emperor suffer strange nations to spoil a great
part of the Empire. Yea, and as the world goes now a days, it is to be
thought that the Princes of Germany, contemnynge their Emperor, will join
them selves, some with the house of Austriche, and some with the Frenchemen.
When Fridericke the third was Emperor, Charles the Duke of Burgundy warred in
Germany. And Philip Maria Duke of Millan in Italy, and no man did repress
them, but the same was to our dishonor: Moreover a greater shame when the
Emperor was beseged in Austriche: Yea, and driven then out of his own
country by the Hungarians. And yet at the same time did the land of Boheme
take his part: and so did also my graundefather Albert Marquis of
Bra^de^burge, and the Duke of Saxony of the same name. If it chance so, the^
you see what is like to ensew at these days, when some princes are addicted to
others for stipendes. I leave of to speak, how many incidente causes may
chance, for the which the Princes and Cities may refuse to show their
obeidience. Moreover, now we are like to have great tumultes and troubles for
religion. For there are spronge up disputations of indulgences, and the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, and of the Ecclesiastical laws, which
seem as yet curable, but or ever it be long they will cause a great Ruin and
alteration of the Church: For many do subcribe, and mighty Nations maynteine
the cause, the Saxons and the Heluetians: neither can this mischief be helped
but by a general counsel. And how shall an Emperor of small power either
call a counsel or defend the same, especially if other kings be against it?
there remains the Turkish war, the which we must not only defend, but
make also, to recover that is lost, and restore Greece unto liberty: for the
doing whereof we have need of the aid of many and sundry nations: which, if
the Emperor have but small power and little authority, how shall he gather
great Armies of me^? For which causes I judge it mete to chose some mighty
Prince, and Charles of Austriche to be preferred before all other Princes of
Germany. And if any incommoditie should put you in fear so to do, I think it
is a great deal less then that will be, which shall ensew in case the
government be committed to any other: For he is both a Germayne borne, and
has many countries holding of the Empire, and will not see his own country
brought in bondage: besides that, he shall swear neither to alienate nor
diminish thempire, nor to break or infringe our liberties. And albeit these be
great causes which I have here mentioned, yet should they not move me one whit,
unless his towardnes were well known: For he loves Religion, Justice, and
chastity, he hates all cruelty, and has a good wit: which virtues shall
ever admonish him to maintain the comonwealth. They that know him thoroughly,
do much commend him: And if we consider well his father Philippe, and his
graundfather Maximilian, we can not doubt of him. He is of no great age, but
yet fit and ripe to govern: He shall have his graundefathers counselors,
and certain Princes of Germany chosen for the purpose. And whereas I said
before that the worst were, if he should be long out of Germany, we shall
condition with him for that matter, and for as much as he has great
possessions in Germany, it can not be, but that some time he will come see
them. So shall the Turk be driven out of Hungary, and the Frenchemen out of
Italy: the Church shall be reformed and established, and many others helped:
which things when I consider, I care the less for his absens: for his own
natural courage, the love of his country, and the very necessity of
things, shall provoke him to come often among us. When The oration of the
Archbi. of Treuers.
the Archebyshop had ended his Oration, and had exhorted the rest to speak
their minds: the others after they had talked a little together, desired the
Archebishoppe of Treuers to succeed. Who for his syngular wit and experience,
was of much estimation. And he began his tale of a prophet that said
Maximilian should be the last German Emperor: Now (says he) me thinks
it is almost comen to pass, forasmuch as my Lord of Mentz (who has spoken
many things wittely, has gone about to persuade us to commit the government
of the Empire to a stranger. But I marvel much, why he prefers the
Spaniarde before the Frencheman? Certes I lament the state of Germany: For if
we follow the steps of our elders, we should need no forayne help: But
now seeing that we seek upon strangers, what other thing do we, then procure
our own bondage? But leaving of this complainte, I will follow the same order
that my lord of Mentz has done, and speak first of the law and of our
oath. And the chief cause and ground of the law I suppose to be this, lest, if
a foreine prince should be chosen, that had no certain habitation in Germany,
the dignity of thempire should by little and little be alieuated to strangers.
If this be the meaning of the law, then can no more the Spaniarde be chosen,
then the Frencheman. But now, if Charles may be created, because he has
lands lyinge within the Empire, of necessity, the same must be of force also
in Fraunces, which has Millan and other members of our common weath. Wherefore
of two things propounded, let France and Germani were (...)ted.
us see whether is better. Certainly, wha^ France was united to Germany, then
did our Empire most florishe: in so much that the remembrance of that time
does not a little delight me, when I chance to read the stories thereof. And now
is the like occasion offered us, which certainly would not be let slip.
Foreyne nations are also of this opinion the bishop of Rome, the venetians, all
the Princes and cities of Italy. For the Frenchmen come of the same ofspringe
that we do, and use almost the same laws and manners, showing all love and
gentleness to our men: And for the vicinitie thereof are very necessary for the
Italia^s and us. If any tumult shall arise, straight ways shall an army be
ready, and France shall pay their wages. And if the Turk shall invade either
Hungary or Italye (as verelye I think he will), shall it not be a goodly matter
to have so nere and so flourishing an Emperor, fournished with the strength of
either nation? As for the Spaniards, though they be accounted warlicke, what
notable thing did they ever in Italye without the healpe of the Germans?
Furthermore because they be so far from us, We can look for no help at their
hands in time: And though they would never so feign yet can they not healpe us
greatly: For Spain is so wasted with continual sailing, that it can send
forth no great nombre of men. Moreover we shall have the Frenchmen our fellow
soldiers) and companions of our travel and pains: But the Spaniardes, if
any thing be well done, will have all the praise to them selves, they will enjoy
our boaties, and rule our countries. Then shall we bewail our bondage all to
late. But I will leave this comparison, and come to the election. If we chose
the king of France, there shall be none occasion of war in Italy. For he
has Millan now in possession, and we shall persuade him that he shall
attempt nothing against Naples: nether against the base countries of
Flanders and Artois, so yt they will be quiet. And yet I see not why we should
think that these countries ought to be defended of us. They be in deed our
neigbours, but we have no league with them, neither do they observe the laws of
thempire, nor give any thing toward our common charges, no more the^ does
England or Scotla^de: Seeing than yt the French kings power is greatest, and
that he has Lu^bardy in quiet possession, and is furnished with al things
necessary, he will attempt greater enterprises and more honorable, and move
war namely against the Turk, and bend al his power thither wards, yt the
cruel enemy expulsed out of Hu^gary and Italy, Germany may live at rest. But
in case we prefer Charles before him (O living God) what tumultes shall we
raise up in Italy? He will recover Millan, and that will be a long war, and
whilst this goodly country shall be thus tourmoyled, the Turks will invade
Hungary with their whole power. Who I pray you shall resist them? Or be able
to bring a sufficient Army against them? These things would be considered
more diligently, and not passed over lightly Now, what the end of the Italyan
war shall be, it is uncertain. If the French king conquer, he will covet
Naples, and it may be that the Bishop of Rome through his impulson will
undo our Election: what trouble will arise thereby, every manne perceyueth
right well. Again if Charles get the better hand, let us not look to have
Italy restored again, the Spaniardes will keep that to them selves forever.
And not only that, but will hardely let out of their hands this our Empire.
About the keeping of Naples, the possession whereof, it is well known how they
came by, what misery have they suffered? they may not therefore be brought into
Italy. Now will I speak some things of either king. I doubt not but king
Charles is of a mild and gentle disposition, for so is he reported of many,
but being but a young man, how can men discern such virtues in him as be
required in a mighty prince? The commonwealth had need of such a one, as
besides other things could establish and reform the state of the church, as
my Lord of Mentz here did wittely admonish. This verily can king Fraunces
perform best of all men: for he has both a good wit, and a good judgment,
and has oftentimes conferens with learned men, of religion, and reads much
him self. Moreover the state of this present time requires a Prince and
captain skillful in wars, payneful and lucky. But who shall in this behalf
take the price away from Fraunces: for his virtue is rightwell tried and
known: Of king Charles we have noue experiment, but that his towardnes
promises some thing: but the other in prowes and deeds of Arms does far
excel all his ancestors. For he has latly overcome in battaill the Swisers,
a mighty nation and never subdued syns Julius Cesars time: A young man
therefore ought in no wise to be preferred before so worthy a Captain. My
lord of Mentz does account it a discommoditie, if the emperor should be long
out of Germanye, but yet he bids us take no thought for that matter: But I
think it a matter full of great danger, to have an Emperor absente far
without the borders of the Empire. For who shall resist the invasions of the
Turks? Who shall repress the sudden insurrections and Civil vprours? And
there arise a tempest, Who shall save the Ship that wants her Master? He
shall know no certentie of our affairs being absent: many things shall be told
him untruly: he shall have no Germans of his counsel, but Spaniardes only:
he will make many decrees, and send them unto us far out of time and season.
Afterward, if he being tyckled with false complaints and sklaunders, should
come into Germany at anyetyme an Army of foreine soldiers. In what state
think you shall be our with Empire then?

Wherefore if you think it good, and that it be our destiny, that a foreine
prince shall at this time wear our Crown upon his head, certainly I think
mete to prefer the French king before the Spanishe: But if the law do
prohibit us to chose the Frenchekinge, letthe same take place in the Spanishe
king, and let us not through a subtle interpretation account king Charles a
Germany, but let us epsy out among all the Princes one, which has no
mansion but in Germany, which is a Germany in birthe, language, manners, and
dispotition. My lord of Mentz supposes that such an Emperor should for his
small ability be despised: but if we chose a mete man, Germany is rich and
strong enough to bear up this burden. Raffe the xj. The Emperor Raffe.
Emperor before Maximilian, was a man but of Small power, but he excelled in
virtue. And he restored The^pire that was full weak, and sore afflicted with
great wars, in such sort that all the kings about him did fear him. What a
good opinion had also foreine princes, and among others, Jews the xij. king
of France: of themperor Maxilian, only for his wit and virtue, I suppose you
know right well: For doubtless the princes of Germany have been ever of much
estimation: And as yet their noble fame is not extinguished, but florisheth
still. And among others at this day, there be three principal houses in
Germani, the house of Bauar, Saxony, and Bra^denburge: And of these houses
also diverse worthy me^. Wherefore if we chose one of the^, and assist him with
our aides, as surely we are bounden, we shall need to fear no strangers. so
that we be all of one mind and will, althinge shall be in saftie. Therefore
setting a part strangers, let us create some one of our own cou^treymen: and
it shall prove right well: for there be many domestical examples of virtue,
whereof I shall recite one. Matthias king of Hu^gary a stout warrior and a
fortunate, proclaimed war upon a time against your father (my lord of
Saronie) but when he perceived a sufficient army prepared against him: his
anger was sone pacified. So might now also the means be found, that an
Emperor of our own nation being elected might mainteinehis estate and
authority both at home, and a broad. Thirdly spoke ye duke of Saxony, who,
after he had proved the French king to be excluded by the law, and king
Charles to be a Germayne Prince, and to have an habitation in Germany he said
the common weal had need of some mighty prince: but he knew noue to be
compared with Charles: therefore he was contented that he should be declared
Emperor, but yet upon certain conditions, that Germany shall reteike her
liberty, and that those dangers which were mentioned, should be eschewed.
Finallye when the rest had approved this sentence, the Archbyshoppe of Treuers
sayde^ I see the fatal destenye of Germany, and the alteration even now at
hand: not withstanding, for as much as it seems so good to you; I will
confourme my will unto your judgment. This was the xxviij. day of June, when
it was dark night. Wherefore they departed, and met again the next day.
There they began to treat, what conditions should be propounded to the
Emperor: the matter was in debating certain days: at the length when they
were agreed upon, they were written out, and sent to his Ambassadors to Mentz.
When they had received them, all their voices were committed to writing as the
manner is, and sealed the day before thempire was offered to Friderick duke of
The duke of Saxo. refuses to be Emperor.
Saxony, but he with a stout courage refused it, and gave his voice unto king
Charles, whose Ambassadors for his so doing, offered him a great su^me of
money, which he utterly refused, and would not suffer his me^ also to take one
farthing. After this, tharchbishop of Mentz calling the nobility and common
people into the church of Saint Bartholomew, in his sermon declares Charles
Archduke of Austrich, and king of spain, Charles is declared Emperor.
to be king of Romans in ye stead of Maximilia^ departed. And for yt he was
chosen with such a consent, he says they ought to give God thanks, exhorting
the^ to show to him all fidelity and obeysau^ce, and speaking much in his
praise, he declares why they chose him before all others. Than thambassours,
which were comen with in a mile, were sent for. Those were Matthew ye Cardinal
of Salisburge, Erarde Bishop of Liege, Barnard Bishop of Trent, Fridericke
county Palatine, Casimire Marquis of Bra^de^burge, Henry Earl of Nasso,
Maximilia^ of Sibebouge, and certain others of his counsel. When they were
come^, they co^sulted how the common wealth be governed, until such time as
he came him self into Germany. How Casimire the Paulsgraue should levy a
force of men, place them in garrisons, and foresee that the state take no harm.
Afterward the Princes Electours sent Ambassadors with their letters to king
Charles, to declare the whole matter. The chief of the^ was Fridericke the
Paulsgraue. Howbeit in ye mean time Friderick the Paulsgraue sent into Spain.
diverse messengers went into Spain, and among other one went from
Franckefurth to Barcelona in nine days. The County Palatine arrived there at
the end of Nouembre, and delivers the Princes letters, the content whereof
was this. That he would receive thempire offered him, and all delay set a
part, repair into Germany so soon as he might. He answers right
curtesiye by the mouth of Mercurine Cattinar, that all beit there was much
trouble toward him, what by the Turks, and what by the French men: yet this
not withstondyng, he said, he neither could nor would fail the common
country chiefly, syns that so noble Princes had such an opinion of him, and
required him so to do. Wherefore he receives their honor offered him right
thankefully, and so shortly as may be will imbarke him self to come to the
borders of thempire. And in manner with the same words he writes to the
Princes Electours, and sends home Fridericke honorably rewarded. Thus was he
made Emperor the fifth of yt name, being than xxj. years of age. The French
king took the repulse the more greuouslie, for that he perceived a greater
danger to hang over his state, seeing the power of his enemy, whom before he
suspected, herby to be much increased: for he had rather any man else had been
chosen, than he. He had given great sommes of money to have been co^sydered:
And so did they of Flanders in like case as it is reported, but herein I can
affirm nothing certainly. Here will I declare the Petiegre of king Charles.

Charles the fifth (surnamed, wise) king of France, gave the Dukedo^ of
Burgu^dy (which fell unto him) to Philip his youngest brother, which Philip
married afterward ye lady Margaret thonly daughter of Jews Earl of Flanders,
and had by her a son called John. And he had a son named Philip, the father
of Charles the stout warrior, which was slain before Nancey: leaving a
daughter called Mari, an inheritour of many great countries: She was married to
Maximilia^ son to the^peror Friderick the.iij. and brought forth a son called
Philip: He married ye lady Jane ye daughter of Ferdina^do kig of Spain, and had
by her ij. sons, Charles and Ferdina^do. When this lady was with child, she went
into Flanders, and was brought abed of Charles at Gau^t, in the year of our
Lord M.D. the xxiiij day of February. And here is some thing to be said of
Ferdina^do, the^perours grau^dfather by his mothers side, 1500 The birth of the
Emperor.
who was king of Aragonie and Sicilie, and had to wife Elizabeth the daughter
and heir of John the second king of Spain, and in fine had also the kingdom
of Naples: He begotte of her five children, John, Isabel, Jane, Mary and
Katherine: John and Isabell deynge without Issewe, the inheritance by the
laws of the Realm came unto Jane the next sister. By this means all yt the
duke of Burgu^die had, which was exceeding much, and whatsoever Ferdinando king
of Spain had: came wholly to Charles the son of the lady Jane: For the lands
of the house of Austriche in the division of thinheritau^ce, went to Ferdina^do
his brother. Wherefore of a long time Germany had not an Emperor of greater
power. His father died wha^ he was but six year old, and his grau^defather
Ferdina^do, when he was sixtene. At the which time he went into Spain, and
there remained til he was elected Emperor and came into Germany as shall be
declared herafter. And now for so much as we arecome to this place, it shall not
be much out of purpose to speak some thing of the creation of themperor
Charles, king of Boheme ye iiij. Emperor of that name, made a law herofin the
year. 1356. called comenly the golden Bull: whereof this is one thing, yt
the emperor being dead, tharchbishop of Mentz so soon as he knows thereof,
shall immediately signify the same to the residew of the prices Electors, and
The manes of chosing ^he Emperor.
appoint the^ a day within.iij. months to mete at Fra^ckfourt, either in their
own parsons, or to send their deputies with their full authority, to elect a
new Emperor or king of Romans. And if it fortune yt the said Archbishop do
neglect it, yt yet nevertheless the rest shall there assembe within the time
prescribed: accompanied every man with.ij.C. horse and not above wha^ they
enter into the town, and. 50. of the^ to be in Armure. He that neither comes
himself, nor yet sends his Ambass. or depute tofore the business be ended,
shall lose his right of Election for yt time: The officers of Fra^kefurth shall
show al fidelity to thelectours, and duringe the time of thelectio^ suffer
noma^to enter besides the princes and their families: After yt all be common
together, they shall have a mess of the holy Ghost, in the church of s.
Bartholomew: and the^ every man swear yt they shall do nothing in yt matter,
for any bargain, bribe, reward, or promise: Afterward to come to the election,
and not to depart thence before the^peror be chose^: And if the thing be
differred above.xxx. days, the^ to have nothing given the^, but bread and
water: who^ the more part shall chose, to be of as much effect as if he were
chosen with the common assent of alme^: and that themperor thus elected shall
first of all confirm al their priueleges, and whatsoever apperteineth to their
honor, dignity, liberty, and fredo^. Moreover it is provided and ordained how
one shall suffer another to pass through his country, what place each of the^
shall have in the consistory, in what sort they shall give their voices, and
what office every of the^ shall have, what time The^peror either dineth
abroad, or does any thig openly. Furthermore yt durig ye vacatio^ of the^pire,
the cou^tye Palatine shall have the government in Sueuela^de, Fra^keconie, and
about the Rhine: and the duke of Saxo. in such places as they use the laws of
Saxnie: That when a prince elector is departed, his eldest son shall succed
him, or his brother Germayne: that if the Electour be under.xviij. years of
age, his next kinsman shall supply the rowme til he come of age: that the
electours mete every year once, to consult of the come^ wealth: That
Frankefurth be the place of election, and Agnon in the base country the town
where he shall be invested. I spoke before of the conditions prescribed by the
princes, and ratified by the Emperors Ambassadors, puttyng in a Caution, as
the manner is, and writings made of the same in his name, which were these.
That he shall defend the christen comen wealth, the Bishop, and church of
Rome, whereof he is advocate: that he shall minister the law uprightly, and
seek to maynteine peace: That he shall not only confyrme and establish all the
laws of thempire, and chiefly that which is called the golden Bulle, but also
by their advise, when time shall require increase the same: That he appointe a
Cenate or counsel within the empire chosen of Germans only, which shall
minister the common wealth: That he shall not break or diminishe the laws,
priueledges, the dignity of the Princes, and states of thempire: That it
shall be lawful for the electoures when need shall require to assemble and to
consult of the commonwealth: And he shall be no let hereunto, nor take it in
evil part: That he shall abolishe all confederacies and conspiracies of the
nobility and commo^s against their Princes, and prohibit by a law that there
be no such made hereafter: That he make no league nor compacte with strangers,
touching the matters of thempire without the assent of the.vii. Princes: that
he neither alienate nor lay to pledge any part of thempire, or deminishe the
same: and that such goods or lands of the Empire, as other nations have
plucked away, and do occupy, he seek forthwith to recover, yet so, as he
infringe not the laws or priueleges: Also if he him self, or any of his house
do possess any part of thempire, unlawfully gotten, that he restore the
same, being required of the.vii. princes: that he keep peace and amity
withal Christen Princes, and that he attempt no war for the affairs of the
empire, without the consent of al ye states, but chiefly of the Princes
electours, either within the empire or without, that he bring no strange
soldiers into Germany without their assent: And if any man move war against
him or thempire, that then it shall be lawful for him to use what aid he can.
That he call none asse^bly of the Empire, nor command any task or tribute,
but by the consent of the Electours: And the same also to be within the
limittes of the Empire: And that for public affairs he appointe no Foreyners
but Germans, and that of the nobility. And that all writings be made in
Latin, or in the Duche tongue. That no man be sommoned to appear in any court
with out the bonds of thempire: And forasmuch as many things are done at Rome
contrary to couenau^tes made in time past with the Bishops thereof, that he
devise with the Bishop, that there be no fraud used toward the preuileges
and liberties of thempire: that he impose no custom or droicte with out ye
assent of thelectours: neither that through his letters he diminish the custom
of thelectors that dwell by the Rhine: If he have any action against any man,
that he shall try the law, and use no force to such as will answer to the
law, but stand to the order of law.

The goods of the Empire, which shall chance to be vacant, he shall give
away to no man, but a lotte them to the public Patrimonye: If he shall win
any foreine country through the aid of the states of Germany he shall annexe
it to thempire: if he shall recover any public thing by his own force and
power, he shall restore the same to the commonwealth: that he shall ratify
that which was done in the vacation of thempire, by the county Palatine, and
the Duke of Saronie. That he take no counsel to unite Thempire to his house and
posterity, as his propre inheritance, but that he leave to the seven Princes
fre Election according unto the law of Charles the fourth, and prescript of
the Canon law: if he do any thing otherwise, to be frustrate and of none
effect: That so shortly as may be, he repair into Germany to be invested. What
time the Ambassadors had approved these things with an oath in his name, they
delivered unto each of the electors writings thereof sealed. That which is
here spoken of the Cannon law, is contained in the Epistle decretall of
Innocentius the third, which testifies that the seven Princes electours have
fre authority to create themperor. And that thempire goes not by succession
but by election. Which Innoce^tius lived about the year of our Lord.M.ii.C.
Now let us return to Luther. About this same time, Erasmus of Erasmus
judgment of Luther.
Roterdam wrote letters from Andwarp to Frederick Duke of Saxony, wherein
among other things he makes mention of Luther: saying that his books are
ioyfullye received and red of good and well learned men: and moreover that his
life is of no man reprehended, for that it is far from all suspicion of
avarice or ambition: But that the deuines of Louain hearing that he is greatly
oppressed, with thaucthoritie of the Cardinal Caietan, do now triumph. And
in all their sermons and bankettes, rail upon him, calling him Heretic, and
Antichrist: declaringe with mo words the same to be much contrary to their
profession, so to slander any man, before he be comiicte of Heresye. He
writes also in a manner with the same words, to the Archbishop of Mentz and
to Cardinal Campegius, tauntyng these sophistical Divines, and Monks which
can not abide the study of tongues and of eloquens, nor of any good learning.
He writes also to Luther very friendly from Louain, and says how he has
received received his epistle, which declares both the excellency of his
wit, and also his christian heart, shewinge him what a Tragedy his books have
styrred up their, and what hatred and suspicion he ronneth into of the Divines,
and that he can prevail nothing by excusing the the matter: And how there
be many in England of great Estimation, which think rightwell of his works?
And that he himself has tasted of his Commentaries upon the Psalms, and
trusts that they shall profit many, for they like him very well: but of one
thing he would admonish him, that a man shall more prevail with a certain
civil modesty, then if he be to vehement: And that he must rather thunder
against them which abuse the bishop of Romes authority, then against the
Bishops themselves: with certain other good counsels, which he gave him,
exhorting him to proceed as he has begone. Luther having thus many
adversaries, there was a disputation appointed at Lypsia, a town of Misnia,
belonging to George Duke of Saxony, The disputatis at Lypsia.
Uncle to duke Friderike. Thither came Luther, and Melanthon which read the
Greek Lecture at Wittenberge. Thither came also John Eccius a Divine both
stout and bold, who the fourth day of Iulye began the disputation with Luther
touching the supremacy of the bishop of Rome, affirming that they which said
that the church of Rome was not the first and chiefest of all others (even
before the time of Ciluester) did err, for he that has the Seat and faith
of Peter, was ever taken for his successor, and Christ's Uicar in earth. For
Luther had setforth one contrary to the same: that such as did attribute the
supremacy to the Church of Rome, did ground themselves only upon the
Bishops decrees, which were made four hundredth years syns. Which decrees
are contrary to all Histories written a thousand years past, contrary to the
holy scripture, and to the counsel of Nice most famous of all others. But
Eccius mainteyneth the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and called Luther
which dissented from the same, a Bohemer, because John Husse was in times past
of the same opinion. Luther answers that the Church of Christ was spread
abroad far and nere twenty years before Peter came to Rome to establishe
the Church there: therefore is it not the first nor the chiefest by the law of
God, as he says: then they disputed of Purgatory, of Indulge^ces, of
Penance, of Remission of sin, and of the authority of Priests. And ended
their disputation the fourteneth day of July, which was not appointed for
Luther, but for Andrewe Carolostadius and Eccius. But Luther coming only for
the company of Carolostadius, and to here: was drawn forth by Eccius, which
had got him a saufe co^duict of Duke of George, so that he must needs dispute.

For Eccius was of a lusty courage by reason of the matter it self, Wherein
he thought him self assured of the victory. At the which disputation Luther
set forth afterward. And of the words and wrytinges of his adversaries,
through his wittye observation he collected diverse articles of doctrine,
altogether (as he terms them) heretical to the intent he might plainly
declare, how they, whilst they speak and write all things in the favor of
the Bishop of Rome, and of a desire to maynteine their cause, straiynge far a
broad, do confound most things, which being nerer looked to, conteyne often
times great errors and wickedness. At the same time Ulrichus Zwinglius taught
at Zuricke, and shortly after the Bishop of Rome sent thither a Pardoner, one
Sampson a Graye Friar of Millan, to gather up money, whom Zwinglius stoutly
resists, declarynge him to be a disceyuour of the people.

The second Book of Sleidans Commentaries.
The argument of the second Book.
AT the motion of Charles Miltice, Luther writes to the Pope: and dedicateth
unto him a Book of the Christian Liberty. The Emperor having passed through
England, came into his low countries. Luther writes a Book of Fouretene
Images of consolation: of confession: of Uowes: prouyng that the Lords Supper
ought to be permitted to all me^ under both kinds. There was objected the
Counsel of Laterane under July the.ii. whereupon by the way is spoken of July
his acts, and of the said counsel. In the mean while the Divines of Louayne
condemn Luthers Books. In his defense, the articles of Picus Earl of
Mirandula, the Questions of Ockam, and the controversy of Rewcline with the
same Divines are recited. Seeing him self assailed with so many enemies, he
writes to the emperor, and shortly after to tharchbishoppes of Mentz and of
Marseburge. Duke Fridericke being advertised, that he had cuill will at Rome by
reason of Luther, he makes his purgation by letters, and Luther in like case.
And yet this notwithstanding, the Pope by an extreme Bulle does excommunicate
Luther, who (contrary to a decree of Mantua by the way recited) makes his
appellation, having set forth in Print a Book of the captuitie of Babylon.
The emperor at the same tune goes to be crowned at Acon, the solemnities and
manner whereof be there recited. The Pope begins again to solicit Duke
Fridericke against Luther, but nothing preuailyng he causes Luthers works to
be burnt, and likewise Luther burns the Popes Decretals. and shows the
cause why, afterward he answers Ambrose Catarine, who had written against
him.

WHen Charles Meltice, that was sent from Leo the tenthe unto Duke Frederick
with the golden Rose, perceived how Luthers doctrine was so far spread
abroad, and so highly esteemed of many, that it should be heard, and almost
impossible to quench it, he sought all means possible to heal the wound with
a plaster of reconciliation: Wherefore after long conferens with Luther and his
friends, at the last the means was found, that Luther should write his
letters to the Bishop, reportyng of him much honor. And so did he at the
request of his Friends about the 1520 Luters letters to the Pope.
syxte day of April. The tenure of his letters was this: that albeit he had
appealed from him to the Counsel. Yet nevertheless he ceased not to make his
prayers unto God for his health: And for as much as he is sore blamed, to have
hurt and offended his name and dignity: he is heartily sorye to be so charged,
and this to be the cause of his writing at this present: signifiynge that in
deed he has been earnest in rebukyng of vice and errors, but has evermore
written of him right honorably, as it is to be seen in his books: And in that
he does so frankely taunte false doctrine, he does it by the example of
Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles: but that such reprehensions, and wholesome
admonishementes can as yet take no place, to be long of naughty flatterers
which tickle men in the ears: And that he regards gods glory, and The court
of Rome is vnturable.
seeks only that the truth might appear: if he may this obtain, to be
willinge enough to give place in other matters: but to leave of the professyng
of Gods verity, he can by no means. Then comes he to the Court of Rome, as
they call it, and says it is more corrupt and wicked, then ever was Sodom,
or Babylon, and that there ca^ be no more mischief wrought then is there, no
not of Antichrist him self, wherefore he is sorry that he is there as a Lamb
among many Wolves. For Rome is not worthy to have so good a man to govern
it: that it were much better for him to be content with a mean benefice, or
to live of his own lands and revenues far from such pestiferous
slatterers, which to serve their own lust and ambition, do deprave his name
and dignity: he adds that Barnarde bewailed the state of Eugenius, when Rome
was better then it is at this present: but now for as much as it is the most
filthy sink of all the places in the Uniuersall world, and a rakehell heaped
of all mischief, he ought much more to be lamented: And this to be the cause,
why he inueighed so soore against it: which appertains nothing to his
reproach, but rather to his salvation: and he would wish that all learned men
would set on with touch and nail to overcome that Monstre. Touching the thing
it self, when he had set forth certain little books, and saw that his attempt
was vain, he was willing to have left of his enterprise, and employed all his
frudye to the profit of his brethren in the same house: but than rose up
Eccius, who disturbed all these quiet cogitations and desired leisure wherein he
did nothing else but more aptely disclose the shame and wickedness of Rome. After
he touches in few words how he was used before Cardinal Caietane, who (he
says) might have appeased all the matter if it had pleased him, unto whom the
fault is to be imputed, if any thing be a miss, and not to him: And that
afterward came Charles Meltice, who had quieted the king, had it not been for
the importune disputation of Eccius, which provoked him to reason matters
against his will, and is in deed his enemy, which first of all men kindled
this fire. And now for as much as he was requested, by Conditions propounded by
Luther.
Melticius and others his betters, to write to him in the way of submission,
he would refuse nothing that appertained to reconcilement First therefore he
required him that his adversaries might keep silence, and not rail upon him as
they did: secondarely that he were not driven to recante, or bounden to
interpret the scriptures after the prescript of man: for the doctrine of the
Gospel, which brings liberty to the minds of men, can not be bounden
within any certain limits: if these things may be granted him, he is content
to do any thing: so that it lies in him now to end the strife, if he will
understand the matter, and command either party to silence: But herein he
must chiefly beware of Flatterats must be eschewed.
flatterers, and with a deaf ear, sail besides their songs as the
enticementes or dangerous rocks of the Sirenes, which ascribe unto him a
godliness, and affirm him to be the head of all the world, preferring him above
all general counselles: for there is nothing more pestiferous than is this
kind of Parasites: but that he credit them rather which admonish him of his
dewtie; and put him in remembrance that The part of a true friend.
he is a man, and this to be the dewtie of a very friend. Finally he dedicateth
to him his book which he had lately written of Christen liberty, commendinge
the same in few words, for that it contained the sum of true doctrine. In
the beginning of the spring time, The Emperor takes shippinge in Spain to
sail into England, where he was royally received of king Henry the eight,
who had married his Aunte Katherine, which among other kinds of his
princelike liberalite builded a goodlye lodginge purposely for him upon the
River of Themse, called Bridewell, and from thens he sailed into Flaunders,
where he was ioyefully received of almen. About the same time duke Fridericke
fell sore sick: Wherefore Luther compiled a book to comfort him, and in his
letters to him, he says it is the commandment of Christ, Luth. book to the
duke of Saronie.
that among other works of Charity, which we ought to do one for another,
we should also comfort the sick: therefore he which for so many causes was so
greatly bounden unto him, had for his sake gathered this little book, being not
otherwise able to comfort him: signifiyng that like as in man's body: if the
head do ache, it greueth the rest of the members, taking the same to apperteine
privately to every of them: so now that he lies sick, the people not with
out just cause, are all in tears and mournyng: For the greatest part of
Germany does depe^de upon him, and reverence him as their chief ornament and
refuge. Afterward he makes a book of confession: where he teaches that we
Confession of sins.
ought not to lean to the trust of confession, but to the promise of God,
which forgeueth our sins. And that first of all we must confess us unto
God, that who so confesses him, must hate sin, and covet to amend his life.
That therehersall of every sin particularly is not necessary, nor possible to
be performed with diverse other things, and last of vows, whereof he wrote a
several work afterward. In an other certain book he had said that he thought
it expedient if by the authority of the counsel it might be permitted that all
men should receive the The supper under both kinds.
whole supper, or as they use to speak under both kinds. Which saying for that
it was contrary to the decrees of the last counsel of Laterane, did offend
many, and among others, Ihonbishop of Misene, who commanded to be taught
throughoute his dioces that the whole supper was comprised, under one kind,
and condemned Luthers book, which thing he understanding makes answer in such
sort, that he lays not the fault thereof in the bishop, but in certain other
unlearned and troublesome persons unto whom he says, that this wish of his,
that such a decre might be made by the counsel, deserved no just reprehension,
no more then if he had wisshed that by a decree of the counsel, it The wish
of Pope Pius.
might be lawful for pristes to have, wives, which Pius the second Bishop
of Rome, said and wished: Wherefore he ought not to be blamed for wishyng the
same: He grants this to be a Decree of the counsel of Laterane: But yet
nevertheless the same to be contrary to the first and eldest counselles, and
the aunciente manner of the church: Again we dispraise the men of Boheme
because they receive under both kinds, whereas we keep us to the one half
only, and yet have they to make for them, the institution of Christ, and the
manner observed in the church from the Apostels time til it was now of late
days: And we have nothing to aledge against them, but the counsels of
Laterane: which is a light and very weak reason: for what manner of counsel
yt was, it is well known, and even laughed at of the Romans the^ selves: And
though it were of never so great authority: Yet for as The counsel of
Latherane.
much as they can not prove the thing by any reason of more antiquity it is
but a very mockery. But concerning the counsel of Laterane thus it was. Julius
the second when he was elected Bishop, promised by a solemn oath, with in
two years space to hold a general counsel, this was in the year of our
Lord a thousand five hundredth and three. But whilst he made war one while
against the French king, another while against the Uenetians, and now with
the duke of Farrare, and now with others, and troubled all Italy. Nine
Cardinals departed from him and came to Millan, and called a general The
counsel of Pisa.
counsel at the City of Pisa, the.xix. day of May, the year of our Lord a
thousand five hundredth and eleven, to begin at the kalendes of September
following, the chiefest of these was Bernardinus Cruceius, William of Preneste,
Fraunces Cossentine, with whom were annexed the Ambassadors of the Emperor
Maximilian, and of Jews the French king, which intended by the same counsel
to depose him from his bishopprike which he had got by briberye. And now for
as much as he had broken his oath, in that he had been Bishop so many years,
and called no counsel, nor pourposed to do, they could suffer the christian
common weal to be no longer deluded. And because these letters could not
saufly be conueighed unto him, they set them up in all his Towns in Italy,
admonishinge him to appear there in parson at the day appointed. Julius,
understanding the matter, makes answer the first of August. That what time
he was Cardinal, he desired nothing more than a general counsel, which is
well known to kings and princes, and to the whole College of Cardinals: For
even for this cause was Alexander the syxt sore offended with him: And that he
is still of the same mind also: How be it that the state of Italy has of
late years been so troublesome (and was so left by Bishop Alexander) that
there could be no counsel called in such adversity of time: After he
co^futeth their appointment for the shortness of time, and the discommoditie
of the place. For Pise was a Town torn and defaced with the wars of former
years, and all the country about laid waste. Neither that men can safely
repair thither by reason of the wars betwixt the Florentines and them of
Seue. Moreover, how they have none Authority to call it, and that their
causes alleged be most untrue. Wherefore he commands under the pain of
excommunicatynge, that no man obey them.

Then called he a Counsel against the next year, to begin at Rome, upon
the ninetenth day of April, in the Church Laterane: The Popes Shifie.
Where unto subscribed one and twenty Cardynalles. For this (they say) is
ever the Bishops policy, when they are afraid of a Counsel, to appoyncte
an other in some place mete for their purpose. After this he warns the
Cardinals, that were against him, to leave of their enterprise, and come to
Rome, offering them pardon: but after they would not come, he bannished them
the xxiiij. of Octobre, and namely those three which I spoke of, as Heretykes,
scisinatykes, and traitors, sendynge the copy of their prescription to
Maximilian, and alother kings. And because many Bishops of France had
joined them selves with these Cardinals, he bannisheth them also, unless
they forsake them, and within a certain time make their p^^gation. Again,
when the cardinals had diverse times rised him to the counsel in vain, and
had sytten eight times, they suspends him from al, as well civil, as
Ecclestasticall jurisdiction, commanding all me^ ingenerall, that hereafter
they obey him not. This was in the year of our Lord, a thousand, five
hundred and twelve, the one and twentye of April: The same time at Pauie, was
Philippe Decius a Euntian, excellently well learned, who set forth a Book in
the defense of the Cardinals cause against the Bishop of Rome.

Afterward Maximilian forsakyng the Cardinals, made a league with Julius, and
with Fardinando king of Spain, and sent to the Counsel at Rome, Matthew Lang
Bishop of Gurce: which at the sametime was made Cardinal. But Jews king of
France which persisted still in his purpose, and had lately overthrown the
Bishops army at Bauenna, was stricken with the thonderbolte of cursing and his
Realm given over to be spoiled. But after he had sytten in the Counsel five
times, he died the.xxi. day of February the year of our France is offered to
the spoil.
Lord a thousand five hundred and thyrtene, and Leo the tenth did succeed
him. Who continewed the counsel, and restored the Cardinals to their former
dignity. The counsel ended the.xvi. day of March, in year of our
Lord.M.D.xvij. In this counsel was debated, of the At Rome they doubt of the
immortality of the Soul.
Turkishe war, of the reformation of the Church; of the Immortality of the
Soul, which was doubted of at Rome, and how they of Boheme should be reduced
from their errors, which is the thing that Luther speaks of here, for they
received under both kinds. Whilst these things were done in Saxony, the
Divines of Louain and Collen, condemn Luthers works, written to Syluester
Prierias, also of Penance, of excommunication, of indulgences, of Preparation
Luth. Books condemned at Louaine.
unto death, as profane, wicked, and worthy to be burnt, and the Aucthor of
them to be compelled to recante. Which thing being known, Luther answers
to every article of his doctrine. And in the preface lamenteth their state and
condition: For before, what time Capnio. Rewcline.
they condemned Capnio, he had yet some hope of them: But now seeing there
endeavor, to extinguishe the clear light and doctrine of the Gospel, and
grow every day wourse, God doubtless must needs be grievously offended: for in
case they should thus proceed, and no man should bridle them of this liberty,
they would shortly condemn all books of Scripture, and decree what they list
at their own pleasure: which thing when he considers, he can think no
less, but that either Antichrist does now reign, or else will come very
shortly: For their doctrine conteyneth no sound, nor certain thing, but is
waueringe in diverse opinions: he says moreover that William Ockam was in time
paste also condemned by the University of Paris, but now he Ockam.
is received, and set bye.

And likewise Picus Mirandula, and Lawrens Ualla, which Picus mirandula.
Lawrence Ualla.
are now had in estimation: moreover, says he, the Jews were in times
paste, the peculiare people of God, but when they fled from the light of the
Gospel, and refused the benefyte of Christ, they were forsaken, and so gave
place to the Gentyles: So likewise is it now a days, that such as be
Bishops and Divines, which do challenge and take upon them the greatest
authority in the Church, have in deed no thing else but a vain title, but
others that be far from the like ostentation, more ryghtely may challenge
that name: Brieflye how they have thus vexed at all times, all good and well
learned men, yet did they never contend with the same, with any sound or
true reasons, but rather by very disceipte, craft, and tyranye: As they did
with John Husse, and Hierome of Prage, the memory whereof shall endure for ever.
But he marueleth at their rashenes that they can not be ware by so many
examples to blemishe the^ selves, and other Uniuersities for ever. For
although they had never so sure a ground, and alleged never so strong
reasons against those other famous men: yet touching his matter, they have
dealt both wickedly, and maliciously. For if he had ought offended, they might
have considered that to be the part of a man, and have used a certain leuitie
in iudginge of his doctrine: But where they be moved with fury to condemn
althinges without respect, herein they bewrey their maliciouse minds, and
spitte out the poison of their hatred.

They make great account of Aristotle, and will defend him what soever he
says, be it never so contrary to our religion, they will make Aristotle.
an excuse and a glo^e for him: but they deprave his worckes against all
charity, where as they be consonant to the trweth, to declare their malicious
and cankred hertes, where they ought first to have showed his fault,
admonishynge him gently to have reformed the same, and if he had not, then they
might have proceeded as Christ has given in commandment: But now they do no
small iuiurie to the Bishop of Rome, to condemn a Book dedicated unto him,
and with a certain prejudice to reprove his negligence, but to be no news,
nor marvel that they committee such a fault against the Bishop, seeing
that they most malapartely do contemn the laws of God.

This Wylliam Ockam (that he speaks of) flourished in the time of the
Emperor Jews the fourth, about the year of our Lord William Ocka^.
a thousand three hundred and twenty, and among other things, he wrote of
the power of the Bishop of Rome, and in the same book, he handles eight
Questions diversely.

Whether the office of the high Bishop, and of the Emperor may be executed
by one and the same parson? Whether themperor has his authority of God only,
or also of the Bishop of Rome? Whether christ gave authority to the Bishop
and church of Rome, that they should commit to themperor and other Princes
their jurisdiction? Whether yt the Emperor being once chosen, has thereby
full authority to govern the common wealth? Whether that other kings
besides the Emperor, and king of Romans, for so much as they be crowned by
Priests do receive any authority of them? Wherefore the same kings be in
any subjection to such as do inueste them. Whether that if they used new
ceremonies and crowned themselves, they should lose their regal power, whether
the election of the seven Princes can give as much authority to the emperor,
as does the lawful succession to other kings. And debatyng many reasons on
both parts, he determines commonly with the civil Maiestrate. And upon this
occasion mentionynge of John the two and twenteth Bishop of that name then
living, who had made the laws extrauagauntes, as they term them, and had
placed them with the Canon law, which, says Ockam are reprehended of many
as altogether false and full of Heresies, and recyteth the errors, maruelynge
that men of wit will give any credit to them: how beit this is the time,
says he, that Paul wrote to Timothe, for the most part of men now a
days, seek not for the doctrine of Christ, of his Apostles, and the ancient
fathers, but hearken what the Bishop of Rome wills or commands.

As concerning Capnio Rewcline, thus stands the matter, John Phefercorne a
Jew that professed Christianity had sued long to the Emperor Maximilian,
that all the Books of the Jews might be abolished, for that they were wicked
and full of superstition, and were a hynderaunce, that they were not converted
to Christianity: And therefore, that they should be suffered to keep none,
but the Bible. Maximilian at the length commands Uriel Archebyshoppe of
Mentz, that he should appointe certain Uniuersities, and James Hogostrate the
inquisitour, and John Reucline to search and consult The story of Reuchliue.
whether it were mete and expedient for our Religion, that, except their
Bybles, all other Books should be burned. This was in the year of our Lord a
thousand, five hundred and ten. Reuchline which was both a lawier, and right
skilful in the Hebrewe tongue, when he had received the Archbishoppes letters,
he wrote again his mind, and said how the Hebrews books were of three
sorts, there were Histories, Hebrew books of three sorts.
Books of Physic, and of Prophecies, and these last to also of diverse
sorts, in the which, albeit there were many fond and supersticiouse things,
yet are they for this purpose profitable for that they will serve well to
confute their Errors and their dotages. This his opinion he sent to the
Archebyshoppe sealed: After that Phefercorne knew this, he made not a little a
do, but set out a Book against him, calling him the fautoure and defendour
of the Jews. Reuchline in the defense of his estimation, answers him with
another, by the which he offended certain universities, but especially Collen:
in the which were then of most reputation, James Hogostrate, and Arnolde
To^gre: who wrote an Inuectiue against him in like case as Phefercorne had done,
dedicating ye same to the^peror Maximilia^. And after that they went to the
law with him before the Archebyshoppe of Mentz, and Hogostrate was plaintiff,
whom Reuchline, as his ennemy resused: And first answered the vlatter by
attorney, and in fine came him self to Mentz accompanied with diverse gentlemen
and other learned men, which Ulriche Duke of wirtemberge had sent with him:
but after they had sought, means to have quieted the matter, and could not,
he appealeth unto Rome. The Bishop of Rome commits the hearing thereof to
George Palatine Bishop of Spires, commanding that no man else should meddle
with all. This notwithstanding they of Colon condemned Reuchlines book and
burned it in the month of February in the year.M.D.xiiij. This did the
Bishop of Spires take in marvelous evil part: And because the Plaintiff
being called at several times, as the manner is, appeared not, he gives
sentence with Reucline, approuynge his Book to be good, and condemns this
Hogostrate in costs and damage. But he, to the intent to make this sentence
frustrate, trauayleth to Rome. In the mean time his fellows at home labored
and wrote to Paris, and to Lewis the French king, by the mediation of Erarde
Marchiaue Bishop of Liege, who was at the same time great with Lewis the
twelfeth. Wherofore the University of Paris after long debatynge of the
matter condemned the book also, as worthy to be burnte, and the author to be
driven to recant, and those Hebrews books to be brent in like manner as they
have been in times past. This was in Auguste followynge.

The Duke of Wirtemberge had entreated them by his letters. And Reucline him
self wrote unto them gentely, for that he had been there studie^t, and sent
them the Copy of the Sentence pronounced by the Bishop of Spires, but all
was in vain. When this Hogostrate had sued at Rome three years, and could not
prevail, he retourneth home again, as he went. For diverse of the Cardinals
unto whom Leo committed the hearing of the matter loved Reuchline intierlye
for his excellent learning, and among others Adrianus that wrote a book of
the Latin tongue. He was also commended unto them by Erasmus of Roterodame,
whose Epistles in his behalf do yet remain. Before the men of Louaine had
publyshed their sentence of Luther, they took their advise of Adriane
Cardinal of Derthuse in Spain, a Hollander borne, and brought up among them
at Louaine, by whom they were boldned to do it.

Wherefore when Luther had so many and so great ennomyes, Luthers letters to
the emperor.
he wrote an Epistle to the newlye created Emperor Charles the fifte, and
first crauynge pardone, that being a man of so low degree, he should
attempt to write to so high a Prince, he says the matter is weightye, that
causes him to do it, and altogether such as appertains to the glory of
Christ: signifying how he had written certain books, which had procured him
the displeasure of many, through no desert of his: for he was brought into
this contention by his adversaries agaiust his wikhe had much rather have
setten still, but this has been his chief and only study, that the pure
doctrine of the go spell might appear, against the false traditions of men: and
that many good, and excellent learned men can bear witness of the same: And
this to be the cause of all the hatred, disdain, reproaches, pearils, and
displesures, that he has been in these three years: that he had done as much as
lay in him that the matter might be taken up: But the oftener that he sought
quietness, the more were his adversaries offended: and where he has oftentimes
required them, to show him wherein he had erred, and to teach better things,
hitherto they have answered in manner nothing, but by railing words, and
cruel injuries: sekinge only how to quench both him and the doctrine of the
Gospel: For the which causes he is now constrained to use the last remedy, and
after the ensamples of Athanasius to fly unto him for succor: besechynge him;
to take upon him the tuition of the christian doctrine, and to defend him
against all violence and injury, till the matter be further known: that he
will desire no defense, in case he be proved to maynteyne an evil cause: but
desires only that the thing may be tried and known, and nothing to be
determined before: That this apperteineth to his office, and for this cause
has he this high power given him of God, to minister Justice, and to
maintain right and equity. And to defend the pore and weak, against the
injuries of the stronger. In like effect he writes after that, to all the
states of the Empire, reciting in few words, how unwilling he was to fall
into this contention how desirous he has been, to have it taken up, what
conditions he has offered, and yet does the same. Not long after he writes
to Luth. letters to the archbishop of Me^tz.
the Archbishop of Mentz, Cardinal, with great submission being sorry, as he
says, that he is complained upon to him, by such as were wont to praise his
doings. But he admonishes him to give no credit to talebearers, and to beware
of Flatterers, by the example of king David, disceaued by the flatteter Siba,
that he would set a part all sinistrall suspicion of him and of his works,
until such time as he had leisure to read them him self: for there were two
kinds of men that condemned his writing, one was of them that never red them,
another of such as read them in deed, but with a malicious mind, and these
did deprave his doings: wherein if any man could find any error and teach
him that were better he would be glad to follow it, and has oftentimes so
protested: And for as much as he trusted well in his great humanity, and was
borne and brought up in the same province that he has cure of, he could not
but write thus unto him. The Cardinal answered again, that it pleased him
well, in as much as he promised not to defend his doings obstinatelye, but
that he His annswere to Luther.
would willyngly give place unto such as could reach better things: And
albeit he delighted much in Religion, yet had he no leisure hitherto, to read
his works, and therefore would^iot Judge of them, but leave it unto others that
had taken the thing in hand: Nevertheless he would wish that both he and
other expositours of scripture, should handle every thing reverently and
modestly without any How scripture must be hadled
reproach or envy: he is sorry to hear that men dispute openly of the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, of Frewill, of the Supper of the Lord, and
such other questions, full of danger: for his part he could be content that
learned men should confer of these matters friendly among them selves, and
would not blame him for teaching the truth, so it be done without bitterness
and contempt of the Ecclesiastical power. For if he profess the truth of a
good zeal it will continewe: but if he do it of presumpsion, or of malice, it
can not be permanent, nor long endure. For he that abuses Gods gifts,
heapeth up doubtless sore vengeance upon him self.

Luther wrote also to the Bishop of Mersebourge the same thing Luth. letters
to the Bish. oy Merseburge.
in effect, that as touching his doctrine, he was of a clear conscience: for
he taught none other thing than Christ and his Apostles did. But because his
manners and life did not Answer to his professyon, he wishes that he were
removed from the office of preaching: He seeks for no lucre, nor desires any
vain glory, but this thing only that the everlasting verity might be known
to all men. Such as condemn his works, are moved with a marvelous hatred, and
abuse the Bishop of Romes name to fulfill their own affections: Whereas many
learned men of foren nations have writtin to him letters reioysyng at his
writings and giving him thanks for the same: whereupon he believes the rather,
that he has taught a sound doctrine. Wherefore he requires him to deal
fatherly with him, and to show him his fault, if he be out of the way: For
hitherto could he not obtain so much as that the matter might be heard,
notwithstanding that he has with His aunswers to Luther.
ernest prayer required it: And now also a man should do him no greater
pleasure, than to take from him his error. Whereunto the Bishop answers,
that he has been oftentimes very careful for him, and how he is not a litell
sorry that he has written among others a Book of the Lords Supper, wherewith
are many sore offended: And that the people under his cure are greatly inflamed
with that doctrine, for the which he is chiefly sorry. After he reprehendeth in
him the sharpenes of his writing, and says that albeit strangers like it, yet
can not he allow the same: but wishes that he would bring a Christian mind,
void of all affections to the handlinge of the matter: furthermore he charge
him to have spoken irreverently by the bishop of Rome, which thing neither
becomes him, nor is mete to be suffered. Wherefore he admonishes him to
apply the dexterity of his wit to dthirthynges that may profit the common
wealth more, and to leave all this bitter contention. Last of al, where he
requires that his error may be showed him, and promises to be tractable, he
says how he can not answer thereto by writing: but au other time when they shall
mete, he will talk with him more at large. Duke Fridericke at the same time had
certain ^rtes at Rome, which he had commended to Ualentine Ditleb a Germane.
He sent word that his matters were not well heard at Rome; by reason of the
rashness and lewd demener of Luther, who had written many things bitterly and
spitefully against the bishop, and the church of Rome, and all the college of
Cardinals, which fellow he nourished and maintained, as most men affirmed.
When the Duke had received these letters, he answers, that it was never his
intent to defend Luthers doctrine by his maintenance, neither does he take
upon him any judgment of the things that Luther teaches: He hears in deed
that his doctriue is well allowed of learned men that can judge thereof, and
that he has long since made this offer, that if he may have a sure sauf
conduicte, to render a reason of his Doctrine before the Bishops Legate, what
so ever he be: and then if his error can be showed him to be most ready to
forsake his opinion, and thus has protested openly. And although this
might appear to be sufficient, yet being admonished of him long sense; he
would have forsaken the country, had not Charles Meltice advised him to the
contrary: For he thought it better that he should remain here still, then to go
to an other place, where perauenture having more liberty he might setforth
worse things then hitherto he has done: wherefore there can be no just cause
alleged to suspect any evil of him: and trusts to fare never the worse at
the Bishops hands therefore. For he would be right heartily sorry that any error
spronge up in his time, should be said to be defended and established by him.
After this he deuiseth with him more familiarely how the contention began by
reason of Eckius and others, what excellent wits, what good learning and
knowledge of to^ges do florishe now in Germanye, what desire the common people
have to read the scriptures, how Luthers doctrine is infixed in many men's
minds, so that if he be used otherwise then well, it is like to stir up
such tumultes in Germany, as will turn another the bishop or no man else to any
profit. When the Duke had thus written at the Kalends of April, he received
the, vi. day of July letters from the bishop of Rome, wherein he reioysed not a
little, that he would have nothing to do with Luther that wicked man, affirming
that he had ever a very good opinion of him before this: But now forasmuch as
grave me^ have aduouched it to be true, the good will, that he bare him before,
is hereby not a little increased: For this thing does rightwel become him, and
all his house, which has evermore done great honor to the church of Rome: And
that his singular wisdom does also herein appear, that he perceives him,
not to be sent of Christ, but of Satan the enemy of almankinde. Which,
for a mad kind of ambition reyseth up again the Heresies of Wiclife and Husse
before condemned, which seeks the favor of the people, and vain glory,
whichs by the false enterpretatio^ of Scripture, gives to the simple an
occasion to sin, which dispiseth Chastity, and speaks against Confession
and Penance, which bears favor to the Turks, and raileth against all the
discipline of the church, which lamentech the punishemente of Heretics, and to
be brief turns all things vpside down, which is grown to such a pride and
arrogancy, that contemning the authority of Counselles and Bishops of
Rome, he would have his own oppinion to take place against the judgment of
me^: Wherefore it is wittely done of him to have, no familiarytie with so
pestilent a fellow, nor to allow his error. In the which thing all grave
and wise men do much commend his virtue: And chieflye he gives God hertie
thanks, that he has given him such a mind: affirming moreover that he has
suffered and borne with his rashenes a while, to see if he would amend: but
now for as much as he has nothing prevailed with gentle admonishmentes, he
is compelled to use an extreme remedy, fearyng, lest through his contagion, he
should infecte many: Wherefore calling a counsel of Cardinals and learned men
to debate the matter, he has made a decree, by the instinction of that holy
spirit, which never fails the Church of Rome, the copy whereof he has
sent unto him, to the intent he might see what monstrouse errors that minister
of Satan The pope curses Luther.
defends: he wilieth him therefore, that, unless he do openly and solemnly
recant with in the day prescribed, he should commit him toward: for so shall
he put away all shame from his house, and from Germany, win much honor, and
do God high service. The decree is ouerlonge, but the sum is this.

First the Bishop Leo calling upon Christ, Peter and Paul, and other
saints, to turn away the danger hanging over the The Bulle of Leo.
Church, most lamentably complayneth that now there should spring up a
doctrine, conteinyng both the Heresies already condemned, and also new
errors, and great wickedness: And that in Germany, that was wont to do so much
for the Church of Rome, both long sins, and of late days, concerning Husse
and the^ of Boheme: But because the number of Christians throughout the
universal world, are committed unto his charge by Christ, he can no longer
wyncke at so great a matter: After, reciting Luthers opinions, says, that
they be against Christian charity, and the reuerens that all men owe of duty
to the Church of Rome, and against the counsel of the aunciente fathers:
Wherefore by the consent of his Cardinals, he condemns both him and his
works to be brought forth and burned, and by the authority which he says
he has, he commands all Magestrates, namelye in Germany, to se the thing
executed accordingely: Then comes he to Luther, showing with how fatherly a
love he sought to refourme him, how he cited him to Rome, and promised him to
bear his charges: And how in contempt thereof, he appealed from him to the
counsel, contrary to the decrees of Pius and Julius: And all be it he had The
decree of Pius and Julius.
hereby deserved the punishment condign for Heretics: yet did he of his
clementie give him a longer time, if happily) as the prodigal child amended)
through his own misery, he would return to the bosom of the church: And to
be yet also of this mind, yea and most hertely besecheth him and his
adherentes to trouble the church no more, promysing them great good will, if
they will cease from their errors. Notwithstanding he commands Luther to
teach no more, prescribynge him.lx. days, within the which time he should
amend, burn his own books, and recante his doctrine openly: if he did not,
he condemns him as an Heritike, and to suffer according to yt laws, he
suspendeth him out of the Church, commanding al men to eschew his talk and
his company, under the like penalty: and this decree to be red in all Churches
and assemblies of people at certain days appointed. Touching Pius and Julius,
thus it stands.

This Pius hilde a Counsel at Mantua, in the year of our Lord.M.CCCC.lix.
chiefly because of the Turkisshe war: And there among other, he made a
decree that no man should appeal from the Bishop to the Counsel, for that
under the Coope of heaven, he said there could nothing be found better then
Christ's Uicar: And not long after he suspended Sigismunde duke of Austriche,
for taking the Cardinal of Cusane prisoner: The duke appealed from him to the
counsel: Wherefore the Bishop did excommunicate George Heimburge the worker
hereof, commanding the Senate of Norinburge to banishe him the City, and to
spoil him of his goods. Which decree was after renewed by July to maynteyne
him self against the Cardinals that swarued from him, against kings and
princes, and the university of Paris, which used often such refuge. This
Bishop Pius (called before Aeneas Siluius) was at the Counsel of Basil, wrote
Aeneas Siluius.
every thing, praising the decrees that there were made exceadyngly: But when
he was auaunced to this high degree of dignity, he changed his opinion, and
would have the counsel subject to the Bishop. Honors change manners.
When Luther heard that he was condemned at Rome, he goes to his former
appellation, wherein he appealed from the Bishop to the counsel: And now
forsomuche as the Bishop persevering in his Luth. impugneth the popes
censure.
wicked tyrrannye, has proceeded so far to condemn him, nether called, nor
heard, nor yet conuicte of Heresye, he says, how he appealeth from him
again to the counsel, chiefly for four causes, for that he has condemned him
at his pleasure, not hearing the controversy: for that he commands him to
deny faith to be in sacraments necessary: that he prefers his own decrees
and dotages of men; before the Scriptures: and for that he leaves no place to
any Counsel. Wherefore he calls him Tyrran, a proud contemner of the
Church, and fynallye Antichriste: affirmynge that he will show and prove al
these things, whenever it shall please his superiors. And therefore prays
the emperor and other Magistrates to accept this his appellation, for the
defense of Gods glory, and the liberty of the counsel, that they would
bridell his tyrranny, and think that the decree made concerned nothing, nor
that they would stir nothing, till the cause were lawfully decided. Before
he had thus appealed, about the.xvij. day of Nouembre, he had written a book of
the Captivity of Babylon, in the preface, Luth. book of the captivity of
Babilou.
whereof he says how he profits daily more and more in the knowledge of
holy Scripture: And how a few years paste he set forth a book of the
Bishops pardons, and that time wrote renerently, because he stood than in
great fear of the Romisshe tyrranny, and had it in great estimation: but now
his judgment is far otherwise, and being styrred up by the provocation of
his adversaries, he has learned that the Sea of Rome, is nothing else but the
kingdom of Babylon, and the power of the strong Hunter Niutroth. Afterward
he disputes of the Sacraments of the Church, and holds that there be but
three only, Baptism, Penance, and the Lords Three Sacrases.
Supper, and then treats also of the other four, confirmation, order,
Matrimonye, and Unction. But these he calls no Sacraments because they have
no signs annexed to the promise, other sacraments, Which are properly called
Sacrament.
which have no promise to the^ joined (he says) are but vare signs, and
therefore thinks that Penance can not be counted in the number of the^, if we
will properly and exactly speak, according to the difinition of the word,
because it wa^teth the visible sign, and heavenly institution. But after yt he
had hard of the bishops decre besides the appellation before mentioned, he
setforth tha^ another work, wherein he confirmed and mayteyned all his opinions,
which Leo had condemned: In the mean time the Emperor in Flaunders having
set all things in order, appoints the Princes Electours to mete him at Acon
the sixte day of Octobre, there to be invested: but the priuces arritsing at
Collen ten miles from Acon heard of a sore plage there, whereupon they wrote to
the Emperor being that time at Louaam, that he would chouse some other
place: but the Towns melt which had bestowed great cost in preparyng of
their houses, and victualles, with words did extenuate the force of the plage,
encouraginge him to come, wherefore the Emperor perceuereth still in the same
mind, saying that he can not so lightly alter and break the law of Charles
the forth, which had thus ordained it. Wherefore the xxi. day of Octobre come
thirther the three Archebyshoppes of Menty, Collen, and Treuers, with the
Ambassadors of the Duke of Saxony, and of the Marquis of Bra^denburge. For
the duke of Saxony lay sick at Collen. The next day they rode forth to mete
the Emperor, whom, lyghting of their horses, they received honorably by the
mouth of my Lord of Mentz: he answers them as gently by the Cardinal of
Salisburge. Thus ioynynge together, they marched toward the town: Before the
gate mete him the Paulsograue. The Princes Electors had about a thousand and
sire hundred horses, some demi lances, some archers. The Emperor had two
thousand, al in gorgeous apparel. John the duke of Cleave had four hundred
horsemen fair Armed, they contended much with the Saxons, whether should go
before other, in so much that the prease being great, the companies fair and
many, such as the like has been seldom seen in Germany, the night came upon
the^ before they could enter the Town, on either side the Emperor rode the
Archebishoppe of Collen and Mentz: next after followed the Ambassador of the
king of Boheme, also the Cardinal of Sedune, Salisburge, and Croye, and the
Ambassadors of other kings and Princes: The Ambassador of the Bishop of
Rome, and of the king of England were only absent, which was thought to be
done of a set porpose lest they goinge after the Princes of Germany, should
seem to diminishe the dignity of them that sent them. The Emperor was
brought into our Ladies Church, where after he had made his prayers, he
talked with thelectors a part, and so went to his lodgyng. The next day they
met again at the church: where was such prease of the people, that haruesed
men had much a do to keep them back. In the mids of the Church hangs a
large crown: the floor underneath was covered with clothe of Arras: upon the
which The Emperor The manner of the Coronatio^
lay down gruflynge, whilst my lord of Collen said over him certain
prayers: which ended, the Archeby shoppes of Mentz and of Treuers, took him up
and led him to our Ladies anltar. Here falls he down again, and when he had
said his prayers, he was led into his seat fair gilted. Tharchebishoppe of
Collen goes to Mass, and when he had a little proceeded, he demau^deth of him
in Latin, whether he will keep the Catholic faith, defend the church;
ministre Justice, restore the Empire, defend the widows, the fatherles, and
such others as be in distress? Whether he will give dew reverence to the
Bishop of Rome? After that he has assented, he is led unto the altar, and
takes his oath upon the same, and so retourneth to his seat again. After
this the Archebishoppe of Collen asks the Princes, whether they will
perform and give him their faith and allegeaunce? Which thing promised, and
again certain prayers finished, he annointeth his Breast, head, the boughtes of
his Arms, and the palms of his hands: This done, the Archebishoppes of Mentz
and Treuers, lead him into the reustry, and there apparelled like a Deacon,
bring him again to his chair. And after more prayers said, Collen
accompanied with the other two, delyuereth him a Sword drawn, and commends
unto him the common wealth. And again, puttinge up the Sword into the
skabarde, he puts also a ring on his finger, and about him a Roobe
royalle: Moreover, he reaches him a Scepre, and an Appell of Gold,
representynge the shape of the round world. Then all three Archebishoppes
together set the Diadem upon his head: And so led to the Aultare, he swears
again that he will do the duty of a good Prince: Afterward they follow
conueing him up into an higher place, and set him in a seat of stone: There
tharchebishoppe of Mentz speaking in the vulgar tongue, wishes him great
prosperity, commending unto him most diligently him self, and his Peers,
with all the states of the Empire. Likewise do the Prebendes of that Church,
for he is chosen f^^lowe of their College by an old custom: When all this is
done, the Organes, and the Trompetes blow up myrthe and Melody. All these
things beheld the Lady Margarate his Aunte, yt was ^egent of Flaunders. When
Mass was done, and the emperor had received the Lords supper, he dubbed as
many knights as were willing. Which honor in times past, was wont to be given
only to such as had foughten manfully against their enemies, and was the
reward of valeauntnes: And now the manner is, that kings with the swords
drawn, shall strike softely, the shoulders of them that desire the order,
whether they be of the nobility, or Merchants, that covet honor. From the
church they came, to the Palace, most sumptuously hanged and arrayed, where the
Emperor dined, and the Electours also, every man by him self. For in the
same hall were diverse tables set on each side the Emperors table. And the
Archebishoppe of Treuers was placed right over against themperor, according to
the law of Charles the fourth. That day of an ancient custom there is
roosted a whole Ox, farsed with other Beasts: A piece whereof is served to
the Emperors table, the rest have the common people: Moreover all that day
there run two Conduictes with Wine, free for all men.

After diuer the^peror retornyng to his lodging, delivers to tharchbishop of
Mentz ye seals of thempire: the next day he makes a supper for the Princes
Electours. And the day that followed, reparynge to the Church, when he had
heard Mass, he worshipped the relics of Saints, and among others, as
they say, a cloth that our Savior was lapped in when he was in his swaddlynge
cloutes: After this, the archbishop of Mentz pronounces that the Bishop of
Rome approuynge his Creation; does command him hereafter to use the name of
Caesar. The electours being departed out of that contagious place, Caesar takes
also his journey and arriueth at Collen, about the first of Nouembre: from
whence sendyng letters through out Germany, he calls an assembly of the
Empire at Worms against the syxte day of Ianuarye. Themperor calls a
counsel imperial.


As concerning that which the Archbishop of Mentz spoke how the Bishop of
Rome had confyrmed the Emperors creation, thus have they turned Totnam into
French of late years. For in times past the Bishops of Rome were wont to be
approved by themperours, when they were but pore: but increased in wealth, they
did not only begin to rule at their pleasure, but also at the length brought
it unto this pass, after much strife and contention, that in deed they The
Pope was subject to themperor
permitted that the seven Princes of Germany might elect him, but say, how it
lies in their power only to confirm and ratify the same And this Authority
have they used many times, in manner through all realms, but chiefly in Italy,
France, and Germany, what time they have put down kings, and substituted
others in their place. For besides other places of the Canon law, in
thepistles decretall of Gregory the ix. Innocentius the iij. affirms, that
the authority of chosyng themperor, was by the benefit of the Bishops and
Church of Rome conueighed from the Greeks to the Germans in the time of great
Charlemaigne, and how it is their parts to know and judge, whether the person
be mete. And yet not co^te^ted with that, they have also extorted his faith by
an oath from the highest Magistrate of the whole universal world. Which
thing has been often times the cause of great wars, and much other
mischief. And in fine Clement The law of Clement.
the fifth bound them to it by a law, who lived in the year of our lord a
thousand and three hundred. For whereas Henry the seventh Emperor of that name,
of the house of Lucemburge, would not after this sort be bounden, for that he
said it was a matter newly invented, neither used in former time: Clement for
them that should come after, opens the matter at large, declarynge what is in
same oath contained, (that is to say) that the emperor should defend the
Church of Rome, that he banish Heretics, and have no company with wicked me^,
that he by all means possible mayneteine the Dignity of the Bishops of Rome,
yt he defend and kepeal privileges granted to the church of Rome at any time,
but especially such as were given by Constantine, Charlemaigne, Henry, Otto the
fourth, Fridericke the second, and Rodulphe, that he challenge no part of the
lands and possessions of the Church of Rome, by any manner of title or
pretense. In these things (says he) the Emperor is bounden to him. And that
Henry also by messengers promised him no less, how soever he dissembled
afterward: This decree came forth after the death of the Emperor Henrye. The
same Clement was the first of all, that called forth the Cardinals from Rome to
Lions, and kept his Court in France. Syns the which time the The court of
Rome in France.
authority and power of Emperors has decreased in Italy daily more and
more. And the power and dignity of Bishops been augmented, in so much that
at these our days, and a little before our time, Emperors have supposed, that
they owe this faith and obediens to them even of bounden dewtie. But the
chief of the Bishops yt have molested our Emperors are these: Gregory the
seventh, and the.ix. Alexandre the third. Innotentius the third, and the
fourth. Nicolaus the third, Bonisace the eight, and Clement the fyste. Now
let us return to our purpose.

In the mean time that Cefar was yet at Collen, the Bishop of Rome sent
Marinus Carracciolus, and Hierome Aleander to encense The duke of Saro.
incensed against Luther.
the Duke of Saxony against Luther, who speaking first in the praise of him
and his family, than telling of the danger that hanged over all Germany for
the deuilishe works of Luther, demanded of him in fine two things. First
that he would command all his books to be cast in the fire, secondarelye
that he would either see him executed, or send him bound to Rome: This was
before Peter Bonhomme of Tergeste, and Barnarde of Trent, Bishops. They had
also commission that Caesar, and all other Princes of Germany, being required of
aid, should accomplish the Bishops request, who had committed, as they
said, to this Aleander and doctor Eckius the herynge of the matter. Duke
Fridericke because it was a matter of importance, axynge a time of
deliberation, the fourth day of Nouembre The answer of duke Friderike.
makes them answer by his counsel for that he him self was otherwise
occupied in the presence of the Bishop of Trent. How it is far beyond his
expectation, that the Bishop of Rome should demand any such thing of
him, who has always endeavored him self, to do nothing unworthy the virtue
and dignity of his ancestors, to do his faithful service to the Empire, and
his dew obseruaunce to the Church. And how he has heard, that whilst he
has been from home, Eckius has gone about to bring in trouble, not only
Luther, but others also, of his dominion, contrary to the order and manner of
the Canon law, which thing as right is, he takes in evil part, that a
private man should take upon him to meddle so much in any other
ma^siurisdictio^: What Luther or others, have done in his absence, sins the
Bishops decre was brought; he knows not, but he had never any thing to do
with his matter, neither now will have: Howebeit if he teach not rightly, he
is the more sorry: Two year past through his labor and means, he was brought
to Cardinal Caietaine at Auspurge: But when they had spoken together, they
could not agree, in so much that Cardinal Caietane wrote unto him letters of
complaint, which he so answered at the same time, that he thought he had
satisfied him, yea, and to take away all suspicion, he would than have put
Luther from him, if Miltitius had not let the matter.

Moreover how oftener that, that the Archbishop of Treuers was appointed to
hear the matter, and how Luther will appear in any place when so ever he is
commanded, so that he may be assured, and makes so large and great an offer,
that no more can be required.

This is the opinion of good and well learned men, that he has thus far
proceeded, not of his own accord, but pricked forward of his adversaries: as
yet he has neither been so heard of the Emperor, or of any others, that his
works should be so conuicte of Hercsye, that they ought to be burnt: or else
would he already have done the duetye of a good Prince. He requires them
therefore that they would not deal after this sort, but rather find the
means that some Godly learned men may be chosen, that shall frendely and
quietlye hear the whole matter: that Luther may have a good safeconduicte,
and that his books be not burned, before he has pleaded his cause. And if he
can by the testimonies of Scripture, and sownde arguments be convicted, than
will not he hold with his doings: And although that both he and his cause
should take the foil: yet would he trust that the Bishop would require him
to do nothing but that might stand with his honor. In all other things
through Gods help he would do as should become a Prince of the Empire, and
an obdient child of the church: What time this answer was given them, After
some deliberation, they began to recite how many things the Bishop of Rome
had done, and suffered, that Luther might at the length return into the
right way: but that he has kept no part of his promise. And that it lies
not now in the Archbishop of Treuers to here the matter, for so much as the
Bishop of Rome has taken to him self the same, to whom only it
apperteineth to be judge in such causes, the conclusion of their talk was, yt
they said how they must proceed according to the Bishops decree. And so not
long after they burned Luthers works. Luthers books are br^^.


Aleander was an Italian borne, right skilful in the Hebrew tongue: he was
sometime a Reader in Paris, coming to Rome, he grew in estimation, and was
first made Archebistoppe of Brunduse, and after that Cardinal. To the same
degree of dignity came also Carracciolus. When Luther understood this, he
calls forth all the students of Wittenberge, and in the presens of many
learned men, he burns the Luther burns the Canon laws.
Bishop of Romes law and the decree lately published openly, the tenth day of
Decembre: And the next day in his lecture admonishes al men that regard their
salvation, to beware of that Bishops kingdom. Afterward he set forth a book,
wherein he shows the causes, why he burned the Canon law. First that it has
been an old custom observed at all times that naughty and Pestilent books
should be burned, a testimony whereof is yet in the acts of the Apostles:
Moreover that it concerns his dewtie, that is baptized in Christ, which is
a professor and an open teacher of holy Scripture, to impugn wicked
doctrine, and to teach men that is wholesome, and to pluck out of men's minds
false and erroneous opinions. And that the same apperteineth also to many
others. And although yt they bring let either through ignorance, or for
fear of peril do not that they ought to do, yet can that be none excuse to
him, unless he do his dewtie. Moreover the Bishop of Rome, and all his rabble
are so obstiuate and shameless, that not only they will hear no good
admonitions, but also condemn the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and
compel men to commit open Idolatry Furthermore he supposes how these book
burners Book burners.
have no commission to burn his books, no more than had the Divines of Collen
and Louain of the Emperor. Finally for as much as his works being burnt, and
the brute thereof spread abroad over all countries, many will grow to be
weaker and doubtful, supposing they were not cast into the fire without
cause: therefore did he, seeing his adversaries past all remedy, burn their
Books also, that he might thereby erecte and confyrme the minds of men.
Wherefore he besecheth all men that laying a side thambitiouse and proud titles
of his adversaries, they would look nerer to the thing, that is, how wicked
and pestilent opinions are contained in those books of the Law. Which thing
that it may be the better perceived, of innumerable, he has gathered a few
things, which belong to the reproach of almighty God, to the injury of the
civil magistrate, and to the establisshing of their own tyranny: to the
number of thyrtie places whereby he shows that he had just cause to burn
them. Than provoke he them to show the reasons wherefore they burnt his
works. And the cause why few or none have in diverse ages past attempted
anithing against the tyranny of Antichrist, he says, has been, for that
the Scripture has prophesied, how he should destroy his adversaries, and
have the kings to assist him. Seeing therefore that the Prophets and Apostles
have told us before of such tyrrible things to come, it is easy to consydre
how great it behooves his crueltye to be.

For so comes it to pass ordenarily in worldly matters, that of the best
beginning of things proceeds the worste end. Which after he has proved
by diverse examples, he inuergeth against the City of Rome, which being
indewed of God with many benefits and ornaments is utterly gone out of kind,
and with her contagion has infected a great part of the world, that this the
Bishops ordinance is against the laws, against good customs, nether is he
to be suffered, for that he flees from lawful judgment, for that he affirms
him self to be above all laws and judgments. I told you in the first
Book, how Syluester Prierias, wrote against Luther: when he had answered him
sharply, Ambrosius Catarinus an Italian took in had to defend him: setting
forth a book of the dignity of the Bishop of Catarinus writes against Lut.
Rome: to the which Luther answers at large, and interpretynge certain
places of Daniell, teaches that the Bishops Tyrrannye is there painted out,
and proves that such things as he has prophesied of the kingdom of
Antichriste, do altogether concern the Sea of Rome. After this was Catarinus
made Archbyshoppe of Cossent.

The third Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the third Book.
DUke Fridericke obteyneth letters of safeconduict for Luther to come to
Worms, there to defend his opinions and writings before themperor, and the
other states, and perseuereth constantly, although themperor threateneth him
with banishment, and the Pope had cursed him in the Bulle of the Lords supper.
And the Princes severally sought to peruerte him. The counsel of Constaunce
was set before his eyes, upon which occasion mention is made of Wyclese, of
John Hussc, and of ischa a Bohemer, the Sorbonistes condemn Luthers books.
Whilst the Pope and the French king made a league with the Swisses, wmglius
diswadeth the^ from taking Pensions of the^. Luter being exiled by letters
patentes, auoydeth. The king of England writcth against him. Pope Leo dies,
Adrian succedeth. Solomon the great Turk has luckie success in Hongary.
Commotions in Spain, themperor couetyng to appease them, after he had treated
with England, goes thither. The Bishop of Constance persecuteth wynglius.
Troubles at Wittenberge, The Annabaptistes arise, for the which, there is an
assemble at Norinberge. The Pope sends thither letters and Ambassadors. The
Turk takes the Rhodes. winglius having set forth his doctrine by certain
Articles, is assailed by the Papists, but in fine the Gospel is received at
uricke.

DUke Fridericke accompaniynge the Emperor The Emperor sent for Luther to
Worms.
to the assembly at Worms, had obtained that Caesar said he would call for
Luther, and hear his matter, which Luther understanding by the Dukes letters,
wrote again about the latter end of January, that he was exceadyng glad, to
reduce men from many gross errors to the sownde and pure doctrine. He
desires him moreover that the Emperor and he would have a regard to the
horrible bondage and miserable estate of Christientie oppressed through mere
Papistrie. Wherefore Caesar Collicted The Empe. writes to Luther.
by the Duke, wrote unto Luther the syxte day of March. That for so much as
he had setforth certain books, he was determined to hear the matter him
self before the princes: wherefore these be to signify unto him that he has
free liberty to pass and repasse safely without any danger, as more plainly
does appear by the saufe conduict sent here with: he commands him therefore
to take his journey spedely and not to fail to be with him within one and
twenty days.

The Bishops of Rome have accustomed on Thursedaye in the Passion week
solemnly to curse and banne certain kinds of men. The Bull of cursyng.
First Heretics, secondarely Pirates, then such as either Reyse up new
customs, or extorte that is forboden: Also such as cou^trefeit the Bulls or
Iustrumentes of the court of Rome: Moreover they that sell any Armure to
Turks or Sarasyns, and such other unlawful wares: They that let or hinder
corn to be brought to Rome: they that hurt any man suyng or belonging to the
Court of Rome. Furthermore all such as work any damage or violence to the
possessions or neighbors dominions of the Church of Rome, as namely the City
of Rome, Sicilie, Naples, Cardinie, Corf, Hetruria, Spolete, Sabine, Ancona,
Flaminie, Campanie, Bononie, Farrare, Beneuent, Perusie, Auenion. The former
Bishops have named for Heretics the Garasians, Pateronians, the pore men
of Lions, the Arnoldistes, Speronistes, Wicleuistes, Hussites, and the
Fratricelles. Leo the tenth put to also the Lutherians, and curses them full
black, this curse is commonly called the Bull of the Lords Supper. Which
Luther got afterward, and translated it into Duche, not without much myrthe
and pastime. When Luther had receued the Emperors letters, he went to Worms
with the same Heralt: but when he came almooste there, there were diverse that
diswaded him, putting him in mind how his books were brent, which was a
certain prejudice of his condemnation, and how the same might chance to him,
as ded to John Husse: but he with a stout courage, contemned all peril,
saying that it was plainly the Devil that would put him thus in fear,
seeing The consta^cie of Luth.
that his kingdom should quayle by the confession of the truth in so notable
a place, so came he to Worms the syxt day of April. The next day he was
brought before the Emperor and the whole counsel of Lut. comes to Worms
Princes. Where as by the Emperors commandment Eckius the the Lawyer spoke
unto him on this, wise. There be two causes, Martin Eckius to Luther.
Luther, for the which the Emperor by the consent of the Princes and all the
states, has sent forth, commaundyng me to enquire of thee the same. First,
wherther thou will acknowledge these Books to be thine, and made by thee:
Again, whether thou will revoke any thing in them or stand to the defense of
all that is written therein? Luther had brought with him a lawies of Wittenberge
one Hierome Schurffe: Lu. pleads his cause before the emperor and the whole
Empire.
he had that the titles of the Books should be read and showed: which done
Luther briefly repeting the questions propounded, as concerning my Books,
says he, I confess and acknowledge them to be mine: but whether I will
defend all that I have written, to the intent I make true answer, and do
nothing rashely, and for so much as the thing is of weighty importance, I
require a time to take deliberation. When the thing was debated. Albeit (says
he) that thou myghtest easily have known by the Emperors letters why thou
waste sent for, and therefore nowshouldest seek no delay to answer, yet Caesar
of his clemency grants thee one dayto take aduisement, commanding thee to
be here to more we this time, do declare what thou will do herein, by mouth,
and not by writynge. For that he made this delay, many supposed that he would
not be constant. When he came the next day, Eckius said unto him: yesterday
thou would not answer to the second demand, but required a time, which
might right well have been denied the: for every man ought to be so certain of
his faith, that he should answer thereto at al times: much less should a
great divine doubt or premeditate an answer: but what so ever the matter be.
What say thou now? will thou defend thine own writings? Then Luther
addressyng his answer to the Emperor and the Counsel of the Princes, besought
them to hear him patiently, and if he should ought offend them, either in
words, manners, or gestures, unseemly for such a presens, to bear with him:
and pardon him for the kind of lyfes sake that he has been brought up in, for
of my self (says he) I can witness nothing else, but that I have taught
syncerly hitherto, those things, which I believe, do concern the glory of
God, and the salvation of men: And as concerning my books I answered yesterday
that they were made and written by me, but if any other has added to any
thing, that will I not take for mine: Now to the second question. The books
that I have written, be of sundry arguments. For some apperteine only to the
doctrine of faith and virtue, which mine adversaries them selves do comme^de.
If I should abjure them, I should not play the part of an honest man: others
there be wherein I reprehended the Bishop of Rome and his doctrine, whereby
he has sore afflicted the Christian common wealth. For who sees not how
pitifully men's conscience are vexed with his laws and decrees? Or who can deny
how craftily and disceiptfully he robs all countries, and chieflye Germany,
and makes not yet an end of his rauenynge? If I should abolishe these books,
I should confyrme their tyrrannye: And it should be the greater prejudice, to
be done now by the authority of the Emperor and the Princes. The third
kind is written against certain private men, which would defend the
Romish wickedness, and seek every where to in trap me in the which I confess
to have been more vehement then became me, but I ascribe to my self no
holiness, nor my profession is not of life or manners, but of true doctrine: Yet
will I retracte nothing in these same: for in so doing I should set open a
window to the arrogancy of many: And yet I would not be so taken, as though
I took upon me, that I could not err: but for so much as it is the property
of a man to err and be disceaued, I take for the defense of my cause that
saying of our savior, who, speaking of his doctrine what time he was stricken
of a servant, says: If I have spoken evil, bear witness of evil.
Wherefore if Christ which is all perfection, refused not the witness of a most
vile servant, John.xviii.
against him. How much more I that am a sinner by nature, should come when I
am called, to here if any man can testify or bring forth any thing against my
doctrine? Wherefore I desire you for the honor of God, if any of all you, have
any thing to obiecte against the doctrine that I profess, he would not hide
it, but come forth and show the error by the testimony of Scripture: which
thing done, I will be so little obstinate, that the first of all men I shall
cast mine own Books into the fire: And hereby may a man judge that I am not
led rashely or like one that were ravished of his wits, but to have waied
diligently the weightines of the thing, and the troubles that are engendered by
this doctrine. And I rejoice greatly, wha^ I perceive that my doctrine is cause
of so great offenses. For Christ him self says how it is the nature of the
gospel to stir up strife and contention, even among such as be joined
most nere in blood. Now therefore (O noble men) ye ought gravely and with
great deliberation to consider: and to foresee lest in condemnynge a doctrine
through the syngular beuefyte of God offered you, ye be not cause of much
inconvenience that may thereby chance unto you and all Germany. You must have
respect also that this new Empire of the young Emperor here present be not
made unlucky and unfortunate by some ungodly and unprofitable example for our
posteriti. For it is to be proved by diverse places of the Scripture, that
there have Empires fallen into great perils, what time the common wealth has
been governed only by counsel and man's wisdom. Notwithstanding (most wise
and honorable Princes) mine intent is not to show you what you have to do:
but I speak this for the zeal I bear to Germany, which is our native
country, and ought to be derer unto us than our own lives. For the rest I
besethe you to receive me into your tuition and protection against the forse of
mine enemies.

What time he had made an end, Eckius with a stowning comutenaunce said unto
him: Thou answerest nothing to the purpose, noyther is it thy part to call
again in question such things as have been determined intimes past, by the
authority of Counsels: Thou should make a plain and direct answer,
whether thou will abide by thy writings? Then said Luther, for as much as it
is your commaud dement (most mighty Caesar, and most noble Princes) that I
shall answer directly, I will obey: This therefore is mine answer, that
unless I be convinced by the Testimonies of holy Scripture, or by manifest
reason, I can not revoke any part of that, which I have written or taught:
for I will never do that thing that should hurt mine own conscience: And as
for the Bishop of Rome, and the Counsels only I do not believe, nor admit
their authority: for they have erred Pope and Cost sell may err
often times, and set forth things contrary one to another. And they may err
and be disceaued.

When the Princes had laid their heads together touching this answer: Then
said Eckius, thou aunswerest Luther, more irreverently, then it becomes thee,
and not sufficientlye to the matter: of thy Books thou make a difference:
but in case thou would retract those, which conteyne a greater part of thine
errors, Caesar would suffer no injury to be done unto such as be well
written: Thou dispisest the Counsel of Constaunce, whereas were many noble and
well learned men of Germany, and renewest the errors therein condemned, and
wilt be convinced by holy Scripture: Herein thou do not well, but art far
abused: for look what things the Church has once condemned, the same may
come no more into any new disputation: for if every man will seek for a reason
of each thing, and he that speaks against Counsel must be reproved only by
the Scriptures, there shall be nothing certainly determined. For the which
cause the Emperor will have thee to pronounce openly, what thou determinest of
thy Books. I beseech you (says Luther) give me leave to keep my conscience
safe and sound: I have answered plainly, and have none other thing to say:
for unless mine adversaries can show me by true arguments taken out of the
Scripture, and take away my error, I can not be quiet in my mind: for I am
able to show that they have oftentimes, and shamefully erred: And for me to
swerve from the Scripture, which is manifest and cannot err, were a very
wicked deed? the other said it could not be proved that ever general counsel
had erred: But Luther said he both could and would, and so they departed at
that time. The next day the Emperor sent letters to the Princes, syttyng in
Counsel: signifiyng, that his progenitors had both professed the Christian
Religion: and evermore obeyed the Church of Rome: And now seeing that Luther
does impugn it, perseueryng obstinately in his opinion, his duty requires
that following the steps of his ancestors, he defend the Christian
Religion, and succor the church of Rome: Wherefore he will banishe Luther and
his adherentes, and use other fit remedies to quench this fire: but touching
his promise, he will keep it, that he may return home again safe and sound:
This Epistle was much debated, and skanned among the Princes: And there were
some that said there was no promise to be kept with him, according to the
decree made in the Counsel at Constance, but against that were many others,
and namely Jews the County Palatyne, Prince Elector, affyrminge that it would
redounde to the perpetual shame of Germany. Whereupon diverse thought mete, not
only to keep their promise, but also not to condemn him rasshelye, for that
it is a weighty matter, consyderyng how themperor, at these years is soon
moved and exasperated against Luther, by the Bishop of Romes ministers.

A few days after the Bishop of Treuers appoynteth Luther, to come to him,
the.xxiiij. day of April: There were present Joachin, Treuers and other
Princes threateneth Luther.
Marquis of Brandenburge electour, George Duke of Saxony, the Bishop of
Auspurge, and other nobles. And when Luther was brought in by the
Archebishoppes Chapplaine, and the Emperors Heraulte, Ueus a Lawyer of Badon
said unto him: Where these noble Princes have sent for thee (Martin Luther) it
is not to enter into any disputation with thee, but to treat fre^dly with
thee, and privately to admonish thee touching thine own profyt. For the
Emperor has given them leave so to do. And first it may be that counsels have
taught diverse things, but not contrary: And albeit they have erred, yet is
not their authority so decayed herby that every man may tread it under foot.
Thy books (if it be not well looked to) will stir up great trouble. For many
interpret the same which thou have written of Christen liberty, after their
own affections, to the intent they may do what they list. This world is
now more corrupt than it has been here tofore. And therefore men must work
more warely. There be some of thy works that can not be reproved: but it is to
be feared, lest the Devil in the mean time petswade thee, to set forth others
against Religion and godliness, that so thy books may be altogether condemned.
For those that thou have set forth last, declare right well, how the tree is to
be known by the fruits, and not by the blosome. Thou art not ignorant, how
diligently the Scripture warns us, to beware of the noone Devil, and the
fliynge Arrowe: that enemy of mankind cease not to lie in wait for us, and
many times under a Godly pretense, intrappeth and leads us away into error.
Therefore thou ought to consider both thine own salvation and other men's,
and it would become thee to foresee, lest such as Christ has through his
death redeemed from death everlasting, being through thy fault, books, and
prechinges seduced from the Church perish again, the dignity of the which
Church all men ought to acknowledge reverently. For in all the world is there
nothing better, tha^ the observation of the laws. And like as no commonweal
consists without laws: even so unless the most holy decrees of our
forefathers be reverently kept, there shall be nothing more troublesome than
the state of the Church, which should be most quiet and stable. These noble and
virtuous Princes here present, for the singular zeal they bear to the common
weal, and for thy cause and wealth also, thought good to admonisshe thee of
all these things. For doubtless if thou will persevere thus obstinatlye in
thine opinion, and not relent, the Emperor will bannishe thee out of the
Empire, and will forbid thee to have any resting place of Germany, to the
end thou may the better consider thine own state.

Whereunto Luther replied: For this your great good will and gentleness Luthers
answer to the Princes.
(most noble Princes) showed unto me, I give you most hertye thanks: for
certenlye I am a man of a baser sort than that it should beseme so noble men
to take such pains for me: But as concerning the Counsels, I do not
reprehende all, but chiefly that of Constaunce, and have just cause so to do:
For Husse defyned the Church to be the fellowshippe of Gods elect, both this
and that saying of his, he believed the holy Church, they condemned also, more
worthy them selves to be condemned: for he spoke both truly and like a
Christen man. Therefore I will suffer any punishment, yea spend my life sooner
than I will swerve from the manifest word of God: for we must rather obey God
then men, touching the offense that connneth by my books I neither can, nor
ought to eschew. For the offenses of Charity and The offenca of Faith and
manners.
of faith differ much, whereof that which consists in life and manners must in
any wise be avoided: but the other which cleaves to Gods word is not to be
regarded: for the truth, will, and commandment of the heavenly father must
be accomplished, though the whole world should be offended: The Scripture
calls Christ himself the stone of offense. And the same appertains also
likewise to all such as preach the Gospel: I know that we ought to obey
laws and Magistrates, and so have I evermore taught the people also, and my
writings do sufficiently bear witness how much I do ascribe to the dignity
of the laws. But as touching the decrees of the church, there is an other
consideration to be had. For if Gods word were taught sincerely if the Bishops
and pastors of the church did their dewtie, like as Christ and his apostles
have ordained, it need not to impose unto men's minds and consciences yt heavy
and intolerable burden of men's traditions. Moreover I am ignorant not how ye
scripture admonishes us to refrain our own affections, which thing is truly
spoken, and I will be glad to perform it, neither will I do any thing
obstinately: so that I may only profess the doctrine of the gospel. When he
had said thus, he was commanded to depart. When they had consulted of the
matter, Ueus among other things began to persuade him to submit his
writings to the knowledge of the Emperor and the princes: content (says he)
I will never seem to refuse the judgment of Caesar, and the states of thempire,
so it may be done by Scripture, and Gods word, which makes so much for me,
that unless the same do reprove my error, I can not forsake mine opinion: For
Paul commands not to believe an Aungel coming from heaven, if he bring an
other doctrine. Wherefore he besecheth the Princes, that he might keep a saufe
conscience, which if by their mediation to the Emperor he might obtain, he
was content to do any thing. Then said the Marquis of Bra^denburge: Will thou
not give place except thou be convict by Scripture? No in deed (says Luther)
or else by manifest reasons. Wherefore when the counsel was broken up, the
Archbishop of Treuers took him a part, and began to admonish him again,
but it might not prevail. The next day also he moved him to commit the
judgment unto Caesar, and to the senate of Princes, without condition: But it
was in vain. At the after noone the Bishop and certain others required him
at the lest, to submit his works to the next general counsel. He agrees
thereunto, so that the matter be handled by the Authority of Scripture. After
this the Archbishop in private talk with him alone, demanded of him what
remedy would help this grievous disease? (He said) the best counsel is, that
Gamaliel in times past gave to the Scribes, and Phariseis, and not to contend
with God. In fine when he could not prevail, Acts.v.
he lets him depart gently, and said he would devise for him, that he should
return home by saufeconduicte.

And not long after comes Eckius the Lawier, and says unto him: For
as much as thou have refused the admonishmentes of Caesar, and the Princes, the
Emperor from hence forth will do as to his office apperteineth, and now
commands thee, to depart hence immediately, granting thee one and twenty
days for thy return: and look what promise he made thee, the same will he
keep unbroken: charginge thee moreover yt in thy return home, thou stir up
no people by the way, neither by word, nor writing. On this wise being suffered
to depart, Luth. sent away scom Worms.
he gave the glory unto God. By the way he wrote to the emperor, and to the
residew of the Princes and states, repeting the whole actio^ at few words,
requiring the^ that for so much as he has, and ever will seek a quiet agreement,
and desires nothing else, but yt the matter may be indifferently heard and
judged by Scripture: they would defend him from the force of his enemies, for
yt it is not his private cause, but common to all the world, and namely Germany,
whose weal he estemeth more tha^ his life.

For as much as oftentimes mention has been made of Husse, of the Counsel of
Constaunce and of the Bohemers, I shall brieflye declare the matter. John
Wickliffe lived in England about the year of John Wicl^ffe an English man.
our Lord.M. CCC.xciij. Who wrote many things against the Sea of Rome, which
were brought afterward into the land of Boheme. Prage was the^ a noble
University: And there flourished John Husse a Doctor of Divinity, who in his
lectures and sermons set forth and John Husse a Bohemer.
taught Wicliffes doctrine, to be wholesome and godly; beyngt accused of the
same to the Bishop of Rome, Alexander the fyfte, he is cited. He by his
procurers shows causes why he could not come: Wencelaus also the king,
entreats for him, and requires that he would send his Legates into Boheme to
understand the matter: but yt was in vain. Wherefore Husse condemned at Rome
for an Heritike, sets forth a writing, wherein he appealeth from the
Bishop, to the Judge Christ.

The church of Rome was yt time full of trouble, for the Cardinals Husse
appealeth from the Pope.
being divided, had chosen three Bishops at once, Gregory the.xij. Benedicte
the.xiij. and John the.xxiij. Which thing Themperor Sigismside, and other
kings were right sorry for. And caused Bishop John to sommon a counsel at
Constance: And Sigisinunge the brother of king Wencelaus, called thither John
Husse sendyng him a safe conduicte The Counsel of Co^stau^ce.
in month of Octobre, in the year.M.CCCC.xiiij. Whereupon Husse accompanied
with diverse gentlemen, come unto Constance the third day of Nouembre: But
three weeks after when he came to the private talk of the Bishop and his
Cardinals, he was detained prisoner. The Emperor was then absent, which being
certified of the thing came thither in great displeasure: But when they had
borne him in hand, that there is no promise to be kept with Heretics, he was
not only content (albeit that the Bohemers made oftentimes great suit to him)
not to keep his promise, but also was the first that spak bitterly against him.
Finally the syxt day of July in the year followynge the Synnode condemned him
as an Heretic and a sedicious parson, his his works also to be bursit. And
thus being condemned he was delivered John Husse and Hierome of Praga burned.
to the emperor and burned. And his ashes were cast into the river of Rhine,
lest any relics of him should remain. After him Hierome of Prage a Scolar of
his was in like manner executed. In this Counsel besides The Emperor were the
Ambassadors of sundry kings, three Princes Electours, Jews county Palatine,
Raffe duke of Saxony and Fridericke Marquis of Brandenburge: And a great
number of other Princes: Three Patriarchs, of Aquileia, Antioche, and
Constantinople.xxviij. Cardinals, and an.Civ. Bishops, Divines and Lawiers
very many, Italians: Germans, Frenchmen, Englismen, Hu^garia^s, Polonians.
Here was the doctrine of Wicliffe condemned, and a decree made that his body in
England should be taken up, and brent.

Furthermore it was decreed that priests only should receive the hole supper
of the Lord, al others to be content with one kind. Which thing Husse had
impugned. There was also a law made, that there should be no promise kept
with Heretics, or suspected of Heresye, albeit that they came to the counsel
to be examined, by the Emperors saufeconduicte. Finally the three Bishops
were deposed, and by common Three Popes deposed.
assent was chosen Martin the fyfte of that name. When it was reported in
Boheme of the death of Husse and Hierome, there arose a tumulte, and after,
also a very bloody and crewell war, by the conduicte of John Zischa, in so
much that Sigysmunde was constrained to require the aid of the Empire. But
their most cruelty was wrought against pristes, for the hatred of the Bishop
of Rome, whose tirranny they had shaken of, and received the doctrine of Husse.
About this time, the Divines of Paris condemned Luthers Books, gatheryng out of
the same certain titles as be these, of the Sacraments, of The Divines of
Paris condemn Luth. books.
thecclesiastical laws, of vows, of contrition, absolution, satisfaction,
Purgatory, frewyll, and such like, admonishyng all men that profess Christ,
to beware of such Heretykes, which under flattering words exhibit present
poison, as Wiclyffe, Husse, and Luther, as though it were like that they could
see more then all others, or that it were to be thought, that Christ would
have suffered his only spouse to have wandered so long in the darkness of
Errors. And so in recytyng of his books, they show in which opinions, what
Heretics Luther follows, wherefore (say they) seeing it apperteyneth chiefly to
our profession, to suppress the errors that spring up, finding his doctrine
to be pernicious, we co^de^ne his Books to be brent, and him self to be forsed
to reca^t.

To this decree of theyrs answers Philip Melanchthon, and after Thauthoritie
of the Divines of Paris.
that Luther him self, but skoffyngly. Notwithstanding the Divines of Paris
take upon them herin to be the chief in all Europe: they have two principal
Colleges, Sorbone and Nauare. The Bachelars of Divinity are exercised in
disputations all the somer time, and by the space of.xij. hours, must they
answer to all men's arguments. Here be marvelous co^tentions, and for the most
part either of very trifles, or of things far exceadyng man's capacity, they
be clamorous above measure, but their strife is commonly ended by the hissyng
and clapping of their Auditors, what time the one of the disputers is either to
fo^de or to tedious, The Doctors of Divinity stand in the latesse windows,
and hearke^, they are called magistri nostri, they be the Ce^sours, and judges
of all doctrine, and plainly possess a kingdom. For no man dare publishe any
thing touching Divinity, but through their permission, Leo the.x. had The
Swysses make a league with the French king.
already made a league with the Swyses, yt if he had need at any time he should
have their aid. The king of France in like case, which before had concluded a
peace with the^, labored the^ to aid him with me^ for his money Zwinglius in his
sermons diswaded them from the same, declaringe unto them how vile, and how
wicked a thing it is to serve a foreine Prince for money, he exhorted them
therefore to follow the frugalitie of their elders, which kept cattle and
occupied husbandry, and yet had done many goodly exploictes, but all this was
in vain. For the chief of them corrupted with bribes, persuaded the rest to
make a league also with the king, and aid him with men. Save they only of
Zuricke persuaded by Zuinglius, refused it, and made an oath, that they would
never take wages nor stypende of any Prince, to serve him in his wars. After
this was borne the kings son Charles, whom Thirtene towns of Swysses.
the Swyces sendynge their deputies, Christened at the Fontestone. The
Heluetians or Swicesse, consiste of thirtene Towns, Zuricke, Bernes, Lucerna,
Ura, Swite, Unterualde, Tugie, Glarea, Basille, Solodure, Friburge,
Schafusiane, and Apecelle. These are joined in a most strait leage by an oath,
using one and the same law, and govern as it were in common their common
weal.

The first of all that made this leage, were the Uranites, the Swyces, and
Unterualdians, what time they expulsynge their nobility The liberty of the
Swysses.
(under whom they were oppressed) procured their own liberty. This was in
the year of our Lord.M.CCC.xv. After came unto the^ they of Lucerne next them
the Tugians, in the syxte place the men of Zuricke, and last they of Bernes and
of Basille. Than joined with them in society (but not in the same laws nor so
great frendshippe) the Rhetians, Lepontians; Sedunites, Ueragrites,
Sangallians, Mullusians, and they of Rotuuille.

The Emperor being now past one and twenty years of Age, banisheth Luther by a
common decree, the eight day of May, taking the beginning thereof, of his own
parson, for that it was his part and office, Luib. is ontlawed by the Emperor.
not only to establishe and augment the Empire, but also to forese that no
blemishe nor Heresye should spring up within the limittes of the same. And
that his Progenitors in deed have been diligent men herin. Wherefore it is mete
that he, unto who^ God has given so large and ample dominions, should follow
their steps: for unless he should punish now the Heresies lately spronge
up in Germany, he should both hurt his own conscience, and in the beginning
now of his reign sore blemisshe his name and dignity: that it is well known
unto all men, what wicked doctrine Luther has spread abroad now these three
or four years, against the Bishop and Church of Rome, against the decrees
of the ancient fathers, and namely against the counsel of Constance, to the
great reproach of the^peror Sigismu^de and the Princes of Germany yt were there
present: Wherefore syns that in his books is nothing else contained but sedition,
discord, war, murder, and mischief, so yt he appears not to be a man that
wrote the^, but rather a Devil in a man's likeness: He for the zeal that he
bears to the common wealth and the dignity of the Bishop of Rome does
condemn, and proscribe him as aucthor of Scismes, as a manifest and an
obstinate Heretic, commaundynge all men under a great penalty so to accept
him, and after three weeks wherein he gave him leave to return, to apprehende
him, and bring him unto him: and al such as shall favor or aid him in his
doings, he banisheth in like case: he commands also his Books should be
brent, appoyntynge a great penalty herafter for the Stationers, commanding
this decree of his which he says was made by the common consent, and assent
of the Princes, to be well observed. Men say how this decree was made by a very
few, for diverse of the Electours confessed that they were not made privy to
it, as shall be declared hereafter of the Archebyshoppe of Colle^. The
Archbishop of Mentz being Chauncelour of the Empire may do much in such
matters. But how so ever it came to pass the Emperor hereby wanne much
favor, in so much that the Bishop of Rome, clean forsakynge the French
king, made a league with him, as shall be declared hereafter.

From the time of this publication, Duke Fridericke appointed certain of his
nobility, whom he especially trusted, to conueighe Luther Luth. is conuetghed
out of danger.
out of the way, in to some secret place, that he might eschew the danger,
which thing was done both diligently and closelye. In this carefulnes Luther
wrote diverse epistles to his Friends, and also books, concerning the
abrogating of the private Mass, which he dedicateth Sunday books of Luth.
to his brethren the Austen Freres: of Religious Uowes, to his father John
Luther, and a book against James Latomus a Doctor of Louaine. The Austen
Freres began now first of all men to leave of Massyng, and for that cause
Luther compiled this Book for them, that he might encourage the weak, and
confyrme the skylfull, exhortinge them much to persevere in the same purpose.

Which thing known, Duke Friderick fearing that some great trouble or
commotion should arrise thereof, commanded that the opinion of the whole
University herein should be known and brought unto him: The University chose
iiij. for the same purpose, Iustus Jonas, Of themasse to be abolisshed.
Philip Melanchthon, Nyclas Amstorfe, and John Dulce. Who conferryng with the
Austen Freres, brought word what their intent was. And furthermore declared
what an injury was done to the lords Supper. Wherefore they beseech the Prince
that he would abolish so great a wickedness, not out of one Church only, but
also in all places, and set up the true use of the Lords Supper, according to
Christ's commandment, and the manner of the Apostles, stoutly contemnyng all the reproaches of the adversaries: for it has euerbene seen, that who so takes
in hand to maynteine the true doctrine of the Gospel, must suffer many
things: and that he ought greatly to foresee, that he accept reverently this
present gift of God, wherewith he is chiefly adorned, by reason of the light of
Gospel; spronge up among his people. Whereunto the Duke answered, that he
would leave nothing unattempted that might be for Gods glory: but for so much
as the thing is full of difficulty, he thinks good not to beto hasty, for
litel it is that so few can bring to effect: but in case the matter be
grownded on the Scriptures, they shall doubtless have mo to take their parts.
And the^ shall that alteration, which shall seem both Godly and necessary, more
conveniently be brought to pass: For he him self which is ignorant in the
Scriptures, ca^ not tell what time this accustomed use of mass, which you
reprove came up, or when, yt manner that the Apostles used, was left: But as he
takes it, the most part of Colleges and Churches, were fownded for Masses,
which if they should be put down, and the lands taken away, that were given
for the same purpose, every man might well consider what hurly burly would
follow upon the same: Wherefore his advise shall be, that they go, and consult
further of the matter with the rest of good and well learned men of the
university, that all their heads leyde together, such means may be found,
as may keep a Godly quiet.

These men, after more deliberation had, make him answer, admoshing him as
before, to put down the^ Mass, that the thing may be done without any
tumult. And though it could not, yet that which is right and godly, would
not therefore be left undone: that they be fewer in number, it is no news: For
ever syns the world began, the greater part of men have resisted the true
doctrine: moreover yt those The best thiges please fewest men.
only shall receive this right use of the Lords Supper, unto whom it shall
be given from above.

Furthermore, that Colleges were first instituted, not for Masses, but that
youth might there be vertuousely brought up in learning. And the lands given
to find some to teach, and some to learn, and the rest to the use of the
pore. And this use to have continewed in manner to the time of Barnarde: But
about four hundredth years syns this Marchaundise of Masses began, which is
utterly to be taken away: And albeit the original thereof, were yet more
ancient, yet is not so great a wickedness to be suffered. And in case any
busynes should come thereof, the same ought not to be ascribed to the doctrine,
but to the wickedness of them, which for their own lucre will impugn the
truth, against their conscience. And that we ought not to regard such
inconveniences, but to proceed constantlye what trouble so ever shall come
thereof: for all these things were showed before of Christ. This year
Themperours brother Farnando Archduke of Austriche, marieth the lady Anne,
sister to Jews the king of Hongary. Emonges so many adversaries as Luther
had, Henry the eyghte, King of England wrote soore against him. And first he
confuteth his judgment, Henry king of England writes against Luth.
touching Indulgences, and defends the Bishops authority. After he reproves
all his disputations, concerning the Sacraments of the Church, taking the
occasion of writing, out of his book intitiled, of the captivity of Babylon.

When Luther knew thereof, he answered most vehemently, showing that in the
defense of this cause, he did not one whit respect the highness or dignity of
any parson. For this cause the Bishop Leo gave the king an honorable title,
calling him, the defendour of the faith.

How king Charles was chosen Emperor, it is here to fore declared: And
whereas ever syns certain private dyspleasures did grow Themperor has war
with France
betwixt him and the French king, it brake out into wars. But first in the
borders of Spain, and of Flaunders. The same time the Frenchmen kept Parma and
Placence in Italy: which the Bishop Leo was right sorry for. And when they had
also of late attempted Rhegium, he utterly forsook them, and entered into league
with the Emperor, whereof the chief conditions were these.

That the dignity of the Church of Rome should be defended, that such Towns
as the Frenchemen of late had taken from him, should be recovered, that Frances
Sfortia, that time a banished man, should be restored to his fathers seat and
to the dukedom of Millan. Thus joining their powers together, they recovered
of the frenchmen Parma and Placence, and by force took the city of Millan and
drove the French king out of Lumbardy, which he had kept in quiet possession
fullye.vi. years, and afterward restored Sfortia, by the conduit of prosper
Column, and Fernando Daualle marquis of Piscare. And not long after these
news were brought, Leo departed not without the suspicion of poysening. He was
son unto Laurens Medices and had to The death of Leo the.x.
his great grandfather Cosmus, that was yt great honor of that house. Leo was
made Cardinal when he was but.xiii. years old: he lived not past seven and
forty: his successor was Adriane the sixth a Holla^der who had been tutor to the
emperor. About the same time Soliman Adrian succedeth Leo.
lately created Emperor of Turks moved war upon Jews king of Boheme and
Hungary, which had married the Lady Marye themperours sister, and besides many
other towns and Castles, he took The Turk takes Belgrade.
Belgrade the chief fortress of Hungary, and placed therein a garrison. Whilst
Caesar makes his abode in Flaunders and Germany, great seditions arose in
Spain: Wherefore to the intent he might remedy the thing in time, having first
appointed a counsel to minister the law, Commotfos in Spain.
and to see to the affairs of thempire, he saileth again into Spain. But
before he took his journey, the states of Thempire were all ready assembled at
Norinberge concerning diverse matters, but chieflye the Turkyshe war: And
Caesar sending forth his proclamation at the later end of March, warns
chiefly all ecclesiastical parsons, to pray The lady Mart assured to the^peror.
time should serve, for she was then but seven years of age: Whethersoeuer
brake of, to pay to the other four hundred thousand crowns. The French
king bends all his force toward Italy, to recover that he had lost: you
have heard before of Zuinglius: and now Hugh Bishop of Constance, within
whose province Zuricke is advertised the Senate, what complaints he heard of
Zuinglius, and what a kind of new doctrine he had brought in: he defends
his cause before the Senate, whom he satisfied. After the Bishop wrote his
letters to the College of Canons; whereof Zuinglius was one, and speaking much
of new doctors that troubled the Church, he exhorts them to take heed and
beware of them: And for so much as Leo the Bishop of Rome, and the Emperor
also have by most streigth proclamations condemned this doctrine, he warns
them that they obey the same, and neither alter nor change any thing, till
they that have Authority, should decree some thing by a general counsel,
this was in the month of May. When this Epistle was read in the College,
Zuinglius whom it concerned, writes again to the Bishop, that he
understands right well by whose motiou he does this: He admonishes him not
to follow their counsel, for the truth is invincible, and can not be resysted.

Afterward with a longer letter he answers those, which styrred up the
Bishop to write. Then Zuinglius and certain others entreat the Bishop by
their letters, that he would not hinder the doctrine of the Gospel, nor suffer
any longer that filthy and sklaunderous life of pristes, but permit them to
marrye: And of the same effect he writes to all the Heluetians, admonishyng
the^ not to stop the course of the true doctrine, nor to work any displeasure
against married Who is author of single life.
priests, for of the single life, the Devil him self was author. In many of
their Towns it is the manner, that when they receive a new minister of the
church, they bid him take a Leman, lest he attempt to defyle honest women,
which custom although it be laughed at of many, yet was it wittelye divised
as the time served, and in so great darkness of doctrine depraved. And the
same that they did touching their concubines, ought now to be every where
received for lawful wines. In the mean time Luther, who had kept him self
closse cercertein months, retorneth to Wittenberge, and fearinge lest the
duke Lut. rotaurneth to Wittenberge.
should it take in evil part, he writes unto him in March, signifiyng that
where as he is returned without his commandment, he did so, of no evil will
or contempt: he knows that some will bear him in hand, that the same shall
be dangerous for his grace, for as much as he is condemned, both by the
Bishop of Rome and the emperor. Whose powers both are great: this did he
consider before long and often: but there be three causes, of his return,
first that he was oftentimes requested by sundry letters of the Church of
Wittenberge to return, whose desire he could not but accomplish, for that
the same people are properly committed to his charge of God, and ought not to
be neglected. And albeit that some are much offended with this refourmation of
doctrine and report evil thereof yet knows he most certainly, that this his
profession is unto God most acceptable.

Secondarely in the time of his absence, through the craft of the Devil (who
can not abide this light of the Gospel, there was styrred up trouble in his
church, which unless he him self were present, could not be well appeased,
which matter was so great and weighty that it might be in no wise neglected,
for if the thing might have been dispatched by letters, he could right
easelye have forborne Wittenberge. Thyrdely, he says, he fears and does in
manner foresee, a wonderful great tempest in Germany, which so racklesly does
contemn Luther foreseeth the teni pest coming.
this present benefit of God: For many in deed do embrace the true doctrine,
but in their living they sklaunder it, abusing the liberty of the spirit,
after their carnal appetit. Others be wholly given to quench and oppress the
word, they rare not how, which contempt of his word, God must needs
punnishe with one plage after an other, as he did in times past the Jews and
their city Jerusalem: Wherefore it is his part and such others as he is, to
admonish all men hereof with their whole force and diligence: for albeit they
should travail in vain, and be laughed at, yet may not they therefore leave
their office undone, seeing that it pleases God, who has committed unto them
the cure of souls: wherefore he prays him not to be offended, that he is
thus returned, being neither called nor commanded of him: for sithe it is
altogether Christ's cause, his trust is, that he shall sustain no displeasure
or peril for his return.

The trouble which in his absence (he said) was in his Church, was this:
Andreas Caralostadius, in the mean time that Luther was absente, preached
contrary doctrine, and disorderlye styrred up the people, to cast the Images
out of the Church:

For the which cause Luther being called again of his friends, dispraiseth the
rashenes of Carolostadius, showing that first the Images should have been
removed out of the peoples hearts, being instructed, that God is not pleased
with Images, but with faith only: And then if they should be taken away, the
same to be done by the Magistrates, and not by the tumulte and rage of the
common people. The same time began a sect of them, that said, they had talk
with God, who had commanded them, that sleyng all wicked men, they should
begin a new world, wherein only the holy and innocent people should live and
bear rule. These kept them selves priuelye in that part of Saronie that
lies by the river of Sala, whose opinion (as says Luther) Carolostadius also
favored: And when he could not bring his matters to pass at Wittenberge,
being defaced by Luthers authority, he went from thens unto them: Of this
sort of men was Thomas Muncer, which styrred up the people against their
magistrates in Thuringe and Franconie, as shall be recyted in his place.

Luther hearing yt in the land of Boheme there were some which in common
assemblies counseiled to receive again the Bishop of Romes Luther writes to
the Bohemers.
authority, or else there should never be end of contention and
controversies, he writes unto them in the month of Auguste, that their name
was in times past odiose, and hated of him, before such time as he knew the
Bishop of Rome to be Antichriste: But now, syns God has restored to the
world the light of the Gospel, he judges far otherwise, and so has
professed in his works, in so much that now the Bishop and all his
Clientes are much more offended with him, the^ they are with them: His
adversaries have many times said, how he was fled into Boheme, and in deed
he has often wisshed to go thither, but lest they should call his journey a
runnynge away, he has altered his purpose. And now is the matter brought to
such a pass, that there is good hoope, how the Germaynes, and the Bohemers
shall profess the gospel and the same Religion together. Where many be sorry
that they be divided into sects, they are not grieved without just cause, but
if they reuolte unto Papistrie, they shall not only not take away their
sects, but increase and swarm in the Many sects in the popish kingdom.
same. For there is no where mo sects than is in the Romish kingdom, as is to
be seen by the graye Freres which differ much among themselves: And yet are
all such things done and maintained by the Bishop of Rome, whose kingdom
through men's discord, is nourished and establsshed.

For this is the very cause, why he sets Princes together by the ears,
and seeks always to stir up matters of grudge and displeasure. Wherefore let
the^ take goodhede, lest whilst they go about to abolish those lesser sects,
they fall into more pernicious, as al those Romish be utterly incurable. From
the which now through Gods benefit Germanye is latelye delivered. And how there
is no better medicine to take away evil, than if the Pastors of the Church
would setforth the doctrine of the Gospel purely and syncerely. And in case
they can not reteyne the weak people in their dewtie, but that they will
reuolte, at the lest wise let them endeavor to keep still the Lords Supper
wholly, and the memorial of Husse and Hierome of Prage vndetiled. For it may be
that the Bishop will attempt to take these two things from them chiefly.
Wherefore if any of them relent, and graunr the tyrant both, it shall not be
well done of them. How be it though (...) Boheme do reuolte, yet will he set
forth and commend the doctrine of Husse unto all posterity. Wherefore he
prays and exhorts them (...) persevere in that state of Religion, which
they have defended (...) with much blood and valeauntnes, neither through
their (...)yng blemishe the gospel, that now florisheth.

And all beit that al things be not well established among them: yet will not
God fail them, but when he sees time he will stir up some faithful
minister to reform Religion, so that they will be constant, and utterly refuse
the fylthines and wickedness of the Romisshe Bishop. As concerning the
Bohemers thus it stands.

After the death of John Husse, the people of Boheme were divided Three sects
of the Bohemers.
into three sects. Oue part took the Bishop of Rome for the head of the
Church, and the Uicar of Christ. Another sort received the Lords Suppes in
both kinds, and in their Masses had certain things rehearsed in their vulgar
tongue, differing in nothing else from the Papists. The third sort were called
Picardes, they call the Bishop of Rome Antichriste, and the whore of Babylon,
described in the Revelation: they admit nothing but the Bible, they chose
their own priests and Bishops: they forbid no man to mary: they pray not
for the dead, as for holy days and ceremonies, they have but very few. After
this Luther compiled a Book against the false named order of Lu. writes
against the Bishops.
Bishops, in the preface whereof (he says) it is to them great shame that so
many of them as they be with their great liuinges and honorable titles,
prosessyng them to be masters of the whole Scriptures, yt they dare not come
to dispute with him only before indifferent Judges, being so often provoked
thereunto. Wherefore (he says) that from hence forth, he will no more submit
his writings unto them, as he did at Worms, for the Doctrine is not his, but
Christ's. Who lives and reigns for ever, who will once restrain their
madness, and bluddye enterprises.

By the decrees of the Bishop of Rome, and the^peror, the name and mark of
that great Beast is taken from him, for the which he tha^keth God highly, that
has delivered him out of the stiking do^geon of most filthy errors, and wicked
doctrine, and lightened him with the true knowledge of his word, whereof he is
so certain, yt he will not herafter submit his doctrine to the judgment, no
not of any Angel, but by the testimony thereof, to judge both him self, and
all them, and the Angels also. Wherefore, he warns the^ to put no trust in
their tyrany, for the more that they swell in their malice and envy against
him, the more boldly will he proceds in his purpose, for Christ lives and
reygneth, which can, and will, confound their cruel and bloddy enterprises:
he would wish in deed their amendment, but if yt will not be, he will have such
continual war with the^, as shall never be reconciled: And where as they
charge him, that his frank rebuking of the^, should stir up the people
against him, in that they do him much wrong: for it is to be proved by the
Scriptures, yt such reprehe^sions are necessary, when the pastors of Churches
bevnlearned, wicked, and obstinate, neither doing their duty themselves, nor
permitting others to do, yt would, and can do it right well. Now to the counsel
at Norinberge, Lewis king of Hu^gary sent his ambassadors, who lame^tably
co^plaining of the Turks great cruelty, desired strong and continual aid.
Thither sent also Adria^ Bishop Adrian writes to the duke of Sa.
of Rome Hierome Rorare, one of his cha^berlaines with letters to duke
Friderike signifiyng yt he was right glad to hear of thasse^bly at Norinberge,
trusting yt there shall be some thing done, yt shall concern the common weal
for the which cause, he has also determined, by the consent of his Cardinals
tose^d his Ambassador thither. And in yt mean while thought good to se^de this
man before, to signify unto him, who^ he has evermore loved derely, his good
will and affection toward the common wealth, as he shall better know by his
Ambassador yt follows: he exhorts and prays hi, yt he which is a price of
the^pire, in the tuition of the which Empire the church of Rome consists,
would travail and co^sult diligently, for the things yt concern the dignity
of thapostolical church and the tra^quilitie of the common weal, and to follow
herein the steps of his noble progenitors: desyringe him to give further
credit to Jerome, in such things as he has wylled him to debate with him.
Farna^do Archduke of Austriche was a straight executer of the sentence given
the year before against Luther, and in the Dukedom of Wittenberge, which he
held at the same time, he set forth a sore proclamation the.xxvj. day of
Noue^bre, promisyng rewards to the promotors, and in all his own provinces he
punished extremely all those yt obeyed not the Popes laws. Reucline dies.
This year departed Reucline, a pure aged man: who^ Erasmus of Roterodame
commended with a goodly Dialoge, attributyng unto him immortality, and the
excellency in the knowledge of all three tongues. At the latter end of
Nouembre, Adrian Bishop of Rome sends letters to the whole assembly at
Norinberge: That sins the time he was The Pope writes letters to at the
princes of Germany.
first chosen to thoffice of Apostleship, he never wished for thing more, than
yt he might in every condition accomplish the dewtie of a good pastor,
suffering no one sheep of his flock to go far a stray, for as much as might be
done through his vigilant eye, and carefulnes: And hereof he takes God to be
his witness, who has auaunced him unworthy, to this dignity, which he never
looked for: And to the intent he might more easily atteine to his purpose, he
has greatly exhorted all kings and princes, to abstain from civil wars:
And if they will needs make war, to bend all their forse and power against
the enemies of the Christian faith: And the same yt he assaied to persuade
others, he has performed him self: having sent a great sum of money to the
knights of the Rhodes, which at this present are in great danger of the^peror
of Turks: Afterward calling home his remembrance of foreign periles, and
loking more narrowly upon domestical evils, he hears, to his great
disco^fort, yt Martin Luther (who has oftentimes been gently, and fatherly
admonished) at the length, when there was none other remedy, condemned and
banisshed by certain Uniuersities, by Leo his predecessor, and also by
themperor, by the common consent, is not yet put to silence, but still at
liberty, setting forth daily new books, by the which the christian religion,
and al honest living is sore decayed: Which thing greueth hi so much the more,
for that he hears say, how diverse of the nobility favor him, and that
the matter is so far gone, that Ecclesiastical parsons are in danger to
lose both lands and dignity, through out Germany, touching ye which things,
certain have already styrred up civil war: It is 1. Corin. (...).
trewly spoken of Paul, yt iiedes there must be Heresies, but as things stand
now, it chau^seth most out of ceason. But the devil is disposed to wrap us in
sundry calamities at one time: for through his instigation, the fury of the
Turks, and the Heresy of Luth. oppress us both at once: And although it were
for us possible to disco^fite the foreine enemy: yet so long as this
domestical adversary is vnua^quished, it should litel prevail. What time he
was yet in Spain, he heard much of Luthers false opinions, and albeit it
grieved him yt such an evil should spring in the country where he was borne, yet
did he comfort him self with.ij. things.

First, for that his trust was, that so trifelynge and wicked a doctrine
should have been despised of all men.

Secondely, that such pestilente plant brought out of an other place, should
not lightly take root in that country. Which had always engendered the
roters out of Heresies. But where it has chau^sed otherwise, whether it be by
the just judgment of God, or through a certain negligence, and racklesnes of
such as should have redressed it in time.

Uerelye they had need to look to it, lest whilst they work slowlye herin,
they appear either to have forgotten their old virtue, or else to approve this
wickedness, alledgyng among other things, what a shame it were for so strong
and so constaunt a nation to swerve from that religion, which Christ and his
Apostles have left us, which so many Martyrs, and notable persons, which also
our forefathers have kept and observed, at the motion of a sorry Friar which
has followed and professed the same him self many years. As though we had
erred Luthers Friar.
so many hundredth years. As though Christ which has promised to be ever
among us, would have suffered his church to remain so long in errors. As
though he were only wise, and styrred up of God for this intent, to open the
error of the whole world: which things are doubtless to all that wise be, a
very mockerye, and be laughed at: But they have a deuilish purpose, that under
the pretense of Christian liberty, they may contemn all law, rule, and
authority, and work what outrage they list: for seeing they have already
committed sacrilege, and irreverently handled the laws of holy Bishops and
counsels, yea cast they them in the fire: think you that they will know or
obey any civil Magistrate? but as they have begone to sley Priests, and to
enter upon their possessions, so will they in fine, end their mischeuous
enterprises with the Princes themselves, their wives, children and families:
Wherefore he prays and exhorts them, and for the authority, and office
that he bears (as the successor of Peter, and Christ's vicar) also charge
and commands them; that layinge all displeasure a part with new reconciled
minds, they come wholye together, and quench that common and domestical
fla^me, punishing Luther, if he do not amend according to that new decre made
by the^peror and them. Following herin thexample of their elders at the counsel
of Co^stance, which burned there John Husse, and Hierome of Prage, as they well
deserved, whose virtue in case they now would imitate, God should not fail
the^, and then might they also be in the more hope to give the repulse to the
Turk, with all his violence: Then will he bestow all his treasures, yea and
his life also, for the flock committed to his charge, the rest, as concerning
Luther, they shall know of his Legate Fraunces Cheregate Bishop of Aprutia,
unto whom he prays them to give credit. The civil war that he spoke of,
was betwyxte Richard The war of Treuers.
Archebyshoppe of Treuers, and Fraunces Sickynge, a noble man, that favored
Luther very much: notwithstanding the cause of that war was not for
Religion, but for because the Bishop would not suffer two men within his
Jurisdiction, for whom he became suertie, to answer to the Law: for so
mentions the writing, wherein Fraunces sent him defiaunce, about the latter
end of Auguste. Bishop Adrian wrote letters of the same effect to certain
others also and after he had greatly detested the doctrine of Luther, he
required the Senate of Strasbourge, that they should suffer no Books of his
nor The Popes letters to Strasburge.
of his adherentes to be Printed, and that such as were set forth already,
they should not only suppress, but burn also. For he hears say, how
such manner of Books are put in Print by their men, and the contrary works
refused. Whereunto unless they obey, he threateneth them with the wrath and
vengeance of God: For although they persevere never so much in the old
Religion: yet unless they take from others the liberty to offend, and the
occasyon of error, let them not look to escape unpunished.

But where he says, that whilst he was in Spain, he heard of Luther, thus
it stands. The stock of Aorian.


This Adrian was a poor man's son of Utrecht, in the egg of Hollande, who
for his learning, which he got in the University of Louain, was called to
be Scolemaster to Charles that now is Emperor. And afterward being sent
Ambassadoure into Spain, he obtained the Bishopric of Derthuse, of the king
Ferdinando, after whose death, when the government came unto king Charles, he
remained there as chief of his counsel. At the same time Bishop Leo
Dissension betwixt Leo and his Cardinals.
fell at variaunce with his Cardinals (which had conspired his death) in so
much as he dispatched so many, what with exile, and what with imprisonnement,
that he made one and thirty new Cardinals at one time, partly for his own
defense, and partly to get money, among whom this Adriane was one: Who
afterward whilst the Emperor went to be crowned in Germany, had the
government of Spain in his absens. And when Leo the tenth died, whereas Julius
Medices and Alexander Farnesius, labored excendyngly for it, Adriane being
absent and unknown, was chosen Bishop the.ix. day of January in the year
of our Lord, a thousand five hundred twenty and two. Who hearing thereof,
wrote letters of thanckes to the College of Cardinals, for the good opinion
they had of him.

And whereas iii. Cardinals were appointed to be sent to him Ambassadors into
Spain, he wills them to spare their pains, for so shortly as may be, he
will come to Rome him self. He writes moreover to the Senate, and people of
Rome (who were not a litel displeased that a stranger should have that
dignity) promisinge them, what soever pleasure he could show them.

And a few months after chaunsynge on a fair wind, he takes shyppynge
into Italy, and arryueth at Rome, in the monthe of August. And all beit that at
the same time Caesar was coming out Flaunders (to appease the rebellyon) was
arrived in Spain, yet departed he, and never bad him fare well, but wrote unto
him gentell letters, signifiyng that he had great have.

At the which time Soliman Emperor of Turks, had besieged the Rhodes three
months, and in the seventh month, when the knights of the same had defended
them selves most valeauntly, being than destitute of all aid and succor, he
took it by composition, the.xxv. of Dece^ber, not only to our great loss,
but shame also. At that self same time Cheregate the bishop of Romes
Ambassador, came to Norinberg, and upon new years day he sent from thens to the
Senate of Strasbourgh the Bishops letters, offering his service, in case they
would writ an answer. Whilst many bare grudge toward Zuinglius, and diverse
as well within the city as without, preched against his doctrine as wicked,
and swaruing from the faith, especially the black Freres. And he again
affirmed it to be agreeable to the Scriptures, and that he was able to prove,
the senate of Zuricke called a co^uocation of all the priests A disputation at
Zuricke.
within their Jurisdiction at the.xxix. of January for the controversy about
Religion at what time all men shall be heard there, so much as shall be requisite.
They require also very lovingly by their letters the The questions of Zuinglius.
the same in all places, to the intent men might come to the disputation
fournished and prepared. And what time the Borowmaster had done speaking, he
propounded the same again, desyring them to join with him in disputation.
There, when Faber had showed the cause of his coming, he goes about to
persuade, that the place was not mere, to decide matters of Religion, but that
the same apperteineth to a general counsel, which he trusted should be
shortly. But Zuinglius required him to dispute, and if he had any thing to
say, not to dissemble the matter: he said he would confute his doctrine by
writing.

After many words had betwixt them, when neither he, nor any other would come
forth to dispute, the Senate, breaking up the assembly, commands, that
through out their dominions (the traditions of men, laid a side) the gospel
should be taught syncerely out of the Books of the old and new Testament.

The fourth Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion
and the common Weal, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the fourth Book.
POpe Adriane by his Ambassadoure utters many things, and confesses the
wickedness of Rome. The Princes of Germany answer him: and propounde conditiond
of the counsel. An alteration is in Denmark. Christierne the king sleeth. He
speaks of the impostes over Germany, of the first fruictes, and the tenthes.
Of the dear Mantel of the Archbishops. Of the burning of two Austen Freres. Of
the decree of Norinberge expounded by Luther, and of certain books written by
him. Of the complaint made of him by the king of England. Adriane dies,
Clement succedeth him. Trouble in Swysserlande for uinglius doctrine, and at
Strasbourgh for the marriage of Priests. At the assembly of Norinberge,
Cardinal Campegius came Ambassador from Clemente, who prays Duke Friderike
to be there. After having spoken to the Counsel, the princes make him
answer and reply. Troubles arrise in Swiserlande against them of uricke:
who render a reason of their doctrine to the Ambassadors sent by the other
Ca^tons. The Bishop of Constance defends Images, and yet not wythstandyng his
writing, Images were beaten down, through out all the dominion of uricke. To
the foresaid assembly of ^orinberge, themperor sent his Ambassade. They of
Strasburgh and their Bishop utter their controversy to Campegius. After the
said assembly, King Ferdinando and others make a league against the Gospel.
The war of the Bowres.

BEsides the former letters, Bishop Adrian The request of Adrian to dispatch Lu.
had prescribed to his Ambassador, what he should furthermore say, and
expressed the same in writing: First, that he should account before the
Princes, what a grief it was to him, that Luther should stir up this trouble
and sedition, for that the thing concerned the loss of souls, and destruction
of the flock committed him of Christ to keep: secondly, that it has chasised
in the same cuntreye, where he himself was borne, which nation was ever
furthest of from all suspecion of Heresye. Wherefore he desires greatly, that
they would help to remedy the matter so soon as might be, lest through
longer delay, the same thing happen unto Germany, as did to the land of
Boheme. Affyrmyng that he will neither spare cost nor labor herin, beseching
them that they will every man after his power, do the like, there being many
weightye causes why they so ought to do.

First, for the glory of Gods holy name, which through this Heresye is
chiefly obscured, the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church defaced, and in manner
quite abolished: the love of our neighbor (unto whom Charity binds us) to
show the right way. For Germany, which was wont to have the chief praise for
Religion, now by reason of this reuolting, their fame and estimation grows in
contempt and ignomie. For where they might easily have dispatched Luther, and
also quenched his heresies, they would not, degenerating herin from their
ancestors, which left a notable example of their virtue at Co^stance. Is it
not a most open wrong that he does both to them, and also to their elders?
For where as they followed the Religion of the catholic church of Rome, now
by his judgment, that condemns the same Religion, they are all damned. Let
them wey and consider with them selves, what these fellows do purpose and
intend: Uerely under pretense of the liberty of the Gospel, to subuerte and
take away al laws and Magistrates.

And albeityt Luther seemed in the beginning to impugn only the ecclesiastical
power, as tyrranical and wicked: yet is this his intent, that after he has
once persuaded that Christians are by no laws bounden to obey the Magistrate,
he may open the way unto all men, to work what mischief they list. And
therefore great danger hangs over them also. Hitherto they do craftily and
traiterouslye hyde their purpose, and flatter the Magistrate, to the intent
they may freely utter their malice upon the clergy: but when they be oppressed,
they will doubtless attempt further: For they may see already by experience what
grudge, hatred, tumultes and offenses, this Heresy has alreadi brought into
the common wealth. Which euyles unless they be suppressed in time, it is to
be feared lest God (who has given them the power of the sword) will plage
this their so great negligence, both with their own private, and also with
the common destruction of all Germany. Luth. compared with Bahomet.


For Luther differs not much from the sect of Mahomet, which permits men
to mary many wives, and after to forsake the same, by the which policy that
mischievous man bewitched, and allured the greatest part of the world: which
thing though Luther permits not, yet does he advise all them to mary, which
have vowed chastity, gyuing the reigns of liberty to man's lust and
concupiscens, that he may have the mo of his confyderacie, to the utter
destruction of the common wealth, namely of Germany.

He said therefore to be their parts to put in execution the decrees of Leo and
Caesar, to the intent they may avenge Gods glory, avoid the sklaunder of the
country, and eschew the present danger, yt hangs over their own heads.
Furthermore, if there be any yt say, how Luther was condemned before his
matter was heard, or that it were reason, the thing should be debated, before he
were executed, they think not well: for Christ has taught us the rule of
faith and Religion (whose authority we must follow, and not reason of the
articles of our faith, nor inquire the cause of this or that precept: He is in
deed to be heard when he is examined, whether he spoke this thing or that in
his sermon: whether he setforth this book or that: but touching faith and the
Sacraments, we may not permit him to reason or defend those things which he
has written thereof: for in this we must follow the use and custom of the
Church, and in no wise swerve from the same. Again, since his doctrine is such
as has been heretofore condemned by general counsels, there is none account
to be made thereof.

Moreover, there should be no end of contention, if it might be lawful for
every private man, to call in question those things, which witty and great
learned men have with much deliberation established: wheresoever is any
asse^blie or fellowship of me^, there be certain laws which all they are
bounden to observe: how much more ought the same to be done, what time any
thing is openly establisshed in the church? But seeing these men do not only
contempne the laws and decrees of counsels, and ancient fathers, but also
burn them, they ought suerly to be punished as breakers of the common peace
and quietness. Nevertheless he confesses how that God, which is the revenger of
all wrong, does thus plage his church for the sins of the ministers
thereof, as the Scripture says. The iniquity of the people proceeds
Iniquity proceeds from the Priests.
from the priests and elders: for certenlye (says he) they have sinned at
Rome, these many years full grievously, by sundry ways, even from the high
Bishop to the lowest Ecclestasticall parson, and not one to be excused: for
the which cause, calling mekely to God for The sin of Rome spread over all the
world.
pardon. He will endeavor to redress the thing, and see that the court of
Rome, which perchance has been the occasion of all this mischief, be first
sharply reformed: And that as it has been the example of vice, so it may be
the beginning of amendment, and Patron of virtue. which (he says) he must do
by little, and litell, for that al sudden mutations be dangerous, and as the
common proverb is, He that blows his nose ouermuche, shall wringe out
blood. This writing did Luther translate in to the vulgar toungue, and set to
his notes in the Lut. expounds the Popes saiynge.
margente, and where he says by little and little, Luther affyrmeth that to
be the space of many men's lives. But in that he so frankely bewrayed the
vicious living of the court at Rome, he got no great love of the Cardinals (as
it is reported) Nevertheless this (they say) is ever the bishop of romes
policy, when he will defer the counsel, or delay the hearing of the matter,
he will promise largely: that whilst men trust The mean to let counsels
upon his promise, he may find the means, what by the favor of Princes,
and what by force of Arms, to maintain his power and dignity, which is like
to fall in some danger, by fire and general counsels: Whilst the Bishops
Ambassador declared thus, the Princes complained that the leagues, which they
had made in times past with Bishops of Rome, were broken there diverse ways.
Whereof the Bishop being certifyed by the letters of his Ambassador,
answers them by the same, that such things as his predecessors did, it
lies not in him to help, but he misliked the handelyng of the matters at
Rome, when he was but a private man, and purposed no less, but to refourme the
same though no man had spoken therein, and to suffer no man to sustain any
wrong, much less them, whom for the common country sake, he coueteth
chiefly to gratify: And where they desire that their actions commenced might
be returned in to Germany so soon as the Judges and advocates, which are
fled out of Rome for the Plage, shall return, he will inquire of the case,
and do therein that which shall seem reasonable. He commanded moreover his
Ambassador, to require an answer of the Princes, what (in their opinion)
were the best way to destroy this pestiferous sect, that he may understand
in time, what shall be his part to do therein.

These things being declared to the counsel, the Princes and other The answer
of the prices.
states make answer. First, in recityng briefly his demaundes, they say they
are right glad that it has pleased God to place him in the government of the
church, which in this perilous time had need of such a Pastor, who bears
such a zeal to the common wealth, and takes such pains to set kings at
quietness, and emploieth his treasure to the repressing of the Turks violence,
which things they rejoice to hear of: for by these civil wars thempire is
decayed, and the Turks power increased, where no man prepares any Army to
resist him. Here be the Ambassadors of the king and Princes of Hungary, which
not without great lamentation have recited, what cruel things they have
suffered, and what danger they stand in daily: Wherefore they desire him
which is the father and Pastor of all others, that he will persevere in this
most holy purpose and travail, yt either a suer peace, or else a long treuce
may be taken, yt in the mean time they may make preparation, to withstand the
Turks violence, and recover the countries of the Empire, which are lost:
Whereunto they promise their aid both of men and money.

As concerning Luther, if any displeasure be grown in Germany by the means of
his doctrine, they are right heartily sorry therefore, as it becomes them no
less, and desire also to remedy the evil, knowing it to be their duty to
obey both him and the emperor: another will Why Luth. was not punished.
they degenerat from their progenitors herein: where he complains that he is
not already punished according to the Emperors decree, it is upon no light
consyderation omitted: for all degrees do complain most heinously of the
court of Rome. And in manner al men are so well instructed by the preachinges
and books of Luther, that in case the decree should be put in execution, it
would doubtless styre up great sedition, and many would so coustre it to be done
for this intent, that the truth should be oppressed, and the light of the
Gospel extinguisshed for the mayntenaunce of such open crimes, as were not
to be borne withal: which persuasion most certainly would stir up a
rebellion of the people against the Magistrates: for it tan not be denied, and
he himself grants also, that they live dissolutely and vitiously at Rome,
to the great decay of Religion: Wherefore in that he dyssembleth nothing, nor
clooketh the disorder of the court at Rome, but promyseth a reformation, it
deseruith much praise, especially if he perform in deed the thing which he
has promised by words and writynge: which they earnestly require him that
he would do, for otherwise there is no certain or long quietness to be looked
for. Germany is much impouerished with wars and other charges, and with
tributes that be extraordinary, so that it is hardely hable to sustain the
necessary charges of the Common wealth, and to give aid to the Hungarians and
others against the Turk: Now in what sort the Germans certain years past,
did permit, that their Bishops and others of the Clergy, should for certain
time be tributaries to the Bishop of Rome: they suppose he is not ignorant:
they co^ditioned at the same time, that all that money when time served, should
be employed upon the war against the Turk: But now both the time is
expired, and his predecessors, Bishops of Rome, have not put the money to the
same use that they ought to have done: for the which cause, now that a
subsidy is to be gathered in all countries of the Empire for the Turkishe
war, men do grudge and mutine. And think that those great sums of money,
which have been levied in many years, and kept for the same purposes, should
now serve the turn, and they to be no further charged: They desire therefore
that from hence forth he demand not any such tribute, but permit the same
to be brought into the common treasure house of the Empire: For thus shall
many men be quieted in Germany, and when need shall require, there shall not
want money, to aid foreine nations against the force and violence of the
Turks: where he areth their counsel in this alteration of Religion:
consydering that the matter consists not only in Luthers doctrine, but also
in many other abuses and errors crepte into the Church, and mayntened by
long custom of men that be of a corrupt life and judgment, as he him self
confesses: They ca^ see no better way, to redres al these things. Than by a
free general counsel, which the Emperor and he being The manner of a free
counsel.
the chief Magistrates in Christendom, may sommon in some city of Germany.
As Mentz, Straseboroughe, Metz, or Collen: which they think also good for the
common wealth, to begin as shortly as might be, and at the furthest within
ayere. Yet under this condition, that as many as shall be there present, of what
estate, or degree so ever they be, shall take their oath to speak freely and
not to hyde, what so ever shall seem to make for the glory of God, and the
profit of the common wealet or else it shall be suspected, and do more harm then
good: And that this may the rather be done accordynglye, they will see that
Luther in the mean time shall write no mo books doubtinge not, but that
Fridericke the noble Duke of Saxony will assiste them herein: And that the
Preachers shall teach the Gospel syncerely and reverently, after the
interpretations approved by the Church, and that the Printers shall Print
nothing but the same shall be first perused and aucthorised by certain
learned men, appointed by the Bishops and all matters of controversy to be
reserved for the counselles.

And where among other things, his Ambassador spoke of priests that married
wives: for so much as there is no punishment appointed for them in the Civil
law, they think it not a miss that such as have offended, should be
punished after the Canon law: Finally they beseech him to take in good part
their opinion touching every thing: for it does proceed of a sincere mind,
which both tendereth the common weal, and favors also his dignity.

In the same time chaunsed a great alteration in Denmark. And thus befell the
case. Christierne the first of that name king of De^marke An alteratiu in
Denmark
Norweye, and Suecia, had two sons John, and Fridericke, John did succeed his
father, and had war with the Suecians, which rebelled, notwithstanding by
composition the matter was appeased. This John had a son named Christierne,
who, when he was but six years of age, was proclaimed king, his father yet
living, and six and twenty years after that, when his father was dead, he was
crowned in the year of our Lord.M.D.xiiij. During whose reign the Suecians
rebelled again, and set up Steno Stura, to have the government. Christierne
made all his power against them, and after many battles and sundry sieges, he
subdueth them, commau^dyng that this Steno, which was slain in battle, and
buried; should be taken up and brent. This was in the year.M.D.xx. the
Suecians being thus vanquished, Gustauus Erixonius, a noble man having aid;
as it was thought, of the Lubeckes, stirred them up to a new rebellion, and had
good fortune. He pretended first to have done it for Steno his children, and
for the more assurance, married his daughter. when the king had lost this
province, and was evil beloved at home (for he governed the commonwealth
eruelly, and offended all men, when also his uncle Fridericke, and they of
Lubecke moved war against him: fearing lest this broile at the length would
turn to his utter destruction, fled The king of Denmark flecth.
away with his children and his wife Isabell, sister to Charles the emperor,
when he had reigned.ix. years; and first aryued in Selande themperours
province. Immediately the states of the realm, calling a counsel, do create
his uncle Fridericke duke of Holse an aged man, king, being aided herin by
the^ of Lubecke. And then sending abroad their letters, to the Emperor, to the
Bishop of Rome, and the other Princes of the Empire, they render a reason why
they did so, they accuse him of most grievous crimes, and say, how he is
banisshed by his just deseruinges. The same thing also does Fridericke and
the City of Lubecke, which is of most authority and power in all those
parties. But Christierne finding a good writer, Cornelles Scepper, a Flemmyng
very well learned, answers to these crimes and desires Cornelles Scepper.
the states of the Empire (assembled at Norinberge) of aid and succor. He had
one son, whom the Emperor took unto him: and two daughters, Dorothie and
Christine. The same year his friends attempted war, to have restored him, but
it was in vain. The Emperor being entangled with the French wars. The
Ambassodor of Rome had complained of the preachers of Norinberge, that they
should teach evil doctrine, and required that they might be laid fast by the
feet: But the Princes supposed how he was miss infourmed: for the Preachers
say, they are had in great estimation with the people. And if ought should be
done to them, all men would take it to be done of a set purpose, to oppress
the truth: which thing might cause a rebellion. Notwithstanding they will
appoint certain men that shall make inquisition of the whole matter, and therein
do as shall be reasonable.

What time the Princes had answered to all the Bishop of Romes demaundes,
they gather into certain articles, such things as they would have done by
him and other Bishops in Germany, which were such as infringed their liberties,
made Germany bare of money, and keptmen in great bondage, which they said
plainly they would no longer suffer, but in case they were not reformed with
speed, they would seek a redress the^ selves. Concerning the tribute of the
Clergy, thus it was. Among other means to gather up money, this was one,
that Bishops and other spiritual parsons should pay to the Bishop of
Rome, after the rate of the benefice, a certain sum of The beginning of the
first fruictes and tenthes.
money, commonly called, first fruits and tents. Some do ascribe this device
to John the.xxij. others unto Boniface the.ix. The prete^se was fair and
goodly, that there might be Treasure ready at all times against the Turks and
Saracenes.

And for as much as at that time the authority of the Bishops of Rome was
grown great, and esteemed holy, it was easily granted. Englishmen only refused
to pay, namely for their small benefices. This continued till the counsel of
Basil, where it was put down, and brought up again by Eugenius the fourth,
who made that counsel frustrate, and so has continued ever syns, but yet not
with out much repining. For in the year of our Lord, a thousand and fine
hundred, what time the Emperor Maximilian held a counsel at Aus^^rge about the
Turkishe war, it was decreed that Ambassadors should be sent to Alexander the
sixth, that he should aid the common wealth. And give those yearly revenues
unto this use that were granted for the same purpose. But tharchebishops or
Metropolitanes, receane of him a certain sign of honor and dignity made of
Flax and wolle, they call it a Palle. For the which they must pay a great
piece of money to the Bishop A Romish Palle.
of Rome, and that in a short space: For he may admit none other Bishop till
he have received his Palle, which he wears always at Mass: but before it
be delivered to him, he must take his oath to own him his faith and
obeidience. And the sixte day of March the Princes at Norinberge set forth a
writing of the things before mentioned, charging all men to observe the same,
under a great penalty, which decree was published in the Emperors name. For
he had establisshed the Senate and judgment before he returned into Spain.
And Fridericke County Palatine was his deputy in that assembly. Two freres
brent at Brusels.


About this time were taken at Bruxels two Monckes of S. Austens order, John
and Henry. Hogostrate a Friar Dominicke, had the^ in examination. They were
asked what they believed? They made answer: how they believed the books of the
Old and New testament, and the Creed of the Apostles, that contained the
Articles of our faith. Again, whether they believed the decrees of the
Counsels, and of ancient fathers? Such of them as are agreeable to the
Scriptures. Whether they think it deadly sin, if a man break the decrees of
the fathers, and of the Bishop of Rome? It is only ascribed to Gods
commandments to condemn or save. When they perseuered herin, they were
condemned to dye: But they gave thanks to God yt they should suffer for the
glory of his name. When they were brought forth to suffer, The Ceremonies of
disgratyng.
all men marueyled to behold their constancy, so were they burnt the first
day of July. But before they were executed, they were disgraded, which thing is
done unto priests only. For being condemned Heresye by an Ecclesiastical
Judge, he has put upon him an albe and a Uestement, and delivered into his
hands a Chalice with wine and water, also the gilt Patent with a singing Cake.
And so knelyng upon his knees, the Bishops deputy takes from him the
things before named, commaundynge him that he shall no more say Mass for the
quick, and the dead. And with a piece of glass he skrapeth his fingers in
ioyninge him that he never herafter halowe any thing. After he takes the rest
of the things from him, with certain curses joined thereunto. When he is
exempted thus out of the number of Priests, he is also put from ye rest of the
ordres by the which he came unto priesthod. Then he is he turned naked and
decked again with a laymans apparel and so delivered to the magistrate, whom
the bishops chaunceloure entreats yt he would determine no harm against his
life nor body, for they use this Ceremony, lest they being holy men, should
seem to be the Aucthors of death or bloodshed.

When the decree of the Empire made at Norinb. was of many taken diuersely, of
some also contemned. Luth. Writing his letters to the Luth. interprets the
(...) of the Princes.
Princes, does advertise them yt he has read it reverently and with great
pleasure: First where they command the gospel to be taught after the
interpretatio^s approved by the church, some in deed understand it to be after
ye accustomed manner of Thomas of Aquine, Du^se, and such others as the Bishops
of Rome have allowed, but he takes it to be mont of more ancient writers, as
Hilary, Cypria^, Auste^, and such others. And yet not so much credit to be
given unto the^, nothing like, as to the scripture. The Bible to be preferred
before all others.
Thus he doubts not but they me^t it, and so does he take it: which is the
cause yt certain of the chiefest nobility would not subscribe to it, nor suffer
it to be proclaimed in their countries. Secondly, where bishops should appoint
mete me^ to be present at sermons, which should give gentle admonition, if any
thing were a miss (he says) the decre is good, but that the Bishops though
they would can not observe the same, for yt they want learned men, and have no
other but such as have learned nothing else but sophistry. And where they
prohibit yt no books be printed before learned me^ appointed thereunto have
first perused the^, he will not be against it so yt it co^cerue no books of
scripture, which in no wise ought to be inhibited. Finally where they have
decreed yt priests which mary wives or forsake their order shall be punished
according to the Canon law: yt to be to over hard a thig: For as they confess,
if the gospel be preached sincerely, tha^ must the Cano^ law be much qualified.
Afterward he bewalleth the misery and frowardnes of our time, yt in so clear
a light of the gospel, yt extreme law that prohibiteth marriage, is not
abolished which has given thoccasion of so many great evils: yet are they much
to be praised, which are content with the punishment prescribed in the Canon law:
but such as would kill the priests yt marie or leave their order, after they
have by prison and all kind of punnishement tormented the^, are greatly to be
abhorred. Wherefore he besecheth the Princes, that for so much as their
adversaries will not obeie the decre which they might and ought to observe:
the pore priests might be pardoned for yt thing ^ech not in their power to
perform, for every man has not the gift of chastity, and the vows made be
foolish.

After this he set forth a book of ordeining of ministers to the Senate Lut.
wrote to the Senate of Prage.
of Prage, and joins with it a writynge wherein he declares how the Church
has power and authority to judge of every doctrine, and to appoint ministers.
But first, he defyneth the Church to be where so ever the Gospel is
syncerely taught. And the Bishops he calls Images, and heads without
brains, whereof there is not one yt does his duty in any place, namely in
Germany.

And not long after, he wrote of the eschewynge of men's doctrine, Luther wrote
of eschewing the doctrine of men.
wherein (he says) he holds not with them, which do in deed conte^ne the
laws and traditions of men. And yet do nothing which belongs to the dwetie
of a true Christian. After this he prescribes how the Mass and Communion
should be used in the Church of Wittenberge. And says how he has hitherto
wrought slouthfullye, by reason of men's infirmity, and to have had a care one
lie, how he might pluck wicked opinions out of men's minds: but now that
many be confyrmed, it is time to suffer ungodliness in the church no longer,
but that all cloking and simulation set a part, sincere workyng may ensewe
upon pure doctrine. And to this he adds an other writing of holy ceremonies
to be observed in the Church. And again, of the abomination of the private
Mass, which they call the Canon. Wherein he exhorts ye people to flee from
the accustomed sacrifices of the mass, as they would do from the Devil him
self, for the demonstration whereof, he recites in order the Canon of the
Mass, declaryng how full it is of blasphemies against God. Among other
learned men of Germany that favored Luther, Ulriche Hutten, a noble man borne,
The death and works of Hutten.
was one, who died this year not far from Zurick. There be certain works of
his remaining which declare his excellent wit. In the iij. book I showed you
how Luther made answer to Henry king of England. Which after the king had
read, he writes his letters to the The king of England writes to the princes
of Saxony.
Princes of Saxony Fridericke, and John his brother, and to his uncle George,
and grievously co^plaining of Luther, he shows them what danger hangs over
them, and all Germany, by reason of his doctrine: And that it is not a thing
to be contemned or neglected: for the great cruelty of the Turks, which is
now spread so far a broad, had his beginning of a naughty man or two: And
Boheme hard by them, may be a warning for them, to see the thing reformed in
time: he admonishes the^ also, that they suffer not Luther, to translate the
new Testament into the Uulgare tongue: for he is well known to be such a
practisioner, that there is no doubt, but such things as are well written he
with his evil translation, will corrupt and deprave. Unto these letters The
answer of duke George.
Duke George answers very friendly, blaming also Luther excedingly, whose
books (he says) he has banished out of al his dominions, as the most hurtful
enemies that can be. Moreover how he is right sorry that he has written so
extremely against him, and has given commandment through out all his
country, that no man read it, nor sell it, and how, he has punished the
Printer that brought the first Copy thither. In the assembly at Norinberge,
besides matters of Religion, the Princes entreated of peace, and laws, of the
punnisshement of those that obeyde not the laws of the Empire, of continual
aid against the Turk. Which two last were not agreed upon. And all the cities
of thempire, because certain things were enacted, which they sow should be
prejudicial to them, sent their Ambassadors into Sp^ine to the Emperor.
Which ariuynge at Ualolet the sixth day of August. The third day after declared
their message: Unto whom the Emperor answered gently and frankely:
Notwithstanding (he said) the Bishop of Rome had complained to him in his
letters of Strauseborough; Norinberge, and Auspurge, as favorers of Luthers
doctrine, he trusted it were not true, yet would he not hyde it from them, to
thentent they might observe the Bishops decrees and his: (as he thinks they
will do.) These Ambassadors pourge them selves, faiyng: that they do what they
can, to accomplish his will and pleasure. In the mean time dies Bishop
Adrian at the Ides of Septembre, Adrian the Pope dies. Clement succedeth.
and in his place was chosen Clement the vii. of the house of Medices. They of
Zuricke only followed Zuinglius doctrine, the rest of the Suices hated the
same: Wherefore in a common assembly had for the fal^e purpose at Bernes, some
accused Zuinglius that he preached openly, how that such as made league with
other nations, did sell Zuinglius is broughtin hatred.
blood, and eat men's flesh: Zuinglius heringe thereof, wrote that he spoke not
so, but that he said in general, how there were some which abhorred as a
wicked thing to eat flesh, being forbidden by the Bishop The eating of
Flesh.
of Romes law, which think it none offense to sell men's flesh for gold, and
destroy it with weapon: But herin he named no nation: And seeing that vice does
now so much abound, it is his dewtie to rebuke it: but the same does nothing
concern the good and innocent parsons. Zuinglius among other things, taught
that images should be had out of the Church, and the Mass to be put down as a
wicked thing. For the which cause the Senate called a new assembly in their A
new disputation at Zu.
City, whither came great resort, in the month of October. And the
disoutation continued three days. About this time in sundry places, and namely
at Strausburgh: Priests married wives, which thing made Priests married wives.
much contention. For being accused for so doing, they answered that they had
done nothing against Gods law, permittinge all men to marie indifferently.
The Senate of Strausburghe had much a do with the Bishop in this case, who
called them the.xx. day of January any thing against the commandment of God.
The senate entreats the Bishop, that for as much as they refuse not to come
to their answer, and if he should punish them, it were like to bread much
trouble, co^syderinge that the reside ^^o keep Harlots openly, and are nothing
said to he would at the lest defferre it to the end of the imperial counsel.
Which was than at Norinberge, where doubtless such like cases should be
decided. To this later counsel holden this year at Norinberge Clement the
Bishop of Rome sent his Legate, Cardinal Campegius, Pope Clement sends
Campegius to duke Fri.
who had his letters moreover to Friderike duke of Saxony, written very
friendly in January. Signifiynge how he reioysed to hear of this assemblye,
where he should be present him self, trusting that some thing should be
there enacted that might help the Common (...) for the which cause he has
sent thither Cardinal Campegius (...) man of excellent virtue, who can
enfourme the Princes of his carfulness and (...) toward the Common weal,
and devise with him privately of the means of peace and quietness, whereunto
he exhorts him (...) give his mind, for the same thing concerns the
prosperity and dignity of al magistrates. And how he bears a great good will
unto Germany, having good hope that they will not fall from their ancient
virtue, but help to eschew public dangers.

Wherefore he requires him to show all good will and favor to his Legate, of
whom he shall hear all things more at large.

At the six and twenty day of January, the Heluetia^s called a convocation A
decree of the Suyses.
at Lucerne. There was a decree made that no man should mock or contemn Gods
word, which had been taught these thousand and four hundred years, nor the
Mass wherein the body of Christ is consecrated to his honor, and comfort of
the quick and the dead that such as be of lawful age to receive the Lords
supper, do confess them selves to the priestwise in the Lent season, that al
men abstain from flesh on days forbidden, and in Lent also from eggs and
chese. That nothing of Luthers, or any new doctrine be taught privily nor
openly. That such as carry about the relics of the holy ghost, the virgin
Relics of the holy ghost
Mary, or of S. Anthony be not laughed at, and yt they do observe all other
old customs, they that offend herein to be presented to the Magistrates and
punished. When Ca^pegius was common to Norinberge, The Cardinal writes to the
Duke of Saronis.
Duke Friderike was departed thence, wherefore he wrote unto him the last day
of February, and sendinge also the Bishops letters, he lamenteth that
unhappy chance that he can not speak with him presently, having many things
to talk with him from the Bishop of Rome, which can not so well be done by
letters and messengers, and be of such sort as may abide no delay: But
seeing it will be no better, after much gretyng made in the Bishops name and
his own, he says, that albeit the report be great that he should be a
fauorer of these new spronge up Heresies, yet can not the Bishop hitherto,
nor he be so persuaded, for the manyfold and excellent virtues which they
perceive to be in him. And especially, for that he has been ever a great
favorer of Religion, and of the Apostolical Church: whereupon he will not
trust the judgments of others, another leave the good opinion that he has of
him, before he shall see cause, and know it him self: Germany has been
wonderfully altered with in these few years concerning Religion: but he
understands how much the common people do differ from the nobility and
Princes, the rulers of the laws, among whom he is as principal, as well by his
own, as also by deserte of his au^cesters, which have evermore done great honor
to the church of Rome: Wherefore the Bishop requires him that in these
dangerous days, he would after the example of his elders declare his virtue
of stoutenes, not only in mislyking this liberty of the people, but also in
extremely punishing the same: for unless their licentious boldness and
malapertenes be restrained, it will bring the like misery and confusion into
Germany, that it did before time into Boheme and Hongary, which are not yet
quieted: For they that do stubberuely contemn the sacred Laws, and
Ecclesiastical Magistrate, will also undoubtedly work their violence against
the Civil Magistrates, whom they love not: Many are now glad to see the
Pastors of Churches, and the Court of Rome thus troubled and despised: which
perceive full litel, what danger they them selves stand in: But the Bishop,
which as the master of a ship sits watching at the Healme, does foresee
this storm approaching, and has sent him, to warn all the Princes, and him
especially, to beware of this tempest, which is like to distroy, not only the
city of Rome, but also Germany it self. And for the same cause also, has
sent letters by him, and willed him to treat diligently with him of all these
matters, to the intent the tranquillity and quietness of Germany might be
recovered: For he is purposely sent, to lift up them that are fallen, and to
receive unto grace, such as are penitent. Whereunto albeit he is not very fit,
yet trusting upon his gentleness, he will attempt it with all diligence: wherefore
seeing that he has taken this weary and painful journey, he prays him that he
may not want his help and favor herein. And that he would write again
shortly, what he thinks best to be done: And he will do for him again what
he can in the world.

After in the Counsel of the Princes, he first declares how that no man was
willing at Rome to take this voyage into Germany, at Campegius oration to the
Princes at Norinberge.
the last was he appointed, as one, that may thank the Germans for all his
promotions, having two things to treat of, Religion, and the Turkishe war:
And first he marueleth much, that so many great and worthy Princes can bear
with this alteration, and suffer the same Religion, Rites, and Ceremonies,
wherein they were borne and brought up, and their fathers also and progenitors
dead in, to be thus defared and set at naught. Which thing if it be not spedely
reformed, will styre up doubtless, great commotions and rebellion of the people
against their magistrates.

This the high Bishop fearing and consyderyng, has sent him to devise a way
with them, how to remedy this matter. Whose diligens herein, if it be
refused, which as a good father and pastor, wissheth well to all his Children
and sheep, there is no cause hereafter, to lay any blame in him: As touching
the Turks, he denies not, but that there was money gathered for the same
purpose, and brought to Rome, which albeit it was not employed all that ways,
yet may not the common wealth therefore in this calamity of time be neglected:
what hurt that cruel enemy has done, it is not unknown: for by the
negligens and cowardice of our own men, he has taken the Rhodes, and the
chiefest foretresse of Hongary. The Rhodes endured an hard siege many
months; and at last, wantynge all things necessary, when they saw no aid
would come, they yielded: the like chance was in Hongary. Which if he should
subdew wholly and bring under his subjection, it is to be feared, lest they
will become our enemies, much worse than be the Turks: But unless this
contention procedynge of this new doctrine, be first taken away, the other part
of the common wealth can not (in his opinion) be well helped.

Hereunto the Princes answer, that whereas he bears this good The princes
answer.
will unto Germany, they are glad that he came thither, and among them all,
they will chose certain to confer with him, supposing that he has some
order prescribed him of the Bishop and his cardinals, which they have willed
him to follow, knowing the matter so well as they do, for the last year, what
time another Ambassador was here, they wrote unto him their minds, how the
danger of this alteration should be foreseen and remedied. And also what they
required of him to be done for his part. Whereof if he have brought any
answer, they desire him to utter it, to the intent they may the better proceed
in the cause. And as touching Turkishe matters, they confess to be as he has
said, notwithstanding that great war does not only concern The Empire, but
all together, kings and princes of Christendom in like manner: For unless
that they be at peace among them selfs, and give their aid, there can
nothing be done to continue: But for as much as the Turk now, makes great
preparation unto wars, both by sea and Land, they would also know his
opinion herin.

The Legate said again, that whether there were any such way by them devised
to appease the strife about Religion, or whether it were delivered to the
Bishop and Cardinals or no, he can not certainly tell: but the Bishops
good will is much, who has given him full authority in all such matters:
but they which know the men, the manner and custom of the country, must find
out that way, that may lead them to the end wished for.

In the counsel at Worms, the Emperor (by their common assent) The decre of
Worms repeted.
made a decree to have been executed thorowout all Germany, which some obeyed,
and some not: Wherefore this great diversity should be in the Empire, he
knows not: But he thinks good before any thing be determined, to consulte
how it may be executed: he is not comen thither to stir up fire and
dissension (as some report) but all his desire, and the Bishops in like case
is, to make peace and concord, to thentent that such as have erred and
straied, may be reduced into the way, that the decrees of the counsels.
Themperors and Princes proclamations might be observed: concerning their
requests, whether they were made to be sent to Rome, he knows not: But three
copies were brought thither to private men, whetof he had one, but the Bishop
and the College of Cardinals could not be persuaded, that they should be
made by the Princes, but thought rather that some private men had devised for
hatred and malice, that they bare to the city of Rome: Wherein be diverse
things that deny the Bishops authority, smell of Heresye, and be such as
he can not meddle withal. But for others that are not against the Bishop, such
as are grounded upon equity and reason, he will not refuse to treat of: How
be it it seems unto him, that the demaundes should have been propounded with
more modesty, if they had ought to say to the high Bishop. For so did lately
the Spaniardes, which sendyng an Ambassade to Rome, declared ge^tely what their
request was. But whereas they be printed and publisshed abroad, he thinks that
over much: And yet there is no doubt, but that the Bishop of Rome, will do
for Germany what he can. Moreover what power the Turk has, and what
preparation he makes the bishop has good intelligence. And has already great
treasure The pope is well monied.
in a readiness, and will have more. And for so much as the concord of
Christen Princes is very requisite, he has done what he can, that the Emperor,
the French king, and the king of England, having peace together might set
upon the Turk on all hands, and he will employ thereupon all his treasure.
This does the Bishop as a good sheperde foresee and care for peace and
quietness. But in case the sheep will not follow the voice of the Sheperde, he
can do no more, but take it patiently, and commit the whole matter unto God.

Among the Suyces increased daily contention for Religion. And The Suises are
offended with them of Zuricke.
the rest of towns, sendynge their Ambassadors to them of Zurycke, showed
their grief. How that in times past, all things were at a godly quiet, and no
contention of Doctrine at all: But now through the means of Luther that first
began, and Zuinglins, and Leo Jude, that preached among them, interpretinge
Gods word after their own just and appetite: that godly peace and quietues
of the church and the common weal, is now turned into trouble and
dissension: And besides that these incommodities do ensew: upon fasting days
they eat both Eggs and Flesh: Religious folks, as well men as women,
forsaking their profession and orders, do marry. Gods service is laid down:
they singe no more in the Church, they neglect confession and penance, the
Mass is railed on, our Lady and the saints, dishonored, their Images pulled
down and broken, the sacraments had in contepte, in so much that now a
days, the sacred holy host Year for the Host.
that represents Christ's body, can skarsely be safe in the Priests haides.
These are things to be lamented, and to be avenged also with the loss of life
and goods: Wherefore they desire them to leave their new doctrine and persevere
in the old religion of their fathers: for they can bear this gere no longer:
But in case there be any thing wherein they find them selves offended with the
Bishop of Rome, Cardinals, Bishops The Marchaundise of the clergy.
and such others, when they enter into benefices, choppe and change them, and
gather up all the money in the country, usurping, and taking over much upon
them, if these and such other like things do molest and grieve them, they will
not refuse to help to reform the same, for they do mislyke them very much
them selves.

The Senate of Zuricke, answered the.xxi. day of March, that The answer of
them or zuricke.
their ministers of their church had preached there five years. Whose doctrine
at the beginning seemed unto them new, because they had not heard the like
before: but after that they understood how the end thereof was to show Jesus
Christ the aucthor of salvation, who dyed for ye sins of the world, who a
love delivered us wretches from death everlasting, being the only advocate of
mankind to God the father, they could not but with fervent desire embrace so
joyful news: there was great agreement and concord in times past betwixt the
Apostles and those which after their time embraced Christ's doctrine: the same
they trust, shall be now also among such as give their minds hereunto. And
if Luther or any other do so teach, it is well done, neither ought Gods word
to be called his doctrine: And although they do honor Christ only: yet do they
no injury therefore to the virgin Marye, or other saints: For all they being
here in earth, looked for eternal salvation, by the only name of Christ, and
now is there such a light given, that in manner all men within their city do
read ye Bible diligently: so that the ministers can not wrast a wrye, that is
so continuallye in all men's hands: wherefore there can be no sect objected
unto them, but that name accords to them, which to maintain their lucre and
dignity, wraste Gods word whither they list. They are said to be in an error,
but no man can show it: they have often times required herin the Bishop of
Constaunce, of Basil, and of Courts certain Uniuersities, and them also, but
unto this day there is nothing done: Therefore, their Ministers give none
occasion of diffention in the common wealth, but Authors of Scismes.
the Bishops and such, as for their own profit, teach that which is
contrary to Gods word: For they deceive the people and offend God grievously,
which fear to lose any of their commodities, and were loath to forsake their
pride and avarice: As touching the eating of Eggs and Flesh: Albeit it be
free and not forbidden by Christ, yet have they made a law to avoid offense
and rashenes: God is the Aucthour of Matrimony lawful for all men.
Matrimony, and has ordained it for almen. S. Paul also commands that the
minister of the church should be the husband of one wife. And sins that
Bishops do permit priests for money, to keep Concubines and Harlots by a
filthy example. And they neither can nor will be without women, they think it
not good to resist God, who ordained holy wedlock, sufferyng them that have
not the gift of Chastity, to marry, rather than in singlenes to live a
fylthy life.

Colleges and such other places were first founded for the pore, but now for
the most part they possess them, which have enough besides. And often times it
is seen that one has as much as would find many. Wherefore they think it
reasonable, that such goods were again converted to the use of the poor,
wherein notwithstanding to use this moderation, that such as be in possession
already, be permitted to enjoy the rent, during their lives, lest any man
should have cause to complain. That the Jewels of the Church apperteine not
to the true What needs gold in the church.
worshipping of God. But this to be more acceptable unto God, what time the
pore and nedye are releued. The order of Priesthode is not of them despised,
but much set by, in case they do their dewtie, and teach syncerely. But as for
the rest of the rabble yt does no good, but harm: If it be by litell and
litel diminished; without offense, and their possessions put to some godly use,
there is no doubt but the same would be unto God most acceptable. For whether
that God do accept their singing and service in Latin, it is much to be
doubted of. For many of them understand not what they say, and yet are they
hired to do the same. The order of Monks is the invention of man, and not the
ordinance of God.

How much Auricular confession is of valewe, that numbreth the sins, they
will leave undiscussed, but that, whereby true penitentes, What is true
confession,
have access unto Christ their mediator, they judge not only profitable, but
also necessary, for consciences troubled, and pressed down with the burden of
sin. And this to be trewly to repent, when a man does amend his life: The
Sacraments which were instituted of God, are not of them contemned, but had in
great reverence, notwithstanding they must be used according unto Gods word,
and the Lords supper not to so applied, as if it were an oblation or a
sacrifice. And if the Clergy that thus complains, can find out any error
among the^, or prone that they be hindered or empeched by the^, they will make
them amends: if not, it were reason that they should be commanded to do their
dewtie, that is, to teach the treuth, and to abstain from sklau^dering of
others:

Where as they desire to be delivered from the pillage and usurped How the
yoke of the Papists is to be shaken of.
authority of the Bishop of Rome and his clientes, they are exceadyng glad
to hear it: which thing can be done by no means better than if Gods word
may be thoroughly received: for so long as their laws and decrees shall take
place, let us look for no deliuerau^ce. For it is only the preaching of Gods
word, that shakes their power and dignity: For the force of the Gospel and
verity is such, that they distrusting their own strength, seek forth aid
of kings: Wherefore if they should in this case use the help of Scripture, it
is requisite that the same be done like wise in all other things, that all
that God is offended with, may be abolished: for the reformation whereof they
will be glad to bestow not only their travail and counsel, but their goods
also: for this would have been done long syns: Wherefore they desire them to
accept this in good part, and to weighe it diligently: They conet nothing more
than peace and quiotnesse, and will do nothing contrary to their league: But in
this case, which concerns their everlasting salvation, they can not otherwise
do, unless their error can be detected: they desire them therefore, that if
they think their doctrine to be against the Scriptures, it may be showed them
before the end of May: For so long will they tarry for an answer, from them
and from the Bishops, and also from the Universitie of Basil.

In the mean while the Bishop of Constaunce, calling a conuotion, The Bishop
of Co^stance makes a book in defense of Images.
made a book to answer them of Zuricke, the end whereof was to declare that
where the Scripture speaks against Images, it is to be understand only of
the Idols that were among the Jews and Gentiles. And that the Images
received of the church are to be kept still. Then treats he of the Mass,
the which he proves by many testimonies of Bishops of Rome, and their
counsels, to be an oblation and a sacrifice. This book sends he to Zuricke
the first day of June, exhorting the Senate with many weighty words, that
they neither take down their Images, nor abrogate the Mass, nor suffer the
people to be taught otherwise. The Senate make the answer the eighteneth day
of Auguste, how that they are glad, that he has setforth this book: for now
it shall appear, whether party defends the iuster quarrel. After they
declared the minds of their learned men, teaching the contrary by the
Scriptures.

But before they wrote an answer; the Senate had commanded throughout their
incisdiction, all Images to betaken down and brent. Images bre^t at Zuricke.
Yet without any trouble, this was in the month of June, and within a few
months after the Canons of Zuricke make a compact with the Senate, and order
was taken how the lands and goods of their College should be employed.

The Emperor sent to the Counsel at Norinberge, John Hawnart, and complainyng
that the decree made at Worines by their common assent and counsel, was broken
to the great loss of Germany, he commanded that from hence forth it should be
diligently observed. The Princes answer, that they will do herein what they
can.

Finally the.xviij. of April, it was there decreed, that by the assent of The
decre of Norinberge.
the Emperor, the Bishop of Rome so shortly as might be, should all a free
counsel in Germanye, in some place conueniente. That the estates of the Empire
do assemble at Spires, the xi. of November, there to consult, what they shall
follow, until the beginning of the counsel. That the Princes shall assign
certain good and well learned men in every Province, to gather out of Luthers
books and others, all questions disputable, and exhibit them to the Princes
at the next assembly, that they may proceed more spedely when they shall come
to the counsel. And that by the mean and diligens of the magistrate, the
gospel may be purely taught and soberly) according to the interpretatio^s
approved by the church: Moreover that herafter therebe set forth no mo famous
Libelles and Pictures: Finally that such things as the Princes have to charge
the court of Rome and the Clergy, be treated of and discussed in the next
assembly at Spires. For the counsel, Campegius did undertake, and promised the
Princes to declare it to the Bishop diligently. The Princes at this assembly,
were Jews county Palatine, Wylliam, and Jews Dukes of Bauare, Friderike
Palatine, Casimire Marks of Brandenburge, Bishops of Treuers, Bamberge,
Wirciburge, Trent and Brixine, and Albert of Brandenburge, master of Pruselande.

I told you how the Senate of Strasebrough entreated the Bishop thereof, for
the married priests whom he had cited to appear at Suite betwixt the Bishop
and senate of Strauso.
Sabernes: which came not at their day appointed, wherefore the Bishop writes
to the Legate Campegius complaynyng of the Senate, by whom (he says) he is
let so that he can not execute his office, nor punisshe them that have
married contrary to the Bishop of Romes laws. Thomas Murner a Graie Friar
was the messager, who complained grievously of the Senate to the Cardinal: But
the Ambassadors Thomas Murner.
of the same Town being present at Norinberge, came before him, and made
their purgatio^, that they neither had, nor would be any let to the Bishop,
but had signified unto him by their letters, yt look what actio^ he had
against the married priests, agreeable to Gods law, that he might come and
execute it. And they would assiste him, but he called them out of the
liberties, contrary to an order that was taken betwixt him and them And whereas
they claimed their liberties, they were condemned, their cause neither heard
nor known. They said moreover how the most part of the Clergy at Strausb.
lived viciously, kepi^g stro^ptes at home with the^ after a lewd example: And
yet the Bishop does not punish one of the^: Wherefore if the Senate should
permit him to handle these extremely for not observing the Bishop of Romes law,
and let the common whoremonges that break the lawc of God, escape unpunished,
doubtless the people would grudge and styre thereat: To this Ca^pegius answered,
yt what co^paet or bargain was betwixt the^ he knew not, but surely their act
was manifest, and neded no great trial in the law: for they were sequestered
from the fellowship of the church by the deed doing: And for because others kept
harlots, and lived dishonestly, yt does not excuse their crime: he knows it
to be the manner of the Bishops in Germany to permit their priests for money to
keep lemans, which is evil done in deed, and they shall yield an account for it
one day: Nevertheless, it is a greater offense for priests to Mary than to
Campcgsus raileth agai^^ holy Matrimony.
keep at home with them many harlots: for they are persuaded yt they do well.
And these do acknowledge their sin: for all men are not so chaste as John
Baptist: yet was it never seen that they might lawefully refuse the sole life,
no not among the Greeks, which in their rites and customs differ much from
us: Wherefore he prays them to give their aid to their Bishop in this
matter. The Ambassadors say that if he would first punish the whoremongers,
than might the Senate assiste him the better in correcting of these others; But
he was in hand with them again. First, to assist their Bishop: And than if he
would not punish whoredom, he would come thither him self and see them
punished accordingely. After the assembly at Norinberge, Fernando, Campegius,
the Cardinal of Salisburge, the dukes of Bauare, yt Bishops A decree of
Papists against gospellers.
of Trent, and of Regenspurge, also thambassadors of the Bishops Ba^berge,
Spires, Straus. Auspurge, Co^stance, Basil, Frisinge, Passame, and Brixine,
met at Ratisbone, and agreed upon this opinion the sixth day of July. For as
much as Themperor, following herin the Judgment, and request of Leo the tenth
condemned at Worms by a publik decree the doctrine of Luther, as wicked. And
for that it is likewise decreed in the assembly at Norinberge as well first as
last, that al men should obey the same as much as in them lies: they therefore,
at the request of Cardinal Campegins, who has full auethoritie of the Bishop
of Rome concerning that matter, will and command that the foresaid decree,
and the decrees made in the last assemblies be observed and kept within their
jurisdictions: That the Gospel and others Scriptures be taught in churches
after the interpretation of the au^etent fathers, which in purity of life
excelled, and through their great virtue, confyrmed their doctrine by
martyrdom: they that teach any Herestes already condemned, or any thing else to
the reproach of Christ, our Lady, or the saints, or the which may be an occasion
of sedition, let him be punished according to the tenure thereof: That no man be
admitted to preach, without he have the Bishops license. Such Ecciesiastical
laws as cardinal Ca^pegius has written by common asse^t, to take away vice,
and to reform manners, when they be ons published, shall be observed. Touching
the Mass, Sacraments, and al other things, let nothing be altered: But done as
has been accustomed by our forefathers. They that receive the Lords supper,
without confession and absolutio^, they that eat flesh on days forbidden: Also
Mo^cks or Nones yt ron out of their order: Priests, Deaco^s, or Subdeaco^s yt
marrye, shall be punished. Let nothing be put in Print, but by the consent of the
Magistrate: Namely of Luthers, and his companions, let nothing be set forth nor
sold: That such as be of their jurisdiction studying now at Witte^berge, wtin
three months after they shall hear of this decree made, return home, or go
some where else, whereas Luth. poison takes no place: They that shall do
otherwise shall be depraved of their benefices, and lose their inheritance: And
all those that shall co^tinew in the University of Witte^berge shall neither
enjoy benefice, nor have the charge to bring up youth: That certain fit men
be chosen in every place to see these things executed. That the offenders so
many as can be taken, be committed to ward, the rest yt shall be banisshed to
have no place of refuge, so far as their rule or dominions do rtretche: if
any co^motio^ or sedition should fortune to arrise, by reason of this decree
wtin any of their limittes, that the rest shall come and aid him. The
Ecclesiastical laws, which Campegius had devised were these: Let the
priests live honestly, go comely appareled, another by nor sell as marchantes,
hau^t not the Tauernes, let the^ not be covetous, nor for their ministration
extorte money gredelye: let such as keep Co^cubines be displaced: let the
nu^bre of holy days be in measure: These would Campegius have enacted in the
counsel of the Empire: But when he could not bring it to pass, he held this
assembly a part. When Luther understood that the Emperor, and diverse Princes
would practice the decree of Worms, he bewaileth the state The lamentatio^ of
Lut.
of Germanye, which being so often admonisshed, neglects her own wealth:
And calls upon the Princes them selves, that being so openly and wickedly
disceaued of the Romish Bishops, they maynteyne nevertheless their dignity,
and seek all his distructio^, which wissheth best unto them: Wherefore (he
says) for this great ingratitud, and frowardenesse inexcusable, there hangs
a most terrible Plage over Germany: He warns them also, that they attempt
not rasshelye to war upon the Turk, who in counsel and moderation does
far excel our Princes: And living as we do, we may hope of no victory.
Furthermore, he calls it a mockery, that the emperor and the king of England
(which can not lengthen their lives one moment) should cai them selves
defendors of the Church and the faith: He besecheth God, to send such
Magistrates, as will seek and tender Gods glory:

The golden Rose, which the Pope had lately consecrated (as is atcustomed, The
golden Rose sent to the king of England. Erasmus book of Free will.
three weeks before Easter) he sends to Heury the eyghte king of England,
as a notable token of his singular good will and beneuolens: About this time
came forth Erasmus book of Freewill. Whereunto Luther answered with a contrary
tytell, of Bondewyll. The king of England, and the Cardinal of York caused
Erasmus to write his book, as he him self confesses in a certain Epistle to
the Cardinal, which is in printe: About this time also, Anthony, Duke of A
decree of the duke of Loraine.
Loraine, made this decree: For so much as Luthers Doctrine is condemned of
the Bishop of Rome, of the Emperor, and of famous Uniuersities, he commands
that none of his do preach any such doctrine. And that all such as have any
books set forth by Luther do exhibit the same within a certain day,
appointynge a penalty to such as did disobey: This year Henry Zutpha^ was put
to death with exceadinge Henry Zutphan.
pains and torment for the doctrine of the gospel, by the^ of Dietmary, which
is in the marces of Germany: for being called he went thither, after he had
taught two years among the Bremers.

I told you before of a counsel that should have been at Spires: the The
Emperor biameth the Princes.
same was altered, and themperor when he knew, writing his letters out of
Spain to the states of the^pire, at the Ides of July, does blame them
exceadinly for the decree made. For whereas certain years paste, in the
counsel at Worms, by the common assente of all states he had with most
weygtie words condemned Luthers doctrine, as Heretical and pestilent: where
also the Bishop of Rome had after dew examination condemned his Books,
commaundyng them to be bre^t: he marueyleth greatly and is sorry also, that they
should forbed only his sclaunderous Books, or skornefull Pictures to be
sold, as though that decree at Worms were not ryghtly and orderly made.

And moreover, he is not a little moved, that they would both have a counsel
holden in Germany, and have spoken to the Legate Campegius, that he would write
to the Bishop herin, as though the same concerned not more the Bishop or
him, than it does them: for if they thought it so expedient for Germany to
have a counsel, why made they not him preuie to it yt he might have obtained
the thing of the Bishop. And now albeit he perceives rightwell how much the
Bishops authority and his also, is by this decree diminished: yet
considering that the way shall not be unprofitable for the common wealth he
approves the counsel also, yet so, that it may be done by the Bishops
authority, and in time and place conueniente, so as he may be present there
him self, as he is fully determined. And whereas they have appointed an
assembly against the.xi. day of Nouembre, to establisshe Religion, till the
beginning of the counsel, where they have also chosen certain learned men to
gather the sum of a Doctrine, he neither can, nor will consent thereto in any
wise. But according to his office, in so much as he is the defendor and
protector of the Bishop of Romes Church, he does by all means prohibit this
decrre, lest he Themperor defendour of the Romish church.
should procure to him self the displeasure of God, and of the Bishop also:
for what greater co^tumelie ca^ be wrought against the christian church, tha^
if the reuere^s dew to the highest power should be thus shaken of? if Germany,
which has been ever most commended for virtue and obeidie^ce, should a lone
alter yt religion, which no Princes, nor the bishop of Rome him self ever durst
do: Which never man forsook hitherto, but he felt of Gods vengeance for his
wickedness? if they should forsake and abolish, that has been of so long
co^tinewau^ce in all Christendo^, at the craftye persuasion of Luther, who
endeavors with painted words to disceaue Lut. compared with Mahomet.
and abuse me^, as in times past, did Mahomet, what plages of god might they
look for? He besecheth God, to look mercifully upon Germany, and not to suffer
so great a mischiefest to take place there so long as he lives. Wherefore let
the^ obey the decre of Worms, unless they will smart for it, and defer all
matters of religion, till a general counsel may be had, at the Bishop of Rome,
and his appointment, which are their chief magistrates. After the self same
sort writes he also privately to certain states, and among others to the
senate of Strauso. And thus was the decre of the next asse^blie abolished: for
themperor having both his hands full of the French wars, sought to win the
Bishop of Rome by all means The duke of Bourbo^ besieged Marfelles.
possible. This summer, Charles duke of Bourbon, Constable of France which the
year before, partly by his own accord, and partly labored by themperor,
fell from the French king, beseged Marselles, but in vain. Whom departing
thence into Italy, the king follows with great expedition, and taking many
holds in Lu^bardy, and the city of Millan it self, toward winter he
besegeth Pauie, a town by the river of Ticine. In the month of Nouembre, the
country people of Suelande, began to rise against their lord, the county
Lupse, for charges, wherewith The beginning of the rustical war.
they complained to be over much burdened. Likewise others in other places
nere unto the same, rebelled against their magistrates, in so much yt the
counsel of the^pire, which governs the common wealth in themperors absence,
being then at Eslinge, sent their ambassadors and appeased certain
controversies: But this broile ceased not, as shall be told herafter. This was yt
beginning of the greatest and most dangerous co^motion, yt pearsed afterward
throughout a great part of Germany.

What time Luthers doctrine was set forth in all places, ye Clergy did resist
it with all their forse, fearyng to lose all their goods and benefices. The
Papists fight for their belly.
And certain of Straceborugh complained to the senate of the Empire of the
towns men, that they did infringe their liberties and priueleges diverse
ways, how they had appointed married priests, and Monks, as Capito, Bucer,
and others to have the government of their Churches. that they received the
Lords supper under both kinds, yt they had rasshely cast the Images out of
their churches. For the which cause, two of the chiefest counselors of
thempire, Friderick cou^tie Palatine, and Philip, marquis of Baden, in their
letters written from Esling, in the month of January, admonishing the senate
to leave of their change, and restore each thing to his place. Diverse of the
Swices The co^plai^te of them of Zuricke.
on the one cheek, thou shalt offer the other: And we folowinge this his
doctrine, have suffered many things, and that patie^tly: But now since there is
no end nor measure of injuries, we are enforced to fly to yt same, which
Christ him self used. And if we have done any evil, we desire yt the same may
be taught and showed us. Undoubtedly for as much as we sustain such hatred
and malice, and are every where evil reported of all men, the thing it self
requires and constreineth us to to make answer. Wherefore we will declare the
cause of all this malice, The cause of their hatred.
confute the sclaunders, and show how we be affected toward our common
country. And first in deed, whereas Fraunces the French king had made great
and long suite to enter into league with us, and had your consent thereto: we,
notwithstanding that you were often in hand with us, did utterly refuse the
same. And that for diuerses causes, but chiefly, for that the manner liked us
not, to wit, that we should To serve foreine princes is vile.
send our strength and soldiers unto strangers, which for money, should be
hired to war on them, that never did them harm, to bring up such an evil
example, and maineteine them in Idleness: which if they should die in the
wars: their wives and children should come to extreme misery: For we judged
it an vusittynge thing to our own great loss and hynderaunce, to serve the
kings torn, and to bring our country men into such a bondage to him. And
therefore have we judged it best, to retain and keep the same liberty both of
body and goods, which our elders with great valeau^tnes, and blouddy hands
have gotten us, with like virtue and constauncie. And this is all the matter,
this is the very cause, and as it were the welspringe and beginning of all the
displeasure: for if we would have ratified the league, we think there should
have risen no displeasure at all: For when you were often times in hand with
us, that we should not forsake your league, we showed you our mind (that was
to keep amity with the king, according to the composition of peacetions of
our old league that was made for the wealth and preseruaalready established:

And moreover that we would observe the condition of our common Country. And
because we persevere herein, we have gotten displeasure abroad. For syns the
light of the gospel sprange up, we have shaken of our shoulders that most
weigtie burden, which the Bishop of Rome, and his adherentes, had laid
upon us, and abolished manifest errors. This occasion have some of you taken
of late, and by your Ambassadors sent, have entreated us that we should
convert and amend. And we answer thereunto (as before) that we work after
the prescripte of Gods word: if any man can show us, that we be in error,
we will alter our purpose: if not, surely it is more reason to obey God than
men. Than stood up Egly the Captein of Lucerne, threatenyng us, that vulesse we
forsake the doctrine of Luther, and Zuinglius, the Lucernates, Uranites,
Switensians, Unterualdians, Tugiaus, and they of Friburge, will sit no more in
counsel with us from henceforth. And not long after that they had confyrmed
this thing among them selves by a law, the Captain of Turege had taken in
the night season John Oxeline, a preacher of the gospel in his own house,
and carried him away prisoner. Which unto vsis a double injury, in that our
own man, is taken out of our own liberties.

And whereas many ran out the same night, of al parts at the outcry, and did
many things wickedly, all the blame was laid upon us and our men, that
happened to be among them.

Now the second matter that you charge us with all proceeds of that
assembly, which Ferdinando Archeduke of Austriche held the last year at
Regenspurge, with the rulers of his country, also with the Bishops and such
others as hate the doctrine of the Gospel. But The era^t of, the Papists
what they endeavor and go about, it is not unknown, verily to make dissension
among us, and to pluck us a sonder. Which thing greueth us the more, that
you will credit such, as in time past you have known, at the least some of
them to be lewd and wicked parsous, whom we also, understanding their craft
and treason, have banished out of our limittes. Even they now, for so much as
we would give no ear to them, are fled unto you, and accuse us now, as
though we had broken the league that was made with the house of Austrich. They
say how we sent aid to them of Walsute against their Prince Ferdinando, but
that is untrue: For whers the Walsutensia^s were in danger, for their
Religion, and could not be suffered to speak for them selves, a few of our
men (against our knowledge) ran thither to save the harmeles men from injury
and violence. Whom, so sone as we knew thereof, we called back again.

Therefore is the ground of their accusation untrue. And Ferdinando have any
thing more to show that the league should be broken, let him bring it forth,
and he shall be answered in such sort as al men may plainly see, whether
part has kept couenauntes. Where therefore you have had secret talk with
Ferdinando his Ambassadors, a part from ours, we can not a litell marvel, for
if you treated of tholde league, than ought our me^ to have been made privy to
the same: but if it were of Religion, why than deal you not with us after the
same conditions which we have many times offered you: The report goth that you
have conspired to destroy the sect of Luther, which although it were true,
yet for so much as we are joined in league as well with him as with you:
Moreover, because we follow not the steps of Luther, but of holy Scripture, we
ought not to be accounted in that number: But in as much as we know not what
is done among you, and be complained on to you by malicious parsons, as
though we had spoken for the aid of certain cities, we protest it to be a
false sclaunder. Of like sort is that, where they say, how we will suddenly by
the so side of a dromme cause men to take Armure, and so to surprise Baden, and
certain other places. Which lies are devised for this entente and purpose,
that you might take those Towns and lay in them garuisous against us. Which
thing (if it were done) they doubt not but that some greater tumult would
thereby arrise, which might kindle among us domestical and civil war. And
besides these there go many other sclaunderouse reports of us, as this is
one. How we should teach, that Mary the mother of Christ had mo sounes, and
that the younger, James an Apostle, died for us, and not Christ him self. These
and such other like things would we have confuted at Lucerne, but you would
not suffer our men to speak unto the people.

What time also that Eckins promised to come and show Zuinglius his errors,
we were right glad thereof, and sent, not only him, but Ecksuc the^ Popes
champion.
also others a Safecouduict, exhorting him earuestly to come, and promisyng to
show him all favor. Finally (as we hear say) the plucking down of Images,
has procured us no finale displeasure: But hereof we have declared the cause
and reason before.

Wherefore, seeing we have done nothing against the conditions of our league,
seeing, we refuse no peril for the safgarde of our common country, and bear
you the like love that we have done always, in case you will permit us for
to do. Why suffer we this diuisyon to be The poverty and boundage of the
Swices.
made among us? It is known in what state and condition some of our
Auncesters were, which content with a poor living that they got with sore
labor for them and their householde, were oppressed of the nobility with
extreme bondage: But God looked mercyfully upon them, for they expulsed the
tyrrauntes, and got liberty.

And after they were enriched with the substance of such as they The riches
and liberty of the same.
had driven out, they fortified them selves with a league, by the force whereof
they were able to defend their country from the invasions of all foreign
power, and had many times the victory over their enemies. For many they were ye
sought to seauer, and break that society, but yet in vain. And what aid and
power our elders prepared at the same time: we doubt not but you have in
remembrance. And these few words may suffice touching the beginning of our
league. For as for the faith, endeavor, and diligence that has been showed of
us ever sins in amplifiyng the dignity of our common country, need not to be
recited. And doubtless the same mind and good will that we have showed ever
hitherto, remains still in us. And seeing it is thus, it greueth us
exceadingly, that you should through the persuasion of others, that seek their
own commodity thereby, be so incensed against us.

Call rather to your remembrance, what amity has been always between us,
what time in sundry places, as well at home as a broad, we have abiden the like
chance of war, and done many things right worthily. Assuredly the memorial
hereof, ought not only to bynd us, but also our posterity, with a most
straight bond of amity. If ye cause of Religion, or any other fact of ours
do offend you, why do we not reason the matter quietly, and friendly among
our selves as becomes fellows and friends knitte together in a brotherlye
league? we will neither be froward, obstinate, nor intractable, but as we have
always said, will be content and glad to be reformed by such as can teach us
better things.

And for so much as the profession of the gospel, for sakynge of the French
league, and moreover many sclaunders invented against us, have turned your good
wills from us, and altered your former minds, we must write these things of
necessity in defense of our own estimation. For as we have often said,
unless our error can be showed The consta^cie of them of Zurieke.
us by the Scripture, we may not forsake our religion, what force so ever be
bent against us for the same.

About the mids of February, the Senate of Strausburge answered the letters
that were sent them from the chamber imperial, and confuted all things that
those three accusers (for mo say they can not be found) had charged them with,
whom they report to be troublesome parsons, which are fled out of the city to
stir up strife and contension. And therefore require them to give no credyte
to them, but to have the same opinion of the Senate, as is mete to be had of
the^ which after the example of their elders, seek the concord and wealth of
the Empire. Also the Preachers themselves wrote the same time unto those
counselers. And in a long oration declare the reasons of their doing. And for
so much as they have committed nothing against Gods law, they require them
most humbly, to give no credit to their adversaries, nor determine any thing
against them, before the matter be known.

That time the war in Italy waxed hot betwixt the Emperor The French king
taken prisoner.
and the French king, who after he had beseged Pauie all winter about the
later end of February, was taken in battle, and carried to the Emperor in
Spain.

In this war the Bishop of Rome Clement, was secretly, of the The
vnconsta^cie of Clement.
French part, but after this change of fortune, he gave unto themperors
Captains a great sum of money to pay their soldiers. Anthony Lena kept
Pauie with garnisons of Germans and Spaniardes. The king had a wonderful
great army, in so much that the Imperialles being in despair of Lumbardie,
consulted how to conueigh their army, and to keep Naples: but encouraged
through the oration of Fernando Daualle, marquis of Piscare, they gate the
battle, and wanne the field, and by taking of a most mighty king, they The
victors of themper^alles.
obtained a noble victory, and rich spoils. The Chirstaine was Charles de
Lanoy a Bourgonion. He pretending at the first as if he would have led the king
to Naples, taking shypping, he changed his course, and sailed into Spain,
that the matter might the sooner be pacified. The Battle was foughten the same
day that the Emperor was borne on, the four and twenteth of February.

In the beginning of the spring time, began a new commotion in The co^motion
of the bulgare people.
Sueuelande, and that part of Germany yt lies by the river of Thonawe, of the
bulgare people against the Prelates of the Church, pretending a cause as
though they would defend the Gospel, and bring them selves out of bondage.
The magistrates promised to hear their complaints and to reform that was a
miss, but they perseuered still and increased daily. And set forth certain
demaundes, to the number Their demaundes.
of xii. wherein they would be satisfied. Which coming to the hands of
others, styrred up new commotions in sundry places.

Whylest these things were a brewing, Ulriche duke of Wirtemberge, The duke of
Wirtemberge atte^pte^^ wars.
whom certain years before they of the confederacy of Suela^d had driven out
of the country, got an army of Swices, thinking to recover his dukedom, but
being resisted by Fernandoes captains, that kept the towns thereof, and by
others of the foresaid confederacy, and last of all wantyng money, he gave over
his enterprise. In the mean time the host of the Bowres was much increased.
And the power of the Princes, which had given the repulse to the Duke of
Wirte^berge and recovered the towns that he had taken, went against the^ to
Ulmes, which had gathered three armies, whereof one had pitched nere unto
Biberake, an other in Algouia, and the third by the lake of Co^staunce: There
was much intreatye for peace betwixt them, by them of Rauesbourge, and
Campodune. Also the Senate of thempire being careful for the state of the
commonwealth, sent to Ulmes, Simon Pistor, which was for duke George of
Saxony. And James Sturmnus a noble man of the Senate of Strausburge to treat
of peace with the counselors of the Princes confederated, commaundyng either
party in the Emperors name, to withdraw their war, under a great penalty.
But when neither peace nor trewce could be taken, certain bands of horsemen
went from Ulines, to Elchinge which is by the River of Danubius, and slew a
great number of the Bowres, and The first slaughter of Bowres.
brought many prisoners back into the city. After that George Truckese,
chief captain of the Sueuical league, marching forward with his army, came
to Lippene a little town by Danubius two miles beneth Ulmes, where was a great
number of Pesauntes, who neither taryinge for the footmen, nor for the
Munition, gave the charge with his horsemen, and slew the most part of
them, the rest took the River Another slaughter.
and were drowned, the town being given up was taken and spoiled, and many
therein beheaded. When Truckesse after this victory would have gone against the
resydew, the fotemen which were lead by Wylliam Furstemberge, would not
forward before they were paid, as though they had fought a battle, but the
Captain said it was no battle, and that the enemies were discomfited or ever
they came, yet long it was before they could be pacified. Then was there a new
entreatie of peace. But when nothing could be concluded, and this Army marched
against them that were in Algouia, who would have had all men a like, what time
they should join in battle, some ran away, the rest yielded them selves at the
Ides of April.

But in this mean while in another part of Sueuia there assembled an other
great number about Hala, and Franckonie, which upon The great cruelty of the
Bowres
Easterday, being the.xvi. of April, took the town of Winsperge, and slew
diverse noble men therein. And among others, Jews Earl of Helfestene, in a
most cruel sort, runnyng them through with spears, and him so much the more
cruelly, for that they did it in the sight of his wife, which was bastard
daughter to the emperor Maximilian, who cariyng a young child in her arms,
fell down at their feet lamenting and weeping most miserably to behold, axing
pardon for her husband and father of the same child; whom they spurned at,
and utterly rejected.

But Captain Truckesse (who had discoinfited the other three Armies before
mentioned, marched straight upon them also, and slew two or three thousand of
them, putting the rest to flighte: punishynge grievously the prisoners, namelye
those which had fleyne the County A most cruel manner of burning.
Helfestene, where one he tied to a stake with a long chain that he might
run up and down, and with a fire made round about him, burnt him: others of
the nobility do the like. After he fyreth the town of Winsperge, and
commanded that it should never be builded again. Another troop of them went
into Franckonie, and burned there two hundredth castles and above, besides
Abbeis and noble men's houses. And taking the city of Wirciburge, they beseged
the castle. But Truckesse coming upon them through the Country of
Wittemberge, vanquished them also and put them to flight. After he recouereth
Wirciburge and reskeweth the castle beseged, being aided by Jews cou^tie
Palatine, which was there in his own parson.

And out of Germany this broile went into Loraine, in so much that The war of
Bowres in Loraine.
Anthony duke thereof, accompanied with his brother Claude Duke of Guise, who
had gathered up the remenaunt of the French army dispersed at the battle of
Pauie, when the king was taken, went to Sabernes, whereas much people was
assembled, as well of Lorayne, as of Alsate. And whereas no Bowres resorted to
aid ye others, he made out certain horsemen and fotemen against them, who at
a village called Lupfsteine, slew of them to the nu^bre of a thousand and five
hundred, the residew escaped by flight. The next day he made a great
slaughter of those that were at Sabernes. Where notwithstanding he kept not
promise. For commaundyng them to lay down their weapons, and promisyng them
all pardon, when they had done accordyngly going home wards without any
weapon, they were slain by the horse men and fotemen the most part of them:
After the town and the Bishops The slaughter of Bowres.
Castle were spoiled by the lewd foldiours, and the Citizens also slain all
without any respect or mercy. When the Duke returned home from this
slaughter, an other army of Bowres had encamped in the valley of Willers,
kepinge the streightes that he should not pass: but when they joined in
battle, they were slain above.iiii. thousand: in the same conflicte, he lost
the Earl of Iserburge: And thus he returned home with much spoil and many
prisoners. There were slain (as it is thought) in these three places, about
an eghtene thousand: This was in the monthe of May. The like success had
others in all places. And at Petersheme besides Worms a great number were
murdered by the soldiers, what time they had re^dred the^ selves, and laid a
part their weapons. At the which slaughter were present the County Palatine,
and tharchbishop of Treuers. The County did the best in his power to stay and
pacify the soldiors: the other did not only The cruelty of the Archbishop of
Treuers.
allow their doings, but also killed many with his own hands, as it was
credibly reported. Notwithstanding in sundry places, through the policy of
the Magistrates, the thing was appeased quietlye, as at Friburge in Brisgoye,
whither the Senate of Straus. at the request of Gnest, Marquis of Baden, that
had great lands there, sent James Sturmius and Conrade Iohame, ambassadors, by
whose persuasion, and the Ambassadors of Basil together, all those yt encamped
at Lara four miles from Straus. were appeased the.xxv. day of July: Where yet
fidelity failed: For many after they came home, were executed. Likewise the
Heluetians appeased an other rebellion in Sontgauia, a Province belongyng to
king Fernando and the house of Austriche, declaringe unto them, what was the
dewtie of a Magistrate, and of the people also. All their requests were every
where a like, beginning in Suela^de and passing so unto others, reaching from
Thuringe and the borders of Saxony, unto the top of the Alps, and into the
country about Salisburge, whither, after the rebellion appeased in Fra^ckonie,
came also the army of the Princes, confederated, and distroied Geismer
captain of the Bowers.
and banished many, among whom was their captein Geismer, who passed through
the Alps by straight passages with a part of his host to the Uenetians, of
whom he had an yearly stipende, and dwelled at Padwey, whereas after he was
slain by treason. And this was thend of the Bowres war, in the which were
slain in one summer, at the least, fifty thousand. The league of Swelane.


The Princes that were of the confederacy and league of Swela^d so often
mentioned werethese, Caesar as Prince of Austriche, and his brother Fernando,
tharchbishop of Mentz, the Palsegraue, the Bishop of Salisburge, Bamberge,
Wirciburge, Aistet and Auspurge, Wylliam and Jews brethren, Dukes of Bauar,
Otho Henricke and Philip, brethren Counties Palatine, George Marquis of
Brande^burge, and Albert his nephewe, Philip the Lantzgraue of Hasse, and
diverse others, both of the nobility and Clergy. Moreover the most part of all
the cities in Sweuia, and among other Norinberge. About the eight day of
April, the Mass was put down at Zuricke, by the commandment The Mass
abolisshed at Zuricke.
of the Senate, as well within the city as without. And in stead of that was
instituted the Lords Supper. Likewise all Ceremonies abolished, the Doctrine
of Gods word takes place, and a law made, against Fornication, and
adultery, and Judges appointed to hear the causes of Matrimony.

The fyfthe Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common We ale, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the fyfth Book.
MUncer by his new doctrine, teaching goods to be had in common, inflamed the
rage of the people, having Phifer to his companion. Duke Frederick departs,
the princes assemble against Muncer. Who, persuading the people to resist is
discomsited, and after executed. Luther had written against him toye senate of
Misshuse, the requests which the wurs made at ye beginning are here recited.
Whereunto Luther answers and shows their disordre, exhorting ye magistrate
to destroy such wicked men. Themperor understanding these troubles, appoynteth
a counsel at Auspurge. Carolostadius exiled from Wittenberg goes about to make
his purgation. Luther marieth a nonne, winglius and he meet at Marseburge to
confer of their controversy of the Lords supper. Whilst the French king
was prisoner, Pope Clement, receiving letters from the kings mother,
solliciteth the parlamente of Paris to make persecusion. Faber was constrained
to flee, whereof the king wing advertised, causes such suites, and actions
against learned men to surcease, the commonwealth of Pruse is altered from the
Knights of Germany to a Duke donie, and receives the Gospel.

AGreat occasion of this terrible War Muncer a great anabaptists.
came by rash and lewd preachers, whereof Thomas Muncer was principal: who
leaving of the preaching of the Gospel, set forth a new kind of doctrine in
Alstet atowne of the Dukes of Saxonye in Thuringe, and taught not only against
the bishop of Rome, but against Luther also, contendinge that both their
doctrines were vile and naught: the bishop byndeth men's consciences with
straight and over hard laws: which bonds he said, Luther in deed has
lowsed but offended in the contrary part in giving ouermuche liberty, and not
teaching those things, that are of the spirit. The bishops decrees we may
fafely contemn, for that they help nothing unto salvation: which to obtain
says he, we must first eschew open crimes, as murder, adultery, blaspheming
of gods name, the body must be chastened and made lean with fasting and simple
apparel, the countenance must be framed unto gravity, speak seldom and
wear a long beard. These and such other like thigs he called the cross, ye
mortifie^g of ye flesh and a discipline, wherwt he yt was furnished he said,
must get him out of company, and thike often of god what he is, whether he has
any care over Whether Christ died for our sakes? Whether our religion be better
tha^ the Turks: Moreover to axe of God a sign whereby he may testify, that
he cares for us, and that we be in the true Religion: And albeit, he show not
a token by and by, yet must we nevertheless proceed, pray still, yea
expostulate and braule with God, that he deals not well with us: For seeing that
the Scriptures promises, that he will grant such things as be demanded, it
is not right, that he does not exhibit a Muncer will have a token ared of
God.
sign to a man that seeks the true knowledge of him: This expostulation and
anger (says he) is of God well accepted, for that he perceives herby our
earnest mind and zeal: And than no doubt but being thus instantly solicited,
he will declare him self by some notable sign, and quench the thirste of our
mind, dealinge with us as he did intymes paste with tholde fathers. He taught
moreover that God opened his mind by dreams, wherein he builded the foundation
of his intent, and look whose dream he could interpret, him would he praise
openly in his sermon. And when he had by this means allured many to him, then
began he to take stipulation of them, and wrote their names that promised him by
an oath, to aid him in his pretensed mischief: For he said, he was commanded
of God to distroy all wicked Princes, and subsistute new in their places. He
taught moreover, that all things should be common, and al me^ of like fredom
and dignity. whereupon ye common He teaches that all things should be common.
people leaui^g their daily labor, took such things as they neded of others yt
had store, eue^ against their wills. The dukes of Sax. had banished him what time
he began first to preach seditiously: thence went he to Norin. and from thence
to Mulhuse, wherhe altered the senate, drove out the Monks, and entered into
their possessions, takig upon hi, not only as a preacher, but also as a
Senator, determining al matters as he list. For he said, how he had all things
showed him by revelation, and look what he said was to the^ sacred and holy.
These parts played he for the space of two or three months: And when the
Bowres were up in Swelande and Frankonie, to the nu^bre of forty thousand,
and had discomfited a great part of the nobility, taken, spoiled, and fyred
many holds and castles as before is mentioned, the^ began he to set hand on,
seeing the time serving so well Muncer makes gonnes
for his purpose, he cast field pieces in the Gray friars, and got a wonderful
number of people out of the Country, thinking to get some thing. He had of his
counsel one Phifer, a bold and a desperate fellow, which Phifer his companion.
was much given to dreams and visions in the night, who dreamed that he saw
in a certain stable, an innumerable sort of Myse, which he put to flight al:
This took he, as yt God had commanded him to lead forth his army against the
Nobility, and to scatter them: Muncer, albeit he had made sedicious sermons,
was not yet so hot as to hasarde all before the whole country were up in
armure: And therefore sent letters into al places, namely to such as dug in
the Mines in the country of Maunsfelde, exhorting the^ in any wise to set upon
their princes without any respect, for shortly should all those yt were up in
Franckonye come into these parties. In the mean while Phifer yt could no
longer Phifers enterprise.
abide makes a roode with his company, and spoyleth the country of Isefelde
hardely, sacketh Castelies and Churches, discomfiteth many gentlemen, and
casts some into fetters: And so retournynge with a great buttie, encouraged
men's herts excedinly. And Mu^cer supposing that all men were than in a redynes,
departs out of Mulhuse with three hundredth, and joined with them of Francuse. At
the same time departed The death of Fridericke the noble duke of Sax.
Fridericke Duke of Saxony without Issewe: for he was never married, leaving
his brother John to succeed him. Now had Alberte County Mu^sfelde, hearing of
a stir in his country, levied spedelye certain bands of horsemen, and
gyuynge the charge, slew two hundredth. Which thing put them in such a fear,
that they remained still at Fra^ckuse, tariyng for more company, and durst
proceed no further. The princes make a power.
And in the mean time, the Dukes of Saxony, John Prince elector, and George
his uncle, Philip Lantzgraue of Hesse, and Henrye Duke of Brunswike, levied a
thousand and v. hundredth horsemen, and certain bands of foot men, and
marched toward them. The rebels had encamped them on a Hill a litell
without the town, and had so fensed them selves with Carriages that hardely
could they be invaded: But they were neither sufficiently furnished of
Munition nor weapons, nor skillful in the wars. Wherefore the Princes having
compassion, sent unto them, advised them to deliver their captains only, and
lay aside their weapons, and they should have their pardon, and return home.
But Muncer fearing him self, came forth with a sower countenance, and A
seditious oration of Muncer.
made this oration. You se my fellows and brethren not far from you,
Tyrrau^tes, which albeit they have conspired our deaths, yet are they so
discouraged in their minds, that they date atte^pte nothing against us: And
they offere you such conditions as be foolish, that is to torn you out of
your weapons. Now know you right well that I have not attempted this thing of
my own brain or private authority: for I was never experienced in such
matters: But by the commandment of God. And seeing it is so, it shall be my
dewtie and yours to obey, and not to depart of this ground, were God him self
has placed us. In times past he commanded Abraham to offer up his son: And
although he was ignorant what should be the^de, yet following the commandment,
he refused nothing: And therefore God both preserved his son, and also
rewarded his faith with great benefits: so likewise ought we, yt stand in the The
says of Abraham obtained of god great benefits.
same case to commit the success of the thig to god: And nodoubt we shall have
our desire: you your selfs shall se the help of god manifestly: For we shall
disco^fit our enemies in all places: God has promised in su^drie places of the
scripture, to help the pore and toppresse the wicked. Which saying
apperteineth unto us, for we are poor and afflicted. And because we seek to
setforth and maintain the true knowledge of God, we can not doubt of the
victory: Again, let us consider the state of our enemies, Muncer rai leth on
the Princes.
they are called in deed Princes, but they be very tira^tes, they care not for
you, they take your goods, and spend the^ wickedly in pride, riot, and
voluptuousues: And for light causes, move wartes, which destroy all that the
pore have left, these be their Princelik Uertues. In the place of the Widow
and Orphane, they maintain the Bishop of Romes authority, and wickedness
of the Clergy, where youth should be brought up in learning, and the poor
releued, they establishe the merchandise of massing, and other abominations.
Think you ye God will suffer this any longer: No truly, but eue^ as he drove
out the Cananites: so will he now expulse these also. And as Christ whipped out
the biers A blouddy Preacher blows the Crompet.
and sellers forth of the Temple, so will he do now likewise with these
priests, their Patrones and mainteiners. Wherefore play you the men, and
gratify God, in distroiyng this unprofitable people. For surely there is no
suerer way to pacify the matter: For they will not forsake their old wont,
they will not restore us unto liberty, nor permit us to have the true Religion,
and service of God. And I wis we ought rather to die, then to allow their
wickedness, and suffer the doctrine of the gospel to be taken from us: For I
promise you most assuredly, ye God will aid and strengthen us, and that the
Uictorye shall be ours: For he him self did so promise me, he him self that
can not lie nor be disceased, commanded me to proceed on this wise, to punish
the Magistrate. For herein is Gods power chiefly declared, when a strong Army
is destroyed by a small handful, as appeared by the example of Gedeon, and
Ionathos, Gods power appears in sewest men. Iud vii.i. Sam.xiiii. and.xvii.
and David, that killed Goliath that great Gyaunt so tyrrible to look upon:
And no doubt but this present day shall be notable by a like spectacle, and
spoken of whilst the world goes about: For albeit we are not well fournished
with weapons and other things necessary for our own defense, yet shall this
engine of heaven and earth be changed rather tha^ God shall forsake us: so was
the water of the Red Sea, changed in times past, that the Israelites being
persecuted by Pharao, might pass through. Therefore fear you nothing but fight
ma^fully against your wicked enemies, and be not a fraide of their Gunnes: for
all the pellettes yt they shall shoute, I will receive them with my cote.
Behold, se you not how merciful a God we have? behold a sign and token of
his everlasting good will toward us, lift up your eyes and see the Reinebow
in the sky: for seeing we have the same painted in our enseigne, God declares
plainly by the similitude that he shows us Muncer disceaueth the people by
the Rainebowe.
on high, that he will aid us in battle, and distroye the Tyrrauntes.
Wherefore now set upon them with a bold courage, most assured of Gods help.

When he had made an end, they were all for the most part afraid of the great
danger, but yet there were among them many lewd Fearein Mu^cers Camp.
and desperate persons, ready unto all mischief, which being inclined of their
nature to evil, and persuaded by his oration, and chieflye by the celestial
sign, supposyng it to be a most sure token of victory, more over having no
small company, to the number of eight thousand, and the place mete enough to
be kept: Cried out that all men should take their weapons, and fight with a
stout courage against their enemies: singing a so^g, whereby they called for
help of the holy ghost: There was A messenger slain against the law of Arms.
sent unto them before a noble young man: Whom Muncer (against the laws of
Arms) had slain, wherewith the princes being more displeased caused the
trompettes to sou^de to the battle and set their me^ in order. Tha^ Philip
Lantzgraue of Hesse, though he were youngest of them all, An exhortaci on of the
Lantzgraue.
ryding up and down from one company to another; exhorted the soldioures to be
valcau^t. And although the things were true whereof they were accused, yet were
it not lawful for the subjects to rebel against their princes or magistrates,
unto whom God has given the sword and would have them obeyed, as may be proved
by sundry places of Scripture. He went not about to execuse either his own
faults, or any other Princes, but to confess their fault, and grant that
many things ought to be amended, yet ought the people nevertheless to
absteyne from all sedition. For where they allege that they are not permitted
to have the doctrine of the Gospel, it is no just cause to make any rebellion.
When Peter stroke with the sword, he was rebuked of Christ, if any Princes do
persecute the true religion, they ought to bear with them, yea suffer death
rather than to resist by force of Arms. They take ye name of the gospel for a
cloak, but their intent is in deed to take other men's goods, to sley the
Magistrates, to force other men's wives, that no crimes should be punished: and
for as much as they pretend the name of holiness in these so shameful deeds,
there is no doubt but God will plage their Hypocrisy, and revenge the
blasphemy of his holy name, When he had with these and such other like
words encouraged his men to fight, they gave the charge on their enemies, and
first went of the ordinance. And the other poor wretches standing all amassed
and as men ravished of their wits, neither defended them selves, nor The
madness of the Munceriane
sought their saftie by flight, but song in Duche mytre, requiringe the aid
of the holy ghost: For many trustyng to Muncers promise, looked for help from
heaven. When the great pieces were shot of, and that they entered their camp
and had slain many, at the last they fled toward the town of Franckuse:
others went again to the other side of the Hill, and in the valley beneth
skirmished with certain horsemen, and slew two or three of them: For the
Horsemen scattered them selves, when their enemies fled, and followed the
chase out of a raye. But when they missed of their company, they were in such a
rage, that to revenge their fellows death, they slew five thousand. And
immediately after the battle, was the town taken, and three hundredth there
beheaded.

Muncer was fled into the Town and hyd him self in a house not The slaughter
of the Mu^cerians.
far from the gate: Hither by chance came a gentleman, and his servant
going up to see the house, found in a chamber above, one lying in his bed. He
asks what he is, and if he be not one of the rebels that fled: He said nay,
he had layue there sick a good while of the Ague. His Purse (as it chaused)
lay upon his bed: that chatcheth up the other thinkyng to have a piece of
money: After he had opened it, he found letters which Albert County Mansfelde
had sent to Muncer, admonishynge him to cease from his enterprise, and stir
not up the people to rebellion. When he had red the letters, he demanded of
him, whether the letters were written unto him. He denied it, the other
threatened him, then he desired him to be content, and confessed that he was
Muncer: Then was he led to duke George of Saxony, and to the La^tz Muncer is
taken.
grave, and being demanded of them: why he had thus abused the poor and
simple people: He answered that he had done nothing but his dewtie. And that
the Magistrates, which can not abide Gods His cruel answer.
word, ought thus to be punished.

The Lantzgraue replied and proved to him by Scriptures, how God has
commanded the Magistrate to be honored and obeyed, He is reproved of the
Lantzgraue.
how he has forbidden all sedition, and that it is not lawful for any
Christian to revenge his own wrong. Whereunto he answered nothing: And being
examined upon the Rack, when he cried out for pain. The duke said unto him:
thou art now Muncer in pain, but remember again the loss of so many men, as
being wickedly abused, this day, have been distroied: Then with a great
laughter (he said) they would have it so. The unreasonable laughter of Muncer.


Afterward being led to Helderunge, a town of the cou^tie Ma^sseldes, upon
the Pymebanke there he appeached many companions, confederats of his
conspiracy, which were beheaded at Mulhuse, and among others, Phifer before
mentioned. When he should be executed, he was not hable to receite his belefe,
but as Henry duke of Bru^swicke, said it before him: But when he should die,
he acknowledged At the hour of death he repents.
his offense and error. And being environed with soldiers, he exhorted the
Princes, that they would show more mercy to poor men, and read over
diligently the books of Scripture, that are written of kings: He had no souer
spoken thus, but the sword was in the neck of him, and for an example his head
set up on a pole in the mids of the feldes. What time he was banished out of
Saxony (as I said before) wanderyng from place to place, and at the last (as
it was reported) purposed to come to Mulhuse: Luther hearing thereof, wrote his
letters to the Senate, admonishyng them in no case to receive Muncer: For he
was a sedicious parson, and imagined nothing but murder and mischief,
signifiyng what things he had attempted at Alstet, and other places: Moreover
his doctrine to be fond and pernicious, whereof he wylled them to beware, for
shortly would his craft be known, with other friendly words, which (he said)
if they contempted, and fell after into misery, he should be without blame that
had so diligently warned them, and they should repent them to late. Likewise
before any tumolt was in Germany. And yet all things like to come to such a
pass, Luther set forth a book, wherein he warned all men to abstain Lut.
diswadeth the^ from sedition.
from sedition, declaryng that the same is not the way to refourme the tyrrany
of the Clergy, which shall fall and be confounded by no force of men, but by
the spirit of God, and coming of our Savior Christ, as appear in Daniell, and
saint Paul. This to be the ground of his ii. These.ii.
opinion, and to be right well assured, that they that seek to redres the
thing by force of Arms, shall travail in vain: Yet for so much as some
great tumult and danger ha^geth over the Clergy, and the thing requires
counsel, he will Franckly declare his opinion.

And first to be the Magistrates dewtie, to foresee that the people The dewtie
of a good Magistrate.
sustain no hinderaunce through the fault of others. And that true religion be
not defaced by false doctrine: This to be their propre office to use all their
power that is given them, to the glory of God, and wealth of the people. But for
as much as they do the contrary, and let one an other, and some of them also
maintain the false doctrine, they shall not escape unpunished.

It was never his purpose that the Papists should be oppressed with How the
Magistrate should deal with the Papists
force of Arms, but that the civil Maiestrate should compel them to do
their dewtie, and herin to extend their right and authority: And that they
neither with their lenity, nor yet with dissimulation, should confyrme their
boldenes and lewd doings. And as touching the common people, they must be
earnestly admonished, that they stir not, except the Magistrate command
them. For that way they labor al together in vain, and God will avenge the
thing, and that with some grievous punishment. And whereas the Magistrates work
so slowely herin, where they bear and suffer so many unworthy things, and are
Gods wrath is slow, but yet sore.
not moved with so manifest injuries, and mockeries of the Clergy, that is
done through Gods permission, that he alone might avenge all the matter, and
power out all his indignation upon them. But in case this matter should come to
a tumult, and that God could be content with so light a punishment: yet were
all this manner of procedyng not only discommendable, but also unprofitable.
For in a sedition there is no reason to be had, and for the most part it
chances that thinnocent parsons are plaged sooner than others. Moreover there
is no man Thauthors of rebellion are without excuse.
that stirs up rebellion, yt can be excused, be his matter never so just.
And in a great co^motio^ of people, the good with the bad, the honest with the
wicked of necessity must perish together. Wherefore let them have an eye to
the Magistrate, and so long as he styrreth not, let there be no private
attempt. For all sedition is against the commandment of God, who commands
that all the controversies of private men shouldebe lawfully decided before a
Judge. But consyderinge yt Rebellion is nothing What thing rebellion is.
else, but a private reuengement, no man need to doubt, but ye god disaloweth
and abhors the same. And that this sedition which is like to coin, is
reised by the Devil him self the enemy of all mankind, who, for that he can
not abide the light of the treweth, styrreth up tumultes by men that profess
the gospel, that he might bring in co^te^pt and hatred the true doctrine that
has been (through Gods benefit) in these former years restored: as though it
proceeded not of God, which seems to give an occasion to so many evils. This do
the adversaries of the gospel already brag of: But their judgments are to
be contemned. Whom he utterly dispiseth herin: For he has never written nor
spoken that thing that might kindle any sedition. Now unto such as will
question and object what shall we than do? How long shall we suffer their
enormities: seeing that the Magistrate winketh thereat? I How wicked dominion is
to be shaken of.
answer, yt they ought to follow this order. First let them acknowledge their
faults: wherewith God being offended, has suffered the tyrrany of the Clergy
to continue so long, and to stretche so far as it does for their wicked and
cruel government is the reward of our offenses: From the which if we will be
delivered, we ought first to reconcile our selves unto God through
thamendement of life: And than with earnest prayer to desire gods aid against
the popish knigdome, by the example The best way to over threw the popes
authority.
of king David, who prayed God many times to break ye power and pride of the
wicked. Finally that the doctrine of the gospel be preached and set forth, and
the iuggelinges of the Papists made manifest to the world, that their errors
being detected and the truth known, men may esteem lightly and clearly
contemn what so ever shall proceed from them. And this to be the rediest way
to overthrow their authority: by strength and forse of Arms, ye can prevail
nothing: and commonly it chances that through war they are made stronger.
But in case you compare Christ with the Pope, and the gospel with his doctrine,
than shall it openly appear, what difference there is betwixt the light of the
sun, and mere darkness: and how great a benefit of God it is, Lu. did more
with yt word tha^ cold have been don by force of Arms.
that the way unto the knowledge of him is made open, al lettes being taken
away: Tha^ slideth and faleth down all their force and estimation, which thing
may appear by his example, which has more afflicted the popish kingdom, than
any force of arms could have done.

And therefore there is no other rebellion to be wished after For only this
preaching of the gospel, which is raised up of Christ him self, is mighty
and sharp enough to overthrow all Papistrie. Hereupon let them fix their eyes
and minds also, and look for no other mean, Furthermore, not to be his own
matter, wherein he is so much occupied, for so great a weight exceadeth the
strength and capacity of ma^s wit. And that it is more than he looked for, yt
the matter is brought so far forth as it is: And therefore he puts no
doubt, but that he which has laid the foundation of the work, and has given
increase to the same, will bring it also to the conclusion and end, maugre
the heads of all his adversaries. He says how the Devil knew long before
of this great alteration, and how he went about to let it, and by certain It
appears by the Prophecies of Briget and others.
men prophesied of these times, to the intent he might drive men far from
this wholesome doctrine. But where he sees his attempt to be in vain, he
seeks a new way, and styrreth up men to rebellion, to let that there should
be no reuolting from the Bishops kingdom and his But yet shall he fail of
his purpose. For through the preachinge of the pure doctrine their kingdom
shall more and more be confounded. In which true doctrine we must still
persevere, declaring how men's decrees help nothing at all unto salvation:
Moreover, how men must be warned that they suffer not them selves to be
bounden to Monkish vows, and such as are entangled already, to forsake the
same.

Furthermore, that they give no money to vain and foolish uses of the church,
as for Tapers, Belles, Tabels, Uessels, Arms, Works, and Ornaments, and
such other like things. For the life of a Christian, consists not in these
things, but in faith and Charity. Thus if the people be taught, there is no
doubt, but that the authority and kingdom of the Bishop and all his
adherentes will fall in a few years.

But in case this doctrine be not taught nor therrours plucked out of men's
minds, Papistrie shall continue though never so many conspiracies be made
against it. Let them now consider and po^der with him, what he, in litel time
brought to pass by his doctrine only, which his adversaries can testify, that
wanted their wonted commodities. Whereby it may be easily perceived, what would
have come thereof, in case this doctrine might have had free course but two
years longer.

Wherefore the Devil that smells out all the matter, does now bestyrre him,
and goes about to let this enterprise through sedition, but The Practice of
the devil.
we must work wisely, and comme^de this benefit of God with high praises,
which has set up this light of his knowledge before our eyes. The Iuggling of
the Papists are bewraied, their ignorance, briberie, tyrrany, and all their
fylthynes, where with they have so long disceaued the world, be now disclosed,
and they which heretofore have been feared of all men, are now brought to
that exigente, that they But where they now appear in their likeness, and are
beholden naked with the eyes of all men, what uncleanness they have hid
hertofore, The popish kingdom may not long endure.
and are now driven to force of Arms, it can not be, that their state should
long endure: And if there chance any part of their power to remain, which
this doctrine of the gospel shall not infringe, all that shall be abolished
by the coming of Christ. We must therefore apply it manfully, and proceed in
the same course, but yet it must be done in order. For some are far out of
frame, which being not furnished with learning, after they have heard two or
three Sermons, by and by take much upon them, calling them selves Lutherianes,
and reprove bitterly some that as yet know nothing. Wherein they do much
offend, for so ought they not to do: And he requires that no man usurp his
name: But rather endeavor, that seeing we profess the name of Christ, we may
rightly challenge that to ourselves, that we may be surnamed Christians. And he
that teaches, has need to be well ware, what they Preachers ought to be
circumspect.
be that he deals with: For some be obstinate and froward, that both will
contemn sound doctrine, and also bring others into error: such must they
quite eschew, and after the precept of Christ, to cast no pearels before
Hogs. But whereas they not contented either with their own ignorance or
obstinacy, do seek to seduce others, and bring them from the crew doctrine,
tha^ must they be sharply withstand: not for their own sakes, but that same
of the multitude might at the least be saved. Again therebe others not
obstynate but simple and without knowledge: with whom they must deal gently
and not hastily or rashely: showing them in order wherein the salvation of men
consisseth: And according to their small capacity to apply all their
speech, till by little and little they increase and be confyrmed.

In the last book I showed you of the Bowres yt were up in Sweuelande, before
Muncer came forth into the field. These people handled the matter with more
attempraunce at the beginning, declaringe by articles written what things they
would have reformed by their Princes and Magistrates. And in case they were
abused in any thing, they would not be styfe nor wilful, but promised to
follow better counsel: their requests were these:

First, that they might choose them such ministers as should preach Their
demaundes.
Gods word sincerely, without any mixture of men's traditions: Secondarely,
that herafter they would pay no tithes, but of corn only: and the same to be
distributed by the discretion of good men, partly to the Ministers of the
Church, partly upon the pore, and partly about commen affairs: Thyrdly that
they have been hitherto unworthily kept in bonds, consydering how they are
all made free in the blood of Christ, they refuse not to have a Magistrate,
knowing that he is ordained of God, and will obey him in all honest things,
but they can not abide to be any longer bound, unless it be showed reasonable
by the testimonies of Scripture:

Again, that it stands not with equity that they are forbidden to Huntinge,
Haukyng, and Fishyng prohibited.
Hunte, Hawk, and Fish, and that in many places they may not be suffered to
chase the wild beasts out of the corn. Seeing from the beginning of the
world, God has given man right and rule over all kind of beasts: we desire
that some equality herein may be had, and that rather the commodity of a
multitude, than of a few might be considered: Moreover wodes be in few men's
hands, to the great discommoditie of the people, wherefore their mind is to
have all such common both for fuel and also for building, as be no private
man's inheritance: And for other woddes to be friendly used by the owners:
Furthermore they be sore burdened diverse ways daily more and more: Wherefore
they desire the Princes to moderate the same, after the rule of the gospel,
and charge them no further, than in times past has been accustomed: They would
also that such, as have goods, lands, or possessions, by the benefit, or
grant of Princes, or Magistrates, be no further charged, than was couenaunted
at the beginning: likewise some of them pay more rent yearly than their Fermes
be worth, wherefore it is reason that the lords remit some part thereof, to the
intent they ye till the ground, may reap some fruit of their travail, and
not live in extreme poverty: Brieflye in paimentes of money, they would
require more equity, for daily are divised new laws and means to get money
of them for no amendment, but oftentimes the thing is handled by favor or
displeasure, or some one or other pertialtie. Wherefore they require that all
affections set a part, this thing be used from hence forth, as the manner was
first prescribed. Finally that some have taken in lands and Meddowes that are
common, which they will redress, unless they be agreed withal: last of al,
that whereas the goodma^ of the house departs, the wife and children are wont
to pay some what, which because it is unreasonable, they would that the
Magistrates should utterly take it away.

Unto these Articles being once published: answers Luter (unto Lut. answer to
the Bowres.
whom they had referred their matter) And framing his style unto the^: It is
true (says he) I grant you, that such Princes as do not admit the preaching
of the Gospel, and oppress the people diversely, are worthy whom God should
thrust out of government: for they have none excuse: And albeit this be true,
yet must you take heed that you bring hither a pure and unspotted conscience:
or else shall you suffer the loss both of body and soul: neither ought you to
consider what power you are of, or how much your adversaries are to be blamed,
but how just the quarrel is, that you defend. Take diligent head therefore, and
believe not the preachinges of all men. For Satan has at this time under the
pretense of the Gospel, styred up many sediciouse and bloody doctors. I will
counsel you ryghtly and truly as I am bo^den: it shall be your part to give
ear and mind to hear it. Nether shall it move me one whitte, though many shall
report evil and rail upon me: It shall suffice if at the lest wise I may
deliver some from Gods vengeance, for the rest of them I pass not, and as
they contempne me, so shall not I fear them: But for the purpose, you take to
The Bours use Godly titles.
your selves an holy name, and call your selue a Christian felloweshyp and
brag that you will follow in all things the law prescribed of God. But you
know certainly that the name of God may not be taken in vain, nor vntrewlye:
for God threateneth a punyshemente, Genesis 7 Gene. 19.
which remains dew unto you also, if you handle not this business ryghtly he
that drowned the whole world with a flud, he that swallowed up Sodom with a
fyrie shoure, the same can easily destroy you also, what power someuer you
have. But it is to be proved easily that you take the name of God in your
doings falsely: Wherefore it is not very hard to conjecture what the end will
be.

For he disceaueth not, that said they should dye of the sword, Math. 26.
which took unto them selves the sword (that is) which by their boldness
usurped the aucthritie of correctyng others.

Where as Paul not withstanding commands all men generally Roma. 13.
tobey the Magistrate with reverence and fear: What will you answer unto
this, which will seem to follow the prescript of gods law, and yet lay
hold on the sword, and resist the Magistrate, whom God has ordained, is
not this to take the name of God in vain? But you will say the Magistrate is
such as is intolerable, for they take from us the doctrine of the Gospel,
and in all other things they oppress us unreasonably. I admit it be so, yet
may not you therefore styre up commotions and seditions: for it is not every
man's pacte to punish malefactors, but this appertains to him only, unto
whom is given the right and power of the sword, as the Scripture planely
teaches: Again not only the laws written, but also the law of nature
printed in men's minds, shows that no man ought to be judge in his own
cause. For we be all faulty and blinded with the love of our selves. Neither
can it be denied, but that this tumult and sedition of yours, is a private
reuengement: for you take upon you the determination of matters, and the
injuries that you think are done unto you, you seek to revenge by your own
aucthoriti. but the same is against Gods law, the law of nature, finally
against equity and justice. And seeing it is so, you are by no means able to
defend this fact of yours, or if you have any commandment of God concerning
your doings, the same of necessity must be declared by some notable miracle.
But it takes place in you that Christ spoke: you can see manifestly that is
to be rebuked in others, but you consider not what wyekednes is in your own
cause.

The Magistrate does naught, but you do much worse, which We are all blind
in our own cause.
contempnyng Gods commandment, do enter in to an other man's jurisdiction,
which leave unto the Magistrate nothing, for what remains when you have
taken a way his power and authority? the higher powers take your goods or
possessions, they do wrong. But you take away their jurisdiction, in the
which thing consists all The state of a magistrate wherein it consists.
their state both of body and goods.

Now whether is he more wicked that takes some part of your goods and
spares your life, or he that takes life and goods also? Way well what is
said, and you shall be found more wicked. But we desire not their life nor
their goods, you will say, let him believe you that list I will not. Who so
takes away the chiefest thing, will not be afraid to take the rest also,
which depends upon the same, but let it be as you say, let them enjoy
their goods and their life in safitie: That which you have done already,
exceadeth all measure, when you taking from them all their authority will be
Lords and Rulers your selves.

Way it with your selves I beseech you, in case your enterprise The
Magistrate is as necessary as the seune to the world.
should be commended and take place, there should be no place for judgment, no
Magistrate at all, each man might use an other as he thought good, and what
would follow thereof, but robbyng and murtherynge one of an other? for so sone
as one shall think him self to have received wrong of another, he will covet
to revenge him self at his pleasure: Which if it be amysse and not to be
suffered in any man, much less should it be permytted to any unlawful
assemblye, or if it may be suffered, it is also to be borne with, in all
others. But what say you, if in your assemblye the cause should require that
every man would pryuatlye avenge his own cause, tell me what would you do?
Doubtless he should be constrained to stand to the public judgment
appointed by you. What thing does than excuse you that contempne laws and
judgments, and reiecte the Magistrate whom God him self has appointed over
you?

This law whereof we speak now is impryuted in all men's hearts, The law of
nature aloweth a Magistrate.
and is observed also of the most barbarous people: for else should there be a
wonderful confusion in all things: which law all beit you did observe never
so dilygently, yet should you be nothing better, than Turks or such other
like people that know not our religion: For to be ruled by law and
Magistrates makes not a man a good christian: for necessity byndeth them to
it maugre their heads.

Wherefore seeing that you do break this law which is ingryft in the mind,
and common to all men, ye are a great deal worse then the Heathen people: and
far unworthy of the name of Christians. Which title because you do usurp
to your selves, and do injury to Gods name, being not worthy in deed to be
called Turks for breakyng of the law of nature, how shall you stand before
the face of Christ, what time he shall judge us al? For see therefore again and
again, what manner of men your preachers be, for I fear lest some blouddy
butchers be crept in among you, which persuade you to this in their Sermons,
to the intent that they may through your aid bear Rule and reign, being
carclesse for your salvation.

God commands that all vengeance be left unto him. the scripture teaches
us to obey the Magistrate, though he be froward, you ought therefore to be
obedient: otherwise you shall Reyse a co^motion in deed, but the same shall
light in your own necks: for GOD will not permytte your lycencious outrage to
be unpunished.

And whylest you seek your liberty, you shall procure to your self the loss
of life, goods, and soul also. For the wrath of GOD is kyndled against you:
And the devil enemy of almens saluations, has sent into your felloweshyp
false teachers: followyng therefore my counsel, beware and amend in time.

Now will I speak of the Christian law, or the law of the gospel: The
christian law.
For as much as you challenge to your selves that surname, is mete it should be
tried and known what your law is in this behalf. And first Christ commands
us not to resist harm, but when we are stryken on the one cheke, to offer also
the other, and to him that takes away your coote, he byddeth you to deliver
also your cloak: he commands us both to pray and do for our enemies. And
in the Math. 5.
same sense are also many other places of Scripture.

Now consider with me, how this your enterprise agrees with Christ's
commandment: see how far your Doctors have lead you astraye. For it is
the part of Christians to suffer and bear the Cross, not to resyste, not to
revenge, not to stryke with the sword: And what like thing appears in you.

The profession of a Christian man is exceadynge hard, and very The christian
profession is hard.
few do perform in deed that which they are bounden to. And to make the
thing more plain, I shall bring you an example out of the same law. Peter to
defend his Lord and Master, stroke the bishops servant: Was it not a
just cause? seeing they did not only seek the life of Christ, but with that
to take a way also from his dissciples the doctrine of the Gospel, wherein
consisted their salvation. But such like cruel injury has not yet touched
you: but what said Christ to this? He commanded Peter to cease from his
defense, giving a sore sentence against them that stryke with the sword, that
is to say, which concempning the Magistrate, will avenge their own cause.
What did he, when he was nailed to the Cross, when he was prohibyted to
execute his office committed unto him of God the father? Uerely, took it The
nature of verity.
patiently, committyng the whole matter, to GOD his father, unto whom he
makes intercession for his persecutors: these steps must be followed of you,
or else must you leave and lay aside the goodlye name and title of
Christianytie. But in case you would follow the example of Christ, the power
of God would appear: And as after the most unworthy death of his only
son, he set forth the Gospel far and nere against the will of all his
adversaries: so would he undoubtedly look upon you also, and send his wholesome
doctrine abundantly: But now, consydering the matter is attempted by force of
arms, you shall neither obtain your purpose, nor escape in the day of
battle. Now will I speak su^what of myself also. I had the whole world
against me with all their force and might: And yet the more and greater that
their violence was, the better success had my doctrine. How so? I used no
force I styred up no commotion, I was not desirous of vengeance: But I obeyed
the ciuyle Magistrate with reverence, and wrote in his commendation, and set
him forth as much as lay in me, and that which was pryncipall, committyng my
cause into Gods hands, I rested wholly in his protection: And thus have I
been preserved unto this day, though the Bishop of Rome with all the rest,
stamp and stare at it: I have decayed his kingdom more, then any force of
arms could have done, and my doctrine is spread over sondrye nations. But you
rushe forth headlong unadvisedly, and whylest you think to further the thing,
you consider not how much you hinder the same. Wherefore in this quarrel you
must set aparte the name and title of Christians, for though it were never so
just, yet for so much as a Christen man may not fight nor resist injury, I
may in no wise grant you that title and surname.

And yet I speak not this to defend or pourge the Magistrates: for I confess
them to do many things unjustly, notwithstanding your doings, are here far
from the profession of Christianity. In so much that in case you will
obstinatly keep still that name, and with this color shaddowe your evil
cause, I protest to be your ennemie, for because under the pretense of the
Gospel, ye do that is clean contrary to Christ's doctrine. Therefore will I pray
unto God, that he will mercyfully look upon you, and subuerte your enterprise.
For I perceyne this euydently that the devil goes about, in as much as he
could not hitherto oppress me by the Bishop of Rome, to destroy me now by
the bloody preachers. Wherefore I will pray, notwithstanding The crafts of the
devil to oppress the Gospel.
that I had lever you would so demean your selves, that I should not need to
make my prayers against you. For all be it I am a sinner, yet having so just a
cause to pray, I doubt not but my prayer shall be heard. For GOD will have his
name to be sanctified, and so has he commanded also that we should pray.

Wherefore I exhort and beseech you, that you despise not the prayers of me and
others, lest ye feel to your utter undoing, what they can bring to pass. but
you can have in your prayers no such like faith or affiaunce, for the
Scripture and your gylty conscience do declare your proceadynges to be
profane and ungodly. But I pray you how many of you have prayed unto God in
this cause? I suppose not one. For you put your whole trust and affiaunce in
your great army. But assure your self, for as much as you so do, all your
atattemptes at the last, will turn to your own destruction.

Now as concerning your demaundes they are easily answered, Answer to the
demaundes of the bowers.
which though they were grounded upon equity, and were agreeable to the law
of nature, yet touching their Pryncipall part, they stand not vpryghte,
because you will extorte them by vyolence from the higher powers which is
against all law and equity Again he that devised them for you, is no good
man. For the places of Scripture, which he alleges to incense you and bring
you into danger, he recites no wholly nor truly, which if you look better upon
them, make nothing with you, but against you. But al your bravery No man may be
kept from the Gospel.
is about the Gospel, that it is taken from you: but that can not be, for if
it be restrained in one place, you may repare to an other where it is freely
preached. For the place may not be kept by force, but we must forsake it, and
flee to another, as Christ him self has taught us. Your first demand for
ordeynyng of Ministers is not amysse, so it be done in dew order: For if the
lands or possessions that find the mynister were given by Magistrates, then
it is not lawefull for the people to give them to whom they list. But first
must the Magistrate How ministers should be ordained
be required to place one: which if he refuse to do, than shall the people
choose one, and maintain him of their own charges: if the Magistrate will not
suffer this, than let the minister chosen by the people, flee, and with him who
so list: if it be done otherwise, it can not be without wrong or mischief. That
of the tenthes, is most unreasonable. For Tithes must be paid.
what other thing is this, tha^ to take away al rule and power. You must be
liberal, but of your own, not of an other man's: but now ye use the matter as
if you had al authority in your own hands, whereby it is easily perceived what
your intent and purpose is. you would again have all Christianity takes not
away bondage
men free, why had not Abraham and other holy me^, bondmen? read Paul he shall
instruct you touching bondemen: wherefore this request is full of violence and
robberye, and strives with the Gospel.

For he that is a Servant, may nevertheless be devout, and use Bondage is
not let to christen liberty.
the Christian liberty, as well as he that is sick or kept in prison. You
shoot al at this mark, to have all equalle, and of one state and condition,
which is fond and absurd. For this civil life and government of the
publyque wealth can not endure, unless there be a difference of persons, that
theremaye be some free, and some bound, some to rule, and some to obey.

The rest concerning wild beats, wooddes, waters, pastures, paymentes of
money, and such other like, I leave to be disputed of Lawyers, for they touch
not my duty, which is to instruct the minds of men in Godliness.

And now ye men and brethren, this is my mind, and counsel Luters office
which you desired to know: Now shall it be your parts, for as much as you
say ye will obey the Testimonies of Scripture, to hearken unto the same. And
not by and by so soon as it shall comme to your hands to make an outcrye, as
though I flattered the Magistrates, and taught you not ryghtly but ponder the
whole matter and way all my reasons dylygentlye. For certainly the cause is
your own. And above althinges be ware of those preachers that prick you
forward, I know that sort of men right well: they lead you head long into
dangers, that they might get preferment and riches through your peril.

The cause why Luther does so much cast in their tethe the false The false
title of the bowers.
title that they bragged of, was this, for that in all their lettres that they
wrote to provoke and allure others to their felloweshyppe they made their
boaste, that they took armure upon them for Gods commandment, and for a
certain love and zeal to the common wealth, to the intent the doctrine of the
Gospel might be set forth, augmented and mayntayned, that truth, equity, and
honest living might reingne and floryshe, and that they might so provide for
the^ and theirs, that hereafter they be not oppressed with any violence, and
when they had thus at few words declared the cause of their enterprise, they
would than command their neighbors by and by to put on Armure, and come
unto them immediately and help them, if not, than would they threaten to come
upon them withal their power.

What time Luter had thus answered the commotioners, admonyshyng also the
Princes and the nobility by writing says, unto them: All the trouble and
busynes that is at this day is altogether long of you, chieflye that bears
the Title of the Church, which cease not yet at this day for all my
preaching to persecute the doctrine of the Gospel, and that again your
conscience, secondarely you that are Princes and cyuyl Magistrates being wholly
addicted to exact and gather up money, you care not by what means, so that
the poor people are no longer hable to bear the burden, and al to mainteyne
your riot, pride, and voluptuousnes. Wherefore there hangs assuredly a
wounderfull danger over you, as a sword dependynge over your necks by a
twhyne threde. And yet are you in the mean time so careless, as though no man
were hable to displace you: but this security will doubtless hurt you one
day: for God powers out some time his indignation upon Princes, as it is read
in the Psalms. I have oftentimes admonyshed you to beware thereof, but no
warning will serve. Wherefore Gods whrath will fall upon your heads, Psalm. 107.
unless you amend your lives. The signs and wounders that are seen in all
places, do pretend no good. We may easily conjecture that Gods anger boyleth
against us, for that he permits false doctors to be so much esteemed
amongst us, to the intent we being lead by them into errors and darkness,
might be plaged worthily. Moreover this rebellion of the people, which will
vtterlly destroy Germany, unless God, moved with our Prayers, send some remedy.
And your government is at this day after such a sort, that men neither can
nor will, another ought in deed to suffer it any longer. You must be clean
altered, and give place unto Gods word: And if the people bring it not to
pass at this time, others shall succeed: for albeit you kyl up these, yet God
will reise new, which works this, warreth against you, and seeks to plage
your wickedness. Diverse of you have made your boaste that you would spend all the goods and lands you have, upon condition that Luthers doctrine might
clean be taken away: And what is not the thing brought no we to the effect?
God forbydde I should ieste in these weyghty matters. The Jews in times paste,
said, how they had no king: but at the last the state of their common wealth
came unto that pass, that they want a king for ever, for many of you not
content with your former faults, work a new injury to the Gospel,
affirmyng that all this hurly burlye is the fruicte that spryngeth of my
doctrine. Well go to, rail on still hardely: you will not know what my
doctrine is, nor understand the voice of the Gospel, The Gospel is sclasidered
with rebellion
which is the sign of an obstinate and a malicious mind, I have ever from
the beginning taught quietly, and have abhorred all sedicion. I have earnestly
exhorts the people to be obedient to the higher powers, nay rather I have
admonyshed the^ to bear with your Tyranny and wicked government: And hereof
you your selves can bear witness. Therefore has not this sedition proceaded of
me, but those The rasers of tumultes.
bloody Prophets, no less ennemies to me, than to you, have brought in this
mischief seducing the people, and have been about this, three years and more,
and no man has resisted them so much, as I alone. If god has now for your
sin permitted satan, by those bluddy prophets, to stir up the rage and
fury of the people against you, and that it shall not lie in me to let or
appease the storm, say, I pray you, what fault can be laid in me or the
Gospel, when this doctrine, which I profess, has not only borne with your
cruelty hitherto, but also prayed unto God for you, has commended your
authority and state to the people, and maynteined the same with high
commendacion? But and if I coueted now to avenge the injuries that you have
done me, I might laughe in my slyue, and be a loker on this cruel tragedy or
assist the furious people, and as the common saying is, increase the flamme
with oil, and be as sharp nail in the sore, wherefore (noble Princes) I
require you earnestly, that you despise not mine admonition, nor set light by
this same sediton: Not for that I fear left they should be able to destroy
you, for I would not you should dread that: but that the Ire of God should be
be fearful unto you. For if he intede to plage you worthily which thing I
fear you shall not escape the danger, although the power of your ennemies be
never so small. Therefore if any place as yet remain for counsel I pray you,
give place unto fury, and appease this matter wittely: And for so much as the
end is uncertain, The part of a wise man.
and Gods will unknown: it shall be mete for you first to try always, and
to take heed that there be not such a flamme kyndled, that shall set all
Germany on a fire. For certainly our offenses wherewith we have styrred gods
wrath against us, are so manifest, that we ought to be afraid of every little
stir, much more when so great a number of ennemies are assembled to offer
battle. Lenytie and gentleness can turn you to no loss, and if it should,
yet after it will restore you the same with the advantage: but if you go to it
by force, it shall peradventure be in great hasarde. And where as you may
prevail more by other means, why will you venture with so great danger. Their
requests be twelve, whereof some be so agreeable to reason and equity, that you
may have good cause to be ashamed. They demand first of all, that the
minister of the church may be ordained lawfully such as can preach gods
word. And albeit they have a respect herein to their own private commodity,
in as much as they would pay him his stipende of other men's tithes: Yet is it
against reason, it should be denied, for it is lawefull for no magistrate, to
keep their people from the doctrine of the Gospel. Others that concern
services, droictes, and such like things are grounded also upon reason. For it
is not the part of a The duty of a Magist.
Magistrate, to vex orpille the people: but rather to maynteine and preserve
their wealth and substance. But now there is no end of pillage, and how
should this continue? Certainly ye ought to leave this exaction, and refrain
your prodigality and riot, that the poor may have some thing more to releue
their great mysery. When he had thus admonyshed either part severally, he
writes an epistle common to both. And for so much as either party
maynteyneth an evil quarrel, he aduyseth them to lay down their weapons, and
put it to arbitrament, declaryng unto the Magistrates how cruel ever and how
bloody the end of Tyrauntes has been, and again to the people how
unfortunate, and miserable has been the success and wyndyng up of The end of
tyranny.
commotioners, which have taken armure and standen in a defense with the high
powers. One thing he lamenteth exceadyng, that seeing they war on either side
with an evil conscience, the Princes to establyshe their Tyranny, the others
sediciously to accomplish their wicked desire, they should lose their own
souls, so many as peryshe in this war. After he bewaileth the state of
germany, which through this civil war should utterly be destroyed: for to
begin war is an easy matter, but we can not so well end the same when we
would. He admonysheth them therefore to absteyne, and not to leave to their
post ritie the state of the common wealth so full of trouble and bloodshed: by
force of arms can nothing be done to continewe, by the amendeme^t of life very
much. he exhorts them to commit the whole matter to the hearing and
determening of certain good me^ chosen for the same purpose. That the Princes
would remitte somewhat of their right: and that the people again should
follow good counsel, and leave out some of their demaundes. This to be his
advise and counsel, which unless they would follow, he would give them the
lokyng on: for to be on either side were unlawful: seeing the people move war
against their Princes as the oppressors of their wealth and riches: And the
Princes again with the people as with thieves and murderers, that do also
injury unto the name of Christ. In this there obstinate fiercenes he will pray
unto God that either he would show some way to accord them, or else to
subuerte their counsel and all their enterpryses: How be it after all these
wonders, he fears that the wrath of God shall no we no more be mitigated,
than what time he declared by Jeremy that his wrath and displeasure should not
be aswaged, no not at the instaunt prayers of most holy men, but that he
would plage the Iewyshe nation: wherefore he would wyshe for nothing more,
than that they would amend and serve God in fear and tremblyng, that Of Not,
Daniel, and ^ob
at the lest wise, the plage hangyng over us, might be differred and aswaged.
Whylest he endeavored thus to appease the tumulte, they yt were in Franckony
and indiuers other places, marchynge forewarde suddenly warred not only against
the papists, but against the nobility Luther blows the tro^pet against the
boures.
also, and did much mischief as is she wed before. Then Luther in an other
writing, exhorts all men that they would come to destroy these wicked thieves
and paracides in like case as they would come to quench a commen fire, who
have most shamefully broken their faith, to their Princes, taken other men's
goods by force and cloak all this abomination and wickedness with the cover of
Christianity, which is the vylest and most unworthiest thing, that can be
imagined. And after that he has confuted their reasons, as is before rehearsed,
he byddeth the Princes not doubt nor fear to set upon and destroy that
seditious There can be nothig worse then sedicio^.
Rabble: for it apertayneth chiefly to their duty, and not they only, but also
every pryuate man may kylle a seditious person by what means he can, for that
there can be no more pestilent thing in the public wealth than sedition. so
long as they protested not to be obstinate, but to be reformed by the
testimonies of Scripture, or by them that could instruct them with better
things, he durst not be bold to condemn them: but now sithe the thing it
self declares that they did nothing but dissemble, he must also change his
style. And therefore he ryngeth a larme and admonysheth all men to set upon the^
and destroy as if they were so many wild beasts.

This book did many discommende in all places, as to earnest and Lut. to
vehement.
cruel, but he answers in the defense thereof, maintaining his opinion that
none of them ought to be pardoned, no not they which were constrained by
others, if they have done any thing sediciously, saving those only, which
being ones admonyshed were content to render and yield them selves. I told you
before how the Emperor by his letters The^perors letters to the princes of
Germany.
sent out of Spain, did inhibite the assemblye of the Empire, that should
have been the last year in Nouembre at Spyres: but now hearing of the
trouble some state of Germany, and of the great preparation that the Turk made
to invade Hongary, he sent his letters again from Toleto, appoynting a
counsel of the whole Empire at Auspurge, to begin the first day of October,
for the causes above An assemble called at Auf.
mentioned, but chiefly for aid against the great Turk. sygnifyinge that in
case he can not be there present him self, he will appoint others to supplye
his place: which letters being written the.xxiiij. of May, were not delivered
in Germany till the.xiij. of August, wherefore by the advise of Ferdinando and
others, it was differred till saint Martyns day the.xj. of Nouembre, that such
as dwelt far of, might prepare them selves to come in dew reason.
Carolostadius dissenting from Luther, and therefore departing from Wittenberge,
as before is mentioned, had kept familiarity with those secret teachers that
feigned themselves to see visions, and to have talk with God. for the which
causes the Dukes of Saxony had banyshed him out of his country: And he had set
forth books against Luther and his fellows calling Carolostadius writes
against Lu.
them new flatterers of the Romyshe bishop, and such as taught amysse
concerning the mass, confession of sins, Images, and other things: And
those words of Christ: This is my body, he interpreted thus here sytteth my
body, and rayleth on the Duke for exylyng him, but laid all the blame in
Luther. Whereunto Luther answered at large defendyng his opinions, and
affirmed the cause to be just, wherefore the prince had banyshed him. Now after
this sedition was opressed, the armies of the commoners disco^fited, and many
executed daily in all places: Carolostadius being afraid of his own part,
co^pyleth a book wherein he pourgeth him self right dilygentlye, affirmynge
Carolostadius makes his porgatio^
that they do unto him great iniurye that report him to be one of the authors
of this sedition. And writi^g his letters to Luther desires him earnestly to
set forth this same book, to defend his innocensie, that he be not unjustly
condemned, and never come to his answer. Luther writing an epistle, that all
be it he dissented much from him, yet for as much as in this distress he
flees unto him for sucour, he says he would not disceyue his expectacion
herein, considering chiefly that this is the very duty of a Christenman.
Wherefore he desires the Magistrates, and all others in general, that in so
much as he utterly denies the thing that is laid to his charge, and
refuses not to come to his answer before any lawful judge, the same might be
granted him, which stands both with equity and justice. After this
Carolostadius sends Luther an other book, wherein he protests, that such
things as he wrote of the Lords supper, was not to defyne or determine any
thing, but by way of disputation to search out the truth Luther admits the
excuse, but he warns al men to beware of his opinion, for so much as he is
doubtful in it him self, or else if they doubt in like case, to suspende their
judgment, till such time as it be certainly known what to believe therein. for in
things that we must believe, we ought not to doubt or waver, but to be so
certain, that rather than to Faith ought not to vauer
forsake our opinion, we should not refuse to dye a thousand times. In those
days Luther married a Nun; whereby he gave occasion to his adversaries to
speak evil of him. For than they said plainly he was Luther married a Nu^ne.
mad, and became the servant of the devil. At this time, Zwynglius the
minister of the congregation at Zurick, agreing with Luther in all other
things dissented from him, touching the lords supper. For those words of
Christ, this is my body, Luther understood barely and symply after the text of
the letter, admitting none other interpretation, affirming the body and blood
of Christ to be verily in the bread and wine, and so to be received with the
mouth also: but Zuinglius takes it to be a trope or a figure, as many others
mo are to be found in the Scriptures and expounds the words thus: This
signifies my body. Whereunto subscribed Oecolampadius, a preacher at Basil,
interpretyng it thus: This is a sign of my body. The matter was handled on
either side with much contention and writing. The Saxons held ye opinion of
Luther, the Zwicers of Zwynglius. There followed others which did expound it
otherwise, but they all agreed in this opinion, that the body and blud of
Christ is received spiritnally, not corporally, nor with ye mouth, but with the
heart. This contention endured the space of.iii. years: at the last, by the
means of the Lantgraue, they Luther and Zwynglius met at Marpurge.
came to a communication at Marburg, as hereafter you shall here. Also the
counsel of thempire appointed a little before at Auspurg, because few came
thither, by reason of the tumultes in Germany, was proroged to the first of May
in the next year following, at the which time Ferdinando put the^ in hope that
the Emperor would be there him self, and the place was appointed at Spyres.
Nevertheless it was decreed, yt in the mean time, the preachers should
expound the scriptures to the people, after the minds of the doctors which
the church had received, and not to teach sediciously, but so, as Gods name
may be gloryfied, and quietness maintained. Whilst Fraunces the French king was
prisoner in Spain, Ales his mother had the government: Who to keep in the
bishop of Rome, signified unto him by letters and messagers what a zeal and
affection she bare toward him and the church of Rome. Whereupon Eleme^t the
seventh writing to the court of parliament The Popes letters to the^ of Paris.
in Paris, signifies how he understood by her, that certain heresies began to
spring up in France, against the ancient faith and religion and how they have
(wittely forseing the thing) chosen certain men to punish such offenders,
which thing he confirms also by his authority, wyllyng them to be diligent
herein, both for Gods glory and also for the wealth of the Realm. With many
other fair words of exhortation to persevere in so doing. Which letters being
dated at Rome the xx. day of May, were delivered to the Senate at Paris
the.xvij. day of June. Moreover in the kings absence the divines of Paris,
had so Faber driven out of Paris
evil entreated James Faber of Stapulles who has written diverse works both
of Philosophy and divinity that they drove him out of France. Whereof the
king being certified by the lettres of his sister Margaret, which loved Faber
for his virtue, writes to the Senate of Paris in his behalf, geuyng him a
Godly testimony for his learning and virtue, and that he is in much estimation
among the Italians and Spanyardes, wherefore he wileth them to surcease, and
let the action fall, till his return, or his pleasure further known, being
assured that it is by evil will commenced against him by the doctors of
Serbone, for the matter was heard before his coming from home. These letters
being dated at Madricea town in Spayn, The kings letters for Faber.
the.xij. of Nouembre, were delivered at Paris the.xxviij. of the same month.
It was a thing given to the deuines in times paste, to rail upon learned men:
the cause was that they saw their ignorance despised. This year was the
state of the common wealth altered in the land of Pruse, the uttermost
province in Germany, bordering on the We shall repete the matter from the
beginning, In the Empire of Henry the syxth, the son of Frederick
Barbarosse, what time the Christians warred to recover Jerusalem, there was
instituted an order of Knights of Germany, which because they fought for
religion, did wear the white cross on their garments as a badge of their
profession. This was the year of our Lord.M. C. and four score and The story
of Pruse.
ten. The first master of that order was chosen, as it is reported, in the
Camp before the city of Ptolomais. After wards did they subdue Pruse land,,
when Frederick the second was Emperor. And after they had kept wars of long
time with the kings of Polande, being vanquyshed in battle they became
subject, geuyng their fidelity by an oath to Casunire king of Pole, the father
of Sigismund. From the first master, to the Marquis Albert of Brande^burg,
were thritty and three. This Albert being chosen the year of our Lord.M.D.xi.
kept great wars for two years together with Sigismunde king of Polle. And in
the year.M.D.xxi. there was a trewce taken for.iiij. years. In this time
Albert sued often to the Emperor and the states of the Empire, for aid and
coming to the council at Nurrenberg, whereof we have often times spoken, had
his place among them as a Prince of the Empire. For the cause of the war
was, that he would not be sworue to the king. But what time the Emperor was
empeched with the French wars, and the Turk invaded Hongary, and Germany
was so tourmoyled with the sedition of the communaltie, that no aid was to be
looked for from thence, and the time of the trewce was expyred, he makes peace
with the king of Pole, geuyng him him his faith as to his suprome Magistrate,
and receive the doctrine of the Gospel, and alteryng the order, he takes
Pruse for his own. And he that before was master, no we by the kings assente,
is called Duke of Pruse: And shortly after, he married Dorothe the daughter of
Frederick king of Denmark, and foundeth the university of Conningsberge,
called the kings mount. Whereby he had the displeasure of all the order: for all
be it he kept the country, and was supported here in by the king of Pole, yet
by a common assent was chosen in his rowme, Walther Cronberge, which should
represent the ancient name and dignity: who after in all assemblies
complained upon him grievously. Again he defended his cause by writing,
declaryng how he was driven by extreme necessity being utterly forsaken of
the Empire, to submytte him self unto the king. There is an epistle of Leo the
tenth to Sigismunde and Alberte, exhorting them unto concord, and either to
commit their matter to his legate, which he would send, or to the counsel
of Laterane: for that it is most convenient, that the controversies of Princes
should be decided and determined by general counselles.

The syxthe Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the syxth Book.
LUther wrote to the king of England, and to Duke George: but they both
rejected the same. Christerne king of De^marke, had moved Luther to do so: the
sycknes of the French king during his imprysonment, hasted the treaty of
Madrice. The king being delivered, his two Sons were given as pledges.
Whylest the estates were assembled at Spyres about matters of Religion, the
Turk enters into Hongarry. A disputation was hoioen at Baden in Swycherlande.
Pope Element, and the French king, make a league. The Emperor and the king
complain sore the one of the other. Rome is sacked by the Duke of Burbon. The
French king sends Lawtrecke into Italy. The sect of Anabaptists begins.
A disputation is kept at Bernes, for a reformation. A contention betwyxt
Ferdinando and the Uayuode. Paccius is beheaded at Andwarpe. The Emperor, and
the French king offer them selves to the combat. The Mass is abolished at
Strasburge. Troubles at Basyll for relygion. The Ca^^ous Papists make a league
with Ferdinando. An assembly is holden at Spyres, where the name of
Protestauntes has his beginning. Civil war emonges the Swychers: a treat
of peace at Cambray. Uienna beseged of the Turk. The sweatyng sycknes. The
Protestants make a league.

YOu have heard heretofore how the king of England wrote against Luther, and
Luther Lut. letters of submissio^ to the king of England.
against him: But when he had heard certain things, that sounded much to the
kings commendation, delighted with that report, he writes to him with great
submission. Doubting not but he had sore offended his hyghnes, by setting forth
his book: nevertheless he did it not so much of his own accord, as by the
instigation of others. And where as he is so bold to trouble him with his
letters at this present, it proceadeth of his Prynclyke humanity, which is
hyghly commended of many.

Moreover for that he understands how the books set forth against him,
were not of his own doing, but written of certain Sophisters, which full
craftily took an occasion. And speaking here by occasion of the Cardinal of
York, he calls him the plage of England: And that he hears moreover to
his great comfort, how that his grace mislyketh that naughtye sort of men,
and gives his mind to the knowledge of the truth: Wherefore he besecheth him
to pardon him that one fact: And that it would please him to remember, that
syns he is a man mortal, he ought not to bear ennemytie immortal.

And if he shall command him, he will confess his fault openly, and commend
his pryncelike virtues in an other work. After he exhorts his majesty to
give no ear to sklaunderous tales, that report him to be an heretyke: For the
chief point of his doctrine is, how al we The chief point of Lu. doctrine.
must be saved by faith in Christ, which bare the punyshement of our sins on
his neck, shoulders, and al his body, who dyed for us, rose again, reigns
with his father for ever: And this to be the doctrine of all the Prophets and
Apostles: This foundation ones laid, he teaches the dewty of charity, what
one ought to do for an other, how we must obey the magistrate, and apply our
whole life to the profession of the Gospel: If there be any error or
wyckednes in this doctrine, why do not his adversaries show it him? Why do
they conde^pne and banyshe him, being neither examined nor convicted? where as
he writes against the bishop of Rome and his adherentes, he does it, for that
they teach contrary to Christ and his Apostles, for their own The end of the
Papists doctrine.
gain and lucre, to the intent they may command all men, and live like
gluttons in all voluptuousnes: for unto this end, tend all their denises and
doings, which thing is so well tried and known, that they them selves can
not deny it: but in case they would amend their lives, and not lead this idle
and beastly life, to the loss and injury of many, the strife might sone be
quieted. Diverse princes and cities in Germany, have embraced his doctrine,
acknowledging it reverently to be Gods benefit: and he would gladlye wyshe,
that he might also be accounted in that nombre. And where as the Emperor and
certain others, do attempt things agaynsthym, it is no news. For David has
prophesied long since, that kings and other people should conspire, and
imagine many things against the Lord, and his anointed, reiectyng his laws
and commandments. So that when he considers such places of Scripture, he
maruayleth that there is any Prince, that should favor the doctrine of the
Gospel. Finally, he requires him that he may receive a gentle answer. And
not long after, he writes also to George Duke of Saxony, signifyinge how God
has accustomed in the beginning to chastise me^ severely and sharply, Luth.
letters to George Dake of Saxon.
but after ge^tly and loui^gly to embrace the same. he was aterrour, and a
fear to the Jews, wha^ he gave the^ the law by Moses, but after by the
preachig of the gospel, he showed the^ great joy and gladness, and that he has
follows the same manner, in ha^dling some over roughly, and even him for one:
but yet since has he written other thingesful of fruit and co^solatio^:
whereby it is easy to se, yt he takes all this pain to profit others of no evil
will, but of a zeal he bears to the truth. And where as he Duke George
hates the Gospel.
hears yt he relenteth nothing in the displeasure that he bears him, but
increases his malice against him daily more and more, that is the cause why
he now writes unto him, desyryng him to surcease to persecute his doctrine,
which is consonaunt to the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: he
admonysheth him also to have no respect to the baseness of his person, for the
matter is not his but Gods almighty. Al be it that all men should fret and fume
thereat, yet shall this doctrine continue for ever. And therefore it greueth him
the more, that he is so much offended with the same, which he may in no wise
forsake: and yet for that he seeks to gratisie him, he desires to be
forgeuen, if he has spoken any thing sharply against him, and he will again
crave pardon of God for him, in that he has persecuted the Gospel, and
doubts not but he shall obtein, so that he leave of in time, and seek not to
extin gwishe that great light of the Gospel, that appears now unto all the
world. For if he so proceed he will pray for Gods help against him, and
doubts not but his prayer shall be heard, which he takes to be stronger than
all the crafts of the devil: which always is his refuge and most assured
defense. When the king of England had received Luthers letters, he made a
sharp answer and defends his book, which he says is well accepted of
diverse good and well learned men: And where as he has rayled on the reverend
Father the Cardynall of York, he marueyleth nothing thereat, which can not
abstain from the contumelies both of men and saints: he says the Cardinal
is a necessary instrument, for him and his whole Realm: And where he has
loved him before dearelye well, now will he set by him ten times more,
consyderyng that he myslyketh him. For among other things this does he
forsee with great dylygence, that none of his Leprosye, contagion, and heresye,
do infecte any part of his Realm.

After he casts in his teeth his incestuouse marryage, which is a Thomas
wulley Cardinal a Butchers son.
vice most detestable. This Cardinals name was Thomas Wulsey, a Buchers
son of Ipswyche, but in high authority with his Prince. Likewise Duke
George made Luther such an answer, as a man might well perceive what mortal
hatred he bare him.

When the Ambassadors of France, which were sent into Spain for a peace,
among whom was Margaret the French kings sister a wydowe, could bring
nothing to pass, Ales his mother which had the governance, for her aid and
defense found the means to bring into her league and amity, Henry the king
of England, which was done in the month of Auguste. A league between England
and France


The first and chiefest point of this league was, that the violence of the
Turks, and the pestiferous sect of Luther, should be driven and kept out,
which is no less dangerous, then the Turks be. The Cardinal of England
(which might do al at ye time) was thought to have persuaded ye king unto this
league. for he bare ye Emperor no great good will, for yt he took him to have
been thonly let yt he was not chose^ bishop of Rome after the death of Adria^,
as in deed certain of the^perours have expressed in their writings. When Luther
red the king of Englandes answer in printe, and saw that he ascribes to him
inconstancy, as though he had changed his opinion, considering how this did
not concern his own private injury, but the profession of the gospel, he
took the matter heuely that to gratify his friends, he made so humble a
submission. In like manner, he entreated ge^tly both by word, and writing,
Christerne king of Denmarck, that he would receive the pure doctrine, trusting
to have prevailed with gentleness, and now he perceived how far he is abuse:
The like thing happened unto him in Cardinal Caietane, in George Duke of
Saxony, in Erasmus of Roterdame, unto whom he has written friendly, at the
request of others, and has obtained thereby nothing else, but made them more
fierce, and cruel, to be fondely done of him, to think that he could have
found godliness in the courts of Princes, that sought for Christ, where
Godliness is not to be sought for in the court.
satan rules, or looks for John Baptist, among the^ that were clothed in
purple Wherefore, seeing that he can not prevail by this gentle and fre^dly
kind of writing, he will take an other order from henceforth. The french king,
for that the treaty of peace took not place, through a great thought, and
pensiuenes, fell syck: but comforted again by the gentle talk of the Emperor,
who bad, he should be of good chere, he began to be somewhat better. The
Emperor also waying with him self what a pray he should lose, if any thing
chanced unto him other wise then well, inclyned his mind to peace daily more
and more wherefore the.xiiii. day of January, then concluded of all things at
Madrice, in the which writing emonges other things, is this recited, The
peace of Madrice.
that the Emperor and the king, have this respect chiefly, that the ennemies
of the christian religion, and the heresies of Luthers sect, should be
extyrped, and that the peace being concluded, they shall set an order in the
commonwealth, and move war against the Turks and Heretics that be out of
the communion of the church: for this is very needful, and the bishop of
Rome has often warned them, and been in hand with them, to apply this thing
diligently: wherefore the rather to satissye his request, they are determined to
entreat him, that he would appoynte a certain day in some place convenient,
for the Ambassadors of all Princes to assemble in, having full power and
authority, to agree upon all such things, as shall be good and requisite, as
well for the Turkey she wars, as also for the wedyng out of Heretics. In this
peace making, was Elenor ye Emperors sister which The lady Elenor.
had been married to Emanuell king of Portugal, being espoused to the French
king, the Emperor promyseth to give him for her dowery, two thousand ducates,
and certain lands in high Burgundy. For the which they were at controversy.
And the king shall within two months after he is returned home, restore to
the Emperor the Duckdome of Burgundy, which the kings of France have kept
in their possession syns the death of Charles Duke of Burgundye, by the space
of fyftie years: Moreover he shall renounce, Naples, Millan, Gene, Aste, and
Flaunders: He shall give no aid to Henry king of Navarre, Charles Duke of
Gelders, Ulryche Duke of Wirte^berg, nor to Robert Earl of March. He shall
attempt no secret devises or counsels in Italy. When the Emperor will go
into Italy by Sea, he shall assiste him with a navy of sixtene Galleis
vitayled and fournyshed with all things saving soldiers, and also two
hundredth thousand crowns, to arm them. The yearly pension that the Emperor
is bounden to pay to the king of England, all shall the French king pay
to the king of England. He shall restore Charles the Duke of Burbon and his
fellows, to all their right, lands, and goods, permittyng them to use the
same, dwelling where they list. For such action or title as the Duke of
Burbon has to the Province of Marseilles, the king shall abide the order of
the law at any time. When he had given the Emperor his faith to observe these
conditions, he was set at liberty, to return home. And departing out of the
borders of Spayn, leaves behind him his two sons Frau^ces and The kings
sons are pledges.
Henry, verey young, for pledges, as it was agreed upon. And unless he observe
couenauntes, he promyseth to yield him self prisoner again.

After this the Princes of Germany, assemble at Spires, as I told you in the
last book, it was appointed. Emonges whom was Duke Counsel at Spyres.
John electour of Saxony, and Philip Lantgrane of Hesse. The Emperor deputes
here, were Ferdinando his brother, Barnarde Bishop of Ttent, Casimire, Marquis
of Brandenburge, Philip Marquis of Baden, William Duke of Bauarre, and Ericus
Duke of Brunswyck. When they had begun the counsel the.xxv. day of June,
and had declared the causes of that assemblye, they added this moreover, that
the Emperor above all things wylled and commanded that the states of the
Empire should with common assent take order, how the Christian religion and
ancient custom of the church of long time observed, might be still retained
in his former estimation of al men, and how they are to be punyshed that will
attempt the contrary, and also to be resisted, if they make any force in the
matter to the intent that both Cesars decre made at Worms, and publyshed five
years syns, and the decre of this assembly also may be observed of al men and
put in execution. When certain were chosen of all degrees to treat of these
matters, and emonges them also the Lantgraue, James Sturmius of Straisborourgh,
and Cressus of Norinberge: The Emperors deputes call an assembly of all states
the.iii. day of August, and say how they understand that they have chosen a
certain nombre to confer of these matters propounded: Who, as they suppose,
will first consulte of religion: But to the intent that the Emperors pleasure
may be accomplyshed, and that they entreat of nothing, which they can not
determine, but be a loss of time, and a let and hynderaunce to other
matters, therefore will they let them understand what the Emperors
commandment is in this behalf. After this, they read the Emperors letters,
dated at Hispale the. xxiii of March. Whereof the some was this. How he
intended to The Emperors letters
go to Rome to be invested, and also to treat with the bishop for a general
counsel: but in the mean time he wylleth and commands, that the states in
this assemblye decree nothing, that shall be in any wise against the old
custom, laws and Ceremonies of the church, and that in theri dommions they do
establyshe all things, according to the decre made at Worms by their common
assentes: And take well in worth this delay, till he have devised with the
high Bishop concerning a general counsel, which shall be very shortly: for in
such private assemblies, there is not only no good to be done, but also errors
and licenciouse liberty of the people more confirmed. About this The Turk
inuadeth Hu^gary.
time, the Emperor of Turks setting foreward with his army from Belgrade,
when he was passed over the rivers of Danubie and Save, he marched the right
way into Hongary. Wherefore king Lewys sendyng again his Ambassadors to
Spyres, requires aid. Further A league between the venetians, Pope, and
French king.
more out of Italy came certain news, that Clement bishop of Rome and the
Venetians, had made a legue with the French king, that was lately returned
home out of Spain, to war upon the Emperor, as you shall hear afterward.
When the Emperors letters before mentioned, were read in the assembly, the
cities for the most part, namely, of high Germany, put up their advise in
writing: declaring how they desired by all means to obey and gratifies the
Emperor, nowithstanding the controversy about religion increases daily,
especially touching ceremonies and men's traditions: hitherto the decre of
Worms, could not be well observed for fear of sedition and vprores: but now
is the danger much more, as in the last assemblye, before the Legate of
Rome, it was also well declared. In so much that if the Emperor him self were
here present and infourmed of the state of things, he could judge none
otherwise. He makes promise in his letters of a counsel, but what time they
were written, the Bishop and he were friends, and now it is far otherwise,
seeing the bishop has altered his mind, and levied an Army against him:
wherefore it can not synke into their heads, that in this trouble some time
they should have any general counsel: wherefore they think it best to send
ambassadors to the Emperor, which may inform him of the whole matter, and
of the state of Germany, and how dangerous a matter it is also, to delay the
cause of relygion any longer, and no less perilous to put in ure the decree of
Worms: And therefore to entreat him, that for the avoiding of a further
inconueniencie, he would permit them to hold a counsel provincial of
Germany, to treat of all matters in controversy: Which thing was agreed upon
at Norenberg, and the place appointed here in this same city, and many of the
states had made preparation for the same: But when it was again defeated by
the Emperors countremaundeme^t, it opened the way to rebellion, sedition, and
to civil wars, all the which things might easelye have been eschewed, in
case at the same time, the cause of relygion had been heard indifferently: And
if he will not allow a counsel of Germany, than to entreat him to differ
the execution of the decree of Worms, until the general council: for
otherwise it will come to pass, that the wound newly healed, will wax raw
again, and another that shall be worse, break out. Furthermore in this discord
so long as every man is careful for his own estate, it wylbe very hard and
paynefull to collecte any money for the aid of others. Besides this wrytinge,
exhibited to the Princes the fourth day of August, they put up also an other,
wherein the poverty co^playned that they were in all cities and towns
ouermuche burdened with beggyng Freres: For that which should be a help unto
them to susteyn Against false Freers.
their life, was prevented and caught up by them: and not only that, but often
times also there came to their hands, through flattrye, great lands and
legacies, to the loss and hynderaunce of many: wherefore their deuyse was, that
they should not be suffered to make any moo Freres when these are dead, and to
permytte them that will take an other kind of life upon the^, to depart out of
their cloister, with some annual stypende: And the rest to be given to the
poor men's box. Moreover they think it not reason, that the clergy should be
frelye exempted from al charges and payme^tes, for that privilege was granted
them in times past, by the lyberalitie of kings and Princes, but yet at such
time as they were both few in nombre, and had but small lyuynges: But now
that they be so many, and grown to such a wealth, there is an other
consyderation to be had, for the cause of their inunitie being taken away, the
benefit also employed takes place no longer, for they do enjoy the benefytes
and commodities, as much as other The number of holy days
men, or more, for the which tribute, custom, and all other money is paid:
again to have ouermany holy days, which hinder the people sore, whereunto
they are bounden under great penalty, and do not only leave their necessary
works undone, but also in those idle days offend God diverse ways: They
think it also mete to abolish the law that is made for the choice of meats,
to leave unto all men their own ceremonies till the counsel, and in no wise
to stop the course of the eua^gelical doctrine. But after the bishops
understood the Emperors pleasure, they would not proceade in matters of
religion, but thought in this great dissension bet wyxte the Bishop and him, to
defer the thing till some better opportunity served, when there arose great
strife among the men chosen, which were contrary in Relygion, the Duke of
Saxon, and the Lantgraue, all consultation laid aside, meant to go home, and
commanded their company to make them ready to take their iournaye.

That seeing Ferdinando, the Archebyshop of Treers, and others, and considering
what danger it were in so peryllous a time, if they should thus breaking of
in displeasure conclude upon nothing, but depart with grudge and malice:
Found the mean to Salve this wound: For whereof the commotion in the year
before, and what dissension so ever is now in Germany, sprange up altogether
of the controuersye that is in Relygion, they thought good to remedy the
thing in time.

Wherefore to appease certain men's minds, at the last they made A decree for
Religion.
a decre, that for the establyshynge of Religion, and mayntenaunce of the
common peace and tranquillity, it was necessary to have a lawful counsel,
either provincial, or general, to begin within a year at the furthest: And
to the intent there shall be no let nor delay in the same, to send
Ambassadors to the Emperor to entreat him that he would consider the
miserable and troublesome state of the Empire, and to repair shortly in to
Germany, to hold there a counsel. And touching the decree made at Worms,
they were contented that untyll the counsel were begone, all men should so
demean them selves in their provinces, as they would yield an account of
their doings, both to God and to the Emperor. Before this decree was made,
the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, enter in to talk with the Ambassadors of
Strausborough, Norenberge, and Auspurge, The beginning of the Protesta^tes
league.
which they saw favored the Gospel, concerning a league, that for as much
as they knew not what the Bishops and their adherententes intended, if it
fortuned any to stand in danger for Relygion, that one might help an other:
And for as much as they had a good opinion of them of Frankeforth, and Ulmes,
they would not refuse to break with them also in the matter. The Ambassadors
make answer that they had no commission touching any such matter,
nevertheless, they would write home right diligently. The Duke of Saxon had
his preachers, George Spalatine, and John Islebie, and the Lantgraue had also
his. The residewe of the Princes, requested that they might not preach for
fear of any stir, but it was in vain. Fardinando also calling before him
the Ambassadors of all cities, and accomting unto them the benefits of his
auncesters, and the house of Austriche, exhorted them to be obedient to the
Emperor, and not to be carried away, by the counsel and persuasion of others.
They decreed also here to send aid to the king of Hungary: but at what time
the assemblye was finished, which was about the end of The king of Hungary
slain.
August, the Turk was entered into Hungarye, and had vanquyshed king Lewis in
battle, who was also slain in the chase. At this assemblye were all the
Princes electours, sauinge only the Marquis of Brandenburg. The Emperor this
summer married Isabell, The Emperor married a wife.
daughter to Emanuell king of Portugal, sister to John which had succeeded his
father. What time the assemblye was at Spyres, thetwelue towns of the
Neluetians or Swycers, kept a disputation at Badene. Thither came the chiefest
divines of the bishop of Romes A disputation at Baden.
side, Faber, Eckius, and Murmer. And the bishop of Constance, Basil, Courts,
and losanna, sent thither their Ambassadors. There were theames set up, which
Eckius defends right boldly. That the very body and blood of Christ is
present in the Lords supper: that it is a true oblation for the quick and
dead, that the vyrgin Mary and other saynctes, must be prayde unto as
intercessours: that Images ought not to be taken down: And that after this
life there is the fire of purgatory. Oecolampadius, and others, did impugn
the^: Zwynglius was absent, and in his letters to the Heluetians, he declared
the cause of his absence, and confuted the opinions of Eckius by writing. For
Zwynglius dred bad measure suspecting both the men and the place. They
concluded thus. That all men should persevere in the same religion, that they
have observed hitherto, and receive no new doctrine, but follow the
authority of the counsel. The bishop of Constaunce, A Priest burnt.
had a little before caused one John Huglie a priest, to be brent at Merspurge,
for that he would not allow the bishops of Romes doctrine in all things.
When Lewys the king of Hongary was thus myserably slain, Ferdinando contended
that the kingdom was Discord in Hongary.
dew unto him, by a certain composition, but he had an aduersarye John Sepuse,
the vayuode of transsyluania. Of the which dissentio^, when all the nobility
and states were divided, there arose war right noisome and hurtful to the
Germans, and other nations that dwelled nere. For afterward the Emperor of
Turks, receiving the Uayuode into his faith and protection, established him
king, as his tributarye and client, and had Buda delivered up into his hands.
The French king which was returned home, leaving his children for The
French league against the Emper.
pledges in Spain, said the conditions of peace were unreasonable. Wherefore
sendyng Ambassadors to and fro, the bishop of Rome and the Uenetians, enter
into league with him: the effect whereof is this That for the defense and
quietness of Italy, they shall find an army of.xxx. thousand fotemen, of men
at arms, and lyghthorse men six thousand: They shall also provide an Navy
of two and thirtye galleys with Ships of bourthen: that what time they shall
have vanquyshed the enemy in Lumbardye, and Italye, they shall muade the
kingdom of Nails, both by sea and land, which being ones wo^ne to remain in
the power of the church of Rome, yet so as.lxxv. thousand duckates be paid
yearly to the French king, which claymeth a title in it: That the dignity of
the house of medicees be maynteyned in the city of Florence. The French king
leaves the Duckdome of Myllan to Fraunces Sfortia, whom the Emperors men
besegyng in the Castle of Millan, constrained to render, and promises him his
own aid, and the Swycers to help him, and also a wife in France of the
blood royal, yet upon this condition, that he shall pay unto him therefore
year fyfty thousand crowns, and find his brother. Maximilian, which is
prisoner in France. After this the bishop of Rome The Popes benefits to the
Emper.
writing his letters to the Emperor, recyteth his benofites toward him, what
goodly offers he refused at the French kings hands for his sake, how that
when the king was taken, he gave a hondreth thousand Duckates to his
captains, upon certain conditions, that he has uttered unto him oftentimes,
the counsels of his enemies, that what time his men did besege Frances Sfortia
in the Castle of Millan, and certain men of great power moved him to join in
league against him, he would not hear them: For all the which things he is
full evil recompensed: For his soldiers have wrought such injuries, shame,
and mysery to him and the church of Rome, as has not been heard: moreover
that neither the conditions are fulfilled, nor his money restored, how it
appears what good will he bears him, which would not make him prinie upon
what conditions he concluded with the French king, that he utterly rejected
his suite and intercession made for Sfortia, how he sent the Duke of Burbon
from the siege at Marseilles to reyse up a new kind of war in Italye: for
the which causes, he is of necessity constrained to make a league with such
as love the quiet and wealth of Italy: Wherefore if he will also be content to
embrace peace, well and good, if not, he shall not want force and power to
defend Italy, and the common wealth of Rome. In this league was comprysed the
king of England, and with great promyses was desired to be the protector
thereof. Unto this epistle Caesar aunsweryng at Granato, the.xviii. of September,
reaccompteth The Emperors answer
his deserts and benefits done unto him. How that by his suit and means he
was made bishop of Rome, how before that time he gave him an yearly pension of
ten thousand duckates out of the revenues of the Archebyshop of Toledo, when
he was legate to bishop Leo, notwithstanding that he had conspyred against him,
with Albert prince of Carpes, to have dispossessed him of Naples, and Sicily.
When the French men were driven out of Italy, by the conducte of Bourbon, he
could not deny him, but that he might war in France, or else where, to
recover of the French king his own: he grants the kingdom of Naples to be
holden of him, not withstanding in The kingdom of Naples.
case says he, you should make any war there, you should thereby lose all
your right and title: for even for the same causes that the Cliente loses the
benefit granted, for the self same also does the Patron A point of yt law.
lose his prerogative. Before the king was taken, you entreated of a peace, but
it was to the intent you might have inioyed the Dukedom of Millan. And
therefore the Uenetians and Florentines, withdrewe their aid, through your
motion, from my captains, against their league. For the French king
confesses openly, how through your provocation he entered into a new league
before he went out of Spain. And I know by certain report, that you have
dispensed with him for his oath, whereby he is bounden to me: Furthermore you
have moved war, before the letters (wherein it was proclaimed) were unto me
delivered, seking not only to drive me out of all Italy, but also to depose me
from the dignity of the Empire: For all this am I able to prove by the letters
of Ferdinando Daualle, Marquis of Pistare, whom you would have entysed in to
your league, promising him the kingdom of Naples. I have title to Millan by mo
ways than one, yet for the quiet of Italye, I suffered Sfortia to enjoy it:
And when he was grievously syck, I would have placed in his stead the Duke of
Bourbon, for that I saw it pleased you well and diverse others in Italy. And
the cause why Sfortia was besieged in the Castle of Millan, was that he had
committed treason against me, by ioynyng in league with you, whereof being
detected, he would not deliver to my captains, the Castelles of Cremone and
Millan, neither make his pourgation, nor come to any talk in the matter. Your
request was, that I should forgive him altogether, which I neither could nor
in deed ought to do, lest by an evil example I should give an occasion unto
Clientes, to offend against their patrones. Touching the peace concluded with
the French king, I kept nothing secret from your Ambassadors: for the
conditions be such as I would not have concealed, for they tend to a public
peace, and to the resistau^ce of Christ's ennemies. But se, the unworthiness of
yt thing. There comes more money yearly to Rome out of my Realms and
provinces, than does from all other nations. That is to be proved by the
requests of the Princes of Germany, what time they complaynyng grievously of
the court of Rome, desired a reformation. Whose complaint Rome is the treasure
house of yt whole world.
at that time I neglected, for the zeal I bare to the church of Rome. Which
thing considered, and for as much as I have given you none occasion of
offense, I do instantly require you to lay down your armies: And I will do
likewise. And seeing we are both appointed of God, as two great lyghtes, let
us endeavor our selves so as the The Pope and the Emper. are two great lyghtes.
whole world may be lyghtened through us, and not that by reason of
dissension, there should arise an Eclypse: Let us regard the public weal,
and attempt to drive out the Turks, to quench the sect and errors of
Luther: For this appertains unto Gods glory, and hereof ought we to begin,
and after to debate other controversies, you shall have me ready unto all these
things, which if I can not obtain, but that you will needs persevere to play
the man of war: I do The Pope is a warrier.
proteste here, that I appeal to a general counsel, in the same may all
griefs be decyded, and I require that the same may be called so shortly as
may be. Where he speaks of two lights, he follows herein the words of
Innocentius the third, which applies the two great lyghtes, that God created,
the one to guide the day, the other ye night, to the bishops and princelyke
dignity. But that which ministers Godly things to be much more excellent
then that which governs polytike matters only: And look what different is
betwyxte the son and the moon, so great a diversity is there betwyxt the
office of the high bishop, and a kings office. When Caesar had made this
answer to Clement, he writes also to the coledge of Cardinals, the sixth
day of October, signifiyng that he is not a little sorry to hear that bishop
Clement is confederated with the French king, who renews war against him
afreshe, and how the bishop has sent him letters of defiance, which he
supposes were written by their common assent. whereat he marueleth not a
little, considering there is no king yt bears more love and affection to the
church of Rome, than he: Witness Parma and Placence, which being cities of the
Empire, and plucked from it of late, he has not withstanding restored to the
church, all be it he was by no right bound so to do: And the princes and
states of Germanye co^playned unto him at Worms, of sundry injuries done by
the court of Rome, and required a recompense, but he for a singular love, and
natural inclination toward the church of Rome, passed over their requests
with deaf ears: And where as great sedition and trouble ensued thereupon
through out all Germanye, and the Princes there had appointed another counsel,
he for the indemnitie of the bishop and church of Rome, countremaunded the same
under a great penalty, and to appease A counsel promised.
their minds he put them in hope of a general counsel to be holden out of
hand: Wherefore the bishop has done him great injury, which has done so
much for his sake, that he has by the same means lost the good wylles of the
princes of the Empire: he desires them therefore to admonyshe the bishop of his
duty, that he appointe a counsel, and persuade him to incline his mind to
peace, rather then to war: which if he refuse, and will differ the
counsel, that then they would call it, for if the christian common wealth
sustain any loss, or damage, either for the want of a counsel or for long
delay of the same, it ought not hereafter to be imputed to him. After the
news came out of Hongary of the great overthrow there, the princes set
forward their Ambassade appointed at Spires to the Emperor, with the great
speed. And for the more expedition, they entreat the French king, to grant
them a saufeconduicte, to pass into Spain through France: which he
granted, prescribing them a certain time to pass in, and took an occasion
hereby to write unto them the.vj. of Octobre. The french kings leters to the
princes of Germany.
That for the loss of Hongary, the death of Lewis the king, and the danger
that approached Germany, he had conceived an inward sorrow in his mind, and
nothing less lamented yt the public wealth also peryshed through civil
wars: it was not surely long of him that Christome is not quiet, but this to
be the Emperors fault, who refuses al honest, and reasonable conditions of
peace: And for so much as he is neither moved, with the common loss and
destruction, nor with the most unworthy death of his brother in law king
Lewis, nor yet with the miserable estate of his own sister now a wydowe, nor
co^sidereth not in what danger stands Austriche, they shall do well and
according to their duty, if they can exhort and persuade him unto peace, to
keep love and amity with kings that dwell nere him, and refrain this
unmeasurable covetousness: for this should be more honorable for him, than if he
still endeavor to get other men's lands, and possess all him self alone: his
progenitors kings of France, have often times fought many battelles with the
ennemies of christentie: the same might now be done with their powers joined
in one, if the Emperor be so minded: wherefore in case they can devise to bring
this thing to pass, he will bestow on the Turkyshe war al his force, and
him self also: but if not, no man blame him, if he assaye to recover by force
of arms, such things as by good will he can not, for it stands him upon
rather to seek for peace, which is nerer the Turks danger tha^ he is. When
Caesar was aduertysed of these letters, the.xxix. of Noue^bre, The Empe.
confuteth the letters.
he writes to the Princes, and first he rehearses how mercyfully and gently
he used the French king prisoner, how he set him at liberty, how he gave
him in marriage his eldest sister, to him in degree of succession the second.
And where as he, all things being quyeted, as he supposed, was taking his
journey into Italye, to the intent he might bend his whole force against the
perpetual enemies of the Christian Religion, he breaking his fidelity, and
making a league with Bishop Clement and certain others, and deuydynge emonges
them the kingdom of Naples, which they had already in hope conceived to be
their own: Renewed mortal War. By means whereof he could not deliver the
country of Hongary from the violent fury of the Turks being forced to defend
his own limits. And where as he pretends to lament the death of king Lewis,
and destruction of Hongary, it is a plain dissimulatio^, to the intent he
might by some mean put to silence such as found his letters, and do
constantly affirm, that the Turk attempted this war through his
instigation. When he was in Spain, and since his return home also, he
confirmed by his letters the observation of conue nauntes: but for as much as
he has his kingdom, liyng in the mids of all Europe he is careless, and
seeks wars and contention, thereby to make his profit. Besides the wrytinge
before mentioned, there came forth in the French kings name an Apology in his
defense, declaring An apology for the french king.
the causes, why he stands not to the peace of Madrice. Whereunto an answer
was made in the Emperors behalf at large. For as much as the Turk had Buda
with a great part of Hongary, and oppressed the people miserably, being a
great terror to Germany: Certain princes of the Empire consulted at Eslyng, to
write spedely to the Emperor, The princes letters to the Emperor.
entreating him to repair into Germany as shortly as might be, in
consideration to the great danger, that than hanged over the Empire. in these
letters, written the.xix. of Dece^bre, they make mention of the Ambassade that
they were determined to have sent unto him: but because they should have
travailed through France, and the king would grant them saufe conduict, but
only for.iiij. months, whereof one was past, and before the Ambassadors
should mete together, the time would be much shortened. Therefore to avoid the
danger, they have determined to differ the same until the next assembly of
the Empire, which they have appointed at Regensburg, the first day of April
next following, to treat of the Turkysh war, trusting ye either by yt time,
An assemble at Regensburg.
they shall have some better occasion to send, or yt he shall have some
intelligence of the thing in ye mean time. Al be it that Caesar wrote thus to
the bishop of Rome and his Cardinals, yet would it prevail nothing, but the
co^federatours sending unto him Ambassadors, as was agreed upon, require him
to depart from his armies, to restore Sfortia Duke of Millan, to receive the
money for his ransom, and send home the kings sons whom he deteineth as
pledges, and to repay the money, that he borrowed of the king of England,
hereunto answered the Emperor, at Ualolete the.xij. of February. That he ca^
not dismiss his armies in any short time: notwithstanding he will not refuse to
take truce for three years or more, and to se^d the armies on both parts
against the Turk our common ennemie, and in ye mean time to treat of peace.
Sfortia holds his lands of the Empire, and is accused of treason, he can not
therefore be restored, before his matter be examyned. Wherefore let him answer
to the law and his accusers, and he will appoint him indifferent judges: To
restore the kings children upon the receipte of the money, he can not, and the
same is against the kings promise, oath and fidelity. Where they require
him to repaie the king of England his money, he marueleth not a little,
consydering they have no commandment of him in this matter, for the king and
he be such friends, as a money matter can not break their frendshyp: Wherefore
saying the requests be unsitting, he wills them to bring forth others: for
his part he will do nothing obstinatly, but shall be content to bear with many
things for the common wealths sake. Wherefore the Ambassadors thus departing
without any thing concluded, they renew the wars again with all their force
and power. In those days John Frederick son and heir to the prince electour
of Saxony, married Sibille John Fridmarrieth Sibille of Cleue.
daughter to Duke John of Cleave. the lady Catharine yt Emperors youngest
sister, was promised him, and writings made of the same: But when this
alteration of religion chanced in Saxony, they swarued from their couenauntes.
And Hawnart which was then Emperors Ambassador in Germany, said plainly, that
there was no promise to be kept with Heretics following herein (as I suppose)
the footsteps of the counsel at Constance, as in deed the Duke of Saxony
recites in a certain writing. Emo^ges others of themperours captains was
Charles Duke of Bourbon, who going with a certain power to Naples, by the way
took the city of Rome, and sacked it the next day after he there Rome is
sacked.
arrived, being the sixth day of May. Clement the bishop, the Cardinals and
other prelates, fleing in to Castle angel, were beseged a certain time, being
trenched in on every side: which after they had endured siege seven months,
were at the last delivered by the Emperors commandment. It is hard to
express with words the great cruelty and oultrage of the Germans and
Spanyardes at Rome. For besides the cruel slaughters, destruction, spoiling
and raueshynge of women, they left of no kind of contumelious reproaches and
mockinges of the bishop and his Cardinals. The Emperor excused the fact
diligently, affirmyng that it was not done by his commandment. And chiefly he
wrote thereof to the king of England: that albeit he supposes the thing to have
happened unto him by the just judgment of God, who avenged the wrong and
injury done unto him: yet he says, he will so use the matter that this same
calamity, shall be the beginning and occasion of the health of the common wealth.
When news were brought into Spayn of the sacki^g of Rome, Caesar immediately
commanded to cease from playing of pageantes and interludes which were the^
set forth for joy of his son Philip, newly borne. The king of England answe The
king of England.
red nothing to themperours letters: and the bishop of Rome being captive, unto
whom he bare a great zeal and reverence, and themperours power increasing
daily, he fixed his mind upon war, sending ye Cardinal of york ambassador
into France. To the counsel of Rege^sburg came the Princes, but sent their
Ambassadors only. Wherefore there was nothing concluded, saving that they sent
letters to the Emperor, the xviij day of May, signifiyng that for diverse
causes his presence were requysite and needful. In this time sprange up a new
kind of doctrine, of such as are called Anabaptists. They condemn the
baptism of infantes, and are baptized again them selves, teaching that The
beginning of Anabaptists.
all things should be common. Against these wrote Luther, Zwynglius, and
diverse others. And the magistrates punished in every place. They boaste of
visions and dreams, and at Sangal a town in Swycerlande, one of them cut of
his brothers head, in the presence both of father and mother, whom he had
persuaded, that God had commanded him so to do: but being apprehended of the
magistrate, he suffered the like punishment. Now, how much they increased, and
what co^motions they styred up in Germany, hereafter shall be declared. This
year the Senate of Strasborough decreed that none should from henceforth be
buried within the city, and appointed certain places for the burial of the
dead without their city. When the French king heard that Rome was taken,
making league with the king of England, he sent a great army into Italy, by
the conduicte of Lautrech The French Army.
a Gascon, to rescewe the bishop. Who coming into Lumbardy, and aided by the
Uenetians, takes first Alexandria, and after Pauie, partly by force, and
partly by composition, but the soldiers in their rage and fury, for that the
king was there taken, after a wou^derful slaughter of the towns men, spoiled
the city. The.xxvij. day of July, Charles Duke of Burbon, lately stayne in the
assault at Rome, was condemned The Duke of Baurbon conoempned at Paris.
at Paris, by the court of parliament of treason, his name and memorial
accursed, his Arms plucked down, and his lands and goods confiscated.
Anthony Prate Chauncelour, gave the sentence. This Duke bare a mortal hatred
to the king, and what time he went to besege Marseilles, as is mentioned
before in the fourth book, for because at the same time the king of England
took the Emperors part, he wrote to the Cardinal of York, emonges other
things that he would spare no pains nor peril, that king Henry might by his
help recover the right and title that he has to France. For English men do
claim all France to be theires, for a two hundredth England has title to
France.
years since and above, especially Normandye, Gascoyne and Gwyne: In these
letters therefore did Bourbon provoke the king to claim and challenge his
right. Which letters the French king afterward chauncing upon, conceived
much more hatred against Leonarde Caesar.
him. There was in the dukedom of Bauarie one Leonarde Caesar a professor of
the Gospel, who being apprehended by the commandment of the bishop of
Passauie, defends these opinions. that faith only does justify: that there
be only two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords supper: the Mass to be no
sacrifice, not to profit the quick nor the dead. The confession of Syns to
depend of counsel and not of commandment: that Christ only has made
satisfaction for sins: That the vow of chastity byndeth not: That the
scripture makes no mention of Purgatory: That there is no difference of days:
That the dead be not intercessours for us: That in divine things man has not
free will. When he was examined, he would have declared these things to the
people more at large, but he could not be suffered. Emonges other there was
Eckius, who reasoned altogether in Latin, that the people should not
understand, but the other answered him in the vulgar tongue, neither yet
could he cause him to do the like. In fine, being condemned by the bishops
own mouth for an heretyke, he was burnt the.xvj. of August, by the
commandment of William Duke of Bauar, unto whose jurisdiction he was
committed, after his condempnation, for the bishop lest he should in deed
defile Hopocrisy of bishops.
the sacred things, and become profane and irregular, gives not sentence of
life and death.

What time Ferdinando who was the Emperors depute in Germany, was after the
death of king Lewis created king of Boheme, and contended with Uaynode of
transiluania for the kingdom of Hongary, Philip of Baden, substituted in his
place, appointed a counsel of the Empire in Cesars name, commanding them to
be at Rege^sburg, at the beginning of March in the year followyng, to
consulte of Religion, and the Turkyshe war. The senate and people of Bernes,
which are of most fame and power emo^ges the Swycers, co^sydering The power
of Bernes.
how the dissension about religion increased daily, and that the Ministers of
the church not at all one doctrine, do assign an other disputation within
their City, at the.xvij. of Decembre: And setting it forth in writing, called
unto the same all the bishops nere about them, as the bishops of Constance,
Basyll, Sedune and Losanna. Warnyng them to come them selves, and bring their
divines with them: or else to lose all their possessions, that they have with in
the precinct of their lymites. After this, they nombre the clergy with in
their jurisdiction, appoyntyng that the Scripture only of the old and new
Testament, should be of force and authority: To all that will come thither,
they grant saufe conduicte: And make this law, Laws of their disputacion.
that all thing be done quietlye without chiding and brawling, that every
man should speak his mind frelye, and pronounce it in such sort as every
man's sayings might be written: And what so ever should there be agreed upon,
that the same should be ratified and observed through out al their domions. And
to the intent men might know what things should be decided, and comme thither
all prepared, they propounded ten conclusio^s, which the ministers of their
church, Fraunces Colbe, and Bertholde Haller, did profess, and said: they
would prove by the Scriptures. Which are these, that the true church, whereof
Christ is the only head, proceeds of Gods word, perseuereth in the same, and
hears none other man's voice: that this self Theames or conclusions.
same church makes no laws, without Gods word: therefore are we not otherwise
bounden to men's traditions, bearyng the name of the church, but in as much as
they be consonant to Gods word: that Christ only has made satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world. Therefore if any man say that there is any other
way of salvation, or mean, to put away sin, the same does deny Christ,
how it can not be proved by the testimony of Scripture, that the body and
blood of Christ, is really and corporally received: that the use of Mass
wherein Christ is presented and offered to his heavenly father, for the quick
and the dead, is against the Scripture, and a contumely to the sacrifice,
which Christ offered up for us: that only Christ is to be called upon, as the
mediator and advocate of mankind to God the father. that there should be any
place after this life, wherein souls should be pourged, is not to be found in
the Scriptures: wherefore all those prayers and ceremonies, yearly Diriges and
Obites, which are bestowed Prayers for the dead are superfluous.
upon the dead, also Lamps, Tapers, and such other things, profit nothing
at all: That any image or lykenes should be set up to be worshypped, is against
the holy Scriptures: therefore if they be errected in churches for that intent,
they ought to be taken down. That matrimony is to no kind of men prohybited,
but for to avoid fornication, is commanded and permitted unto all men by holy
writ. Where as every whoremonger is even by the testimony of Scripture,
sequestered from the communion of the church: That the syngle life unchaste, and
fylthy, is most unseemly for the order of priesthode. What time the men of
Bernes had written their letters, concerning these matters unto all the
Heluetians, exhortyng them both to send their learned men, and to suffer all
others to pass saufelye through their countries, the Lucernates, Uranites,
Unterualdians, Engianes, Glareo^s, Soloturnians, and they of Friburg, exhort
them with long letters, to leave their enterprise, saying that it is not
lawful for any nation or province, to alter the state of religion, but the
same to belong to a general counsel: wherefore they desire them, that they
would attempt no such wicked act, but contine we in the religion, which
their parents and elders have observed. Finally they say that neither they
will send, nor suffer any of their men to come, nor grant saufeco^duit to any
others to pass through their country. All this not with standing the men of
Bernesse, proceed in this matter, and at the day prescribed, which was
the.vij. of January begin their disputation. There came none of the bishops
before named. They of Basyll, Zuricke, and Abbecell, also the Shafusia^s,
Sangallians, Mullusia^s, and their neighbors of Rhetia, sent theirs: moreover
they of Strausborough, Ulmes, Auspurg, Lindaue, Constance, and Isne, did
likewise. The doctors of the same city before named, began the disputation,
and their conclusions defended Zwynglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito,
Blanrer, and diverse others: And there impugned them emonges others Conrade
treger, an Austen freer of great fame, who at the last what time he sought for
help besides the Scriptures, and the masters of the disputation would not
permit him so to do, for that it was forbidden by the law, he departed out
of the place. The disputation ended the.xxvj. of January, and the forsayde
conclusions approved by the common assente of the most part, were ratified
and observed not only at Bernes, but also proclaimed by the magistrates,
Religion reformed.
in sundry places there aboutes, Masses, Aultars, Images, abolyshed in all
places. They of Constance had changed certain things before. And when they had
made a law against whoredom, adultrye, and dishonest or suspected company,
these that are called Cannons, departed The prebids depart.
thence in great displeasure Ambrose Blaurer, was preacher there, who was a
gentleman borne, but had professed him self a Monk in the Abbey of
Alperspacke, in the Dukedom of Wyrtinberge, which Ambrose Blaures.
by the readyng of Luthers works changed his mind and his cote together,
returnyng home again to his friends. His Abbot would have had him again, and
wroote earnestlye to the Senate of Constance for him. Wherefore Blanrer
expresses the whole matter in writing, and propounds certain conditions,
where upon he was content to return, but they were such as the Abbot
refusyng, he remains still at Constance: Where after the disputation at
Bernes, Images, Aultares, Mass, and Ceremonies, were utterly abolyshed.
Likewise they of Geneua, in remouinge their Images and ceremonies, did Religion
reformed at Geneua.
imitate them of Bernes, wherefore the bishop and clergy, forsook the city in
anger. The Religion being thus altered, they of Bernes renou^ced the league
made with the French king, prohibitynge the hired warfare, as they of Zuricke
had done, and were contented with that yearly pension that the king pays
them to keep peace. And wrote The victory of the gospel
the day and year, wherein they forsook the Popyshe religion, upon apyllour
in golden letters, that it might be an everlasting memory all to their
posterity. I showed you how the Cardynal of York, was sent into France. When
they were agred upon the matter, both kings The kings of France and England
Amballade to ye Emperor.
sent their ambassadors to the Emperor: And the French king, requires to
take his ransom and deliver his sons that were pledges: The king of
England again his debte to be paid him, which is threfolde: first three
hondreth thousand Crowns that he lent him, secondarely, five hundredth
thousand, for not observing the contracte of Matrimony, thirdly four years
pension, which the Emperor promised him, as before in the third book is
declared. When the Emperor hereunto had answered, not after their minds, the
king of England also sent him defiaunce by an Herault of Arms, who at the
same time was consultynge, how he might be deuorced from Catherine the
Emperors haunt, and Marry an other, which he did afterward, as shall be
recyted in his place, the Emperor in his letters, to other kings accused the
French king most grievously, that he kept not his faith and promise, and had
often times said so much to the French Ambassadors. Where upon the king in
his letters written at Paris, the.xxviij. of March, which he sent by an
Herault: By the talk says he, which thou have had with some of mine, I
perceive that thou braggest certain things, that found to my dishonor: The
French kings inuectiue against the Emper.
as though I had escaped thy hands against my fidelity: And now, al be it
that he, which after the compacte made, has put in pledges, is him self
quytte from bond, so that I am hereby sufficiently excused, yet nevertheless
in the defense of my honor, I thought to write this briefly unto the. Therefore
if thou blame this fact of mine and my departure, or say that ever I did
any thing, contrary to the duty of a noble Prince, I tell the plainly, thou
lie. For I am determined to maynteyne mine honor and estimation whylest I
have a day to live. We need not many words therefore, and if thou wylt ought
with me, thou shall not need hereafter to write, but appointe the place, where
we may fight hand to hand: For if thou dare not mete me, and in the mean
time ceasest not to speak evil of me, I protest that all the He offers the
Emper. the combat.
shame thereof belongs unto the, for by our combat all the strife shall be
parted. I told you before of the contention between king Ferdinando and the
Uayuode of Transiluania. When the same burst out in to a cruel war, and
Ferdinando was of the greater power, the Uayuode in the month of Apryll,
writing his letters to the states of The empire. After the lamentable death of
king Lewis, says he, I The letters of John Uaiuode, to the states of the
Empire.
was by the common assent of the nobles, chosen and crowned king of Hongary:
except three, whom poverty, hatred, and hope of better fortune, had seduced,
that forgettyng the wealth of their country, they subscribed to Ferdinando
king of Boheme. And what time I was wholly addicted to succor my country, to
recover that was lost, and by the same means to procure your quiet, behold he
inuadeth my Realm with violence, takes certain Towns, and by those which
were of his faction, was created king at Posonye. I marueled not a little, and
it grieved me also exceadingly, that this nation should be molested by him
which ought most of all to succor and releue the misery of the same. It had
not been hard for me at that time, to have given him the repulse, but I would
not hasarde rashely the remnant of the power left of so many shypwrakes and
losses of that Realm, has had of late, and I complained unto Clement the
seventh, to Frau^ces the French king, to Henry king of England, and to
Sigismu^de king of Pole. And in deed the king of Pole, sendynge his
Ambassador, without my knowledge, entreated him that he would not in this
dangerous time make away through civil discord to let in the foreyne enemy,
which after neither he, nor yet any other should be able to keep out, but that
he would keep peace with me, and join his power to mine to resist the common
enemy. And where as Ferdinando answered, that he would attempt nothing
against right and equity, it was agreed upon, that a certain day, fytte men
should be sent to debate the matters of controversy: I was content, and
sendyng also my Ambassadors unto you, and submytting my self unto your
arbytriment, I made request, that you would give none aid to mine adversary:
but what time they came into Ferdinando his country being taken and deteyned
as prisoners, against the law of all nations, His Ambassadors taken
they could not declare their commission: And from you they should have gone
to the Emperor. And al be it that this same was an extreme wrong and injury,
nevertheless at the day appointed by the king of Pole, I sent certain others
that were very desirous of peace, both of themselves, and also by my
commandment: Notwithstanding Fardinando his men propounded things so far
out of reason, that there could be nothing concluded. Whylest these things were
a workyng, certain of the nobility, entysed by the craft and polycie of
Ferdina^do, break their fidelite, which before they had given me. And for
somuche as the way is laid, that I can neither come nor send unto you, I
thought good to declare unto you by my letters, how unjust war he
attempteth, peradventure intending to recover the same that his auncetours,
Frederick and Maximilian Emperors, have lost here to fore for the one of them,
when he was triumphyng, and thought him self sure of the kingdom of Hongary,
mine uncle Emeryck expulsed out of the whole country. And my father Stephen
Sepuse, when Matthie was king, did disconfite them both in such sort as he
adjoined Uienna to Hongary. And I my self being very young, gave the repulse
to Maximilian, when he moved war against us, and would have done the like to
his enemy also, but that he contendeth with me rather by craft and subtyltie,
than he does by power and manhood. Hitherto have I borne with this injury as I
might. But think with your selves (most noble Princes) how grievous a thing
it is to be cast down out of the highest degree of power and dignity to the
state of a private man. I suppose there can none be found, so mylde and
patient, that sufferyng so many injuries, would not look about him on every
side for all the aid he might get. Wherefore, seeing that at no time since I
received the government of the common wealth, I have refused any conditions
reasonable, nor will not yet do, and had rather do any thing than styre up
cyuyle war. and mine aduersarye proceadeth obstinately, I do proteste, that
it ought not to be laid to my charge, as blame worthy, if for mine own
defense, I seek the best means I can: For in case the common wealth do
sustain thereby any dommage, that may not be ascribed unto me, that has
sought all ways to have peace, but to mine ennemie, which inuadeth an other
man's Realm, through great injury. He has laid dylygent wait in all ways
and passages, that nothing be conveyed unto you: Notwithstanding I suppose
you have heard, how he forsook King Ferdina^do forsook king Lewis
his brother in law king Lewys: unto whom, being often and earnestly required,
he sent neither men nor munition, nor any other aid, against the violence of
his ennemie. And why? for he looked after his death to be king: Moreover the
common aid of the Empyry, appointed for Hongary, he sent to his brother to
disquiet Italy. Where as I sent to king Lewys at the same time, my brother
with three thousand men of mine own costs and charges, and would have been
at the battle my self, had I not been commanded by the king to remain in
Transiluania: My brother dyed in the battle right valeantlye. Ferdinando
promised by an oath, that unless he did first recover Belgrade and certain
other castelles of the Turks, he would not take upon him the government: but
his faith failed herein, for the Turks have invaded further, destroyed and
spoiled the country, and have won the castle of Iaice, the chiefest
fortress of all Bosna. Which Castle king Matthias, with a great loss of his
men, recovered in times past of the Turks, and mine uncle Emerick, defended
the same afterward, enduring a long sege, and the kings have fortified since
that time, to their exceading great charges, and now lost by our valeau^t
captain, yt made so many goodly promises. and I think not long to, he will for
very necessite call upon you for aid, as though he stood in danger for the
defense of Germany, but his mind is an other way. For he intends not to
war upon the Turk, unto whom he is content to pay tribute yearly, and has
sent his Ambassadors thither for the same purpose: but he myndeth with your
men and money to help his brother in Italye, to destroy me, and bring the
Realm of Hongarye into bondage. And seeing the matter is thus, I most earnestly
beseech you, to forsee that this private iniurye done unto me, turn not to
the great hynderaunce of the common wealth. And after a while he wrote also to
the Emperor, much like to this in effect, exhortinge Ferdina^dos title to
Hongary.
him to appease his brother. And thus much for ye defense of his case, but
Ferdina^do grounded him self upon the composition which the emperor Maximilian
had made with the Hongarians and their king Ladislaus, in the year.M. iiij.C.
xci. by the which it was provided, that if Ladislaus died without heir male,
that then Maximilian and his heirs descending in of the right line, should
possess that kingdom. Wherefore when Lewys the son of Ladislaus was dead
without issue, as I told you before, Ferdinando nephewe to Maximilian by his
son Philip, and Archeduke of Austriche, and moreover having married the sister
of king Lewys, affirmed the kingdom to be his by good right. And this self
same time, the Lantgraue of Hesse, and the prince electour of Saxony, mustering
their me^, prepared the^ selves unto war, the cause thereof was this. One Otto
Paccius a Lawer and a gentle man borne, one of the chiefest councillors about
George Duke of Saxony, by occasion of talk, admonyshed the Lantgraue to look
to his own things. For now of late had Ferdinand, the Marquis of
Brandenburge, the Cardinal of Mentz and Salisburge, George the Duke of Saxon,
William and Lewis, Dukes of Bauer, and certain bishops, as Bamberge, and
Wirciburge, made a league to destroy him, the Duke of Saxon electour, and
Luthers religion: And for the more credit of the thing, he showed him the copy
of the confederacy, The duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue prepare the^ to war.
promysing him also the principal. Whylest they levy their Armies, and make
preparation for the wars, all men marueled much wherefore it was, and what
would come of it, some said one thing, and some an other, as in such cases
is accustomed. When they had all things in a redynes, sendyng abroad their
letters and messengers into all parts, they published the copy of the
co^federacie, which was brought unto them, and wrote also unto them which were
thought to have made this league, and sent their Ambassadors, to know what
their intent was. But they al pourged them selves every man several, and
sending abroad their letters, affirm it to be a forged matter, and that it can
not be proved. And Duke George, ye Lantgraues father in law, urged him chiefly
to bring forth the party that told him, which if he did not, he will think
none other wise, but that it is his own deuyse, to styre up strife, and
disturb the quietness of German ye. Their first attempt should have been to
have set upon the bishops that were next them, and therefore they took up and
waged men, as many as they could get upon such a soden. But when Paccius
could not show the deed it self according to his promise. Than the Lantgraue
begaune to wax cold in the busynes: And at the last, by the mediation of
county Palatine, and Richard Archbishop of Treer, they dimysed their armies,
upon condition, that the bishops should pay unto the La^tgraue for the
charges of this war, a hundredth thousand ducates, the Archebyshop of Mentz,
forty thousand, Wirciburge as much, and Bamberge, twenty thousand.
Afterward, what time the Ambassadors of the princes did mete at a day
prescribed, whom in deed this accusation did touch Paccius, whom the
Lantgraue there presented, was convicted of falsihode. Yet by his means put at
liberty, when he had wandered in strange countries certain years, at the last
was beheaded at Andwerpe. When the matter was thus Paccen beheaded.
pacified, the princes confederated of the Sweuicall league, accused the
Lantgraue, that he had done wrong and injury to their fellows: And where a new
stir had like to have grown upon the same, the matter in fine was quieted at
Worms, about the end of Decembre, by the intercession of the Palsgraue. There
be some that think it was not altogether nothing, that he had spoken of the
conspyracie: And the assembly of certain princes at Regensburg, four years
before that increased the same suspicion. Wherefore it is supposed that some
such thing was conceived, but not brought to perfection, nor fully determined.
Which thing I do not here affirm for a certentie, but leave unto every man
his own judgment. The assembly of the Empire which I showed before, should
have been in the beginning of the spring time at Regensburg, was in this
warlyke preparation, not at all, the Emperors deputy, sending word that they
should not come there. The French kings letters written in the later end of
March, the Emperor received the seventh day of June: Afterward sendyng an
answer by an Herault of arms, the.xxiiij. day of June, from Mou^tison: The
Emperors answer to the French king.
I blame the not, says he, nor accuse the for departing home, for the same
was done by my leave and permission: but for that thou did not return
again into my custody, captive, as thou did promise me by thy faith, thou
would, unless thou fulfillest the conditions of peace, like as in deed it
is to be proved by writing subscrybed with thine own hand. This in deed if
thou had done, thou had played the part of a Just man, and of a
worthy Prince: But now for so much as thou have herein broken thy faith I
affirm, and that without any lie, that thou have done shamefully and
wyckedlye. And where as thou desire to have a place appointed for the
co^bate, I am content, and do assign the place by the River that runs
beside fount Arabie, and Andey, which thou ought in no case to refuse. For
if thou did their credit thine own life and thy chyldrens, two years past
what time being set at liberty to return home, thou gave them to me for
pledges, thou may as well now also commit thy self to the same assuredly.
And to the intent it be not differred by long delay, let noble men be sent
thither on both parties, that are skillful in such matters, which shall espy
out a place convenient, and agree upon the kind of weapons, and appoynte a
certain day. But in case I receive none answer from the within forty days,
after the receipt of my letters, what thy mind is herein, the fault of the
delay and all the shame shall remain toward the, and to the crime of
falsifying thy faith shall this be added also. These letters the Emperor
delivered unto the Herault, that he going into France, should read them
before the king openly, or if he refuse to hear them, than he commands him
to deliver them to the king to read.

When the Herault came at the length, the king syttyng at Paris Themper.
Heraulde came at Paris.
hearing of a sermon with his nobles about him; demanded of him if he had
brought the manner of the combat? He said, he had both that and somewhat to say
besides that, and more how he had in commandment to read it before him, or
else to deliver it to his own hands, which he besought him that he might do.
But the king understanding right well the Emperors request herein, and loathe
to have the thing read openly, falling at words with the Herault, arrose and
would neither hear him speak any more, nor receive any letters of him, as in
deed the Emperors men affirm in their wrytinges. The first of August, the
Emperor writing his letters from Ualolete, calls a counsel of the Empire of
Spyres against the An assemble at Spires.
beginning of February, to treat of Religion and the Turkysh war. He
excuses him self by certain affairs, by means whereof he can not be there
present, appoyntyng of his deputes, his brother Ferdinando, Friderike Palatyne,
William of Bauer, the bishop of Trent, and of Hyldesseme, Lantrechus the
Lieutenaunt of the French kings Army, after he had taken Pauie and
Alexandria, as you have heard, wyntered he and his Army at Bononie. And in
the beginning of the spryngtyme went forewarde, and beseged Naples, which was
kept Lantrech be segeth Naples.
and defended by Alphonsus Daualus, Ugo Moncada, Ferdiando Alarco, Philibert,
prince of Orange, and Ferdinando Gonzago.

But in the month of July a sore Pestilence consumed a great part of his
Army, and Lantreth him self also in the month of Auguste, and before him
Mounsour Uaundemont, brother unto Anthony duke of Lorayne, which served the
king in hope to attain to the kingdom of Naples, for that the house of
Gaunte, whereof the house of Lorayn has also his ofsprynge, affirm it to be
their right.

After the disputation of Bernes, Religion was altered in sondrye places,
whereupon the preachers at Strausborongh, emonges other Contention about the
Mass.
errors of the bishop of Romes doctrine, taught chiefly that the mass was
wicked, and a great blasphemy to Gods holy name: wherefore it ought to be
abrogated and the right use of the Lords supper instituted, unless they could
prove these things by the testimonies of holy scripture, they will refuse no
kind of punishment. Again the bishops ministers taught otherwise, which bred
no small contention: whom afterward, the senate for because they refused to
dispute or confer with The papists forboden to preach.
the others, commanded to silence. The bishop in his letters to the senate,
exhorted them to persevere in the ancient religion of their elders. The Senate
desires him again, as they had done oftentimes before, that such things
might be set forth as appertayned to the true service and glory of God, and the
residue taken away and abolyshed: for the same belongs to his office. But he
notwithstanding that he would some time appoynte a metynge and a day for
such matters, would do nothing in ded, but only put them in fear with his
letters, wherein oftentimes he mingled with intreatinges, threateninges, that
they should alter nothing.

And when he was almost in despair of the thing, he entreats the Senate of
the Empire, which was at that time at Spyres, by The Ambassador of the
chamber imperial to Strausbor.
their authority to set in foot in the matter. Who sendynge their
Ambassadors solemnly, at the later end of Decembre, require them not to put
down the Mass: for that it is neither in the power of the Emperor nor of
other states, to change the ancient Religion of their forefathers, but either
by a general, or else by a provincial counsel: which if they supposed to be
far of, or over long to, that they would differ it at the least until the
next assemblye of the Empire, and there put up their requests: where they
doubted not, but that they should receive a reasonable answer. for it is
forboden by the laws, that a private Magistrate may undo such things as be
agreed upon by the common consent of the whole world: wherefore it is reason
that they should obtain this at their hands: For if they should obstinatly
proceed in their enterprise, and work by force and violence, both the Emperor
their high Magistrate, and king Ferdynando also his depute throughout the
Empire, would take the matter right grievously: And they likewise, according to
there office and duty, must both inform the Emperor thereof by their letters,
and also see such redress in the thing as apperteyneth. Which they would be
loath and unwilling to do: wherefore they desire them aduysedly to way the
matter and follow good counsel, for the same shall be to the Emperor most
acceptable, and for the^ selves most profitable. When the senate had made
answer to the Ambassadors, what their purpose was, they departed, and shortly
after the bishop of Hildesseme, came unto the^ in themperours The bishops
letters.
name, with the like exhortation. Furthermore the bishop of Strausborough
writes letters to diverse of the senators, which were gentlemen that held
their lands of him: That for as much as they were bounden unto him by their
oath and fidelity, they should as much as in the^ lies, hold with the mass,
and not suffer it to be abolished. In ye mean time the senate, wha^ the thing
had been above two years in controversy, and the preachers called upon the^ in
their sermons daily, and the citeze^s also were suitors, callig the whole nu^bre
of.ccc. as in matters of weight and difficulty is there accustomed, does
declare yt in case they should abolishe the mass, what danger they were in by
the emperor, if they did it not, how much God would be offended, wherefore they
grant the^ leisure to consider, and require them to consulte together so, that
at their next assembly, by their common will and consent, the matter may be
determined. Wherefore when the day came, their sentence that were against the
Mass prevailed. Where upon a decree was made the.xx. of February, that the
Mass ought to be suspended and laid down, until such time as their
adversaries could prove it to be a service acceptable before God. And this
decree to take place as well within their The Mass put down at Stansbor.
City, as without, in all places so far as their jurisdiction stretches,
and afterward by their letters certify the bishop of the same: which was
news to him as heavy as lead, as he wrote again him self in his next
letters. There was also great dissension about Relygion, certain years at
Basil, and in fine the senate decred that there should Dissentid at Basil for
religion.
be one uniform doctrine through out the whole city, and touching the Mass
which as yet was said in a few places after an open disputation had, it
should be determined by voices, what were to be done therewith. But where as
the Papists defend their Mass with touthe and nail, and in their parsons
rayled against the others unpunished, the Burgeses chose certain to put the
Senate in remembrance of their promise, and to require that those Senators
which are a let to the thing, might be displaced. when this could not be
obtained the Citezens flock together and mete in the gray Freres church, first
without Armure, and after with weapons keep the gates, Towers They of Basil
take armure.
and strong places of the City, with watch and ward. The Senate was glad to
grant them certain requests to apease their furye, referryng the cause of
their judgment, that first were sent unto them.

In the mean time, certain of those that were appointed to make provision in
the City for the rest, chanced to comme into the chief church, and one of
them with his staff, thruste at the Image of a saint, in so much that it
fell down and brake: Upon which occasion they served mo in like case, but
when the Priests came thither, which were much offended with their doings,
they because they would not pass their commission, departed without any
further babble. When word hereof was brought to the Cytizens in the market
place, and report made that their fellows stood in danger of their Images
put down.
lives, by and by were three hundred Armed men, sent to the head Church to
help them. When they came thither, the others were gone. But lest they
should appear to have commen thither for nothing, they break down all the
Idols and Images, they could find there, and from thence go to all other
Churches and do the like. And when certain of the Senators, ran forth to
appease the tumulte, the Cytezens said unto them, that, that you have been
consulted about these three years, the same shall we dispatche in one hour, to
the intent we shall have no more contention about images. Thus did the Senate
condescende to al their requests, and twelve Senators were displaced, and
emonges others Henry Meltinger, that time boroumaister, and Lucius ziegler,
captain of the bourgeses. A decree was also made, that as well within the
city as without in all their lyberties, the Mass, with all manner of images,
should be abolyshed, The Mass put down.
and that the Senate from henceforth should admit two hondreth and three score
burgeses to consulte with them of all matters concerning Gods glory and the
common wealth. These decrees made the citezens return home joyful, and all
their anger was wreaked upon their images. The third day after which was
Asshe wednesdaye, the images were distributed to the poor to burn for want of
Fuel. But what time they fell out about the partyng, and the matter came from
words unto hand strypes, they agreed that they should be brent. Wherefore
there were nine stakes or heaps made Images bre^t on ^sh wednesday.
before the head church, and set a fire and burnt.

And so it fortuned that the same day wherein the bishops ministers are wont
to mark men's foreheades with Ashes, to the intent they should remember them
selves to be earth and ashes, was unto the whole city for consuming their
Idolles into ashes, merry and joyful. The men of Zurick, Bernes, and Solodure
hearing of this tumulte, sent Ambassadors to be means between the^. but
tofore they came thither, the matter was appeased. I told you a little before
of The assembly of Spir.
the assembly at Spyres, which the Emperor had appointed to co^mence at the
beginning of February, but it began not till the Ides of March. Thither came
many princes and states: the Prince electour of Saxony, brought with him
Melanchton, first they treated of Religion, and after much decision, a decree
was made, as we shall tell you hereafter. The Bishops and their accomplices,
did what they could to sequestre the Duke of Saxon and other Princes, from the
Cities, that they should not take counsel and agree in one, which they hoped
well to bring to pass, for as much as they dyffered in opinion, touching
the Lords Supper. And Ferdinande with his colleges calling before them the
Ambassadors of certain cities, charged them sore that contrary to the Emperors
decree, they had altered many things, and finally exhorted them to be
confourmable to the minds of others, lest through their dissension the
assemblye be The papists i^ Swicerla^d make leage with king Ferdinando
quite dissolved. They make answer, that the alteration is not injurious to
the Emperor, but that they are desirous of concord, and would do any
thing for the Emperors sake, not refusing to stand to the judgment of a
lawful counsel. When two the most floryshynge Cities of the Swycers,
Zuricke, and Bernes agreed in one Religion, the Lucernaites, Urites, Swites,
Unternaldians and Engians, which abhorred most this doctrine, make a league
with king Ferdinando. Clement bishop of Rome the.xiij. day of April, sends
John Thomase of Mirandula, to exhort the princes to war against the Turk:
And al be it that he has sustained great losses of late years, yet promyseth
he to assiste them with aid, and to do his endeavor, that the Emperor and
the French king being accorded, the counsel may begin immediately, to the
intent that Germanye may embrace again the same religion that other countries
do. In this assemblye, the Senate of the Empire would not permit Daniel
Miege Ambassador for the city of Strasborough, to sit in counsel, The Amb^
of Srausborough excluded.
for by cause the Mass was abrogated, before this counsel imperial, not
withstanding that they were entreated to the contrary, wherefore James Sturmius
Ambassador for the same city, said unto them, that in case they were thus
displaced, contrary to the law and custom of the Empire, let them not look
from henceforth that they will bear any part of charges. But all might not
preuayl, and Ferdinando him self aunswering the intercessours bad, that any
other city, that observed the Emperors decrees, should be substituted in the
place of the other. After a long dispute of Religion, the fourmer acts of
Spires were repeted, and a new decree made on this wise. They which have
hitherto observed the Emperors decree, let the^ observe the same still, until
the general counsel, and bind the people to do likewise: but The decres of
Spires.
such as have altered their Religion, and can not now depart from the same,
for fear of sedition, let them stay from henceforth and alter nothing
besides, until the time of the counsel: Furthermore that their doctrine,
which teach otherwise of the Lords Supper, than the church does, be not
received, nor the Mass abolyshed, nor that in such places where this new
kind of doctrine is, any man be let to go to Mass that will: The
Anabaptists also such as defend their opinion obstinately, shall suffer
death: the ministers of the church are commanded to teach according to the
interpretacio^ received by the church, referring al disputable questions to be
in the counsel decided. Moreover that all states keep the common peace, and
none to hurt other for the cause of Religion, neither one to take the defense
of an others subject: they that shall do otherwise to be accounted in the
number of outlawes. This decree, resisted the Prince electour of Saxony, George
Marquis of Brandenborge, Ernest and Frances, Certain princes resist the same.
Dukes of Lunenborough, the La^tgraue, and count Anhald, who ye.xix. of April
recite openly in writing, the causes why they do not consent thereunto. And
first they do repete the decree of the former assembly, whereby every man
has his Religion permitted him freely, until the counsel: from this may
they not depart, nor infrynge those things, which after great delyberation,
were for a common quiet establyshed, and with their sygnetes and oaths also
confirmed: They would in deed be glad, after the example of their
progenitors, to do all thing that might content the Emperor, and as for
their goods and lives also, they will spend them wyllinglye in his hyghnes
service: but this present cause, coucerneth the everlasting salvation of all
men. Wherefore they desire them not to be offended with them, for that they
herein dissente from them: for like as the former decree was made by the common
assent of all: so can not the same be broken with out all their consentes. They
will not be against, that they shall in their own country, establysh what
religion shall seem good unto them, beseching God to illuminate the hearts of
all men, with the light and knowledge of his truth: And where as there has
been dissension, and controversy about religion certain years, it was declared
in the counsel at Norinberge, who have been the authors, and causers thereof,
as well by Who be the authors of dissension.
the confession of the bishop of Rome him self, as also by the requests of
Princes and states of the Empire, which were delivered to the bishops legate,
to the number of four score: whereof notwithstanding as yet no redress is
made: And that of al consultations, this has ever been the end, that for the
debating of controversies, and refourmyng of vices, there is nothing better
than a general counsel. And where as the same left a part, they have now
decreed, that such as have changed their Religion, and can not now without
much trouble forsake the same, shall alter nothing from henceforth, that can
they neither commend nor allow, unless they should discredit the doctrine,
which they have professed hitherto, as both true and Godly, and grant
moreover that they ought to leave the same, if they might with any tumulte or
vprores: And what things else were that, tha^ to deny gods word, which is
taught them purely and syncerely? which were the most heinous offense that
could be committed: For they must confess it, not in words only, but in very
deed also: Moreover what an hynderaunce this abnegation would be and how
much prejudicial to the favorers of the Gospel, it is easy to conjecture.
As concerning the Mass, it is right well known, with how strong and
invincible testimonies of holy Scripture, the preachers within their dominions,
have confuted the Popish Mass, and in stead thereof, instituted the Lords
supper, according to the institution of Christ, and the manner by the Apostles
observed: wherefore they can neither admit this part of the decree, neither
permit their subjects to hear Mass, which is abolyshed: For though the
bishop of Romes Mass, were never so good and godly, yet if they should have in
their churches two contrary Masses, al me^ may well perceive what grudge and
dissentio^ would there upon ensewe. Moreover where they do prescribe, what they
shall command their own subjects, and what laws they shall make with in
their own dominions, they can not a little marvel, considering that they them
selves would not suffer any man to do the like with them. Furthermore what
thing is taught in their churches, touching the presence of the body and blood
of Christ, is so euydent to all men, that it needs no further declaration:
Notwithstanding, as they have said oftentimes, so think they it good now
also, not as yet to make any decree against the^ that teach otherwise, for
that the Emperors commissio^s (teach the Latin beneth,) makes no mention
thereof. And again for as much as the maynteners of that doctrine, are another
called nor heard: which in so weyghty matters is much to be considered, that
nothing be determined at any time, and they not heard speak, whom the matter
does chiefly concern. And where as they How scripture should be expounded.
say that the Gospel must be taught after the interpretations approved by the
church (that is very well) but all the strife is, which is the true church:
But seeing there is no doctrine more certain than Gods word, and besides that
nothing ought to be taught, and such places of Scripture, as appear to be some
what obscure, can not be better expounded, than by other more manifest places
of the same Scripture, therefore will they dwell herein, endeuourynge that the
books of the old and new Testament, may be taught syncerely and plainly: For
this is the only mean and way, that is evermore certain and sure. And as
for men's tradicions, they are grounded on a weak foundation: The decree of the
last assembly, was enacted for peace and concord: but in case this decree
should take effect, it would open the way to much trouble, and displeasure:
for even now all be it the decree of Worms was suspended, do some Princes
seek to make some of their subjects to forfyte their goods, for not obseruyng
that decree, where The decre of Worms.
of men may easily conjecture what will insewe, if the same decree shall now
take place again, and that some of them will use force, and co^pelle men to
such things as can not be done with a saufe conscience. But that is not well
spoken, that the fourmer decree was penned with such words, as many did abuse
the same thing, till the counsel were called, they might do what they list:
this is bruted of them chieflye, which are little afraid of the last
judgment, when all things shall come to light: for their parts, they will not
refuse to answer, before indiferent judges, to such as will say that they
have in any point broken the same decree. Which things standing thus, they
can not consent to this their decree: And how they will answer the matter
both openly before all men, and also to the Emperor him self. And in the
mean time, till either a general, or else a provincial counsel of Germany,
shall be called, they will do nothing that shall deserve just reproufe. Unto
this protestation of Princes, certain of the chief cities, laying their heads
together, did subscribe, as Strausborough, Nore^berge, Ulmes, Constance,
Rutelinge, Winsseme, Meminge, Lindane, Campedune, Hailbrune, Isne, Wysseburge,
Norling, and Sangall. Thorigicall of Protestants.
And this is in deed ye first original of the name of Protestau^tes, which not
only in Germany, but also emonges foreyn nations, is now common and famous.
Ferdinando was departed out of the assembly of Princes, before they had
protested, notwithstanding that the Duke of Saxon and his fellows required him
to tarry a little. After this the protestants devise a certain appellation,
wherein they do appeal from the decree made at Spires, unto the Emperor, to
the next lawful general or provincial counsel of Germany, and to all judges
that be not suspected, and determined also to send Ambassadors to the
Empeperour. Not long after this, the men of Zurick and Bernes, sent forth their
armies against their ennemies of the five towns that made league Civil war
among the Swicers.
with Ferdinando, declaryng why they so did, by writing. And emonges sundry
causes and injuries, which they recite, this is one, yt what time certain of
their Citezens came for money that was dew unto them, the Snites whypped them
naked, and the Unterualdia^s had in despyte, hanged up their Arms, and also
the Arms of the Cities of Basil and Strausborough upon the gallous, and how
they have all ioynctely made a league with king Ferdina^do, to oppress
Religion, and to root them out of the country, whereby they have not only
infringed the law of nature, but also broken the bonds that were between
them, in conspiring with their most utter and mortal ennemie, whom to
subdue, they have long and many years, even from the first beginning of their
league, with one assent joined together al their force and power. When both
armies were ready to join in battle, by the mediation of their neighbors, and
by them of Strausborough, the matter was taken up. Ferdina^do had sent the^
aid, which came as far as the Rhine. emo^ges other things it was agreed
upon, that they should have no war for religion, and that from henceforth
they should absteyne from all opprobriouse words under a great penalty. The
French king considering the state of his children, Mishappes of the french
king.
which he had left pledges in Spain, and what evil success he had of his
wars in Italye, having lost both his Army and also his chieftayne
Latrechus. And more over Androwe de Aure of Genes, a Captain of the Sea, most
skylfull, who about the same time that Lantrech the Coronell dyed, revolted
from the French king to the Emperor, restoryng his country unto liberty: he
inclined his mind to peace. Wherefore at Cambrey a City in Artoys, met the
Lady Margaret, the Emperoures Aunte, and Ales the kings The peace of Canbrey.
mother, and many other Nobles, and emonges others, Erarde Marchiane, Cardinal
and Bishop of Liege, which concluded a peace in the month of Auguste, wherein
they recite the decree, which was made three year before in Spain against the
Lutherians, which they newely ratified: the other conditions were partly
altered. For the Emperor permits the French king to inioye Bourgundy in
case he have a son by his sister. And the king paieth unto the Emperor for
the delyuery of his sons, twenty ho^dreth thousand crowns, accompting herein
the debte dew to the king of England. Not long after the Emperor embarked
him self in Spain and arrived at Genes. At what time also Soliman the
Emperor of Turks, by the provocation of John Uaynode made by his Ambassador
Hierome Laske, a Hongarian, a man of an excellent wit, marches with an army
innumerable, through Ho^gary into Austrice, and in the month of Septembre,
lays sege to Uienna, the chief city of that country. He assayed to
undermine it, and where as he had overthrown the The Turk besegeth Uienna.
walls, he gives the assault desperately: but seeing the Souldioues of the
garnyson, which were Germans, whose chief captain was Philip the Palsgrane,
defendyng the breach most valiauntly by the space of one month, about the
eight day of Octobre, he raised his siege and departed without his purpose,
many thousands of me^, in his return partly slain, and partly lead away
into miserable and vile captivity. At his departure he created the Uayuode,
king at Buda. The sweating sickness
This year also was Germany sore afflicted with a new kind of disease called
the Sweathing sickness. Men were suddenly taken with a pestilent sweat, and
within four and twenty hours either they died or amended. And before the
remedy was known, many thousands peryshed. It began at the Ocean sea, and in
a very small time spread over all Germany, and with unspeakable speed, like a
fire con^^med all things far and nere, it is called in Germany the English
sickness. For in the first year of Henry the seventh king of England, which
was the year of our Lord M.cccc. lxxxvj. the same death began in that Island,
and because in a new disease, the remedy was not known, it made a wounderful
destruction. Moreover this year was small plenty of wine and corn: wherefore
all those things which God in his displeasure is wont to cast upon
unthankful people (sedition war, sycknes and penury) were powered upon
Germany the Sundry plages.
same time all at ones. The same time at Collen, Peter Flisted, and Adolphe
Clarebacke, two learned men were imprisoned for that, touching the lords
supper, and other opinions they believed otherwise Two clerks brenct at Collon.
than the papists. The Senate of that city has authority, to lead to
prison such as be offenders, but the Archebyshop only has power of life and
death: And it may be that whom the Senate has condemned, the Archebyshoppes
officers may acquit and set at liberty. but these men being deteyned in
prison half a year and more were now at the last condemned of both parts,
and brent, to the great lamentation and compassion of many. Some laid the
blame thereof in the divines that were preachers, which cried out daily that
Gods wrath must be appeased with the deaths of these wicked me^, for who^ he
plaged us with a new kind of disease. This Adolphe was a well favored man,
learned and eloquent. And as they were lead to the fire, they declared the
manner of their believe, and comforted one another by the testimonies of
scripture, in such sort that all men had their eyes and minds fixed upon
them. I showed you before how Luther and Zwinglius, Luther and Zwinglius
dispuie at Marpurg.
differed in opinion, touching the Lords supper: And because there was much
contention about it, the Lantgraue found the means that the learned men on
both parties, should mete at a certain day at Marpurge, to confer upon the
matter frendlye: Out of Saxony came Luther, Melancthon and Jonas: From the
Swycers Oecol^padius, Zwynglius: From Strausborough, Bucer, Hedio: From No
rinberge, Osiander. And besides these many grave and well learned men: but
Luther and Zwynlius, only did reason the matter: But after that this foresaid
disease, was then comen thither, they brake of the disputation, by the
commandment of the Lantgraue, concludinge thus: That for as much as they
consented in all the chiefest points of The manner of their agreement.
their doctrine, it was agreed that from henceforth they should abstain from
all contention, besechyng God that he would show forth his light also in
this controversy, and set them at a concord. And thus they departed friendly.
In the beginning of Octobre, you have heard how the Duke of Saxon and the
Lantgraue, were about a league three year since at Spires, and now after this
decree was made, they intended the same more earnestly, whereof a draught was
drawn at Norenberge, and after debated, further more in other places, but
because they were not all of one opinion, touching the Lords supper, it was
long before they were accorded, wherefore they appointed another assemblye at
Smalcalde, at the eight day of Decembre. What Erasmus book against Gospelers.
time Caesar was arrived in Italye, Erasmus of Roterdame, who for the alteration
of Religion, and for the avoid of suspicion, was gone from Basyll to Frybourg,
a town of king Ferdinandos, in the month of Nouembre, set forth a book
entitled against them, that falsely boast them selves to be Gospelers: but
touches in deed the whole nu^bre. For emonges many other things, he says he
knew not one of the^, which appeared not to be made worse then he was before.
This was answered by the deuines of Strausborough, whom it concerned most,
and them of Basil, but chiefly Bucer. When the Emperor was comme to Bononie,
Fraunces Sfortia, which was before in Fraunces Sfortia.
league with the bishop of Rome and the French king, after he had pleaded his
cause before him, was by the intercession of Clement the vij. restored to the
Dukedom of Myllan, upon condition to pay him nine hondreth thousand crowns,
the one half the same year, the resydue within ten years, and the Emperor
for a pledge, reserueth to him self Comes, and the castle of Millan, until
the payment of the first year be made.

The seventh Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the seventh Book.
THe Ambassadors of the Protestants sent to the Emperor, do appeal from the
answer he made them at Placence, where they were stayed. Whereof being
aduertysed, the Protestants assemble at Smalcade. Stausborough enters in to
league with three cities of the Cautons. The Emperor returnyng from his
coronation, comes to Auspurge, where the Protestants offer their doctrine,
which their adversaries go about to confute, and the mean while, certain are
nominated to accord it. The Emperor persuades with Princes of the
Protestants, who notwithstanding the threatenings evil words and
replications there made, and the scaunders wherewith they were charged,
persisted in their said confession, and having given their last answer,
depart home. Eckius and Faber, forgyng of confutations against Strasborough
and other towns, are lyberally rewarded. The compacte of Pruselande was here
made frustrate. The notable decree of this assembly at Auspurge, is red. The
River of Tibre ouerfloweth at Rome. Melanchthon being heavy for this decree, is
comforted of Luther, who was come nere unto Auspurge: Bucer went to agree him
and Zwynglius. Commandment came to make Ferdinando king of Romans, which
the electour of Saxony and other Princes resist.

I Said before how the Protestants sent their Ambassadors to the Emperor.
Those were The Ambassadors of ye Protestants to the Emp.
John Khinger, Alex Framentrute, and Michaell Cadene of Norynbergh, which going
as far as Genes, understood there of the Emperors coming out of Spain, and
afterward the nynthe of Septembre at Placence, make their way and mean by
Mercurine Cattunarie, who was made Cardynall the day before by Henry Earl of
Nassow, Alexander Schweissie, and Alphouse Ualdese, a Spanyarde. The Emperor
appointed to hear them the.xii. of Septembre: Not withstanding he warned them
to compryse their requests in writing and to use no long circumstance, for
because of his sondrye and most weighty affairs. When they came before him at
their day, he admonished them eftsoon by an interpretour, to knit up the
matter in few words. They in like case as they had in commandment, repete
in order the decree of the Empire, made three years past, that is newlye taken
away by an other decree: which if it should be of force, great trouble would
come thereof: Wherefore the Prince electour of Saxony, and his fellows and the
Cities, also ioynynge with them, did there proteste openly that they would not
consent to this decree: And their request is that he would not take this thing
displeasauntly, or in evil part: For they will do nothing until such time as
there shall be a counsel, but that which they trust, shall be allowed both
before God and him also: offering them selves in the mean time, after the
example of their auncesters, to do any thing for the wealth and dignity of
him and of the Empire, either to serve in the wars against the Turk, or in
any other charge, they shall be put to: Moreover they beseech him that in case
it shall be reported to him otherwise, he would give no credit thereunto, but
trust unto this information, and conceive no displeasure against the^, unless
they be first heard to make their purgatio^: especially, seeing they make
always offer, that if they may be more right instructed by the scriptures,
they will do nothing obstinatly or against their dewty: Wherefore they desire him
to accept the^ in to his defense and protection, and as shortly as may be to
answer them mercyfully and louyngly by writing: And because the whole matter
can not be declared by mouth, as he has also commanded, therefore have they
comprehended in writing, what thing so ever is needful for the further
knowledge of the matter, which they deliver unto him. the Emperor answers
them by an interpretour, that he The Emperors answer.
has heard what their suit is, and lyketh well also the obsequiens service,
that they offer in their Princes behalf, wherefore when he has talked with his
counsel, he will make them an answer reasonable. Finally the twelth of
Octobre, he gave them an answer in writing as their request was. That he
understood by king Ferdina^do his brother, and the residue in commission with
him, of the decree made at Spyres, before they came to him. and how he is
right sorry for the dissension that is amongst them. And for as much as it is
his dewtie to forsee that such things happen not, or at the least when they
are chanced, to see them reformed, therefore after long delyberation, had with
privy counsel of the whole matter, he finds how the same decree was made,
to the intent nothing hereafter should be altered, that there should be no
place for any new sect from henceforth, as there be many al ready evil
favored enough, and that peace and concord might be had throughout the
Empire: Therefore the Duke of Saxon and his fellows, ought of right to have
consented to al these things: for both he and other Princes, set as much by
the health of their souls, and tranquillity of their consciences, as they
do: And he for his part, no less desires a general counsel, for a stay
to the common wealth, than they do: which not withstandyng were not all
together so needful, if the laws and decres (as that of Woormes and others
which are made by common assente of all states) might be observed, as they them
selves will grant that such decrees ought to be fyrme and stable: Which
thing considered, and seeing that the use and custom is, that look what the
more part of the states of the Empire do decree, the same may not be disolued
by a few persons, therefore has he in his letters to the Duke and his
fellows commanded them, that they do accept this decree as ratisfied, and
attempt nothing against it, but obey the same upon their allegeaunce that
they owe unto him and the Empire: If not, it will come to pass that for
authority and examples sake, he must punyshe them extremely: but he supposes
that his letters be already delivered unto them, or wylbe shortelye, and that
they will obey his commandment, whereof he would be right glad, especialy at
this time, wherein he is credibly infourmed, how the great Turk (the common
ennemy of christendom) is at this present marchynge through Hongarye with all
his power into Germanye. Danger of the Turk.
Wherefore it were now requysite to have domestical concord, to the intent this
mighty and cruel ennemy might be repulsed, against whom he intends, so sone
as he shall have stayed all things in Italy, to bend all his force and power.
wherefore he trusts, that they consyderyng well the danger, will do that:
which they are bounden of duty. What time the Ambassadors had red this
answer, The Ambassadors appeal.
they delivered an appellation, which was ready made to Alexander Schneissie,
calling wytnes to the thing, as the manner is. Who at the first would not
receive it, but in fine he was content to take it, and carried it to the
Emperor, and the same day at after none he retourneth, and having ended his
other talk, he says how the Emperor commands them, not to styre one
foot out of their Inue, that they write nothing home, nor send any of their
men, til he bring them further news, in pain of for fayting life and goods,
if they should do other wise. Why left this charge was given, it fortuned yt
Michaell Cadene, was not within his lodging, and being hereof immediatlye
certified by a servant, he writes the whole matter to the Senate of
Norinberge, and dispatcheth away his letters with great expedition for he was
not bound upon fidelity as his fellows were. At the length the last day
saving one, of Octobre, at Parma, whether they were commanded to follow
Nicolais Granuellane, who executed the office of Cardinal Mercurine lieng
sick, she weth them, that all be it Gra^unulane
The Emperor takes in evil part the appellation that was sent him, yet does
he nevertheless permytte them to return home in to their country: But he
commands Michaell Cadene to remain still under pain of death, if he
disobeye: the cause whereof is this.

The Lantgraue when he came forth had given him a book fair garnyshed, which
contained briefly the sum of the Christian doctrine to the intent he should
deliver it to the Emperor. He upon an occasion when Caesar went to Mass did
present it, and the Emperor A book presented to the Emperor.
again delivered it to a certain Spanyshe Bishop, to understand what it was.
He fortuned to light on the same place, where as Christ warns his Disciples
that they desire not soueraignitie, for the same is not their profession, but
the kings of the gentyls do usurp unto them such authority: that place had
the author emo^ges other things expounded, declaryng the duty of such as be
ministers of the church, but he lokyng upon it superficially, when the Emperor
asked him The honest of a byshoy.
what it was, he made answer as though the book took away the authority of
the sword from the Christian Magistrate, and permitteted only the Gentyls to
use it, which were far from the Christian Religion. And for this cause was
he stayed, Granuellan said this moreover how the Emperoures pleasure was,
that he should deliver the like book to the Bishop of Rome: And where he
sought to excuse his doings, and received no pleasant answer, perceyuyng by
the words of Granuclane, what dannger he was in, he took his horse privily
and roode to Farrare in post, and from thence going to Uenyse, returned home.
When the Senate of Norenbergh, had received Cadenes letters before mentioned,
immediately, they certified the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, and their fellows
thereof, the. xxiiij of Octobre: the matter being debated, they agreed to mete
at Smalcaldia, about the end of Noue^bre. Thither came the Duke of Saxon An
assemble at Smalcald
and John Frederick his son. Erneste and Frances, brethren Dukes of
Lunenburgh, Philip the Lantgraue, and certain counselors of George Marks of
Brandenburgh, moreover these cities: Strausborough, Norinberge, Heilprune,
Rutelynge, Constance, Menynge, Campodune, Ulmes and Lindaue. It is mentioned
before how the Princes and certain of these Cities differed in opinion touching
the Lords supper, wherefore they of Strausborough had already made a league,
with them of Zuricke, Bernes, and Basyll, which were A league of the^ of
Stransborough, Zuricke and Bernes.
both nerer unto them, and accorded better in Religion, to the intent they
might at all times be able to defend them selves from iniurye. The conditions
were, that if they should be attempted with force of arms for Religion sake,
that then those cities should send aid and men, as many as shall be requisite,
yet so that they of Strausborough, shall gyne unto every thousand of footmen,
two thousand crowns by the month, in part of recompense. Again if it be
their chance to be first assauted, the city of Strausborough shall aid them
with no me^, but with three thousand crowns every month, whylest the war
shall endure. Moreover if their ennemies be found in any part of the others
dominions, not to escape free, but to suffer according to the law of Arms.
If they shall be warred upon all at ones, then every city to bear their own
charges: Strausborough shall in time of peace, send unto Zuricke when they may
conuenientlye, ten thousand pounds of gunne powder, and as many rasers of
Wheat, unto Basyll: Whereof shall be nothing spent, but in time of war, then
to deliver it out to the towns men, upon a reasonable price. If they shall
come to aid them of Strausborough, they may spend of the powder so much as
shall be needful: and in the war common to them both, they to pay the one
half for the same.

This league was made for fyftene-yeares, the fyft day of January. When this
was known, Fridericke Palatyne, presydent of the The chamber writes to
Straush.
counsel imperial, addressed his letters unto them about the end of the
same month, signifiyng how it is commonly reported that they have made a
league with certain towns in Swycerlande: whereat he marueyleth not a little
that they which are bounden to the Empire, should enter into league with
others without the consent of the Emperor, and the states of the Empire, and
all be it that most men affirm it to be true, yet will not he credit the
thing, before he shall understand it by them selves. Wherefore he requires
them to declare plainly by writing unto him (which represents the place of
the Emperor) what the league is, and what conditions they are agreed upon. The
Protestauntes had appointed an other assemblye at Norinberge, The Protestants
assemble at Norinberge.
whyther came the Ambassadors of certain Princes and cities, who for so much
as it was thought how the Emperor would call a counsel shortly, agreed upon
this only, that in the mean time they should consulte what to propounde in the
same, and every month, to aduertyse the Duke of Saxon, what things they
thought mete, that the rest might understand it by him.

And thus departed the fourth Ides of Ianuarye. In the mean while the
Emperor, which was come to Bononye the fyfte day of Nouembre, the one and
twentye day of Ianuarye, dispatchynge An assemble at Auspurg.
his letters into Germanye, sommoned a parliament of all states at Auspurge,
the eight day of Apryll chyefiy for the cause of Religion, and The Emperors
coronatio^ at Bonony.
the Turkey she war. After the four and twenty day of Februarye, he was not
wtithout great pomp and solempnitie, invested by the Bishop of Rome, when he
had first taken his oath, to be the continual defendour of the Bishops
dignity: Before he came at Bononye, as he should enter within the lymites of
the bishops jurisdiction, there were three Cardinals sent by the bishop of
Rome, to demand and take his fidelity, that he should never do any injury to
the liberty of yt church. He answered in such sort as he declared, that he
would lose no part of his right signifiyng secretly, that Parme and Placence,
belonging to the Dukedom of Millan, which towns the church of Rome
possessed at the same time. Departing out of Bononie, he created Fridericke,
Duke of Mantua. In times past Mantua was a free city of the Empire, but
afterward being sore afflicted with vprores and civil tumultes, they chose
Lewys Gonzaga to be their governor, for expulsyng of a Tyrant called
Passeryne, the year of our Lord M.ccc. xxvii. whose nephews son John
Frances, the Emperor Sigismunde created Marquis, the year.M.cccc.xxxiiij.
the second day of Septembre, and remains in the same estate until this
time. The first that came to Auspurge, was the Duke of Saxony, with his son
John Fridericke: in the train that came behind, was Philip Melauctho^, Ihon
Iselbe Agricola, Iustus Jonas, and George Spalatine, the city Ulmes, sent to
mete and welcome the Emperor, but The divines of yt protest.
they were long or they might be suffered to come to his speech, in fine he
required them to renounce the protestation of the year before, and promise to
be obedient from henceforth. The men of Auspurge had mustered eight hondreth
footmen, to keep their Town: when the Emperor heard of it, he commanded
them to be discharged, and he appoynteth and swears others in their stead,
and required one gats of the City to be delivered unto him, certain days
before that he came thither. Cattinarie that was newly made Cardinal, dyed
this time at Isprouke, and Granuellane had his rowme. And about this The lady
Eleuour comes into France.
time also, the lady Elenor with the kings two sons Fraunces and Henry,
which had been pledges for their father in Spain four years, came now home
into France. After a while that the bishop had invested the emperor, he sent
unto king Ferdina^do, Peter paulle Uerger, his legate, with great authority:
Unto whom he gave in commandment especially to devise with Ferdinando, that
he should endeavor Uergerius yt popes ambassador.
to let and hinder yt prouincial counsel of Germany yt in no wise there should
any be holden. He handles his co^missio^ right diligently and seeks al means
possible to hinder the Lutherians, and extended his lyberalitie toward John
Faber, Eckius, Chocleus, and Nanseas, that they should play the men: and made
Eckius a Cannon of Ratisbonne, as the bishops legate, in whose presence, the
right of Election ceasseth. the Emperor came to Auspurg at the Ides of June,
and in his company the Cardinal Campegius with the bishops full authority.
The Emperor had purposed to have ryde^ into the city in the mids there
Ferdinando and the Cardinal, but because it was against the manner of the
Empire, the Archebyshop of Mentz and Collen, rode before him, and after him
Ferdinando and Campegius. The next day was Corpus Christi day: the Emperor
therefore went devoutly to the church, and the Cardinal of Mentz said Mass.
All the Princes were present, except the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, the two
Dukes of Lunenboroug, George of Brandenburge, and the County Anholde. The
princes that would not hear Mass.
The Emperor in deed had both wylled them to be there, and to put their
preachers to silence: but they neither came them selves, nor yet imposed
silence to their preachers, which they said they could not, for as much as the
same assembly was appointed to the intent al me^ might speak their
consciences. Two days after was a proclamation made, that the preachers on
both sides should keep silence, til the cause of religion were decided,
notwithstanding how the Emperor in the mean time, should appointe certain
that should preach without the reproach of any man, this was proclaimed by the
herault, under a great penalty. The twenty of June, the parliament began, and
the Emperor going to hear Mass, as the manner is, commands the Duke of
Saxon to be there, and to bear the sword before him. For that is the of The
office of the Duke of Saxon.
fice of the house of Saxon in such Sole^nities: he asked the advice of yt
preachers, who said, how that, he might be there present, for as much as he
was called forth to do his office. Then went he not to hear mass as gods
service, but to execute his office, accompanied with George Marquis of
Brandenburg: none of the rest came there, from mass he came to the court of
parliament. There Frederick count Palatin, excuses the long abse^ce of
the emperor, and repeteth the causes of the calling of that asse^blie. After
this was recited a long oration written (as the manner is) wheri^ was as well
declared the cause of themperours departure out of Germany into Spain, and of
his long abode there, as also of his return now, and the calli^g of this
asse^blie, which is instituted chiefly for two causes, the one for establishing
of religion, for the which sins his depature, he has heard to his great
grief, what tumultes and commotions have been in Germany, the other for the
Turkyshe war, considering what turmoyle of late the Turks have made in
Hongary taken Beigrade, The Turks victory in Hongary.
and many other fortes and castles, slain king Lewis, and won all the
towers and fortresses, betwixt the rivers of Save and Drove, spoiled and brent
the whole country, and slain of me^ full many a thousand, how sins that also
they have invaded Slauonie, lieng above the Goulfe of Uenise, from whence,
after they had dove exceadynge much mischief, in slaughter, burning,
spoylyng, destroying, and rauyshynge, they led away.xxx. thousand in to most
miserable captivity, and how this last year they made an incursion into
Austriche with an Army innumerable, and beseged the chief city Uienna,
destroyed the country far and nere, till they came almost to Lincie,
workyng all the cruelty that could be imagined, cuttinge a sondre in the
mids, young infantes, deffouring and rauyshing young maidens and wives, and
driving them away before them, like a sort of beasts: At the which time he
was fully determined to have common with his whole The Turks cruelty.
power against them, and so he wrote to his brother Ferdinando, and the Princes
and captains, that were beseged in Uienna, that they should defend it
valeauntly, and look certainly for his coming, but hearing that the Turk had
leuid his sege, he changed his purpose, supposyng it most requisite to set
all things at quiet in Italy, and to confer with bishop Clement, for the
establyshyng of religion here in Germany: to the intent yt peace and co^corde,
and one uniformity of Religion had in all places, the Turk may the better be
resysted of all hands, and stronger armies sent against him, than have been:
For all be it he took not Uienna at this present, but carried his Army back
again, yet left he behind him in the borders, garysons and captains, not
only to vex Hongary, but Austriche also and Stiria and all other places nere:
And seeing that he has his limits extended unto ours, there is no doubt, but
at the next occasion he will return with a greater power to the utter
destruction of all, especially Germanye: wherefore to be very neful and
requisite to co^sulte now how that houge and cruel ennemy, which seeks to
bring all men under his subjection, yea to bannyshe them quyte out of the
bonds of nature, may not only be resisted, repulsed, and discomfited: but also
subdued, vanquished, and driven out of all Europe. Whereunto we have need to be
contributaries for greater aid of Men and money, the high bishop has promised
him for his part largely and liberally, and although he has been at all the
charges of his coronation at Bononie him self alone, which has cost him a
great quantity of treasure, yet in so holy and necessary a business, he will
do that, which shall become his estate: and likewise his brother king
Ferdinando, which is now set forth as a strong bulwark of christendom, but
chiefly of Germany, to fla^ke the Turkyshe rage. And also other kings and
Princes, will not fail to help us, wherein he has written to some already and
will be in hand with the rest: And where there has been dissension in
religion ever since, the first beginning of his empire, to his great
discomforte, he according to his office and duty, intendyng to prepare a
remedy in time, made a decree at Worms by their common assentes, which if it
had been observed, Germany had not been these years past so sore afflicted:
with the sedicion of the commonaltie and the wicked sect of the Anabaptists:
And where as at sundry assemblies touching the same, nothing could be
concluded hitherto, thinkyng that his presens should be auayleable herein, he
has called this assembly to the intent that every man may herein propounde
what he will in writing, that the matter may so much the sooner and more easily
be understand and determined, and that he will both in this and all other
causes of the Empire, do that thing that shall concern his office and dewtie,
for the love he bears to the common wealth and country, and requires that
all others, would bring hither with them the like mind and affection every man
for his part. The Princes after deliberatio^ taken, judged it mete first to
treat of relygion. The fourth day after in the consistory before the Emperor
and the other Princes, Cardinal The oration of Cardinal Campega.
Campege made an oration in Latin, exhorting the whole number there present,
that in matters of religion, they would follow and obey the Emperor,
commending his virtue and devotion: And that he will in the name of the high
bishop do his endeavor, that all may profess one and the same faith that
their minds being reconciled, they might move war against the Turk. This
done the Ambassadors of Austriche The co^plais of the Ambassador of Austriche.
come in and declare what an ouerthro we they have had by the Turk, and desire
aid. After this the Marquis George, the electour of Saxony, the Dukes of
Lunenburge, and the Lantgraue, entreat the Emperor, that he would hear the
confession of their doctrine comprysed in wrytinge: he commands the writing
to be exhibited, The confession of the protestants
and laid down: again they for as much as the same thing concerns their
estimation, their life, lands, and goods, and also their everlasting
salvation, and for because happily the thing has been other wise reported
unto him than it is in deed, require him instantlye to be heard. The Emperor,
commands them to come home to his house the next day, but the writing to be
delivered him now. They again urge him and beseech him as earnestlye as they
could devise: saying how they had thought full little, that this should have
been denied them, seeing that he is content to hear others, that be their
inferiors much, in matters of less importance. But when he would alter
nothing of his purpose, they require him to leave them their book, till such
time as it has been read openly: which granted, they came the next day, and
in the audience of all the Princes and states, the Emperor him self being
present, recite it over: Afterward they deliver it unto him written both in
Latin and Dutche, and if they shall doubt in any thing, they offer a further
declaration, and in case the matter can not be determined at this present, they
do not refuse to abide the counseell so often times promised and looked for.
The Emperor, which had layne all the winter from Nouembretyl March at Bononie
in the same place with the bishop of Rome, endeavored as much as he might to
appease this controversy in Religion without a counsel. For by this means he
knew he should please Clement best, whose intent was, that in case the matter
could not be quieted by gentle means, it should be oppressed by force of arms.
Therefore the.xxvj. of June he calls before him in his own house, the
Ambassadors of al cities, and declares unto them by Frederick the Palsgraue,
how in the assemblye at Spires a decree was made, whereunto the most part did
consent, where he was right glad: but that certain others contemned the same,
for the which he was as sorry: Wherefore he required the^, not to swerve away
from the rest, orels to show the reason, why they should not obey. Hereunto
answered the Ambassadors of the cities of Protestauntes, that they had done
nothing contrary to their duty: For they have no less desire, than their
elders have had, to perform their faith and obedience: but where as he would
know the cause why they did not admytte the decre, they desire some time to
make answer: and after the seventh of July, they put up their answer in
writing, in effect like unto that, which they sent the year before, by their
Ambassadors into Italy. Two days after that, the Emperor causes one to
demand of the Duke of Saxo^ and his fellows, whether they will exhibit any
thing more? They say nothing else, but a brief sum of the same confession,
which they have delivered already. After he commands the Ambassadors of
the Cities, that where they say, how they can not for conscience sake, keep
the decree of Spyres, they should draw articles briefly, of the things where
with they found them selves grieved: And he delyuereth the confession of
Saxony, to the resydue of the Princes to be skanned. And they again, to their
divines, among whom Faber and Eckius were pryucipall. A consultation of the
Protesta^tes doctrine.
Who wrote a confutation against it, which after the Princes had heard red,
many judged it to be much extreme, and thought mete that certain should be
chosen, to read over both their wrytynges, and to qualyfie them, but their
opinion prevailed, which said it should thus be exhibyted to the Emperor,
and the whole matter be referred unto him. In the mean time, they of
Strausborough, Constance, Memming, and Lindaue, present the Emperor with a
confession of A confession of the Zwinglians.
their doctrine. For touching the Lords supper they believed otherwise, than
did the Duke of Saxon and his fellows. The Emperor debatyng the matter with
the bishops Legate, framed an answer to the doctrine of Saxon, and shows
it unto the Princes the first day of August. The wyndyng up of it was
vehement and hard, commanding them to observe it under pain of outlawing:
But through the counsel ye of Princes, this thing was mitigated: Wherefore the
third day of Auguste, he sends for all states, and declares to them by
Frederick Palsgraue, how he has long and much consulted upon the confession of
the Saxons doctrine, how he has also commands certain honest and well
learned men, to examyne it, and to judge what is Godly therein, and what is
against the consent of the church: which they have done accordingly and have
declared their minds in an other writing, which also he allows. After this
was the confutation of the confession rehearsed in this order. They had divided
the Saxons books in two parts. The first part contained.xxj. chapters of
doctrine: of these some they received, and some they rejected, certain things
were partly admitted, and partly refused, alledginge many testimonies out of
the fathers and counsel. They forsook these good Things refused.
works deserve nothing: Justification to be ascribed to faith only: and not
unto works, also that the church is the congregation of the godly, that we
can not make satisfaction for sins: that saints be not intercessours for
us, other things they admit after a sort, as ceremonies, Matters received.
moreover that the true body and blood of Christ was in the sacrament, so as
Christ should be under both the kinds, and the wine and the bread, clean
changed: they allowed their articles of confession, so that the people were
bound to confess them every year at Easter, tellyng all their sins
diligently, and receive the Lords supper, and believe that there be seven
sacraments of the church: provided always that no man were appointed to
instruct the people, but by the bishops leave and consent. Moreover that all
laws and decrees of the church should be observed, and in such places as
they be abolyshed, be restored. The second part comprehends five things
chiefly, the communion of the Lords supper under both kinds, as they term
it, is rejected: and the Emperor desired, that herein they would follow the
consent and custom of all Christendom. For the marriage of Priests, he
says it is to him marvel they will require it, syns it was never used, from
the Apostles time unto this day: wherefore it may in no wise be granted: Their
Mass is admitted, so that That the Mass is a sacrifice.
it be consonant to the use of the Roman church: But in case it be altered,
it is rejected: and also affirmed, that the Mass is a sacryfice for the quick
and the dead, neither that the private Mass ought to be abolyshed: For
Daniell had prophesied long before, that when Antichriste should come, the
daily offering should cease: which thing is A fair exposition of Daniel.
not yet come to pass, save only in such places where the Mass is laid down,
and the Aulters destroyed, the Images brent, in the which churches nothing is
song nor read, nor no lyghtes burn any longer, there in deed is the saying
of the Prophet represented and verified: Wherefore all men must take dilygent
head, that they give none occasion, of the coming of Antichriste: the
monastical vows to be grounded as well upon the authority of the new
Testament, as of the old, wherefore they deserve punyshement which contrary to
their profession, have forsaken their order: That the bishop have authority
not only to teach, but also to govern the common wealth, and therefore ought
not to be abridged of their right and privilege, which they have obtained
through the liberality of their elders. Not to abstain from flesh on days
forboden, not to fast in the Lent ceason, not to confess Good ghostly fathers.
their sins, is an obstinate frowardnes, and not Christian liberty. These
being recyted, they confessed how there were many things, that would be
reformed: The Emperor promyseth to do his endeavor, that both these things
may be redressed, and the state of the church also reformed, and says,
how he trusts surely, for as much they are agreed upon diverse things,
that the Protestants will return to the bosom of the church, and submit
them selves unto him: which if they do, there is nothing but they may be
bold to crave and look for at his hand: but if not, then must he needs do as
becomes the protector and defendour of the church. Whereunto the Prince of
Saxony answered for him self and his fellows. For as much as they promised
at the first, that if they went about the reconsiliation of Religion, they
would then do what so ever they might with a saufe conscience: Moreover if
that any error could be found in their doctrine, and proved by the
testimonies of Scripture, they would not stand in it: furthermore that if they
required a further declaration, it should be given: And now seeing that of
this their doctrine, some articles be admytted, and some refused: it is
requisite, that they should confyrme their things the more plain and
manifest reasons: wherefore they desire to have a copy of the confutation.
After two days, when the Emperor had taken long delyberation, he said they
should have a copy, but under this condition, that they should put forth no
part thereof in prynte: Also he will have no further disputation in the matter,
requyryng them to be ordered by him: but they show him how they can not
receive it upon that condition. The next day which was the syxt of August,
the Lantgraue departed The Lantgraue departs from Auspurg.
from thence with a small company, leaving his deputes. The Emperor took this
displeasauntly, and commanded the Senate that they should suffer none to
depart out of the City by the posternes in the night ceason. And the next
day sendyng for the Duke of Saxon and his fellows, he dissembled not his
displeasure, requyryng them to tarry till the later end: and he will do what he
can to make a concord. They excuse the Lantgraue by his wives sycknes, and
show him how he has left his deputes, and say that they will not depart:
Notwithstanding they marvel to see the gates kept with watch and ward: For
it has not ben thus accustomed in any assemblye of the Empire. Caesar excuses
the matter, to be done sor a murder committed, and for the dissension that is
between the Germaynes and Spanyardes: but if any like trouble chance
hereafter, he will do nothing therein without making him first privy to it,
which is high Marschall of the Empire. The Duke answers, that if any thing
happen wherein his duty is required, he will be ready, as it be comes him:
Duke of Saxon Marschall of the Empire.
And so were the warders removed from the gates the same day. About this time
ended the war of Florence, whereof I shall somewhat declare by the way. What
time Rome was sacked as I said before, and the bishop taken, the Florentines
expulsed the house of Medices, and after aided the Frenchemen at the sege of
Naples. But when the bishop was restored, to the intent he might revenge his
kynsfolkes, The war of Florence
sending his Ambassadors into Spain, made a league with the Emperor,
promysing him emonges other things to crown him, in case he will punyshe the
Florentynes, after their demerites. The Emperor The Pope made a league with ye
Emperor.
was content, and shortly after arriueth at Genes. Thither came the
Ambassadors of Florence to crave pardon. Unto whom Caesar after he had sore
blamed them, made this answer. Albeit they had deserved great punyshement,
yet might their fact be pardoned, in case they would receive again the bishop
of Rome, for other way is there none, to have peace. When they were come home
with this answer, after that the matter long and much debated, the opinion
of one or two prevailed, which said they would defend their liberty, to the
vttermoste of their power, and inferred that not only the bishop, but also the
Emperor him self was through long wars much impoueryshed and wanted money.
Notwithstanding, when the Emperor was come to Bonony, they sent other
Ambassadors, but they through the bishops counsel, would not be received.
Wherefore being beseged with the armies of the bishop of Rome: and the Emperor,
when they had prolonged the wars, almost by the space of one year: In the
month Florence rendered.
of August, they fell to a composition with Ferdinando Gonzago, the Emperors
general of his army. Afterward the Emperor addressing his most effectual
letters, appointed Alexander Medices, (unto whom he had promised Margaret his
bastard daughter in marriage) to be their Prince and ruler. And he builded
there a marvelous strong Castle, the beginning of their servitude and bondage.
Florence loses her liberty.
When the town was ones rendered, the bishop of Rome Clement, chopped of the
heads of certain of the Senators and set a new order in the commune wealth,
being assured that Alexander should be their governor, according to the
Emperors promise. Now to our purpose again. After much debatinge, at the
Ides of August, seven were chosen on each side to frame the matter to a
concord. Of the chatholyke side were these, the Bishop of Auspurg, Henry Duke
of Brunswike, Certain chosen to accord Religion.
two lawayers, and three deuines, Wimpine, Eckius, and Cocleus: of the
Protesta^tes, George Marquis of Bra^denburg John Friderick of Saxon, two
Lawyers, three divines, Melancthon, Brentius, and Schnepsius. These agreed upon
diverse things, but their chief controversy was about the Mass, the marriage
of Priests, the Lords supper, monastical vows, and the jurisdiction of
Bishops, but especially for the Mass, and Uotaries, for herein would the
catholics nothing at all relent: For other matters, though they did myslyke
them, yet they said, might be suffered until the counsel: They permitted
also priests to have wives, such as were married already, but others not, all
this for avoiding of further trouble: touching the power and Jurisdiction of
bishops, they of Saxony granted more, than the Lantgraues men, the Dukes of
Lunenburgh, or they of Norinberge, would allow. Then took they a less number,
on either side three. Melancthon, with the two Ciuilia^s, and Eckius with as
many. But in fine they could not agree. Whylest they were consulting together,
the Emperor does solicit George the Marquis of Brandenburge, by the bishop of
Mentz and others of the same family, and the The Protestants were labored.
Duke of Saxon, by Friderick Palsgraue, the Earl of Nasso, and by George
Truckesse, that they should leave of their enterprise. He sought to draw away
the Duke of Saxon from the rest as pryncipal, and where he desired to be
invested in his Duckdome after the custom of the Empire, he denied it, unless
he would first reconcile him self to the church of Rome: and told to the
other plainly that unless he would obey, he would take from him the wardshyp
of his nephewe Albert the son of his brother Casimire. And they went about to
persuade with the Lantgraue, that in case he would agree unto the Emperor,
Ulriche the Duke of Wyrtemberge, should be restored, and that an agreement might
be had by the Emperors means, between him and the Earl of Nassoe, for the
rule of Chattes. In this Assembly the bishop of Rome had granted to king
Ferdinando, all manner of Plate and ornaments of gold and silver, of all the
churches in Germany, for the Turkyshe war, and also to take a subsydie of the
clergy, but the Princes would not suffer it, sollicityng the Emperor to make
yt decree frustrate. The.xviij. of August, Erasmus of Roterdame, writes to
Cardinal Campegius from Friburge. How the Emperors Erasmus writes to
Campegius
power is in deed great, but all men do not acknowledge this name: The
Germans do so acknowledge it, that they rule, rather the^ obey: Luthers
doctrine is sown abroad throughout Germany far and near, in so much that
the chain of this mischief reaches from the Ocean sea, unto the vttermoste
borders of Swycerlande. Now if the Emperor shall attempt to accomplish the
bishop of Romes desire in all things, it is to be feared, lest he shall have
but few to commend his doings: Moreover in what great danger of the Turk
we stand in, whose power all the force of Europe is skant able to resyste: The
Power of the Turk
And what a thing it is to fight with unwilling soldiers, it is manifest by
mo examples than one. The Emperor doubtless is of nature inclyned to peace.
Nevertheless by a certain desteny haled and enforced to wars. France and
Italy, have been sore afflicted with war now of many years. But this war
will do more harm than all the rest, if it be not well forseen: Men are
commonly persuaded, that all these things are done through the instigation and
counsel of the high bishop. But the fear is, lest a great part of the
peril, redounde to the Emperor him self: They that love sects, are in deed
worthy of punyshement, but yet ought rather a respect to be had, for the
preservation of the common wealth: The state of the church was in times past
full miserable, when the Arrians, Pagans, Donatistes, and the Manycheis, sowed
abroad their opinions, and also the Barbarous nations made war.
Notwithstanding it waded out of all these dangers at the length. For verily
time it self will at last bring remedy also, unto most dangerous diseases.
The Bohemers were The Bohemers.
borne with all, though they did not acknowledge the bishop of Rome. If the same
were also permitted to the Lutheria^s, it were not amiss, in his conceit: and
all be it this were very much, yet were it a great deal less evil than
war. The seuent day of Septembre, the Emperor sends for home to his house
all the Pryntes and states catholic about none: And two hours after for the
duke of Saxons and his fellows, and commanding all others aside, saving his
brother Ferdinando, the bishops of Constance, and Hispalia, Granuellan and
Truckesse, he speaks by Frederick Palsgraue on this wise: how he The
Empeoracion to ye Protesta^tes.
had trusted assuredly, that being so friendly and gently warned, after their
confession exhibited, they would have taken his part. And all be it that his
hope was in vain, yet at the request of the Princes he was content, that
certain should be chosen on either party, to confer and to make an agreement.
And thus was he brought again in to a new hope of a concord. But now he
understands to his great grief that they dissente from the others in the
chiefest opinions, which is clean contrary to his expectation, for he would
never have thought, that they being so few in number, would have induced such
new fanglednes, against the ancient and sacred custom of the whole universal
church, or chouse unto them selves a several religion so far differinge
from the bishops of Romes religion and his, from king Ferdinandos and all the
princes and states of the Empire, yea and from all the kings and princes of
the whole world. But now for as much as their desire is to have a general
counsel and here to have a quiet decree made, he which chiefly coueteth
quietness, will devise with the bishop of Rome and other christian Princes, to
have one called so soon as they can agree upon a place: This will he
undertake to bring to pass, but yet under this condition, that in the mean
time, they shall observe the same Religion, that he and other Princes do: For
to procure a counsel, and to suffer this gere to hang waueringe, and not to
prohibit this new fanglednes, every man says plainly how sore and
prejudicial it would be to him, and others. They make an delyberate answer,
that neither Their answer to the Emperor.
they have brought up new sect, nor swarued from the Christian church. In
that he refused not a counsel, they give him great thanks, desyryng him that
so shortly as is possible, there may be had in Germany a lawful and a free
counsel, as in the last and former assemblye of Spyres it was agreed upon.
But to receive again the ceremonies of the Romyshe church ones abolished, they
can not, with a good conscience. The Emperor after long consultation
answers them again by Truckesse, that he has red over diligently all their
disceptation, and fyndeth that they swerve very much from the Christian
church: Marueylyng also at the lyghtnes of the other part, that they would
grant to so much, and again at their styffenes that would not take their
offer. And where they crave a counsel by the decrees of the Empire, it can
take no place in them, which refused the last decree, protested against it, and
appealed from it: which appellatio^ notwithstanding, he makes none account
of. For reason would that the less part should be comfourmable to the more.
But how small an handful are they, to be compared with the great bishop and
him, and with the rest of the Christian Princes?

Wherefore he desires to know, whether they will maynteyne any further talk or
discourse of the matter, for he will spare no pain nor travail to bring them
to an atonement: which if they shall refuse to do, and yet persevere in their
purpose, than must he do as becomes the protector of the church. And
because it is now nere night, he gives them leave to take aduisement till the
morrow.

The next day when all the States were assembled at the hour appointed,
Pontane a Ciuilian, was set to answer for the Duke and his companions. If the
Emperor in deed do understand the whole matter, he will than give credit
to their first tale, and doubt not but that their doctrine shall be adjudged
by the testimony of a Godly and a free counsel to be agreeable to Gods word:
Wherefore it is the less to be marueyled, that they did not receive such
things as were of late offered and granted.

That appellation of necessity was objected against that part of the decree,
where it made against the doctrine of the Gospel, and the manner of the
primative church: For the rest they do obey. Again that counsel was
promised in the beginning of the assembly long before the decree was made.
And not there only, but also in all other assemblies of the Empire. This was
ever the opinion of all men: Wherefore seeing that they have appealed both unto
him, and also to a free counsel, they trust he will not disanulle the thing,
till sentence be lawfully given: But whether the less part in this
controversy, ought to give place to the more, it is not to be discussed in
this place. And for their appellation, which was done of necessity they will
make further answer at the counsel. Where as therefore all the fourmer
assemblies, have determined upon a counsel, they beseech him that he would
not break those decrees, but give his consent herein, to the good wylles and
desire of all other states. And where also he offers his pains to have the
matter debated further, they render him great thanks. How be it, it is
manifest by that which is done already, how much they did submit them selves
at the last. And where he marueleth at the Bishops side, that they would
grant so many things, it is easy to conjecture thereby what judgment he is
of. And therefore were it in vain to treat any more thereof, for as much as it
should be but a let and a hynderaunce to other matters. But they will not be
against it to deuyse how peace may be kept throughout the Empire, as they
offered in the beginning. In the mean time they will do nothing but that
which they trust will be allowed of God, and of a lawful counsel: being
commanded a side, at the last they were called in again.

And for as much as the matter was weyghty, the Emperor said, he would take
good aduisement therein, and desired the Duke of Saxon, which was the chiefest
of them, that he would not depart. And in deed Georde Truckesse, and Uehus, a
doctor of Civil, had A decree made.
devised a reconcilement touching the Mass and Uowes, but it was in vain.
Wherefore the Emperor chouseth out certain of the Romysh Relygion to make a
decree, the effect whereof was this.

That the Duke of Saxon and his fellows, had exhibited the confession of their
doctrine, which was afterward confuted by the testymonies of holy Scripture.
And how through his great pains, and travel of other states, the matter was
brought to this conclusion, that they received certain opinions of the church,
and certain they did refuse. Wherefore to declare him self how desirous he is
of peace, and how he coueteth to do nothing upon a will, of his singular
humanity and gentleness, he grants them space to take aduisement in, until
the.xv. of April, to the intent they may in this mean while, way and
determyne with themselves, whether they can be content in the other articles to
profess the same, that the bishop of Rome, and he do, and all the rest of
christendom. In the mean time he wylleth, that all men keep peace throughout
the Empire, and that neither the Duke of Saxo^ nor his fellows, suffer in the
mean time any new thing to be prynted concerning Religion within their
dominions, also that they alter nothing else, that they neither allure nor
compelle any man unto their Religion. And that they do not let their subiestes,
that would follow the old Religion. Moreover that they do not disturb
Religiouse persons, but that they may say their service, hear confession,
and minister the Lords supper after their wonted facion: How they shall
consulte with him and the other states, to punyshe the Anabaptists, and
Sacramentaries. Finally because there has been no counsel of a long time,
and many things are to be reformed as well in the Laity, as the Clergy,
therefore will he labor and solicit the bishop and other Princes, that within
half a year, one shall be A counsel promised.
sommoned, and begin a year after.

The Duke of Saxon and his fellows, after consultation had, set Pontane to
make answer, that where the decree mentions, how their doctrine was
confuted by the Scriptures, that do not they confess nor grant. But to
think thus, that it is so grounded upon the Scriptures, that there is nothing
to be found in it that is ungodly, and that would they have proved manyfestly,
if they had obtained a copy of the consutation: Notwithstanding lest it should
be passed over Scripture is the touch stone of all doctrine.
in silence, they have made an answer as soon as they heard it red, to so
much as they could bear in memory, which al be it, it did not answer to
every partycular, for want of the copy: yet doubt they not, but if it would
please the Emperor to peruse it, he should find their doctrine as yet fyrme
and stable, and neither pearsed nor shaken with any of their adversaries
weapons.

When he had thus far proceeded, he delyuereth this Apology to the Emperor:
which after Fridericke Palsgraue received of him, at the An Apology delivered
but not received.
Emperors beckenynge, whom Ferdinando had whyspered in the ear, he deliver
it again. After this Pontane proceadeth, where as it is decreed, that they
should not alter or publyshe any thing in prynte, they have in the last
assemblye, touching this thing made such answer as they thought was
sufficient, and be yet of the same mind, and will do nothing, that may be
justly reproved: Moreover they have nothing a do with sects. And although
the doctrine be true which they profess, yet did they never bring any man
to it by compulsion, nor will not hereafter. As touching the Anabaptists, and
such as do contempne the sacrament of the Altar, they never suffered any such
kind of men within their lymites, but their divines have preached against
them: And the Anabaptists have also been punyshed, in such sort as no such
sects can take root or remain emonges the^. Finally, for as much as this is
a matter of most weyghty importance, which verily concerns either the ever
lastyng salvation or damnation and loss of their souls, and for because the
Ambassadors of their fellows, which are absent, have need to aduertyse the^
of all things, they do earnestly beseech him, to grant them a copy of the
decree, to the intent they may consider and condescende upon an answer
against the day. The next day the Emperor sent them word by The Emp. to ye
Protest.
the Prince electour of Brandenburge, that where they so stoutelye affirm
their doctrine to be true and Godly, he can not marvel enough, considering
how it is not only confuted now even by the authority of scripture, but
also condemned in all former counselles long syns. And he marueyleth so much
the more, for that they do ascrybe unto him and the resydue of Princes error
and false Religion, for if that should be true, as they say, than should
both his and the Dukes of Saxons progenitors also, which have kept and
maynteyned the same Religion, be accounted for Heretics: Wherefore he can not
be persuaded, nor grant, that their doctrine should be establyshed by the
testimonye of Gods word.

And where of a syngular clemency and love of peace, he has wylled the
decree to be thus devised, and herein has abased him self over much,
therefore he requires them, that they will admytte the same, in like case as
other Princes do, and consider with them selves, that unless they so do,
what great occasion they shall give to much michief: for the which they shall
render a straight account to God one day. Moreover how it was never set
forth by no writing Prayers mixed with threatenings
that it should be lawful to spoil men, and afterward to excuse it thus, as
though he that has sustained loss, should make no restitution: And as
concerning the Apology written against the confutation, he had showed them
before, that he would admytte no further disputation about Relygion, for as
much as he may not, another is it any part of his office: And for this cause
has he refused it: For unless they will allow and confirm this decree, he
will do as he shall see cause, that thing which shall be come his estate and
office. The Marquis said this moreover, how they knew what travel and
pains the rest of the Princes and states had taken; that this controversy
might be ended quietly. And now besought them to way with them selves, how
much it were both for their private profit, and also to the common wealths
to obey the Emperor and admit the decree, which unless they will do,
doubtless all the other states will do herein what soever the emperor shall
command the^: For they have The conspiracy of the Papists against the
Protesta^tes.
promised him already upon their fidelititie, that they will in this quarrel
spend with him al their substance, their blood and their life also, to
fynishe up the matter: and he has promised them again, to bend hytherwardes
all his force and power, and not to depart out of the limits of the Empire,
before he have brought it to pass: And that he was commanded to say this
much to them by all the Princes and states. Again the Protestauntes maynteyne
their doctrine to be agreeable to Gods word, which the gates of hell are
notable to resist, and the same to be further declared, in the writing lately
prese^te, but for the decree made, they can not allow it with a saufe
conscience: wherefore they desire to have a copy thereof, to the intent after
good deliberation, they may frame a determinate answer, which shall be as
conformable, as Gods word shall permitted them: And in all other causes, they
will not stick to spend life and goods for his sake: but to hear that the
Princes and states have bounden them selves to the Emperor in such sort,
they can not a little marvel, considering they have given them none occasion
so to do, and that there is nothing which they are not ready, after the
example of their auncesters, to do for the Emperor, and when need requires,
will not be the last. And where as he said, that no man ought to be spoiled of
his goods, they The protest. spoil no man
do confess the same also and herein are nothing culpable: For as touching
Religious houses, they have oftentimes protested, so to use the matter until
the counsel, as it may be certainly seen and perceived, that they seek not
their own private lucre or commodity: After much deliberation, the Emperor
answered them again by the Marquis of Brandenburge, that he will not confess,
nor grant, that which they baoste of their religion: And that he has also a
regard to his conscience, and his souls health as well as they, and will
cleave to the ancient Religion of the old fathers: In the decree made, there
can nothing be changed: if they will allow it, well and good, if not he has
an occasion given him to deuyse with the rest for an other decree to be made
whereby these new spronge up sects may be plucked up by the rotes, Germany
set up at quietness, and the ancient Religion of the church, faith, and
ceremonies, be had in estimation: which thing belongs chiefly to his office
and duty: For except they will be ordered, he will declare all to the high
bishop, and to other kings, and use both their counsel and aid herein: Unto
that where they say, they have given none occasion of offense, there is much
to be objected: For their preachers were a great occasion of the co^motion and
rusticall war, wherein almost an hondreth thousand were slain: The protest.
accused of sedition.
And many things have been done in their dominions to the open reproach,
contempt and mockery of the bishop of Rome and of him, and of other states
also: therefore not to be so clear without blame as they would make it. Moreover
that the princes and states have of no private affection, but according to
their duty offered their assistaunce, especially seeing how they will admit
no way of unity and concord: Finally he wylleth and commands them to
restore in to their The drone bees desire to be restored into the hyue.
former estate, the Abbottes, Mou^kes, and other ecclesiastical persons, which
they have expulsed. For he hears their daily complayntes, and is troubled
almost continuallye about the restitution of them. After a little respyte, the
Protestants do reply thus. For as much as they can not obtain the Copy of
the decree, nor time to consulte of the whole matter, it is but folly to make
any further discoursynge thereof: Wherefore they do commit the whole cause
unto God, in whom they repose the chief hope of their salvation. But where
they are charged with the sedition of the commons, they be utterly clear in
that matter: for what they did at the same time, and how they spared neither
cost peril, nor pains, it is manifestly known to all men: And the cause and
original of that sedition, was declared also four years since in the
assembly of Spyres. Wherefore it is not well done to lay this thing to their
charge, but therein they suffer injury: for if there be any man that will try
the law with them, in this or any other matter, they refuse not to abide
judgment. Wherefore they beseech him, he would conceive no heinous displeasure
against them, nor be incensed with hatred and malice: considering that al they
have is as well at his commandment, as any thing else of the other states.
When they had thus said, they axed leave, and departed, leaving certain of
their cou^sellers for their deputes. But before they went, the Archebyshoppes
of Mentz and The excuse of some to ye Protesta^tee.
Triers, and also the Palsgraue, sent to declare unto them, that the same that
the electour of Brandenburg, spoke of gening their aid and assistaunce for the
defense of Religion, was done without their commandment: which thing also
they hyd not from the Emperor, showing him how they had none occasion of
ennemitie or displeasur against them: Wherefore in case they had conceived any
evil opinion against them, they desired them to leave it. The Prince of Saxony
was content with that purgation, and bad them again to look for all good will
and frendshyp at his hand. The next day after they were gone, the Emperor
calls before him all the states, and first he commands the Ambassadors of
the cities by Truckesse, that they should not depart before the end of the
Assembly, after that declares what had been done with the Duke of Saxon and
his fellows, and because the cities of Strausborough, Constance, Memmyng, and
Lyndaue, had exhibited a several byll by them selves, he shows how he will
treat with them in like case. After are debated other matters of A deluge at
Rome and in Selande.
the Empire, chiefly of the Turkyshe war. This time at Rome the River of
Tiber ouerflowed exceadingly to the great terror of the city, by reason that
the wind blewe sore against the stream, and drove back the course of the
water from the sea, wherefore it did much hurt. A like deluge and more cruel,
was in Hollande and Zelande, where the Sea brake in over the walls, that are
made to keep it out in those parties, and drowned all the country far and
nere. Finally the xiiij. day of Octobre, when all the states besides the
Protestauntes were called and assembled in the court, the decree was red to
the Ambassadors of the Cities, who requyryng a Copye, were said nay, but it
was repeted ones or twyse. When al for the most part had allowed it, they of
Auspurge, Ulmes, Hales, and Franckeforth, desired further delyberation: the
eight day after the deputes of the Duke of Saxon and his fellows, declare unto
the Archbishop of Mentz, which is chief emonge the Princes: that if they may
have their Religion quiet until the counsel, they are also contented to
become co^tributaries with them for money and aid toward the Turkyshe war,
wherefore the next day being called into the court, there was red before them
a certain tenure of the peace, wherein they only were comprised which had
consented unto the decree made, where about rose a contention. the Ambassadors
affirming, that it concerned them nothing at all, or if it did, how it ought
to be uttered with playner words, to take away all ambiguitie. They said, how
they would move it to the Emperor. After two days, the Emperor sent for home
to his house, the^ of Strausborough and their fellows, and before all the
states commands A co^futatio^ of Zwilius doctrine.
the confutation of their doctrine to be red openly, a writing long and
tedious, and also where it touched the Lords supper full bitter and sower. The
authors thereof were John Faber and Eckius. And for because the argument was
odiouse, they left out no kind of excusation, whereby to kyndle the Emperor and
Princes against them, the end was this. For as much as in their Religion,
they professed an opinion contrary to all the rest, and allowed that most
heinous error of the Sacrament, had also cast their Images our of their
churches, abolyshed the Mass, and plucked down Colleges, builded in times
past through the lyberalitie of kings and Emperors, maynteyned sundry sects,
and dispersed their books written of such matters throughout Germany:
therefore he requires them eftsoon to come to amendment and receive again
the ancient Religion, for otherwise will not he fail to do the thing which
his office requires. They aunwer not long after, that in this confutation they
were charged with many things that were untrue, for in there cities is nothing
Their answer to the same.
done out of order, but the same is extremely punyshed: wherefore, seeing they be
clear in conscience, the cause weighty, the co^futation ouerlong, and can not
be answered, before they make certificat home to their cities, they desire
first therefore to have a copy, secondarely, that credit be not given to this
accusation, before such time as their pourgation be heard and examined: In all
other matters they will do any thing for his sake. The Emperor says, he will
take aduisement, and the fyst day after she weth them by the Marquis of
Brande^burge, how they can have no copy. For that was for weighty causes
denied of ye Duke of Saxony, and all disputation of faith is now prohibited:
But if they desire to be reconciled, and return again to the church, he is
content, that they shall hear the confutation red again ones or twyse: but he
charge them to profess the same kind of doctrine, that al other Princes and
states do, and to give aid against the Turk: for unless they forsake their
stubburnes, he will work by the counsel of the bishop of Rome and other
kings, as shall become him. After this they make a further suit to obtain a
copy, and the same not granted, to have peace and quietness in their Religion
till the beginning of the counsel, and therein to have their cause decided,
and they will in the mean time give their aid against the Turk so farforth as
their power will extend, or else could they grant nothing. The Maques
promised them, to be a petitioner for them to the Emperor. At after noone was
red unto them a grant of peace, wherein were only contained such as received
the decree, as was rehearsed before to the deputes of the Dukes of Saxon and
his fellows, whereunto they answered in like case, that the same touched them
nothing, and desired to know further of the Emperors pleasure herein. In this
mean while had they of Ulmes, Auspurge, Franckeforth and Halles, forsaken the
decree made as concerning Religion, and urged sore to have a counsel. But Faber
and Eckius, crave a great reward of the Princes, for making the confutations,
and had it. And promise from he^ceforth to bestow their travail in the
defense of the Romyshe Religion. For they and diverse others sought preferment
by the means of Luther, and in deed Faber was afterward by king Ferdinando
made bishop of Uienne. Whereupon Erasinus of Roterdame, was wont to say Poor
Luther makes many men rich.
merely, how poor Luther made many rich. In the mean ceason the Saxons and
their fellows, put up a supplication to the Emperor, entreating him to
establyshe a peace throughout the Empire, that no man be put in trouble or
danger for Religion. But where this could not be obtained, they write an
Epistle to all states, making a brief rehearsal what thing has been done,
desyryng that the names of their Princes be not put in to the later end of the
decree emonges the rest. And for as much as they have sued for peace in
vain, they say how they can grant none aid to the Turkyshe war. More
over, where it is provided in the decree, that they only shall have place in
judgment and counsel chamber, which allow the decree made, they require
that the same may be changed and amended: for else can they bear no part of
the charges, which the chamber requires. What time they had thus denounced,
they departed the next day, being the.xij. of Nouembre. I showed you in the
fyft book, how Marquis Albert of Brandenburge was by the king of Pole made
Duke of Pruselande. But the Emperor being sued unto by Walter Cronberge,
disallowed all that treaty or co^pacte as made to the damage of the Empire:
and the.xiiij. day of Nouembre pronounces it to be of none effect. The fyft
day after, in the Emperors presence was the decree recited before all the
states, and after a long discourse The decree of Auspurg.
of the handlyng of all matters, the Emperor decrees, that they should no
longer be suffered that teach otherwise of the Lords supper, than has been
observed hitherto, that in the Mass, either common or private, nothing be
altered, that children be confyrmed with chresme, and sick folks anointed
with oil consecrated: that no Images be removed, and where they be taken
away, to be restored: that the opinion of them that deny man to have fre will
be not received, for that it is beastly and also contumeliouse against God:
that nothing be taught any where, against the authority of the magistrate:
that the opynion, that faith only justifies take no place: that the
Sacraments of the church be in number and place accustomed, that the
ceremonies of the church, rites, obsequies for the dead and such other be
observed: that benefices vacant, be employed upon mete persons: that such
priests and men of clergy, which have married before this time, be deprived
of their benefices, which immediately after this assembly shall be given to
others. But such as forsakyng their wives, will return to their old
profession and be absolved, the bishop may restore, by the consent of the
bishop of Rome, or his legate. But the others to have no refuge in any place,
but banyshed or extremely punyshed: that the priests be of honest
conversation, their apparel decent and commonly, that they avoid all
sclaunder. That the preachers exhort the people to hear Mass, to pray to
the virgyn Mary, and other saints, to keep their holy days and fasting
days, to abstain from meats forbodene, to releue the poor, to tell the
Monks how they may not forsake their profession and order, briefly that
nothing be altered in Religion: they that shall do otherwise, to lose body and
goods. that where as Abbeys be pulled down, they be reedified, and what
soever has been taken away from the clergy, to be restored, that the wonted
ceremonies and rites, may be accomplyshed. And such as be followers of the
old Religion, dwelling within the lymites of the contrary part, and allow
this decree, shall be received in to the protection of the Empire, and shall
flitte whether they list without any hynderaunce. that the bishop of Rome
shall be called upon to apoynte a counsel in some place convenient, within six
months, that afterward the same may begin as shortly as may be, and at the
furthest within a years space: that all these things be ratified and
establyshed. Al exceptions, or appellations made to the contrary, to be void
and of none effect. And to the intent this decree may take place and be
observed, as concerning religion, the force and power that God has given them,
shall be wholly applied hereunto, and their life and blood also spent in the same
quarrel. During this Parliament, Luther by the commandment of his Prince, was
at Coburge in the borders of Frankony, to the intent he might be nerer
Auspurge, in case the matter required his advise or counsel. And though he
were absent, yet to the intent he might some Luth. wrote a book to ye
bishops.
what further the common benefit, he wrote a book to the bishops, and
Prelates in that assemblye, wherein he shows what the state of the church
has been, under the bishop of Rome, what wicked doctrine, what shameful
errors: And with most weightye words, admonishes the^ of their duty,
charge them to be of cruel and bloody minds, and again exhorts them, not
to let slip the occasion, now to redress their evil: He shows them how
his doctrine is agreeable to the books of the Prophets and Apostles, and
proves that is in vain, what soever they consulte or imagine against God. In
this malice and threatheninge of the Emperor and Bishops, Melancthon was
discouraged and careful in his mind, not for his own cause, but for
posterities sake, and gave him self wholly to pensiuenes, weeping, and
mourning. But when Luther knew thereof, he comfort him Luther comfort
Melancton.
with sondrye letters: And for as much as it is no men's matter, but the
cause of almyghtie GGD, he admonyshed him, that layinge al thought and care a
part, he cast the whole burden upon him. And why says he, do thou thus
afflicte and tourment thy self? If God has given his son for us, why do we
tremble and fear, why do we syghe and lamente? Is Sath an stronger than he?
Will he that has given us so great a benefit, forsake us in lyghter matters?
Why should we fear the world, which Christ has vanquyshed? If we defend
an evil matter, why do we not change or purpose? If the cause be just and
Godly, why trust we not to Gods promyses? Certainly the Devil can take no
more from us but our life: But Christ lives and reigns for ever, in whose
protection consists the verity. He will not cease to be with us, unto the
Worlds end.

If he be with us. I beseech you where shall he be found? If we be not of his
church, do you think that the bishop of Rome, and our other adversaries, be
of it? We be sinners in deed dynerse ways, but yet for all that Christ is no
liar, whose cause we have in hand. Let kings and nations fret and fume, as
much as ever they list: He that dwells in heaven, shall laughe them to
skorne. God has governed and maynteined this cause hitherto without our
counsel: the same shall also from henceforth, bring it to the end wyshed for.
Luthers opinion of mistraditions.
Touching laws and traditions of men, that you write of, the answer is not
hard: For both the first commandment, and all the Prophets also, do
co^dempne such manner of works: They may be a bodily exercise: but if they
come ones to worshyppyng, it is idolatry. As for any agreement it is in vain
looked for: for neither can we depose the bishop of Rome, neither can the true
doctrine be in safety, so long as Popery shall endure. In that you will have
the Lords supper to be communicated wholly, and give no place to your
adversaries, which hold it to be indifferent, you do well. For it is not in
our arbitreme^t, to decree or suffer any thing to be used in the church,
which has not Gods word to bear it. They cry out that we condemn the
whole church: but we say how the church was violently taken and oppressed
with tyranny, when the communion was divided in the mids, and therefore to be
holden excused, as the whole Synagoge was excused, that in the captivity of
Babylon, it kept not the law of The church oppressed with Tyranny, is to be
excused
Moses and other ceremonies, being by force prohibited that they could not do
it. Take heed in any wise that you grant not to the bishops over much
jurisdiction, lest more trouble ensue there of hereafter. All this treaty of a
concord in doctrine is clean against my mind: For the labor is spent in
vain, unless the bishop of Rome would abolyshe all his kingdom. If they
condemn our doctrine, why seek we an uniformity? If they do allow it, why
do they mainteyne their old errors? But they condemyne it openly. Wherefore it
is dissimulation and falshode, whatsoever they go about, they labor sore (as
it appears) about their ceremonies: but let them first restore the doctrine of
faith and works: Let them suffer the church to have Ministers that will do
their duty. They require that Monks may be set again The papists are
accused of rerages.
in possession: let them restore to us again so many innocent and Godly men,
as they have murdered, let them restore so many souls, destroyed through
their wicked doctrine, let the^ restore those great richesse, gotten by fraud
disceiptfully, let the^ restore Gods glory, with so many contumelies,
dishonored. When they shall have made satisfaction for these things, we shall
than talk with them unto whom the possession Bucer laboreth for a co^corde.
belongs. Where as Luther and certain others differed only in opinion touching
the Lords supper, which the catholykes reioysed at, and the rest much
lamented, Bucer, by the Duke of Saxons procurement, went from Auspurge to
Luther, for an agreement, and received such answer as he mislyked not, in so
much as he went thence to Zwynglius and the Zwycers, to the intent they might
be joined nerer in mind and opinion. When the state of things stood thus,
and all was full of displeasure The Lantgraue makes a league for six years,
with the cities of Zuricke, Basil and Strausborough, that if The Lantgraue
made a league with Strausbotough Zurick and Basyn.
any be attempted with force for Religion, they should aid one an other This
was concluded in Nouembre. The same time the Emperor addresseth his letters to
the Duke of Saxon, commanding him to be with him at Collon, the.xxi. of
Decembre, for certain weighty affairs of the common wealth. Which after he
had received the same, the.xxviii. of Nouembre, the same day came a messenger
with letters from the Archbishop of Mentz, wherein was written, how the
Emperor had required him to call to an assembly to Princes Electours, to
create a king of Romans. Wherefore he cited him to appear at Collon the.xxix.
of Decembre, for this appertains to the bishops office, as before has been
declared. Which thing ones known, the Duke of Saxon dispatchyng his letters
to the Lantgraue and to all other Princes and cities that were Protestants,
prays and exhorts them to mete at Smalcalde, at the.xxii. of Decembre:
Nevertheless in the mean time, he sends spedely to Collon John Frederick
his son, and with him certain of his privy counsel, to be there at the day
appointed by the Emperor. By whom he declares, how this citation of the
archbishop of Mentz is not rightly nor orderly done, and how by this creation
of the king of Romans, the right and liberty of the Empire is infrynged, and
also the law of Charles the fourth broken, wherefore he will not allow nor
ratify their enterprise. After that all were assembled at Smalcalde, they
devise a league, not offensiuely The league of the Protestants at Smalcalde.
but defensiuely. Unto this subscribed immediately all the Princes, and moreover
Albert and Gebart, Earls of Manssteld and Maidenborough and Bremen: But
Strausborough, Ulmes, Co^stance, Lindaue, Me^ming, Ca^pedowne, Heilbrune,
Ruteling, Biberack, and Isne, do receive it in such sort, as first to infourme
their cities thereof, and within syx wekes to make an direct answer, what they
will do herein. It was furthermore decreed to follicite by their Ambassadors,
the king of Denmark, the Dukes of Pomerane, and Megelbourg, the cities of
Embeck Northe^me, Franckfourth, Brunswick, Gotinge, Minda, Hannobria,
Hildesseme, Lubecke, Stetine, and other hauon towns. When the bishop of Rome
understood, what was yt end of the assembly at Auspurg The co^plait of the
Pope to the king of Poole.
he wrote his letters to the king of Pole and others, how he had trusted
assuredly, that the authority and presence of the Emperor, should either have
quenched or quieted Luthers heresy: for upon this hope, and for this cause
chiefly he came to mete the Emperor at Bononie, to the intent he might
encourage him forward (who notwithstanding of his own accord was well willing)
for if this thing had been brought to pass, religion had been stayed, many men's
souls saved, which through this heresy are now in danger, and then might
remedy have been found against the Turkish fury: but where as he understands
al well by the^perours as also by the letters of his legate, how they can not
only be in no wise reformed, but are waxed also more obdurate, he which through
yt will of God, governs the ship of Peter, in a time so te^pestuouse, and
susteyneth the greatest part of the whole care for the same, consultinge with his
The Pope is a sayler.
Cardinals, ca^finde no better remedy, tha^ the which his predecessors have
used, yt is a general counsel: wherefore he does admonish him since the matter
is brought to this issue, that either him self presentlye, or else by his
Deputes would further so holy a cause: For he entendeth, so shortly as may
be, to appoynte one in Italy in some place convenient. These letters were dated
the first day of December. The xxiiii. day of Decembre the Princes
confederated at Smalcalde, The Protestauntes letters against Ferdinando
write unto the Emperor, how they hear it commonly bruted, that he
pourposeth to create his brother Ferdinando king of Romans, who makes great
suit for the same. But what authority and right the Princes Electours have
herein by the law of Charles the fourth, how when the Emperor is dead, an
other is to be chosen in the name of the whole Empire, it is known to all men:
Notwithstanding he being alive and in health, and no such chance happened,
how the Archebyshop has cited them to Collon, against the prescripte of the
law, and against the custom of the Empire: They hear moreover, how the
residue of the Electours will come thither at his request, to accomplish the
suit of Ferdinando, as it were by conuenaunt and promise: for this report is
spread far and near: Wherefore they have thought good to admonish him of
certain things. And al be it they had lever abstain from such kind of talk,
yet for as much as they love both him and their conntrey and especially the
liberty thereof, which they have received of their auncesters, again for
because now in this later end of the world, many things are done captiously
and crastely, they can not otherwise do. First therefore, he knows right well
how circumspectly how depely, with what words and bonds he bound him self
to the Empire, how he gave his faith by an oath, that he would observe the
law Carolyne, whereupon the liberty of the Empire chiefly depends, how he
promised and confirms by an oath, yt he would neither him self do any thing
against it, nor suffer any other to do. And certainly these conuenauntes may not
be infrynged, broken or changed, without the consent and advise of all states:
But now in case during his life and prosperity a king of Romans should be
chosen, and that his natural brother, making suite and labor for it, he
sees him self how directly it were against the law, against the right and
liberty of the Empire, against promise and conuenaunt and the faith that he
owes to the common wealth, confyrmed by a solemn oath: Moreover how
incommodiouse also it were for him and how chargeable to the whole Empire to
have two Rulers at one time, whom they must obey. And because they would be
sorry if any such thing should be laid to his charge for breaking his
fidelytie, or also unto them for their sloughtsulnes in defending the common
wealth, therefore do they ernestly beseech him to impute this their writing to
the love of him and their country, and to the world that now is that he would
call to his remembrance things past, and by his office and authority
prohibit the creation of this new king, that he would consider well with him
self, to how many evils and mischiefs this thing will hereafter give
occasion, unless it be forseen: signifyeng how they write also touching the
same matters to the resydue of the electours, trusting that they will work for
the profit of the common wealth, and do their endeavor that there be no
division made among the states of the Empire: for the rest they will do as
much for his sake as their ability and power will extend to. Afterward the
Duke of Saxon writes his several letters to the Princes his colleges: that
for as much as he was somoned to Collon by the arche The duke of Saxons
letters to the Princes.
bishop of Mentz, therefore has he sent thither his son and certain of his
counsel, which shall do in his name that shall be requisite: He requires them
to leave of their enterprise, and to way with them selves, what a prejudice
and discommoditie, this will be unto the^ and al their posterity, for to break
the right liberty and honor of the Empire: he desires them also that in
such things as his son and counselors have to treat with them of, they
would so use them selves as it may appear and be perceived, that they love
the common wealth of their country. The Duke of Lune^burge, the Lantgraue,
Count Anhald; and the Earls of Mansfelde, wrote unto the Electours at the same
time long letters of the same effect, admonishing them right ernestlye, that
they do not such an open wrong to the laws and to their country: saying
how it is reported, that the matter is handled with brybes and promesses,
which is also openly against the law Caroline. After this, the last of
Decembre as well the Princes as cities before named, by common assent write
their letters to the Emperor, wherein they recite the treaty of religion at
Auspurge, how long they sued for peace, what answer he made, and also what
manner of decree was there made afterward. And al be it he him self did
mitigate the words of the Electour of Brande^burge, affirming that he had made
a compact with the rest of the Princes for his own defense only, and not to
offend others. Yet if that authority be committed to the chamber imperial,
as the decree purporteth, to whom can it be doubtful, but that the same thing
apperteyneth both to force and violence? but seeing that both they and their
au^cesters have showed many testimonies of great good will to him and his
progenitors, they beseech him in as much as he has mitigated the saying of
the Electour of Brandenburge, he would also qualify in deed and take away
the terror of confiscation, to the intent they may be assured, that until the
end of a Godly and free counsel, they shall need to fear no violence. The
causes which the Emperor alleged to create a king of Romans at the first
communication with the princes in Collo^, were these: First because that he The
causes of creating a king of Romans.
had ye rule of sundry realms and nations, and could not be always in Germany:
again for yt the state of christendom was troublesome, namely in Germany, by
reason of the dissension in Religion, and for the violent power of the Turks,
for the late sedition and rural war, and for disobedience within the Empire:
Wherefore he thought it very necessary, and for the profit of the common wealth,
that there should be a king of Romans chosen under him, as it were an other
head of the Empire in his absence, which should be wyttie, cyrcumspect,
industrious, of great power, that loved peace and concord, and were skillful
in matters of the Empire, and in every point such a one, as he might repose
his whole trust and confidence in. And he knows none more mete for that
charge, than his brother Ferdinando, king of Boheme and of Hongary: For his
realms and dominions, are a defense unto Germany against the Turkyshe
oultrage. The Princes electours, after delyberation had entreat the Emperor,
that he would not forsake Germany, but to set and plant himself there: but
where he persisteth stiff in his opinion, conferring their counsels together.
The fyft day of January, they proclayme Ferdinando king of Romans. The Duke
of Saxon as much as lay in him, by his son protested that this election was
faulty, and showed the causes why, and that he could not allow it. Long
before they departed from Auspurge. The brute was, that Ferdinando should
obtain that dignity. Afterward they went all from Collon to Aquon: where
Ferdina^do was crowned king, the.xvj. day of January, and Ferdinando proclaimed
king of Romans.
streightwayes were letters dispatched into al parts of Germany to signify
the same. Caesar also commands by his letters patentes, that all men shall
acknowledge him for king of Romans, and thereof sent his several letters to
the Protestants. This done, from Aquon the Emperor went to Brussel in Brabant.

The eight Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the eight Book.
THe Protestauntes from Smalcalde, sent letters to the kings of France and of
England, against sundry false reports, and solicit the king of Denmarcke,
and the cities by the sea coaste, to enter into their league. Into this league
the Swycers are not admitted. The king of France (who is descended of the
Almaines) answers their letters, so does also the king of England. About
the strife of the creation of king Ferdinando. An assemble was holden at
Franckforth, where was also debated the controuersic betwixt the bishop of
Bamberge, and George Marquis of Brandenburge. The Emperor appoints a metyng
at Spyre. whether the Duke of Saxon being moved to come, excuses him self.
Conditions are put in writing, which granted, the Protestauntes offer them
selves to be there. The five Cantons give battle to them of uricke, wherein
wynglius is slain, Shortly after dies Ecolampadius. A peace is granted to
the Protestauntes until a counsel. Christierne king of Denmark, is committed
to prison. The Turk inuadeth Austryche, but he is thence repulsed. The Pope by
his Ambassador, sent to Duke John Frederick (who had lately succedeth his
father) the conditions of the counsel. The Duke and his associates, after
deliberation, make him (...) full answer by writing.

IN the first assembly at Smalcalde, this emo^ges other things was agreed
upon: that for as much as their adversaries did aggrauate the cause and
profession of the Gospel with many sclaunders, and brought it every where
in to great hatred, they should write pryncipally to the kings of France and
of England, that they would not credit, nor be persuaded herin. The protest.
letters to the kings of France and of England.
Wherefore the.xvj. day of February, the Protestauntes write their several
letters to them both, of one effect. How they know undoubtedly of the old
complaint that has been of long time, concerning the vice and faults of the
clergy, which many notable men, and of late memory, in France John Gerson,
and in England Gerson. Collet.
John Colet, have sore noted and reprehended: the same thing has happened of
late years in Germany. For where as certain freers went about with indulgences
and pardons, which they so highly commended to the great contumely of
Christ, and no less danger of men's salvation, yt they got a shameful and an
unreasonable gain thereby. And being ge^tly admonyshed by certain good and well
learned men, that they should not so do, did not only abstain from such
usage, but also cruelly condemned them for Heretykes, which gave them good
counsel, in so much that they were constrained to stand in the defense of
the trewthe: upon which occasion many other things were espied and
reprehe^ded, but the adversaries which through their impudent marcha^dise,
gave occasion of offense, would never be in quiet, till this doctrine which
reuealyng their crafty iuglyng, was without dew examination, condemned for
wicked. And to the intent they might wholly oppress it, have brought it into
great hatred with the Emperor and other kings. Neuerthesse the truth
breakyng out like the son beams discovered the faults most manifestly,
which of evil customs, and preposterous judgments, were crepte in to the
church, in so much they could not be denied by the bishop of Rome him self,
when they had been exhibyted before to the Emperor by the states of the
Empire, in the assembly at Worms. and after had been treated of in all
assemblies of the Empire, all men judging for certentie, that for reformation
thereof there were no way better than a free and a lawful counsel, wherewith
the Emperor was also content. But at his coming out of Spain into Germany
through Italy, he was addicted wholly at Auspurge, to quiet the matter without a
counsel. And so they discourse the whole treaty at Auspurge, as has been
before rehearsed, and how for the sore decree there made, they were compelled
to appeal to a free and Godly counsel, lest they should both have hurt their
conscience, and offended God most grievously. Afterward they confute Their
appelation.
the false opinions and sclaunders, that their adversaries ascribe unto them,
to bring them into hatred with all men, and chieslye that the doctrine which
they do profess, is against the authority of Magistrates and dignities of
laws: but their confession exhibited at Auspurge, does fully answer this
matter, wheren is the office and state of a Magistrate, by their doctrine
declared to be of Gods ordinance, and again the people taught to owe all due
obedience to the Magistrate, for Gods commandment and for conscience sake: so
that it may be truly said, that the learned men of this time and doctrine,
have more hyghly commended the dignity of laws and Magistrates, than any
former age has done. for else seeing they are also appointed of God to have rule
and government of others. What madness were it for the^, to permit that
doctrine, which should give licencious liberty, take away obedience, and
styre up the people against them? Wherefore after this and diverse other things
they say, how that for so much as these sclaunders are reported by them, and
how it forces very much for the common wealth of christendom, that they
being kings of such wisdom and authority, should be ryghtly infourmed in the
matter: therefore have they thought good in their own purgatio^ to write this
much unto them, earnestly desyring them to give no credit unto sclau^ders, nor
to conceive any sinistre opinion of them, but to keep their judgment in
suspense, till they may come to the place, where to make their purgation
openly, which thing they chiefly desire: they beseech them also to exhort the
Emperor, that for the weyghty importance of the matter, and the profit of the
whole church, he would call a godly and a free counsel in Germany so shortly
as might be: And that he would work no extremity against them, until such
time as the cause may be lawfully decided and determined. For hitherto have
they always done their duty to the common wealth of the Empire, and now that
they profess this doctrine, they are brought in danger, of no self will nor
obstinacy, but for Gods word and glory: whereby they have the better hope
also, that they will grant to their requests herein. For it were high
praise worthy, if they could through their authority and mediation bring to
pass, that these controversies be not decided by force of arms, but that an
vpryght judgment be had, that abuses may be removed, the Churches reconciled,
and no force or violence done unto men's consciences. Finally if they may
understand by their letters of their good wylles toward them, it shall be to
their great comfort. In February, the Duke of Saxon summoneth all his fellows
to be at Smalcade the.xxix. of March to co^sulte how to resist the force of
their ennemies, if any thing be attempted against them: those were the
Princes and cities before mentioned. But the Duke being discrased, sent thither
his son John Frederick. At the former meting it was agreed to solicit
Frederick the king of Deumarke, and the cities by the sea coaste of Saxony,
touching their league. And now that they met again, rehersall was made what
had been done in the mean time, and what answer every one made. And the king
in deed said how he favored the doctrine of the Gospel, but in his realm
were so many bishops of great The bishops of De^marke resute the Gospel.
power and authority by reason of their richesse, clientes, and noble
kyndred, that he could not enter into this league as king, but as concerning
his other countries, lieng within the Empire, he was content, Henry the Duke of
Megelburge, excused the matter, for that his deputes had subscribed to the
decree of Auspurge, notwithstanding he would be no ennemy to them. Berninus
Prince of Pomerane, was not against it, but that his elder brother had as yet
in manner yt whole government. They of Lubecke refused not, but for as much as
they had been at great charges in the wars, they desired that the same might
ve considered. And if it fortuned that Christerne king of De^marke, whom they
had help to drive out of his realm, should war against them, they desired
to know, what aid they should look for again at their hands. The city of
Lunenbourge said, that look as their Duke Ernest would do, so would they
also. Afterward they consulted about geuyng their voices, for sudden aid,
leuieng of money for continual aid, chousyng of Captains, and receiving of
those that would be of the same league. After that they appointed their
attourneis and advocates, to answer for them in the law, if the Emperor or
any other, should attempt suit against them. And to this part of defense,
adjoined them selves, George Marquis of Brande^burge, Norinberge, Campedowne,
Heilprune, but the league they refused. It was decreed moreover that open
crimes should be punished by each man in his dominion. Before the league was
made, they took the advise and counsel, not only of lawyers, but also of the
divines. And Luther taught always, that they might not resist the Magistrate,
and set forth a book of the same matter. But where as the lawyers in this
consultation did affirm, how the laws did permit in The laws permit yt
the inferior Magistrate may in some cases resist yt superior.
some cases to resist, and how it was now come to the same point, that the
laws made mention of: Luther confessed plainly, that he knew not this to be
lawful before, but for because the Gospel does not impugn nor abolyshe the
polityke laws, as he has always taught. And again, for as much as in this
doubtful and dangerous time, many things may happen, so as not only the law
it self, but also the force of conscience, and necessity may drive us to take
weapons, he says, how they make a league in their own defense, whether the
Emperor him self or any in his name, should move war against them. In a
book also set forth he declares first how obstinate the Romish side was in
the convocation at Auspurge, secondly, he warns all men in general, that
they obey not the Magistrate, commanding them to take in hand any such
war. And he recites many and most detestable errors of the Romyshe
doctrine, which he says, are maintained of them that war in those camps.
Wherein he says is great wickedness: he shows also how greatly men's minds
are lyghtened, by the knowledge of the Gospel, warnyng men to tempre them
selves from entryng in to wicked wars. They appoyted an other metynge at
Frankefurte, the fourth day of June, wherein they should determyne, whether
they of Zurick, Bernes, or Basyll, should be received into the league without
exception of any opinion or doctrine, and the cities make a determinate answer,
touching the preparation for their defense. And also an answer was framed in
the mean time by the Duke of Saxon to the Emperors letters, wylling them to
take Ferdina^do for king of Romans, which thing they will not grant to. But
whylest they were yet at Smalcalde, they received letters from the Emperor,
pourportinge how News of yt Turks coming.
the great Turk was coming with an exceading great Army, to invade Germany:
wherefore he charged them without exception to prepare their aid to resist:
They make answer, how they will, after thensample of their progenitors,
refuse no charge or duty, that they owe to the common wealth. But he knows
what threatening words the Marquis of Brandenburge spoke unto them at Auspurge
in his name, and the rest of the Princes, and what things were there decreed
against them, how they have both there, and since sewed unto him for peace,
and can get no grant nor answer. Wherefore to send their aid against the
Turk, when they can obtain no peace at home, but are driven to look daily for
outlawyng and violence, were to unarm them selves and to cut their own
senewes. How be it if he will grant them peace and quietness, from the law
and civil war for Religion, until the time of the counsel: they will do
again for their parts, not only in the Turkyshe war, but also in all other
affairs that concern the common wealth, that thing which shall be their
duty, requesting him to signify unto them, by the same Ambassadors, what his
mind and purpose is herein. In the month of March, Rychard Archebyshop of
Treers, departed out of this life, The Archebyshop of Treers departs.
not without the suspicion of poison: and one of his house being racked for the
same, through his constance and stoutenes, escaped the daaunger. This bishop
was of great authorite emonges the Electours, for his experience, and frankenes
in speaking. When they of Ulmes had asked leave of the Senate of Strausborough,
Bucer went thither and Bucer set order in yt churches at Uimes,
set an order in the churches, prescrybing them a form of Religion, by the
advise and counsel of Oecolampadius, and Ambrose Blanrer. About this time, the
Lady Mary the Emperors sister, which was married to Lewys king of Hongary, came
into Flaunders, whom the Emperor made Regent of all the base countries, in the
place of his The queen of Hungary made rege^t of Flanders
aunte Margaret lately departed. Clement the seventh, was at suit with alphonse
Duke of Farrare, for the cities of Rhegio, and Mutina: at the length making a
compromisse, they put it to the Emperors arbitrament, who being at the same
time in Brabant, gave sentence with the Duke of Farrare. The French king
answers to the letters of the Princes and cities of Protestauntes the.xxi.
of April. How he desires The answer of the French king to the protestauntes.
nothing more than the concord of all Europe, and is right glad that they do
also bend the same way, and covet to have a counsel: for the same appears
unto him to be not only profitable, but also right necessary: And so often as he
chances into talk of refourming the common wealth: He judges always
thatthere can be no surer foundation, than if that holy spyrit (vtterer of all
truth) might in this case be president. Whereunto if others would give like
consent, and a place might be assigned for the counsel, void of all danger
and suspicion, where as every man might speak his mind freely, and nothing be
chief given to affections, than in deed there were good hope that all should be
well. And where as they are careful, lest he should bear them the less good
will by reasons of the sclaunders of their adversaries, they need not to be
afraid: for he is not wont to credit things lightlye, that are reported of
his ennemies: but seeing there is so great and so ancient frendshyp between the
kings of France, and Princes of the Empire, what vngentylnes were this of his
allies and friends, to conceive The amity of France and Germa.
a sinistrall opinion, especial and they not hard? for how much he sets
by this old amity, hereby it is well perceived, that what time he has war
with the Emperor, yet have the Germaynes and the citezens of the Empire free
access into France, and liberty to pass from thence again, when their
marchaundise and business is done, as much at their own pleasure as if they
were at home, in so much as France may very well be called the mansion place
of the princes and citezens of Germany. And al be it these things be commonly
known, yet are they not so great, but that when occasion shall serve, he will
do much more for them, in case as they do profess, they shall not refuse the
decree of a free and Godly counsel, for to have the controversy decided by
way of disputation, rather then by yt sword, like as their request is, so
seems it unto him also to be both more honest and profitable for the common
wealth: which shall suffer great misfortune in case the matter come to
handstripes. Where he speaks of the familiarity and alliance betwyxt
France and Germanye, thus it is. The A story of yt king of france.
Germans of Franconie bordering upon Swaues, in times past making inuasio^
into Gawles subdued the people about Treers, Gelderlande, Cleauelande, and so
down to Terwen and Tourney, and vanquyshed Amiens, Beanuois and the Soissons:
setlinge them selves at the last in that part of Gawles, which is yet called
France unto this day, the chief city whereof is Paris. And where as many of
their kings there reigned and enlarged their dominion, at the last the
government came unto Pipine, and also to his son charles, which was after for
his worthy acts called Charlemaigne. All people saluted him with Charles the
great.
the title of the Emperor Auguste, he possessed Germany, Italy, and France.
Afterward his son Lewis, and his ofspryng were kings of France. Whereunto
king Fraunces does ascribe his original, and says how he is lineally
descended of the stock of Frankons. The same persuasions used he also, what
time after the death of the Emperor Maximilian, he did seek the dignity of
the Empire. For knowing that by an ancient law, no stranger might attain
the crown imperial, he went about also to prove him self a Germayne. But in
deed the last king of France of the heyremales of Charlemaigne, was Lewys
the fifte, who died without isshewe, in the year of grace nine ho^dreth four
score and eight: when that possession of that kingdom Lewys the fyfte.
had remained in the same family two hondreth and eight and thyrty years.
After his death the succession had descended by right to Charles Duke of
Lorayne, uncle to king Lewys: But Hughe Capet, Hugh Capet
Earl of Paris, as they report, whose mother fetched her petygrewe from great
Charles, discomfiting and taking the Duke of Lorayne prisoner, usurped the
kingdom, and left it to his son Robert, whose heirs males continued
afterward until king Fraunces. Some there be that say how that this Hughe
Capet was of low and base hyrth, but the most part of the writers of French
Cronicles recite his original, as I have said heretofore. Henry the eight,
king of England, writes to them again the third day of May. That he has
The answer of the king of England
red their letters to his great co^tentation, for as much as they be inclined
and bent, that true religion remaining still saufe, and peace conserved the
faults and abuses of the church and clergy may be reformed, and all such
things redressed, as have been either by the wyckednes or ignorance of men,
corrupted and depraved. Moreover how he took great displeasure to read over
the whole discourse of their procead inges: That a report in deed went of
them, that was not very good, as though they should maynteine certain frantic
persons, which sought to disturb and tourmoyle all things vpsyde down.
But he gave thereunto no credit, first for because that Christian charity does
so require, secondly; knowing for certentie, that such kind of sclaunder can
take no place in me^ of such dignity, Nobility and wisdom. And all be it he
would never have believed any such report, before he had certainly tried and
known it to be true: Yet for as much as they have thus pourged them selves,
he is glad for this cause, that he was not disceaued in his opinion and
judgment. And where as they desire a refourmation, in that they do agree with
his mind, and the opinion of all other good men. For the state of worldly
things is after such a sort, that like as man's body, so also in the common
wealth and public administration, there is need of continual remedies:
wherefore they deserve great praise, that can lay to such medicines The
commo^wealth has need of many remedies
as will so heal and cure the disease, that they do not bring to an outrage
the matter. And doubts not but that their endeavor tends to the same end:
Notwithstanding how they had need to take diligent care of that sort of men
who seek alterations, would have all men a like, and bring the Magistrate in
contempt. For he has had certain of that sect within his Realm, which came
thither out of Germany. And for because in their letters they mentioned of the
obedience unto Magistrates, therefore he thought good to admonish them at few
words, that they give no man ouermuche liberty: For if they beware of this,
and seek a reformation, they shall doubtless do high service unto the common
wealth. How he also desires chiefly a general counsel, besechyng God to
styre up the hearts of Princes unto this desire: And has so good an hope of
them in all things, that there is nothing, that he will not ve glad to do for
their sakes: And will be a peticioner for them to the Emperor, that means of
peace and concord may be found, and will work so herein, as they them selves
shall from time to time, think best for their purpose. When the day came of
their assembly at Franckefourth, the Ambassadors of the Cities, as it was
agreed upon, declare what they thought touching the creation of the king of
Romans. And after long consultation, they found that it was not expedient for
the title and style of king The opinso^ of the cities of the king of Romans
Ferdinando, to enter in to any suit or trouble. For so long as the Emperor
lives or is within the lymites of the Empire, the whole power is his: And in
his absence it comes in deed to Ferdinando, but as to the depute or
lieutenaunt of the Emperor: They have at sundry times promised to do what so
ever lay in their power. And now in case they should resist the creation of
the king, many would judge that promise to be vain, and therefore would
bear the^ the less good will, and would also work against them, which else
would have done nothing at al against the cause of Religion. It is also to be
feared lest such as would have joined them selves unto this league, will be
affcayde now of this, and withdraw them selves. For yt which cause they may
not be against the election of king Ferdinando, but hold it indifferent as it
is: But if Ferdinando shall commau^de any thing contrary to Gods word, they
will not obey it, or if he atte^pte any force, then will they work after the
prescripte of the league, and defend to the vttermoste of their power. But the
Princes wrote unto the Emperor and Ferdinando, that they could not allow that
thing which was done against the custom and liberty of the Empire, nor
attrybute unto him the title of king of Romans. The Duke of Saxon in his
letters to the Emperor, added this moreover, that if the matter The Duke of
Saxons doubt of yt Swycers.
might be lawfully used, he would not be unlike his ancestors. As concerning
the Swycers whom the city would gladly have received into their league, the
Duke of Saxon answered by his Ambassadors, that for as much as they were of a
contrary opinion, touching the Lords supper, he might have no fellowshyp with
them: How much they were to be esteemed for their strength and power, he was
not ignorant, but he might have no respect unto that, lest it should come to
an evil end, as the Scripture witnesses to have chanced unto those, which
for their defense, have not cared what aid they have sought. During this
assembly, letters were brought from the Duke and Lantgraue, to the
Ambassadors of the other Princes and cities, pourportyng how the Archbishop
of Mentz and Lewys the The Palsgraue and yt archbishop of Mentz intercessonrs.
Palsgraue, had leave of the Emperor to treat of a peace, and had requested
them by letters to grant also to the same: For then would they appoynte a
time to mete. After deliberation had, the Ambassadors answer, that they be
contended. Wherefore when the Duke and the Lantgraue had made report again,
how they misliked not the so that the process in the law might cease in
mean time: They having first obtained this of the Emperor, appointed the
day, the last saving one of the month of Auguste. Wigande bishop of Bamberge,
A controversy of the bishop of Ba^berge with the Marquis of Brandenburg.
had certain years before complained to his fellows of the Sweuicall league,
of George Marquis of Brandenburge, for certain wro^ges and injuries which he
had done unto him, as hindering his ecclesiastical jurisdiction and living,
and compellinge the priests to this false kind of doctrine, and if they
refused, erpulsynge them and imployinge the church goods to profane uses.
And for as much as this was contrary to equity and justice, and against the
decrees both of the bishop of Rome and the Emperor, he requires that
according to the league, they would aid and assiste him herein. Wherefore this
year in the month of Iulye, a day was appointed at Norlinge for the hearing
of this matter, whether came at the request of the Marquis, the Ambassadors of
the Protestants: And of the bishops side, were the bishops of Auspurge,
Wircinburg, and Aester, as his coadiutours and counselors. When the plantife
had propounded and charged him with injuries, requiring the judges to proceed,
and give sentence after the prescripte of the league. The defendaunt in things
concerning religion, and jurisdiction ecclesiastical, put in an appellation,
The Appellation of the Marquis.
wherein he appealed from their decrees and judgment to a general counsel.
The judges said how they would not admit their sentence given. This cause
did not concern the Marquis George only, but also his nephewe Albert, which
was his word. In the mean time the Emperor calls a counsel imperial at
Spyres, at the Ides of Septembre, for the appeasyng of the controversy in
Religion: But the eleventh kalendes of Septembre, came unto the Duke of Saxon,
the Earls of Nassowe and Nuenar, men of great authority, nobility and virtue:
and by the Emperors priuitie, move a reconciliation The Earls of Nassowe and
Neuenar.
and to treat with him of five things, the Lords Supper, the ceremonies of
the church, the church goods, the aid nedeful against the Turk, and the
Election of king Ferdina^do. And where it appeared by their words how the
Emperor was persuaded that he allowed the doctrine of Zwinglius, and the
opinion of the Anabaptists, he answers that what kind of doctrine his is,
and what his ministers do preach and teach, is right well known by his
confession exhibited at Auspurg, in the which he pourposeth through Gods grace
to remain, during his life, and that he had never to do with Anabaptists, nor
greatly with the Zwinglians. And desired the^ to pourge him herein to the
Emperor: They said, how they knew it before this to be so, nevertheless they
would declare it so to the Emperor, who no doubt, would be glad and joyful
to hear it: For the rest of their demaundes they were agreed, they should be
differred until the next assembly of the Empire, whether they desire him
either to come him self or to send his son: He says how he would be
glad to gratify the Emperor in all things, but he is now aged and unable to
travail, and besides that there be certain weyghtie causes, for the which he
can neither come him self nor send his son, unless the Emperor will
grant a saufe conduicte for him and his train: Upon what conditions the Duks
of Saxon will come to the assemble.
Again where so ever he shall become, he can not want the preaching of Gods
word, nor have prescribed him a certain kind of meat: furthermore if the
disputation shall be touching Religion, it is requysite that he bring with him
Luther and others, which must also have saufecouduicte: Finally how he has
oftentimes made suite to the Emperor, to be invested in his own Dukedom,
after the custom of the Empire, and for other things which he could never
obtayn, all be it he made many fair promyses.

And now in this last assembly at Auspurge, Fridericke Palsgraue, The
intercessours and Protestant.
answered him so in his name, as it did easily appear that the Emperor is
sore offended with him: upon which consyderations he can not come, unless he
may through their mediation, obtain the Emperors saufe conduicte in dew
season: And than he will come without fail. About the later end of Auguste,
the Ambassadors of the Archebyshop of Mentz and the Palsgraue, met with the
Ambassadors of the Protestauntes at Smalcalde, speaking much of the love and
zeal that their Princes bare to their country, who seeing that they could
not agree at Auspurge, and considering the great danger that might ensue of
that dissension, would never rest till the Emperor had granted them leave to
treat of peace. Wherefore they thought it good to call again in question such
things as could not be agreed upon at Auspurge, and to begin where they
left there. The others say again, how the Protestauntes knew not what
things should be propounded, and therefore gave them no certain commission to
determyne any thing, but wylled them to send home in wrytinge sealed, that
which should be propounded, and so they must do, and none otherwise. And when
after much altercation in words, they could not otherwise conclude, at the
last it was agreed that they should mete at Spyres at a day, which the
intercessours should assign, after that the pleasure of the Duke and the
Lantgraue herein were known, who ought in deed so shortly as might be, in the
name of them selves and their fellows to signify their mind therein. Letters
of yt Duke and the Lantgraue to the intercessours.
This was decreed the second day of Septembre. And in the beginning of
Octobre, the Duke and the Lantgraue, wrote to the Archbishop and to the
Palsgraue, and repetinge the treaties of the Ambassadors before said, they
declare how there could be no good done therein without divines: And how
they continewe iin the same Religion still, which they professed at Auspurge.
And where as in all assemblies both when the Emperor was absent, and now also
of late being present, a counsel was promised, which should forthwith be
called and commenced, they trusted that the Emperor would shortly procure one
in Germany: wherein they and their fellows will open their doctrine more at
large: In the mean time, they beseech them to be means to the Emperor, that
there be no extremity wrought within the Empire, but that such as now do or
hereafter shall profess the Gospel, may live in quiet until such time as
the decree and authority of a lawful counsel may determine the matter. And
if they shall think good to treat how to conclude the peace, and appointe a
day for it, they will send their Ambassadors thither. And if in their
doctrine exhibited at Auspurg, any man shall think to find an error, and
will show it, or if he cannot prove it, to stand to the testimony of
Scripture, that would they and all their fellows be glad of: And if it shall
please the Emperor to assign a day for it at Spires, granting a saufe
conduicte for them, their fellows, and for Luther, whom they intend to bring
with them, among other ministers of their church, and will permit them to
have free and open preachinges of Gods word, and the use of the Lords Supper,
according unto Christ's institution, prescribyng no difference or choice of
meats: than will they either come themselves, or else send their deputes with
large commission, and make declaration of their doctrine unto all men. And if
at the same metyng, their doctrine can not by the Scriptures be confuted, than
trust they that the Emperor will no further moleste them, but that they may
still persevere in the same Religion. And for as much as they have appealed to
a lawful general counsel, and as yet nothing is found in their doctrine,
that is against Gods word where also by the order of the law and equity,
during the appellation no extremity ought to be showed unto the party that
appealleto; their trust is; that the Emperor will the rather at their
requests, suffor Germany to have peace and quietness. I showed you before of an
assemblye, that should have been in Septembre at Spyres: But the Emperor being
advertised by sundry letters and messengers of the Turkyshe preparation,
prorogeth the same to the month of January followynge, appoyntynge the place
at Regenspurge, that he might be so much the nearer Austriche, where he
perceived the war, would be. I showed you before in the syrt book, how the
war which they of Zurycke and Bernes, would Wars in Swycerla^ce
have made upon the five towns, was pacifyed by the intercession of other
Cities: But this year the Sore brake out again, and those two Cities,
steppynge all streightes and passages, would permit no victual to be
brought unto them. This was when the days were at the longest. And where as
great trouble was like to ensue thereof, Conditions or peace.
the French king and certain other cities of the Suysses, labored to take up
the matter, and drew certain conditions of peace, but all was in vain. Than
did they of Zuricke and Bernes, declare by writing, with what great wrongs and
injuries they were co^streyned to stop their victualles: And now for as much
as they refuse the co^dicions of peace, which the intercessours have devised
and propounded, they declare their malicious hearts against them, and how they
have broken the fourmer conuenauntes made between them, wherefore it is lawefull
for them to cut o^ their victualles: And if any hurt come thereof, it ought to
be ascribed unto them, which seek nothing else but dissension, this was the
nynth day of Septembre. And what time these five towns were in great want and
penury; the nynth of Octobre, they armed them selves secretly and marched
forward: And before any man was ware of them, come unto the borders of Zurick,
where as lay a garrison of a thousand men or more. Which sent diverse
messengers into the city to warn their men to come to them with speed, but
their ennemies approached so fast, that they could hardely come to their
reskewe. For when they were come to the top of the Hylle, whereby they must
needs pass; they saw their men in great danger, in the next valley. Than
exhorting and incouraginge one an other, they ran down the hill, who might
go foremoste, but the nature of the hylle was such, as there could but one go
down at ones, which was the cause, that where as they could not march in
order of battle, they were of a greater multitude vanquyshed and put to
flyghte. This was the eleuent day of Octobre. Among the nombre of them They
of Zarick disconfited.
that were slain, was Zwynglius. For it is the manner of Zuricke, that when
they go forth in warfaye, the chief minister of their church goes with them.
Zwynglius also of him self being a man of a stout and bold courage,
consyderyng that if he should rary at home, The death of Zwyng.
and they should go by the worse, what displeasare he should sustain, as one
that in his Sermons would encourage others, and him self faynte, when any
danger was, would needs take such ^^te as other did. They showed great
cruelty upon his dead corpse, and their hatred toward him was so much, that
their malice was not satisfied with A beastlye cruelite.
his death. He was forty and four years old, four years younger than
Luther.

At the same month of August before, was seen a blasyng Star, and at the
same time died Lewys the French kings mother, sister unto Charles Duke of
Sauvy. The city of Bernes, hearing of this overthrow, comforted them of
Zuricke, promysing to send them aid, and to come with their whole power to
avenge them of their ennemies: When they were all commen together, which was
about the eight day after the battle, and they of Bernes, which before
desired to take the matter in hand alone, were than nothing hasty, the city
of Zuricke, which had aid sent them from the Schaffusians, Mullusians, and
also from Sangall and Basil, of the whole number chose out certain enseignes,
which setting forth in the night, lay in the Hylle besides Mencinge,
pourposynge when the Move rose, to take the town of Tugie thereby, upon the
sudden. But their ennemies which had encamped them selves not far from
thence, knowing of this by espeiall, went thither spedely, and set upon them
being a sleep, the.xxiiij. day of October. And to put them in the greater
fear, they made a wonderful clamourous outcrye. Many were slain on An other
slaughter.
both parts. And all be it the five Towns had the vpperhande, yet would they
of Zuricke nothing relent in their Religion. At the last through mediation, a
peace was concluded, whereunto was added that they of Zuricke, Bernes, and
Basil, should forsake the league which they had latelye made with the city
of Strausborough and the Lantgraue: likewise should the five towns break of
their league with king Ferdinando. And hereof were obligations made and sealed
in the later end of November. Oecolampadius departed out of this present
life, as it was supposed, for the inward sorrow and The death of Oecolampadius.
thought, he conceived for the death of Swynglius, whom he loved intierly: he
wanted but one year of fifty, there be of his works written upon certain of
his Prophets, which of learned men are much commended. At the.xxix. day of
December, the Ambassadors of the Protestauntes, mete again at Frankeforte to
finishe up the rest, concerning the preparation of their defense. In the which
assembly, the cities of Goslarie and Embecke, were received into their league,
and a little be fore that, they also of Eslyng. But George the Marquis of
Brandenburgh, and the city of Norinberg, Campedown and Hailbrune, were absent.
For all be it they profess that same Religion, yet were they not of that
league. The Emperor in the beginning of January, took his journey from
Bruselles, to go to Regenspurge for the assembly before mentioned. By the way
when he came to Mentz at the beginning The Assemble of Rege^spurge.
of February, the Archebyshop there and the Palsgraue, entreat him again for
peace, which the Emperor grauntinge unto, they aduertyse the Duke of Saxon
and the Lantgraue, willing them to do the like: Wherefore by their letters
sent to and fro, they appoynte to mete at Schwinfurte, a town Imperial by the
River of Moene, at the beginning of Apryll. There did they begin to treat of
a peace, which should continue unto the general counsel. The Princes that
were intercessours, were there present, and by order given by the Emperor, do
propounde these conditions. That besides the writing exhibited at Auspurge
touching Religion, they should alter nothing, teach nothing, nor publyshe any
thing, but Conditions of a peace between the Emperor and Protest.
remain in those bounds, until the time of the counsel: so as they have
nothing to do with the Zwynglianes and the Annabaptistes. Neither that through
the occasion of Religion, they do allure unto the^ other Princes subjects, and
permit any of their Ministers to preach out of their own country: that
they abstain from words of reproach: that they disturb not the jurisdiction,
rytes, and ceremonies of the church, that they give their aid against the
Turk, and obey the decrees of the Empire, which concern the common wealth
and politic governance, that they be obedient to the Emperor and king of
Romans. And if they have made any league against the Emperor, king or other
states of the contrary Religion, to abolyshe the same: If they will thus do,
they trust how the Emperor and the king, will leave and forget all
displeasure paste. The Duke had sent thither his son John Fridericke, being
him self sore sick. There was also Fraunces Duke of Lunenburg, and Count
Anhalde, again the Ambassadors of other Princes and cities, whereunto came
also the Nortusians and Halbestans of Swelande. After much debatyng, the
intercessours advertise by their letters, the Emperor of the whole matters,
who was than at the assembly of Ratisbonne, to know his further pleasure in
matters. Unto that demand, which was that the Duke of Saxon and his
fellows, should obey the king of Romans. They write an answer to the
Emperor, what lack they find, and and what they would require him to do
therein. and delivered the same sealed to the intercessours the.xvij. day of
Apryll, the effect whereof was, that Ferdinando should not take upon him to be
king of Romans, but in case the Emperor had need of a coadiutour, that than
by the advise and counsel of the Princes Electours, he should so interpret
the law Caroline, making an act thereof for ever, ye it might be done
lawefully after this sort. That as long as the Emperor lives, Conditions of
creatinge a king of Romans.
there should never hereafter be chosen a king of Romans, unless the seven
Princes Electours, and six other Princes of the Empire joined with them, judge
it so mete to be done. And what time it shall appear to be for the profit of
the common wealth, that than the Archebyshop of Mentz shall appointe the rest
of the Electours, and six other Princes to mete in a place convenient for a
further consultation to be had therein: And when they shall have considered the
whole matter diligently, that than the Princes Electours only with the king of
Boheme, shall have authority to elect a king of Romans, who so long as the
Emperor lives, shall govern the common wealth in the Emperors name only,
and otherwise to take upon him none authority or government. That the
Princes and states of the Empire, be not bound to him by any fidelity or oath,
except it be after the Emperors death. And when a new king shall be created,
that he be sworn after the order of the law Carolyne, and that it be not in
the Electours power to alter ye same. He that shall be proved to have done
contrary to that oath, or else be had in great suspicion thereof and makes not
his purgation, shall be deprived of all right of Electourshyp for ever. Moreover
that there be not chosen three kings successiuelye of one house of Princes,
that none be chosen king of Romans, except he be of some house of the Princes
of Germany. Such things as are establyshed by the law Caroline, concerning
the kings election, neither the Emperor nor king of Romans, may change.
When it shall seem good to the electours to create a king of Romans, that they
shall not need to signify the same before to the Emperor: Neither that it
shall be lawful for the Emperor in this case, to commau^de the Archebyshop of
Me^tz, to assemble the Princes electours: but what time there shall appear
just cause, to elect a king of Romans, during the life of the Emperor,
that the Archebyshop at a certain day call his company to Franckfurth: And that
it lie not in his authority to appointe the assemblye else where, unless his
colleagues do upon weyghtie considerations permit him, that the Archebyshop
of Mentz shall not demand the Crown, Scepter, and other ornaments of the
Empire of them of Norinberge, but by the consent of his peers. Neither that he
diminishe any part of three months, which after they be sommoned, is
granted to the Princes to have conference together, for it may be dangerous
to the Empire and common wealth, if one or two coming not in time should be
absent. That whilst the Electours consulte at Frankeforth, all others be shut
out. If any of those matters be infrynged, that the^ the Electours be not bond
either to repare thither, or there to remain, and what soever is there done to
be void and of none effect. That neither the Emperor nor king of Romans in
Italy, France, or other places do permit harms of the Princes Electours to
be borne before him, or their offices to be executed, but by the Electours them
selves or their deputes. That the king of Romans do not solemnyse his last
coronation, unless either the electours or their deputes be present, that
neither the Emperor nor king of Romans, be a let to the Ambassadors of
foreine kings and Princes, whereby they may not come to the counselles of the
Empire, there to propounde their matters: for that this apperteyneth both to
the law of nature, and is also a thing full of humanity and civil duty.
That neither the Emperor nor king of Romans, in cases of the Princes of the
Empire, take upon them any authority of determining, but suffer the same to be
lawfully decided, in place where they ought to be. That such things as shall
apperteine to the honor, wealth, and preservation of the Princes and of the
Empire, and such as the Emperor has promised upon his fidelity to observe,
he do maynteyne, and in case any thing be otherwise done to refourme it, and
bind the king of Romans by a law, to observe the same. And if the Emperor
would after this sort expound and confyrme the law of Charles the fourth,
the Duke of Saxon would not fail to do his duty: when so ever the common
wealth should require any such consultation. But in case the intercessours
could not obtain these things of the Emperor, that they would not refuse
any lawful hearing of the matter. Yet so that in the mean time king
Ferdinando, should neither take upon him nor usurp any government of matters
of the Empire nor authority: namely over the^, and over William and Lewys,
brethren Dukes of Bauier. And if this will not be granted them, that then the
Emperor would hear the^ openly in the counsel of the Princes and other
states: where they will declare, upon how weighty and just causes they
disalowe this election. And for so much as for the refusal of the same, they
perceive how they incur, not only with the Emperor, but also with foreine
kings and nations in to the suspicion of rebellion, they desire much that the
Emperor would not take it displeasau^tly that they should make their
purgatio^, as well within Germany, as also without the lymites of the Empire,
for this must they do of necessity. Where among other things it is said,
that the Electours should swear after the order prescribed in the Caroline,
thus it stands. What time they be comen to Franckeforth, when mass is done
they go up to the Altar, and there lay their The oath of theelectoars
hands upon the holy book (as they call it) and certain words being spoken,
take a solemn oath, by the faith that they owe to God and to the Empire, that
they will chose a new and high Magistrate, such a one as they shall think
most worthy, mete, and necessary for that office, so farreforth as they can
conjecture by their wit and judgment, without any compacte, bribe, reward,
or promise. Where they account the Dukes of Bauier to be of their number, this
is the consideration. They also misliked the election of king Ferdinando, and
taking their counsel herein, entered into league with the Duke of Saxon, the
Lantgraue, and the French king, to defend the liberty of Germany: And
indede the king of France delivered into cucustody of the two brethren, Dukes
of Bauer, an hondreth thousand The Dukes of Bauer misliked the election of
Ferdina^do.
crowns, to be always in a readiness, if need required. The Princes that were
intercessours make answer hereunto the.xx. day of April. How they treat of
these matters for a concord, neither had they thought that they would have
propounded these things. For in that they have chosen a king of Romans, the
Emperor yet living, they have most weighty causes, which were at the same
time declared to John Frederick his fathers deputy there, and if need
require, may be yet more plainly expounded, but since this matter concerns
not them only, but the Emperor also and the king, and residue of their fellow
Princes, they will not make many words thereof, but leave it alone, to the
intent they may come more easelye to the reconciliation of the rest.
Nevertheless if they be constrained to make answer for their doing, they
will not refuse judgment herein, and doubt not to approve their doings in
such sort, that nothing can justly be laid to their charge. But in case
these things should be reported to the Emperor, they fear much that it
should not only take no place, but also let and hinder the whole treaty of
peace. Wherefore that both truce may be taken, and a reconcilement may be had,
as well for Religion as for the Election, and that neither be separated from yt
other, they ernestly beseech both the father and the son, Dukes of Saxon,
that they would consider the thing, and forsake their opinion. And in so doing
they doubt not, but that the Emperor and the king woul put them in good
assurance, that this election should not be hurtful to them nor to their
heirs: and would show them besides all the pleasure they could, as well in
matters of Religion as otherwise. For that Religion should have peace
granted, and the matter of election remain vndertermined, they fear much
that this could not be obtained. Thus verily do they friendly counsel them,
and require them to take it in that part, and so use the^ selves, that they
may perceive their advise is regarded, and their diligence well employed.
Hereunto answers Duke John Fridericke the fourth day after: The answer of
the Duke to the itercessours.
that he looked for no such answer of them. For where they said lately
among other things, that the king of Romans was elected for the wealth and
dignity of the Empire, they ought of necessity to to answer to this
poinct, for the satisfiynge as well of his father as his fellows, who are
persuaded that this election is not good nor profitable to the Empire. And
where as they sustain the persons of intercessours, he had thought certainly
that they would never have defended the matter, but have left the same
doubtful and undetermined: for such things as they have spoken do not concern
them that be intercessours, but ought to be refer dvnto that time wha^ these
things shall come in common consultation. In deed at Collon, what time the
Emperor desired to join with him his brother Ferdinando, in the fellowship of
the Empire, he adledged certain causes, why it ought so to be: But those seemed
not to be so great, as therefore the law Caroline, the right and liberty of
the Empire ought to be infringed. At what time, he and other of his fathers
Ambassadors did answer them, why it ought not so to be done. Wherefore the
thing that was spoken in the last place, now they repete again also: that in
case the Emperor will not admit their requests, that then the matter
determined in lawful judgment, where the reasons of their refusal may be
heard. And seeing they treat of equity, he supposed they would also in this
case have found out some way and honest mean and profitable for the Empire.
But in as much as it is not so done in this controversy, he will no further
moleste them herein. But undoubtedly his father and his fellows will declare
(yet to the injury of no man) how the law of liberty of the the Empire, are
by this mean infringed: he trusts also, that for so much as these things
concern the honor and preservation of the common wealth, the Emperor will not
take them displeasauntly. In the rest of their demaundes, that same The craft
of the Papists
first poinct, which is touching the Zwynglians, was meant, that the Princes
might be sequestered from the most part of the cities: and in this treaty the
intercessours did so expound it, that if the Zwynglians would acknowledge
their error and forsake it, they might also be comprysed in this peace: if
not, to be refused, and neither to aid A cancorde.
them nor enter into league with them. But the last year at Smalcalde, the
Protestants were accorded. And what time they of Strausborough, and certain
cities of Sweuia, had more plainly expounded their opinion propounded at
Auspurge, concerning the Lords Supper, their declaration was excepted of the
Saxons. And therefore now with one mind they answer all one and the same
thing to eueryry request, and at the length propounde these conditions of
peace. That they which at Auspurge did exhibit the confession of their
doctrine, and an Apology of the same, and such as hereafter shall receive the
same doctrine, do consiste within these lymites, and renew nothing
furthermore, until the counsel, so often times promised and poynted upon:
That they join not with them, as concerning their doctrine, which teach
otherwise of the Lords Supper, and of Baptism, than is specified in their
writing exhibited at Auspurg: that they neither allure unto them, nor maynteyne
an other man's Subject, through the occasion of Religion. How be it if it
shall be lawful for any men, either by law or condition, to go whether they
will, when they shall have first declared the same to their Lords or
Magistrates, they may flitte and remove if they will, and be received. That
they send forth no preachers without their own limits to preach, unless
that either the Magistrate of that place, desire or permit him so to do,
when any assembly shall happen to be there. For if he refuse, than it shall be
lawful for them to do it at home: And if they shall be either at the counselles
of the Empire, or send the power against the Turk, let them at such times
use their own preachers, and also the Lords Supper, according to Christ's
commandment, let them absteyne from the reproaches: not withstanding let the
Ministers of the church, according to their duty, reprehende errors and
vices with a modesty, and show them the thing that is right. That such as be
of their Religion, be not secluded from the chamber imperial: that the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction remain in place as it now is. And that it shall
not be lawful for bishops to moleste or bring in trouble any man for
professyng this doctrine. That sentences given concerning Religion,
jurisdiction, Ceremonies, church goods, which are not yet put in execution,
be differed till a general counsel. Let them use the church goods, which
remain in those places, whereunto those gooodes do properly appertain, neither
let any thing be violentlye taken from any man, and that the yearly revenues
be brought to the same places, as they have been of old time accustomed, till
the counsel, shall otherwise determine it: In all civil matter, let every man
do his office and duty, let all men tend the common wealth, and show mutual
faith and benevolence. When the matter was brought unto this point and would
come no nerer, the intercessours continue still their purpose, and to the
intent that all things might be reported to the Emperor more spedely, they
appointe an other metynge at Norynberge, the third day of June. And there at
the last, albeit the full The Emperor of necessity grants peace to Germany.
agreement was not had, yet for as much as the Turk inuading Austriche,
necessity required to make all the power against him that might be gathered,
the Emperor does establyshe an universal peace throughout Germany, and
decrees that no man be molested for Religion, until the time of the general
counsel, and if there be none until the states of the Empire, shall find an
other mean, to redress this controuerste: unto such as shall do otherwise, he
appoynteth great punyshement: And says he will do all his endeavor, that it
may be called within this half year, and begin within a year after. And if
this can not be obtained, that then the matter shall be discussed in the counsel
of the Empire: wherefore he charge and commands that all suytes and process
in the law, commenced for Religion, shall in the mean time be let fall and
suspended. And if any thing be otherwise done against the protestauntes, he
commands it to be void and of none effect. Again the Protestauntes which
were than seven Princes, and.xxiiij. cities, offer unto him their obediences
and service, and promise him aid against the Turk. This peace was concluded
by The ^^ibre of Protest.
the intercessours the.xxiij. of July, and the Emperor, whom they aduysed by
letters and messengers confirmed it the second of August, and caused it to be
proclaimed openly, commanding the counsel of the Empire and other judges to
obey the same. It was decreed in the counsel at Auspurge, that the judgment
of the counselles chamber, should be reformed. Whereunto the Emperor appointed
two in his name, and moreover chose the archebyshop of Mentz and the Palsgraue,
Princes Electours, also the bishop of Spyres, and of Strausborough, and Philip
the Marquis of Brandenbourgh. Every one of these sent his depute to Spyres, at
the beginning of March, who made there certain laws, which concerned partly
the judges, pattly the advocates, and partly the suitors. Which they exhibited
to the Emperor in this assembly at Regenspurge, who lyked the reformation
well, and added a few things to the same. In the last book before The
assemble at Rege^spurge.
this, you have heard how the Emperor vnded the conuenantes between Alberte
Duke of Pruse, and Sigismunde king of Pole. But where as Albert perseuered in
his purpose, he was outlawed at this time by the Judges of the Imperial
chamber, at the suit of Walter Cronberge. Which thing when the king of Pole
understood, he sent his Ambassador to this assembly, to declare how the
land of Pruse has of old time been under the defense and tuition of his
realm. Wherefore he desires that this sentence of outlawerye may be reuersed.
But Cronberge with a long oration had the third day of June, proves it to be
under the jurisdiction of the Empire, and to belong nothing at al to the kings
of Pole. And al be it that his predecessors, vanquyshed in battle, were
constrained to give their fidelity to Casmire, father unto Sigismunde, yet was
the same clean contrary to the conuenauntes made before time, which thing he
is able to prove by the testimony of Albert him self, who confessed the same
eight years since in the assembly at Norinberge. Therefore requires he, that
the request of the king of Pole set a part, the sentence given against
Alberte may be put in execution. This year Christierne king Christierne king
of Denmarck is taken.
of Denmark, who had been ten years a banyshed man, provided a navy,
intendyng to recover his kingdom, but he was taken on the sea, and committed
to ward, and about the same time died, having a toward young man to his
sonnne, and brought up with the Emperor his uncle. The chiefest consultation
in this assembly was about the Turkyshe war. And when news came daily by
letters and messengers, The Turck invaded Austriche.
how the Turk had sent before great bands of horsemen to the River of
Danubius, and also the Ambassadors of Austriche, and of other countries nere,
had declared in what danger they werein, they decreed to give their aid, so
as all the states of the Empire should aid, not with money but with soldiers.
Wherefore the.xxvj. day of July, ended this assembly, and al men prepared them
to war. At the Ides of Auguste, the Duke of Saxon, Prince electour, ended his
life, and John Fridericke his son did succeed him. When Solomon The death of
the Duke of Saxon.
the Emperor of Turks, was come to Belgrade, he takes the way on the left
hand, and attempteth the town and castle of Giunte in vain, being manfully
defended by Nichas Iurixe: after that he sent forth Captain Cason with fiftene
thousand horsemen to spoil the country, who invaded the country as far as
Lintzie above Uienne and destroying all far and nere, leaves no kind of
cruelty unpracticed, but in his return, he fell in to the lappes of our
horsemen, which were made out to keep him from the spoil, and so being fought
with The slaughter of yt Turkysh war.
in sundry places to his utter destruction, at the length him self was
slain. Solomon tournyng more and more on the left hand, marches unto Gratin
a town of Stiria. Which thing ones known, the Emperor being than at
Lintze, takes aduisement what was best to be done. At the last it was
determied, that he should encampe with his whole army at Uienna, abydyng his
ennemie there.

Thus in fine Solima^ retyreth, without any notable exploict done. The Emperor
had entreated the French king for aid, but he made him answer, as the
Emperor that time reported, that Germanye was able enough to resyste the Turk
alone.

The king of England also wrote again somewhat doubtfullye: The bishop of
Rome Clement, sent him aid by the conduicte of Hipolitus a Cardinal of the
house of Medices. The Swycers being requested by the Emperor, would not for
all that styre one foot. This year was seen a blasyng Star in Septembre and
Octobre, before A blasyng Star.
the son rising. After the Turk was retired with his army, the Emperor
mislykyng their advise, that thought good to pursue the enemy, discharges
his army, for that winter was at hand, and from Uienne took his journey into
Italy. And being at Mantua, he appoints in his letters written to the states
of the Empire, that his The Empe. goes into Italy.
brother king of Romans, shall govern the common wealth in his absence, he
was for weighty causes gone in to Italy, and there would treat with the
bishop of Rome, concerning a counsel, as it was decreed at Ratisbone: He
wylleth all men therefore to maynteyne the peace which was of late
proclaimed, and be as obedient to his brother as they would be to him self.
Departing from thence to Bononie, he entered into talk with Clement the
seventh, deuysynge among other things of Religion and a general counsel. He
makes also a legue with him, and with the resydue of the Princes in Italy, in
words to maintain the peace and quiet of Italy. But in very deed to keep
out the French men.

The Ambassadors of the French king, were sore against it, but the bishop
admonished them not to be so ernest, privily signifiyng that it should not long
endure, for the Emperor had brought with him a great nombre of Spanyardes,
which the bishop would feign have dispatched out of Italy. And for this cause
made the league, obser(...)g the The Pope serves the time.
occasion of time. The Emperor shortly after sailed into Spain in the month
of March: And not long after that the bishop of Rome sends a legate into
Germanye, Hughe Rangon bishop of Rhegio: And when he came to the Duke of Saxo^
accompanied with the Emperous Ambassador, he made a long oration, the effect
whereof was this. How after much and long conference had between the bishop The
Oration of the Popes Ambassad. to the Duke of Saron.
and the Emperor, about the controversy that is in Religion, in fine they
concluded, that for the remedy thereof there is no way better tha^ a general
counsel, whereof they perceived, the Princes of Germany to be also very
desirous. And this to be the cause of his message, even to declare unto him and
the other Princes, how both the bishop and the Emperor are determined to have
a counsel free and common for all men, such as the old fathers were
accustomed to have in times The Popes policy.
past, whose minds undoubtedly were governed by the holy ghost, provided
always that such as shall repare thither, make faithful promise to observe
the decrees thereof, for else should all their labor be spent in vain, if they
should make laws which none would observe and keep: As concerning a place
both for wholesome air and plentye of victual commodious, the bishop thinks
either Placence or Bononie not unmeet for the purpose, or else Mantua, which is
a city of the Empire, nere unto Germany, of a goodly situatio^ and plentiful
of all things necessary, of the which three it shall be lawful for them to
chose one: Whereunto if the king of Romans he and other Princes of Germany,
would make some reasonable answer: Than the bishop consulting also with
other kings, would call the same within this half year, to begin within one
year after, to the intent such as dwell very far of, may prepare the^ selves
to take their journey.

When he had spoken this and more, he delivers certain Articles comprysed in
writing to the Prince Electour from the bishop of Rome. Afterward the
Emperors Ambassador speaks on this wise. For as much as in all former
assemblies, the reco^ciliation of religion The Oration of the Emperors Amb.
has been hitherto attempted in vain, and is supposed that by a counsel the
matter might be pacified: therefore has the Emperor of late obtained that same
of the bishop of Rome (that is to say) that it be holde^ after the same manner,
time and place as his Ambassador has declared. And therefore is he sent of the
Emperor, to bear witness that the bishop of Rome is content to have a
counsel, and because his Ambassador has spoken sufficientlye of the whole
matter, he needs to say no more, but to desire him to credit his tale, and
make him a friendly answer. The Duke of Saxon says, that because the matter
is weighty, he will take delyberation, this was at Weymer. After a few days
the Duke answers, that where the Emperor and the bishop have agreed upon a
counsel, he is exceadinge glad, The Duke of Saxons answer.
for the state of the common wealth does chiefly require such a one as
oftentimes the Emperor has promised the Germans, wherein ye cause may be
duly examined, according to the prescripte of Gods word. Which if it might
be, he would nothing doubt, but that all things should go well: he will both
pray unto God to grant this and also admonish the people under his
jurisdiction to do the like: he will apply his whole study hereu^to, and move
his fellows also to be careful for the same: he would be glad moreover to
make a present answer, but there be many others of the same religion, who with
his father Duke John, professed the same doctrine in the assembly at Auspurge
before the Emperor, so that he can not answer of him self alone, without
making them privy, neither is it expedient for the cause so to do. For better
it is that the same be done by common assent. And for as much as the Emperor
and the bishop the last winter in their letters written to the states of the
Empire from Bononie, put them in hope of a counsel, therefore did he and his
fellows appoint a day, the.xxiiij. of June, to mete at Smalcalde, to consult
of the whole matter: wherefore he desires the^ not to be offended with this
differment of time, for so sone as his fellows mete at their day prescribed,
they shall have answer either by Ambassadors or by letters shortly after: And
he would through Gods grace so demean him self, that not only this present age,
but also the time to come, should perceive right well that he wyshed for nothing
more, tha^ that the pure religion and doctrine, and peace, not only of Germany,
but of the whole common wealth of Christendom, might also floriche, and that the
Emperor his chief sovereign might have his due honor and dignity.
Afterward when his fellows were come, with good deliberation The Prote.
answer to the Pope and Emperor.
they framed an answer by common assent in their letters the last of June.
How they gave great thanks to the Emperor, which for Gods glory and
preservation of the common wealth had taken so much pains of a good zeal
they doubted not. And therefore pray God so to confirm and direct his mind to
yt end, that the truth may be set forth and embraced. And false doctrine,
wicked worshipinge, and rites abolyshed, and that all errors being clean
weded out of men's minds, Gods true service, and other godly virtues, may
again take place: For they chiefly desire a counsel wherein the matter that is
in controversy, may duly and orderly be decided. Such a counsel also the
Emperor has promised long since, and that in all assemblies of the Empire,
with great deberation has been decreed, to be kept in Germanye. Whereof sprang
the dissension of Religion.
For all this dissension sprange up first of that well, that certain impudent
persons ouermuche extolled indulgences and pardons. At which time also other
errors were perceived and detected. And all be it that bishop Leo condemned
this doctrine, which brought those errors to light, yet have they hitherto
impugned that condempnatio^ with the testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles.
And therefore has a counsel ben always thought most needful, as well of
other Princes and states of them, wherein the cause might be examined and openly
tried, what is true and what is false: for that they saw how many things
were crept into Religion, which were to be reformed. And therefore in the
assemblies of the Empire, it was decreed, that there should be a free and a
christian counsel, either of all nations, or else of the province of Germany:
by those especial words, lest that either the sentence of the bishop, or the
force and power of any other man, should be prejudicial to the cause. Again
that in all this cause judgment should be given, not after the bishops
decrees and opinions of Scholemen, but according unto holy Scripture. For if
any man's power should be of more force than the Scriptures, than due
examination, who doubts. But that he that should contend against the
bishop, should lose his labor, and strive against the stream: Wherefore not
without great considerations it has been decreed that the counsel should be
holden in Germany: And the Emperor also content it should so be, but now
these requests of the bishop to be utterly against the decrees of the Empire,
confyrmed by the seals of the Emperor and the other Princes. For all be it he
speaks of a free council, yet doubtless he intends an other thing, wha^ How
a free counsel is to be understand
he goes about to have kings and Princes bounden to him: For in case he
would have it free, what should this obligation need? But now seeing that he
is wholly bent this way, certainly this is his purpose, that under the name of a
counsel, he may maynteyne his power and authority that no man shall
reprehende his faults and errors, or if any do atttempte it, that he shall
not escape unpunished. They know not what other men will do, but surely this
demand of his, is written in such sort that it rather makes them afraid
of a counsel, than provoke them to it: for who would bind him self after
this sort, especially being not yet known, what shall be the order of the
counsel, the form and manner: whether the bishop will have his adherentes to
bear there most authority, or whether the controversies shall be determined
according to the holy Scriptures, or after the traditions and laws of men
grounded upon no Scripture at all. The liberty of the Counsel, is also
restrained, in that he will have it kept after the old accustomed manner.

They do not refuse the former counselles that are consonant to the
Scryptures, but such as have been in our time or a little before, The counsels
are swarued from their old purity.
which have attributed more than reason would to the bishop of Rome and decrees
of men, far differing from the ancient counselles: therefore where he says
it shall be after the old accustomed manner, this is his craft and policy,
that there shall not be that lybertye of speech and geuinge of sentences, as
they both desire, and also the cause requires, but that judgment shall be
given according unto his laws and usurped power, which he takes upon him,
as by certain of the last cou^selles it is manifest: but by this usage and
hadling of matters, can neither the churches be pacified, nor the troubled
conscience quieted, but are brought into further darkness and bondage: wherefore
seeing that the bishop has not as yet satisfied the requests of the Emperor
and states of the Empire, they ernestly desire, that Caesar considering The
Empe. part to d(...)d Religion.
the weightines of the cause, which concerns the universal common wealth,
and all nations would see, that the matter might be handled indifferently: For
this is his office and duty, and this may he do by the laws. When in deed
the bishop impugneth the truth: for it is to be forseen and provided, that the
plaintiff or defendau^t be not also judge in the cause. For all nations have
great hope in this counsel, and do The Pope is plentife, defendau^t and judge.
both wyshe and pray, that at the last men's consciences (troubled and sore
afflicted with doubtful dissentio^) may be made free, set at liberty, and
taught the way of salvation. For these many hondreth years has not been so
much contention about so weighty matters as is at this present. And this
strife aryseth of sundry errors and vices, which have spronge long before
our time: But and if men be disceaued of their expectation, and shall have no
such council as has been promised, what sorrow and grief that thing will
be to men's hearts, it is easy to conjecture. Again if the bishop shall refuse
the dew examination and trial of the matter, it is to be feared lest the
common wealth and state of the church, shall be tourmoyled with sorer tempests
tha^ it has been hitherto: But where as the states of the Empire, have in all
their assemblies co^descended upon an upright counsel, they distrust not, but
they will persevere also in the same, utterly refusing the snares The Popes
snares.
and bonds, wherewith the bishop intends craftly to catch the^, trusting
that other kings and Princes will do the like. For the bond that he goes
about, is full of craft and deceitfulnes, neither can there be true judgment,
unless the minds of all men be frank and free: so that if he proceed thus,
and hold the counsel after his own pleasure, they will commit the whole
matter unto God, which doubtless will defend his own cause and doctrine. How
be it in case the matter should so come to pass, that the bishop should be
permitted so to do, they would take further aduisement, what were tha^ nedeful
to be done: And if perchance they shall be su^moneth and se that they shall be
able to do any thing for the glory of Gods holy name, they will come thither by
saufe co^duict, wha^ they are made well assured, or send their Ambassadors to
propounde what soever the necessity of the cause shall require, nevertheless
under that condition, that they will in no wise admytte those requests of the
bishop, nor acconsente to any counsel that is contrary to the decrees of the
Empire: For they can not see how this interprise of the bishop, can make for
the contynuall peace of the church and the common wealth: Neither is it also
semelye for him so to do, in case he would execute the office of a true
Pastor, which is to have a care for all men, and to feed them with the true
doctrine of Christ. Which The bishops office.
things standing thus, they desire them to carry this their answer to the
Emperor and the bishops, and that the Emperor whom they do reverently
acknowledge to be their chief sovereign appointed of God, do not take the same
in evil part, but that he would find the means that the counsel might be
had according to the decrees of the Empire, and that the whole controuesie may
be decided by virtuous men, and nothing suspected. For certainly this
appertains to his commendation and virtue, to employe al his power and
authority to the advancement of true doctrine, and not to the establyshynge
of their cruelty, which now these many years have persecuted innocent
persons, only for the profession of the Gospel, and wholesome doctrine. For the
residue they commit all that ever they have unto the Emperor, neither is
there any other thing, which they will not be glad to do for his sake. At the
same time with king Ferdinando, was the bishops Ambassador Peter Paul
Uerger, whom I spoke of in Uergerius.
the former book. And because the bishop of Rhezo was an aged man and sickly,
Clement commanded Uerger, that in case any impediment happened unto him, he
should supply his rowme: but he gives him an especial charge, that he bear
always in memory what his mind and will is, touching the counsel: Let him
look therefore that in no wise he do pass the bounds of his commission, no
not one finger breadth, nor that he drive not him to such an exigent, that he
must of necessity keep a counsel, though king Ferdina^do would never so feign
have it so, and urged The Pope sleeth the counsel.
him straightly thereunto

The nynth Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the nynth Book
GEorge Duke of Saxon marketh such as favored the Gospel, and accuses Luther
to the Electour of Saxony his cosyn. Pope Element meting the French king at
Marseilles, gives his Niece in marriage to Henry Duke of Orleaunce. The Dake
of Wirtenberge, driven out of his country. Henry the eight king of England,
puts away Queen Katherine his wife, and forsakes the Pope. The Pageaunt of
the spirit of the graye freers of Orleaunce, is recited. The Lantgraue
recouereth the Duke dome of Wittemberge. The agreement between king Ferdinando
and the Duke of Saxon, and the articles of peace betwixt Ferdinando and
(...)ich Duke of Wirtemberge, are rehearsed. Clement dies. Paul of the house
of Fernese, succedeth. persecution at Paris, by reason of certain placardes, the
king pourgeth him self to the Germaynes therefore. The Emperor takes the
city of Tons. Moore and the bishop of Rochester, are beheaded. Pope Paul by
his legate Uergerius sommoneth the counsel of Mantua, wherefore the
Protestauntes metyng at Smalcalde, send their advise in wrytinge. The Lord
Langey being sent thither by the king of France, solliciteth them to a league,
and debated diverse matters: where unto the Protestauntes made answer. The king
of England also sent thither, to declare what would be the end to attend
for such a counsel. The league of Smalcalde is renewed, into which are newly
admitted sundry Princes and Cities.

When they had made this answer, they appointed divines, and lawyers, to
delyberate upon the action for the counsel to come, and determined to set
forth the bishops answer in prynte, and communicate the same to foreign kings
and nations. Also to send Ambassadors to the Judges of the chamber, who
contrary to the Emperors proclamation, granted out process against certain, in
causes of Religion, whose judgment, unless they surceased they would refuse.
Moreover to send an Ambassade to the Archebyshop of Mentz, and to the
Palsgraue, which were intercessours: And last of all to report unto the
Emperor the whole matter in writing. I have told you oftener than ones, how
Duke George of Saxony, bare malice to Luther privily, and hated his doctrine
The craft of Duke George to find out the Lutherians.
openly. And where as he understood that diverse of his subjects did hold
opinion, that they ought to receive the Lords supper after the commandment
of Christ, he charged the Ministers of his churches, to give unto all such as
after the old custom at Easter, confessed their sins, and receive the
Sacrament after the bishop of Romes law, certain tokens, which they should
afterward deliver unto the Senate, to the intent it might be known, who were
of the Romyshe, and who were of Luthers opinion. So were there found in
Lipsia, which is the head Town of that country, to the number of Luthers
counsel.
lxx. without tokens. They had consulted with Luther before, what was needful
to be done: Who wrote unto them, that such as believed certainly how they ought
to receive the whole supper, should do nothing against their own conscience,
but rather suffer death: Wherefore being thus encouraged, they stick unto it,
and when the Prince called them before him, giving them two months respite to
deliberate, and they would not alter their purpose, they were bannyshed the
town. Luther in his letters to them of Lipsia, called Duke George the Apostle
of Satan, which thing bread much trouble: For Duke George did accuse him
before his cosyn the Electour of Saxon, how he had not only rayled on him, but
had also styred up his subjects to rebellion. The Prince Electour in his
letters charged Luther withal, and among other things says, that unless he
can make his purgation herein, he must of necessity punyshe him. Wherefore upon
this occasion, Luther writes a book, wherein he confuteth this accusation,
declaryng how he gave them counsel not to resist their Prince, Luthers
purgation.
commanding them not to do wickedly, but rather to suffer death or exile,
which concerns no rebellion. For that is to be ascribed unto them that
teach how the Magistrate should be resisted by force of arms, and they are
sedicious in deed, of whom also Peter the Apostle has prophesied, but this
belongs to the profession of the Gospel, to be condemned as seditious:
Christ him self was for this cause put to death most unworthy, as though he
would have been king of Jews, Christ was called seditious.
and have made the people to rebelle against the Emperor.

After to the same book, he adioyneth an epistle, wherewith he does comfort
those banyshed men of Lipsia, admonishyng the^ to take their exile patiently,
and also to give God thanks which has granted He comfort the eri^es.
them his constancy of mind, and perseverance. I showed you of the league
concluded, between the Emperor and Clement the seventh, but when the Emperor
was returned into Spayn, Clement at the request of the French king took
shipping and arrived at Marceilles in harvest time: and for the more intier
friendship, he marries his niece Pope Clement comes to Macilles.
Katherine Medices, unto Henry the kings son Duke of Orleans, a young
Prince of fiftene years of age. And because the occasion serves, I purpose
here to speak a little touching ye house of Medices. and Syluester, Euerarde,
and John, were the first accounted of that name, which were all Senators of
Florence: but the first that ennobled that house was Cosmus, who was the
rychest merchant, not only of his own city, but also of all Italy. His son
Peter had two sons, Laurence, and Julian. And Julian had a son borne after
he was dead, called July, who was afterward Clement the seventh. Not
withstanding that they report diversely touching his birth: Lawre^ce had the
sons, Peter, Julian, and John. Who was made bishop of For many suppose him a
bastard.
Rome, Leo the tent: Julian had no children. Peter expulsed out of Florence,
and at the lenght drowned in the mouth of Lyre, by reason of a tempest, left a
son named Lawrence, who married Galla of the house of Bolonois, and by her
had this Katherine, of whom here mention is made. Clement which made his abode
at Marseilles, a month and somewhat more, to gratify the king and his nobles,
made four french Cardinals, whom he perceived to be most in favor with
the A consecrating of Cardinals.
king. Odet Chastilion, Philip Bolon, Claude Gifrie, and John Uenerie, bishop
of Lisiens. No man doubted but this affinity pretended an alteration of the
state of Italy, and many marueled at the vniqualitie of the marriage: In so
much that Clement him self, as the report Unmete marriage.
goes, was doubtful, and would not believe that they meant good ernest, before
the marriage was solempnised. Within a few months after, the Lantgraue goes
to the French king, the cause whereof was The Lantgraue goes to the French
king. Duke Ulrich expulsed
this. In the year of our Lord. 1519. Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, was driven
out of his country by the confederatours of the Sweuicall league, for taking
of Rutelyng a town imperial, which was in confederacy with them. Which
Province first the Emperor had of the rest, and after in the division of the
inheritance, Ferdina^do received it of the Emperor. In the assembly at
Auspurg, certain princes were peticioners that the Duke which had been eleven
years in exile, might tha^ be restored: But it was in vain, for the Emperor
reciting the causes from the beginning, for which he was exiled, did create
his brother Duke, there openly of that country. Wherefore the Lantgraue being a
dear friend, and a nere kinsman to Duke Ulriche, thought to attempt some thing
at this present: but being disapoynted by certain, which had promised their
aid, he differred the matter, until better opportunity served. And now in
the Emperors absence, considering how the Sweuicall league made for eleven
years, was dissolved, he goes into France, and lays to pledge the Country
of Mount Pelicarte, unto the king for a sum of money, in the name of The
Lantgraue boroweth monye of the French king.
Duke Ulriche, upon condition that if he redeem it not within three years, to be
than the inheritance of the realm of France. Besides this some of money, the
king also promised him to lend him another some, in hope that the land should
not be redeemed. At this time fortuned a wonderful alteration in England, and
the occasion was this. Henry A great alte ratio^ in England.
the seventh king of England, had two sons, Arthur and Henry. Arthur married
Katherine daughter to Ferdinando king of Spain, diyng without ishewe. Henry
the father, who coueted much that this alliance with the Spanyarde might
continue, by the license of the bishop of Rome July the second, deuyseth to
marry this Katherine to his other son also, which was king after him, who
departed the year of grace. 1509. Wherefore Henry the eight of that name, after
he had married her, his father being dead, and he now of many years King
Henry.
sufficiently establyshed in his kingdom, propounds this scrupulositie of
his conscience, to certain bishops, and calls in question, whether it were
lawful to marrye his brothers wife, and of long time abstayned from her
company. The bishops having private talk with the Queen, by the kings
assignement, declare unto her, that the bishop of Romes license was herein
neither good nor lawful. She answers that it is to late now to examyne the
license, which so long since they had allowed. She had diverse times
miscarried of child, and brought forth none that prospered, saving one
daughter called Marie. The bishop of Rome commits the hearing of the matter
unto two Cardinals, Campegius, whom he sent into England, and the
Cardinalle of York. After long and much debatyng when the king was put in
hope from Rome, that sentence should be given on his side, Campegius in manner
at the same instant, that judgment should have passed by the bishop of Romes
admonyshement, The inconstancy of Pope Clement.
began to draw back, and find delays. The cause whereof, as men suppose, was
that through the death of the Duke and captain Lawtrech, and destruction of
the French army about Naples, and that Androwe de Aurie, the most expert
man of the sea, forsakyng the French king, was fled unto the Emperor. All the
which things chanced so at the same time, that the bishop was afraid to
offend the Emperor, being nephewe to Queen Katherine, which had such lucky
success in all his assayes in Italy. Wherefore Campegius in fine returned
without any thing determined, wherewith the king took excedyng much
displeasure. Nevertheless, lest it should appear that he should do anythyng
unjustly, the king sent into France, Italy, and Germany to inquire the
opinions of all universities. And the most part consented to the king, and
emonges other the divines of Paris, The universities of Paris and others.
approved the king by the university Seal, and as it was thought were
lyberally rewarded therefore. But among others of the queen's maids, there was
one of an excellent beauty, called Anne Bolen, whom the king began to
fantasy, in so much as men might easelye queen Anne loved the Gospel.
perceive that he intended to marry her to his wife. When the Cardinal of
York perceived this, which was chief about the king, and as they say,
author of the diuorsement, he changed his purpose, admonyshyng the bishop of
Rome by his letters, that he should not approve the diuorsement: For than
should an other succeed Queen Katherine, which was infected with Luthers
opinions. Which thing when the king understood by his Ambassador that was
ledger at Rome, he was sore offended. And not long after for this and other
things which he had practiced in (...)e, where he was Chauncelour of the
Realm, and had three of the best bishop(...)hes, York Duresme and Wynchester,
first he displaced him from his office and after takes away two of his
byshoprikes: And in conclusion, what time he leading a private life at home,
had spooken certain words that were arrogant, and importing a desire of
reuengement: the king sent Sir William kingstone Captain of the guard, to
discharge his house, and bring him to London: but falling in to a vehement
(...)ixe by the way he dyed, and was buried at Lecester. But the bishop of Rome
to the The death of Cardinal Woolsey.
intent Campegius might have some excuse to depart, revoked the suit into his
own hands. And perceiving that the marriage of queen Anne would be to him
prejudicial, he warns the king full often, and goes about also to fear him
with threateninges, that he should leave of his enterprise. But when he could
not prevail, to please the Emperor, he gave sentence with his a(...)t
Katherine, this year the.xxiij. of March, where as the king had a year
before married an other, forsakynge Katherine, and proclaiming his daughter
Marie a bastard. The Lady Mary a bastard.
But after he perceived, that sentence was given against him, he conceived a
mortal hatred against the bishop. And immediately makes a law, whereby he
declares him self to be head of the church through out England, abolishyng
the bishop utterly, and commands under pain of death (and makes it
treason) if any man ascribe unto the The kings hatred against the Pope.
bishop of Rome the supremacy: he denies also the yearly pension, which was
wont to be given to the bishops Collectour. And with most weighty words
enacteth, that from henceforth no monye be conveyed to Rome: and this did he by
the consent of the whole nobility and commons of the Realm, by order of the
high court of parliament. Fraunces the French king, was thought to have
furthered very much this diuorcement to the intent he might thus clean with
draw him, from the frendshyp of the Emperor, concerning the trybute paid to
Rome, thus it stands. Inas king of Britane, about Inas king.
the year of our Lord, five hundredth and forty, for the opinion of Religion
and devotion, made the Realm tributory to the bishop of Rome, as it is leaft
in memory, in ioynyng every house to pay a penny. Wherefore the bishops had
their Collectours continually there to gather this annual stypende, called of
the common people Peter pence. The bishops collectour at this time, was Peter
Uan, who returned not to Rome, but remained still in England. And where as
this money had been continually paid from that time, unto these our days,
king Henry first of all men, made a restrainte thereof, and an inhibitio^ The
conte^tion between Erasmus and Luther.
that it should be paid no more. You have heard how Erasmus and Luther wrote
one against the other of free will, in the fourth book: And this year their
contention began a fresh. And Luther taking an occasion by one of his friends
epistles, charge Erasmus sore, as though he should call the christian
Religion in doubt, mock it, and condemn it: And also alledgyng certain places
of his own works, goes about to prove the same, and shows that in his
writing he is ambiguous, and with his eloquence practyseth a kind of Tyraunye.
And for as much as in Godly things, he trifleth and dalieth thus with
doubtful words, where as he could and ought to speak more plainly, he
aduoucheth that all things ought to be construed against him. Whereunto Erasmus
afterward answered and that right sharply, for he feared most of al other
things, left his works should lose their grace and authority. About this
time in France, the Gray freers of The traged! of the Gray freers.
Orleaunce, wrought a terrible and a bloody enterprise: And thus the thing
was. The Mayers wife of the city provided in her will, that she would be
buried without any pomp or noise. For when any departs in France, the
Belmen are hired to go about the City, and in places most frequented, to
assemble the people with the sound of the bell, and than to declare the name
and title of the party deceased, also where and when they shall be butied, and
last to exhort the people to pray for the dead. And when the coarse is carried
forth, for the most The solemn burieng in France.
part these beggyng freers go with it all to the church, and many torches are
borne before it: and the more pomp and solempnitie is used, the more is the
concourse and gasyng of people: but this woman would have none of all this gere
done for her. Wherefore her husband which loves her well, followed her mind
herein, and gave unto the Graye freers in whose church, she was buried besides
her father and her grandfather, six crowns only for a reward, where as they
looked for a great deal more. And afterward, wha^ he cut down a wood and
fold it, the freers craved to have part thereof without money, and he said
them nay. This took they in marvelous evil part. And where as they loved him
not before, they devise now a way to be revenged, saying that his wife was
damned everlastingly. The workers of this tragedy, were Coliman and Stephen of
Arras, both doctors of divinity, and the first in deed was a coniurer, and
had all his trynkettes False doctors.
and furniture concerning such matters in a readiness. And they used the
matter thus. They set a young man yt was a Nouice, above over the vaulte of the
church: And when they came to mumble up their mattyns at mydnyght, after their
accustomed manner, he made a wonderful noise and shryking a lofte: than goes
this Colman to crossynge and coniuring: but the other above would not speak,
being charged to make a sign, to declare if it were a dume spirit, he
rustleth and makes a The dume Spirit.
noyce again: that was the sign and token. When they had laid this
foundation, they go to certain of the chiefest in all the city, that favor red
them most, and tell them what an heavy case is chanced at their house, yet do
they not utter what it is, but entreat them to take the pains to come to
their service at night. When they came and the service was begone, he that was
a lost made a great noise: Being demanded what he would, and who he was, he
signified that he could not speak: than is he commanded to answer to their
interrogatories by sign, there was an hole made, where by laying to his ear,
he might hear and perceive what the coniurer said. Than was there Questions
moved to yt dome spirit.
a table at hand, whereupon being asked a question, he clapped and beat, so
that he might easily be heard beneth. Wherefore he was first demanded whether
he were any of them, that have been buried there. After that rekening up their
names in order, whose bodies had there been buried, at the last they come to
the Mayres wife: there by a sign made, he shows that he is the spirit of
her. Than they questioned with her, whether she were dampened, and for what
deserte or offense? Whether it were for covetousness, pride, or letchery, or
that she did not the works of charity, or else for this new sprung up
heresye, and Lutheranisme? Furthermore what she meant by this noise and
disquietnes? Whether that her body being buried within holy ground, should be
dug up and carried to some other place? Unto all these things he answered
by signs in like case as he was commanded, whereby he affirmed, or denied any
thing, in so much as he stroke upon the table twyse or thryse.

And when he had thus sygnified that Luthers heresy was the cause of her
dampnation, and that her body must be taken up, the freers desire the citezens
that were present, to bear witness of such things as they had seen and heard,
and set their hands to it in writing. But they taking aduisement, lest they
should both offend the Mayor and bring them selves in trouble, refused to
subscribe. Notwithstanding the freers take the pyxe with the host, as they
term it, and all the relics of saints, and carry them to an other place,
and there say their Masses. Which thing is acustomably done by the bishop of
Romes law, what time a church is suspended, and must be hallowed again. And
when the bishops judge deputed, whom they call official, heard of this, he
came thither to understand the matter better, and associatynge him self with
certain honest men, commands them to conjure in his presence, and would have
chosen certain to go up into the Uault, to se in case any spirit does appear
there. But Steven of Aras, was sore against this thing, and exhorted them
instantly it might not be, saying that the spirit ought not to be molested.
And albeit the official did earnestlye urge them to conjure before him, yet
could he not bring the^ to it. In the meanetyme the Mayor making his friends
privy what he would do, went to the king and enfourmed him of the whole
matter. And for as much as yt freers, by reason of their privileges, refused to
come unto judgment, the king chose certain out of the court of Parliament at
Paris, to examine the matter, and gave themfull authority. The same did also
Anthony Prate Chauncelour, and the Cardinal that was the bishop of Romes Legate
in France. Wherefore having no exception, they were carried to Paris, and
constrained to make answer: but they would confess nothing. Yet were they
kept a part, The game prayers called to paris
and the Nouice which Fumeus a Senator, had at home with him, being often
times examined, would utter nothing, fearyng, lest he should after be
murdered of them, for sclaundering their order: but when the judges had
promised him that he should escape free, and should come no more in the Freers
hands, he declares the whole matter in order, and brought before the others,
aduouched the same. They albeit they were convicted, and in manner taken with
the deed, yet refused their judges, and bragged of their privileges: but that
was in vain, for they were condemned in open judgment, that they should be
carried again to Orleaunce, and put in prison. And afterward The
conde^pnation of fall (...)rs.
brought openly to the Cathedral church, and so to the place of punishment,
where malefactors are executed, and there should confess their own
wyckednes.

But even at the same time chances apersecution against the Lutherians, which
was the cause that the same sentence albeit, it was to gentle for so great an
offense, was not put in execution. For because the Persecution against
Lutherians.
name of the Lutherians was most odiouse, they feared, lest the punishment of
these men, should not have been so much thought dew for their offense, as
done to the reproach of the order: And what soever misfortune happened unto
them, many judged that the same would be a most pleasant sight, and
spectacle for the Lutherians. And this order of Franciscanes, was of the common
people esteemed holy: And what time they were carried out of Paris, certain women
moved with pity, followed them unto the gate of the university, with many
tears and syghinges. After they came unto Orleaunce, and were bestowed in
several prysons, they began to boaste again of their liberties and
pryueleges, and at length after long imprysonment, they were discharged and
set at liberty, without any punyshement. Whylest they were prisoners, they
wanted nothing, but had all things ministered unto them aboundauntly,
especially of women. Had not these persecutions and fyrynges before mentioned,
let the thing, the king had determined, as in deed it was reported, to
pluck down all their house, and make it even with the ground.

But in the Romyshe kingdom were wont to be very many spyrites. Spirits in
the Popyshe kingdom.
For it was believed certainly that dead men's souls did walk after they were
buried: Wherefore they showed that either they were dampened, or else for a time
were tourmented, in the fire of purgatory, and would solicit their nerest
kynsfolkes and friends to sucour them. And most commonly required them, either
to perform their vows and pylgrimages, which they had behight to some saint
in their life time, or else to cause a trentall of masses to be said for the^.
Which thing increased maruelously the opinion of Purgatory, and brought the
mass in to high authority, and was to the priests gainful above measure.
But after that Luthers doctrine was spread abroad Luthers apt (...)o^ touching
the spirits.
and known, those spirits by little and little, vanyshed clean out of sight.
For Luther taught by the scriptures, how the souls of dead men were at quiet
rest, loking for the last day of judgment, and that such terrible noyses and
visions, were styred up by the devil, who lets none occasion slyppe to
confirm men's minds with idolatry and false opinions, and to quench the
benefit of our savior Christ.

When the Lantgraue had bargayned with the French king, in the beginning of
the spring time, he levied his army: And than writing their letters both unto
king Ferdinando, they declared the cause of their enterprise. And whylest
Ferdinando refers the matter to the trial of the law, they march forwards
with their army, and the fourtene day of May, chauncing to mete with their
ennemies, which were twelve thousand foot men, they shot of their
ordinance, and put them to flight besides the town of Lausene in the land of
Wirtemberge. The general of Ferdinando his army was Philip Count The victory
of the Lant.
Palatine, who at the same battle had his hele stryken of with a great piece.
In the chase many were drowned in the River of Neccar, where into they ran
headlong, for fear of their ennemies that pursued them. When the battle was
done, all men for the most part of the Dukedom of Wirtemberge, yielded them
selves to their natural Prince Ulrichus: Asperge situated upon a verey high
mountain standing alone, also Urach, Tubinge, and Nipha, all strong castelles
of nature in fine rendered also. Ferdinando the first of May, set forth a
proclamation, that no man should aid that faction, but that al men should
resist them to the vttermoste of their power, and had written to the
Protestauntes his several letters, touching the same matter. And likewise had
the Emperor done a little before, and openly no man did assiste them. And al
men marueled, to what end this stiring would grow to. About the time of this
war, the archbishop of Mentz, and George Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraues father
in law, sought the reconcilement of king Ferdinando, and the Prince Electour
of Saxon.

And at Cadamea town of Boheme, the last day of June saving one, they concluded
a peace with those conditions. For religion no force to be attempted, nor any
suit in the law commensed, and the same peace Conditions of peace.
that Caesar has made to be observed. Ferdinando in the Emperors place shall
bring to pass, that the Judges of the chamber shall surcease from al process
against the Protestauntes, among whom notwithstanding neither Anabaptists,
nor Sacramentaries, nor any other such like sects be comprehended. The Duke
of Saxon and his fellows shall acknowledge Ferdina^do for king of Romans,
and give him that title. Ferdinando shall again within a certain time devise so
with the Emperor, and other princes Electours, that a decree be made after
this sort. When time shall hereafter require to make a king of Romans,
during the life of the Emperor, that than the Electours do first assemble and
consulte, whether the cause be just and reasonable, and if it so appear, that
than they do proceade after the Tenure of the law Carroline. That which shall
be otherwise done, to be frustrate. And unless this decree be made within ten
months, than the Duke and his fellows not to stand bound to these
co^dicions: and that within the same time, the Emperor shall also confirm the
Dukes succession in the possessious of his father and progenitors: Ferdinando
shall also endeavor, that the Emperor do ratify such compactes of matrimony as
are betwixt the Dukes of Saxo^ and of Cleave. Whilst they treat of these
matters, they take in hand also an other peace making. And the Duke of Saxon
offers for the La^tgraue and the Duke of Wirtemberge, as their substitute,
that they shall ratify, what so ever they should agree upon. After much
debating, the Dukedom being wholly recovered, they co^dicioned thus. Ulrich
the Prince and his heirs Conditions betwixt Ferdinando and Duke Ulri.
males, shall hold the Dukedom of Wirtemberge of king Ferdinando as Archeduke
of Austriche, and so to be his wards and clientes, and if it fortune the house
of Wirtemberge to be without heirs males, than the Princes of Austriche to
possess that region, to hold the same of the Empire which they shall be
bounden thereunto. Ulriche to acknowledge Ferdinando for king of Romans, and
to make no league against him: That the Lantgraue, and Duke Ulriche restore
such goods, as they have gotten in this time of war, to their owners: that
they do constreyne no man to change his Religion: that it shall be lawefull
for such as are fled for fear or for shamefastnes to retourn home. And they
that list, to take their goods, and go where they will. The pieces of
ordinance, that were for the defense of Auspurge, shall remain to king
Ferdinando: the kings debtes, for his own private affairs, he him self shall
pay, but that which was employed for the commodity of the country, the Duke
shall answer: For such lands of the Dukedom, as are holden of the kingdom
of Boheme, the Duke and his heir shall hold still of Ferdina^do and his heirs
as kings of Boheme: That Philip the Palsgraue, and the residue of the
prisoners, be let go without ransom: that the Lantgraue and the Duke shall
submit them selves, and ask pardon of king Ferdinando either in their own
persons, or by their deputes, and than Duke Ulriche to receive full state and
possession of king Ferdinando: Ferdina^do shall entreat that the Emperor will
also forgive the^, for the charges of the war, nothing to be required on
either part: that the Lantgraue and the Duke, shall send unto Ferdinando, out
of their arms, five hondreth horse men, and three thousand fotemen, which
shall immediately go to the sege of Munster, of their cost and charge, there to
promise their fidelity to Ferdinando by an oath, and if need required to serve
him for a three months. For at the same time was Munster a town of
Westphalia, kept by the Anabaptists, beseged, as hereafter shall be declared.
Wherefore king Ferdinando required of the^ this aid, for the winning of the
town. When the Duke had by this mean, recovered the country of Wirtemberge,
and made his peace with Ferdinando, before the year was ended, he repaied the
French king his money, and recouereth the possession of Mompelicarte. And the
lone money, the king forgave The liberal(...)tie of yt french king.
him, which was no small sum. This peace making did Peter Paul Uerger the
bishops legate, took not very well. And in Clements name, did expostulate sore
with king Ferdinando, that he had taken Luther and princes into his amity. And
he answered that he did it in consideration of the time, for the avoiding of
further trouble. What time Duke Ulriche was expulsed, his son Christopher,
being a child of.iiij. years old, was first brought up under the tuicion of
his uncle William Duke of Bauer, after that he was removed from thence to
Insprouek a town of Ferdinandos, in the county of Tirol. And when after the
Turks retire, as I said before the Emperor returned into Italy, he through
the motion and advise of his friends, co^ueyeth him self out of the Emperors
train, and repareth again into Bauier. For being the sole and only heir, this
was thought to be the devise yt he should have been lead into some strange
country, and made religious: but after that his father was restored, he went
into France, and attended upon the french king. When the matter was pacified,
the La^tgraue sent a messager with letters to the Emperor in Spain, and the
conditions of peace in writing The Lantgraues letters to the Emperor.
craning pardon for him self and for duke Ulrich, and from henceforth promises
al due obedience for him and for the other. This was in the month of July: And
in Septe^bre following, the Emperor answers him by letters from Ualentia,
how that he understood the whole matter already The Empe. answer.
by his brother Ferdina^do: unto whom he has written his mind in this
behalf, and now shows him more by his Ambassador, by who^ he may understand
of his clemency and desire of peace and quietness. Wherefore he does admonish
him to perform in deed the things which he has promised in words, using
him self obedie^tly, and eschewig all troublesome counsel. During the wars
of Wirte^berge, Fraunces Sfortia married yt Emp. Nece.
Sfortia, duke of Milla^, takes to wife Christine, ye daughter of Christierne,
king of Denmarck captive, the Emperors nece by his sister. The French king
would have moved war against him: But the death of Clement the seventh, with
whom (as I said before) he had The death of Clement the seventh.
made a league, was supposed to have been the let and delay thereof. For he
being diseased in the stomach, when after the advice of his physician Curtius,
he had changed his diet, being an aged man, dies in this month of Septembre,
and had to his successor Paul the third Paul ye.iii.
surnamed Farnesius, which shortly after, made Alexander his young Nephewe by
his Bastard Son Peter Aloise, and his Nephewe Ascanius, by his bastard
daughter Constance, both Cardinals.

After that he calls home Peter Paul Uerger out of Germany, to understand
the state of the country: And he consulteth with his Cardinals, how the
counsel might be differred, till such time as by their privy practyse, they
might find the means to set the Emperor and other kings together by the
ears. In conclusion they agreed to send Uerger again into Germany, to make
promise of a general counsel, and that he should so handle the matter, that
their craft and subtlety were not suspected, as it was in Clementes time: And
Paul was (...)r than Clement.
that he should aduertyse the princes how the counsel should be holden at
Mantua, and there to entreat of the conditions: And that he should chiefly
mark what form of disputation the Protestauntes would seek to have, that ones
known, he might after prescribe unto them such laws, as he knew they would
not come there for the same. He had also commanded him, to incense the hearts
of Princes The practice of Prelates.
against the king of England, whose Realm he intended to give away for a
pray, to him that could get it: And that he shoud see more over whether that
Luther and Melancthon, might through any means be brought from their
purpose. Also certain Cardinals and bishops were chosen to devise, some
refourmation for the Clergy, which in fine was made and puplished, as in
place shall be declared.

King Ferdinando was causer, that Paul sent again Uerger, saying that he was
a very fit man for the purpose. At this time Andrewe Gritte.
was Andrewe Gritte, Duke of the state of Uenyse, a man of great authority for
his singular wisdom and experience. Who what time he lived at Constantinoble,
had a bastard son called Lewys: which Lewys his son.
being there brought up from his yougth, where he had a good wit, and by his
syngular industry had attained to great riches, and through his lyberalitie
had gotten many Friends first by the gentlemen of the court, and after by the
means of Ibrain Bascha, who at that time might do all things alone: he was
so well known with the Emperor Soliman, that he was also admitted unto his
private talk. Thus using the opportunity of time through the benevolence and
liberality Hongary.
of the great Turk, he came in to Hongary with great power and dignity, to
possess that part of Slauonie, that is next unto the borders of Uenife to his
own private use, and to keep the nether part of Hongary, whereof Belgrade is
chief, for the Emperor of ye Turks. He had a son named Anthony, bishop of
Quineueecclesia: whom bishop Clement purposed, for his father and gra^dfathers
sake, to have made Cardinal: But in the mean while that Lewys was in hope of
no less than a kingdom, and had in much reputation of all men: And that his
father was glad exceadingly of the good and lucky success of his Son, by
occasion of a grudge and a faction raised against him, he was taken by his
adversaries and beheaded, about the same time that Paul succeeded Clement. In
this mean time begins anewe persecution in France, against them that were
any thing suspected Persecution in France.
of Lutheranisme, whereof in deed the occasion was this. In the city of Paris
and certain other places, and even within the kings palace, about one time, in
the night season, sundry bills, were set up against the mass and other
poinctes of Religion: And straight ways inquyrie and search was made, and
many were apprehended, some by information, and some by suspicion, which after
they were racked, were brent alive and vnstrangled, which was terrible to
behold: For they being fastened to an engyne, and lifted up in to the air,
were The punishment of the Godly.
after let down into the fire from on high, and there fynged and skorched,
were hoysed up again: and at the length the hangeman should cut the cord,
and they fall down into the fire underneath them. And such also as were any
thing learned, had their tongues cut out, lest either they should utter the
cause of their death, or declare unto the people The cruelty of John Morin.
the sum of their doctrine. And for this business, was John Motine, the
Lieuetenau^t Criminell, a very mete minister: For as he could most craftily
smell and search them out, that were any thing at all suspected, so likewise
when he had found them in execution and extreme A book of marchau^ted.
punyshement, he passed in all extremity. Nevertheless at the same time came
forth a book in French without the name of the author, against Romyshe
merchants, tempered with mirth and gravity. And first he says how that
merchandise is a kind and trade of life, neither dishonest nor unprofitable
for the common wealth, so it be void of fraud and avarice. For of this kind
of men. Christ took his similitude what time he commanded that the talentes
received should be occupied that they might be made gainful. Which place in
deed is to be understand in a mystery: for nothing less becomes the
pastors and ministers of the church, than the lest suspicion of filthy lucre.
Notwithstanding almighty God being offended with the wickedness of men has
suffered to enter into his church, not only rich and welthy merchants, but
also thieves and murderers. For who will not call him a thief, that either
sells an othermans goods for his own, or counterfeited wares, for right and
true? Is not the bier foul disceaued? But this thing has chanced unto us
long since: For in stead of true shepeheardes, are crept in exceadyng
rauenyng wolves. And al be it that no man's wit or tongue is sufficiently able
to express their craft and subtlety, yet will I touch it a little. Wherefore
these merchants of whom I speak here, are crafty beyond Crafty
merchants.
all measure, and have so auaunced their traffic, that there is not so little
a corner any where, that they have not filled full of their stuff. And all this
through a pretensed kind of feigned holiness. In apparel they differ from the
rest, and for the most part are all shaven in the crown: Neither may any
others, than such as have the great beasts charact, or Balls mark, be
permitted to occupy that trade of marchaundyse. These only sell and sell
again, and change, and that Busy merchants.
at al times: For other merchants cease from their busynes upon holy days,
especially on principal feasts: Again they follow and occupy for the most
part, but one kind of marchaundyse as Woulles or Sylkes, or else Corn or Wine,
or else Cattle, or Metal, or Grossery wares: But these merchants let slip
no time of the year, and they occupy al manner of wares, and nothing escapes
their hands, another men, women, nor young children, as well borne as unborn.
For they reap again of all things in general: Unto their lust serves
heaven and hell, the earth and time it self, yea in all creatures lyuinge, and
without life, wine, bread, oil, flax, milk, butter, chese, water, salt,
fire, and perfumes. Of all these things can they wrynge out gold and A
strange change.
silver, to the wonderful loss of people, both concerning their goods and
chiefly their soul, having infected and utterly extynguyshed the true
doctrine of God. What think you it not a point of a subtle merchant to sell
a thing and that very dear, whereof the bier has none other commodity, saving
only the sight of the thing? Other merchants, when they set forth their wares
to sell, are wont to say commonly, you shall see for your love, and by for
your money: but these do far otherwise. If any man depart, they are
streightwayes ready to demand of you, whether you will have the best
cross, and the best bear cloth when the corpse goes to burieng, or else yt
worste, or the best saving one: for as you shall choice, so shall you pay
accordingly. I beseech the what have thou for thy money, or what thing cariest
thou away besides the sight thereof? For they lay up their wares again, and
the next day sell it to an other for as much. It is a like policy, to
increase the price of the thing for the better apparel of the merchant, The
Price of the mass is derer some time after as the parso^ is.
for in case the abbot, or the bishop do say you a mass, it must cost more
than if a monk or a chaplayne say it. In the which thing in deed they
differ nothing from common harlottes, for the gayer the whore is, the derer she
sells her filthiness. But what pratty sleyght is it, to sell the self and
same thing at one instaunt to sundry men, and they never the wyser: especially
(...) such places where is great resort of people. There comes a man of
honor or worship into the freers church, and desires to have a mass, the
freer doucketh: and says by and by sire: And forth with an other craves the
same, and likewise the third, or more also, at the last comes he forth
disguysed, and when mass is done, takes the whole reward of every of them.
And think you this is nothing? This gere does not want a wily wit: And
for the most part you shall find, that they need little other thing to make
their profit of than craft and pollycie. It fortuneth that a poor woman
comes into the church, and sets up a candell before an image: my
merchant the priest is at hand, which fyngereth the candell, puts it out,
and sells the same to sundry others, one after an other. For all the sort of
them occupy wax, the poorer sort, as I have now told you, but the greatter
cobbes, in sealyng their letters and other writings of the which sort be
those that are commonly called Officialles, Commissaries, Seal kepers,
Notaries, and such other like. But that great Choploch which so far
exceadeth all others, that he places him self two degrees above God, for
where as God is called the od merchant.
Sanctus deus, he will be called Sanctissimus, that is to say, holy God, and
the other most holy father: he in deed uses no ware, but by a marvelous
artificial policy, thaungeth lead into gold, far exceadinge all the
Alcumisticall multipliers that ever were, again he sells hearts very dear,
namely read or purple, which after the buyers have ones gotten on their
heads, they are as brag and as proud as pecockes, and iette up and down in
all places, where is great resort of people, to show and set forth them
selves, and most commonly frequente the courts of kings, and Emperors,
with whom they are checkmate. For they have wonderful great prerogatives, and
may enjoy as many byshoprikes and benefices as they list, without any
charges or paymentes. And again they are of that number which are in election
to clyme to the highest degree and seat of dignity. After whose example, the
doctors of Louen, and of Paris, namely the Sorbonistes, do sell their cappes
also to the Batchelars of divinity, and of their charges, fare right
delicately. But here would I feign Pope John a woman.
know, for as much as John the eight of that name, was a woman, and delivered
of a child going a procession, in the third year of her byshopryke (I say)
I would feign know first, whether she were chosen by the virtue of the holy
ghost? Again whether her doings were to be approved and ratified, what time
she sold Cardinalshippes, byshoprikes, and Abbotshippes? Finally what is to be
thought of the priests mark, that she received. But I return to my purpose,
which is to declare that in all the whole world, is there not to be found,
more fine craft and subtlety, than is in these kind of merchants. Do we
not see how they have gotten into their hands, Empyres, kingdoms, countries,
cities and great possessions? Have they not oftentimes deposed Covetous
marchaunts
kings and Princes, spoiled them of their Realms and dominions, and brought
them into much mysery? And now are they of such force and power, that they
keep al these things by stronghand, Proud merchants.
and will tourmoyle heaven and earth together, rather than they will forgo or
lose one jot. Oh insatiable woulues: how right in times paste, have the
Prophets and Apostles, namely Paul and Peter, painted and set you forth in
your colors. Other merchants force no man to bye their wares: but these do
compel men, will they nyll they to bye. And if any do refuse their baggage,
they cry out upon him Heretic, to the fire with him. There dies a very poor
man, leaving behind him wife and children, not able to help them selves: A
pitiefull case surely, and the poor wydowe were worthy to be releued, but what
do they? They not only have no compassion upon her, but having an eye to their
pray, immediately after that they have mumbled up a few prayers, must have
money and good chere, and besides that the parson and vicar will have for a
mortuary, or a coarse present, the best thing that is about the house. But
what greater iniurye can be Theuishe marchaunts
done, than to sell a thing that is not his own, yea and to sell it unto
those that have most right to it, and to sundry men one thing. Tell me, I pray
the, who bought the belles and hanged them up? Unto who^ belongs the church
flower? Is it their patrimony? no forsouthe. Why than do they sell the ryngyng
of the belles, and the church flower, so dear and so oftentimes? Perauenture
they will say, it is the right of the church. I grant, but not of that
church, which Christ has washed, instituted, and justified, but of the same
wherein they walk, that is replenyshed with theftes, robberies, and all other
kind of vice. For Christ commands all these things to be given freely. But
it is a sport and a pleasant sight to see, how the Ravens will strive
among them selves for the carrion. For when any rich man is dead, Brawling
Freers.
by and by come they flockyng and swarming, gaping each man for his pray full
busely, especially those that are called beggyng freers. For the graye freers
contend with the Dominickes, and the white freers with the Austen, oftentimes
about the buriyng, a kind of people that is idle, sloughtful, and not only
unprofitable, but also very chargeable, and worthy to be whipped out of every
good common wealth. These things that I have said, can not be denied, and are
seen daily: and yet is this miserable world so assotted, and mortal men so
blinded, that they can not understand with what spyrite they are moved.

When a benefice or prebende is fallen (Lord God) what busy suite, what
gadding and prickyng up and down, what diligent inquisition Selling of
benefices.
is made to know the yearly value, what it is worth to be absent, and what
to be resident upon it, what profits arryse of the christenyng of children, of
marriages, pilgrimages, and relics of saints, and what may be levied of
buriynges, habites, and diriges, by legacies and last wills. But the most
advantage is gotten by such saints, as for some notable property and power
are sore feared, as saint Laure^ce, and S. Angry salutes.
Anthony, S. Roche, and such other angry saints, which must be pleased
with vows and great gifts. But oh ye kings and Princes, why do you wynke at
so wicked and detestable things? Why do you so long suffer so patiently, so
many great enormities? They will in deed refuse to be reformed by you, and yet
doubtless have you the rule over them, whether they will or no. For God has
given you the sword and authority to punyshe: And why do you not use the same
than, and be avenged of this most cruel kind of extortioners? God requires
this duty at your hands, which if ye do neglecte, he will not leave it
unpunished. Would to God you were as diligent in auauncing his glory, as they
are vigilante and circumspect in handlyng of their matters, for they let slyppe
none occasion. They keep so good watch, that Wyly merchants.
nothing can escape them, having as many eyes as had either Ianus or Argus. If
they here the sound of the bell, they run thither straight, if any welthie
person be sick, they put them selves in prease, and will never away till
they have their reward: At every marriage will they be, and must bless the
brides bed, and say over it certain prayers, chaste and holy men (I warrant you)
which live a sengle life most filthely, to the intent they may more at
liberty, play their parts in all naughtines. And this which I have spoken
here of marchauntmen, concerns also merchant women called nuns, whereof
there be sundry orders. Idle N(...)
But it can not be expressed with words, what idolatry and wickedness, all this
rabble had induced. At the last arryse thou O God, and avenge thy self for the
glory of thy name, into whose league or society, no man ought to presume to
come. And where as this foresaid buchery, began in the month of Nouembre: In
January followyng, the king came to Paris, and to appease Gods wrath, he goes
a pilgrimage to diverse saints, with an incredible nombre and concourse of
people. They worship at Paris saint Geneuefa a virgin, above al other
saints. Whose image was now carried about with great po^pe, and solemn
procession. Which is never wont to be done, but in time S. Geneuefa yt gods
of Paris.
of extreme danger, when either Gods wrath is pacified, or that they must
fight a great battle or else when they fear great penury and skarsitie of
corn and wine. For than fly they unto her, as unto the last ancker, and only
port of their succor: And the people are persuaded, that her help was never
yet desired in vain, in so mutch as some will say, how God can do verey
mutche, but saynct Geneuefa is the savior of Paris. It is carried of four
butchers, by an old custom, which prepare them selves hereunto certain days
before, by fasting and prayer and there be officers appointed to make rowme and
way, which is not done without great pain. For when the image is borne
about, the people run unto it on every side with great devotion, and well are
they that may touch it with their fyngers end, or else with their cappe or
handkerchief, so that the thronge and prease of people is beyond all reason.
When mass was done, and the king had dyned in the bishops palace by our ladies
church in the presence The kings oration.
of his children, and the foreyne Ambassadors, and al his nobility, he made
an oration full of affections, testifying the inward sorrow, which he had
conceived of the presumption and naughtines of these wicked persons: Than
after he had made a long discourse concerning his obedience to the church:
he exhorted them all to beware of the pestiferous sect, for none should escape
without punyshement that was taken with the manner. And if he knew any part of
his own body infected with this contagion, he said he would tear it away,
least it should grow any further. But to make amends toward God, the same
day were syx brought forth, which being fastened to the engines, as before
is said, in sundry places, as the king should pass by home to his own
house, were burnt, the fire being kyndled at the same instaunt, that the king
should go that way by, and they beseching him of mercy and pardon. It is the
custom of France to do execution at after none: And there when silence is
proclaimed, are read the causes of his punyshemen: But when any man is
executed for heresy, The manner of execution in France.
if it be touching the justification of faith only without respect of works,
or against praying to saints, or if he have affyrmed that Christ only is the
bishop and advocate of mankind, or if he have eaten flesh on days forboden,
which is death with them, there is no such thing spoken of, but generally is
reported to have offended the divine Majesty, and been co^tumelious against
the virgyn Mary, and other saints, and to have broken the laws of our mother
holy church. An therefore the people believe that there is nothing more
hurtful, and wicked in The Lutherians are ab borred.
all the world than this kind of people: And it is commonly seen there, that
when they are burning in flammes of fire, the people will gnashe their teeth at
them, and even in the mids of their tourmentes, will curse and deteste the^ as
wicked and unworthy to look upon the son. And where as the Turks
Ambassadors were at the same time in France, and the king himself had heard,
that he was for this same cause, brought into hatred and suspicion throughout
Germany: And that this fyryng had offended many, the first day of February, he
addressed his letters unto all the Princes and states of the Empire, excusing
The French kings letters.
both the coming of the Turks Ambassadors into France, by the example of
others, which have sent and received Ambassadors from the Turk in like case:
And also the burning of Lutherians, saying that he was constrained to be
severe, against his own nature and will, by reason of the rashenes of certain
which under the pretense of Religion, intended the destruction of the common
wealth, and so excuses the matter as though it had been for rebellion, and not
for Religion, that these men were executed. At the first beginning of the
spring time, the Lantgraue went unto king Ferdinando, as in the year before
The Lantgraue.
it was agreed upon for a full reconcilement, and there found he Peter Paul
Uerger, newly come thither from Rome. Who upon this occasion did his message to
the Lantgraue, concerning the counsel before mentioned, but he taking
deliberation, made him none other answer. After yt Uerger traueling to the
rest of the Princes, applied his business with diligence. And a few months
after, the Lantgraue, Duke Ulriche also, went unto king Ferdina^de. For where
as it was conuenaunted that they should both come and ask him pardon, coming
at several times, it was easily granted. How beit, Duke Ulriche was sore
offended, both with the Lantgraue and also with the Duke of Saxon, that they
had consented that he should hold his lands of the house of Austriche, and
was of long time doubtful, whether he would ratify the peace made or no, at
the length by the persuasion of his friends, he went to Ferdinando, according
to the conuenauntes. In the month of April, the Emperor took shippinge at
The Emperor voyage into Barbaria.
Barchin, and transported his army into Barbary. And when he had won the
city of Tons, and taken the castle of Golete, he restored the king of that
country Muleasses, being of Mahumetes Religion, whom Barbarossa the Turks
admiral had before expulsed, byndyng him to pay him tribute, and after he had
fortified the Castle, with a strong garnyson, he sayleth into Sicilie. Unto
this war, bishop Paul, sent certain Galleis furnyshed, by the co^duicte of
virginie Ursine, and also did permit him to take tenthes of the clergy in
Spain. Barbarossa through our men's negligence and ignorance steppynge
Barbarossa.
aside escaped: And first he fled to Hippon, and from thence to Argiers, where
he repared his navy and returned to Constantinople.

In England were two notable men, John Fysher bishop of Rochester, and sir
Thomas Moore knight, both very well learned. For Rochestr and More beheaded.
the first wrote sondrye books against Luther, and Moore also, whilst he was
Chauncelour, which is the chiefest office there, extremely punished such as
were suspected to be of Luthers doctrine. They neither approved the kings
diuorseme^t, and much less the act of Parlame^t, which denying the bishop of
Romes supremacy, affirmed ye king to be head of the church of England:
wherupo^being both apprehended, where they perseuered obstinatly i^ their
opininio^, the year in ye month of July they were beheaded. The bishop of Rome
had made Rochester Cardinal, whylest he was prisoner in the Tower, which thing
was supposed Rochester Cardinal.
to have kyndled more hatred against him.

Afterward about the end of Octobre, Fraunces Sfortia Duke of Millan died
without issewe, which gave the occasion of a new The death of Sfortia.
war, as shall be showed hereafter. In the mean time the Emperor came out of
Sicilie unto Naples, and in his letters written the last day of Nouembre to
the Protestauntes, he said in deed that he would observe the peace of
Norinberge, notwithstanding he was informed how they had taken church goods
and did withholde the same, and when judgment was given, that they should make
restitution, they refused, alleging the pacification of Norinberge: which
appears unto him unreasonable, and can not but discontente and offend him.
About this time also went the prince Electour of Saxony unto king Ferdinando in
Austriche, and having dispatched his business, for the which he went thither,
in his return home at Prage, the chief city of Bohemy, met him the bishops
Legate, Peter Paul Uerger, who declared unto him his message touching the
general counsel, Uergerusto the Duke of Saxen.
which the bishop Paul intended (as he said) to hold at Mantua, free,
Godly, and lawful, without any conditions, whereunto al other Princes had
consented, for he had been with them all, namely in Germany. Wherefore if he
should now refuse it, men would suppose that nothing could content him.
When both the Emperor and king Ferdinando are willing with the thing and the
place: and the bishop so ernestly desires the same, that unless he bring it
to pass, he will doubtless be weary of his life. Therefore now the time
requires, that he should declare how much he loves the advancement of Gods
glory and the common wealth, willing him not to let pass this present
opportunity, which he should hardely at any time hereafter recover. And albeit
he would nothing further the counsel, yet nevertheless should it proceed,
and Christ they trusted would not fail them. Where unto the Duke of Saxon said,
wha^ he had devised with his fellows, The Dukes answer.
he would make him an answer, requiring him to deliver unto him such things as
he had spoken in wrytinge. Wherefore at the kale^des of Decembre exhibiting a
writing, he declares things more at large, and otherwise than he had spoken
before, how other Ambassadors were sent unto other kings, and he unto king
Ferdinando and the Princes of Germany, how Mantua is the place agreed upon by
the Emperor and other kings, and that Germany is full of Sacrame^taries,
Anabaptists, and such other sects, that it is to much danger for other
nations to keep a counsel emonges them, for they are for the most part
Frantic and without all reason. Again such as supposed, that the bishop
would give place in his right, that has been of so long time confirmed to be
far disceaued: And they also that believe how the Emperor can hold a
provincial counsel of Germanye, against the bishops will, are as much
abused. And where as they talk of a saufe conduicte and pledges for their
coming into Italy, there is no cause why it should so be: For Mantua is a
City of the Empire, nere unto Germany, and next the dominions of the Emperor
and the Uenetians, wherefore there is no danger. Finally he says how he will
go to king Ferdinando, abiding there for their answer. He had been Uergerus
spoke with Luther.
before in Saxony, and had spoken with Luther at wyttemberge. And in his
return to king Ferdinando, he met with the Duke coming from thence homewarde.

The Protestauntes were appointed before to mete at Smalcalde the sixte of
December, for other matters. Wherefore the.xxi. of the The answer of the Prot.
same, they framed an answer for the bishops of Romes Ambassador, which
they say is not so exact as the things requires, yet for as much as he
desired to have the same with expedition, plain and manifest. And first how
they have declared their minds concerning a counsel, both in diverse
assemblies, and also two year since, to the Emperors and bishop Clementes
Ambassadors: For they also wyshe to have a lawful counsel, for the
preservation of the common wealth and common salvation of all men, and have
required this of the Emperor jointly with other Princes, who also thought it
needful him self, doubting not but all good men do desire such a counsel,
as may help and profit the common wealth. For it greueth many good men, that
the true and wholesome doctrine is through the wicked cruelty of certain men
every where oppressed, the members of the church tone a sondre, and open
crimes maintained: but such cruelty becomes Cruelty is unseemly in
churchmen.
not the Rulers of the church. Wherefore if ever there were any, now is most
need of a counsel, that both the old accustmed vices may be roted out, and
also unjust violence and cruelty be restrained, and the church from
henceforth set in due order. They therefore will not fail the common wealth
herein, but will right gladlye come unto such a counsel, as in sondrye
assemblies of the Empire has been agreed upon: Besechyng God that all the
doings there, may redounde unto his glory, and the salvation of men. And where
as the bishop has chosen Mantua to be the place, they trust assuredly that
the Emperor will not in this point swerve from the decrees of the Empire, and
his own promise also, in as much as it was provided, that the counsel should
be holden in Germany.

For where he says it is dangerous keeping of the same there, the truth is
far other wise, for what peril can be there, where all the Princes and
Cities are obedient to the Emperor only? Where the Cities be so ordered that
they defend strangers from injuries, and save them from all peril? Therefore
ought it chieflye to be kept there, to the intent that matters in
controversy, might duly be debated, that men might frankely speak, and judge
vpryghtly, and fear no force nor faction, but say their minds freely. Two
years paste, Clement the seventh promised a counsel, with conditions very
captions. And now the chiefest point is craftily left out, touching the
liberty of the counsel and more of the treaty, and partlye referred to Their
craft is spied.
the Bishop of Rome, whose office they say it is to call and order the
counsel. Now is the bishop which has so often condemned their religion and
doctrine, their open enemy. But in case they should permit their adversary
to give judgment, than could not the counsel be free: wherein by the advise
of the Emperor and other Princes. Mete men should be chosen out of the whole
number, which according unto Gods word, might hear and determine the cause:
For a counsel is the judicial seat not only of the bishop of Rome, but of
all other states also: for it is to be proved by the examples of the primative
church, and also by holy scripture, that Princes and other states have in
times paste been admitted in counselles, for the hearing of matters. But
wheresome would have the bishops power to be above the authority of the
whole church, it is against all reason and full of tyranny: For it belongs
as well to the Emperor and other civil The Empe. may order counsels.
states to set in foot in counselles, and to chose expert men, especially in
such causes, where the bishops errors be impugned, that is to wit false
doctrine and Idolatry for this thing is permitted also by the bishop of Romes
law.

And feinge that this is the universal cause of all men and concerns Pepes
concempned of Heresy.
the whole common wealth, it is the Emperors part and other Princes to
forsee, that vpryght judgment be had: For both other bishops of their own
people, and also bishops of Rome have in times paste been condemned for
Heresy and obstinacy, of the Emperor and the church together.

And at this time there is contention of many weighty matters, which the
bishop does defend not in words only, but also by wicked and cruel decrees,
punishyng most sharply, such as obey not the same. For as much therefore as
he is an adversary, and susteineth the one half of the suit, the thing it
self requires that the whole church, the Emperor and other kings take in
hand to prescribe an order, for the deciding of the matter: wherefore as they
have done ever, so they require now also, that the matter may be handled
vpryghtlye, according to the examples of holy writ, and the old primative
church. And if it so may be, they will not be behind with their parts,
trusting that truth shall come to light, and the glory of our Savior
Christ be advanced and tranquillity be restored to the Church, but if it be
otherwise, there is no doubt but greater commotions will arryse thereof, than
hitherto has been seen: for their parts, they will at no time neglecte the
common wealth. And as they can not forsake nor shrynke from the true doctrine,
so likewise in all other matters, they will do all things for peace and
concord.

The king of France which was fully determined to make war in Italy sent
Ambassador William Bellaye, to this assembly at Small The oration of the
French Ambassad.
calde. Who the.xix. day of Decembre, had there an eloquent oration. And first
he excuses the kings severity in punyshynge certain of his own subjects,
which not withstanding was nothing prejudicial or hurtful to their cause of
Religion, though some evil tongues did report so, no more than it was
displeasure to him, what time they with all their force did suppress the
rebellion of their commons, and punyshed the Anabaptists, doing yet nothing
without just cause. wherefore he distrusteth not but they be men of such wisdom
and gravity, that they will of no light report conceive any evil opinion of
so noble a king that is their friend, who was now for urgent causes (not here
to be spoken of) constrained against his nature to use extreme punishment,
Folysh pity marreth a city.
lest having so large a Realm, he should through ouermuche lenity, set open
the wyndowe of wickedness, to the temeritie of many. And touching their
religion and doctrine, the king will not take upon him the person of the
judge, but in deed lyketh many things well, and the rest he leaves
undiscussed. After this he goes about to win their favor, and confuteth
their opinion which had warned them to be ware of forayne Ambassades: For he
proves that the same does tend to their own hynderaunce and bondage: saying
that there is no people so strong that can long prosper and floryshe, unless
they be maintained by the league and amity of their neighbors. But the
frendshyp of the kings of France, and the Princes of Germanye, Of France and
Germany one offspring.
has been of such auncientie, and both nations procedinge of one original,
and lie so borderynge together, that they may be not only an aid and
strength, but also an honor and beauty, the one unto the other.

Therefore when the king heard say how the Germaynes did hardely agree
among them selves, he was right sorye, and as much as in him lies, wysheth a
reconcilement: fearyng lest this dissension in Religion, should come to some
sorrowful end.

Wherefore understanding that for their own preservation, they were now here
assembled, the king had sent him to declare unto them his advise to be thus.

That for as much as a free and general counsel could not as yet be obtained,
the Germains within the^ selves should assemble altogether and come to some
unity and concord, for the furtherau^ce of the which cause, in case they be so
contented, he will chose out certain well learned men and expert divines in
France, and send them into Germany to be at the same reconcilement, or else if
they would send some of theirs in to France for the like purpose, they
should do him a marvelous great pleasure. In the mean time, he does exhort
them to be at peace among them selves and knitte their minds with mutual
consent and brotherly love, and the king will never aid their ennemies, neither
with his help nor counsel, in case they continue their good will toward
him, as they have done always hitherto. In the beginning of this book, I
showed you how the judges of the imperial chamber contrary to the Emperors
decree, made out process against the Protestauntes: The judges of the chamber
trouble yt Protesta^tes.
For the judges in deed were of the Romish religion, and what time the Emperor
was returned from the war of Austriche into Italy, they at the suite of the
clergy, which had complained on the Protestauntes, attempted the law against
them: And albeit the Emperors proclamation were to the contrary, yet did they
proceed against them. The protestauntes wrote herein to the Emperor, And the
Duke of Saxon him self traueled to king Ferdinando, who commanded the law
to cease, and ratifieth the peace made by the Emperor, but that would? not
stay them. Than did the Protestauntes utterly refuse their judgment, as
suspected and their enemies, declaryng the causes wherefore. But that would not
be admitted, for they were encouraged by the Emperors letters, whereby he gave
them The Emp. letters.
authority to judge, which were matters of Religion and which not, so that
after that they proceaded not only in doubtful causes, but in such also as
concerned religion and nothing else. After this the Duke of Saxon obtayneth a
new commandment from the king Ferdinando, but all was in vain. Finally
after much ado Ferdinando consented that he would find the means to stay
all matters in the law, which the Duke and his fellows had touching
Religion, co^prysed in the peace of Norinberge: Unto such things as the
French The answer of the Protestauntes to the French Ambassad.
Ambassador had spoken, this answer was made. Albeit that of the execution
done, reports went diversely, yet for that he says, how they went about
sedicion, they can not be much offended with the kings doings herein, which
in deed would suffer no such thing them selves in their own country:
Nevertheless they would wyshe, the king should have a respect unto such as
do profess the pure doctrine of the Gospel, which they protested in the
assemblye at Auspurge, and not to punyshe them with the rest, for it can not be
denied, but many false and wicked opinions, are crept into the church, which
unlearned and malicious persons, do defend with great cruelty, to maynteyne
their lucre and Authority: and they through a marvelous polycie do forge
oftentimes great crimes, upon the good and innocent persons, to exasperate the
kings mind against them: But seeing that it is the propre office of kings and
Princes, to seek Gods glory, to The duty of Princes.
pourge the church of crrours, and to inhibite unjust cruelty, they desire
instantly that the same most mighty king would wholly apply him self
hereunto, for if he so do, than will they suppose that he bears a friendly
and loving mind toward them, which they wyshe to be lucky, and fortunate to
his highness, and to the church. Touching the ancient alliance and frendshyp
betwixt the kings of France and the Princes of Almaygne, all his talk was to
them right pleasant, and they will to their powers endeavor, that the same
mutual love and amity may long continue. And as concerning the reconcilement
of opinions in religion, they desire nothing else but that the matter may be
heard indifferently, and determined by a lawful counsel: And for as much as
it is not the office of the bishop of Rome only, to appointe the counsel, but
that the same thing also concerns other kings and Princes, they desire the
king to forsee, that there be no violent counsel called, in a place suspect
and perilous, to the intent that under the name of a counsel, the true
doctrine be not extinguished, but that in so weyghty matters as concern the
preservation, and peace of the universal church, and every particular
person, free disputations and upright judgment be had accordingly: Which
thing should get the king immortal fame and thanks, not only in this present
age, but also in time to come, so long as the world should endure. As for the
conferens to be had between the learned me^ of France and Germany, it
requires a long deliberation and diverse co^missions extend not to such
matters. But so sone as any thing may be determined herein they will aduertyse
the king by their letters. For they desire nothing more than that wholesome
doctrine might be set forth and auaunced: last of all, where he said how the
king would give none aid against them, they were very glad to hear thereof:
wherefore in all things that concern not the Emperor and the Empire, they
also will assist no man against him. The Ambassador had also private talk
with Pontane, with Melancthon, with the Lantgraues learned men, and with James
Sturmins, of sundry doctrines, and declared what was the kings opinion in
every article, and the minds also of other learned men in France, especially
of Paris. Of the bishop of Romes supremacy, The kings opinion of matters in
controversy
of the Lords supper, of mass, of the invocation of saints, of Images, of
free will, of purgatory, of justification, of monastical vows, of marriage of
priests: And that in most of these things, the king agrees with the book,
that Melancthon has written of common places: touching the bishop of Rome the
king is wholly of Philippus The commo^places of Malancthon.
opinon, that he is not chief supreme by Gods law, but by man's law as he
affirms, but the king of England denies both. And certainly the bishop
usurps ouermuche authority, when he takes upon him to depose kings and
Emperors, which now he entendeth to put in practyse against the king of
England, albeit that the king and also diverse Cardinals, iutreate him to
the contrary. The divines say he is head of the church by Gods law, but when
the king demanded the place they could not show it. He misliketh also the
defense of pourgatory: For of that well, spryngeth mass, dirige, and al their
marchaundise. But if the mass were taken away, their combs were cut, The
mass mainteineth purgatory.
and they should no longer be able to defend their authority. And wha^ the
king had granted them certain months, wherein they should prove purgatory by
Scripture, they answered at the length, how they ought not to reach their
enemies weapons, which they might use against the^. As touching monastical
vows, the king supposes that it might be obtained of the bishop, that none
should be taken in young, Monastical voues.
and before the vowers were of type years, and that it should be lawful for
them to depart thence when they would and mary: And thinks not good to
deface their houses, but to convert them in to Colleges, wherein yought may be
brought up in learning and virtue. The divines would in any case have priests
to live unmarried, but the king had devised this mean way, that such as have
married wives, should remain so still, but the rest not to mary, or if they did,
to absteyne from the ministration of the church. For concerning y^ which is
alleged of Paphnutius, who in the counsel of niece, persuaded the marriage of
Paphnutius.
priests, the divines answer, that it can not be proved, that priests have
married at any time, Not withstanding they will not deny but that they had
wives, before they were admitted to the order of priesthod. As concerning the
lords supper to be received wholye or under both kinds as they term it, the
king had conference herein with The Lords suppervnder both kinds
Clement the seventh, and trusts also that it wylbe obtained at this
bishops hands, that it shall be lawful for every man to receive after his
conscience. Moreover the king affirms, that a hondreth year since in
France, they received the whole supper, not in the mids of the church, but
in chappelles, as he had heard old men make relation. And again the kings of
France do receive the whole communion. And where as the king objected this
unto them, the divines made answer that kings were anointed as well as
priests, and that the Scripture speaks of a Priesthode Royal: And that the
same which is lawful for kings, is not to be permitted to others, in like
case. Furthermore in mattins and other daily service, the king does acknowledge
that many things may be cut of, and many taken clean away. And that Clement
the seventh committed the charge here of unto Cardinal Crucei, a Spaniarde,
whose book of the same thing remains, which the divines of Paris have
condemned for heresy: which be such a kind of men, that will condemn not
only the Germans, as wicked and erring in Religion, but also the bishop him
self with all his Cardinals, and the case require it. But seeing the whole
matter is full of difficulty, the king is altogether addicted to have the
church restored to unity and concord. And how he has talked herein with the
Dukes of Bauier, whom he fyndeth stiffer, tha^ the divines of Paris. Finally he
exhorted them, to admit no place of counsel, but by the king his masters,
and also the king of Englandes advise, which will consent both in one.
Moreover how certain years past. Lewys the French king, contended that it was
not laweful for The kings of France and Nauane ercommunicated.
July the bishop, to appointe a counsel without the consent of the Emperor and
other kings. And the king of Navarre was than of the same opinion, and where
as July did excommunicate them both, Ferdinando king of Spain, by this title
invaded Navarre: And that the king is now also of that mind and opinion,
neither will he admit any counsel, unless the place be sure and not
suspected or apt for injury, and wherein a man may speak his mind freely.
Besides the talk before mentioned, he was earnestly in hand with them, to
enter into league with the king. And this was the principal cause of his
Ambassade. But where they did except the Emperor, against whom they said,
they might attempt nothing, he departed without his The protest. would make
no league with the king.
purpose, and to certain he spoke in counsel, how he marueled, that they would
neglecte so mighty a king, and said, the time would come, wherein they would
wyshe to have redeemed his frendshyp derely. The king of England also Henry the
eight, sent thither his Ambassade, the chief whereof, was Edward Fox bishop of
Hereforde, who in the beginning made his relation. For as much as the aliaunce
and kindred the oration of bishop Fore Ambassa. for the king of England.
is great, between the kings of England and the Princes of Saxo^, the king can
not but bear much good will toward him and his co^sortes, especially since
their chief endeavor is to set forth Gods true knowledge unto others. And al be
it that for this cause only, they have sustained great reproach, yet does he
mislyke them never a whyt therefore, nor judges otherwise of them than of such
good men, as contrary to their duty, and without a reasonable cause will do
nothing, and to have this respect only that through the true preaching of the
Gospel, Gods glory might be advanced. And of the same desire is The
alteration of Religion in England.
the king also, which is sufficiently enough declared, by the alteration that
is now in England. For by the kings commandment, a great part of Errors are
abolyshed, and by common assent of the whole Realm, the bishop of Rome, with
all his deceiptfull iugglynges, are from thence clean banyshed, in like case
as it is in Saxony. And for so much as the same desire and good will is common
to them both, the king has a wonderful great affection toward them, that
they would thus proceed, and profess al one doctrine: for that should
doubtless establysh a continual peace and quiet. And what commotions have
arrysen of the diversity of opinions, the king understands. And the
Anabaptists, by their example have declared: The bishop now pretends as
though he would call a counsel: and certainly if there remain any dissension,
and they do not agree in their doctrine, it will make much against them, when
they shall come to the counsel. Wherein notwithstanding he imputes not the
fault to the divines, for the state of the church was never so quiet, but at
some time there has been dissension: Which thing is also proved by the
example of Peter, Paul, and The state of the church troublesome
Barnabas. Therefore is an uniformity to be sought for, that may be grounded
upon the sure foundation of Scripture. And the bishop of Rome endeavors with
all his might, to let that peace and concord. Wherefore the king is of this
opinion, that so long as his authority, tyranny and cruelty endures, it is
impossible to come to agreement: for that the king has lately delivered his
realm of England, out of that most fylthie bondage, and restored it unto
liberty, that Idol and Antichriste is now stark mad, and where as he can
work no mischief openly, he goes about fraud and gyle, and with false forged
sclaunders, to incense kings against him. And al be it he would do any thing
to mainteyne his authority: yet is this his deuyse and polycie, to styre up
cruel wars, and set one in an others top. And the kings pleasure was,
that he should thus declare unto them, not for that he stood in fear of the
bishop, for he was so furnyshed with all things, that he cared neither for
him, nor yet for all his adherentes, but to the intent they might clearly
perceive what Antechristes purpose The rage of Antichrist.
is, chieflye at this present time, when he pretends to hold a counsel, but
in his mind intends far an other thing. The king does confess and
grant, that a lawful disputation were very profitable and expedient for the
common wealth. But yet for all that, it ought to be forseen in any wise, that
there be no such counsel had as shall entreat only to establysh the bishops
authority. Wherefore he requires and admonysheth them, that they will allow
no counsel before a common peace be made through out christendom: Moreover he
wishes that Gods true Religion and service may be restored, which thing to
accomplish and mayntaine, he is content to join him self with them. And that
these are the things which they were commanded to declare unto them. And
moreover required the^ that they might hereafter have further conference in
these matters privately with certain appointed persons. For the king bare such
an affection toward them and their Religion, that he would employ herein al
his treasure, and him self also. Whereunto they made answer, and commending
the kings good will, do show how their chief desire is, that the doctrine of
the Gospel might be spread far abroad. And whatsoever they do herein, to be
done of duty: And all be it they have suffered for the same great rebukes and
injuries, and although they have procured the^ selves hereby most heinous
displeasures, and have oftentimes endured the malice and threatenings of many,
yet have they nothing relented, nor slacked therefore their enterprise, in
setting forth that most holy thing. And the only cause of so great hatred and
Malice was, that they had forsaken wicked errors and false doctrine. Now where
the king promised his aid herein, and so ample manner, where also he has
expulsed and banyshed out of his Realm, the tyranny of the bishop of Rome,
from whence as out of a well sprang all wicked idolatrye, they are glad and
joyful to hear it, and beseech God that he may thus proceed. Moreover where he
does admonyshe the^ to beware, that there be no dissension in their doctrine,
they give him hearty thanks: but doubtless there is no controversy at all, and
they do persevere in the same doctrine, which they professed at Auspurge. For
as concerning the Anabaptists, they be with the^ extremely punyshed, unless
they come to amendment: And that they also reign chiefly in those places,
where the doctrine of the Gospel is prohibited. The talk also of the bishop,
and of his crafty dealing, pleased them very much, and that the bishops
legate is now in Germany, making promise of a counsel to be holden at Mantua,
and how he had talked herein with the Prince Electour of Saxony. But what
deliberate answer they made unto his demaundes, is comprised in writing,
which he shall have delivered unto him to bear unto the king, to the intent
he may understand what is their mind herein, for the kings society and
conjunction, whereof he spoke, they yield him hearty thanks. And also to the
intent that this so wholesome doctrine may keep his right course, they will spare
neither pains nor peril, and doubt not, but God will govern these affairs,
although their adversary do never so much contend, and spurn against them.
And for because he desires to confer of these things more at large with
some men privately, they have chosen certain for the same purpose, with whom he
may communicate his things, praying him to report of them so unto the king,
as their good will toward him, may appear the better through his
commendation. When the Duke of Saxon was returned from king Ferdinando The
protest. league is renewed.
to Smalcalde the twelfte of Decembre, on Christmas even, a decree was made,
that the league which lasted one year longer, should be renewed for ten
years, and how the rest of their furniture should be provided, and were
agreed to receive into the same league such as were willing and desyrours, so
that they profess the doctrine propounded of them at Auspurge, and would
bear with them scot and lotte. Emonges whom were the Princes of Pomerane,
Ulriche Duke of Wyrtemberge, Roberte Bauier Prince of Bipounte, Aulpurge,
Franckeforte, Kempten, Hamborough and Hannobria. And herein took order how to
withstand and defend themselves, against the unjust judgment of the
Imperial chamber. At the same time also was William Earl of Nassowe, admitted
into the league. And albeit that the Lantgraue by reason of the controversy
that was betwixt The Earl of Nassowe.
them for the land of Chattes, did not assente, yet if any wrong were offered
him for the profession of the Gospel, he said he would not fail him, in
case he desired his aid. This year also the Senate The Gospel received at
Auspurge.
of Auspurge, all dissension at the length taken clean away, receives the
doctrine of the Gospel, and wrytinge their letters unto Luther, entreat him
that he would send them faithful ministers of the church, and among others,
Urbanus Regius.

The tenth Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the tenth Book
THe city of Munster through the preaching of Barnarde Rotman, received the
Gospel whereupon the clergy with their bishop forsook the place, nevertheless
a reconcileme^t was made by the Lantgraue. There came thither out of Hollande
an Anabaptiste called John of Leiden, who having won Rotman and diverse
others, infected the whole city with his poison, in so much as they of that
sect being set on mischief, became stronger, had all things in common, and
married many wylles. John of Leiden, after the death of John Matthewe, is
declared the chiefest Prophet and shortly after king universal having his
cheyalry, and power of life and death. The city being beseged, a metinge was
appointed at confluence to enforce the siege. The Anabaptists had sent letters
to the Lantgraue, and a book of their doctrine, which Luther than impugned.
The city being in extreme famine, at the last was surprysed and won. The
king and his companions were taken prisoners, whose execution is after recited.
About this business of Mu^ster was an assembly appointed at Worms. The Duke of
Sauope besegyng Geneua, is repoulsed. The king of France prepares an army to
go toward Millan, and by this occasion here is mentioned of the right which
he pretends to have there. The Emperor being aduertysed of his enterprises,
comes to Rome and accuses the king, and solliciteth the Pope to hold a
counsel. The Protestauntes make a league with the king of England. The Pope
publishes the counsel to be kept at Mantua. There is war betwyxt the
Emperor and the French king. The Archebyshop of Collon reformeth his
countries.

Now must we come to the siege of Munster, Munster a city of Westophalia.
the Metropolitan city of Westphalia. But first are certain things to be
repeted, even from the beginning until such time as the city was finally
taken, and the chief malefactors executed. I spoke of Thomas Mu^cer in the
fist book, how he raised a tumulte of the communaltie, and showed what his
doctrine was, and also how he ends his life. Out of his schole proceeds The
original of Anabaptists, their doctrie and manners
a kind of prople, which for their practice and doctrine, are called
Anabaptists, of whom also is some thing mentioned before, for they prohibit
the christening of children, and are the^ selves baptized again, affirming that
all others ought to do likewise, and take away al efficacitie from the former
baptism. They pretend certain outward holiness. They teach how it is not
lawful for the christians to go to the law, nor to bear office, nor to take an
oath, neither to have any thing private, yt al things ought to be common unto
al me^. And these at ye begi^ning, but afterward they propounde a great deal
more heinous matters, as I shall hereafter declare. And when they began to
spread over all Germany, and that Luther, and almost all other learned men
inueyhed against them, and the Magistrate also punyshed them, in so much that
there could no great nu^bre of them cleave together. At the length they placed
them selves in this forsayde city, which in deed was of great strength, and
that fortuned thus. Not far from the city of Munster is there a church of
saint Morice, wherein in the year of our Lord M.D. xxxij. Barnarde Rotma^,
preached the Gospel, and had a great Rotman a Preacher.
audience out of the city. And he where they devised to receive him in to the
city. The catholics to hinder that, give him a mean sum of money, to the
intent he should go to some other place, to exercise him self in learning. So
he departs to certain places, where he thought to attain to some further
knowledge. After a few months retourneth, wherewith they being sore
offended, do their endeavor to debar him from preaching, but that was in
vain, he had so great favor of the people. Within a while certain of the
best and principal Senators, receive him into the City. And where he was
kept out of the church, they set up a pulpet for him in the church porche,
and hear him without. But where as his audience increased daily, request
made, that the church might be open for him, or else should the doors be broken
up.

And he not long after, through the advice of certain that the people had
chosen, writing his letters into Hessia not far of, the Lantgraues country,
desires that certain good and well learned men might be sent thither to help
him to preach the Gospel. Wherefore a couple were sent thither from Marpurge.
And when they came thither, they consulted with Rotman, and three others how
they might bannyshe the bishop of Romes authority first of all, that after
they might teach the Gospel, to the more profit of the hearers. For the
compassing whereof, this way seemed unto them best.

They draw out certain articles of the bishops errors, to the number of thyrty,
and deliver them to the Senate, being in the mean time so prepared, that
unless they could prove by the Scriptures that all these were directly against
Gods word, they would refuse no punishment. The Senate commands the
catholics of the clergy to come into the court, and there propounds unto
them the forsayde articles of errors. And for because they have always
pretended, that their doctrine was pure and grounded upon Gods word, and
the Preachers deny the same, and will ieoperde their lives, to prove it. They
demand whether they will confute by the Scriptures, such things as are
objected. Being thus spoken unto, and perceiving that the Senate took
pleasure in the thing, they answer in few words, that they have nothing to
allege for them selves: And where they have affirmed hitherto, their doings
to be The papists co^ sesse their ignorance.
right and good, that was done by wening and ignorance. Than the Senate, for
as much as they were conuicte of false doctrine, and had nothing to say for
them selves, and confessed their own naughtines: commands from henceforth,
that they teach no more, but give place in all churches to these new
Preachers, which have detected their errors. After by the consent of the
Senate and the common people, churches were assigned to every of them where
they should preach. Which thing the Popyshe priests took very
displeasauntly, especially those that were of the cathedral church, being
for the most part gentlemen borne of good houses. Who at what time they
could not otherwise prevail, depart thence in great dislikynge and go unto
the bishop of the city, and layinge their heads together, do The papists
forsake the city.
devise to stop all ways and passages, that there should no corn be brought
unto the city. And a little while after, when all the ways were stopped on
every side, the bishop and the others before said, for a further consultation
to be had, come to Telget which is a little town a mile without the city: from
whence was a messenger sent to the senate with letters of this effect. That
they should forsake their enterprise, and restore the old and former state,
or else they would take the^ for their ennemies. The bishop was county Fraunces
Waldeck. The last before him had Frederick, brother to the Archebyshop of
Collon: Frederick forsakes the byshoprike.
But he either for that he could not have his health in those parties, or else
for because he smelled some thing, not long before, forsook the place of his
own accord, and was content to live a private life at home in his country.
The Munsterians consulting of the matter, deteyne the messenger, and setting
forth upon Christmas eue^ at night, about They of mu^ster oppress the papists
i^.C. of them, and coming upon the^ soden, taking the town, and keeping the
gates yt none should escape, they apprehend the^ al. The bishop was gone thence
the day before as it happened. By and by they carry the prisoners in to the
city, among whom were the chief of the clergy, and diverse others of the
nobility. The senate demands of the^, what their intent is, and whether
they purpose hereafter to disturb the preaching of yt Gospel. They make a
gentle answer how they will do their endeavor, that the same doctrine may
floryshe, whereupon a co^uenaunt is made, the copy Condicious of peace.
whereof the Senate sent unto the Lantgraue, requestinge him for the Gospel and
common wealths sake, he would further this matter. Who sends certain of his
counsel, by whose meditation it was concluded that being reconciled in their
minds, and forgetting al displeasure past, both parts should observe the
peace, that the Gospel should be preached in six churches, that al wicked and
supersticious Religion should be abolished, that in the cathedral church
nothing should be altered, neither that the city should imagine, that the same
co^cerned them any thing: This conclusion of peace was confirmed with the
Seals of the La^tgraue, of the Bishop and his clientes, of the nobility and
common people, the foretenth day of February, the year of salvation M.D.
xxxiij.

Wha^ al things were thus pacified, comes a certain Cobbler to Mu^ster out of
Hollande, one Iolm Leidan, a rank Anabaptist. Who after he was acquainted with
the preachers of the Gospel, demanded of John Leida^ an Anabap.
them privately, whether they supposed, that young children were rightly
christened? Which after they had affirmed, he, that was wholly addict to the
contrary opinion, began to smile, and contempne their answer. Which thing once
perceived, Barnarde Rotman (before mentioned) exhorts the people in his
sermon to pray, yt they may keep still the true doctrine, and maynteine it,
that it be not infected of fantastie^all persons, namely of Anabaptists, which
now also are privily crept in amongs them, and kept company with others, whose
opinion, if it should prevail, not only the state of the common wealth, but
of religion also, should become miserable. About the same time came thither
also Herma^ Stapred, Herman Stapred.
who being co^pagnion to Rotman, inueighed openly against the christening of
Children. He was scholar to Henricke Rollie, which a little before was
executed at Utreight for thopinion of Anabaptisme. And he was another occasion
of this new doctrine. And now was the matter comen so far, that there was a
great brute of the Anabaptists throughout the city, albeit that as yet the
thing was closselye and secretly wroughte. For no man was admitted, unless he
were of their sect: besides that the chief aucthors, did not profess these
things openly, neither taught they, but in the night when other me^ were a
stepe, than practiced they their mysteries. But when the thing was known, and
many citezens sore offended, which said it was not suffrable, that a new
doctrine should be privately taught in the night, by a decree of the Senate,
they were commanded to depart the city. The Anab. banished the city.
But they went out one way, and came in by another, braggyng how God had
commanded them there to remain, and defended their cause earnestly. Which
thing troubled the Senate, and also stroke them with a soden admiration:
Wherefore, for the auoidinge of a further tumulte and danger, the Senate
commanded the preachers, as well of the Anabaptisme, as of the Gospel, to come
before them, and certain other learned men with them. Than did Rotman bewray
his opinion Rotman became an Anabaptist.
which he had kept close until that time, and condemned the christenynge of
children, as wicked and detestable: But Herman Busche chieflye, defended the
contrary opinion before the Senate in such sort, that they were commanded
to get them out of the City immediatlye by a common decree. And where they
alleged that they might not safelye pass through the Bishops Country,
the Senate both obtained for them a saufe conduicte, and gave them also money
to bear their charges: but they which long before were determined to go no
whither else, went privily to the followers of their sect, and lurked there for
a certain space. In this mean time before they came abroad again, the Senate
shut up all the churches save one, fearyng lest the Anabaptists (the number of
whom increased daily) accompanied with their teachers, should have driven the
preachers of the Gospel out of the churches.

Afterward in the month of Nouembre, the Lantgraue at the request of the
Senate, sent two thither to preach, Theodoricke Fabritius, The consta^cie of
Fabritius.
and John Melsinger. And he in deed understanding the trouble toward and
affrayde of the danger, returned home again: but the other aboade stoutely,
admonyshyng the citezens diligently to beware of the Anabaptisticall doctrine,
and keep still this course and perseuered till the Anabaptists gettinge the
upper hand, drove the rest out of the City, as hereafter shall be recited. And
to the intent they should find lack in nothing, he penneth out a certain
form of doctrine and ecclesiastical administration, which was allowed of
the Senate and the commo^s. Moreover by the leave of the Senate, Peter Peter
Wirtemie.
Wirtemie began to preach again: but he had made but a few Sermons, before
he was through the instigation of Rotman, expulsed of the Anabaptists. Who
now waxinge fierce, provoked Fabritius and others to disputation. And the
Senate did consent, that the matter should be tried by the Scriptures only,
and by such other like wrytinges as were agreeable to the same. And that there
should be certain well learned men, as arbitrers, who considering the sentences
and reasons on either part, should determine the case, and what they decreed
to be ratified, to the intent that in fine all controversy secluded, peace
might be restored to the church. But this condition Rotman and his fellows
refused. Wherefore when they would not abide judgment, they began to be
dispysed. But to the intent they might wash out this spotte, they inuente an
other way more easy.

One of them, as though he were moved with the spirit of prophecy, A Prophet
inspired.
tuneth up and down the city, crying repent, repent, and be baptized
again, if not the wrath of God shall now ouerwhelme you.

At this began the common people to stir, and as many as were christened
again, cried out after the same manner as he did. Many for fear of Gods anger,
that they so much bragged of abused through simplicity, being in deed
otherwise not evil, follow their minds herein: Others also for saving of
their goods, were rebaptysed, for the Anabaptists punished sore their
adversaries, and the best was the loss of their substance: This was at the
end of Decembre. And now again were they crept out of their dens, that we
spoke of before, and resortyng to the market, make an outcrye, and command
that all which are not rebaptised should be slain as Paganes and wicked men.
After this they take the common pieces of ordinance and Eiuile war in the
city.
munition, they invade the town house, and do much mischief to many. And
others, to the intent they might defend them and theirs from the spoil and
injury, keep against them an other strong place of the city, and take diverse
of them. This contention with the Anabaptists that kept the market, and had
fortified it on every side, continewed so long till at the last they came to a
compositio^, giving pledges on both parties, whereby it was agreed that every
one should follow his own Religion, that they should go home and keep the
peace. In the mean time Rotman and Cnipperdoling; which was the chief of that
faction, notwithstanding that they had commended the composition,
Cnipperdolyng.
yet sendynge their letters privily into Towns nere by, warned men of their
sect, that leaving all their goods behind them, they should repare unto
them with all possible diligence. And what soever they left behind them, they
should receive ten times as much in recompense. They being allured with so
large and ample promises came thither in great nombres, both men and women,
having an assured hope to attain to better fortune, especially such as were
poor and not able to live at home, resort to the city of Munster. But the
tounes me^, especially those that had any great substance, when they saw
their city full of strangers, conveyed them selves thence as well as they
might, leaving the Anabaptists and the other multitude. This was about
shroftyde in the month of February.M.D.xxxiiij. And what time the one part
was thus weakened, the Anabaptists, do chouse new senators, all of their
own faction, and also make new conselles, and one of them was Cnipperdolyng.
And shortly after they fyred the church of saint Morice in the suburbs, and
all the other buyldinges thereabout. Than spoil they all the churches, and
undermine the cathedral church within. That done they flock together in
every street, and cry first repent, repent: And by and by, avoid thence
quickly ye wicked men, unless you intend to hazard your lives. Finally they
assemble in armure, and all that were not of their sect, immediately they thrust
out of the city, without respect of age or sex, in so much that in that
hurly burly, diverse women miscarried of child. And as soon as they had put
them to flyghte, straight ways they took their goods. And albeit that this
happened yt day before, that they besieged the city, yet nevertheless where
as certain of the^ that fled, chanced into the bishops hands, he took them
as his ennemies, and diverse of them lost their heads, and emonges others one
or two preachers of the Gospel. And the same Peter Wirtemie being in danger
among the rest, at the request of the Lantgraue, was preserved. Which thing
moved the residue of the honest citizens, that all be it they were minded to
forsake the town, yet seeing the present danger without, they were in a manner
constrained to tarry against their will. At this same time the chiefest Prophet
among them, for that name they do usurp to themselves, John Mathewe
commanded them, that look what gold or silver every man had, he should
bring it all John Matthewe the high prophet
forth under pain of death, and for the same purpose was a common treasure
house appointed. The people being fore astonished at this cruel decree, durst not
but obey: Neither might any man disceiue or begile the^ of any part, for two
certain young maidens that prophesied, could declare what fraud was used,
neither did they only bring their own, Maidens do prophecy.
but took also to their own use the goods of the^, whom they had expulsed.
After this the same Prophet cominaunded, that no man from henceforth should
have or keep any book, saving the holy Bible: All others he commanded to be
brought forth and brent. This commandment said he, was given him from above,
therefore were books brought thither in a wonderful number, and all consumed
with fire. It chanced at the same time, that one Hubert Trutelynge a smyth,
had spoken some thing in ieste against them, which named them selves
Prophets. When this was known, they called the people together, Iestyng
p^nyshed.
and commanded them to put on harness: by and by the man was accused and
condemned to die: which thing astonished the people maruelously. Than the chief
Prophet before named, takes this poor man and casts him down flat upon the
ground, and thrusts his spear into him, yet he gave him not his deadly
wound, although he pearsed him with great violence: that done, he commanded
him to be carried away to another place. Then caught he a boore spear out of a
young man's hand that stood next him, and as he lay iobbed him in with the
staff head, and seeing that the man would not by and by die for all this he
said how it was declared unto him out of heaven, that his time was not yet
come to dye, and that God had granted him his pardon. Notwithstanding he died
within a few days after. Which thing when the Prophet knew, he took a long
morispike, and rode up and The prophet inspired with (...).
down the town a great pace, crieng that God the father had commanded him to
discomfite the ennemies without the city, and put them to flight. When he came
nere to their camp, a souliour encountered with him and ran him through. And
albeit yt his false prophecy was thus detected the second time, yet had his
fellow Prophets so bewitched men, and made the matter so fair to the common
people, that they were right sorry for the loss of him, saying that there
hanged some great plage over them, that so worthy a man was taken from them.
The next prophet unto him, John Leidan, bad them be of good comfort, for it
was revealed unto him long before, that he should thus end his life, and
that he should marry his wife. Two days before Easter, they ran in to every
church, and there range all the belles at ones. And after a few days
Cnipperdoling prophecieth, that such Cnipperdoling prophecieth.
as are placed in high dignity, shall be cast down, and others preferred to
their rowmes that be of low and base degree: than he commands that all
churches should be destroyed, affirminge earnestlye that this commandment
came from God. Therefore was he obeyed, and the commandment which he said
came from heaven, was accomplyshed with great diligence. Not long after this
John Leidane, delivers the sword of execution unto Cnipperdoling, and
appoints him to be hangeman, for thus it has pleases God, that he which
From the horse to the Ass.
had before borne the highest office of consulshyp, should now have the lowest
office of the hangeman. He not refusyng, took his offer in very good part also.
When the bishop had now by the space of two or thremonethes, borne the whole
charges of this war alone: Herman the Archebyshop of Collon, and John Duke of
Claeue, sent him money, munition and certain bands of horsemen and fotemen for
his aid. And the Archbishop went also to the camp, tasist him with his
counsel, and not long after the city was assaulted in diverse places. But
when they were out of hope to win it by assault, they builded seven
bulwarks or fortes about the city to take away their victualles, and put into
every forte an enseigne of fotemen, with certain ba^des of horsemen to winter
there. And for the continuance of the siege of war, which as well concerned
others, the bishop of Munster desired aid of those Princes and cities, that
are of the province of Rhine, by reason they were nere at hand. For the which
cause an assembly was appointed at co^fluence the.xiij. day of Decembre of
the year.M.D. The division of Germany into prouice
xxxiiij. for all Germany is divided into six provinces, into Frankony,
Bauier, Swelande, Saxony, the coaste of the Rhyne, and Burgundy. Within the
which limits all Princes and cities are of an ancient custom, accounted in
the assemblies of the Empire. But now is Saxonye divided into high and low,
and again the base country of Germany, Westphalia and Austriche, are added
hereu^to, so that now the Empire contains ten regions. After the assault was
attempted in vain, John Leidane gave him self to rest, and slepeth three whole
days together, and what time he did awake, he spoke not a word, The salshod
of Leidane.
but at the last called forpaper, wherein he wrote the names of twelve men,
whereof certain were gentlemen, which as the twelve trybes of Israel, should
rule and govern all things: for this said he, was the Twelve judges.
will of the heavenly father. When he had thus by the means of these twelve
men, prepared away for his kingdom, he propounds certain opinions to the
preachers, which he requires to have them confuted by the testimonies of
Scripture: for if they can not, than will he utter them to the people, that
they may be approved and ratified. The some whereof was this, that a man was not
bounden to one wife, but might The Paradoxes of john Leiden.
lawfully marry as many as he list: But when the preachers reproved his
opinion, he calls them into the counsel house, and the twelve me^ also. And
when they were all come thither, he takes of his cloak, and throws it on the
ground, and the new Testament withal: Witnessing and swearing by the same,
that the thing which he had propounded, was revealed unto him from heaven.
Therefore he thretneth them with right high words, as though they should not
have God to be their friend, unless they consented to him.

In fine, they agree in opinions, and the Doctors preach of Matrimony three
days together. And straight ways he marieth three wives at ones. Whereof the
one was the wife of the aforesaid great Prophet John Matthew. Whose example
afterward others follow, in so much, as it was all accounted a praise, to be
often married.

But diverse honest citezens, which misliked their doings, giving a notice
throughout the City, called all such as professed the doctrine Sedition in
the city.
of the Gospel into the market place. And afterward apprehended the Prophet,
and Cnipperdolinge, and all their Preachers. Which thing when the rascal
people understood, they came in armure, took away the prisoners from them, and
slew of them about fifty with great cruelty: For they tied them unto trees, or
pillars, and shot them in with dagges, their high prophet greatly
commendinge them, and wylling them that would do God pleasure to shoot first:
howbeit others were otherwise murdered.

At the eight kalendes of July, arriseth a new prophet, which was a Goldsmith.
Who calling an assembly of the people into the marketplace, declares unto
them, how it is the will and commandment of the heavenly father, that John
Leidane should possess thempire of the whole world. And that he marchyng
forward with a puissaunt John Leida^ inuadeth the kingdom.
army, should distroy all kings and princes without respect, and spare only
the multitude, at the least such as loved righteousness. And that he should
possess the seat of David his father, until such time as the father should
revoke the kingdom into his own hands: And how the wicked being destroyed,
godly men should reign in his life.

When these things were openly declared, John Leidane immediately fell down
upon his knees, and liftyng up his hands unto heaven, said: Men and brethren,
this thing knew I many days sins: Yet would I never speak it. For to the
intent it might be of better credit, A new king of Anabap.
the father has used another minister. And being thus made king, forthwith
he displaceth the xii. men, and after the custom of kings, chouseth unto him
nobles, and commands also, that a sword with a gylte seabarde, two crowns,
a cheyne, a s^^ptre, and such other like ornaments, should be provided for
him of pure gold. After that he appointed certain days wherein he will hear
them openly that have any suits to him. As often as he came abroad, he was
accompanied with His pomp
his nobles and officers of household. Next after him followed two yo^gmen
ryding, whereof the one of the right hand, carried the crown and the bible, and
the other bare the sword drawn: with the like pomp went his chief wife, for
he had diverse at ones. In the market place was prepared for him an high seat,
hanged with cloth of gold, such complaints and suits as came before him, were
all for the most part concerning wives and diuorcementes, which were then
most common cases, in so much as many which had lived together a long time,
were now first divorced. And it fortuned that what time the people stood
thick about him, preasing to hear, behold Cnipperdoling lea peth forth and
creping upon the men's heads and sholders that stood the madness of Cnipper.
thick together, and breathing into their mouths said unto every one, the
father has sanctified the, receive the holy ghost. At an other certain time,
when he daunced before the king, thus says he, was I wont to play in times
past with my whore? and the father has commanded me to do likewise before the
king. And where he was over tedious and could make none end, the king being
offended departed: tha^ gets he up into the kings seat, and took upon him
to be king: But the king retourning in the mean time, plucked him down
headlo^g, and keeps him in prison three days. During the siege, they compyle
and set forth a book, which they call a restoration: wherein among other
things they teach that the kingdom of Christ shall be of this The book of
restitution.
sort, before the last day of judgment, that his elect and chosen should
reign, the wicked being utterly destroyed in all places. They teach moreover,
how the people may put down the Magistrate. Further more, albeit the Apostles
had no commandment to usurp any jurisdiction, yet such as are now
ministers of the church, ought to take upon them the right of the sword, and
by force to establyshe a new common wealth, and that no man ought to be
suffered in the church, which is not a true christian. Again, that no man
can be saved, unless he make all his goods common, and keep nothing private to
him self. They say also, that Luther and the bishop of Rome be false
prophets, yet of both is Luther the worse. Finally they say, how the marriage
of such as are not lyghtened with the true faith, is polluted and filthy, and
rather to be reputed for whoredom or aduoutrie. These opinions Who wrote
against the^.
of their were comfuted chiefly by Melanchtho^, Iustus Jonas, Menius, Urbanus
Regins, whose works full of eloquence remain touching the same. Than a few
weakes after, the new Prophet that I spoke of, blewe the trompet in every
street and commanded all men to arm them selves, and repair to the head
church porche: for the enemy must be driven from before the city. When they
came thither they find their supper ready, and being commanded, there sat
down to A supper.
the number of four thousand. Afterward also suppe they which had watched in
the mean time (...) a thousand. The king and the queen with their family
served, what time they had eaten well, and that supper was almost done, the
king him self reaches bread unto every one with these words, take, eat,
show the death of the Lord. And the Queen giving the Cup, says, drink,
and show the Lords death. This done, the Prophet before mentioned goes in
to the pulpet, and demands of them, whether they will obey Gods word. When
they had all said yea. It is the heavenly fathers commandment says he: to
send forth preachers of his word, to the number of twenty eight. which going
into the four parts of the world, may preach the same doctrine that is
taught in this City. Than he recites The Apost. of Munster.
their names, and she weth whether each man shall go. Wherefore six were sent
to Osenbridge, as many to Warre^dorfe, eight to Soest and as many to Cos^elde.
And than the king and the Queen suppe with the rest of the seruitours, and the
Preachers that were appointed to be sent forth. In supper time the king ryseth
up and says, he has a little business that the father has communded him, it
chanced that a soldier was taken prisoner, whom the king accuses of
treason as an other Judas, and beheaded him his self. After this he The kings
murder.
retourneth to his supper, and tells merely what he had done. After supper
these foresaid eight and twenty were sent away about night, and besides their
charges, every man had delivered him a piece of gold, which they were
commanded to leave in such places as would not admit their doctrine. Which
should be a token of their destruction and death everlasting, for refusyng of
peace and wholesome doctrine offered. Who setting forth, when every man came to
his place, they cried throughout the towns, that men should repent and do
penance, or The preachers of Mu^ster.
else they should shortly be destroyed, they spread their clothes upon the
ground before the Magistrate, and threw down upon the same the pieces of
gold which they had received, affirming how they are sent of the father to
offer them peace, which if they will receive, they bid the^ to communicate their
riches. But if they refuse so to do, than do they by this sign witness their
act and unthankfulness. For this is the same time that all the Prophets have
spoken of before, wherein God would have ryghteousnes observed, through out the
whole universal world. And when the king shall (according to his duty) have
brought the matter so to pass, that justice shall reign in all places, than
shall Christ deliver up the kingdom to his father.. What time they had spoken
thus, they were apprehended, and first by gentle means, and afterward by
torments being examined of their belief, and kind of life, and the
fortification of the city: They make answer how They be racked.
they only have the true doctrine, and that would they witness and stand to
the death. For since the Apostles time hitherto, the word of God was never
preached ryghtly: neither has there been any justice. And that there be four
Prophets, whereof two are just, David and John Leidane, and two unjust, the
bishop of Rome, and Luther, who is worse than the other is. Being damau^ded why
they did expulse the innocent people out of the city contrary to their
fidelity and promise, taking their goods, their wives and their children, and
by what place of Scripture they could prove, and defend this their justice?
They say that now is the time come, wherein Christ said, how the meke should
possess the earth. And yt after the same sort in times paste, God gave the
goods of the Egiptians unto the people of Israel. Afterward speaking of the
number of men and victualles within the city, they affirmed that diverse and
many had above five wives. Moreover how they looked daily for a greater power
out of Hollande and Friselande. So sone as they should come, the king would
march forward with his whole Army to subdue and co^quere the world,
destroying kings and Princes, for that they had not ministered justice. After
their racking, when they perseuered still in their purpose, and would
acknowledge Their obstiuacie.
no Magistrate, besides their own king, they were rewarded with the loss of
their heads. Nevertheless one escaped. But now was the city on every side
so narrouly and straightlye besieged, that there was no way to go out.
Wherefore the citezens fearing famine, and being careful for their own peril,
thought to apprehende the king, and send him to the bishop bound. But the
king hearing thereof, chose The King takes head to him self.
out twelve among them all, which he thought were most faithful unto him
and called them Dukes, and appointed to every of them a guard, and some part of
the town to keep, lest there should arise any tumulte among the people.
Than makes he promise to the multitude, how at Easter they should be
delivered, both from siege and penury But unto the twelve Dukes which he
chose, he promised more ample things a great deal, telling them how they
should have the chief rule and government, namyng also what countries, towns
and Castles, he would give unto every one of them. He said, he would only spare
the Lantgraue, for that he trusted that he would take his part at the length.
I showed you before of the assembly appointed at Confluence, in the month of
Decembre, for the states of the province of Rhine. Unto whom also Friderick the
Prince Electour of Saxony, annexed him self of his own accord. In this
assembly, after consultation had, was decreed to aid the bishop of Munster
immediately, with three hundredth horsemen, and three thousand footmen, for six
months: over the which garryson and the whole war also, Wiricke, County
Obersted had the charge. They decreed moreover, to solicit the residue of the
states imperial for their aid. And because the Emperor was in Spain, to
entreat king Ferdina^do, that against the month of April, he assign a
general metyng for the same purpose. After this they admonish them that were
beseged, by their letters earnestly written, that they should leave and forsake
their enterprise, which was so dishonest and wicked, as nothing could be
more: And unless they would obey, and submit them selves unto their laweful
magistrate, they do proteste that the bishop (who now besegeth them) shall not
want the aid of the whole Empire. This was at the end of Decembre. And at
the Ides of January, in the year a M.D. xxv. They write again with many words
in deed, but to small purpose, yet so as they commended and maintained their
quarrel: but unto that, which was objected unto them for making of a king,
they answered nothing at all. How be it in their letters to the Lantgraue,
they go about to excuse the matter, speakinge many things of the salle and
destruction of all wickedmen, and of the deliuerau^ce and kingdom of the Godly
in this life. And send him withal, the book of Restoration, before
mentioned, admonyshyng him to amend, and that he attempt no war against
them, as other wicked Princes do, for they are holy men and good people. The
Lantgraue readinge over their book and their letters, noted what he thought
blame worthy, and commanded his learned me^ to answer it. And for as much as
they had in few words and those abscure written that their king was not so
much of theirs, as of Gods appointment, he demands of the^, wherefore they
did not express those places of Scripture, whereby they thought it lawefull
thus to do? And why they did not confirm the thing before with signs and
wonders? For of the coming of Christ, God had declared long before by all
the Prophets, so evidently, that it was well known, not only of what house or
family, but also when and where he should be borne. They had also requested
that the matter might be heard, whereunto the Lantgraue answered, that the same
might not now take place. For so much as they had taken upon them the
authority of the sword, and had been the workers of so much mischief: For
all men see what mark they shoute at, certe^ly to subuerte all laws and
common wealth. And like as their intent is wicked and detestable, so is now
their request to have their cause heard, feigned and dissembled. He doubtless
sent unto the^ faithful preachers and ministers of the church, of whom they
were ryghtlye instructed. And where as they now conte^pning their doctrine, do
resist the errors and mischief of Anabap.
the magistrate, take other men's goods, mary sondrye wives, and have chosen
them a new king. Where also they deny that Christ took the humane nature of
the virgyn Mary, where they affirm that man has free will, where they compel
men to make their goods common, where they say there is no remission for a
sinner that falls, all these things are against the laws both of God and
man.

When this answer was brought unto the^, they write again, and send a book
with all compyled in the vulgar tongue, of the mysteries A book of yt
mi^^ries of scripture.
of Scripture. And again in an Epistle they amplefie their cause, and defend
their opinions. And in this book they divide the course and time of the whole
world into three parts, and the first age from Adam to Noe, they say was
destroyed with the Deluge of water, the second wherein we are now at this
day, shall be consumed with fire, but the The division of the world.
third shall be clean a new world, wherein justice shall reign:
nevertheless before this last time shall appear, this present age must be
pourged by fire, but that shall not be tofore that Antichriste shall be
revealed, and his power utterly abolyshed. Tha^ shall it come to pass, that
the scate of David, which is decayed, shall be newly erected, and Christ shall
possess his kingdom here in earth, and the wrytinges of the Prophets shall
be accomplyshed. And that this present world now, is like the time of Esaw.
For justice keeps silence, and the Godly are persecuted. But as after the
captivity of Babylon, so now also This present age cumpared to Esaw
the time of restoration is at hand, to deliver us from all these myseries,
and to render unto the wicked abundantly after their demerites, as in the
Apocalipse is declared: And that in this same Restoration goes before the
world to come, to the intent that all the ungodly being destroyed, the house
and seat of justice, might be prepared and beautified.

When the Lantgraue had red this book, he set in hand the Ministers of his
church to write against it. The residue of the states imperial assembled at
Essinge, do mislyke the doings of them that were at co^ffuence, affirming that
they had no authority to impose or charge them with any burden, unless it
had been by the consent of the Emperor and all states. In the month of
February, Corn within the city waxed very scarce, in so much that some also
died for honger and want of meat. It fortuned that one of the Queen's, pitieng
the people had said to the rest, how she supposed that God would not that
men should peryshe thus with famine.

The king which had his stoore houses furnyshed at home, not only The king
beheaded the Queen.
for necessity, but also for riot and voluptuousnes, after he knew it,
brought her forth in to the Market place, and all the rest with her, and
commaundynge her to knele down, stroke of her head, and when she was dead,
uttered her to have played the whore.

This done the residewe sing, and give thanks to God the heaue^lye father.
After that the king daunceth with them and exhorts the rest of the
multitude, which had nothing left them but bread and salt, to dauncynge
and merry pastymes. When Easter came and no deliverance appeared at all, the
king which had promised so stoutely, to inucnte some excuse, feigned him self
sick for the space of six days: After he comes abroad among the people,
and tells the^ how he has ryden on a blind Ass, and that God the father
has A blind ass
laid upon his back the sins of the people. Wherefore they are now made
clean, and delivered from every spotte. And this to be the deliverance which
he promised, wherewith they ought to hold them contented. Luther among other
things which he set forth in the vulgar tongue, about this time, wrote also
of this tragedye of Munster. Luthers writig of Mu^st.
Alas says he, how should I complain or lamente those wretched men? for the
thing it self declares, that there dwell deuylles thycke and threfolde: but
yet ought we to pray the infinite mercy of God herein, and have good cause so
to do. For albeit that for the contempt of the Gospel, the reproach of Gods
holy name, and the shedyng of innocent blood, Germany has justly deserved to
be plaged, yet has God hitherto restrained the force and violence of Satan,
and has not permitted him to have the reigns at liberty, but mercifully
admonysheth us, and by this tragedye of Munster, nothing at all artificious,
calls us to the amendment of life. For unless God had brydeled God bridleth
the power of Satan.
him, and holden him back, I doubt not, but that most subtille find, and
wily artificer, would have handled the matter far other wise. But now that
God has made a restraynte, he rages and tourmoyleth, not so much as he
would, but so much as he is permitted. For the wicked spirit, that seeks the
subversion of the Christian faith, goes not this way to work, to persuade the
marriage of many wives.

For seeing both the unlawfulness and the filthy beastlynes of the thing, is
apparent in the sight of all men, he perceives well enough that men would
abhor it. In deed the politic and civil government may through this mean
be disturbed, but the kingdom of Christ must be attempted with other weapons
and Ingines.

He that would circumuente and deceive men, may not affectate rule and
government, and play the tyrant: For all men disalowe By what meanesmen be
disceaued
this, and see plainly what his intent is. But he must attain thereunto by
secret means, as it were by certain bypathes. To go in old and evil
favored apparel, to look with a grave countenance, to hang down the head
toward the ground, to Fast, to handle Crooked necked cattle.
no Money, to absteyne from Flesh, to abhor Matrimonye, to eschew bearing
of office as a profane thing, to refuse gouernemente, and to profess a
wounderfull lowelynes of mind. This I say, is the ready way and mean, to
deceive them that be also right wise, and the which covertly and privily
sets open the way to a kingdom. But it is ouermuche impudency, for a man
to take upon him self to be king, and for his fleshly lust to mary as many
wives as he The craft of an ignorant Devil.
fansieth, this is not sure ye policy of any skilful devil, but of one yt is
yet rude and ignorant, or if he be expert, tha^ assuredly God has him so
bound in a chain yt he can work no more craftily. Which doubtless he does
for this intentethat we should fear his deity, and amend our lives, before
he let lose that cunning devil, which certainly will assault us much more
fiersly. For if this devil being but a simple grammarian, has styred up so
much trouble, what shall we than do, when Satan of much more knowledge, being
an expert Lawyer, and a perfect divine, shall make toward us with full sail.
Wherefore there is no great fear of this so ungoodly a devil. I suppose also
that all that be in the city, like not well this sport and game play, but
that many are right sorry, which not without syghynges and tears, desire of
God to be delivered, as chanced certain years since, also in the sedition of
the country men. And would to God, that in the whole world there were no
craftier Devil than this of Munster: So that God would not take his word from
us, I believe there are but few that would give any credit to so gross and
so drunken a master. And yet surely when Gods wrath is kyndled, there is no
error so absurd Gods wrath
or unsavory, which the Devil can not persuade, as we see happened in the
doctrine of Mahomet. For albeit, it is altogether folyshe, yet the light of
Gods word being quenched, it took force and strength, and is spread abroad
in such ample manner as you see. And if God had not infrynged the devise and
enterprise of Muncer, the same would have come to pass also in Germany. For
Satan can raise up a great By what means the devil is vanquished.
flamme through Gods permission, of a verey small spark: neither is there any
better way to quench the fire, than by the word of God: for where as ye
armure of our ennemies is al together incorporate, it ca^ neither be subdued
with tropes of horsemen, nor yet by the force of munition or other warlyke
furniture. But our Princes and Bishops go the contrary way to work. They
hinder the doctrine of the Gospel, by the which only the minds and hearts of
men can be healed. And in the mean time, exercise cruel punyshement, to bring
the body from the Devil, but they leave him the better part of man, which is
the heart and the soul: which thing shall have like success with the^, as it
had with the Jews in times past, who thought to que^che Christ by his cross
and passion. But as concerning those things, which they of Munster have
written and set forth, I suppose the thing stands thus, and their wrytinge
lately publyshed makes me so think, wherein they have gallantly painted out
their own furye.

For first touching faith they teach verey absurd things, and of Christ,
as though he were not borne of the virgyn Mary, not withstanding The errors of
the Munsterians in faith.
that they confess how he came of the seed of David. But they do not
sufficiently declare the things, and assuredly Satan brings up some
monstre. This in deed does he signify nothing darkely, that the seed or
flesh of Marye, can not deliver us, but he labors in vain: for the
Scripture says that Christ was borne of the virgin Mary, which vocable sure
in all tongues is referred unto the child In baptism.
which conceived of the flesh and blood of his mother, and taking shape, is
brought forth into the world. Again, where they condemn the baptism of the
time paste as a profane thing, it is vnwittely done of them. For they do not
judge or esteem that work as a thing ordained of God, but of man only. But in
case every thing ought to be despised and cast away that wicked men give or
have, I marvel surely wherefore they do not as well contemn gold, silver, and
other riches, taken from the wicked, and inuente some new metal or other
devise. For like as these are, so is also baptism, the work and creation of
God. When the wicked swears, he abuses the true name of God: If he have not
the true name of God, he offends nothing. He that robeth or steals,
breaks the commandment of God: In case he have not the true commandment
of God, he synneth not: so likewise if the former baptism be nothing, than
such as are washed therewith, have not erred. Why tha^ do these fellows
detest the Christening of though it were a wicked thing, where it is nothing
at all, as they them selves do confess. If the marriages of this fourmer time,
were to be accounted for whoredom and adultery, because they were contracted
Of marriage
of such as wanted faith (as they say) I pray you do not they grant them
selves to be whore sons all the pack of them? Now if they be bastardes and
misbegotten, tell me why do they enjoy the lands and patrimony of the city
and of their auncesters? Reason would in deed that for as much as they are
of that sort, they should inherit no land but in this their new kind of
matrimony, should provide them new possessions and riches, which might have
a more honest title: For it is not semelye, that so holy and Godly people as
they do pretend to be, should live of the unlawful and bastardelye goods
of Harlottes, much less take them from others, by vyolence and plain
robberye. And as touching their foolyshe kingdom, there be so many and open
crimes in this one thing, that it needs no longer discourse: And certainly
that which is said, may seem over much and not greatly necessary,
especial seeing that all these matters are sufficiently treated and declared
of others.

In the assemblye of the Empire, which King Ferdinando, at the request of
the Princes, kept by his Deputes, in the Month of April at Worms, the
cities which hitherto had given no money, do proteste in the beginning, that
their coming thither was not for The assembly at Worms.
the decree made at confluence, but only to obey the Emperor and king
Ferdinando. After they had great altercatio^ with the Princes, about
contribution. At the length they condescended to give aid for five months,
twenty thousand crowns monthly, they decreed moreover that what time the
city should be won or taken, the innocent people should be spared, and that
such good men, as either be there beseged, or else are fled thence, should be
restored to their goods. When this decree was made, the bishop of Munster
delivers his army unto Obersten. But where as the money was over neglige^tly
levied, and almost in deed to late, there could no notable exploicte be done.
And the captains them selves, for lack of money, were oftener than ones in
danger of their lives, through the sedicion of the soldiers. What time the
matter was brought to such an extremity within the city, that many died
daily for famine, many also departed thence, and went a broad so pyned and
hongerstoruen, that their very ennemies had pity and compassion upon them: The
Captains sent word to the The city was required to render
towns men, that in case they would deliver the king and certain others, they
should have no harm. Which albeit the citezens would feign have done, yet
were they so afraid of the kings cruelty, and vigila^cie, that they durst
attempt nothing, for he was so obstinate, that so long as any thing remained
for him self and a few others to eat, he would never render. Wherefore the
captains write again, and bid them send out no more from hence forth, not
so much as women or children. This was the first day of June: The next day
they wrote an answer, The co^plait of ye Munsterians.
complaining that their matter could not be heard, and said they were afflicted
without desert of their part: For if any man could detecte them of error,
they would do as should become them. After this they do expound a certain
place of Daniel, of the fourth beast which was much more cruel than all the
rest. The conclusion of their letters was, that they would through Gods help
persevere still in this confession of the verity. All which things were thus
written after the kings mind. But when things were brought to a marvelous
extremity Two escaping betraye the city.
in the city, two certain men escaped out, the one of them was taken of the
soldiers, the other upon his fidelity came to the bishop, and either of the^
showed the mean how to win the city. County Obersten and the bishop,
hearing both their tales, the two and twenty of June, sommoned the town,
charging the citezens to render it up and yield them selves, that the people
might be saved, and not perysh thus for honger. They cause Rotman to answer on
the walls, the king standing there by, in such sort as they would not
relent nor change their purpose. Two days after about aleuen a clock in the
night, the fotemen were brought closely to the city, and certain chosen
soldiers, through the conduict of the two men escaped, got over the dyche up
to wall, and slew the watch: others followyng the^, find the posterne gate
open, and about five hondreth with certain captains and ensigns entered the
city. Than the tounes men being assembled together, stayed the rest that
would likewise have invaded, and long it was or ever they could put them
back and shut the gate, that done, they give charge by and by upon those that
were come in, and slew many of them. And when they had foughten sore by the
space of one hour or The wynnyng of Mu^ster.
two, the soldiers that were enclosed, stepped to the next gate, that was kept
with a small guard, and break it open perforce, and so made way for their
fellows without, which immediately pressed in with a strong power. And whereas
the towns me^ at the first made resistaunce, and kept the market place, which
they had well fortified for their own defense, at the last the matter being
desperate, and many of them stayne, at the first encountre, they craved and
found mercy. But the king and Cnipperdoling were taken at the same instante:
Botman being out of The king is taken.
all hope to live, running among his ennemies where they were thickest was
stayne, lest he should come into their hands alive. When the City was won,
the Bishop took to him self the munitio^ and half Rotman desperate.
the spoil, after discharging his army, he reserueth to him self two
enseignes only to asiste him in the city.

Than followed an other counsel imperial at Worms, in the month of July,
wherein king Ferdinando by his deputes, propounded and demands, whether that
the city being now taken, they shall treat furthermore how to destroy all
the Anabaptists: He admonysheth them also to call upon the Bishop of Rome for
a counsel. They say that as touching the Anabaptists, it has been all ready
set forth by diverse proclamations, what is mete to be done. And the Bishop The
bishop of Munster demands his charges.
has been often enoughe solicited for a counsel even by the Emperor him
self: neither can they do any thing more therein. In the same counsel the
bishop of Munster requires to be recompensed for his charges, and co^playneth
that the money promised was not yet paid. When nothing else could be concluded,
and very few states also were there present: An other metinge was there
assigned against Nouembre, wherein they should take order for the accomptes and
charges of the war, and how the common wealth of Munster hereafter should be
governed. When the day was come, Ferdinando his Ambassador in few words
repeteth the causes of that assembly, and that among other things they
might devise also, how the city lately taken, may remain from hence forth in
the old religion. After this the Bishops Ambassador declares what charges
he has been at all this war time, what great somes of money he has
borrowed, and How after the city was taken, for the avoiding of tumultes and
^ut there danger he was enforced to build two fortes in the city and to manne
them: Of all the which things he desires that a consideration might be had.
Hereunto answer was made that the bishop had the greatest part of the spoil,
all the munition, and also the citezens goods. All the which things do in
deed apperteyne to the common wealth of the Empire: wherefore reason would that
of al these things an estimate should be made, and so much be out of the
charges diducted, and than the overplus to be answered accordinglye. After it
is decreed, that the bishop of Munster should be under the Empire, according to
the old custom, that all the Nobility of the city should be restored, and
the citezens also that are fled away so that they be not Anabaptists. Touching
Religion the Bishop shall take order therein according to the decrees of the
Empire, that in the spring of the next year following the Ambassadors of the
Princes should go to Munster, and understand the state of the citezens, that
they save the innocent people, and destroy all the fortifications made by the
Anabaptists, and that the bishop shall also cast down the two fortes which
he has builded within the city. And that he execute immediately the king,
Cnipperdoling, and Crechtinge, prisoners according to their demerites, and keep
them no longer.

To that point concerning Religion, the Duke of Saxon, the Lantgraue, the Duke
of Wirtemberge, and County Anhalde, protested openly, that they would never
assente to. The cities also professed the same, neither would they have the
old fortification defaced, for the new they were not against. The king and
his two fellows were The king and his fellows carried about (...)
carried hither and thither unto Princes, for a show and mockery. By the which
occasion the Lantgraues preachers enter in disputation with the king,
touching these opinions chieflye of the kingdom of Christ, of Magistrates,
of Justification, of Baptism, of the Lords Disputation with ye king (...)
supper, of the incarnation of Christ, and of Marriage, and by the testimonies
of Scripture priuayle so far, that albeit they did not change him wholly,
which strove and defended his opinions stiffly, yet did they turn him and
co^founde him, so that in fine he granted to many things, which not
withstanding he was supposed to have done to save his life. For when he
returned unto him the second time, he promised if he might have his pardon,
to bring to pass, that the Anabaptists which were in Hollande, Brabant,
England and Freselande, an exceadyng great number, should keep silence, and
obey the Magistrates in all things. Afterward the same preachers reasoned
with his fellows also, both by mouth and writing, of mortification, of
Christening of Children, of the communion of goods, of the kingdom of
Christ. What time they were brought to Telget, the king being demanded of the
Bishop, by what authority he durst be so bold to usurp so much liberty
upon his City and people? He asked him again who gave him that power and
authority over the City? And where The bold answer of the king.
the Bishop made answer, that by the consent of the College and the people,
he had that rule and jurisdiction: And I (said he) was called hither of God.
At the thirtene kale^das of February, they were brought again to Munster, and
committed every man to a several prison. And the same day also, came the
Bishop thither accompanied with the Archbishop of Collon, and the Ambassadors
of the Duke of Cleue. The space of two days followyng, was spent in Godly
admonitions, that they might be reduced from their heresy: And in deed the
king confessed his fault, and fled unto Christ through prayer. The other two
neither would acknowledge any offense and yet stood obstinatly in their
opinions. The next day the king was brought up to the skaffold and tied to a
post: There were two hangemen ready and each of them a pair of tongues read
hot: at the three first pulles he held his peace, afterward calling
continually for Gods mercy, when he had been The cruel death of the king.
thus turmented an hour and more, and at the last was thrust to the heart with
a sharp poynted dagger, he left his life: and his fellows had the same
punyshement. When they were dead, they were fastened to grates of iron, and
hanged out of the highest tower of the City, called saynet Lambertes, the king
in the mids a man's height above the other two.

In the month of January, of this present year, died the lady Katherine
Dowager, whom Henry the eight king of England, had The death of queen
Katherine.
put away three years before. I showed you in the fourth book, how Fridericke
Duke of Holste, was by the help of the Lubeckes, made king of Denmark. After
whose death there arrose mortal war between his son Christian that was
king after him, and the City of Lubecke. But where as the Duke of Saxon, the
Lantgraue, Ernest Duke of Lunenburge, and the City of Breme, Hamborough,
Mayde^burge, Brunswicke, Lunenburge, and Hildisseme, entreated a peace. This
year in the month of February, all was pacified. Than had Charles Duke of
Sauoye, a certain space maynteyned war against the City of Geneua, being
aided by the Bishop of the same City, or The war of Geneua with ye duke of
Sauoy.
set on rather, partly for the profession of the Gospel, and partly for other
matters. And the City of Geneua, was joined in league with the City of Bernes
in Swicerla^de of whom at the length receiving great aid, they gave the
repulse to their ennemies. And they of Bernes marching further, subdued all that
lay commodious for their country, even to the look of Geneua. The residue of
the Swicers also, that bordered The aid of Bernes.
upon Sauoye, did the same. Whylest this was a working, the king of France,
which had long before purposed to war in Italye, but especially since the
death of Fraunces Sfortia, leuieng his Army in the beginning of the spryng
time, makes war also with the Duke The French king against the Duke of
Sauoye.
of Sauoye his uncle, for a controversy of inheritance, which he said was
due unto him, possessed and deteyned by the Duke. Who being already much
inpoueryshed by the Swycers, and therefore an unmeet match for so puissaunt an
enemy, was in short time dispossessed in manner of his whole Duckdome. For the
king passing over the Alps, inuadeth also the country of Piedmount, and
among other takes Turrine, the chiefest town in those parts and fortifieth
it with works and strength of men, by the conduict of Philippe Schabotte
Admiral. The Duke of Sauoy had married Beatriche daughter to Emanuell king of
Portugal, and the Emperors sister Isabel. And in the former time, he addicted
him self to neither of them: but now where he seemed to incline to the
Emperor, he styred up the king his nephew by his own sister Lewesse against
him. Some report how bishop Clement, what time he was at Marseilles, as in
the last book is recited, The Popes counsel to invade Sauoy
gave the king this counsel, that in case he intended to recover Millan, he
should first seek to be lord of Sauoy and Piedmonte, adjoining to the same.
How soever it was, the king in the year followyng, after a certain new
custom ordained through out the Realm of France legions of Soldiers, to
the number of forty thousand, Legions of Soldiers.
which should exercise their weapons, and be in a readynes, when time of
service came. For where as aunciently the kings of France have always
maynteined cheualry, and their whole force has been horsemen, this man would
have also footmen ready monstered, that he should not evermore have need of
foreign soldiers. And the kings purpose was to lead forth his army, and
make war thereby in Lu^bardie, to the intent he might recover the Duckdome of
Milla^, which he had before enjoyed six years together, and contented that it
was his, and the right of his children by Ualentine his grandmother, sister to
Philippe Uicecounte, the last Duke of Millan of that family. And thus the
matter stands. The house of Uicecou^tes, bare a noble brute The house of
vicecou^tes
in Lumbardie. And the first of them is accounted Otho, Archebyshop of Millan,
who in the time of Raffe Emperor, expulsed the Turrians, a noble and worthy
family, whom his nephewe Matthewe, his brother Theobaldus son, succeeded
after him Galeace, Actius, Luchine, John, Matthew the second, Galeace the
second, Barnabas, John Galeace, whom the Emperor We^ceslans created the first
Duke of Millan. He had two sons, John, and Philippe, which died both without
issewe, and one daughter, Ualentine. Fraunces Sfortia, a stout warrior,
married the bastard daughter of Philip, and by that occasion usurped the
Dukedom of Millan, secludyng Uale^tine, Philippes sister, whom Lewys, Duke of
Orleaunce, brother to Charles the sixth, king of France, had married. Sfortia
had three sons, Galeace, Lewis, Ascanius. Whereof Lewis invaded the Dukedom,
The French kings title to Millan.
and begot two sons, Maximilian and Fraunces. The Duke of Orleaunce, had by
Ualentine, Charles, Philippe and John. Charles was father to Lewis Duke of
Orleaunce, which was after king of France, the twelfth of that name. Philippe
died without issewe John Earl of Engolesme, had a son named Charles, father
to king Fraunces, who took Maximilian Sfortia prisoner, and subdewed all
Lumbardie. But Leo the tenth and the Emperor, dispossessing him again,
restored Fraunces Sfortia an exile. Who being now dead, king Fraunces to
reclayme his right (as he says) and to be aue^ged, moves war again. For
that after the death of Sfortia, the Emperor had taken the possession of
Lumbardie, by Anthony Leua, who^ he left his depute there, what time he sailed
into Barbaria, as before is mentioned.

Wherefore so sone as he had any knowledge of the kings enterprise, he leuieth
immediately all the power he might in Germanye and other places, to come into
Italy. And coming from Naples to Rome in the beginning of April, within a few
days after his repair, he required that a Senate might be called, wherein
before the bishop The Emperous oration against the French king
and a great number of Cardinals, and the Ambassadors of foreyne Princes, he
had a grave and a vehement oration against the French king, who breakyng
league, of an old hatred and malice, hinders and impecheth his most worthy
and Godly enterprises. The end of his oration was to declare, that he was
ready to fight with him the combat, to the intent that through the private
loss of one of them two, rather than by public damage of the whole world,
the war might ones have an end.

Before he departed from Naples, The Uenetians entered into league The Uenetians
league with ye Emperor.
with him against the Turk, the rather for that they hoped well, that he would
deliver the possession of Millan to some private man. For the states of Italy,
chiefly the Uenetians, wouldneyther that the Emperor nor yet the French king
should enjoy the goodly Dukedom of Millan. And therefore in these former
years, they conspyred oftentimes, one while against the French king, an
other while against the Emperor, that Fraunces Sfortia might be restored, of
whom they supposed to stand in less danger. For the league which Clement
and the Uenetians made against the Emperor, ten years before, was for this
cause only. Thinkyng that the Emperor having displaced Sfortia, would have
kept to his own use, all Lumbardie, which in deed they supposed would be to
their great hinderaunce. And where at the intercession of Bishop Clement (six
years past) he restored Sfortia at Boloigne la grass, he got him wonderful
favor and great good will. At Naples also the Emperor finished up the marriage
of his bastard daughter, with Alexander Medices, whom he had made Duke of
Florence, as I told you in the seventh book. The Duke of Florence marieth the
Emperors bastard.
This Alexander was the bastard son of Laurence Medices, which had to father
Peter, which was drowned in the mouth of Lire, as in the last book is
mentioned. You have heard how Uergerius was sent into Germany. When the
Emperor was arrived at Naples, the bishop calls him home again, who
returning with great expedition, when he came to Rome, declares his Ambassade,
how the protestauntes required to have a free and a Christian counsel, and
that within the precinct of the Empire, in a place convenient, as the Emperor
had made them promise. Of Luther and the rest, there is no hope Luthers
constancy.
unless they be dispatched out of the way. And as concerning the king of
England, the Protestauntes will not assente to it, and the rest of the
Princes are very cold.

How George Duke of Saxonye, affirms that there is great danger of the
Lutherians, which can not be otherwise eschewed or avoided, unless the
Emperor and the Bishop make war against them right shortly. Which thing
when the Bishop understood, he sends him to Naples with all speed, to recite
these things to the Uergerius sent to the Emperor.
Emperor, especially concerning the war to be attempted against the
Lutheria^s. Aterwardes wha^ the Emperor was come to Rome, he was earnestly in
hand to have a counsel called, and coueted greatly to carry with him the
letters patentes of the same: The Bishop said he was content, notwithstanding
he would chouse some city in Italy, and prescribe therein certain conditions
necessary for the church of Rome. Hereunto the Emperor so that he would do
it ones, he cared for no more. For he would bring the greater part of Germany
to follow him herein, so therefore the Bishop chouseth out nine of that nu^bre
to make the writ. Those were Campegius, Cesius, Simonet, Ginucius, Co^tarene,
Poole, Cardinals: The Archbishop of Brunduse, The diuisers of the b^ll.
the Bishop of Rhezo, and Uergerius tha^ made bishop of Modruse, and not long
after of Instinopulis. All these together, first in the Bishops presence,
afterward severally by them selves devise the form of Somoning the counsel.

You have heard before of the Ambassadors of England, with whom it was
accorded at Smalcalde upon certain conditions, that the king should set forth
the pure doctrine of the Gospel, which they professed at Auspurge, and
maynteyne the same with them in a lawefull counsel, if any such shall be: that
neither of them admit the calling or place of a counsel, but by common
assent. Nevertheless if it may appear by certain and manifest reasons, that
any such counsel is like to be, as has been declared to Peter Paul Uerger,
the Bishops legate that it be not refused: but in case the bishop continue
his purpose, that than his enterprise be let, and by open protestation be
refused. And like as the king has joined him self to their religion, so
likewise to join with them in league also, and to be called the Patroneand The
king of England is patron of ye Pro^. league
defendour of the same. That common opinion of the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome, to be utterly rejected for ever. If any war be attempted against other
part for Religion or other cause, that no aid be given unto him that
inforceth the same. That for the defense of the league the king shall pay one
hundredth thousand crowns, whereof the one half the confederatours shall and
may employe, wha^ need shall require, the rest of the charges to be borne of
their own money, which they shall contribute among them: but if the war
shall long endure, and the force of the ennemy drive them to it, tha^ the king
to disburse two hundredth thousand crowns, for as much as they if the like
chance should fortune, stand also bound, not only to spend their goods but
their blood and life also. And of this sum also the like consideration to be
had as before, and that it be not employed to any other use, than to defend
the league, and the remainder to be restored when the war is finished. That
the Ambassadors shall write to the king hereof, and when they know his mind,
to advertise the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue thereof, that after a common
Ambassade The english Ambassad. winter at Witteberg^
may be sent unto him. When the Ambassadors had sent these requests unto the
king, going than to Wittemberge they passed away the rest of the winter there.
And in the mean while reasoned with the divines there of certain articles, but
their chief controversy was about the marriage of Priests, the Lords supper,
the Popyshe mass, and monastical vows. But their chief desire was, that the
divines would approve the kings diuorsement, but they said, they could not
do it by the scriptures. And when they had alleged many things to persuade
the matter, and this one chieflye that the bishop Clement varied in his
sentence, and had declared to the French king in private talk, what he
thought: The divines answered, that in case it were so, the king had great
cause so to do. But where they urged the^ to say the cause was most just, to
that would they not grant. And now when letters were come out of England,
pourporting the declaration The kings letters to the Protestants
of the kings mind herein, the Ambassadors do advertise the prince Electour
hereof. And the.xij. day of March at Wittemberge, whether the Duke was at that
time come, speaking first many things of the kings great good will, declare
how the most part of the requests do content him, if a few might be amended.
And albeit that in England all thing is quiet, neither is there any cause
wherefore the king should fear any man, and if happily any cause has been,
the same is now taken away by the death of his wife forsaken, nevertheless to
recover and maintain the true doctrine, he does not refuse to de^ray the sum
of money which they require, so that the league go forward, and hereof will
treat more at large with their Ambassadors. And where they offer unto him
this honor that he should be defendour and pairone of the league, he gives
them great thanks, and acknowledges their good will. And although he
understands, with how much envy and displeasure, the same is annexed, yet
for the common wealths sake, he could be content, if they can agree upon the
first and second demand. For unless there be an uniformity in doctrine, he
supposes that this charge can not be greatly to his honor. But he would
chiefly wyshe that the learned men of his Realm and theirs, might be wholly of
one opinion. And where he sees The king of England requires a conference of
learned men.
well that the same will not be, unless certain places of the confession and
Apology of their doctrine, may before through private talk be some thing
qualified. Therefore he desires them instantlye to send their Ambassadors,
and among them some one that is excellently learned, which may confer with
his divines of the whole doctrine and ceremonies, and determine the matter. And
where he shows him self so lyberall unto them, he requires again, that in
case any man attempt war against him, first they will aid him either
with five hondreth horsemen, or else with ten Ships well manned and fournyshed
for four months. Further more, that upon his own charges, they shall provide
him two thousand horsemen, and five thousand footmen. Finally that the
sentence which the divines of The kings deuorceme^t.
Wittemberge prononced touching the diuorcement made, they would approve also,
and defend in the next counsel. The Duke answers that for as much as the
whole matter concerns his consortes, he will make them privy to it, and use
their counsel in the same.

After the four and twenty day of April, was assigned for all to mete at
Franckeforth, both for this and other causes. And first they prescribe there a
form for their Ambassadors to follow, which should be sent into England,
wherein it was provided among other things, that when they shall come
thither, and perchance conclude upon a league, that in all things they do
except by express words, the Empire, and the Emperor, unto whom they are
bound by their oath and fidelity. Ambassador for the city was appointed
James Sturmius, Received in to league.
and the divines were Melanchthon, Bucer, and George Draco.

In this assembly, were received into the league Ulriche Duke of Wyrtemberge,
Bernine and Philippe brethren, Dukes of Pomerane George and Ioachime brethren,
Countes of Anhalde. Moreover the cities of Auspurge, Franckeforte, Kempten,
Hamborough, Haunobria: they treated also of other things appertayning to the
league and defense thereof, and of the judgment of the imperial chamber. It was
decreed moreover to send messengers and letters to the Emperor, thereby to
answer to the Epistle sent them from Naples. And where as George Duke of
Saxon, for the exceadyng hatred he bare to Luthers doctrine, was oftentimes at
great contention and suit with the Prince Electour of Saxon, this man's father,
and at the last an agreement was made, and now broken again by the said Duke
George diverse ways. The Prince Electour declaringe the whole matter by his
Ambassadors to his consortes in this assembly, requestyng to be assisted with
their aid and counsel, in case he attempt any force or violence. After the
assembly brake up the tenth day of May.

And in the beginning of June, the king of England having condemned The
lamentable death of Queen Anne.
his wyue Queen Anne, of adultrye and inceste, but unjustly as it is supposed
and proved since, causes her head to be stryken of, after that she had borne
him a daughter, calls Elizabeth. And with her were executed certain Gentlemen
of the kings privy chaumbre, Noreis Weston; Brewton and one Marks, which
contrary to his conscience (as it is reported) for hope of preferement
subscribed to a byll, whereby he condemned both him self and all the rest.

For where the Lord Admiral Fizt Williams, that was after Earl of
Southhampton, said unto him, subscribe Marks, and see what will come of it,
he subscribed, and received therefore a reward unlooked for. And also the Lord
of Rochforte the Queen's brother, through the false accusation of that errant
strompet his wife, which afterward suffered therefore, according to her
deserts. Which doulfull tragedy took clean away the Ambassade, that should
have been sent into England.

When the war was hotely begone between the Emperor and A counsel is called.
the French king, Paul the third publishes a wrytinge under his Bulls of
lead, the sum whereof is, to call a counsel at Mantua against the.xxiij. day
of May, in the year followyng, commanding al Archbishops and bishops, and
other heads of churches to be there at the same day, under the penalty by the
ecclesiastical laws prescribed, for disobedience. Furthermore he charge and
desires the Emperor, kings and princes, and al others, which either by law
or custom have interest to be there, for the love of Christ and the common
welthes sake, to come in person, or if they be otherwise let, tha^ to send
their Ambassadors with their full authority, to remain till the end of the
counsel, that the church may be reformed, heresies weded clean out, and
war attempted against the ennemies of Religion. This was the effect thereof
whereunto subscribed six and twenty Cardinals. The seventh of June, king
Ferdinando sent James Sturcelly, a Ciuilian Ambassador from Insprucke to the
Swycers. I hear says he, how the French king has required your aid, but
not obtained, which was to me great pleasure, and I have advertised the
Emperor hereof. And certainly reason would it should so be. For the Emperor
gave none occasion of this war, but was fully resolved this summer to have
warred upon the Barbarians and the ennemies of our Religion. Notwithstanding
Against the French king.
the French king immediately after the death of Fraunces Sfortia Duke of
Millan (albeit he has no right nor title thereunto, and a composition made
touching the whole matter certain years paste) contrary to the conuenauntes
sought to renew war, and to recover Lumbardy. And at the same time passing
the Alps with a great army, invaded the Duke of Sauoye, a Prince of the
Empire, to the intent that having ones subdued his country, he might have the
way open to pass further. And now that the Emperor has levied an army to
resist him, as he was in deed constreined, I am informed that he craves now
aid again of you. Nevertheless for as much as he breakyng his fidelity
has commenced wars a fresh, I desire you that you do not assiste him.
Whereby you shall do the Emperor and me pleasure, and preserve the quiet of
your own common wealth, The Protestants send to the Emp.
In this mean while the Protestants had sent an Ambassade to the Emperor in
Italy, to make their purgation in that he had charged them by letters to have
taken the church goods, and further more to complain of the judges of the
Imperial chamber. But before the Ambassadors were arrived, the Emperor, the
seuenthe of Iulye, had sent letters to the Protestauntes, from the Town of
Sauilie. signifieng how he has at al times both present and absent, by his
letters The Empe. letters to the Protestant.
and Ambassadors, sought the quiet of Germany, and has both promised them
peace in their Relygion, and also performed the same. And now for as much as
the French king, against whom he is enforced to raise an army, may
perauenture by false suggestion persuade with them, that he would now take
occasion to break that treuce of Religion, therefore has he thought good to
admonyshe them by his letters, to believe no such thing, but assure them
selves, that he would observe his promise, neither would he move war upon
any man for religion, nor styre up any trouble in Germany: for all this
preparation of war is to mainteyne his right and authority. Wherefore let them
quiet them selves, and styre not, what so ever they shall hear: For this shall
be both to him acceptable, and to them also profitable.

When the Emperors power was come altogether, he marched The Empe. inuadeth
the French provinces.
through the myddest of Italye with a strong army, till he came in to
prouynce of France. The king had encamped him self at Auignion, betwyxte the
Ryuers of Rhosne and Druence, and destroyinge the country. Whereinto he
perceived the Emperor would come, and keeping him self from geuynge the
battle, he brought his ennemies into great perplexity and myserie.

For the Emperor enforced through the penury and scarscitie of all things,
and the loss of many thousands, which died for famine and pestilence, and
also for the death of Anthony Levy, discharges the rest of his Army and
retourneth to Genes.

An other Army of his, that warred this summer in Uermandoys, Peronne beseged.
beseged the town of Peronne, by the co^duicte of Henry Earl of Nassowe, but
preuayling not, levied the siege about the same time that the Emperor retired
in the province, and the report of either news brought unto Paris the same
day, reioysed the city exceadynglye. For they were in very great fear, and
the Preachers in their Sermons to the people inuehed sore against the Emperor.
And the kings Lieutenauntes began to intrenche the city, and kept the gates
with watch and ward. William Furstemberge a Germane, served the French king
in this war.

About the beginning of this war ended his life the French The death of
Fraunces the Dolphin
kings eldest son Fraunces, the Daulphin, eyghtene years of age, the
report went that he was poisoned, and one Sebastian de moute Cuculo an
Italian, being had in suspicion, was first racked, and after torn in pieces
with sondrye horses at Lions. And the king afterward in his letters to the
Princes of Germanye, among other made a grievous complainte hereof, against
Anthony Levy, and Ferdinando Gonzage the Emperors Lieutenauntes, in whom he
laid all the blame. Herman Archebyshop of Collon, of long time intending A
reformation of Collon.
a reformation of his church, holds at this time a counsel of his own
province, calling to it as the manner is, the Bishops within his
jurisdiction, of Liege, Utreicht, Munster, Osenbridge, and Minds. Herein were
decrees made of ceremonies and doctrine, and after set forth in a book
compyled by John Gropper wherein were al Popyshe Ceremonies for the most part
painted out with new colors, which book did not content the Bishop than, as
hereafter shall be declared.

About this time also in the month of July, Erasmus of Roterdam The death of
Erasmus
departed out of this life, an old man of three score and ten years, and was
buried at Basil. How excellently learned, and how eloquent a man he was, and
how much al learning is bound to him, his own works shall testify. By
occasion of puttyng down papistrie in England, and suppressing of certain
Abbeyes, under three hundredth marks of yearly valewe, there arose a commotion
in Lynkcolneshyre, in a Commotion in Linkcolnshyre.
market town they call Lowthe, styred up by Doctor Mackerell a false Monk,
who named him self captain Cobblar, and after that it was appeased by the
Duke of Southfolke the kings Lyeutenaunt, an other began in York shyre, a
grear deal worse. For those Rebels were many and strong, and came as far
as Dankcaster, where the Duke of Northfolke met them with the kings power, and
when they should have joined together in battle by the mediation of the Earl
of Shrewisbury, which was a man well-beloved of the commons, the matter was taken
up without bloodshed. Their chief Captain was Robert Ask, who was after
executed for his treason, with certain others of the Nobility his adherentes.
Unto the letters which Captain Ask.
the Emperor wrote in July, the Protestau^tes answer the nynth day of
Septembre, and where it pleased him to write so gentle and so lyberally, they
show him how they conceive great pleasure in their minds: for albeit they
did never distruste his promise, yet for as much as diverse reports of his
displeasure came to their ears, and again for that the judges of the
imperial chamber and others, making none account of the peace concluded, did
proceed diverse ways against them, they had some cause to doubt and fear
the matter. But now that he has written again so lovingly and plainly, they
are out of all doubts, that he will perform the same, and refuse the
sclaunderous reports of their adversaries: likewise will they do, and give no
credit unto such as shall otherwise report of him, and in all other things
also, do according to their duty, than came they to the counsel which the
Bishop had lately appointed at Mantua. And for as much as the Emperor had
oftentimes promised them a free counsel in Germany, and especially in the
peace concluded at Norinberge, and what this shall be, they can not perceive by
the writing, they desire him that he would see the matter might be
indifferently heard and used. In this same month the bishop of Rome publysheth
an The Pope will reform the court of Rome.
other writing and says how in the mean time till the counsel begin, he
will refourme the holy city of Rome, the head of all christendom, and maistres
of doctrine, manner and disciplyne, and wash it clean from all spots and
vice, to the intent that his own house being first well pourged, he may after
more easily take order for the rest, and because the nature of man is full of
imbecillitie, neither can he do so great a thing alone, and also dispatche
other affairs of the common wealth, therefore has he chosen certain
Cardinals, whom the living God has joined to him, as the coadiutours and
companions of his cure and of office, to be the workers of this necessary and
wholesome busynes, the Cardinal of Ostia, Sauseuerine, Ginute, Simonet, and with
them three bishops, whom he commands all men to obey under a great penalty.

In the month of Octobre the Emperor imbarketh him self at The king of
Scotts married yt French kings daughter.
Genes to sail into Spain. The French king came afterward to Paris, and
on new years day, gives in marriage madame Magdalene his eldest daughter, to
James the fifth, king of Scotts, who came into France in Autumn before. And
in manner about the same time Laurence Medices, through treason in the night,
murdered Alexander Medices Duke of Florence, of his own kyndred and family,
The Duke of Florence slain by his cosyn.
when he had allured him home to his house, putting him in hope to enjoy a
noble matrone, that was his neighbor, who in beauty and honest fame, far
excelled others. Who being slain, the government came unto Cosmus Medices,
which after by the Emperors consent, married Elenor daughter to Peter Toletane
Uiceroy of Naples.

At the Ides of January, the king of France came in to the court of Parliament
at Paris, which thing is seldom accustomed. And there in a great audience,
he makes a sore complaint of the Emperor, and declared causes, why the
countries of Flaunders and Artois, which the Emperor holds of the kings of
France, as his elders have done also, ought to be called again to the
patrimony of France. The speaker hereof was Capell the kings advocate, and he
named The Swycers sewe to the king for the Gospellers.
him not Emperor, but Charles of Austriche. In the mean time the cities of
Zuricke, Bernes, Basyll and Strausborough, make suit to the French king, for
such as were imprisoned for Religion, entreating him that the exiles might be
restored, the king granted partly unto their requests, but yet accomplished
not their desire. Wherefore when they had received their answer the four and
twenty of February by Annas Momorantie the Conestable, and suspected that the
king through his impulsion, dealt the less friendly with them, the
Ambassadors used afterward the help of the Queen of Navarre, the kings
own sister, a very good lady, and which bare a great zeal to the true
doctrine. In this mean while the king having mustred his men, in the beginning
of March leadyng his army toward Arras, besegeth the town and strong
castle of Hesdine, which he had rendered Hesdine rendered.
to him within a month.

At the self same time came to the king an Ambassador from the bishop of
Rome, Reignalde Poole an Englysh man borne, of the blood Cardinal Poole the
Popes Ambassador to the French king.
roial, lately made Cardinal. The cause of his ambassade was thought to be to
work some mischief against the king of England. About the same time that the
king of Scotts married the French kings daughter, the bishop had sent him for
a present a fair sword, rich, and well wrought, and did exasperate him
against the king of England. For the bishops are accustomed on Christmas
day at night, among other things, with certain ceremonies to consecrate, as
they term A sword hallowed.
it, a sword, which after for an honor and token of benevolence, they give
or send unto some man to whom it lyketh them. Sixtus the fourth was first
author of this custom, as is mentioned in the book Pooles book against king
Henry the eight.
of their ceremonies. Afterward Cardinal Poole wrote a book, which he had
entitled, a defense for the unity of the church. And he addresseth his style
and speech unto king Henry, and reprehe^deth him sore, that he took upon him
to be head of his church, for that title to be long only to the Bishop of
Rome, which is the Uicar of Christ and Cold reasons for the popes supremacy.
the successor of Peter, whom Christ appointed Prince of the Apostles: For
he it was only that answered, how Christ was the son of God: upon him as
upon a Rock, Christ builded his church. And how Christ prays for his
faith that he being converted, might also convert his brethren: And that John,
after Christ's death did ever obey Peter. And what time they made haste both
to Christ's Sepulcher, he would not go in before, but gave him this honor. The
cure and charge to feed the sheep, was committed chiefly to him of Christ. And
the net also full of fysshe, which many were not able to hale up was drawn
upon the shore by Peter alone.

Than has he a long discourse of the deaths of the bishop of Rochester, and
sir Thomas Moore, detestinge his cruelty. Moreover, how the king had
afflicted all the states of his realm, And into how much mysery, he had
brought a most floryshynge kingdom, what danger he stood in of the Emperor,
for the diuorsement of his Aunt, and subversion of Religion, and shows him
how he neither can nor ought to look for any aid, either of his own subjects
or any other men, which has deserved so evil of the common wealth. And
tourning his tale to the Emperor, with many words stireth him up, provoke
He ince^seth the Emper. against the king of England.
him and prycketh him forewarde, to avenge that notable reproach done unto his
family, and says how the Turkyshed seed is sown abroad in England, and
in Germany, signifiyng the doctrine that is contrary to the bishop of Rome.
Finally after many opprobrious words and sharp rebukes, he provoke him to
regentaunce, and tells him how there is none other remedy, but to return
again to the bosom of the church, which ones he defended by setting forth
of books, greatly to his honor. This book printed at Rome, bearyng no date,
was of long time kept close, and at the last after many years, it came to one
or two in Germany. And he says, the cause of his wrytinge thereof was for that
the king had desired him to write his opinion. And albeit that certain learned
men in England, which had done the like, had lost their lives, yet could not
he which was so much bound unto him, dissemble what his opinion was, neither
ought it to be imputed to him as raylynge or cursed speaking: for he does
both of his natural disposition and also by a certain order of life, clean
abhor that vice. But in that he endeavors to reduce him again into the
way, which deceived by flatterers, was strayed far out of the right pathe,
he gives him a great benefit. King Henry had brought him up in his yought in
good letters, and done very much Poole was unthankful.
for him. But when this alteration was in England, which I have spoken of,
and he myslyked it, Paul the third, through the commendation of Contarene,
made him Cardinal, and sent for him to Rome. They that are familiarly
acquaynted with him, say, how he knows His hypocrisy and falshod.
right well the doctrine of the Gospel, and suppose the cause to have been why
he wrote so against king Henry, to avoid the suspicion of Lutheranisme. He
caused the book to be printed at Rome of his own cost and charge, as they
report. And taking to him self all the Copies, gave it to read only to the
bishop him self, and to the Cardinals, and others of his dear friends: for
unto such he would be commended and feared on the other side, lest if it should
be red openly of all men, he should incure the rebuke and obloquie of them,
that had oftentimes heard him speak the contrary.

The eleventh Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of
Religion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the
fyfte.
The argument of the eleventh Book
THe Protestants having declared to the Emperor by ambassade three points,
Heldus coming to Smalcald, makes them answer, to the which they reply, and
urge a fre counsel, such as was promised: upon this the Pope sends the Bishop
of Aste. The Protestants set forth an Apology upon the refusal of such a
counsel, and writ thereof to the French king. The king of England writes
against this counsel of the Pope.

I Spoke of the City of Auspurge in the nynthe book, and of the change of
Religion there, for the which cause the Clergy being for the most part of
noble house, forsook the city. Whereupon the Senate in a writing directed to
the Emperor, A writing of Auspurg.
king Ferdinando, and all the states of the Empire, declares the cause of
their doings, how friendly they dealte with them, how many things they
suffered, and how scornefully they behaved them selves, and how often they
went about to stire up sedition in the city. Whereunto not long after,
Christopher the bishop answered for him self and the rest, and after many
contumelious words, exhorts the Emperor and Princes, that for as much as
the dangers concerns as well them as him self, they would look to it in time.
You have heard in the last book of the Ambassadors which The Prote. Ambassad.
to the Emp.
the Protestauntes sent to the Emperor in Italy, to whom they gave
commandment chiefly three things to treat of. First to confute the brute
which was raised up, that they should have made a league with the king of
France and of England, secondly that the Emperor would restrain the
judgment of the counsel chaumbre, thirdly that such as were come into their
league, since the composicion of the peace at Norinberge, might inioye the same
peace. Which requests the Emperor in deed heard, but being wholly occupied
with warelyke matters, he said how he would send his Ambassador into
Germany, who should make them answer. Wherefore at his departure from Genes,
into Spain, he sent Matthie Held his vicechau^celour, Heldus the Emperors
Ambassad.
into Germany. When the Protestauntes understood that by their Ambassadors
now returned, they appoynte a general metyng at Smalcalde, the seventh day
of February.

And because the day of the counsel approached nere, neither was there any
doubt, but that the Emperors Ambassador would have some talk of the same,
they were agreed also to bring with them their chiefest divines. Wherefore at
the day assigned, besides the Princes and Ambassadors of the cities, came
thither Luther, Melanchthon, Bucer, Osiander and diverse other. When the
Ambassador was come to Smalcalde, the fyftene day of February, he speaks
thus before them all. How the Emperor had commanded him to do his message,
His sration at Smalcald
only to the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue. But for as much as they have
thought good, to make their consortes also partakers of the same, he is
content to follow their minds herein: he says in deed that he knows not
all the Ambassadors of the league, wherefore in case there be any amongs them,
whom this answer of the Emperous does not concern, there is no cause why they
should suppose that any treaty is made with the^, but chiefly they of
Auspurge, which have oftentimes solicited the Emperor both in Italy and
Spain, about Religion, and now also lately at Genes by their Ambassador.
Unto whom the Emperor said, how he would send his Ambassador into
Germany, which should make them an answer. And they not abiding his
coming, have altered the state of Religion, not without both the contempt and
also making of the Emperor. Therefore when he came to Auspurge, being
constrained of necessity to change his purpose, he treated with them nothing
at all, and has written to the Emperor the whole matter, as it stands.
After wha^ he had exhibited the testimonial of his Ambassade, he proceeds.
And where they had so diligently pourged them selves of the French and Englysh
league, the Emperor was joyful to hear it, which does both credit them,
and also commends their virtue, that they have so wittely eschewed the
French practices, full of disceirfulnes. Afterward The French practices.
discoursing the war of Sauoy, and speaking many things of the French
king, said that he was not only a let unto the Emperor, that he could not
bend his whole power against the Turk, but also that he consulted with the
Turks, and provoked the^ to invade Cristendome. And that this is also his
daily practice, to styre up strife and civil war in Germany, and now
endeavors all that he may to persuade them, that the Emperor will not keep
promise with them. He desires them therefore not to credit his crafty
counselles: For the Emperor to be of such honor and virtue, that he will not
shrink from his promise: And that may they well perceive by mo experime^ts
than one. As touching the judgment of the imperial chamber. The Emperors
commandment was, they should meddle with no cases of Religion: But they
advertised him by their letters, that there was oftentimes controversies,
which partly concerned religion partlye not. And therefore the Emperor
commanded the^, that of such matters as they supposed were sequestered from
religion, they should judge indifferently. For it were pity but the law
should have his course. And seeing the Emperor has commanded them to surcease
from determining matters of Religion, they ought to be content there with. And
if the judges have done ought, contrary to the Emperors decre, they shall not
escape free, but shall be punished according to the law made at Regenspurge. But
the Emperor again admonished them, that they would do nothing rashely,
neither prescribe the imperial chamber. For this thing is neither lawful nor
void of sedition, and should The judges of the chamber
seem to be done in contempt of the Emperors jurisdiction, and to the reproach
of the judges, which ar partly men of noble houses, and partly of excellent
learning and virtue. And therefore requires them, not to hinder the law. Unto
their third request which is, that such also as be not comprised in the
peace of Norinberge, should inioye the benefit thereof, he says: the
Emperor can not with a safe conscience grant it, for that they have promised
and subscribed to the decrees of the Empire, which are contrary to this
Religion. And if each man should be suffered to swerve from his promise when he
list, that were the ready way to break the pacification of Norinberge.
Wherefore when the Emperor shall know more certainly of their procedynges, he
will do than as shall seem right and reason. In the mean time he requires
them, to observe the peace them selves, and to see that it be not broken of
others, which his trust is they will do, considering that the counsel is
so nere, whereof they have written to the Emperor, and is the fourth thing,
which he has in commandment to treat with them of. And after uses a great
and long persuasion with them, that seeing the Emperor and all other kings and
nations, intend to be there and to further it, they will not refuse nor be
against the same: wherein the Emperor desires to understand plainly their
minds. For in case they should refuse, take exceptions and make delay. The
Emperor thinks both that a most Godly purpose should be stopped in the mids
of the course, and that strangers would also conceive of them a suspicion,
that they loved rather the vexation of the common wealth, than peace and
quietness. And seeing the Emperor has this respect only, that Gods glory be set
forth, and the salvation of men be considered, he exhorts, and earnestly
requires them, that they would satisfy herein his desire and the common
wealths also. He has also in commission, that if any controversy shall
happen in this matter, he shall solute and appease the same, whereunto his will
and diligence shall be ready. If they desire also any further declaration of his
talk with them, he would not refuse. The next day after he had thus spoken,
he treats seuerallye with the Duke of Saxony, how the Emperor bears him
an especial good will, but the let that he has declared not the same
hitherto has been the dissension about Religion. But seeing that there is great
hope, that all that matter shall be quieted by the counsel already called, he
desires him to further the same, and to send his Ambassadors thither, to the
intent that all discord taken away, he may declare his good will toward him.
For if he refuse, and take exceptions, what displeasure will come of it, he
knows well enough. Moreover for as much as the Turk makes great
preparation to invade Germanye, he requires him to send him the aid decreed
at Regenspurge against the Turks force, or if chance that the Turk come not
to the field, nor attempt Germany, that then he would send him the same aid
against the French king, who has invaded Sauoye a province of the Emperor.
Last for because the Emperor has borne the whole charges of them periall
chamber of long time alone and has consumed great treasure in his wars, he
requires that after the old custom of the Empire, he would be contributary,
for the portion of money hereunto belonging, as the residue of the Princes have
also promised. The Duke says The Dukes answer.
that in as much as these things concern not him alone, but his co^sortes
also, he will take deliberation. After the.xxiiij. day of February all the
confederatours make answer together. And first wyshynge unto the Emperor
long health and preservation, as concerning them of Auspurge, they have heard
the whole matter by their Ambassadors, and say how they can not sequestre
them from their fellowshyp: Touching the Emperors war with the French king,
they are not a little sorry, seeing the same to be commodious for the Turks the
ennemies of the Empire. For that the Emperor has taken in good part, their
purgation, and minded to keep the peace made at Norinberge, they are right glad
and thank him. But touching the Judgment of the Imperial chamber: where he
said, how sore it should grieve the Emperor, to stop the course of the
law: They show how there was a difficulty in the thing, what time the
Archbishop of Me^tz and the Palsgraue, were intercessours. How after much and
long deliberation, there appeared no surer way to establish the co^monwelth,
than to grant peace to religion, and to al matters annexed to the same, till
either a general counsel of Europe, or a prouincial counsel of Germany migh be
had. For unless it might so be, and except yt all manner of matters that
proceed of religion, might be comprised together, how lightly occasion of
trouble may be given, was both than considered, and now may be also perceived.
The words also of themperours proclamation, set forth at the same time,
declare this sufficiently. And that it was never their mind, to pretend any
other cause, save only matters of religion, neither are the judges of the
counsel chamber in their opinion, able to prove the contrary. But now where he
says, how the emperor gave them authority to judge of quality of matters, it
is to them greuouse. For they account al those actions to concern religion,
which in deed can not be decided, unless the controversy of religion be
first in a lawful counsel determined. Which thing they have many times
signified both to the emperor and king Ferdinando, by letters and Ambassadors.
For this question of Religion is prejudicial, and ought to be determined by a
counsel, before such matters be examined, as depend upon the same. And seeing
that benefits are employed for desert and duty, they can not suffer yt those,
which wtin their dominions follow a contrary religion, from their doctrine to
enjoy the goods of the church, in as much as either they will not, or can not
execute their duty. And for so much as the matter concerns the conscience
of the mind, there remains no place to right of possession or of
restitutio^. And seeing yt when the co^positio^ was made at Nori^berg, they
expresseli named al actions and suits, which hanged then either in the chamber
or other courts of judgment, exhibiting the^ to the intercessours as matters
of religion, who promised than to find the means, yt the emperor should exempt
the^ from judgment. The same thing also king Ferdina^do took upon him in
thasse^blie of Cadane, and by those words of proclamation, where the emperor
cutteh of all ple, all authority to judge of the state of matters, was clean
taken away from the judges of yt imperial chamber. And although they would not
report evil of the^, yet many, seeing the^ ready to give sentence against them,
were encouraged to rather to come^ce their actions, which thing is to be
provoked by mo ways tha^ one. For what time their men do require iugedme^t in
any thing they are not only admitted, but also with contumeliouse words
rejected. As of late they of Humborough were by them commanded to restore the
clergy of their city not only to their goods and possessions, but also to
their old religion and al their jurisdiction. And where as they could not so
do with a safe conscience, they were condemned in a great so^me of money. And
therefore the emperor may se by this one fact what their mind and purpose is.
For either is these a matter of religion or else there is none at al: And if they
may use the matter after this sort, than was the truce made in vain. And in
case by this mean the rites and ceremonies that are changed, may be restored,
there shall need no general counsel, whereunto notwithstanding the emperor him
self says, that al these things do belong. Wherefore upon just and necessary
causes they have refused that judgment, when after diverse exceptio^s they
could prevail nothing. Now as touching the persons of the judges, there can
not past one or two of our religion be found in the whole company: but what
decre was made at Rege^sburg, in these behalf, is not unknown. For the more
fiersly that any of the^ impugneth our doctrine, the better is he there
accepted. And eue^ by their cou^tenau^ces it may be easly perceived, what
affection they bear us, in ha^dli^g of matters. Which thing being thus, they
doubt not, but that themperoure will command the^ to surcease. And in case
the emperor think, yt any profane matter be mixed with matters of religion,
they refuse not the due examination of the same, so that in the mean time, the
judgment of the imperial chamber may cease. And for such as are common into
their league since the pacification of Norinberge: in the former years the
intercessours did require them at Scwinforte, that they should receive no mo
into their league and nu^bre, but than they refused the same. And when they
came after to Norinberge, they perseuered in the same opinion. But where he
said, that many had promised and co^dicioned, not to alter their religion, some
of them answer thus, that they made no promise at al, some again made
exceptions in their private compositio^s, that they might thus do, and some in
deed promised, but upon condition that the emperor put the^ in hope to procure a
counsel to be called wtin six months, which should begin within the year
after. But whereas yt was longer delayed, and they in the mean while through
Gods benefit, understood more rightly the true doctrine, they could differ it
no longer, and thought it their duty to profess yt thing, which they knew to
be true and Godly: For yt bishop of Romes law so teaches, yt if a man has
also bound him self by an oath to do any thing yt is wicked, he is not bound
to perform it. And again, like as their adversaries will not refuse, if any of
their nu^bre should fall to take their parts, no more may they also, if any
may escape from them, and come into their fellowship, let him, but that he may
so do. Wherefore they beseech the Emperor that he would restrain the Judges,
and suffer not them only, but others also, which are since come to them, to
enjoy the benefyte of the peace: for if it be otherwise, or that they have any
wrong offered the^, they can not forsake their league fellows or like
professors of doctrine, in that necessity, which they declared also to
Ferdina^do at Uie^na: For their cause is alone with theirs, which if the judges
of the chamber shall take unto the^, and preuente the counsel herein, who
doubts it to be extortion and open wrong, against the which they are
constrained, even by the law of nature, to defend the^ selves. But what
disco^moditie will come thereof, and what will be the end of it, The Emperor of
his wisdom can consider. They doubtless wish for peace, and covet to gratify
the emperor in all things, yet so as all men may have fre access to the true
doctrine. And if they may this obtain, they wylbe the more pressed and ready to
acco^plishe that, which the Emperor and king Ferdina^do require, touching the
Turk, and charges of the chamber. Concerning the counsel, whereunto
the emperor so greatly persuades them. They have red the copy of the letters
which Paul the third has publyshed touching the same, and perceius thereby
that he is not of the same mind and opinion, that the emperor is of. For
although Adrian the sixth in thasse^blie at Norinberge confessed there by his
legate, yt in a manner al things at Rome were sore corrupted, promising to do
his endeavor that they might be reformed. Yet was Clement the seventh, his
successor with in two years after, clean of an other mind, as appeared by
his legate sent to the next assembly, in so much as themperours
lieutenau^tes, and other Princes, by a decree there made, ordained a fre
general council might be holden in Germany, in the which counsel what error
or vice so ever had crept into the church, might be taken away. This decre was
afterward confirmed by the emperor at yt suite of tharchbishop of Me^zt and the
Palsgraue Prince Electour. Howbeit this Clement, a year after, propounded a
counsel far otherwise, tha^ was specified by the decrees of thempire, and had
assigned the place in Italy, which tha^ they refused. The same thing afterward
did Paul the third, whom they answered also, following the like trade as they
did before. And now also does the bishop of Rome attempt the same (although
covertly) as did Clement the seventh openly by express words. For herein does
he by a certain implicatio^ condemn their doctrine, where he speaks of late
spro^g up heresies. For that he means the same of this doctrine, and
intends to pluck it up by the roots, it is manifest by thexecution and
punishment that he puts innocent persons to, for professing this same
doctrine, and yet he through a shameless dissembling, pretedeth as though he
would reform those horrible e^rours and vices of his church, of the which,
these many years, so many good and learned men have complained. And yt
the emperor being through his crafty policy persuaded, provoke the^ to ye
counsel which he would not do, if he knew his fraud and disceiptfulnes. The
same crafts he uses also, what time by his legates, he solliciteth kings and
Princes, yea and them also to admit the counsel, to the intent he may have
the^ as favorers and mainteiners of his wicked purpose, and by the
confirmation of the counsel, might the^ selves condemn their own doctrine. By
the which craft Julian the Apostata disceaued in times past the Christen
soldiers. And although the bishop of Rome susteineth the person of their
adversary, yet takes he upon him the authority of judge, against al right and
equity, and has all others, consenting to him herein, which are bound to
him by oath and many ways. But how unlawful the same is, and how it ought not
to be granted the^, the emperor doubtless and other kings in their opinion, can
judge. For yt the bishop of Rome has brought errors into ye church, and a
doctrine clean contrary not only to Gods word, but also to the ancient
tou^selles and doctors, and mainteineth the same, and that he has also made
exceading many laws against Gods commandment, whereby the true knowledge is
utterly oppressed and defaced, the same vereli have their divines through Gods
gift declared. And therefore do they inte^de, to accuse the bishop and his
fellows in any lawful counsel, of these so great matters, and to coude^pne
the^ of the same. How also through evil crafts, and dishonest means, yea
through force and guyle they achiefe their dignities, how filthy a life they
lead, what evil examples they give, how they do no part of their duty, how
they neglect such as are committed to their charge, and wallowe in all
wickedness of life, it is so well known and tried, yt it needs no further
declaration. For the which causes also, it is not lawful for the bishop (even
by the testimony of his own law) to appoint there counsel, much less to be
judge in the same. Neither may his sworn clientes usurp the person of the
judge, seeing they may not in deed, be any part of a lawful counsel. moreover
the place of the counsel is appointed in Italy, clean contrary to the decrees
of the emperor and states of thempire, which he scornefully dispiseth. They know
not more over as yet, whether other princes of Christendom will allow yt place,
and that there be weighty causes for the which it should be dangerous for them
and theirs to come thither. For albeit they should have a saufe conduicte, yet
for so much as the bishop has there his clientes every where, which hate
this doctrine most bitterly, there is great danger of lieng in wait, and
privy co^spiracies, which in those parties are much to be feared. Furthermore
since this matter is most weighti, and such as under the son can arrise no
greater, which doubtless concerns either ever lasting salvation or da^natio^.
And seeing that the greatness of the matter requires, yt they should in great
nu^bre with the ministers of their church and preachers be there present, and
not to commit so weighty a matter to their deputes and proetours alone, it
should be a great grief unto the^, to pass out of the limits of thempire and
go into Italy, leaving their country and people, in such grudge of minds as
is now in Germany, without guard, and their churches any long time without
preachers. Wherefore they most humbly beseech that the Emperor would way with
him self all these poinctes diligently, and seeing he is the high and supreme
magistrate, unto whom chiefly belongs the setting forth of the true doctrine,
that he would apply him self wholly, that the true knowledge of God might be
advanced, for they do embrace no wicked kind of doctrine, nor seek any other
thing, than the glory of Gods holy name. And this answer concerning the
counsel agreed unto, also the Ambassadors of George Marquis of Brandenburge,
and of the cities of Norinberge, Halles, and Hailbrune: in other things they
meddled not, because they were not of the league. What time the Protestants had
thus spoken, Heldus the Ambassador answers by and by, and speaking The
answer of Heldus.
many things again of the great good will of the Emperor and of the French
king which had conspired with the Turks to the destruction of the common
wealth, he comes to that matter touching the judgment of the imperial
chamber, and says in deed that peace is granted for matters of Religion,
and no man to say the contrary, but all the strife to consiste in this which be
matters of religion, and which not. And where as they take such for cases of
religion, as others do acco^pte for civil and profane, how far against
reason is it, that the thing should not be debated, and the causes and
obiectio^s of either part be heard, and so proceeds further to the meaning of
yt same matter. And as touching such as are lately received into their league,
yt Emperor thiketh thus that they yt be not comprised within the peace of
Norinberg, are bound al to the decrees of thempire, and ought to yield to ye
authority of the counsel. And for as much as themperours mind is wholly addicte
to peace and co^corde, he requires estsones, yt they will aid him with men and
money, for the Turkish war, and nedeful charges of the imperial chamber. And
if the Turk invade not, yt tha^ they would a few months, assiste the emperor
with like aid against the French king: which if they will do, it shall not
repent the^ of yt service, wherein he desires to know a direct answer, that he
may advertise the emperor thereof. And as concerning the counsel, they the^
selves know what labor and travail, the emperor had to bring it to pass. And
how his trust is, yt in the same shall be appeased all controversy, yt is in
religion with quietness, and the state of the commonwealth be reformed to the
glory of God, and preservation of men. Wherefore them perour trusts assuredly
that they should make none exceptions, nor swerve from the rest of men, for if
they should persiste herein, it would be grieffull for him to hear. And after
he had again used sondrye persuasions, and among other, that the Emperor
would through saufeconduicte save them harmless, he required to have a
determinate answer herein, and besides the names of them, which are come unto
them, since the peace of Norinberge: Wherein was written that Marquis George,
the cities of Norinberge, Weysenburg, Hailbrine, Winsem and Hales, were of the
same Religion, but not of the league. Wherefore in the Emperors name he
desired to know what their league was, and the condition of the same. The
self same day came thither the Romyshe legate, the bishop Aques, with letters
from the The Popes Ambassad.
bishop of Rome to the Duke of Saxon, exhorting him to come to the counsel,
whom the bishop of Rome sent into Germany, in the place of Peter Paul Uerger,
hopinge well that the new Ambassador should some thing have brought to pass,
but he also lost his labor, and was as little regarded, in so much that on a
certain day, when he desired to speak with the La^tgraue, he told him he was
at no leisure, and in manner at the same instant, went to see how Luther did,
who at the same time lay sore sick of the stone. Which thing the Ambassador
The Popes Ambassad. vispysed.
might see out of his lodging. Uergerius had given this Ambassador
instructions of the whole state of Germany, and how every man in the bishops
behalf must be enterteined and used. The fourth day after, which was the
last of February, the Protestauntes answer Heldus. That for the Emperor him
self, they never doubted, but that he would observe the peace made, which he
has also promised, both in public and private letters, but the imperial
chamber contrary to the express words of the composition, sealed and
confirmed by the Emperor, has taken upon them to hear and determine, and to
call before them diverse for the alteration of Religion, for Rites, ceremonies
and church goods, which thing were plainly exempted in the pacification
concluded. But the judges of the imperial chamber being also of a contrary
Religion, and bounden by their oath to give sentence, as well after the
prescript of the bishop of Romes law, as of the Emperors, do little regard
the compositio^ of the peace, but proceed directly against it. Wherefore they
have just cause to refuse their judgment, and to desire a reformation, and
that for diverse considerations, which are also before mentioned. For first
the judges of the imperial chamber, are for the most part of a contrary
Religion, they are bound by an oath to judge after the decrees of the Bishop
of Rome, as well as after the laws of the Empire. They bear favor to our
adversaries, and that manifestly, and frown upon us and our fellows. They
meddle with mere matters of Religion, contrary to the Emperors proclamation.
Finally they have conde^pued our co^federatours of Hamborough, only for matters
of Religion, in a great sum of gold and so would proceed against others in
case they were not refused. And as touching the names of them that are come
into their league since the peace making, they had long since written and sent
to the Emperor in Italy by their Ambassadors. Who seeing the time of the
counsel so long differred, joined them selves in league with the^, iudgyng it
mete to prefer their conscience, before any civil bond: last where
hedesyreth to know the form and manner of their league: they marvel that he
will require it, considering that the Emperor knows it well enough, and made
means by the intercessours at Norinberg, that they should have left it: but
they made him such answer than, as he moved them no more herein, how their
adversaries have given the occasion hereof. For what mischief they have
devised against the^, it is right well known. And this league of theirs is
ordained to injury no man, but to defend them selves, and is framed of such
conditions as if need require, it may be declared to the Emperor or any man
else without any shame at all. And as concerning such things as he spoke of
the counsel, and of the Emperors mind toward the common wealth, they like
very well all. How they do believe also that the Emperor knows not the
bishops mind herein, and therefore procures the counsel so ernestly. But
what opinion the Emperor has of the bishop, they will leave undiscussed.
Nevertheless for as much as his writ is contrary to the Emperors mind, and
altogether suspicious they can not dissemble, what they think thereof. For
before the counsel do begyune, he has condemned their doctrine, not only in
word, but in deed also: and also it is well known, how that in all assemblies,
where religion is treated of, albeit they see that the Scripture makes against
them, yet will they presume and take upon them the authority of determination.
And although they are minded in a lawefull counsel, to accuse the bishop and
his accomplices, of false doctrine, heresy and The Popes errors.
impiety, yet is there no doubt, but that he will after his accustomed manner
be both party and judge also. For that is his intent, the writ it self
wittenesseth, which if they should ones allow, it were in vain and to late
afterward to talk of any conditions or form of disputation in the counsel.
And whether this be such a counsel than as the Emperor and the states of the
Empire have in diverse assemblies agreed upon, they leave it to the opinion of
any indifferent judge. For evermore those words a free and a Christian
counsel were wyselye and pourposely added, and the same in deed not to be so
taken, as that it should be lawful only, for every man to speak his mind
there, but also that neither the bishop nor his adherentes, which are depely
bound through their fidelity and promise, one to an other, should pronounce
sentence in their own causes. And the other ought not so to be interpreted, as
though there were no place in the counsel for the Turks and such others, but
that according unto holy Scripture, all parts of doctrine might be examined
and determined. And how they know moreover, that not in one country only, but
every where also in the The Popes unreasonable authority.
whole world, are Godly and learned men dispersed here and there: which
thing refreshes their spirits to think upon, considering and hopyng that
in case this unreasonable power of the bishop of Rome might be diminished and
that all things should not depend upon one man's commandment, it would come
to pass that not only their divines, but also diverse other good men in sundry
countries, which being now oppressed with his tyranny hyde the^ in coruers
and said nothing, would apply their whole study and endeavor to the
refourmation of the church. And now as concerning the place of the counsel,
they know not where it should better be chosen, than in Germany. For albeit
the counsel does also appertain to other nations, yet chiefly it concerns
the Germans, which must come thither them selves with the ministers of their
churches, where as other kings and Princes may do the thing by their deputes,
after the old wo^ted manner of long time accustomed. Furthermore what the
situation and commodity of Ma^tua is, they will not dispute of, but there is
now war in Italy, but in case there were none, yet have they lately declared,
why that place ought to be of them suspected. How the Duke of Ma^tua him self
is affected, they will not reason, but his own brother is one of the chiefest
Cardinals, which makes much to increase the suspicion. Therefore if other
nations shall hear one of their reasons, wherefore they do refuse both the
place and form of pleadyng, they doubt not but they will allow the same,
and if they did not, than should they in deed conceive of them a wrong
opinion. The Emperor Of the place of the counsel.
knows also that in Germany be many cities as commodious for the purpose, as
Mantua, and the which ought chiefly to be respected, much commended for
equity and justice. For those secret and privy conspiracies to dispatche men
out of the way, are not so well known and practiced in Germany as they be in
some other places. And where as they cleave and stick on this wise to the
decrees of the Empire, and will not permit them selves to be removed from the
same, it ought to seem no marvel nor news to the Emperor. For also in times
past Liberius Bishop of Rome, the friend and fawtour of Athanasius, required
the Emperor Constantine to call a counsel at Alexandria, where the defendant
and plaintiues dwelled. And albeit that the same place was nothing commodious
for the West church: And although the Emperor alleged that Athanasius and
his fellows were by the consent of the whole world condemned, and
excommunicated: Albeit that he contended Liberius to be one man emo^ges
Athanasius. Arrius. Liberius.
all others, that sought to disturb the public quiet: Yet nevertheless did
he relent nothing, and than when the Emperor had denied the same, a long time
after, the error of Arrius reigned, but in fine the doctrine of Athanasius had
the upper hand, and prevailed for ever. And who is able to recite, what blood
was spilte, in the quarrel of his doctrine: And the condition of their Religion
to be like unto the same, whether aconuenient place be given or otherwise. For
a like cause also such as were at the counsel of Basil, refused Ferrare,
where as Eugenius the bishop had summoned an other counsel. The Emperor Henry
the seventh, had a great suit and controversy with Robert king of Sicilie, and
had cited him to appear to Pisa: but the same was thought unreasonable to the
bishop Clement the first, which both defended the king and also showed
reasons, wherefore he was not boside to come thither, nothing so weighty as
these of ours. Therefore where they no we refuse such manner of counsel, the
fault ought not to be imputed unto them, but to the bishop. For so often as
they have referred their matter to a counsel, they meant it of such a counsel
as the Emperor and states of the Empire had decreed: For they were not
ignorant, that in case the bishops might be permitted, to have the whole
orderyng of the matter, but that they would work all to their own advantage,
and oppressing the true doctrine, would establyshe their own wyckednes. And
yet for all that does Paul the third so color the matter with words to the
Emperor, as though he would use the thing vpryghtly and sincerely, where he
intends the contrary. Moreover what counsel they required, they have
declared by writing The craft of Paul the.
to Peter Paul Uerger the Ambassador, not only of Clement, but also of Paul
the third. And where as he says that the Emperors mind is, that errors and
vices might be reformed, there is none appearance thereof at all in the bishops
writing. For in case he intended a true and a needful reformation, he would
not have condemned their doctrine before they were heard. And albeit they
distruste not the Emperors equity, and are so much the more sorry that they
can not gratify him herein, yet are they nothing furthered through this his
good will and diligence. For albeit the Emperor him self be present at the
counsel, yet is it well enough known, what authority the bishops will
permit either him or other kings also, to have in such manner of cases: For
the most that they will grant to, shall be perauenture to use their counsel
in matters, for as to determine any, they will not Popes have Emperors in
subsectio^.
permit them, but reserve that authority to themselves only, to the intent
that in case the Emperor and civil Magistrates went some thing to far,
they might hereby as with a bridel hamper them in, and in fine determine al
things at their own pleasure. They desire therefore, that the Emperor would
not be offeded with them, in that they seek to eschew these snares of the
bishop where with he would intrappe them. For this is given naturally even unto
brute beasts, to shun the place, where they know they are laid in wait
for to be taken. Furthermore it is commonly known, how the matter was handled
in the counsel of Constance, with the Emperor Sigisinu^de. For albeit The
counsel of Co^stasice.
he had granted a saufeconduicte to John Husse, yet did the bishops deminishe
his authority, saying, how it was lawful neither for him John Huss^.
nor no man else to prescribe or measure them in this behalf: wherewith the
Emperor being vanquished, gave place to their authority which they challenged
to them selves, not with out sighinge in their opinion, but yet to the
miserable destruction of him, who trustinge upon the saufe conduicte, fell
into that calamity. Whereby it appears evidently, how much the Emperor is
able to help the^ herein, though he would never so feign, after they have ones
intrapped them, and enclosed the^ as it were in a pinnefolde: therefore must
they work circu^spectly, and yet for all that, lest any thing should be
imputed to them, they are ready not only to abide lawful judgment, but also
most earnestly beseech the Emperor, to way and pounder these so weighty
matters diligently, and to call a lawful counsel in Germany, wherein neither
the bishop nor his consortes shall occupy the place of judgment. And if the
bishop will let or impeche the Emperor in so doing, and shall not permit a
sincere counsel to be holden in Germany, they do proteste openly, that the
fault is not in them, that the matter is not brought to a co^corde. What
incommoditie also shall arise thereof, the same to be wholly ascribed to the
Bishop: in conclusion they request him to make this same report unto the
Emperor, and declare their good wylles and duty to wards him. When the
matter was thus decided among them, And Heldus had promised them to make
relation to the Emperor of all things, the Protestauntes decree also how to
mainteyne The Protestaun^es decre for mainteining Ministers.
the ministers of their churches in living, for the erecting of free schools
that their churches and common wealth might never want learned men, last of
such things as concern their league and defense. As concerning the Turk,
they had answered the Ambassador before, that if they and theirs might have
quietues in other matters, they would be glad and willing to aid the Emperor
against him, but now the brute went, how king Ferdina^do prepared war
against John Uayuode, and therefore required aid. In the which perplexity,
lest happily they should not do their duty to the common wealth, it was decreed
in the absence of Heldus, that the Duke of Saxon, and the Lantgraue, sendynge
abroad espialles of the common charges, should get intelligence what things
were a brewyng, and if the Turk intended to invade Germany, that they should
than assemble again, to consulte what each man's duty is herein.

Moreover to the intent that all men might understand, what just Reason why the
Protest. refuse the Counsel.
cause they had to refuse the counsel they condescended to compryse the whole
matter in writing. Which after wards they set forth in print, and speaking of
foreine kings and nations: Paul the third (say they) has sent forth his
bulls of late, to sommo^ a counsel at Mantua, to begin now at the.xxiij.
day of May, and alledgyng certain causes thereof. Moreover he has sent his
Ambassadors to kings and Princes as well Germans as others to aduertyse them
of the counsel, and to exhort them, either to come thither the^ selves, or
send their protectours. And where he moved us also by his Ambassador here
unto, and so did the Emperor in like manner, the thing it self requires that
we should therefore declare, what peril and loss it were not for us only, but
also for the whole common wealth of Christendom, if men should obey him
herein. And notwithstanding that the cause of our determination is just and
reasonable, yet is there no doubt, but our adversaries be of such nature,
that they will blame our doing, and constrewe it to the worste part. For to
the intent they may bring us and our cause into hatred, they will affirm
doubtless, that we can abide no examination nor judgment, and that we despise
al other nations, among whom there have often been many excellent learned
men. This will they say moreover that it is wickedness to refuse the decrees of
the counsel, for that it is the high judicial seat of the church, which
all men are bound to obey. They will forge also, as though we were ashamed of
our doctrine, or afraid to come to light, or else that we sought contention
where no need is, and can not endure ^n universal quiet. Now if this might be
verefied of us in deed, it were not only wicked, but also detestable be heard
of. Wherefore we must of necessity show the reason of our doing, and we
trust than, that all good men whether they be in Germany or other places, will
not only credit no such thing of us, but will also do their endeavor, that
this most weyghty cause of all others may be handled uprightly, and that the
bishop of Rome be not permitted, under the forged and colored name of a
counsel, to oppress the manifest truth by a kind of tyranny. For we shall
declare that we do not only profess the pure doctrine, but also respect
nothing else but Gods glory, and the preservation of the common wealth, and that
there can be no obstinacy, or frowardnes objected unto us. And first to prove
that we do not contemn the judgment of other nations or of the church,
hereby it appears manyfestly, that al our care is lest the bishop and his
clientes, should take upon them the authority and judgment, and that all
things might be decided by mete and no suspected persons. Which thing we
trust that all Godly men would likewise wyshe for. For where as in diverse
countries there remain certain old wrytinges, and complayntes of the false
doctrine, vices, and idolatry, that were than crept into the church, we
doubt not, but in the same places at this day there be some Godly and learned
men also, which understand the sound doctrine, although being oppressed with
the bishops tyranny, they are constrained to hold their peace. These in
deed of just deserte Who ought to be at the counsel.
ought to be present at the counsel, that they might speak their minds freely.
For it is not to be accounted a free counsel, that is governed by the bishop
and his fellows, which defend false doctrine by power and violence, and of
an old custom make decrees contrary to Gods word. For Christ what time he
instituted this high judicial seat, commanded that all matters should be
referred to the church, that required a reformation. By the which self
words he excludes all tyranny and lordshyp. It is also a sclaunder, where
they say perhaps that we are a feared to come abroad and can not abide the
open light. For in the assembly imperial at Auspurg, we professed our doctrine
openly, before the Emperor and all the states of the Empire. Again The
Preachers of the Gospel have brought godly works to light.
this self same doctrine is preached openly in our dominions, and our learned
men have set forth books of the same, and diverse of our adversaries do
confess, that through our men's wrytinges, sondrye articles are called again
to light, which lay before hid in darkness. For now the true doctrine
shyneth again, of penance, of faith in Christ, of the remission of sins,
of good works, of true worshipping, of the use of Sacraments, of the
authority of the keys, of Magistrates, of the traditions of men and such
other like things. Neither are we ashamed of the Gospel (as Paul says) but
have an especial desire, that we might declare our mind in these things
before al men. And where it is also objected to our preachers, that they
should have It is false yt they styre up (...) heresies.
raised up again the heresies before time condemned, neither should need
therefore further disputation or hearing, it is false and may be easlye excused,
before them that have red our confession and the defense annexed to the same.
For the doctrine that we confess is not new, but the verey consent of the
primative church, as most clearly does appear. Neither have we admitted any
heresy or wicked opinion, but our men have restored the doctrine of the
ancient fathers, which was oppressed by bishops and monks. It is untrue also,
that is reported of us, that we should delight in dissension, for we are sorry
from the botome of our hearts that the Christian common wealth is thus divided,
and to have a concord desire a lawful counsel. But for as much as the
bishop and his fellows do co^dempne the true and necessary doctrine, and do
tormente and persecute the professers thereof, exhorting others to do the same,
we can not but mislike their cruel tyranny. For God will be honored through the
confession of his name, and it is wickedness for any man to join him self to
the bishops tyranny which so rages. Moreover it is manifest that we bear and
sustain all manner of charges of the common wealth, as the residue of the
states do. Whereby it is to be seen, that we would also gladly accord with
others in relygion, Bishops styre up prices.
in case it were lawful. Besides this we understand what danger hangs over
us for the same. For the bishops have now these many years, declared
manifestly, what they go about, and how they incense kings minds against us.
And were it not extreme madness, to abide all these so great dangers, and to be
at so great charges with out just cause? But we know assuredly that we owe
this dewtie unto God. And that there is nothing to be so much respected, as his
commandment, and take God to wytnes, that we seek for nothing else. Now that
we have confuted their sklaunders, we will come to the second part. Emonges
strangers many parauenture suppose, yt we of a certain curiosity have impugned
some light faults, which for kepinge of a quiet, might better have been
dissembled, especially consydering that the state of worldly things is such,
that in a common wealth be ever remaining some things, which must be wincked
at. But the matter stands far otherwise.

For first in deed errors and false opinions may not be dissembled with. For
Christ commands us to beware of false teachers: Again False doctrine is not
to be borne with.
the controversy is not about light errors, but touching the doctrine of
faith, and the true knowledge of God, which is the principal point of the
Christian life, and sincere worshipping of God, which ought not to be passed
over in silence, but to be observed purely, and diligently taught in the
Church. And it can not be denied but this doctrine was wholly extinguished, and
a new brought in for it, to the great contuinelie of Christ. Moreover we do
reprehende diverse and sundry errors and wickedness, which others also have
espied long before our days, and therefore desired a counsel, that the wrong
being redressed concord might be retained: But in this our time a Counsel is
much more needful, for as much as the same errors and vices do remain in
sundry places, and strife and contention is arrisen, and many therefore are in
danger of their lives, that be innocent persons. For these therefore so
weighty considerations, not only we, but the emperor also Why the innocents
be in peril.
and the residew of the states and Bishops, have determined that acounsell is
chiefly necessary for the Church, wherein the pure doctrine might be maintained.
For unless it were of such sort, they saw right well, how it would styre up
a greater confusion: But behold, whilst we look for such a counsel, the
Bishops Bulls come forth quite contrary to the decrees of thempyre. And because
it does not concern us only but also the whole commen wealth of Christendom,
we have thought needful by this public writing to testify and declare,
wherefore we discommende this counsel. For the power and Authority of
Judgment belongs not only unto Bishops, but unto the church. Of which
number verily are all kings and all other states. Wherefore al Tha^thoritie of
judgment is in the church.
beit the Bishop of Rome were nothing at all accused, yet were not this to be
granted him, that he alone and his should be judges, excludyng other ministers
of the church: but seeing manifestly that he is a party and one of the suitors,
much less ought it to be permitted, because it is both against Gods law and
also the law of Nature:

But we accuse the Bishop of Rome of no small crimes, neither do we dispute
only of his usurped Authority and abominable living, but we reprehende his
doctrine, his laws and wicked Religion, that is, we accuse him as guilty of
Idolatry and Heresy. Which crimes The Pope is accused of Idolatry and
Heresye.
being objected, the Bishop ought not, but the church to give judgment, as
the old laws of the Bishops them selves do testify. Furthermore the
Bishop is not only one of the parties, but because he has condemned our
doctrine long before, he has heaped upon him self the greater suspicion:
And seeing it is thus, who can doubt, what his judgment shall be in the counsel
concerning our doctrine? For it is not to be thought, that he will contrary to
his old custom, permit any other man to have the determination of matters.

And whereas in his writynge, he speaks nothing of the manner of treaty in the
Counsel, we have just cause to suspecte all things the more. For he calls
them only thither, which are bounden unto him Like lips like lettuse.
diverse ways, of whose good wills he is assured: And he protests also this
to be the cause of calling the counsel, that the Heresies sprung up of late
might be weded out. And albeit, the same may be taken largely, yet is there no
doubt, but he means it of our doctrine. For it is not credible, yt he
speaks of his own errors. Yea, after he sent forth an other writynge
touching the reformation of the Court of Rome, wherein by express words he
confesses that the Counsel is called for this intent, that the Pestiferous
Heresy of Luther might be abolished. And so in deed at the first, he covered
his mind crastely, that his writ might have some show, but he disclosed it
afterward.

Wherefore there is doubt, but that he is fullye bente, to root out The craft
of the Pope.
our doctrine. And what madness were it than for us to allow this his intention?
For this goes he about: that such as receive his writing, should confess
our doctrine, to be wicked and Heretical: Moreover that Kings and Princes
which admit the same, should be bounden to aid and asiste him.

Therefore seeing the thing concerns the universal common wealth, we beseech
all men, that they will consider diligently, this his craft and policy. For
it is to be marueiled, why he conceived his writynge with such words: And
there is a doubt, whether he did it to the intent to fear us from the Counsel,
or by the approving of the writ to have us intrapped. But among us
assuredly there is no doubt, but that themperours mind is, to further the
common wealth, neither do we think that he will allow this form of writ.
But the Bishop has not only appointed the Counsel, but has also
pronounced sentence against us. For he will not permit that the matter may be
tried by the Scriptures, but he will aledge his own laws, and custom, and
certain Counselles of the latter time to prove the matter. But we chiefly hold
and affirm, ye men's traditions that are contrary to Gods word ought to be
rejected. For we admit the doctrine of the church, but the Bishops errors and
tyranny ought not to be colored with the title of the church. Tholde church
neither received any law contrary to the Scripture, nor attributed ye
unmeasurable power to the Bishop of Rome which he now takes upon him self.
And again y^ sort of men, which do condemn and persecute by the doctrine of
the gospel, be not the church, but paricides, the generation and offspring of
Came. And in old time in deed godly Bishops did oftentimes refuse counsels,
seeing Thosspring of C(...).
the same to be called, not to defend the verity, but either for the main
tenau^ce of some wicked opinon, or else to establishe some me^ in Authority.
Themperor Constantine had assigned a counsel at Antioche: But Maximus Bishop of
Jerusalem, albeit, it was not far of, came not thither, for because he knew
themperors mind, and what the Arrians intended. And although Athanasius came
to the counsel at Tyrus, yet tarried he not long, for yt he saw the chiefest of
the counsel play the parts both of the accusers and Judges. And for yt he saw
certain accusers procured against him. There was holde^ a great counsel at
Sirmiu^, a town in Hungry against Photynus, for the matter was weighty. And
albe it the emperor commanded the Bishops to come thither, yet would not they of
the west parts obey him, for that they saw there a number of Arrians there
increased, and suspected yt some false opinion should there be decreed. That
time was Osius Bishop of Corduba, a famous man, whom themperor, at the request
of the Arrians, commanded also to come thither out of Spain: When he was
come, he approved yt perilous counsel of Sirmie, which brought afterward a
great consusio^ to the church, and for this cause was Osius sore reproved of
Hilarie, which came not there. Cyrillus Bishop of Jerusalem never came at
their assemblies, which denied Christ to be of the same substannce with the
father, and is accounted the first, that ever appealed from the counsel by
writing. There was a Counsel kept at Millan, and the Bishops called thither
by the Emperor: But what time Paulinus, Bishop of Treuers, and a few
others, saw, how Anxentius the Bishop of Millan and his mates went about an
evil purpose, they departed, The Counsel of Mill(...) broken of.
brake up that Counsel. After this sort did those worthy men fly at suspected
counselles, lest they should be made partakers of the crime. And for as much as
the Bishop signifies plainly that this counsel is instituted to confirm his
Authority, we beseech al men that they would not impute this refusal to us, as a
fault blame worthy. Finally the very place of the counsel we can not like for
diverse causes. For it is fit to offer injury, and altogether such, as
should let the liberty of speech. And besides there is much hatred conceived
against us in foreine nations through the sclaunders of our adversaries, as
though Religion and honest living were exiled from among us: which persuasion,
when men's minds be thus prepared, is not without great peril. Wherefore it
were very expedient for this cause only that the counsel should be holden in
Germany, to the intent that strangers might see the order and manner of our
Churches and Cities. And not through false sclau^ders to hate the true
doctrine. The weightines of the cause also requires, yt many of us should come
to the counsel our selves, but to forsake our own limits, is no manner way
for us expedient. And seeing yt for most weighty causes, it was decreed, yt the
counsel should be holden in Germany, we se not wherefore we should depart from
the same Considering therefore yt this case concerns the preservation of al
Christendom, we beseech al kings and princes, to give no credit unto our
adversaries, but herunto rather to apply the^ selves, yt the true knowledge of
God might be restored: For they ca^do nothing yt shall more redound to their
honor. The Bishop laboreth to this end, yt he might persuade the^ to practice
cruelty: the which they ought most chiefly to abhor. For eue^ for this
cause are they placed in this degree of dignity, yt they should honor Gods holy
name, and be a light unto the rest through their good ensample, and to defend
innocent persons from wrong and violence. And if there shall ever at any time be
any lawful counsel, tha^ shall we so defend our matter there, yt all men
shall understand, how that our endeavors have been ever annexed, with the
preservation of the common wealth. In this assembly were these. The Duke of
Saxon, Ernestus and Frau^ces brethren Dukes of Luneburge, Ulriche Duke of
Wirtemberge, the Lantzgraue, Philip prince of Pomerane, the three Earls of
Anhalde, and Albert Count Mansfelde, besides many Ambassadors, of the cities
with most large and ample commission. For they were admonished what things
should there be treated. Before they departed thence, which was the vj. day of
March they address their letters to the French king, wherein first they excused
the matter, that they had The Potest. letters to the French king.
not satisfied his Ambassadoure in the former assembly, and show the cause
also, why they send no Ambassadors as now unto him. Tha^ they desire him to
continue his frendshippe, and seeing they have set open to him all ways to
come to a concord in religion, and yet have nothing prevailed, that he would
recompense this theirendeuor, with his favor and benevolence. Finally they
declare what their mind is touching the Counsel, and desire to know what he
has also determined to do herein. The king afterward makes Answer, at
the tenth kalendes of June, he accepts their satisfaction and promises
largely concerning his continual amity toward them, confutyng the
sclaunders of his adversaries in a writing, the which he sent with all, and
says that this is his opinion of the counsel, and ever has been, that
unless it be lawefull, and in a sure place, he will never allow the same:
neither doubts he, but the king of Scotland his some inlawe, will also
follow his mind herin. He a little before at the beginning of May, was
returned home with his wife, which after about Midsomer, ended her life there.
The queen of Scotts dies.


In the mean time the Bishop of Rome deferreth the Counsel till the
kalendes of November, and the cause thereof (he says) is, for that Friderick
the Duke of Mantua, minds to fortify his city with garnisons of soldiers,
and to employe cost thereupon: which thing has happened contrary to his
expectation, and says he is sore afraid lest many, following his decree, are
already commen to Mantua, and happily being excluded, are driven to return
home again: for the which chance he is in deed very sorry, but yet takes the
matter less greifefully, forasmuch as the thing has fortuned through
another man's fault, and not his.

And not long after the king of England in his own name, and The king of
England re suseth the Counsel.
the nobles of his Realm, publishes a writing. That there is a Counsel
called by the Bishop of Rome, which he has none authority to do, and called
at such a time, when mortal war is between the emperor, and the French
king, and the place appointed at Mantua, whither it is neither saufe nor
commodious for all men to come. He in deed desires a Christian Counsel with
all his heart, but unto the Bishops Counsel, he will nether come him self,
nor yet send his Ambassadors. For this is always their facion, that for
their own l^cre sake, they will in such manner of assemblies, oppress Christ
and his verity: And for his part, he will have nothing to do with the
Bishop of Rome, nor regards no more his Decree, than the writing of any
other Bishop: Adding that Counselles were wont to be called by the
authority of the Emperor and kings, which manner ought to be restored,
especially at this time, when the Bishop has so many grave personages to
accuse him. Yet nevertheless can he neither be reprehended, without the
danger of a man's life, nor accused presently: but in a lawful Counsel: nether
is there any provision made for him or his by saufconduicte, and though there
were, yet manifest dangers should let him, that he could not come: for it is
no news to the Bishops to falsefie their faith, and to sprincle, and desile
them selves with innocent blood: And albeit it should be lawful for others to
repair thither, yet were it no saftie for him, whom the Bishop has laid
wait for, who^ he hates deadly, whom he seeks to bring in hatred with other
kings, for none other cause assuredly, than for that his Tyrranny is exiled
out of his realm, and his yearly revenues taken away: which thing in very
deed he takes in most evil part, and so much the worse for that he fears
lest other kings, warned through his example, will hereafter do the like.

And now also is the counsel proroged until the kalendes of Noue^bre. And
yet not the place appointed where it should be holde^: and the fault is
imputed to the Duke of Mantua. Is not this to delude the whole world? The Duke
of Mantua is surely blameles, which will not receive so great a multitude into
his city being vnfurnyshed of a garrison, but all the blame is to be ascribed
to him alone, who does nothing syncerely, but works al things by craft and
collusion. And now in case he shall assign an other place for the purpose, he
will either appointe it in some city of his own, or of some Prince yt is
bound to him: For he has him self right ample and large dominions, and in the
same many goodly cities, which his predecessors have gotten by force and
subtlety, and he with as small fidelity keeps. But seeing there is no hope to
have a true counsel, as men of wit and judgment do suppose, he thinks it
best, that every Magistrate in his own dominions seek the reformation of
Religion. And if perchance the Bishop should obiecte unto them, custom, the
same takes no place. For even by the testimony of Cypriane, custom that is
grounded upon no counsel, as he has said before, but if any man have an
other way that is better, A proper saying of Cipriane.
he will not refuse it. The Emperor remained all this year in Spain, but his
army in Flaunders, by the conduict of Count de Bure, wan by assault the
town and castle of Sanpulle in Artois, in the month of January, and put al to
the sword, and from thence went and beseged the city of Terowen, but yet in
vain. There at the length was a truce taken for ten months in those parties
only: For in Piedmo^te was hot war nevertheless, and the town of Cherie was
taken by Terowe^ beseged invain
assault of the imperialles, who made a wonderful slaughter both of
soldiers and citezens. And when after the garrison of Turrin suffered great
penury, being on every side beseged, and stopped from virtualles, the French
king in harvest time, levied a power and sent thither his eldest son Henry
the Daulphin, and Mommora^cie, who making way and entering perforce, releued
their present famine. In the month of October, the army of king Ferdinando,
wherein were the horsemen of Saxony, and Meissen, of Franckonie, and Austriche,
the Carinthians, Bohemers and Hongarians, whom the Germans call Hussares,
beseged the town Exechium upon the River of Drove, which was kept with a
strong garryson of the Turks. And Ferdinando his army destroyed.
where they tracted the time, and were constrained for want of victualles to
levy the siege, in the retire they fell into the lappes of their ennemies,
which had laid for them ambusches in the woods, and kept all the straytes,
that they could no way escape. In this distress first certain Centurions and
captains of soldiers, and the Hongarians fled, after also went Cacianer the
kings Lieutenaunt. But the rest who detested the shame of running away,
exhorting them selves unto manhood, especially the horsemen of Almaigne, aboade
the charge and violent force of their ennemies, but in fine, being vanquished
of the greater number, were all for the most part slain, and many of the
captains taken prisoners, and led to Constantinople in to most miserable
captivity. The fourth Ides of Octobre, the king of England had The birth of
king Edward the sixth.
a son borne at Hamptoncourt, Prince Edward, by Queen Jane Semer, whom he
married after the death of Queen Anne. In the mean while the bishop of Rome,
for so much as truce was taken be twyxt France and Flaunders, went about to
procure the like also in all other places, to the intent that through this
occasion he might work his purpose, and ceased not till he had brought it to
pass. The bishops devise was, as it is reported, that setting them at peace,
he might stire The Pope hates the king.
them up against the king of England, whom he hated unto the death and against
the Lutherians. About this time also Christina the Emperors nece by his sister
Queen of Denmark, Duchess of Millan, leaving Italy, retourneth into
Flaunders, through Germanye, and there was a treaty of a marriage between her
and William Duke of Cleave, but it took not effect. Than also the men of
Gelderland began Rebellion in Gelderland.
to rebelle against their Prince Charles Egmonde, which was al his life time
of the French part, and therefore sore hated of the Burgundians: and than as
it was said, went about to make his country French. He was so chased out by
his own people every where in this outrageous tumulte, that he had scarsly a
town or two left him to fly into. He was always a great mainteiner of the
bishop of Romes doctrine, Pope Paul evil reported
and abstained not from sore punishment. Paul the third in the first beginning
of his byshoprike, made his two young nephews Cardinals, as before is
written. For the which thing being evil reported of, he vouched saufe to call
other worthy men also, both in nobility and learning to the same degree of
honor, partly to assuage the envy and displeasure, partly to have mete
champions, which were able to defend him by their learning and eloquence,
among whom was Caspar Contarene, Reginalde Poole, John Belly, Frederick
Fregose, unto whom within a short space after, he added moreover Sadolete,
Alexander, and Bembus. And purposed also Erasinus, as in a The Pope intended to
make Erasmus Cardinal.
certain Epistle to a friend of his, Erasinus himself reports. There remain
also certain Epistles written of Sadolet to Erasinus, wherein after he has
spoken much of the great good will of the bishop toward him, he says that
within short time he will auaunce him to high dignity. Contarenus was a noble
man and a Senator of Uenise, for his learning right famous, and beyond all
expectation, when he had craved nothing, was suddenly promoted to this
dignity.

The twelfth Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign in the Empire of Charles the fyste.
The argument of the twelfth Book
POpe Paul by his deputes ordained a reformation, touching the abuses of the
Church, as permutations, voisomes, benefices incompatibles, Cardinals
courtiers, Chaplelaynes, Courtisanes, Pardoners, and the Colloquies of Erasmus
prohibited. The Protestauntes mete at Brunswycke, whether came the king of
Denmark. Persecution aryseth at Pans. The Pope, the Emperor, and the French
king, mete at Nice, there the king kissed his foot. A College and a French
church, are erected at Strasborough. The king of England burns the bones of
Thomas Becket. The Prince Efectour of Brandenburgh, aduertiseth the Duke of
Saxon, of the preparation of the great Turk. A sect of Antmomians aryseth.
The conspiratie of Heldus and the Duke of Brunswycke, are discovered, by the
taking of his Secretary. An assembly is holden at Franckeforte: decrees are
there made, and appointment mode for a conference to be had for the peace of
the Protestauntes, which to let Duke Henry of Brunswicke, leui^th an army.
George Duke of Saxon, ennemy of the verity dies, Henry his brother succedeth
him. The king of England having set forth a book against the counsel of
Uicence, callseth certain articles to be made concerning Religion. They of Gaunt
rebel. The Emperor having saufeconduicte passes through France. The
Uenetians make peace with the Turk, but certain Senators had disclosed their
secrets.

I Have showed you before how the Counsels were deferred til the kalendes of
Noue^b. but the same also was made frustrate: Notwithstanding the Bishop, to
the intent he might feed men with hope, and seem to do some thing, had long
before chosen out certain of his own sect among the whole number, and had
straightly commanded them, that they should epsy out diligently the faults
of the Clergy, and all flattery set apart declare them unto him: He released
them also of their oath, yt they might speak their minds franckly, and had
commanded them to keep the thing close and secret. There were chosen Caspar
Contarene, Peter Theatrire, James Sadolete, and Renalde Poole Cardinals:
Fridericke, Archbishop of Salerne, Hierome Aleander, Archbishop of Brunduse,
John Matthew Bishop Uerone, Gregory Uenet Abbot, and Thomas, master of the
sacred Palace.

These in conclusion after consultation had, comprehended the hole matter in
writing, and addressinge their style unto him, extolle him with great praises
for the zeal he has to the truth, whereunto the ears of certain Bishops in
times past have been stopped, chiefly through the fault of flatterers, which
have ascribed unto them over much Authority, what time they have affirmed
them clearly to be lords of althinges, and have power to do what they list:
For out of this welspring, as out of the horse at Troy, have spronge into the
church so many evils, wherewith now it is most grievously afflicted. Therefore is
his wisdom and virtue great, who considers that the remedy must be fetched
from thence, from whence the beginning and cause of the disease proceeded, who
followyng the doctrine of S. Paul, will be a minister and a steward, and no
lord: And for as much as he has committed this charge unto them, they willing
to obey him herin, have according to their mean wits, drawn certain
Articles, which do concern him* the Bishops, and the Church. For where he
susteineth a The Pope has a double office.
double person, and is not only the Bishop of the universal Christian
Church, but also the Prince of many Regions and Cities, they only touch
such things as concern the Ecclesiastical administration: for the civil
commen weal, he governs with much comme^datio^ and wisdom. And first of
al., they say, most holy father, in like case as Aristotle commands, that
laws be not rashly altered, so seems it unto us also, that thecclesiasticall
laws be in any case diligently maynteyned, and not infringed without some
urgent cause: For there can no greater plage invade a commenwealth, than what
time thauthoritie of laws is weakened and disolued, which our predecessors
would have to be kept as sacred and holy. The next point is, that the Bishop
of Rome, Christ's Uicar, when, for the Authority he has of Christ, he
gives or grants any thing, he take no money or reward for the same: For
seeing that all these things are given freely, Christ will also that the same
be freely distributed to others. This foundation once laid, it must be
foresene, that you may have very many mete ministers of the church, to
govern it for men's salvation. In the which number the Bishops occupy the
chief place: but herein is a great abuse, in that all kind of men are
received into this order confusely, and without respect, neither commended for
their learning, nor honest living, and diverse also very young. Whereof arrise
sundry offenses, Whereof (...)meth the contempt of the Clergy.
and holy things come in contempt, and grow out of reverence. It seems good
unto us therefore, that first in the city of Rome, you appoint certain to make a
choice of such as desire to take orders, and after command all Bishops to do
the like every man within his own Diocese: And that you suffer none to be
admitted without the consent of the said commissioners, or Bishop. Let the
youth also that purpose to be made pristes, have a Scholemaster appointed to
bring them up in learning and virtuous manners. Moreover in giving of Benefices
and spiritual promotions it is far a miss, in such especially as concern
the Cure and charge of souls. For here have they this respect on lie, that the
Beneficed man may be well provided for, laying apart all care of his flock.
Therefore when such an office is given chiefly if it be a Bishopric, it must
be diligently forsene, that they be good men, Who ought to be made Bishops.
and learned, which both can and will govern the Churches themselves, as they
are bounden by the law. Therefore may not an Italian enjoy a benefice in Spain,
or in England, nor a Spaniarde or an Englishman in Italy.

Furthermore, there is much fraud used, what time a man leaves his benefice,
and resygneth it to another, reserving to him self an yerly pension, many times
also the whole profytes. For no pension may be retained, unless it be for the
pore, or some other godly use. Because the fruits are annexed to the benefice,
and ought no more to be sequestered from it, than the body, from the soul. And
he that has the same, is bounden to use the commodities thereof honestly, and
so much as suffiseth, the residew to employ upon such uses as is beforesayd.
Notwithstanding it shall be lawful for the Bishop, if the case so require to
impose this bondage, that he shall pay a certain thing yearly to some poor man,
especially being of the Clergy, whereby he may live more honestly and better at
ease. Again they offend exceadingly in permutatio^s for all things are done
for lucre: And albeit it is not lawefull to give Unlawefull to give benefices
by legacye.
Benefices by legacy, yet is there a subtle way found by wyttie men to
defeat this law, and benefyces are given to another, yet so, as they have
their reentrie again into the fame with the whole profytes and ministration.
And thus comes it to pass, that he bears the name of a Bishop, which
has no right or Authority, and he which is indede and possession Bishop,
has not the name at all. And what thing else is this, than to make to him self
an heir? Bishop Clementrenewed an old law, whereby it was forbidden that
the son should A pristes son may not enjoy his fathers benefice.
not enjoy his fathers benefice: but yet is this permitted, truly with an evil
example: For it can not be denied, but the greatest part of sclaunders arryse
of this, that the church goods are converted to private uses. Hitherto many
have looked for a redress of this thing, but now they are in utter despair,
and speak and think full evil of us therefore. An other evil use is to give
out vousons of benefices, as it were in a reuertion, where an other man's death
is wished and looked for: And others that better deserve to have it, are
secluded from it, and matter ministered of much strife and contention. What
shall we say to those benefices, which because they could not be employed
upon one man alone, were called commonly incompatibles: but herin is tholde
discipline neglected, and to some one also is permitted to have diverse
Bishoprikes, which seems unto us worthy reformation. Herunto belongs these
pluralities, totquotes, and vnitynge of benefices, when many benefices be
joined together as the parts and members of one body. What? is not this to
delude the laws? Finally now is this disease crept in also, that Bishoprics
are given unto Cardinals, and that many unto one: Which thing seems unto
us in deed a matter of importance, and chiefly to be reformed. For the
offices of Cardinals and Bishops be distinct, and diverse, and agree not in
one person: for the Cardinals were ordained for this cause only that they
should remain about you (most holy father) and never depart from your side,
and should govern the universal Church together with you: But unto Bishops
it belongs to feed their flock committed Why Cardinals were first made.
to them of God, which in deed can not be done, unless they be present with
them, as we see the Shepardes be with their Sheep.

Moreover the thing it self does harm by that example. For with what face
or audacitie, shall we redress the faults of others, which are most apparent
and best seen in our fellowshyppe? For they A^arice and concupisce^ce let
counsels.
may not think, that because they are placed in dignity, they may therefore
take more liberty, no, but let them understand, that they ought rather to
use more temperauncie, for because they ought to shine before others in life
and manners: neither must we follow the Phariseis, which made laws, and
themselves kept them not, but Christ, who flourished in word and work. This
liberty also is a great let to good Counsels, when the mind is before
possessed with lust and Avarice. Besides this, diverse cardinals frequent the
courts of kings, to obtain of them Bishoprikes, and for this cause are so
addicte unto them, that they dare utter nothing frankely. And would God this
way were inhibited. And the Cardinals otherwise provided for, that they might
honestly find them selves and their families, and that Equality were observed
herin, that the yearly revenues of all were egall. Which thing seems unto us
not hard to be brought to pass, if we could, forsaking all covetousness,
follow the fotesteppes of Christ. When these faults are redressed, and mete
ministers in the Church appointed, it is chiefly to be looked to, that the
Bishops do inhabit among their own people, for they be the husbands of
the Church. But what more heuie or sorowefull sight can be showed, than every
where to se congregations forsaken, and flocks destitute of Pastors, deteyned
in the hands of Hirelinges? Therefore ought they to be extremely punisshed,
which lead their flocks to deserte, and to be excommunicated or outlawed
only, but also to lose their liuinges for ever, unless they crave pardon of
you within a short time. For by ancient laws it was decreed, that a Bishop
might not be above three wekes absent from his congregation. We se also that
very many Cardinals are absent from Rome, and do nothing that properlye
belongs to their office. We grant it to be expedient that certain of them
be resident in their own provinces. For by them, as by certain branches and
rotes of trees stretched out far and wide in the Christian world, men are
kept in their dewtie and dew obeidience of this our common wealth: but yet
were it requisite, that the most part of them were by you called again to
Rome: For so should they both execute their office, and also their presence
should be there both honorable and profitable to the court of Rome.
Moreover in punyshynge of crimes and vices, there wants a great severity of
discipline. For such as have offended and deserved punishment find a mean,
whereby to convey themselves out of the jurisdiction of their Bishop, or judge
ordinary, or in case they cannot do this, than go they to the master of the
Pentionaries, and fine with him for a piece of money. And that do they chiefly,
that are of the clergy, which thing does offend many. Wherefore we beseech
you in the blood of Christ, wherewith he redeemed, washed, and sanctified his
church, that this licentious liberty, may utterly be abolished. For seeing
that no common wealth may long endure, wherein sin is unpunished, how
much more ought the same to be looked to in the Church? Emonges the Monckes
also, Many filthy acts of Monks.
are many abominable Acts committed, wherefore we think good that their
Colleges and Couentes be dissolved, not suddenly, or through violence, but so,
that no man from henceforth be admitted into that order. For so shall they by
little and little decay. And afterward may honester men be placed in their
houses. Nevertheless we think mete, that all young Nouices which have not yet
professed religion by a vow solempnely made, be presently removed from thence.
There must also be diligent head taken, that they be mete persons, which are
set to here confession. And herin ought the Bishop to have a vigilante eye,
but chiefly that there be nothing done for money. For the same free gift
which we spoke of before, concerns not you only, but all others in like
manner. Moreover in the houses of Nuns, and sacred Uirgins, namely* where they
be governed of Monks, are many, and that open crimes committed after a most
filthy and detestable example, therefore must the oversight of such be taken
from the Monks, and committed unto others, of whom no peril or suspicion can
be had. Now whereas in many places, and chiefly in Italy, certain wicked
opinions are disputed not only in universities, but also in churches, it
deserves much dispraise. Therefore the Bishops must be charged, that in
such places whereas universities or Schools be, they admonish the teachers,
that they propounde no such thing herafter, but instruct and bring up youth
in virtue and fear of God, nor that they have any open disputations of matter
of divinity, but within their private houses.

Likewise must Princes and Magistrates be admonished, to give commandment to
the Printers, that they set not forth all sorts of books, but such only as
be permitted. There is commonly read in all scooles a book of Colloquies,
compiled by Erasmus of Roterda^, wherein be many things, which may beat in to
young and tender minds, ungodliness, and infecte the frail and bryckel age.
Therefore this and such other like books must be bannyshed the Scooles.
Further more where it is permitted to Monks, that have professed Religion The
cowle makes not the Monk.
by a vow, to put of their own wede and put on other apparel, we think it
not well done, for the garment is as a badge of the monastical vow. Therefore
if they ones forsake their cootes, let them be deprived of their lyuinges and
all ecclesiastical function. Also such as carry about the relyques of saint
Anthony, and other like, are in our judgments worthy to be utterly abolyshed,
for through innumerable superstitions they bring the ignorant people in to
error, and plainly abuse them. Oftentimes also, they a^e permytted to marrye,
which have taken holy orders, but this ought to be granted to no man, but for
urgent causes, as when the whole stock and defense of a Realm is brought to
one man. And because the Lutherians permit all men to marry without respect,
therefore must we more stiffly resyste the same. Another may they be suffered to
mary together, which are at the second degree of blood or affinity, unless
it be upon most weyghtie considerations, but such as are further of, may
have more liberty granted them, and that to be done without money, except
perauenture they have first had carnal copulation, than is it lawful to
punyshe them by the purse, and the money to be employed immediately to good
uses. But the vice of Simonie, which has his name of Simony reigns in the
church.
Simon magus reigns so in the church now adays, that men are nothing
ashamed: For they offend herein most boldly and seek to be assoyled by
geuyng of money, and the benefices thus wyckedly gotten, they enjoy this not
withstanding. We do not deny but your holiness may pardon their offense
touching the punyshement which they have deserved, but that the occasion of
transgressynge may be taken away, we think you had need to deal more
strayghtly, and not to remitte the punyshement: For what more shameful or
detestable thing can be, than this bieng and sellyng? There must be a prouiso
had that the clergy give not away by legacy any part of the church goods,
without great causes, lest that to the hinderau^ce of the poor, some other
shall have abundance to spend in riot and voluptuousnes. Also license is
granted for every man to chouse a chaplain where he list, and to have mass
in private houses: which ought not rashlye to be granted, lest that secret
things should come in contempt, and especially the chiefest sacrament of all.
Iudulgences and pardons ought not to be given so commonly, but only ones in the
year, and that in great cities. Uowes may not lightly be changed, nor
converted to an other work, unless it be correspondent to the vow.

Sometime the last will of the testatours is wont to be changed, which happily
had bequethed some portion of money to Godly uses, and that chances commonly
by reason of the poverty of the heirs, or wylmakers, but there must head be
taken, that unless the testatour fall in poverty, so that the will can not
well be performed, it be not suffered. For it is wickedness else to alter the
deades will. And now that we have declared our minds in things concerning
the universal church, we shall add to the same a few cases, which properly
belong to the bishop of Rome. Where as this city and church of Rome is the
mother and maistres of all churches, it were comlye and decent, that it
Harlottes honored at Rome.
should excelle others in Religion and honesty of life. But in the church of
S. Peter, haunte many unlearned and filthy priests, appareled with so vile
garments, both of their own and of their church, that it were also vndece^t
to the like worn in the private houses of the porest sort. And in these
garments say mass, to the great offense of the lokers on. Therefore must the
Archedeacon, or the Co^missarie be commanded, that first in this city, and
after also in other places, such filthiness be avoided out of men's sight. What
shall we say of the unchaste women and strompetes, which in apparel and all
kind of ornaments differ nothing in this city, from matrones of honor,
rydyng upon their Mules through the mids of the city, even at none days
accompanied with the familiar friends and servants of the chiefest
Cardinals and such other like. Certainly we have not seen such
intemperancie, and dissolute living used, in any other city, but in this which
ought in deed to be a spectacle and ensample to the whole universal world.
These Courtisanes are also maynteyned to inhabit gorgeous houses, which
doubteles is great shame. There be also in this city great contentions and
factions: It is your part to amend all these things, and it shall be requisite
yt you oppointe certain Cardinals mete for the purpose, to appease all strife,
and to reconcile the minds of the citezens. Last of all, the provision of the
wydowes and other pore people, properly apperteineth to your charge. And these
are the things most holy father, which we have thought mete to be reformed:
And albeit we were unmeet for this charge, yet have we done that lay in us,
and uttered our conscience uprightly, and we are entered into a great hope, yt
under your government we shall see the church pure and clean, and quiet, to the
perpetual and immortal glory of your name. You have taken to you the name of
Paul, wherefore we trust it will come to pass, that after his example, you
will embrace the church with a certain earnest and seruent zeal. God chose
Paul as a singular instrument, to preach the Gospel to the Gentyles: so
trust we also that you are chosen to call again to light the name of Christ, by
the ge^tyles defaced, to remedy public diseases, to reduce the flock of
Christ into one shepefolde, and turn away Gods wrath, which ha^geth now over
us, dew for our offenses. This reformation was in deed conceived in words,
but never brou^ght to effect, nor published. Finally the bishop delayeth the
counsel from the beginning of Nouembre to the kalendes of May in the next
year followyng, and assigns the place at Uicentia, a large and a plentiful
city belongyng to the state of Uenise, and sends thither three Cardinals,
Campegius, Simonet and Brunduse, which Presidentes of the counsel
should both begin the treaty, and receive them that came. The bishop would
have had the matter of reformation kept close as is said before, but it was
not long hid. And what time it was brought from Rome, into Germany, Luther
answered it in the duche tongue, and John Sturmius in the Latin, framynge
their style to the commissioners 1538
of the reformation. Before Luthers book was set out a picture, which
plainly declared the argument. For the bishop was placed in an high seat,
and certain Cardinals standing about him, which with foxes tails tied to
staves like besomes, sweep all things vpsyde down. There was among these
Cardinals, Nicholas Archebyshop of Capua, who could abide no reformation. He
being sent by Bishop Paul (as it is credibly reported) contended sore that
The Cardi* of Capua ca^ abide no reformation.
nothing should be redressed at all. And among other things, he said how
than, the Lutherianes would make their boast, that they were driven of the^ so
to do in manner by compulsion. Whereupon the Bishop and the Cardinals were
co^tenthed to be persuaded to alter no thing. And yet he him self, that so
let them, is reported to have sent a book privily to a certain friend of his
in Germany, which many men take so, as though he would have both the bishop
and the said commissioners lawghed to scorn for their labors. Others think
that the bishop was made privy to that book of reformation, that by setting
forth of the same, there might appear in him some will of amendment of
things, and yet understand it by an other mean, as though he him self would
have done greater things, in case he had intended to have publyshed any such
like matter. And as touching the colloquies of Erasmus, thus it stands.
Among many other works whereby Erasmus wonderfully auaunced learning, he
made The Colloquie of Erasmus.
also a book of Dialogues for children. And seeing it red so gredely, he often
augmented the same. And as he was a man of an excellent wit, and of great
eloquence, he took pleasure to write of sundry arguments taken out of natural
things, and of the life of men. And with a certain marvelous dexterity, and
style most pleasant, he sets forth precpres of Godly and virtuous
manners, and notes with all by the same occasion, old accustomed errors and
vices, whereof comes this complaynte of him. In the month of Februarye, the
French Momora^ci^ made constable of Fra^.
king made Annas Momorauncie, Conestable of France, which is the highest
degree of honor there. This office had been ever void since the death of the
Duke of Bourbon. For the king being grievously offended with his treason, had
bestowed the same upon no man until this time. And the same office has had
but bare luck, in more than one or two, whilst they abusing their authority,
have styred up against them, either the kings them selves, or the nobility.
In the mean time the Protestauntes assemble at Brunswicke about the end of
March, to treat of matters concerning their league. And they receive
Christian king of Denmark in Christian king of De^marke receives the
gospel.
to their league. He was son of Frederick, and had received the doctrine of
the Gospel, and had appointed John Pomerane, whom he called from Wittenberge,
to set order in his churches, and by him was anointed and crowned king. John
also Marquis of Brande^burg, the brother of Ioachim prince Electour, made
means by the Duke of Saxon, to be admitted into the league. He therefore was
appointed to treat with him upon certain conditions at his return home, and
tha^ to receive him in all their names. The same request also made Albert Duke
of Pruselande, whom six years before the chamber had outlawed, and that was
the chiefest cause why he was not received in The Duke of Pruse is outlawed.
to this society. Nevertheless they promised him all their favor and good
will. When the Duke of Saxony, the Lantgraue and their co^sortes, were going to
this assembly, Henry Duke of Brunswycke, denied to give them saufe conduicte,
when they should pass through his country. For even than he imagined war,
as hereafter you shall hear. In the Duke of Saxons company was Maurice,
nephewe to Duke George by his brother Henry, a young man of seuentene years
old. Henry was of the Protestauntes Religion, and therefore the Duke took his
son Maurice, being his kynsman, to bring up. The king of Denmark him self
came than also to Brunswicke.

In the nynth book I spoke of the persecution that was in France for
Lutheranisme. It were long to recite al, but this year at the Ides of Apryll,
which was than nine days before Easter, a young gentleman of Tolouse,
learned, about twenty years of age, was brent at Paris for eating of flesh,
not alive in deed, but yet so as being hanged A gentleman of Tolouse burnt at
Paris.
right over, he felt the fire kyndled under him, which after the manner there
was accounted as a great benefit, for that he in prison before he was brought
forth to execution, feared with the cruel words of Morine the judge
threatenyng him, confessed that he had done wyckedlye and against Religion.

For the manner of repentance is there only, that he shall suffer with the less
torment. But such as abide constant are most cruelly tourmented. Two young
men of Flaunders were in the like danger, but admonyshed thereof by a certain
Senator, learned, and of a good judgment, they escaped death by flyeng away.

In the month of May the Bishop of Rome goes to Nice a haven town in
Ligurie: Thither also came the Emperor, and the Themperor the french king
and the pope, meets at Nice.
French king, at his request chiefly, he with a Navy out of Spain, and the
king by land, accompanied among others, with a power of Almaignes, which
were lead by Wylliam County Furste^berge. After a long treaty, albeit they
could not throughlye agree, yet a trewee was made in the month of June for
ten years.

Here was the lady Margaret the Emperors bastard daughter ensured to Octauius
Duke of Parma, the Bishops nephew by his son Peter, whom Cosmus duke of
Florence would feign have married after the death of Alexander Medices.

The two kings spoke not together in this place, albeit the Bishop desired
it much: But a few days after, when he was departed, they met at Aegnes
Mortes, a Town of the Province, in the mouth of the River of Rhosne, whither
the Emperor retorninge into Spain, came with his Navy at the Ides of Iulye.
The king had sent to mete him Uelius his Ambassadoure, and Galleis to
conduicte him. When the Emperor came nere unto Aegnes, the Conestable of
France was there ready to entreat him, that he would arrive there with his
Navy: For he said the king would be there within these two hours, and
would come into his Bark to him. When the Emperor saw that the rest of the
Ships (which were scattered the day before by reason of a miste) were come
together, he puts into the haven. And not long after comes the king
also, and accompanied among others, with Anthony Duke of Loraine, and the
Cardinal his brother, goes straight way to the ships. The Emperor going
forth as far as the ladder of the ship to mete him, receaueth him in. But
it can not be spoken, what embracynges, and gratulations were there.

When they were set down in the Stern of the Ship, the nobles about the
Emperor come and salute the king lowly and right curtesly. There the Emperor
sent for Andrewe Aurie his Admiral, Prince of Melphite, who forsook the king
ten years before, as is Andr^w de Aurie.
mentioned in the sixte Book, to come and salute the king: When he came, the
king said, Prince Andrewe, for as much as you are friend and seruiture to the
Emperor, And that it is his pleasure, that I should speak with you: I am
content to gratify him herein, whom I esteem as my brother. After when they
had talked familiarlye and friendly together by the space of an hour, the king
departs. The next day in the morning. As soon as it was light day, the
Emperor gives commandment by a Trompet that no man go a land: but he
himself guarded with certain of his nobles, saileth out to dyne with the king.
When he came to land, the king and the queen, and his two sons most gently
do embrace him, and lead him into the Palace toward evening, the emperor
aduertiseth Androwe de Aure, who remained The meting ofthemperor and the king.
within board, how, at the request of the king and the queen his sister, he
purposed to lie in the town that night. And the next day at after diner to
return to his Navy. Which he did for this intent, lest he should, through
his absence, conceive some false suspicion in his mind. Wherefore the next day,
the Emperor came again to the sea, accompanied with the king, and all his
nobles: And when they had drunken together in the Emperors cabben of the
ship, they departed great friends. Which thing once known at Paris and other
places, they song Tedeum, and made bonefyers. The Bishop had requested them at
Nice, when the peace was concluded, that they would go to the counsel
Uicentia, and send thither such Prelates as they had than in their companyes.
And also to send commandment to the rest at home, to repair thither in like
manner: But when they had excused them selves of both those things. And the
Cardinals, which he had sent thither advertised him that there was great
solitariness. Again he deferreth the day of the Counsel till Easter
following, sendyng abroad his letters touching the same matter, the fourth
kalendes of July, when he was retornyng homewarde, at Genes. At the first
metyng the king kissed his right foot, as he sat in his chair, and after,
The French king kissed the Popes right foot.
the rest of the nobles: Notwithstanding there were diverse in the kings
train, that refused to do it, although the Conestable had warned them before,
as Christopher, Duke of Wirtemberge, william cou^tie Furstemberge, Germans,
Mareschall Marchan, a Frencheman, and George Gluchie, the Ambassador of the
king of Denmark. At the self same time departed out of this life Charles
Ecmonde Duke of Gelders: In the former book you have hard, how he was in a
manner turned out of al his possessions: And brought to this distress, wha^ he
lay sick, he devised with his cousin, William duke of Cleave, who after by the
consent of the nobility and commons, brought all to his own government, not
without themperours high displeasure, as shall be declared in his place. A little
before that dies also Erarde Marchian, Cardinal, Bishop of Liege: no man
tourmented more for Religion, The Bishop of Liege made his grave yet living.
than he. In the Cathedral church of Liege, he had many years before builded
him a Tomb most sumptuous, and had Mass and Dirige song for him yearly, as
the Papists are wont, for the dead. For he judged these merits of priests
to be more available to him being a live: whereunto they do attribute the
deserte and reward of eternal life. They that knew the man well, affirm
that he did this for a certain ostentation, for that he was most desirous of
vain glory, and took pleasure in that pomp and solemnity. This time were
the English Bibles in printyng at Paris, which by the kings commandment,
English Bibles were printed at Paris.
should be had in all churches through out England: but after it was known,
it was prohibited, and the Printer was in danger. In France they have not
commonly the Scripture in the vulgar tongue: neither does it want suspicion,
if any man chance to read the New Testament, or such a like thing in
French: neither is is lawful for any to study the Scripture, but such as
profess Divinity: but the common sort of men know nothing at all, and the
town wives, when they go to here Mass, carry with them books of Latin prayers,
which they mu^ble up after a sort, knowing not what they say at all, and are
persuaded, that the same is to God more acceptable, than if they should pray
in their mother tongue. This is a practice of the priests The ignorance of the
people is gainefull to priests.
unto whom the ignorance of others is gainefull.

The Bishop retourning home in the beginning of August, was received into the
city of Rome, with a merueilous pomp and triumph. And all the streets and
ways, being hanged and spired with rich and costly carpets, and posies written
in every place, wherein they extolled him wonderfully, for restoryng peace unto
the world, and reco^ciling the Princes.

This year at Strauseborough was erected a College, or a gra^mer A college
erected at Straus^.
Scoole for youth, by the means chieflye of James Sturnne, a principal
Senator: which in short time, thoroughe the diligence of learned men so
flourished, that there repared thither not only from the furthest parts of
Germany, but also out of foreine nations, the manner of teaching the youth, and
dividing them into fourmes, and the whole order was devised by John Sturmie,
which he first exhibited to the Senate, and afterward in a book put forth,
he declares it more at large. And whereas many were feign to fly for Religion
and conscience sake, out of France and Flaunders, and the Senate appointed
them a church, whereof John Calvin was first for certain years the
superintendent, John Calvin. Peter Brulie.
and after him Peter Brulie of whose end I will speak herafter. But in
England Thomas of Canturbury, was of long time had in great reverence: And his
body was shryned in silver, and hanged round about with costly Iewelles of
Gold and precious stones, beyond measure. And among others, there was one
rich Jewel, called the Regal of France. This year did king Henry take him
out of his shrine, and burn his Relics. This Thomas, surnamed Becket, Thomas
Becket.
was in time past Archbishop of Canturbury. And where he stood styffe in
defending the liberties of the Clergy, he fell into the displeasure of the
king of England Henry the second of that name, and commanded into exile, he
fled to the Bishop of Rome Alexander the third, who at that time, for
themnitie of the emperor Friderick Barbarousse, was in France. At the length
Thomas Becket by the intercession of him, and of Jews the vij. king of
France, was reconciled, and returned home, the seventh year of his exile. And
when afterward he troubled certain Bishops that took the kings part, and
did excommunicate them, the king being again offended, said he was in a
miserable estate, that could not live in quiet for one priest: he lamented also
that there was no man about him, that would deliver him from such
disquietnes: which words so ticled many, that, knowing it should be no
displeasure to the king, they went to Cantorbury, and slew Thomas. The king
pretended a great sorrow: And sendynge Ambassadors to Rome to make his
purgation, in fine entreated the Bishop to send inquisitours into England:
to enquire and examine the matter. And what time the Bishop at the last had
sent two Cardinals, and the murder could not be searched out, the king
pourgeth him self by an oath: And because of the former hatred, and words
spoken, there was some suspecion and fault in him, in conclusion, he was
reconciled upon this condition, that after the years he should go into Syria,
and war upon the Saracenes. This murder was committed in the year of man's
salvation.M.C.lxxi. And not long after, the memorial of Thomas waxed famous,
through miracles, which the Monks of Canturbury said he wrought: Whereof when
the Bishop of Rome was advertised by the Legates, that came out of England,
he Canonised him, and made him a saint.

What time the metyng was at Nice, Ioachim Marquis of Brandenburge, prince
Electour, the son of Ioachin, in the beginning of June, sent his Ambassador,
Eustace Schlebie to the Duke of Saxon with these instructions: how Sigismunde
king of Pole, and John Wayuode king of Hungary, had advertised him, that the
Turks made great preparation to invade Hungary, and so fortifiyng Buda, to
make an incursion into Germanye: And this same did the emperor News of the
Turks approach.
of Turks signify unto Uayuode: And where it was once enjoined, his father in
an open assembly, that when he had any intelligence of Turkishe matters, he
should advertise the other states thereof, therefore can not he also, but
perform this dewtie to the common wealth, and is not a little moved at these
news, for the chance and calamity of his native country: For this therefore
and for other causes he went to king Ferdinando into Lusatia: But he had both
before his coming and when he was there also, received letters and messagers
touching the same things: Wherefore in case he should not be resisted, there is
no doubt but they, which lie next him should se shortly in their country that
most cruel enemy: For all the way from Buda until their frontiers, is there
another Castle nor Town fortified, able to hold out such a power, no
mountains nor straight passages to stop his carriage, saving only the city
of Uratislauie, and the town of Lignice: For as for of the situation of
Morauie and Silesie, and how champion and fruietfull a country it is, he
knows well enough, and needs no rehearsal. And albeit he has promised aid
to king Ferdinando, for the common danger, yet he sees how little such
manner of aid is able to help, for the greatness of the case requires all the
aid and power of the whole Empire. But for as much as the same haplye can not
be obtained without a general assemblye, and unless ail Germany be quieted.
And again the present danger will permit no long delay, therefore has he
in talk moved the king that he would wholly dispose him self unto this thing
only, that a fyrme and sure peace might be concluded. Whereunto king Ferdinando
had answered right honorably, and promised his endeavor, and to further the
cause to the Emperor, so that he might understand what he and his league
friends, furthermore demanded. And seeing it stands thus, he desires him to
give his mind hereunto, and open unto him unfeignedly, such conditions of
peace as he thinks mete to be entreated of: And he him self will deuyse and
that in his own name, that Ferdinando shall prefer them to the Emperor, in
such sort as he trusts that the treaty shall be commodious to the universal
world. And now also may the Turks violence more easelye be resisted, for as
much as John Uayuode is reconcyled to king Ferdinando, as the king him self
told him in counsel, for he would not have it bruted abroad, lest it should
come to the Turks care. Certain years past and hitherto has a great part of
Hongary been plucked away from Christendom through civil wars, but now
their minds are appeased and all displeasure paste, there is a goodlye
occasion offered of well doing: Wherefore eftsoon he besecheth him, that he
would help the cause of the common wealth.

This Marquis had married the daughter of Sigismunde king of Poole, which was
nece to John Uayuode by his systers side, and hereof came that frendshyp and
familiarity betwyxt them. He had also than received the Religion of Saxony,
and set forth a book of the The Marquses of (...)denburge of the Protestants
Religion.
same, but kept him out of the league, and was otherwise wholly addicted to the
Emperor and king Ferdinando, and retained certain ceremonies, and sought to
quiet offenses.

The Duke of Saxony signifies the whole matter by his letters to the
Lantgraue. And the twelfth day of June after, they write both to this Marquis
of Brandenburg on this wise. Albeit the matter is of much importance, and
altogether such as they ought to make their fellows privy to, yet do they
see what discommoditie might come through delay, especially considering how
the Turk flacketh nothing of his fiersenes, and they have also consulted
ouerlonge, how to quiet Germany and to withstand him with all their powers,
for where he advertised them by his Ambassadors, that it were needful to
resist that most cruel ennemie, truth it is and they confess, that the
common wealth required no less. But they stand in that case, that they had
chiefly need of such a peace as were honorable, true, syrme, and nothing
doubtful. For in case they should spend their treasure on the Turkyshe war,
and the mean while, have unquiet neighbors at home, he sees him self how
unmeet and hurtefull the same would be unto them. They for their part are
very desirous of peace, which if they can not obtain, and therefore in
doubtful matters, diminishe no part of their power, and in the mean time the
common wealth sustain any damage, there may no blame thereof be imputed to
them, but all together unto those that refuse the conditions of peace. Moreover
they suppose, that it should concern the king Ferdina^do, and others that
border on the Turks, that relation were made of these things unto all the
states: Where also hitherto there is no counsel imperial called, it is not for
the profit of the common wealth. For though perchance the time will not
permit that public aid should be decreed suddenly, and need requires to
crave aid of some men. Yet is the Turk of such power, that he is able to
continue in wars many years: And will not cease till either he has obtained
his purpose, or having an overthrow be constrained to break up wars for a
time. Wherefore they think an assembly of the Empire, to be very expedient,
that both the peace of Germany therein might be established, and co^sultation
had conserning the Turkishe war. And this later to be of so great force, that
albeit al things were quiet in Germany, yet never thelesse a common assembly
to be needful. Nor it skileth not greatly, if perchance king Ferdina^do, can
not well be there in the Emperors name, so that Ambassadors be sent with full
commission and authority. Which thing if he can bring to pass, the same
shall be commodious for the Emperor, and for all Germany. How be it lest they
should in any point fail the common wealth, or hinder the commodity there.
of, they would have in a readynes such aid, as they for their parts are
acustomed and ought to find, to be always ready to serve, when need shall
require: Neither doubt they, but their fellows will do the same, but under
this condition, that king Ferdinando immediately obtain for them of the
Emperor a sure and undoubted peace: And the which all other Princes of the
Empire, that be of the Bysshoppes Religion, shall ratify. That done, and the
suites and actions of the chamber set apart, their aid shall be straight ways
ready. But in case the Emperor by reason of his absence, can not bring all
the Princes heeeunto in time, at the least he persuade these to be of his
opinion, William and Lewis, Dukes of Bauier, George Duke of Saxony, the
Archebyshop of Mentz, Collon and Treuers, also the Bishops of Salisburge,
Maydenburge, Breme, Bamberge, Wyrtenburge, Munster, Auspurge and Aeslet. But in
case they can not be persuaded, that then the Emperor and king Ferdinando do
confirm the same peace, for them selves and for all their subjects, and make
promise do their endeavors that other Princes also may give their assente to
the same: which in case they shall refuse to do, yet shall they never swerve
from this conuenant. And so shortly as may be, for this and other causes, shall
call an assembly of the Empire. If this be done they trust that their league
friends also will be ready to send their aid, like as they themselves are
determined to do, in case their league friends be agreeable to the same, and
that as well they may enjoy the benefyte of this peace, which came into
their league after the composition of Norinberge, as such as shall repare unto
them hereafter. Moreover that the same may extend, not only to the Princes of
the Empire, but also to the king of Denmark. And to the intent it may well
appear how desirous they be of peace, for as much as the state of the Empire
can not be so soon assembled, therefore will they appointe an assembly of
their company at Isenacke, against the. xxiiij of July, to be there with most
ample commission. Wherefore it were well done, if he could bring it to pass,
that the Emperor and king Ferdinando, he him self also and the Palsgraue,
sent their Ambassadors thither. When they had answered on this wise, they
dispatched their letters unto their league friends requyringe them to be at
that day at Iseuacke, a town of Turingie. The Marquis had caused his
Ambassador to show them, that in case they were so content, he would deuyse
that the Palsgraue who te^dred also the common wealth should travail in the
same matter. With the letters to the Marquis of Brandenburge, they sent also
the whole treaty, that they had with Heldus the Emperors Ambassador, that he
might clearly perceive the whole matter, which things received, the Marquis
intrateth king Ferdinando, that he would immediately prefer this matter to the
Emperor, to fore he returned out of Italy, into Spain: After he requires
the Palsgraue, to take this matter in hand together with him, he makes
answer, that albeit the Protestauntes had not spoken to him herein, yet
would he not refuse, but his men were gone, which were wont to serve him in
the same affairs: wherefore he wylleth him to send his counselors all under
one, and if the matter should afterward require his presence, he would not
fail. When the day came, the Marquis by his Ambassadors declared this first
to the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and after to all the rest, at Isenacke,
for the Princes them selves were not present. And he wylled them to desire the
Palsgraue to take this travail and pain, and that an other day might be
appointed, wherein to mete again: In the mean while the matter may be brought
to pass with the Emperor, that his consent also and authority may be had.
Moreover he requested them, that they would not be over straight lased, but to
grant to so much as they might with a saufe conscience. For king Ferdinando
will slack no manner of dilygence, neither doubts he but that the Emperor is
also greatly inclined to peace.

Hereunto the Protestauntes answer from Isenacke the fifte day of Auguste,
that to make a concord they are very desirous, so that the Emperors will and
commandment be accordingly. Further though they think it not needful for
them to entreat the Palsgraue, which is of him self well disposed, and if
the Emperor command him, will not refuse it, yet will they write unto him,
and when the Emperors pleasure shall be known, by the advice of him and the
Palsgraue, they will assign a day, wherein they shall mete all to treat of
the foresaid matter. In this assembly was received into their league the lady
Elizabeth, The lady Elizabeth sister to the Lantgraue is received in to the
league of Protest.
the Lantgraues sister, a wydowe. The cities also of Halles and Hailbrune, made
suit to be admitted by the mediation of them of Auspurge, and Ulmes. Here were
heard also every ma^s complaints, but especially the cause of the Goflarians,
whom Henry Duke of Brunswycke had sore oppressed. Wherefore, they agreed to
request the Marquis, that he would obtain of the Emperor, through the
means of king Ferdinando a precept, whereby the Duke of Brunswicke may be
compelled to answer the matter: For otherwise, the state and condition of the
Goflariens is so miserable that they can not forsake them in that distress.
Hitherto was also news brought of the peace concluded between the Emperor and
the French king. And the assembly brake up the nynth day of Auguste.

This year sprang up a sect of them, which are called Antinomians. The fecte
of Antinomia^s
These do affirm that repentance is not to be taught by the ten
commandments, and impugn those, which teach that the Gospel is not to be
preached, but unto the minds that are first shaken and broken through the
declaration of the law: But they determyne that what soever the man's life be,
were it never so sinful, yet is he justified if he believe only the promyses of
the Gospel. The chief of them was John Islebie, surnamed Agricola. But Luther
does plainly confute these things, and proves that the law was not given, to
John Isleby
the intent it should justify, but to declare sin, and to fear the
conscience, and therefore ought first of all to be taught, and than the
Gospel, which shows unto us the son of God, the mediator and advocate of
mankind. In fine Islebie admonished by Luther privately, and by the conference
of the scriptures better instructed, was persuaded to be of Luthers opinion,
and afterward by open writing witnessed the same, confessing his error.

In the last book you have heard much speaking of Heldus, whom the Emperor
sent Ambassador into Germany. He receiving of the Protestauntes not such
answer as he would, goes to the most part of all the Princes, and
devising a sclaunder, as though the Protestauntes could abide no right nor
hearing of matters, and had refused most reasonable conditions of peace by him
propounded, began to move them to a league, whereof he protested both the
Emperor and king Ferdinando to be aucthours, and rested not before he had
brought it to pass with some. Those were the Archebyshops of Me^tz and
Salisburge, William and Lewys, Dukes of Bauier, George A lege of the Papists
against the Protesta^tes
Duke of Saoxony, Ericke and Henry Dukes of Brunswicke. And for this matter
they assembled at Norinberge, and the league was made under this title, that in
case any man were iniuried or molested, for the bishops Religion which they
call the old, the others should assiste him with their aid. Therefore they
called it holy, as ordained for Gods glory and defense of the church,. It is
decreed for eleven years.

The French king returnyng from Nice, came to a communication with Marie the
Emperors sister, Regent of Flaunders, at Compegue a town of the Swycers. Some
men thought that all her dryfte was, that by the occasion of this new made
peace, and frendlye metynge at Aeguesmortes, she might turn away the kings
mind, from the Duke of Cleave, who possessed Gelderlande. And by the opinion
of the kings amity, might make him sore afraid. Ye have heard much of the
judgment of the Imperial chamber. They being evermore like them selves, and
nothing relentynge of their wonted rygour, had lately outlawed the city of
Myndin for a suit betwyxte The city of Mynden ou^ lawed.
them and the clergy of their city, which thing ones known, the Duke of
Saxony, and the Lantgraue in their own names and their league friends, publyshe
a writing at the Ides of Nouembre: where in they recite in order what trouble
they have had with the chamber these certain years paste. And because they can
never be quiet, and upon most just causes have been refused. And yet
nevertheless procedyng obstinatlye, have now prescrybed their fellows, the
citezens of Myndyn, they do admonyshe and pray all Princes and states, that
they would repute the sentence given as unjust, and not suffer them selves to
be styred up to any violence. For if it were other wise, and that the sentence
were put in execution, they would not sure neglecte the injuries of their
confederatours. In the mean time the Emperor being moved by king Ferdinando,
as before is said, sent his letters in to Germany, declarynge his good will
toward the common wealth. And how much he desired to appease this
controversy in Religion. And because a few days paste he received
aduertysement, that the Protestauntes also did not refuse the concondicions of
Peace, and required a treaty, so that his consent were thereto, therefore he
unto whom nothing is lieuer than the public tranquillity, does both allow
this way, and makes his deputes, the Archebyshop of Land, and Matthie Held,
or one of them, and gives them full authority by these presents, that they
together with the counselors of his brother king Ferdinando, and the other
Princes that be intercessours, may treat and determyne the matter: what soever
they shall do, he will ratify. These letters were dated at Toledo the.xxv.
day of Nouembre. And when they were afterward brought into Germany, the
twelfth day of February, was assigned at the which day all should mete at
Franckefurte.

I told you a little before of a league made at Norinberge. The chief
ryngeleaders hereof were Lewis Duke of Bauier, and Henry Duke The Duke of
Brunswick desirous of war
of Brunswycke, which was wholly addicted to disturb the common quiet. And did
his endeavor to styre up war against the Protestauntes. And where he had
about the same time received letters from the Archebyshop of Mentz, on the
morrow after Christmas day he answers at few words committing the rest in
credit to his Secretary Stephen Faber whom he sent withal.

And the last day save one of December, it chanced not far from the town
of Cassel, that the Lantgraue going a hunting, met with him, and an other
young man of the Archebyshop of Mentz, that had brought the letters. There the
Lantgraue after the Almaigne facion, demanded of the young man, which first
met him, what he was? I am says he, servant to the Prince Electour of
Brandenburge: what is the other? And he likewise when Stephen now came nere
him, he asks of him self, what he was? He answered as the other had done,
he enquireth whether he was going? He said to Spyres: how does the Prince?
in health. After being demanded, whether he would justify these things to
be true? He said yea that he would, and so was dimissed. Afterward when he
was gone a little way, one of the Lantgraues servants told, how that it
was the Duke of Brunswickes Secretary, which after that an other had also
affirmed that knew him, the Lantgraue sent to fetch them back to Casselle,
till he came from hunting him self. In the mean time The Lantgraue
intercepteth the Dukes letters.
Stephen Faber, whylest he was in the Stowffe, plucketh out of his bosom a
lether bag, and taking out of it certain letters, hastes out of the doers:
one of the household servants perceived it, and gave notice to the Steward,
who as it chanced was there present, lookynge down out of the stowffe wyndowe
into the court underneath wherefore being asked for his letters, he draws the^
out of his bosom: The Steward receives the^ into his custody, and delivered
them to the La^tgraue, when he came from hunting. Those were two letters whereof
the one was directed to the Archebyshop of Mentz, the other to Matthie Held.
And with all were certain tables of remembrance, or instructions of things he
had incredite. And seeing the matter was of it self very suspicious, and the
notes within the table increased the suspicion more, the Lantgraue opens them
both. The sum of the Archebyshoppes letters was this: That he had received
his letters, and reioseth much, that he has him in contynuall remembrance,
and that he is all his to command, and how he has sent unto him Stephen his
Secretary, a trustye man, by whom he may understand the whole matter, and
what news was brought him out of Bauier: Unto whom he desires him to give
credit. After he wysheth well to him and their adherentes, but his adversaries
he commends to Satan, of the same effect he had written also to Heldus,
how he had sent again Stephen with instructions, he desires to hear him
gently, and give no less credit to him, than if he spoke presently to him in
person, so long as he lives, he will take the Emperors part, how so ever
the matter falls out. Neither doubts he but the Emperor will deuyse for
all things well enough. In the remembrance of the Archebyshop was this. How
the Lantgraue was unquiet, and could take no sleep nor rest, and was so given
to hunting, that he was almost mad: Whereby the thing might the better be
done. And some part of it was already brought to pass: And what the Lantgraue
goes about, is not unknown to to the Dukes of Bauier, and is most certain;
that he will make war against the one of them two: Wherefore he must persuade
the fellows of his college to come into the league. He shall do very well
also to addicte him self wholly unto this league, and have respect to them, of
whom being ones forsaken, he received much displeasure. How the Duke of
Bauier and he intend to talk together, and by conferryng their counselles to
determine some thing. Moreover how the state of Sweuia are moved unto this
league, and the matter brought almost to an end.

The instructions to Heldus were these. How his trust is, that the Emperor
will come shortly out of Spain, and that if he persevere co^stante in his
purpose all things shall proceed well. For than he trusts that other kings
also, which as yet have not uttered them selves, will favor the same way.
And if all the confederatours be of the same mind and will that he is of,
there shall want nothing. But how soever others use them selves, he will
ever remain constant, and obedient to the Emperor. How he thinks it good
that the chamber command the Lantgraue, to lay aparte his weapons, in the
mean while will he and the Duke of Bauier, be in a readiness: And if he do not
obey, that than the chamber may command the Duke of Bauier and him to forsee
that the common wealth sustain no damage, and inioyne other Princes also to
give their assistaunce after the form of the league. What time these things
were thus come to light because there was great danger toward, and the
occasion of war was sought of them, the La^tgraue furthwith wrote his letters
to his father in law Duke George, and declaringe the whole matter as it
stood, shows how he has great wrong offered him, and how he makes no
preparation for war. About the same time, Matthias Helbus, rode in great post
haste through France into Spain to the Emperor. Afterward the Lantgraue
wrote to king Ferdinando, and to his sister Mary, Regent of Flaunders, to the
Princes Electours, and the Dukes of Bauier, after the same sort as he did to
Duke George 1539.
his father in law, and makes his purgation. When the Duke of Bru^swicke
perceived that the matter was disclosed and heard of the Lantgraues letters, he
answers, that he has not sustained wrong at his hands only, which now
has taken his Secretary, but also by the Duke of Saxon the last year, when by
the commandment of king Ferdinando, in the Emperors name, he went to Duke
George of Saxony, and again coming home from Norinberge, what time the league
was made, than did he lay wait for him. Unto this the Duke of Saxon
answers. For as much as he denied him and his fellows saufeconduicte, when
they went to brunswicke, against the law and custom of the Empire, he could
think none otherwise of him, but to be his enemy: he had diverse times
before gone with two or three with him, disguysed in servants apparel, that
he should not be known through his and his brothers country privily, neither
did he which knew this well enough, empeche or let him. But after he would
have the passage stopped for him and his league friends, why should he think
to have more liberty with other men, than he will grant unto them? Wherefore
upon this occasion they began to write one against an other, which not long
after ended in most sharp and bitter inuectiues: having in deed the beginning
of the Duke Inuectiues unmeet for Princes.
of Brunswicke, which after a rare example among Princes let pass no kind
of raylyng and opprobrious words, as books set forth in prynte do declare.
Whylest these things are a workynge, dies John Duke of Cleave, leauyng
William his son and heir, whom The death of John Duke of Cleave
Conradus Heresbachius, from his chyldhode had instructed in good letters and
manners. What time they were come to Franckefurte, in the month of Februarye,
according to the appointment. After much sondrye and sharp debatynge of the
matter, they concluded at the last the nyntene day of Apryll upon these
conditions.

The Emperor, to the intent a communication of learned me^ may be had
concerning religion, grants to the co^federatours of the doctrine professed
at Auspurge, which are now in that number, truce for.xv. months, and
commands, that in this mean time they be not molested in any case
concerning Religion. The peace of Norinberge and the Emperors decree at
Regenspurge, are also for this time ratified. And if during the time of this
truce, they can not fully agree in Religion, yet shall that peace be of force,
until the next assembly of the Empire. And if perchance there be an
assembly before the truce be expyred, yet nevertheless that peace shall take
place, until the other assemblye. In the mean while, during the time of this
truce the Emperor does suspende all suites and actions in the law commenced
against the Protestauntes, and also the outlawyng of the City of Myndin, and
if any thing be otherwise done, he commands it to be frustrate. Where it
is wont to be objected unto them, as though for the profession of this
Religion, they might not consiste in judgment, the same shall take place no
longer, but they shall enjoy the benefit of the law without exception.

Again the Protestauntes shall moleste no man, and during this truce, shall
take none in their league, yet so as no man sustain any wrong in the quarrel
of their Religion: The Emperor shall also forsee that no man be received more
over in to the contrary league. The Protestauntes shall permytte the clergy to
enjoy all those yearelye profits which they have at this day.

By the consent of the Emperor, a day shall be assigned at the kalendes of
Auguste, at the which day should mete at Norinberge the Cathoqliues and
Protestau^tes, such as were good men and desirous of peace, and not contentions
or froward. Those shall chouse out a certain number of divines, which quietly
and friendly may confer of religion: with them also shall be joined others, that
profess not divinity, but yet expert men and sobre. Moreover, the Emperor
and king Ferdinando if they list, may have their deputes in this conference:
and what soever shall there be agreed upon by consent of either party shall be
signified to the states yt be absent, who approving the same, the Emperors
Ambassador also shall ratify it, or else the Emperor him self in the next
asse^blie of thempire, after he shall have confirmed, shall command to be kept
inuiolate. Both parties shall lay away ye preparatio^s unto war, and he yt shall
seem to go about any thing, shall be enforced to show the cause why he does it,
yet so as no man be inhibited to keep a defense necessary, in all other things,
the law of the^pire shall be of both parties observed. In this truce are
co^prehe^ded neither Anabaptists, nor others yt follow a doctrine contrary to
the confession of Auspurg. The protesta^tes shall have in a redines aid for the
Turckish war, yt there be no delay: And when the Princes Electours and other
principal states, shall at the Emperors commandment send their deputes to
Woormes, at the.xviij. day of May, the Protestau^tes shall send theirs also,
that they may consulte of soden aid against the Turk, and what someuer there
shall be agreed upon by the consent of the more part, to the same shall they
also subscribe. And if the Turk shall move war during the time of the truce,
they shall resist him with the rest. And these things to be ratified, in
case the Emperor within sire months shall allow the same, beginning from the
kalendes of May. And in the mean time, that agreement concerning the truce, and
not to augmente the league, shall be of force. And in case the Emperor do not
declare his mind within the same time, ^yet shall the peace of Norinberge, be
in as full strength and virtue hereafter as it was before. The Emperors depute
here was John Archebyshop of Land, for Heldus was gone into Spain as before
is said. And king Ferdinando also sent thither his Ambassadors. The
Protestauntes were there many, and the Duke of Saxon him self and the
Lantgraue, which brought with them certain divines. The Palsgraue and the
Marquis of Brandenburg, both Electours, did entreat as means. The Duke of
Saxon among other things protested this at that The Duke of Saxony would
not give to Ferdinando the title of king of Romans
time, that he would not attribute to Ferdinando the title of the king of
Romans, but stood to the conuenau^tes of Cadame and Uienne, that same
Archebyshop of Land was a Germayne borne, and counselor to Christierne king
of Denmark, who being expulsed, was also exiled and lost his byshopryke, than
came he again into Germany and attended upon the Emperor, and afterward was
made bishop of Constaunce. Whylest this treaty was at Frankefurte, certain
bands of Soldiers were assembled in Saxony, and were commanded by their
governors to go lie in the countries of the city of Breme, of the Duke of
Lunenburge, and others of the same Religion, and there to remain till the
camp removed. It was kept very secret at the first, by whose conduicte or
authority they were levied, but at length it was certainly known that they
were mustred by Henry Duke of Brunswycke, and his brother Christopher
Archebyshop of Bremen. They that were i(...)ried by them, complained in deed to
the imperial chamber, but it was in vain. The Protestau^tes afterward
through their industry, lest they should do any more harm, procured the same
men to serve them, whom notwithstanding they used to the injury of no man. At
the request of the Princes that were intercessours, Stephen Faber, was set at
liberty by the Lantgraue, who gave him passeporte. He had said of his own
accord, that he would not return to his Prince, for that he trusted him no
more. But when he was released, he went straight way to him. In this assembly
William Duke of Cleue, by his Ambassador, did exhibit a wrytinge to the
Protestauntes, wherein he declared by what right and title he possessed
Gelderlande. And prayed them that they would be means for him to the Emperor,
and to commend his cause also to the Emperors Ambassadors there.

The French king, had advertised Ulrich Duke of Wirtenberge, The Fre^cha king
gives tou^sel to the Duke of wittemberge.
by his Ambassador, that he heard say, how he through the motion of his
confederatours, was determined to make war upon certain Bishops in Germany.
But this purpose did not he allow, and for his good will he bears him, does
admonyshe him that he do it not: For if he did, he should offend the Emperor
and king Ferdinando, unto whom he was lately reconciled, and bring him self
and all that ever he had into great Danger. The Duke geuyng him thanks for the
good admonishement (says) he is sclaundered, and how he supposes the same to
be raised up by the Dukes of Bauier, who has fasly sown a like brute of him
in Germany, he desires him to give no credit to it. For it is neither his
intent, nor yet his fellows, to styre up any trouble, or to atte^pte any thing
by force of arms, unless they be constrained. And doubts not also, but when
they shall hear thereof, they will pourge them selves herein. Wherefore when he
had declared this to his fellows at Franckefurte, the Duke of Saxon and the
Lantgraue, the.xix. day of April, address their letters to the king. And
say how they understand by Duke Ulriche, what report of The Duke of Saxon
and the Lantgr. write to the French king
them was made unto him: but to be a sclaunder forged by their ennemies and
evil wyllers: For they entende to make no war, and how much they desire
peace, that can the Princes tell, that were intercessours. For albeit they are
more ways than one provoked, albeit their fellows city is outlawed, and a
league made of diverse, for the defense of vniusle decrees, though bands of
Soldiers by them hired for great and unaccustomed wages, are now spoiling
the countries of their league friends, yet are they quiet and styre not one
whytte. for they love their native country and remitte all injuries for the
common wealths sake. But their adversaries are lead with a certain impudent
hatred, and follow no temperate ways, nor will admit no lawefull reasonyng,
but seek only that Germany may swymme with civil blood. And seeing it is thus,
they desire him not to credit these false reports but to give his aid, that
the church may be quieted by godly means: For this is properly the duty of
kings, to maynteine truth and innocence. And where as they defend the cause
of Religion, it is done of none evil purpose, but of a certain Godly duty:
for they doubt not, but that the doctrine which they do profess, is
agreeable unto Gods word, which they may in no wise forsake. Duke George of
Saxon ^irth.


About the end of this assembly, the.xxiiij. day of Apryll, died George Duke
of Saxony, without children: For his two sons were departed before without
issewe, whereof the one had married Elizabeth the Lantgraues sister, and the
other one of the house of Mandesfielde. Wherefore Duke George by legacy makes
his heirs, his brother Henry, and his sons, Maurice, and Auguste, under this
condition that they alter not the state of Religion. Which unless they shall
perform, he gives his whole lands to the Emperor and to king Ferdinando,
until such time as either he or his sons, or the next kynsman of that
family, do accomplish this condition. This will of his so made, he shows
first to the Nobility and commons of his country, being now old and
sickly, and wylleth them to confirm the same by an oath never to alter this
his last will. But they fearyng lest it should be the occasion of war
between the kinsme^, entreat him that he would be content, to send to his
brother Henry: For they trust that he will consent to alter nothing in
Religion. Whereupon Ambassadors were sent to persuade with him, and when they
had alleged Ambassadors sent to his brother Henry.
sundry reasons, and especially said, how there was much ready Money, and a
great quantity of Plate and goodly stuff, which should come wholly to his
hands, in case he would obey his brothers will. He answered them by and by
thus: Certainly your message seems unto me to resemble the same that is written
in the Gospel, what time Satan promised Christ the kingdoms of the whole
world, so that he would fall down and worship him. Do youthynke that I
set so much by any riches, that I would therefore forsake the truth and pure
religion? Assuredly you are far abused if you so think. Wherefore when they
had this answer, and were departed without their purpose, before they came at
home, Duke George had left his life. His brother Henry going immediately to
Dresda, and other towns, binds the people to him by an oath, which was the
more easily done, by reason he was in league with the Protestauntes.

Moreover the Prince Electour of Saxony, hearing of his death, hastes home
with all expedition, that if need were, he might aid Henry. The Princes of the
Popysh part, for the loss of so sure a pyllour, and so lucky success of the
Protestauntes, were sore agreued, especially the Archebyshop of Mentz, and the
Duke of Brunswycke, as hereafter you shall hear. Thus had Duke George a
successor and heir clean contrary to his will. And he whom he hated most
of all men during his life time, namely Luther, was sent for by the new Prince
to Lipsia, to preach and to alter the Religion.

About this time in the month of May, appeared a blasyng star, and shortly
after departed Isabel wife to Charles the Emperor, for whom the French king,
so sone as he heard thereof kept a solemn funeral at Paris, as the manner of
kings is. I showed you before of the counsel of Uicence, which the bishop of
Rome had proroged till Easter of this year. But seeing than that none would
come, he publishes his letters the tenth of June, wherein he prorogeth the
counsel no more, but suspendeth it at his own pleasure, and senate of his
Cardinals. The king of England had certain months before set forth another
wryttyng touching this Synod of Uicence, and declares how the Bishop
deludeth the whole world. For where he excused him self by the Duke of
Mantua, it was a plain mockery: For seeing he takes upon him so great
anothoritie, why did he not compelle him? If he could not, wherefore should he
command men to come to a place uncertain, and the which is not in his power.
Now albeit he has chosen Uicence for the same purpose, yet is there no
doubt, but the (...)enetians, men of so great wisdom, will no more suffer
their city to be pestred with such a multitude without garmsons of
Soldiers, than would the Duke of Mantua, and that in fine there wylbe as
small resort thither, as was to Mantua. There fore it is but delusion, what so
ever he does, neither ought he to be permitted in this dissolute liberty any
longer. There is nothing in deed better nor more commodious than a lawful
counsel. But when they are applied unto private lucre and commodity, and to
the establyshynge of certain men's authority, they bring a wonderful
destruction to the common wealth. When the name of the counsel and of the
church was now common in every man's mouth, Luther sets forth a book of
either of them in the vulgar speech. And first he treatefh of the assembly
of the Apostles at Jerusalem, which is mentioned in the.xv. of the acts:
After he recites the contrary opinions of the Doctors, especially Austen and
Ciprian, concerning baptism, and by the same occasion he makes mention of
those laws, that are called the Canons of the Apostles, and proves by
manifest reasons that they The Can(...) commonly called of the Apostles are
false.
be false and countrefeated, and those that give them that title, to deserve
death. Than does he recite in order those four counselles which were of
chief authority, the counsel of Nyce, Constantinople, Ephesus, and
Calcedonie. And declares for what causes they assembled there, and what they
decreed in every of them. After he comes to the principal question, and
shows what is the authority of a. counsel. Wherefore he says how a
counsel may not confirm any new doctrine, nor command any new work,
neither bind men's minds with new ceremonies, not to intermedle with civil
gouernementes, nor to make any decrees, to establysh the authority of a few.
But the duty thereof to be, to abolyshe and condemn new opinions contrary to
holy Scripture, and new ceremonies whether they be superstitious or
unprofitable for the church. And such things as are brought in controversy,
to examine, and determine after the written text of Gods word. After this he
diffineth the church, and shows by what tokens it ought to be known, and by
a comparyson made, declaring what Christ and his Apostles taught, he says
how the Bishop of Rome, which has brought into the church a far contrary
doctrine, and by wicked means has pylled the whole world with intolerable
exactions, ought to be condemned, and driven to make restitution. Among
diverse other things whereby in the same book he declares what blyndenes men
were led into under the Bishop of Rome, and how shameful and vile was the
Religion, he says how A Freers were makes the devil afraid.
it was come thus far, that a monk or a freers wede, was thought to be
sufficient to bring a man to eternal life. And many not only mean folks,
but also great Princes, would be buried in a freers garment. Those that shall
come after peradventure will not believe it, but yet is it true and wont to be
commonly done in Italy. And in our me mory, Fraunces Marquis of Mantua the
second of that name, put into his last will, that he might be buried in a
gray freers cote: The same did Albertus Pius, Prince of Carpes in Paris: And
Christopher Longelie a Bourgonnion, buried at Padwey, a man excellently
Langelius Oration against the Lutherians.
learned, and a great Ciceronian, who also wrote an Oration against the
Lutherians, in like case as Alberte did diverse against Erasmus of Roterdame.
Immediately after the death of Duke George, Henry the Duke of Brunswycke, rydeth
to the Emperor into Spain through France.

About the same time, Henry the eight king of England, calls a Parliament,
wherein among other things were enacted certain decrees for Religion, called
the six Articles, as follows that under the The sir Articles.
four me of bread and wine, was the true and natural body and blood of Christ,
and that after the words of consecration, there remained no more substance of
bread and wine, that the receiving of the whole supper of the Lord was not
necessary to salvation, and that Christ is wholly contained under both kinds.
How it is not lawful for priests to marry. That the vows of chastity ought
to be performed. That private masses were to be retained. That auricular
confession is good and necessary. To such as thought and did otherwise, was
appointed punyshement dew for heretics. And the same time, the king stood
in terms to marry the Lady Anne of Cleue, a maid of an excellent The Lady
Anne of Cleave.
beauty, which after she was affianced, within a few months was sent to
Caleis, whether the king had sent the Lord Admiral and others with his
ships to receive her, and transporte her into England, But he himself
accompanied with all the Nobles and Gentlemen of the Realm, received her upon
black Heath, and brought her to Grenewitche, where shortly after they were
married by the Archebyshop of Canturbury. Some say how the Bishops had
persuaded the king to consent to the six Articles, to the intent they might
bring the Archebyshop of Cantorburye and the Lord Crumwell, which were great
favorers of Religion, out of authority and creditie. This year in the mo^th
of August, Barbarousse the Turks Lieutenaunt, Barbarouse takes Castle news.
takes by assiege, Castelneufe a town in Slauonie, borderinge upon the Goulfe
of Uenise, and sleying all the Soldiers, leads away many captive. A year
before in the month of October, the Emperor and the Uenetians being of one
confederacy had won it. And the Emperor in deed put in a garrison of four
thousand Spanyardes, and made captain Fraunces Sarmiento. Which chanced to
the Uenetians contrary to their expectation, for that they said the town
standing in that coaste, ought rather to be theirs. Therefore not long after,
when they more and more mislyked this society, and saw it would be very
daungerours for them, ask truce of the Turk and obtain it.

In manner at the same time arose a sedition at Gaunte. Which city Rebellienat
Gaunte.
is of great force and authority in those parties, and has oftentimes made
many sore bickeringes for their liberty with the Governors of Flaunders, in
whose dominion it stands. The Emperor having intelligence hereof, where he
first had thought to have gone through Italy into Germany, he altered his
purpose, and determined to pass through France, seeing the king required him
instantly so to The Emperor passes through France.
do, and promised him all things franckely. In the mean time the Palsgraue
and the Marquis of Brandenburge, intercessours, addressyng their letters to the
Emperor of the pacification at Franckfurte, had required him to permit a
conference of learned men to be had at Norinberge. But he said, that the death
of his wife, and certain other affairs, would not suffer him to entende such
matters. When the intercessours had sent a copy of these to the Duke of Saxon
and the Lantgraue, and yet had not signified whether the Emperor had confirmed
that truce of.xv. months. The.xix. day of November, an assembly was
appointed at Arustet, a town of Turingia. Here they consulted to augmente
their confederacy, and for their needful defense in case the Emperor will
not allow the peace making at Franckefurte, for well disposyng the church
goods, to send Ambassadors into England, touching the six Articles, and to
mitigate the kings mind, to move the French king, that innocente persons
be not tormented, for Religion. Moreover to send Ambassadors to the Emperor
so sone as they shall understand of his coming into Flaunders. And for
because certain of the confederatours were absent, and other some had not
commission to determine of certain matters, an other day was assigned at
Smalcalde at the kalendes of March, wherein to treat of the rest. Here were
received into the League the men of Rigen a city in Linonia, which were at
co^tencion with their Archebyshop, like as many others were in Germany. Neither
were they received upon other condition, than to be defended in the counsel
chamber by the common procurers, and therefore paid to the confederatours, a
thousand and five hundredth crowns.

Henry Duke of Saxon, was taken into the league two years before without any
charge, because he was but poor, but yet upon condition, that if he were at
any time enriched, he should bear like charge with the rest: Now therefore
that he was auaunced to this goodly inheritance in this Assembly they treated
with him touching the same, which assembly ended the tenthe of Decembre. The
Princes were not there present, but had sent their deputes. And the Duke of
Saxon had sent John Dulcie and Fraunces Burcarte vicechauncelour into England
in the month of Nouembre, to be is his name present at the marriage between
the king and the Lady Anne of Clean, for he had married her sister Sibille,
as is mentioned in the sy^^ book. Wherefore upon this occasion, they were
enjoined at Arnstade to treat with the king in the name of the Protestau^tes,
for these matters before said. The Emperor receiving a saufe conduictetoke his
journey with a small company in the month of Nouembre. When he came to the
frontiers of France borderynge upon Spain, he met the kings two sons,
Henry and charles, which were come thither in post, and the Constable which
was gone thither long before with a great part of the nobility of France: of
whom being received and conduicted through the mids of France and the
greatest cities, wha^ he came to Loche in Burges, he met with the king him
self, who was than scarcely amended of a late disease. After passing through
Or leaunce, on New years day, riding in the mids between the kings two
sons, he entered into the city of Paris, and the Constable 1540.
bare the sword before him. For no kind of joyful mirth and gladness, no
honor or solemnity that the mind of man could delight in, The Emperor
enters into Paris.
was left undone. Thither came the Bishops Legate, Alexander Farnesius,
Cardinal, who together with Cardinal Bellaye the Bishop of the city,
Received the Emperor into the Cathedral church at Paris. Where the Emperor
remaining seven days, afterward departs, the king him self accompanying
him into Uermandois, and his sons brought him as far as Ualencenes, a town
in Henaulte. The king was brought into a great and almost a sure hope to
recover Millan, but it chanced far otherwise, as hereafter I purpose to
declare. What time the Emperor was with the French The Emperors and French
kings Ambassade to the Uenetians.
king in France, they sent both their Ambassadors to the Uenetians most
nobly accompanied. The Emperor sent Alphonse Daualle governor of Millan, and
the king, Claudie Hannebalde Lieutenant of Piedmonte. These exhorted the
Senators with a long discourse to join them selves in amity with these two
most mighty Princes and to put to their good wills and power to overthrow the
Turk. But they, when they had most honorably dimissed the Ambassadors, The
Uenetians Ambassador to the Turk.
considering the thing more diligently, thought mete to reconcile them selves
to the Turk, with whom they had trewce already. Wherefore concluding at the
last, to render unto him Nanplia, and Epidaurum, they obtained at his hand
peace. Some say, that the Frenchemen, albeit, exhorted them openly, as did
themperours Ambassador, yet secretly, whispered in their ears, that they
should provide for themselves, and not enter into such a danger, for the which
they were first like to smarte: the king him self, in an Apology against
the emperor, reports that the common wealth of the Uenetians, of him
destroyed, was through his means releued, and recovered. Aloisius Bardnarius,
the Ambassadoure of the Uenetians, sent to the Turk for peace, (...) as
commanded first to offer al other conditions, and reserve those two cities for
extreme necessity. But the Turk, which by privy espiall, knew the
determination of the Senate long before, did expostulate with him, that he did
not declare his commission plainly and directly. And without those two places
delivered, would not conclude. Who being amassed, seeing the priuities of the
common wealth were The secrets of the senate uttered to the Turk.
bewrayed (full sore against his will) permits him to have them at last.

But when he was returned to Uenise, and had declared the whole matter, the
Senators greatly astonished, after most diligente inquisition, apprehende
certain, and finding them guilty, cut of their The trators executed.
heads.

One of them was fled into the French Ambassadors lodgyng (the Bishop of
Mompelier) as into a Saintuary: wherefore officers were sent to have searched
all the house: But wha^ they might not be suffered to enter, the Senate
commands certain great pieces to be fetched out of their ordenaunce house,
to overthrow the lodging: Whereupon the Frenchmen consyderinge their own
danger, bring him forth unto them. The Senate afterward, wrote unto the
king, the cause why they so did, lest he should think his Ambassador had
sustained wrong. When the emperor came into Flaunders, Themp. arriueth in
Flaunders.
king Ferdinando coming out of Austriche, met there also: After the
Protestants Ambassadors, as it was condescended at Arnstad, who the xxiiii.
day of February, being admitted to the Emperors speech at Gaunt, welcome him
into the low country, pourge them selves of the evil reports of their
adversaries, and complain of the Duke of Brunswike, and the Judges of the
Chaumber, declare how desirous they be of peace, and by how many ways they
have sought it, which they now desire him to grant and establishe for ever.

The Emperor tells them before Granuella, that after he has consulted of
the matter, he will make them an answer. And in manner about the same time
that they sent this Ambassade to the Emperor, The Prote. write to the French
king
they wrote also to the French king, reioysinge much at the great good will
and amity between the Emperor and him: And with a long process entreat him,
in this consent of minds, to further the cause of Religion and public quiet
to the Emperor. At the kalendes of March, the Ambassadors of the Princes and
cities of Protestauntes An assembly at Smalcald
met at Smalcald, as was appointed, with whom also came these divines, Jonas,
Pomerane, Melancthon, Cruciger, and Bucer. And they were enjoined to devise a
form in writing, wherewith they should think mete to treat with their
adversaries, for the co^ciliation of religion. In this assembly they co^sulted
of such matters as were left undiscussed at Arnstad, as before is said. In the
mean time Dulcie and Burcarte, were returned out of England, and the seventh
day of March, they make report at Smalcalde of the state of Religion in
England, that for the decrees made the year before, there is no great
punishment, Latimer. Shaxton.
notwithstanding Hugh Latimer bishop of Woorcester, and Shaxton bishop of
Salisbury are detained in prison for Religion, and as yet not released. The
Lord Cromwell, which is in most authority The Lord Cromwell.
does appease and mitigate the kings mind, and that also the king him self
in familiar talk, opened unto them his mind, and supposes thus, that the
divines of the Protestauntes think not rightly concerning the marriage of
priests, the lords supper under both kinds, and of the private mass, and
requires them to write unto him of these and other necessary questions at
large, alleging the causes and reasons of their opinions. And he will see
again, that the learned men of his Realm shall write an answer, that thus a
way may be made to come to the knowledge of the truth. Moreover Cromwell and
certain others think it mete and expedient to send a great Ambassade to the
king, and Melancthon with them. For if any mean agreement in religion might be
had, the king would bestow a great sum of money upon a league, that he
purposes to make with them, not only in the cause of Religion, but in
general: for the king marueleth greatly, why they are confederated for
Religion only: for the time will come that they shall be attempted with war,
under a contrary title.

And a few days after, the divines exhibit their writing, the some A
wrytinge exhibited by the divines.
whereof was this. Not to swerve from the steps of the confession at Auspurge,
and the Apology afterward annexed to the same. Which sentence afterward
all the divines that were absent did approve by their letters sent thither.
This time came Henry the Duke of brunswick The Emp. answer to the Protest.
to Gau^t. The day before the Ides of March, the emperor answers ye
protesta^tes Ambassadors by Cornelles Scepp, ge^tly so so, but yet in such
sort as it could not be well perceived, whether he would grant them peace or
not. Wherefore the Ambassadors by the Emperors leave going a little aside: by
and by return, and desire him to inhibite the process of the Imperial
chamber, and grant them peace whereunto the Emperor said, he had no more to
answer them at this time, he would take further delyberation. This answer
was recited at Smalcalde the tenth day after. And on Easter monday, which was
than the.xxix. of March, came thither the Princes them selves. That time was a
certain contention and hatred betwyxte Granuella and Heldus, which in fine came
to this end that Hatred betwixt counselors.
Heldus being displaced, departed from the court, and lived a private life.
For the other was above him in authority, and brought Heldus into hatred and
obloquie, for that he was over vehement in counsel matters and other affairs,
and had constreyned the Emperor, thinkyng nothing less, to have wars in
manner against his will. And when Granuella had given certain manifest
instructions of his will and mind, to be inclyned to peace and concord,
being requested of the Protestauntes, he persuaded the Emperor also to the
conditions of peace. And he himself at the beginning, as though it had been in
his own name sent to Smalcalde intercessours and Ambassadors, Theodoricke
Manderschitte, and William Nuenarie Earls, men of great wisdom and dignity,
notwithstanding the first tarried by the way sore sick. Their demaundes were
reasonable enough, nevertheless they signified this, that the Emperor was
almost persuaded The false persuasion of the Emper.
as though they cared not for Religion, neither desired peace in their hearts,
but altogether sought to convert the church goods to their private uses,
delyghted in discord, and bare him no good will, but were more addicte to take
their parts, that were his open ennemies. And these things were reported to
the Emperor partly by their adversaries, partly by the Frenchemen, as it is
said for a certentie. For what time the Emperor went through France, and all
things were like to grow to a perfect frendshyp, then were certain things
disclosed, and the Protestauntes letters unto the king, showed unto the
Emperor, some do impute this to the king him self, and other some to the
Constable who was than of chief authority, and sought al means possible to
quiet and agree the Princes, and did bear the Protestants no good will,
because of Religion.

The thirtene Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of
Religion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the
fyfte.
The argument of the thirtene Book
THe Protestauutes make answer to the Emperor demaundes, showing how they
have more regard to Religion, than to church goods. They confute also the
arguments of the king of England, touching the six Articles. The Emperor
having punyshed them at Gaunt, sends letters to assign a metyng for the
protestauntes, against whom speaks Alexander Farnese the Popes Legate, who
had followed the Emperor out of France. In the mean time the French king
made a league with the Duke of Clean, whose sister the king of England than
refused. At the assemble of Hagenawe certain poinctes of Religion were agreed
upon the resydewe were referred to the conuention that king Ferdinando assigned
at Woruies: Whether Granuellan sendyng first Naues, came afterward also him
self, and made an Oration: And after him Campeigius the Popes Legate. The
conference brake offe, and all was differed to yt Journey of Regenspurg. In
this mean while Luther answers a book set forth by the Duke of Brunswycke,
where is spoken of the dear mantell of the Archebyshoppes. The counsel being
begone at Regenspurge, Granuellan presents the book of the Interim. The
Duke of Cleave coming into France, marries the daughter of Navarre.

Unto the Which things the Protestauntes the eleventh day of Apryl make a
long answer, The answer of the Prot. to Gra^uella^
declaryng their innocence in such things as they were of the Emperor
suspected. And the chief and only cause why they to their great charges and
peril do profess this doctrine to be done neither for any private commodity,
or for pleasur or displeasure of any person or other respect at all, save only
that God requires this duty of them, that they should profess the name of
his son and the Gospel. For he commands us to fly from Idolatry and
warns us most straightly, that we do not allow their cruelty, which
persecute the true doctrine. And as touching the church goods they show
unto what good uses they imploye them. And of all the dissension that is,
others to be authors thereof and not they. Than they discourse the cause of
Religion at large, and confute that sclaunder that they should be more inclyned
to the Emperors ennemies, than to him, by the goodly and large offers, which
for his cause they refused, and by the aid and assistaunce, which they have
given him in his wars.

Finally they require, that Monser Granuellan who to his great commendation,
has evermore hitherto persuaded the Emperor from ye bloody counsels of their
adversaries, to peaceable ways, would prefer to the Emperor the complainte
of the chamber, and entreat him to grant them peace, so often sought and
desired. What time they had made this answer, at the Ides of Apryl, they end
their entreaty. And appointe the divines to make a confutation, of the six
Articles enacted A confutatis of the six Articles.
by the king of England, and the book afterward to be sent thither, to the
intent that in case the divines of England will answer it, and that there be
any hope of agreement, a further communication may be had: but to make any
league with him otherwise than for Relion only, no man there thought expedient.
It was also there decreed to entreat the king for such as were persecuted in
France for Religion, but first to learn the state of France, and how the
king is affected, and whether it may be thought that the mediation will take
place. There were diverse other decrees, touching the church goods, and
several complayntes, and that they of Haylbrune, should abolyshe the Popyshe
Mass, which remained as yet in certain churches. Finally they determine, what
is nedefuull to be done, in case the Emperor either refuse peace, or answer
doubtfully, or the Chamber proceed after their old manner, or if there be a
power reised up against them pryuelye.

Whilst these things were a workyng, the Emperor does great Great execution
done at Gaunt.
execution of Gaunt, making the chiefest Rebels to hoppe headles, he takes
away all their armure and weapons, all their privileges and commodities, he
buyldeth a Castle, and places there a Garnison in the necks of them. That
city was ever wont to rebel against their Princes, as I have also declared
before. This part played they with Charles of Burgundy, the Emperors great
graundfather, and with Phylip his father before that, with Lewys Earl of
Flaunders, great grandfather to the same Philippe by his mothersyde. All the
which this Emperor seems to have revenged. For they were never so subdued,
as this time.

The eyghtenthe day of Apryll, the Emperor addressed his letters to the Duke
of Saxony, and the Lantgraue. How he has The Emp. letters to the Prootesta^t.
talked with his brother Ferdinando King of Romans, among other things of
the State of Germanye, but especially of the dissension in Religion which he
would feign were appeased. For like as here tofore he has omytted nothing
herein, so is he now also of the same mind still: So that they will
acknoweledge this zeal of his, and not abuse the same. And that desire of
peace which they have long since pretended in words and promyses, they will
now perform in deed: He has used many years now sondrye and gentle means
of treaty, but with them it has not priuayled hitherto. And now is the
matter come to that point, that unless it be shortly remedied, there will
follow a great dissolutio^ of the common wealth, and a marvelous stir of all
states. And although it be so, yet of his benign gentleness he appoints them
again an other assembly at Spyres the syxte day of June, or if perchance
plage or infection of sickness will not permit them then such place as his
brother Ferdinando shall appointe, to devise by what means this great danger
that hanged over Germany may be avoided. Willing them to be there present them
selves at the day assigned, all lettes set aparte, unless it be syckenes, and
than to send their chief counselors, such as be lovers of peace, mete for
the treaty and privy to their doings. And that they signify the same to
their fellows, to the intent they be there, at the day. And thither shall
come his brother Ferdina^do, who can further declare of his mind and will, and
of their Ambassade sent unto him. And that they so frame them selves for the
preservation of them selves and the country, that all dissension being taken
away, they may so much the better consult of the other affairs of the
Empire. And there is no cause to fear any danger, for he wylassure the^ upon
his fidelity, and grants them the benefit of the peace of Norrinberge, and
will suffer no man to do against it, yet so as they again do offend no man.
Unto which letters they answered the.xv. day The answer of the Prot. to the
Emp. letters.
of may. For that he follows the counselles of peace, they give him most
hearty thanks. And where he admonyshed them that they should acknowledge his
studious desire, and not abuse the same, there is no cause they say why he
should think otherwise of the^ and their co^federates and league friends. For
there is nothing more derely beloved of them than peace. And that the matter
has not ben agreed upon hitherto, it ought not to be imputed unto the^, but to
the greatness of the cause, and to their adversaries, which could abide no
declaration of their doctrine. Now where he would have them to be there
present at the day appointed, they will gladly obey. How beit because they
would not that the king should travel in vain, they will show their
fantasye: for it is not unknown to his hyghnes, that euersynce the first
beginning of this controversy, after much delyberation in the assemblies of
the Empire, this way only seemed best unto al men, that either a lawefull
counsel might be had, or else a provincial Synod of Germany: but sithe that
for the shortness of time, that seemed little to purpose, it was devised at
Franckefurte, to have a communication of the matter, and a decree was made of
the same. And seeing the matter is weighty, wherein the salvation of man
consists, it can not be shortly determined, if it should be purposely done,
and therefore should be troublesome and paynfull both to king Ferdinando, and to
them also and others, to traue in such matters, to fore any communication be
had, or the way prepared: wherefore that which pleased all men at
Franckefurte, seems now best unto them also, that in case a convocation of
Germany can not be had, a communication might be appointed: For in their
judgment, there can no better way be found as they declared also of late to
Count Nuenar: wherein they trust that holy Scripture, even by his
commandment shall occupy the chief place, and that when their adversaries
shall swerve from the same, they may be called again into the way. And
albeit they may not go thither without making their fellows privy to it,
and the time is so short that they can not assemble before, yet when the thing
shall be co^menced, and that there shall be any hope to do any good there, they
will not let to come thither in person. Requiring him that he would grant
the save conduicte, which he promised, not only to their Ambassadors, but to
their deuines also. For as much as they shall have most to do in this matter:
last they desire to understand his pleasure herein. I told you before of
Cardinal Farnesius, he went with the Emperor from Paris in to flaunders,
scarsely yet come to man's state. In so much that the Emperor took it in very
evil part, that the Bishop had not sent some man of ripe years and counsel.

What time therefore they did consulte of Religion and the Turkish An oratie^ or
a yeu^g Cardinal.
war, and Granuellan had spoken his mind, at the last the young Cardinal
in the presence of the Emperor and king Ferdinando, said his fantasy,
inueighing chiefly against the Lutherianes throughout his whole oration. And
among many other things, he said it could not well be discerued, whether
were more against Christ, the Protestants, or the Turks. For the one of them
show their cruelty only The Prote. (...) to Turks.
against the body, but the others draw the souls also into everlasting
perdition. Farnesius had joined with him Marcellus, Ceruinus, bishop of
Nicastre, as governor of all his counselles, who in the same legacy was made
Cardinal. This Oration of Farnesius coming abroad a few months after, was
set forth in prynte, and John Calvin made a comentary to it, lest any man
should mistake it.

At this time, the Duke of Cleave came to the Emperor, to be at a point with
him for the possession of Gelderlande, but it would not be. And therefore
returnyng home again, he began to consulte with the French king. For when he
was out of hope to recover Millan, the Emperor offering him such conditions,
as he would little have A privy hatred of yt french king against the
Emperor.
thought, he turned his mind wholly from his frendshyp, yet covertly, and
complained, that he was so far abused. And than began to mislyke the
Constable, which had put him in this great hope, and was the cause that the
Emperor passed through France, and could never abide him after, where before
he did all things. When he therefore sought all means priuelye, how to
moleste the Emperor; and the Duke of Cleave was not able to sustain so great
a suit and displeasure alone, they began to enter into mutual bands of
amity. The French king had a nece the lady Jane, daughter to his sister
Margarete Queen of Navarre, of eleven years of age, the greatest inheriter in
all France, both of an excellent beaultie, and well brought up, unto whose
friends the king made suit, and especially to the Queen his sister, that she
might be married to the Duke of Cleave, and brought The Duke of Cleave joined
with the French king.
it to pass, as shall be recited in his place. At this time did the Bishop of
Rome war upon the Perusians, for that they refused to pay a certain custom
for salt and other things that he had raised upon them. And so brought the
city under his jurisdiction. And for a like cause expulsed Ascanius, a man of
great power, of the house of Columnois, out The Pope warreth upon ye Perusia^s.
of all his dominions. The Cardinal Farnesius, having done his commission,
seeing the peace did not take effect betwixt the Emperor and the French king.
And also unknown to him, a day was assigned at Hagenaw for the Protestauntes
to decide their cause in, he departed out of Flanders, and came to Paris about
the Ides of May. And at the feast of Pentecoste in the Cathedral church
there, he consecrated Anthony, Uncle to madame Destampes, the kings darlinge,
Cardinal of Medone, setting upon his head a purple hatte, latelye brought from
Rome. And salutyng the king by the way, he goes with great speed to Rome.
Afterward king Ferdinando took his journey from Brusselles, to go to the
assembly at Hagenaw, for it could not be holden at Spyres, by reason of the
plague. Unto this assembly the French king also sent Lazarus Baysius, by the
advise of the Emperor for either of them dissembled their grief, and the
matter was hitherto handled with flatteryng words. And the first day of June
the king of France set forth a sore proclamation against the sowers abroad of
Heresy and the false doctrine of Luther and his companions. And the twelfthe
day after the same was imprinted and proclaimed at Paris. About this time the
king of England beheaded the Lord Cromwell, whom he had from low degree
auaunced to high dignity The Lord Crumwell beheaded.
and a little before made Earl of Essex, he forsakes the lady Anne of Cleave,
and marries Catherine Hawarde Nece to the Duke of Norfolk. The Lord Cromwell
was the maker of the marriage with the house of Cleave. And where after the
king loved Hawarde, he The king marieth Katherine Hawarde.
was thought to be persuaded by her, that Cromwell, whom she judged be a let
unto her matters, might be dispatched out of the way. He was a man also not
wellbeloued of the Nobility, and was suspected, as though he should seek the
destruction of the Papists. In the mean time the Duke of Brunswicke, accused
most heinously boeth the other Protestants, and chiefly Henry the Duke of
Saxony, that The Duke of Bru^swik accused the Protestaun.
contrary to the will of his Brother George, and condition expressed in his
Testament, he had altered the state of Religion, that he molesteth the
Bishops of Merseburge, and Misene, in their jurisdiction. And that he kept to
him self the money that his brother left to the use of the league, to the
some of.lx. thousand crowns. Wherefore he admonyshed the Emperor, to compel
him to do his duty, which if he shall refuse, to dispossess him of the
inheritance, after the form of the will. And he wrought not this alone,
albeit he was principal, but certain others also of the same confederacy.

Now will I speak of the assembly at Hagenaw, which began the five and
twenty day of June. When king, Ferdinando was The assemble of Hagenawe.
come thither a month before. A few days before the co^mencement, the
Protestauntes had spoken to the Palsgraue, to the Archebyshops of Collon and
Treuers, to Ericus, Duke of Brunswick, and to the bishops of Ausburge and of
Spyres, every man seuerallye at his own house, that they would entreat the
peace. Ferdinando therefore at the forsayde day, calling the Protestauntes
before him, declares unto them the cause of that assemblye. And because the
Princes came not them selves, which the Emperor thought verily they would
have done, he wylleth them to she we their commission and authority. After he
names intercessours Lewys the Paulsgraue, John Archebyshop of Treuers, Lewys
Duke of Bauier, and William Bishop of Strasborough. When they were content
with them, they began the treaty. Thither came also the divines of the
Protestants, a great number, Iustus Menius, Pistorius, Urbanus Regius, Bucer,
Brentius, Blanrer, Osiander, Shirepsius and many others. Melanchtho^ fell sore
sick by the way. These preached at home every man to their company, but
chiefly what time all the Ambassadors met together to consulte upon any
matter. But Ferdinando when he understood it, forbade them: the Ambassadors
again showed him, how they Preachyngs forbidden.
preached not openly, but only privately, neither was there any cause why he
should be offended. The Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, were about to come, in
case the talk had gone forward, and tarried upon the fro^tiers, to the intent
that hearing news thereof, they might have been there by and by. The
intercessours require the Protesta^tes to deliver them in a brief sum the
Articles that are in controversy, they say, how they did exhibit the sum and
confession of their doctrine ten years since at Auspurge, and an Apology to
the same, which they stick unto, and to none other being ready to make
answer, if any man find lack therein. And for because they know not what
thing chiefly their adversaries do reprehende therein, they have nothing to
exhibyte, but the same is rather to be required at their hands to show what
they suppose to be contrary to Gods word: Which if they do, and that the
matter come to disputation, as was thought mete at Franckefurte, they will not
be against a co^corde. They show them again within a few days after, that
forasmuch as they dwell still in their confession exhibited at Auspurge, they
do find in readinge of the treaty there, that certain things were brought to
a conciliation, and certain not. Now that the rest also might come to a
reconcilement, they will do their endeavors, and desire them to utter their
minds herein. The Protestauntes again say, that there was in deed a talk of
certain Articles, but nothing concluded, nor any agreement at al made there.
Thus the matter being debated to and fro, where the Protestauntes required that
they might come to disputation, and they again said, how it was commanded
them by the king and the Emperor, that they should proceed according to the
treaty at Auspurge. King Ferdinando the.xvi. day of July, calling them al
Ferdina^dos request.
before him, forasmuch says he, as the matter stands thus, that nothing can
now be determined, and that chiefly for the absence of the Duke of Saxo^ and
the La^tgraue, an other day must be appointed, where in the Ambassadors and
learned men of both parts shall mete of like number, to confer of the
Articles professed at Auspurge. And than after a long controversy betwyxt the
king and the Protestauntes, for the peace of them and all their confederatours,
about the restitution of church goods, and the judges of the chamber,
Ferdinando the.xxviij. day of July makes a decree, and reciting the whole
matter, The decree of Hagenaw
appointed the day for a communication to be at Worms the. xxviij day of
October, upon condition that the Emperor be so content.

The Princes Electours, the Dukes of Bauier, and the Duke of Cleave, and the
bishops of Madenburge, Salisburge, and Strasburge, are commanded to send
thither their counselors, and the Protestauntes also theirs, so that there be
eleven on either part. And also as many Scribes, to write diligently what every
man says, and the conference to be had of the Protestants doctrine professed
at Auspurge, and that request be made to the Emperor, that he will call a
counsel of the Empire. And in the mean time he commands all men to observe
peace, and abstain from violence, under a great penalty, appointed by the
Emperors commandment. Princes before mentioned at this assembly were
Christopher the bishop of Trent, and Henry Duke of Bru^swycke, but he went home
before the matter was ended. The greatest peace makers in this assembly were
the bishop of Collon, and the Paulsgraue Electours, and also the bishop of
Auspurge: For all the rest were extreme against the Protestauntes. During this
assembly, died John Uaiuode king of Ho^gary, leaving The death of John Uayuode
king of Hungary.
behind him a young son, Stephen whom Isabell daughter to Sigismunde king
of Pole, had borne him a little before, which was a cause also, that king
Ferdina^do being aduertysed thereof by letters, hasted homewarde.

About this time also were certain towns and villages of the Protestants set
on fire in Saxony and there aboutes, and burnt up clean. This wicked act, was
said to be done by the Duke of Brunswyck, Fyres in Saxony.
as shall be declared hereafter. The second kalendes of July, Robert Barnes,
Doctor of Divinity was brent at London in Smithfield. He was for a certain
time fled out of England for the doctrine of the Doctor Bernes burnt in
Smithfielde
Gospel, and what time he understood, how king Henry gave his mind to the
knowledge of the truth, he returned home again, and was after in the
Ambassade sent into Germany, and was one of them which treated with the
divines at Witte^berge, touching the kings diuorsement, as is written in the
tenth book. But where as the king had exiled the name of the bishop of Rome,
but kept still his doctrine, this man which loved the truth, was chieflye by
the means of the bishop of Wynchester, this day executed, after he had
protested his faith openly there in the place of execution. And with him also
were Three Prot. burnt, and three Papists hanged all at one time.
brent two others of the same Religion. And the same day in the self same
place were three others hanged upon the Gallows, that held with the
supremacy of the bishop of Rome, so yt neither ra^ke Papists nor ernest
Protestauntes escaped punishment. In the month of August, ended his life at
Paris William Budey, master of the requests, a man of great learning, and
worthy to be had in perpetual memory, The death of Budey.
for this cause only, that he and Cardinal Bellaye, bishop of Paris, did
counsel and persuade Fraunces the French king, to do a most noble act, that
is to appoint great stipendes, for the readers of tongues and good arts at
Paris. For out of this welspryng, no man can believe what clear and plentiful
ryuers flow out, not only into France, but also into other countries. The
like has Henry the eight done in England both in Cambridge and Oxforde. And
Buden would be buried without any solemnity. This year was notable by reason
of an intolerable heat and drought: Than also was excellent good wine. In An
erceadig hot so^mer.
the mean time the king of France, dispatchyng abroad his letters to all his
bishops, commanded them to go a procession in all places. For albeit he had
peace with the Emperor, which he would not willingly break, yet feared he
greatly lest the old enemy of mankind, would styre up war by his
ministers or ever it were long. The Emperor being advertised by the letters
of his brother Ferdinando and the intercessours of the whole matter, confirms
the decree of Hagenawe. And writing his letters from Utrecht at the Ides of
August, exhorts the Protestauntes to send their Ambassadors and divines to
Worms at the day assigned, and sends saufe conduicte for them all. And
because of his affairs he can not be there him self, he says he will send
thither some notable man of his: And he doubts not, but the bishop will send
thither also to quiet the co^trouersy.

He promises moreover an assembly of thempire, whither he will come in
parson, unto the which assembly also, the sum of this talk must be referred.

Afterward at the Ides of October. in other letters, dated at Brussels: he
makes Granvellan his deputy, giving him full authority at the communication
to be had. That time was Granvella^ at Bizanse, in high Burgundy, the town
where he was borne. And being so occupied with other affairs, that he could
not come thither by the day, writing his letters to the Archbishop of Mentz,
and to the residew of the Princes, appointed to this talk, the second day of
Nouembre, he sends before John Navy of Lucemburge, to excuse his long
tariyng: For after he had wrong out Matthew Held (as is before said) he
called forth this man, as more obsequious and agreeable to his manners, and
placed him in his rome. In the mean time the emperor Nauius has the place of
Heldus.
calls a counsel of thempire, that in the month of January, they should al
be ready at Regenspurge. After when Granvellan him self came to Worms,
accompanied with his son the Bishop of Arras, and certain Divines of Spain,
Muscosa, Maluenda, Carrobello, showing first his commission, and the Emperors
letters, the xxv. day of Nouembre he made an Oration. And excusing the
matter, that neither the emperor, nor king Ferdinando were there, he declares
The oration of Granvellan at Worcester.
the loving and friendly mind that the emperor bears to the common wealth, who
wishes for nothing more earnestly, than that this old feastred strife might
be taken away, wherewith not only the Church, but also the common wealth is
sore afflicted: For he doubts not, but they them selves see the present
calamity, and will judge that a reformation of the Church is necessary:
Therefore can there nothing concern their duties more, than through godly
counsels to remedy this evil, that it spread abroad no further: For in like
case, as it is the part of good Citezins, to quench the fire that happens by
casualtie: so must you do for all the world in this case, that peace and
concord may be restored. Furthermore, let them wet with them selves, and set
before their eyes, what an heap of euilles have through this dissension, as
it were, ouerflowed Germany: For to pass over murder and mischief, religion
is destroyed, Charity out of men herts The evils that comes of the
discention in Religion.
clean quenched, all reverence of the old Catholic church taken away:
finally, the great misery can not be sufficientlye expressed by any man's
eloquence: In times past Germany has flourished both in Relion, and in all
kind of virtue, but now it has very much degenerated And is accounted the
cause and author of all the discommodities of the universal commune weal. And
unless a remedy be founds for this disease, all things will go to ruin. And
for as much as themperor, has appointed this disputation, to thentente that
both the truth might be searched out, and gods glory auaunced, they must bring
with them a mind neither ambitious nor covetous, but godly and moderat, having
only a regard unto Christ, who now with his arms stretched forth as he would
embrace, desires the same of all men: This is also the only wish of the high
bishop, of the emperor most August and of king Ferdinando: Therefore he besecheth
them, for the death of Christ, and for all loves, that they would amend our
lords coat, which is rent and torn on every side, remembryng the name of
Christ, which was given them in holy baptism, remembering also the noble
province of Germany, the native country of them all: For except they be
reconsyled, it is to be ascribed unto them, what mischief some ever shall
arryse hereafter, of this their obstioate mind: but if they will handle so
weyghty a matter with modesty and sobriety, the same shall be both to God most
acceptable, and the emperor will also accept it in stead of a very great
benefyte: who will afterward do his endeavor, that in the next assembly of
thempire, the matter shall be wholly accomplisshed. After the death of Uayuod, the
tutours and rest of the nobles sent ambassadors to the Turk to commend the
child unto The Turk receives the infant of Uayuode.
him: who promises to defend him, and with all sends him gifts. Fernando
also, when he knew thereof, se^deth Hierosme Lascie which certain years past had
forsaken the Uaynode, from Hagenaw to Constantinople, that by a fit man he
might appease the Turk. After when he came home, he thought it best to make
war before the Queen being a wydow, and the tutours of the infant were
furnished. Which known, the Turk throws his Ambassadoure in prison, as
most privy of Farnando his counsel, and also sends aid, who not
withstanding Lascus committed to prised.
being let by reason of the winter, came somewhat to late, The next day
after that Granuellan had his oration, They beegan to deuyse of the notaryes
and scribes, and on either side were chosen two, which should pen, and keep
althynges diligentelye. By the Protestants were assygned, Caspar Cruciger, and
Woolfangus Musculus, divines. After the eight day if December, Thomas
Campegius, Bishop of Feltre, the Roomisshe Legate, had an oration, in the
preface whereof speaking many things concerning peace, which is so greatly
commended unto us of Christ, lamentyng also the state of Germany, affyrmeth
that serten bisshops of rome, but especially paul the third, have done what
they can, to put of this calamity from it, and for the same cause of late,
called a counsel at Uicence, but when certain months passed, and no man came,
he was constreined to differ it till an other time: but themperoure which is
that eldest and obedient child of the church of Room, the Protector also
and the advocate, has appointed this conference, as a certain preparatiue, to
the treatye that shall be at Regenspurge: by whose will and assent, and by the
Bishops commandment, he is coomen thither to entreat them that they would
apply their whole endeavors to unity and concord for sertaynly the bishop of
Rome will do herein what he can, saving his holiness. The presidents of this
assembly took order at the beginning, that no man should be made privy to
their talk, unless he be of the number appointed, and that the acts thereof
should not be published, till themperoure were first advertised of all
together: moreover, they required that the Protestants would comprise, and
exhibit in writing, such articles as they were fully resolved to stick unto.
Of these matters and of the manner of the oath, of the number also of the
disputers, and of giving of voices, they had a long altercation: For when the
catholics perceived that the counselors of the Paulsgraue and the Marquis
of Bra^denburg electours, and also of the Duke of Cleave were inclined toward
the Protestants, fearing lest they should be over coo^men with voices, of a
set purpose differred the matter from day to day, till such time as they had
other word from the emperor The papists seek delays
as herafter I shall declare. And the second day of January, they do
propounde new and strange condicyons, that of the whole number there should be
chose^ two divines to reason the matter: that the scribes should write their
arguments, and deliver them to the presydentes that the less part should
not be bounden to follow the opinion of the greater, unless themperoure and
the states of thempyre should think it expediente: that the notaryes should
not write all the talk of the reasoners, but the bare sentences, whether they
were agreed upon or left in controversy: that the decree of Auspurge, and such
other like, should nevertheless be of force. But the Protestants again
require, that forasmuch as there be.xxii. on both parts appointed to
confer: every man might speak his mind. And that not only the bare
sentences, but also the Arguments and reasons, with the probations of the same
be committed to writing. They declare also that it is unreasonable in this most
holy cause of al others, to follow the opinion of any part, and not rather the
prescripte of gods word, or to compel any man, that he should either think
or speak against it. Whilst the time was thus prolonged, the Protestants
oftentimes co^plain thereof and desire, that the disputation of the doctrine
propounded at Auspurge, may according to the decree of Hagenawe, be forthewith
commenced, especially consyderyng the same to be a friendly disceptation and not
captious, to thentent a certain way unto concord might be prepared. The divines
also which were there very many, required the same, as Melancthon, Capito,
Bucer, Osiander, Brentius, Calvin, Alesius, a Scot sent thither by the marquis
of Brandenburge and diverse others, unto whom were annexed, Simon Grineus, and
John Sturmius. At the last about the Ides of January, the catholics choose
John Eekius, and thothers Melancthon, to dispute together. A disputation
betwixt Eekius and Melancton.
And first of all to thentent they might proceed in order, they Reason of
original sin, by course, in open consistory: but behold, the third day
after the disputation began Themperours letters were brought to Granuellan and
to the rest of Ambassadors, wherein he differreth the whole matter until the
assemble at Regenspurge, commanding chiefly the Protestants to come thither,
and Granuellan to repare unto him with all syede. These letters being red in
the consistory, the xviii. day of January, Granuellan, exhorts them, to
obey themperoure, and come unto Regenspurge: for he is very desirous of peace:
And if he him self by occasion of talk has spoken any thing roughly, he
desires them not to take it in evil part, and promises to bear his good
will toward the publyke weal. Whereunto the Protestants say, how they are
right sorry, that the disputation had not bego^ a great while souner, and that
they cannot now proceed further therein but for as much as the emperor does so
command, they must obey Wherefore they will now retourn home, to declare how
all things stand, and doubt not, but their Princes and cities will gratifye
the emperor herin: Notwithstanding in case it be long or ever they come or
send, they are to be holden excused, by reason the time is but short. In this
assemble, was also Peter Paul Uerger, bishop of Iustinople in word, as for the
French king, but sent in deed by the Bishop of The oration of Uergerivs.
Room, who supposed that he might serve his turn better, being there in
another man's name, he made an oration of the unity and peace of the church,
and setting it forth in prynte, he gave it there to diverse. Wherein he goes
about chiefly to prove that we may not ones think upon a counsel
provincial, for that same Assembly did represente a certain show of the like
thing, and seemed to prepare the way: for the Bishop could abide nothing
worse, and Uergerius knew his mind full well. By him therefore, and by such
others of the bisshops ministers, the thing was let and at the length
dyssolued. For in tractyng of the time, and fyndyng of delays, they seek
startyng holles, and ways to escape. In the beginning of January themperoure
taking his Journey from Brussels, came unto Mentz, the head city of Lorayne,
from thence by Spires he goes to Regenspurge, and by the way sent those for
said letters to Gra^uella^, he traueled by Norinberge, which city he had not
seen before, and was received with most sumptuous preparation. The eleventh
day of Februarye Philyp Schabotte Admiral of France, a man of great honor,
being, brought into suspicion with the king for not acquitinge himself in The
admiral of france condemned.
the war of Sauoye before mentyoned, after long and mooche inquisityon of
his demeanoure, was condemned of extortyon, and treason, and deprived of al his
honor and dignities, which he had most ample, without all hope of restitution,
and was committed to prison at Uincen, not far from Paris. William Poiet
Chau^celor of France gave this sentence at Mellon, at the which Judgment were
all the notable men, and Judges in the law, in all France. Albeit that
sentences given after this sort, are wont ever to be dissolved or altered, yet
by the kings authority not long after he was clean released, as ye shall
hear afterward. About this time also Maurice the son of Henry Duke of
Saxony, married Agnes, daughter to the Lantzgraue. In the month of March
diverse Princes and states resorted A great assemble at Rege^spurg.
to Regenspurge, when themperor had tarried for them a certain space. Thither
came also the Lantzgraue, with a great company, almost atthende of March. And
the next day went to themperor with his guard about him, of whom he was
received right gentlye. The duke of Saxony sent thither a most honorable
Ambassador, and Divines among whom was Melanchton. From the Bishop of Rome
also came Caspar Contarene, a right famous Cardinal. There were present, the
prince Elector of Brandenburg, Friderick and Otto Henry, Paulsegraues, William
and Lewis dukes of Bauier, Henry duke of Brunswike, Charles duke of Sauoie,
George marquis of Brandenburge, Philip Duke of Pomerane, moreover the Bishops
of Mentz, Salisburg, Breme, Bamberg, Spires, Auspurge, Eistet, Constance,
Luthers book against the Duke of Brunswick.
Hildessene, Brixie and Passaw. About this time came forth (and was brought to
Regenspurge) a book of Martin Luthers very vehement written in the vulgar
tongue against the Duke of Brunswycke. In the last book before this, I
mentioned of this dukes inuectiues against the Duke of Saxon, and the
Lantzgraue: And where in a book set forth of late, he called the Duke of Saxo^
Heretic, rebel, Cain, Monster, Eesope, having nether virtue, or quality of
body, nor yet of mind, whom Luther also him self (whom he makes his god) does
laughe at and contemn. Luther thinking the same to concern his estemation,
answers sharply, and says it is a sclaunder. And for as much as the
adversaries take upon them the title of the Church, by diverse and sundry
arguments brought in, he proves that they have clean forsaken the true
Church, and by a comparison made, he shows that the Bishoprike of Rome, which
has altogether defiled and corrupted the true doctrine of Christ, to be
Antechrist, of whom so many years since Daniell and the Apostles have
prophesied. After he obiecteth unto them, that they fly from the light, and
though they speak much of a lawful counsel yet dare they not abide it, but
if your church be holy, (says he) why is it afearde of a counsel, or what
needs it any reformation? or if it needs, why call ye it holy? will ye also
redress your holiness. We never desired a counsel to refourme our church:
For God has already sanctified it with his word, pourged it from all the
Romish fylthynes, and restored the true doctrine: howbeit our life does not
answer to this profession, neither do we perform in deed so much as both we
are bounden and wish to do: but this was also the complaint of the Prophets
and Apostles whilst they lived. And that felicity shall than happen unto us,
what timr we being delivered out of this sinful body, as out of a prison,
shall obtain the like condition with Angels. We desire a counsel, to thente^t
our churches might be openly Why the Protest. desire a counsel.
heard, and that your doctrine, contrary to the doctrine of Christ, might be
condemned, that men being called again from it, might know and follow the
true Religion of Christ: Now where ye obiecte vntd us rebellion and
disobedience, it is false, even by the testimony of the states imperial: who
know that our Princes are obeidient to the emperor in all things: For being
called to any Assembly, or to go a warfare, they have been evermore ready: But
if ye rail thus on us because we obey not the^perours decres that condemn our
doctrine: We are glad and give God thanks, for showing no obeidience that way.
For the thing that is dew unto god only, ought not to be given to themperor,
which should be Gods Client. God has given him government Themperor Gods
client.
over realms and nations, but he alone will govern his church with his word,
neither does he admit any man into the society of this honor. Themperor has
more than enough to do, concerning thadministration of the common weal. For
unto this office has God appointed him, and prescribed him these limits. But
if he proceed any further, than does he invade and usurp upon Gods
jurisdiction. The Duke of Brunswike had written in his inuectiues among other
things, that Luther had reised up this Tragedye of Religion, at the motion of
Duke Friderik, for envy that Albert Arch bishop of Mentz had the Bishoprike of
Madenburge. Whereunto Luther answering, this sclaunder (says he) comes to
the Duke of Brunswicke by the suggestion of Mentz: And where he dissembleth to
know, when he knows best of all, I shall declare the cause and original of all this business. In the seuente^th year of grace above a thousand What moved
Luth. to writ against the papists.
and five hundredth. John Tecell, a Dominicke Friar, carried about pardons to
sell in Germany. This Tecel themperor Maximilia^ had once condemned to die, and
had commanded to be drowned in the river at Inspruck, but through the
intercession of duke Friderick, whose chance was to be there at that time, he
escaped the danger. He (I say) among other things taught, how he had so
great authority of yt bishop of Rome, yt although a man had deflowred yt
virgin Mary, and had gotten her with child, he had power to forgive hi^ for
money. Moreover he did not only forgive sins past, but also what so ever a
man listed to commit herafter. And within a while after that, came The
blasphemy of friar Tecell.
forth a Book with the arms and title of Bishop Albert: wherein the Pardoners
were commanded, most diligently to setforth to the people the virtue of those
iudulgences. Wherefore it was known that Tecell was hired by the said Bishop
to make those outrageous sermons. For Albert was lately than created Archbishop
of Mentz, upon condition, that he should redeem his Palle from Rome of his
own costs A most costly stole or palle
and charges. For three Bishops of that city were deceased within short space,
Bertolde, James, and Uriell, and it was over chargeable for the College to
bear so great a burden, and so often times. For that Palle stood them in as
good as xxx. thousand crowns or ever it came at home. So dear could the
Bishop of Rome sell a sorry piece of clothe: This money had the Marchantes of
Auspurge disbursed: A mean to get money by pardons.
wherefore to pay them, Albert devised this kind of gain. And the Bishop did
grant it him, yet so, as the one half should be brought to Rome, to the
buildyng of S. Peter's Church. But that time knew I none of all this gere:
therefore wrote I to the Bishop of Mentz, in humble wise, exhorting him that he
would inhibite those criers: but he answered not one word. The Bishop of
Brandenburge being also moved, admonished me to cease, and not to bring my
self in danger. After this I propounded certain Theames, contrary to those of
Tecels, which within a few days were carried over all Germany, and were
gredely red of many: For all men complained of Pardons especially of those that
Tecell taught. And because there was never a Bishop, nor yet doctor that
durst gainesay them, for that Tecel feared all men with the Bishops
thunderbolt. My name began to be spoken of, that there was found one at the
length in all the world, that did resist. But that vain glory was not to me
very pleasant. For I scarsely understood than, what the name of Indulgences
me^t. This is the first original and cause of this motion, which came not of
duke Friderick, but proceeded of the Bishop of Mentz, by the practice of his
collector and briber Friar Tecell: Wherefore if there be any thing now that
nippeth him, let him thank himself therefore. An other cause of this trouble
gave that most holy father, Leo the tenth, what time he cursed me, and
excommunicated me, and many in all places did triumph over me, neither was
there any man so unlearned, Luther is cursed of the Pope.
that did not practice his style to write against me. I thought assuredly at
the first, that the Bishop would assoile me, and condemn Tecell, for that
the Canon law makes for me, which teaches plainly, that Iudulgences can
not deliver souls out of Purgatory: But lo, whilst I look for a joyful
sentence from Rome, I am stricken with the thonderbolt, and condemned for the
most wicked man alive. Than began I to defend my doings, settinge forth many
books of the same, insomuche that the matter was brought at the last into the
assembly of thempire. Thus did the woollen threde, whereof the Palle was made,
breed matter of contention. And now is the same so fast A wolle^ halter to
strangle the pope
wrought, and of such strength, that the Bishop of Rome is in danger, to be
strangled withal. And seeing it is so, let the^ impute the fault to them
selves, which so impudently and excessiuely handled the matter. I may well
laughe in my sleue: For he that dwells in heaven has strike^ them, and would
not suffer so great wickedness to reign any longer, and has brought his people
out of yt darkness of Egipte, into the most clear light and pleasant sight of
the son. This Palle so often here mentioned, is given only to Archbishops,
and as a syngular benefit, to a few other Bishops, of the which number the
Bishop of Bamberge in Germany is one. And it is made with this The manner of
making this Palle.
Ceremony. In the Feast of S. Agnes the Uirgyn, which is the xxi. day of
January, what time they come to Agnus dei in the Mess, two white Lambs are,
laid upon the Altar, which afterward are delivered to the Subdeacon of S.
Peter's church. And they put them forth to pasture, and when shering time
comes, do clippe them, of the which Woll mingled with other woll, when it is
sponne into fine threde, are made these Palles, which are not past three
fingers broad and hang down from the shoulders to the midde breast, and to
the Reins of the back, like a stoale: and at each end, are thin plats of
lead of the same breadth. Being thus wouen and wrought, they are carried to the
bodies of Peter and Paul, and there certain prayers being said over them, they
are left there all that night. The next day the subdeacons receive them again,
and keps them diligently, until such time as some Archbishop that has need
of one, or his Proctor do sue for it. And than it is delivered with many
ceremonies, and they that have the carriage thereof are enjoined, that they
remain not above one night in a place. This ware which is neither costely,
nor curiouslye wrought, do the Archebishoppes redeem of the Bishop of Rome
for a wonderful some of money. For it is not lawefull for him to wear the
same that his predecessor did, but every one of them is bounden to purchase a
new for him self at Rome: Again in case he become Patriache, or Metropolitan
of another church, through promutation, or any other mean, although he had
bought one before, yet must he of necessity bie another again. Of such kind
of pillage, great complaints Complaints of pillage.
have been often made of all nations, as I showed you in the fourth book, but
chiefly in Germany.

And in the year of our Lord, a thousand five hundredth and xviii. what time
Leo the tenth in the assembly of Auspurge, by Cardinal Caietan exhorted
Maximilian and the Princes to the Turkish war, and went about that all states
should pay money, and the Cleargye for their parts, the tenthes: Answer was
made him, yt there was no hope, to obtain that of thecclesiasticall persons,
who were so many ways, and by new policies pilled, and poled by the court
of Rome:

And the people, if any thing should be imposed, would make great
exclamations, that they have so often given their money for this These Fyeres
were set on by the duke of Bru^swike.
purpose, and marvel how it is consumed, or whither that money goes, that is
gathered yearly in Germany. I told you before of sundry fyers, that were
kindled of late in Saxony: When diverse of the malefactors were apprehended
and taken in sundry places, and examination had, they testified, how they were
hired for money, by the captains and officers of Henry duke of Brunswike, and
set on by them to do it. And this they affirmed to the last breath. For this
cause therefore, and for other matters, the Lantzgraue, and thambassadours of
Saxony, accuse the duke of Brunswicke to the Emperor at Regenspurge, and
exhibit in writing the several confession of every one of these make fyers.
And ioinetly with them, did William of Brunswik accuse his brother Henry sore,
who had kept him many years in prison. When all the most part were commen
together, they began to sit the fyft day of April. And in the^perours name, as
the manner is, was propounded, what travail and pain he had always taken,
that the The treaty of Regenspurge
public weal might be well established. And after a long discourse of all
that he had done, as well for the appeasynge of the controuersye that is, in
Religion, and reformation of the church, as also for the defense of thempyre
against the cruel invasions of the Turks. In fine themperor demanded of them
all, but chiefly of the Protestauntes, that they would give him leave to chose
out certain to confer, and herein to trust him, who will do nothing that
shall not concern the preservation of the country. When they had this
granted him, the xiij day of April, he appoints, by Friderike the
Paulsgraue, to this The chosen by themp.
talk, Julius Pflugius, John Eckius, John Gropper, Philippe Me lanchton,
Martin Bucer, John Pistor, that they should treat of the oppinions that be in
controversy, and after make report and bring them to him and the princes.
Again the two and twenty day of April, he calls them unto him, and gives
them a great charge, that in the handling of this matter, they should give
nothing to affections but that all pertialitie set apart, they should only
have respect unto Gods glory. They full modestly do excuse themselves, and
require al, that other more mete, might be appointed, saving Eckius: For he
said The rashness of Eckius.
he was well prepared and fournished: but where themperor did instant them to
take it upon them, they were content, and also entreat him, that he would
assign some to be as presidentes of the disputation and others to be as
witnesses and hearers of the matter. And so he commands Fridericke Palatine
and Granuellan to be as governors: and wills Theodorycke County
Manderschit, Eberhart Ruden, Henry Hasie, Fraunces Burcarte, John Figius, James
Sturmins, to be there, to bear witness. And when all these came together, the,
xxvii. day of April, Fridericke the Palsgraue admonishes the Collocutours that
they should seriously go to the matter and confer together friendly. After
Granuellan exhibiteth a book written A book presented to the Collocutours.
which he said was delivered to the emperor of certain good and well learned
men, as fit for a reconcilement: and that the emperor would to thentent they
might have a lawful argument, and matter to treat of, that they should read
over the same book also, and way it, and look what they should all allow
therein, to commend, and The conte^ts of the book.
the rest to correct. This book contained these articles following, of the
creation of man, and before the fall, of the integrity of nature, of freewill,
of the cause of sin, of original sin, of the justification of man, of the
church, and of the tokens and authority of the same, of the notise of the
word, of repentance after the fall, of the authority of the church, in
discerning and interpretyng the scripture, of the sacraments, of order,
baptesme, confirmyng, of the lords supper of penance, absolution, matrimony,
unction, of the bond of charity, of the dignity of the church, and of the
authority to establishe the weal public, of images, mass, and ministration
of the sacraments, of the discipline of the church, both for the ministers,
and the people. In The Protestants letters to the French king for such as were
persecuted for the gospel.
the month of May, the Protestants writing their letters from Regenspurg to
the French king, entreat for such as at the same time in France, for the
profession of the gospel, were partly in prison, partly in exile, partly hyd in
corners, and led a miserable life. And because many were received into favor,
incase they would abjure, they require that he would release them from that
condicyon, declarynge how heinous a matrer it is to wound the conscience. The
cause of this persecution; was by a sentence given against the Merindolans in
the province, by the president Bartholomew Chassanie a lawyer, which being
terrible and cruel beyond measure, put the poor men in a wonderful fear:
not withstanding the full execution thereof was differred till an other time,
and the persecution of this year was but a balle play in comparison of that,
which followed four years after, as shall be recited in his place. Whylest
these things were done at Regenspurge, the Duke of Cleave, having the emperor
his heuye The Duke of Cleave goes privily into France.
Lord, for the possession of Gelderlande, goes privily into France,
appoynting such as he would have with him, a day and a place where they going an
other way, should mete him, what time, therefore he arrived at Paris about
the end of April, being received of the kings officers and conducted through
Orleans, the sixte day of May he came to the king at Ambose a town in Turin
by the River of Loire who embracing him none otherwise than the father would
his own son, sent word immediately to the king of Navarre, and his sister,
that they should repair unto him with all expedition, and bring their
Daughter with them, for they were the same time in Gascoigne. And after they were
coommen, the king by and by began to entreat of the marriage: And albeit the
parents than did not greatly like it, and the young maid also was somewhat
unwilling, not somoch of her own judgment, or contempt of him, as by the
whispering and perswasyon of sertayne which dispysed Germanye, as rude and
barren in comparison of the delycacye and pleasauntenes of, France, yet
vanquished by the kings authority, which judged the same affinity very fit
for his purpose, at the last they gave place. Wherefore at the Ides of June the
marriage was solemnised, the king himself The Duke marieth the daughter of
Navarre.
leadyng the bryde his nece to the church and the Cardinal of Turnon played
the pressed. The king gave them a goodly dinner: And there were thambassadours of
Room, England, Portugal, Uenise and Saxonye: For themperours had made an
excuse. After a few days the Duke returned homewarde leaving his young spouse
in France whom her mother would have to remain with her till she were of ripe
years for a man. Before the Dukeof of Cleave came into France the king had
enlarged the Admiral that we spoke of before, and sent him home to his own
house, and after in the month of May commanded The Admiral restored.
him to come unto him, whom received most gently, he restored to his former
dignity and called as it were out of hell, into light again, and after a
straung example and seldom heard of, made the sentence given against him, by
all the princypal judges of his realm clean frustrate, partlye for hatred of
the constable, as it is thought, and partly at the request of madame
Destamps, which was allied to the Admiral by a new affinity: Therefore
Memorancie the Counstable, which loved not thadmirall, his egall, and was out
of the The constable put out of the court.
kings favor, for themperours passage, as before is said, being had in
contempt, got him home and led a private life, where before he had ruled the
King wholye himself alone. (?)

The fourtenth Book of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of
relygion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the
fyfte.
The argument of the fourtenth Book.
IN the process of the communication, they treated of an order to be
establyshed in the church: sundry aduyses and aunswers be there gathered.
Eckius dispray sing the book there presented, accuses his fellow
collocutours. Themperoure having intellygence of the Turks coming, remitreth
this colloquie to the counsel, Fregose and Rincon thambassadours of the French
king to the great Turk, at taken and slain, Whereupon the Bastard of
Maximilyan is arested, The Turk takes possession in the city of Buda.
The^peroure arryueth at Argiers. The plage is in Germany, and great calamities
in Austriche. A supplication of the princes of Austriche to king Ferdinando
that they might have the Gospel: Whereunto he answers. After the overthrow
in Hongary, an assemblye was holden at Spires, where Oliuier being for the
French king, made a long Oration. Cardinal Maron the Popes Ambassador
offers a counsel at Trcent. Luther Writes a book entitled the sermon of
Soldiers, comparyng papistry, with the Turks Alcorane: The war being
proclaimed, between the French king and the Emperor, Marten van Rossem
inuadeth Brabante, decrces are made in France against the Lutheranes. Farell
preaches at Mentz.

About the end of April the disputation The colloquie of learned men at
Regtnspurg
began as I showed yon before, but Eckius was impatient and froward, for both
he abhorred the book, and mislyked his fellows and a little after fell into
an agewe, so that he could not be there: yet went his fellows to him, and
conferred with him of al things. And certain places of the book exhibited, were
through conference amended by common assent, but of some other they could not
agree, of the church and authority thereof, of the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, of the recytall of sins, of satisfaction, of the unity and
order of thecclesiastical ministers, of saints, of mass, of the use of the
whole sacrament, of the single life. So was the book delivered up to
themperoure, as it was corrected, and the Divines of the Protestants had
written their minds, upon these foresaid opinions, which were leafte in
controversy, this was the last of May. Themperoure commends their good
endeavor, and lyketh it well. And incase the matter herafter do so require, he
exhorts the^ to show the like goodwill and dilygence. Than in the eight day
of June, in the consistory before the Princes and other states he makes
relation, what has been done, and how far they have proceeded: how the
collocutours have handled the matter dilygentely, and have reconcyled diverse,
and weyghty articles of doctrine: And touching the rest, that are not yet
agreed upon, the divines of the Protestants, have opened their minds. After
he exibiteth unto either of them boothe the wrytinges, requiring them, that so
shortly as may be, they would consulte thereupon, and utter their minds in
either of them. And moreover would consider, how the state of the weal
public, as well civil, as ecclesiastical may or ought to be reformed: he
for his part will leave nothing undone herein, doubtyng not, but the bishops
legate is also inclyned to the same. The Senate of Princes consists for the
most part of Bisshops. Therefore the number of them prevailed, which The
worse part over comes by the number of voices.
both rejected the book exibited by themperoure, and also the whole treaty of
the collocutours: and the reason thereof was comprised in writing somewhat
extremely: but what time the Electours, and certain other princes, that loved
the common wealth, would not assent thereto, another writing was framed and
delivered to themperoure the second day of July, wherein they do admonyshe him,
that as the advocate and defendour of the church, he do communicate the whole
matter with the Bishops Legate, according to the decree of Hagenaw, especially
those articles, which the collocutours have agreed upon: and that they be
wayghed dilligentlye, whether there be any thing in them, that either in
sense or in words is against the doctrine of the godly exposytours, or also
the custom of the church: moreover incase any thing be darkely spoken, that it
may be declared, and that after that done, he himself do make report to the
states of their opinion, and what his mind is touching the same, and that he
would be in hand with the Protestants, that they would be contented to be
instructed in the resydewe of the articles that be in controversy: or if that
can not be obtained, that than the matter be referred, either to a general
counsel, or else to a provincial Sinode of Germanye. Among the states were
sertayne that hyndred the reformation of Relygion: and it is thought that by
their motion, the whole treaty was referred to the Bisshops legate. Themperoure
answered to the same the.vii. day of July. How he had supposed that the
collocutours would have uttered their minds more plainly, especially
consyderyng that they had the book so long by them, but for asmoche as they
stick herein, he will follow their counsel, and will know the legates mind in
every point, to thentent he will omit nothing, that conserneth his dewtie.
The Protestants also declare unto the emperor by writing what their mind is,
and open more at full, the doctrine reconsyled, and show that it is not hard,
to accord the rest in like case, and say: that they keep the^ selves to their
confession at Auspurge. Than touching the third request of the Emperor,
concerning the civil government Means to restore thecclesiasticall function.
of the common wealth, they say how the laws yt were made.xi. year since at
Auspurge, must be put in ure and execution, and show how thecclesiastical
function may be restored if the gospel be taught sincerely, if according to the
ancient laws the ministers of churches may be chosen by the consent of the
people, if the bishops do retain still in their own hands the civil
ministration, and for as much as of an old custom, they them selves neither will
nor can do it they appoint others to execute their spiritual office, and find
them of their revenues: if the ministers of the church may be freely permitted
to mary. If yt foul bying and sellyng, which is of sundry sorts, and of
Simon Magus is called Simony, may be utterly taken away, if the goods may be
so distributed Simons must be taken away.
as the law made long since prescribe, if children be brought up invertue, and
in their yougth learn the first principles of the christian doctrine: if
notable offe^dours be expulsed out of ye communion of the church, til they come
again to ame^dement, and that the Magistrate do his duty herein, and abolishe
al idolatry, if thecclesiastical judgments might be had, and as it were
censours or masters of manners appointed, to enquire dilige^tli of the behavior
of the ministers and people, and of their faults and vices. The Emperor, as I
told you before does communicate the whole matter with the bishops legate, and
nd requires him instantly, that the state of the common wealth, but chiefly of
the church, might be reformed. The popes Legate.
Whereunto the legate answered, for as much as the protesta^tes in certain
opinions do swerve from the common consent of the church, and yet there is
some hope that in fine they will come into the way again, he after diligent
consideration of the whole cause, thinks mete that there be no further
determination made touching any matter, but that the whole treaty be referred
to the bishop, who assuredly will either by a general counsel, or by some
other mean fit for the time, deuyse that thing in this controversy: that
shall profit the whole common wealth, but chiefly of Germanye. Afterward to the
intent he might seem to be desirous of a refourmation, he calls home to him
all the bishops, and there gives them lessons how they should demean the^
selves in all things, govern their families, and have care of the flock
committed to their charge, how they should beware of errors, appoint learned
preachers to resist them, and bestow their benefices upon mete persons, how
they ought to employ the church goods to the use of the poor, and not to
spend the^ in riot or in any superfluous use how they should se yougth
brought up in good litterature, and knowledge of The diligence of the
protestants iu teaching of children.
tongues, which thing the protestants do exceadingly, and by yt means allure
all yougth unto them, and infecte them with their doctrine, how it is the duty
of the bishops to warn the pare^tes yt they se^de not their children to such
places, where there is danger of heresy, with diverse other like things,
which after he delivered in writing to bishops that desired it, and also
themperoure. Who the.xii. day of July, reports to all the states, what
answer he had made. And for by cause it appears that there can be no more
determined in this asse^bly concerning relygion, and the Turk makes great
preparation both by sea and land, to invade Christendom, he thinks it
chieflly requisite, that the treaty be brought to an end, and that decrees be
made concerning religion, peace, and aid against the Turk: wherefore he
requires to know their minds, whether they think it expedient, that those
articles of doctrine, which the collocutours have, accorded, shall be received
till a general, or an other imperyall counsel, to thentent the controversy of
Religion, for the which they have so many years been tourmoyled, may be
somewhat abated, that the residue not as yet agreed upon, may hereafter more
easelye be brought to an uniformity. For he will go straight way to the
Bishop, that he may certainly know what to trust to, and as shortly as he can
will return into Germany, to se to the common wealth. provided always that
these things be nothing prejudicial to the decree of Auspurge. When the
divines of the Protestants had red the two foresaid wrytinges The divines of
the Prote. aunwer to yt Popeslegate
of Contarene, they answer with one accord, and show that he does them
wrong, and say that considering his learning, they looked for much better things
at his hand: and where also he exhorts the Princes to punishment and
cruelty, they reprove him therefore exceadingly, and bid him not think that
they will ever allow such errors as they now do condemn, or at any time
return unto that church which defends so manifest vices. When Contarene
in the mean time heard that his answer was diversely taken, by thaduise of
certain, he sends to the states the third writing, how he will not assent ye
the articles newly accorded, shall be received until the counsel, but refers
al things in general to the high Bishop.

The next day after the ides of July, the Princes Electours, make The princes
electours answer The Emperor.
answer to Themperours demand, and say how they are contented that the
articles agreed upon, should be received until the time of a counsel, for the
same is both expedient for the avoiding of further inco^uenie^ces hereafter,
and will be also a great help unto a further agreement: and if there be any hope
that the rest might at this time be accorded, they desire him to show his
favor herin: but if the shortness of time will not suffer it, yt tha^ according
to his fre promise, he would devise with the bishop and other kings that there
might be with al expeditio^ a counsel appointed in some convenient place of
Germany, either general or prouincial, and that he would send his legate
thither, and if the same can not be obtained as they have no trust it shall,
that than he would return again into Germanye, and declare the same fidelity
to the country, that he has done hitherto, and establisshe peace and
quietness. But the Protestants desire the emperor, that he would command the
articles of religion al ready accorded, to be enacted and taught: for so shall
the truth be opened more and more, and this shall be as a way to amend the
diseases of the church. And that also he would take away and abrogate the
decree of Auspurge, as unprofitable for concord, or at the lestwyse leave it
in suspense: what their opinion is concerning the counsel, and how they will not
permit the bishop or his clie^tes to be judges thereof, and of what sort it
ought to be, they have declared heretofore, and remain in the same opinion:
and if percase such manner of counsel will not be had, and that there be any
assembly of the states, in germany by his commandment, in the same will they
declare their doctrine. After the other princes, among whom the bisshops were
chief, and with them the two brethren Dukes of Bauier, and Henry The answer of
the popish princes.
of Brunswicke, declare, what their advise is, to the emperor severally, which
was that so many vices, sects, heresies and dissentions, did now not only in
Germani, but also in other places, in manner through out christendo^ ouerflow,
that they could not be helped, but by a counsel: and that there should now be
any alteration of religion and ceremonies, thai had so many years continewed,
they could in nowise give their assent, especially, considering, that the
bishop by his legate does promise a counsel, and he him self will move him
herein presently: and say, how they are determined to stick to the old
religion, counsels, and doctrine of their forefathers which has continewed
from the apostles time unto this day. And alledgeing much other matter, but to
no great purpose, they think it most expedient, to differ the cause of
religion unto the counsel, especially, for that the bisshops legate is of the
same opinion, the residew of the cities, which were not of the number of
Protestants, Collon, Mentz, Spier, worms, Tully. Hagenaw, Regenspurg,
Schwinfurth, Colmaria, Semund, Roteburg and diverse others, when they were
excluded from cousultation, and that the princes would not give them the copy
of the answer, they complain hereof to themperoure, as they had don often
before, requestinge him, that they might not be hindered in their right, and
many of them were content, that the articles agreed upon should be received.
When themperoure had heard all men's opinions, he makes a new proposition, and
recytyng every thing in order because the whole matter cannot be determined,
and they most certainly stand in great danger of the Turk, and the time is
far spente, he says, he will refer the matter to the couusel, whereof both
the Bisshops legate has put him into an undoubted hope, and he himself also
will be in hand with the Bishop: for he promises also to return shortly
into Germany, and desires the Protestants that they will in the mean time
attempt nothing else besides those things wherein the divines are accorded: Than
warns he the Bishpops, than they deuyse the The bishops are enjoined to
reform their church
means whereby every one of the^, may reform their own churches to the
intent there be a way prepared for a common redress. This mind of Themperoure
for the most part al men commended, and think inete that the Bisshops
Legate, should give also an ernest and streighte charge to the Bishops, that
they redress and pourge their churches. And the Protestants concerning the
conciliation of doctrine, and all other things, promise to do according to
their dewtie, and require that it may be lawful for all other Princes there, to
propounde in their churches, the articles now accorded. You have heard how
Eckius The presumtuousnes of Eckius.
abhorred both the book exhibited of themperoure, and also the Collocutours.
Wherefore after the conference had when the book was again restored to
themperoure, and the matter debated in the counsel of the Princes, he lying
sick of a fever, sends an epistle to the princes, of this effect, that he
never lyked that foolyshe book, wherein he fyndeth so many errors: and
therefore ought not to be admitted: for the custom of the old fathers and the
church laid a side, the stepes and phrasis of Melanchthon are in it well
perceived: moreover he says, he saw not the book which his fellows
corrected, and after restored to themperoure, but as he lay sick, there were
red unto him only certain opinions of the Lutheranes: Much less did he allow
that writing, that was presented to themperoure with the book for he never saw
it. This thing known, Julius Pfiugius, and John Gropper, which thought how
the same concerned their estimation, desire the Presidentes and hearers of the
conference, as witnesses of the whole matter that they would defend their
honesty against the sclaunders of Eckius. They inform themperoure of all the
matter, who after in a public writing, gave unto them both a goodly, and an
honorable report, affirming that they have done herein, as becomes honest
men. It is before mentioned, that the cause of religyon was referred to a
general or provincial counsel of Germany: After that Contarene understood
it, the.xxvi. day of July he wrote to the states and Princes, requiryng that
the last might be crossed and cancelled: for the controversies of religion,
ought not to be determined by such manner of counselles, but the same to
belong to the universal church: and what someuer is determined in such
cases of any one nation, to be of none effect wherefore they shall show a great
pleasure to the Bishop, who is the head of the church and of counselles, if
in deed they omit the same: unto whom again it would be displeasaunte, in
case they should not do it, for the same would styre up great strife and
offense not only in Germany, but also in other countries. This he does
admonisshe them of, both by the commandment of the Bishop and also of his
own duty. The same day the Princes make him answer, how the Bishop may
avoid all offension, in case he will call a counsel, which has been so
long promised. If not the state of Germany to be such, as they must of
necessity find some other way to salve the sore: And therefore require him
earnestly that he would of his wisdom and gentleness so further the cause to the
Bishop that a remedy might be found. Moreover the divines of the
Protestants do confute those letters and reasons of The protestants confute
his letters and reasons.
Contarene, by a long writing, and prove manifestly, how it apperteyneth unto
all provinces, to establishe gods true service and Religion. This done,
the emperor causes a decree to be made and red the xxviii. of July, he
refers the conference of the learned men, and the whole treaty, unto the
counsel, to the Synod of all Germany, or of the states imperial: in his
Journey into Italy, he promises to entreat diligently the Bishop of Room for
a counsel: And if neither general nor provincial counsel can be obtained,
than will he call a convocation of thempyre within.xviii. months for to quiet
the cause of Religion, and will deuyse, that the Bifshop shall also send his
legate thither: he charge the Protesta^tes, that they attempt no new thing
besides the articles already accorded, and the Bisshoppes, that they should
cleanse their churches of their faults and enormities. In that decree were
certain articles, that Religious houses should not be defaced, that the church
goods should not be put to profane uses, that no man should be allured to a
contrary Religion, of the jurisdiction, and Judges of the chamber: Which
things when the Protestants did mislyke, the emperor in a certain private
writing, declares The Emperors private wrytiug for the Protestants.
severally, what his opinion is herin. In the doctrine not as yet conciliated,
he does prescribe unto them no measure: Monks houses would not in deed be
pulled down, but yet mete to be revoked to a godly reformation: the like is
to be thought of the church revenues: no man that is of an other
jurisdiction ought to be intysed to their Religion, and so be mayneteyned,
but yet shall it be lawefull for them to receive any that will come unto them
uncalled: furthermore the decree of Auspurge, concerning relygion and
doubtful causes of the same, for a common quiet, he suspendeth till the cause
be determined either in a counsel, or other assembly, and commands that no
man shall be rejected of the Chamber for a contrary relygion, but that the law
shall be ministered uprightly, unto all men. What time they had these things
confyrmed under themperours seal, they promise him aid against the Turk, of
whose coming it was bruted daily more and more. And the Ambassadors of
Hongary and Austryche were commen thither which with great entreaty required
aid. So was there a sodayn aid of Almaignes sent into Hongary, by the
co^duict of Friderick county Fursteinberg.

In this assembly, Themperoure, the third day of July before all the states,
had a grievous complaynt of wyllyam Duke of Cleave for the The Emperors
complaynte of the Duke of Cleave.
possession of Gelderland. He exhibiteth also a book unto them, wherein he
declares his right and title to the same, and says how he willed him to have been there, but he took a contrary way, signifyinge covertly, France, as
before is said. There were present the ambassadors of Cleave, which excused
their prince, and when they proceeded to declare his title, the emperor xiseth up
and departs. The.xxi. day of July the Princes and states all go to
themperoure, and entreat him The princes make intercession, for the Duke of
Cleave
for the Duke of Cleave, and request him that he would receive him in to the
tuition of thempire, and permit that the case may be decided fre^dly, and
promise to take pains in the thing, and in case they cannot make an end in
it, they beseech him, to make claim to it, and to recover his right by the
law. Whereunto themperoure makes answer by John Navy. Forasmoche as this
assembly is called for the common welthes sake to thentent that all dissension
and discord taken a way Germany might be restored to quyetnes, and herin has
much time ben consumed, and yet nothing concluded, by reason of contention and
diversity of minds unto his great grief, and hinderance of his own
affairs: he says, he marueleth greatly, that in this on cause, which is
properly his, they can so well agree. Thus he sends them away, not without
displeasure. The next day, Raymunde, the French kings ambassador in a long
oration written, recites the The oration of the French Ambassador
cause of expulsing Charles Duke of Sanoye, who a few days before had accused
the king to the Emperor and all the states. During this assembly, the
French king, sends Caesar Fregose an Italyan of Genes, and Anthony Rincon a
Spaniarde, exiled, Ambassadors to the emperor of Turks: who sailing on the
River of Po, toward The French ambassadors, intercepted by thimperiall.
Uenise were taken and flayne abont the kalendes of July. That time was William
Bellaye the kings lyeutenaunt in Piedmount, who being sertifyed of the
thing, as he was marvelous circumspecte, and industrious, immediately
aduertiseth the king, and also the fyfte day of July, writes from Turryn, to
Alphonsus Daualus marquis of Piscare, than gouernoure of Millan and all
Lumbardie, that he would see, that the kings Ambassadors which were taken,
might be restored, whom he knew for certentie that his men had apprehended:
or else for the same cause should the trewes be broken, which was made three
years past, by thintercession of the Bishop of Rome. And he required, they
might be restored, either for because at the first he knew not, else
dissembling that he knew not, what had happened to them. The Marquis makes it
very strange, as though he knew nothing of the matter, and to pourge himself,
sends Count Frau^ces Ladron Ambassador to the king. Langeus in a certain
epistle, which he wrote to the Marquis the eleventh of July, I would not
doubt, says he, in the counsel of the whole world, to speak of divine
Langens letters to Alphonse.
matters, and that as aptely, as ever did your kinsman and auncestre Thomas of
Aquyne, if I were as expert in divinity, as soom of your familiars are
perfect and privy to this murder. For Alphonsus his graundfather called
Indicus, the son of Rodorick a Spaniard, married a great inheriter of the
house of Aquinas. And this Alphonsus was cosyn germane to Fernando, Dauall of
Piscare, a most worthy captain. The. xx day of July the king answers
Alphonce by letters, from Liner a Town of Burges, admonisshing him to regard
his honor and estimation, and shows him that unless they be restored, he can
not neglect the injury done to his men. Many were the letters that were sent to
and fro between Bellaye and the Marquis for this matter, but nothing else was
done, when Daualus after much search, said he could not find nothing, and
herin perseuered The king moreover by his ambassador complained to the emperor
at Regenspurge. And when he received not such answer as be would, he declared
manifestly enough that war would ensue thereof. It chanced at the same time,
that George of Austriche, Maximilian his bastard son, Archbishop of
Ualencene, came out of Spain, George of Austriche apprehended at Lions.
to return into Flaunders: Who at Lions was apprehended and cast in prison,
to reueng Rincon and Fregose. About the same time, Frau^ces son to Anthony
Duke of Lorayne, maryeth Christine the daughter of Christierne King of
Denmark, Dowager of Millan. The French king took this displeasauntly, and
so much the more, for that the year before, the daughter of Lorayne, was
married to Renat Prince of Orange, which depended wholly of themperoure.
Whattyme The Emperor held the counsel at Regenspurg, king Fernando besegeth
Offen or Buda and lays to it battery, wherein was than Ferdinando besegeth
Buda.
the wydowe of John Uaynode, with her young son Stephen. The infantes tutours,
and nobles of the realm had desired the Turks aid: Wherefore the Turk
sends thither his liuetenant with an army, which came to Offen in July: And
not long after comes he with an other power: so were Fernando his men
repulsed, Almaignes Bohemers, Morauians leuing the siege, not without a great
overthrow, His army discomfited
and loss also of Pestum a Town over against Offen, the residew were glad to
save themselves by runnyng away. About thend of August, the Turk sends
presents to the infant Stephen, cloth of gold, and goodly horses, and
lets show his mother, how he is desirous to see the child, requyring her
to send him unto him into his Tente. The woman sore affrayd, when she might
not otherwise do, by thaduise of her counsel, sends him, and his Norice with
him accopanyed with a great number of the nobility. He receives him, right
gently, and after sends word to the queen's counselors, that he would have
Buda delivered unto him: for he says, they are not able to keep it against
the enemy: and he should be driven to come often hither with an army: which,
would be both very painful and charg able: therefore it should be better that he
had it in his custodi. They being afraid of their own danger, have not a
word to say. Forthwith was the captain of the Ianizarens, appointed to enter
the Town, neither could the queen receive her some again, before the thing was
accomplisshed. When they had possession of the Town, and unarmed all the
citezens, they require also to have ye castle delivered up in to their hands,
wherein the queen was than, whom the Turk by messagers sent between,
comfort, and permits her and her son to enioie Tra^siluania. When she
therefore had suddenly packed up her stuff, and was departed, being conducted
with captains and soldiors of ye Turks, The Emperor of Turks and his two
sons came into Offen the second day of Septembre, And entering into the
church newly hallowed, and giving thanks to his god, for that lucky success,
he retourneth again to his camp, and leaving his garrisons at Offen and at
Peste, he leads home the rest of his army, and by the way delivers Lascus,
whom he leaft prisoner at Belgrade, when he went to Offen, for the taking of
Fregose and Rincon. For the French king being sore offended with that act,
had by his ambassador Poline, signified the whole matter unto Solomon. When
the sessians were dou at Regenspurge, the emperor goth straight into Italy, end
talks with the bishop of Rome at Lukes, whilst his army took shipping,
which he had gathered before of Almaignes, Italians, and Spaniardes. And
because winter was now at hand, the bishop did what he could to put him in
fear of sailing, but he, although he had heard of the overthrow given in
Ho^gary, to thend he might vex the Turks in an other quarter, was fully
resolved to go foreward, and wayinge his Ankers, he hoysed sail The Emperors
torney into Barbary.
in port Uenery, and keeping his course by Corsicke and the Islands of Baleare,
the.xxiii. day of October, he arrived at Argier, a City of Barbary by the Sea
coaste. The nombre of his footmen was.xxii. thousand, his horsemen were
littell above a thousand. The vantewarde of the Spaniardes led Farnando
Gonzago, Uiceroye of Sicilie: the Battle, which was of Germans, the Emperor:
The reerewarde of Italians and Knights of the Rhodes, Camillus Columnas. The
same day that Themperoure arrived, and the next day after, the wether was
fair, and the Sea calm: But the thyrdde A great tempest distroyed his ships
day there arrose so great a tempeste, and so contynuall a rain, that it
let all warlyke enterprises, in so much that the Emperor losing very
many Ships, his munition and all his other fournyture, beesydes two or three
thousand of his men, was enforced to depart without his pourpos, and at
length returned into Spayn in the month of November. Sir Henry kneuet being
there at the same time ambassador for king Henry the eight, lost Sir Henry
Kneuet.
all that he had, and escaped drowning very narrowely: for when his own Ship
was ready to synke, he lept out and was received upon an oar, into an other
ship, by Thomas Kneuet a kinsman of his, who had recovered that ship
before. Thus had our affairs both by Sea and by land, as well in Africa, as
in Europe, a doulfull end. This year was also noisome to Germany by reason of
contageous sickness, especially about the Rhine: among others at Strasburge
The plage in Germani by the Rhine
died Capito, at Basyll, Simon Grineus, both men of excellent learning, the one
of them a great divine, the other a philosopher, and a great favorer of the
Scripture. The Emperor at his departure out of Germany, took order with
Fridericke Palatine, that he should through the Princes Electours, treat with
the Duke of Cleave for restoring unto him Gelderlande. They send their
Ambassadors, and admonish him boothe of his own private peril and also of
the public disturbaunce: he says, how he is both right heir, and took
the possession lawfully and is also content the matter be tried in the law,
beseching them, that they would suffer him to sustain no wrong, but persuade
themperours mind unto equity. And when the emperor embarked him self in
Italy, he least Granuellan to solicit the Bishop for a counsel, and to set
order in the common weal of Senes, sore tormoyled with sedition. When news
came into France in December, of themperours loss at Argiers, there was many
merye heart, for Joy in France at temperours loss.
many men stamped for the murder of Rincon and Fregose, and now they said how
the time was comen to revenge them. King Fernando, after this evil luck and
loss of Peste and Offen, calls an Asse^blie of his states at Prage the chief
city of Boheme. There at the last among other things, the nobility of
Austriche, the.xiii. day of Dece^ber puts up a supplication to the king.
wherein first to have his good The nobility of Austrich, put up a supplication
for the Gospel.
will and favor, they offer all that they have, to maynteine his prosperous
estate and dignity. After they lament the unfortunate state of the comune
weal, and their own condition, which have so nere unto them the Turk, a
most cruel enemy, and also of late a conqueror: wherefore they say, how
they must look for remedies, and chiefly that the wrath of God may be
appeased, who offended with men's synfullnes, sends this great calamity: For
in the whole body of the commonwealth, is no part clean nor sound: al
honest discipline is cast a side, as well private as common: which is the
welsprynge of all enilles, but yet is the contempt of gods word the chief
cause, why God does so scourg and plage us. For it is to be seen, they say,
and proue^ ^othe by sacred and profane histories, that God has often times
grievously plaged great and most florisshing kingdoms, not for these lighter
sins that be graffed in us naturally, but for idolatry and contempt of his
word. The people of Jews were led away captive Kingdoms distroyed for ^dolatry.
into Assiria and Babylon, for contemnyng the prophets, and for a new
Religion and worsshipping, which they themselves had devised: and at the length
was utterly distroyed, and Jerusalem quite overthrown for crucifying the
son of God. The most triumphante Empires of the world in time past, of
Babylon, Persia, and Greece, being now subdewed by the Turks, have so clean
lost their religion, laws, como^welth and all their dignity, for the self
same causes, that there is at this day in manner no toke^ of christianity there
remaining: and where partly they forsook, and partlilothed gods benefits, they
fell into horrible darkness, and most filthy bondage. Whether was this any sode^
alteration: for the Turks maintened war six hondreth years and above,
before they conquered Greece. Which happened than at the length, what time
they being so often provoked and warned, would never amend, but heaped up sin
upon sin. Now if a man should compare those kingdoms, that were of such power
and dignity, wherein florisshed so many excellent wits, with this very rude
and beastly commonwealth of the Turks, he shall find that syns Noes flood
there never chanced a greater calamity. And if they so strong and mighty
nations were not able to resist so weak a people, as the Turks were, at the
beginning, god thus auengyng the sins of the people, what may we look for,
which in deed are gyltye of the same fault, but in so much the worse case, for
that we be matched with anenemie that is strong out of measure? we see how God
does plage us, chiefly in these parties with war famyne, and pestilence: The
most The plages that god sent to Austriche and Germany.
cruel enemy has taken of late Offen the chief city of the Realm? he
has brent and spoiled the land of Bohema: And what misery have we not
suffered these sixtene years? how much blod has been spilte and how many
thousand peopele led a way in to most miserable captyuitie? for certainly now
is the Turks power so increased that he is far exalted above all other kings.
And for by cause he obteyneth at our hands in a manner contynuall victories he
perceyueth him self to be The Turk is the scurge of God.
the scourge of God and that no man is able to escape his vengeance Seeing
therefore that our sins be so great and many, what have we to trust unto, or
how shall we defend our selves against him? Assuredly there is but one only
remedy. All things are in the hands of god: it is god that gives and takes
away empires, which wounds God offers his word before he plageth.
and heals, who provoke us to repentance, by offering us the knowledge of
his word, which thing in deed he does ever before he plageth. So sent he Jonas
the prophet to the Ninevites, and forgave the^ for that they repented: So looked
he mercyfully upon Nabuchodonosor the king of Assirians, followyng the counsel
of Daniel. And certainly most mighty king, we know none other mean or
remedy, than that Gods word may be purely taught, and the people exhorted to
amendment of life, to the intent that being full of confidence, they may
boldly withstand the Turkishe violence, for herein consists our salvation
that we serve God ryghtly. Wherefore seeing that many errors are crept into the
church, which in this our time are disclosed, and that lately in the counsel
of the Empire, diverse opinions were agreed upon, and for a certain time peace
granted for Religion, and the Bishop commanded to refonrme their churches: We
beseech your hyghnes to give commandment that the Gospel be preached The
chief article of doctrine is justification.
sincerely, especially that article of justification, which teaches that our
sins are forgeuen through Christ only. Again that men be excited unto love
and charitable works, which are the true fruictes and tokens of faith.
Moreover let them be made afraid to sin, and accustom them selves to give
God thanks, that of his mere mercy we are delivered through Christ from sin,
death, and hell, and made inheritours of the heavenly kingdom: that such as
desire, may receive the Lords supper after the manner of the primative church,
And that also the Bishops be commanded according to the decree of the Empire
newly made, to redress that is amiss in the church, that they appoincte mete
ministers to instruct the people, and reiecte not the true preachers as they
have ever done heretofore. And let not your grace think that we make this suit
unto you, for that we either seek for any more liberty, or intend at any time
to disobey: for we confess that our whole salvation consists in Christ
only, and that the knoweledge of the Gospel, must be adourned with godly
living, and acknowledge it our bounden duty to show unto you all obedience,
as far forth as our goods and life will extend. And seeing it is so, we do
humbly beseech you to suffer us to enjoy the benefit of this last decree, and
that such as shall follow the form of Religion of us before rehearsed, be
not indaungered therefore. For so shall you have faith full ministers of your
churches, which are now many vacant and boyde of any, and men shall with more
hardines war against that most terrible ennemy, unto whom for our
ingratitude and wickedness, God has given so many victories and conquestes
hitherto.

The nobles and states of Austriche that put up this supplication, were four
and twenty men of honor, and ten cities, whereof Uienne was one, and their next
neighbors the Stirians and Carnites. Ferdinando Ferdinando desfateth the
request of his uobles.
hitherto answered that for calamities by them mentioned, he is right heartily
sorry, and doubts not but these are plages sent for the sins of the people,
and, therefore has oftener than once admonished the ministers of the church,
that they should exhort the people to amendment of life. Moreover says how
he was never against that Gods word should be ryghtly taught, according to the
tradition and setting forth of the Apostles, and such other interpretours as
the church has received and allowed: nevertheless he charge them, that in
Religion they do alter nothing till such time as the matter be fully
determined by a general or a provincial counsel of Germany, or else by some
convocation of the Empire. And not to think that the decree of Regenspurge
concerned them any thing at all, whereof the meaning is, that the catholics
should remain in the old, and the Protestauntes in the same Religion which
they followed at the time of this reconcilement, till some one of these
counselles were appointed within eightene months: and seeing it is so, he may
not permit his subjects, to do any thing to the contrary. They desire him
again at few words that the true Religion of Christ may be auaunced, The
nobles resterut their ^^te.
and that the good preachers be not brought in danger: for otherwise let him
never look to have any victory or lucky success as the Turks hand.

A little after this dyed the Bishop of Numburge, in whose stead Strife about
the bishop. ricke of Nu^. burge.
the College chose Julius Pffugius before mentioned, but the Prince Electonr of
Saxon, contended that they might not do it without his consent, and
reiectyng the Flugins, substituted in his room Nicolas Amstorfe of a noble
house, a doctor of divinity of Wittemberg whom Luther stalled in the month
of January, and after set forth 1542.
a book of the same in dutche, wherein he declares how the flock of Christ
ought not to be committed to Pffugius, as ennemie to the pure doctrine.
Pffugius being thus repulsed, complayneth to the states of the Empire how
wrongfully he is put from his right. The Prince again answers how the
gift belongs properlye to the house of Saxon, and reciting many old
presidentes of great antiquity, alleges among other causes, wherefore he
can not suffer him to be Bishop, this also for one that he is openly against
the confession of Auspurge. After the overthrow in Hongary as is said before,
the Emperor calls an assembly of the states at Spiers by his brother
Ferdinando, to begin in the month of January, and appoints joins An
assemble at Spires.
to him for assistaunce Hughe Monforte, and John Navy. The Princes that were
there present, were the Marquis of Brandenburge Electour, Frederick the
Palsgraue, Albert Duke of Megelburge, Ernest Marquis of Baden, the Bishops of
Mentz, Worms, Spier, Constance, and Hildessem, the residue sent Ambassadors.
What time they were assembled the nynth day of February, king Ferdinando in
the Emperors absence propounds as the manner is, the cause of that assembly
which was in brief to consulte how the Turk might be kept out of Hungary,
and for aid touching the same, After the assembly of Regenspurge, when John
Gropper, ambassador to the Archebyshop of Collon, was returned home, he
commended Gropper commended Bucer.
Bucer exceadingly, and said he was metest of all others, to take in hand the
reformation of Religion, for he was both well learned, a lover of peace, and
of a pure life. The Bishop therefore which knew Bucer well enough before, and
thought to use his help, sends for him in February to come to him to Bonna,
where he was verey gentlye received, namely of Gropper, who entreated him to
go with him to Collon. And so for that time was lycenced of the Bishop to
depart, and to come again when he should be sent for, as I will declare
hereafter.

Moreover about this time also was beheaded Catharine Haward in England, and
for that, where the king had married her for a maid, he found that she had
trodden her show a wrye. He that had defloured her was gone into Irelande, and
had an office there, but being called home again by her when she was Queen,
and taken into her service, he was beheaded after her, as were also certain
others, partly for concealment, partly for like offense. After her death the
king The king of England married the syxte wife.
marieth the syxte wife Catherine Parre, that had been wife to the Lord
Latimer, and sister to the Marquis of Northhamton. To the assemblye at Spiers,
the French king sent an Ambassade the chief whereof was Fraunces Oliver
Chauncelour of Alenson. Who in the presence of all the states when they
consulted of the Turkyshe war, Theioration of the french ambessrdour
the fourtene day of Februarye made a long Oration, in the beginning whereof
he seeking to win their favor recites how the year before the king
understanding that the Turk would invade Hongarye, for the love he bare unto
Germanye, sent Ambassadors immediately to him to persuade him, if he might to
the contrary but the Emperors men took them in Italy, and as yet it is not
certeinlye known whether theibe dead oraliue: whereby not only the truces is
broken, but also the law of arms. And where as certain do encourage the
Germans to war against the Turk in the defense of Ho^gary and al
Christientie, alledgyng that albeit he be of great power, Perswasio^s to war
against the Turk.
yet may he right well be vanquyshed, by the example of John Hunniades,
Matthie king of Hongary, Scanderbeg lord of Epirus, and Tamberlane Emperor of
the Srythia^s, all the which have won honor at his haude, as also they
themselves did at Uienne a few years past, and use diverse other persuasions
to prick the^ forward, he contrary wise affirms that those which give this
counsel, do not well consider the state of Germany, how full it is of
dissension, nor the danger that of this war might ensue. For a myghtyer or
crueller enemy is not in the whole world, nor one that is better furnyshed
of all things belonging to the wars.

Neither can this war be finyshed with one battle or two, but ever requires
new and fresh men continual, and marneylous great charges. The force and
power of Germany is in deed exceading great, but yet is the Turks ten times
greater, which passes little of the loss of two or three hondreth thousand
men, where if they should lose but one battle, in what danger should the
whole country be in, before they should levy an other in this grudge and
dissension of minds? therefore his advise is that they atte^pte not war
against the Turk, neither seek to recover that he has already gotten in
Hongarye for fear of a further mischief. But in case he should at any time
invade Germany, that it should stand upon their honors to bend all their
force against him, and stoutely to give him the repulse, otherwise not to meddle
until such time as they shall be fully and thoroughly accorded in matters of
religion, in like case as they be partly already, namely in the chiefest
articles of justification, of faith and works, for certainly without a perfect
co^corde the state of Thempire can not long endure, especially the Turk still
inuading. The Romans became lords of all the world not so much by power and
force of arms, as by a certain craft and policy, for The policy of the
Romans in establishing their empire
look what nation they purposed to subdue unto their empire, they would ever
practice to weaken by civil discord, and for a time would maintein the one part
of the faction, till at last they had vanquished the^ both. By this mean were
the people of Carthage and of all Asia, the French men and the Greeks
suppla^ted: thus also were the Germains deluded by Tiberius, what time they
moved war in Italy, only Britain which now is England escaped this yoke, for
that they understood their subtle fetches, and always in common peril powered
out all their civil hatred upon their ennemy. And by the same means at the
length were The concord of England.
the Romans the^ selves subdewed. Philip also king of ye Macedonia^s by this
craft conquered Greece, setting together be theares the men of Athens, Corinthe
and Thessalie. Ottoman the first Emperor of this Turkishe nation, took
Bythinia through the dissentio^ that was there among Christen Princes, and at
last by the same occasion the Turk invaded Europe, conquered Thrace, al Greece
and Morea, yea the Turks have these three hondreth years won still through our
discord and treason. How the Turks acheued their empire.
What time the city of Constantinople was taken all Italy was full of sedition,
whilst one sort would be called Gwelphia^s, and an other Gibellines, which
were names of themperial, and popyshe faction: what chanced lately at Rhodes,
and what in Hongary, and by what occasion it is no need to recite. But thus
indede the Turks a poor vile and Gwelphia^s. Wibellines.
barbarous nation, creping out of ye corners of Scithia, have increased through
our dissension, and atteyned to so great an Empire, whylest either the light
Greeks opened the^ a gate into Europe, or yt faithles me^ of Genes have
transported the^ by the sea of Helespo^te, or the Princes of Peloponesus
brethren, falling at variaunce, sent for them the one to destroy the other,
whilst they of Epyrus did aid the^, or the Mysians conspyred with them or the
Hongarians of their own accord did move them to come. Therefore to maintain
their common liberty, they must fall to an unity and concord, and may not
think that whylest they them selves sytte still and do neglecte it, being
denyded into sects and factions, that foreyne nations will take this cars in
hand for them. This he says is the kings advise and counsel, which he
desired them to accept in good part, and of him to look for all amity and
frendshyp. The Bishop sent thither his Legate John Morone, Bishop of Mutma,
who being demanded of king Ferdinando and by the Emperors deputies of the
bishop of Romes The opinion of the Popes Ambassad.
mind, the.xxiij. day of March, speaks on this wise. The last year when the
Emperor went into Africa, passing through Italy, he co^ferred with the high
bishop concerning the turkyshe war, and a general counsel, but sithe the
matter was very weighty, and the Emperor made great haste, nothing was
determined, and Granuellan remained in Italy, with whom the case was further
debated afterward. Than he declares how the Bishops mind is, and ever
has been, to war upon the Turks, and that he will send aid of five
thousand fotemen, in case the Emperor come to the field him self, if not,
half that nombre. And likewise is content that there shall be a counsel, but
that the same should be holden in Germany, neither his age can bear, who both
will and ought to be present, nor also The Pope suspecteth Germany.
the far journey and alteration of the air will permit: therefore he lyketh
better Mantua or Farrare, Bolognia la gras, or Placence which are all ample
cities, and fyt for such a purpose: how beit if none of these will please
them, he will not refuse to keep it at Trent, which is a town nere unto the
frontiers of Germany, and would have had it begone at a Whytsontyde, but for
shortenes of time, has differred it to the Ides of Auguste, praying them that
al displeasure set aparte, they would wholly apply them selves hereunto. King
Ferdinando with the Emperors deputies, and all the Catholyque Princes, give
him thanks, and if a meter place may not be had in Germanye, as Regenspurge
or Collon, they say how they are content with Trente. But the Protestanntes
do neither allow the Bysshoppes counsel nor the place, nor that there was
any mention made thereof in the decree, and openly pronounce to the contrary.
When the French kings Ambassadors could not prevail, and the states were
inclyned to the Turkyshe war, and saw that the Emperors men both lothed and
suspected their presence, before the end of the assemblye, they depart half
in displeasure.

Trent is in the Alps, by the River of Athese, a town in Farna^do his
dominion, three days Journey on this side Uenise, and not two from Uerona. After
the chauncelour of the Duchy of Alenson was returned home, the king began
straight ways to prepare for the war And albeit he had already in effect
restored the Admiral, and used him friendly: Yet lest it should be herafter
prejudicial to him or his children. he causes the whole matter to be comprised
in writing, and restores him to his possessions, dignity and fame, and
protests that he had committed neither treason nor yet extortion, and
releaseth and gives him the condemnation of seven hondrethe thousand crowns,
commanding that these letters should be enrolled at Paris, and in other
places, to remain as matter of record. this was the twelfte day of March.
When the French king was at the same time besides Paris in castle Uincenne,
word came to him in ye night, of a sode^ tumult A soden fear in the French
court.
as though the enemies, out of themperours contrie should make an incursion in
to the contrie of Uermandoeis in Picardie: whereupon the princes that chanced
that time to be there, were sent thither in all have, the Dukes of Uandome,
Guise, Aumall, Niuerne, and diverse others, with a great number of gentlemen.
When they came there, al was hushte, neither saw they nor heard of any man.
Many men said how this brute was raised, that the people might be persuaded
that the emperor sought war, whereof the king him self would not be accounted
the author, when he had already utterly determined the same, as shall be declared
herafter. Forasmuch as the state of Germany was such as before I have showed
you, great aid was decreed on, and commanded An Army against the Turk.
that an army should be levied, which joined with the power of Fernando, might
resist the Turkishe force, and recover that was lost. The leading and ordering
whereof, was both by common assent, and also by themperours pleasure, committed
in charge to Ioachim, Marquis of Brandenburge, Prince electour, who in
continently departing from Spier, prepares him self for the Journey. For this
war was gathered, polle money through out all Germany and granted, that the
magistrates might for this cause impose a tax: They agreed moreover to demand
aid of the Suises, and other princes, especially of the king of Denmark and of
the Italians: furthermore it was decreed, that all me^ should observe the
peace, and reise no tumult within the limits of thempire, and the.xi. day of
April the assembly was dissolved. And in manner at the same time, in Saxony,
there grew a great Contention betwixt the elector of saxon and Duke Moris.
hatred between the Prince Electour, and Duke Moris, who than succeeded Henry
his father lately departed. The contention was for the lymites, and a certain
Town: And Maurice did manifestly mayneteyne the cause of Pflugius, through the
suite of his fre^des, the matter was utterly like to bread civil war: For
either of them had their me^ up in armure: but through yt mediation of ye
Lautzgraue it was appeased This was the beginning of the displeasure betwyxt
them, which after increased in time, wrought a deadlye wound to Germanye, as
shall be recited in place. And certainly many men marueiled at Maurice, that he
would be so earnest and bitter against him that brought him up, and whom both
he and his father may thank for all their good fortune. But certain of the
cou^sellers that were with Duke George, were thought to have set forward this
matter, which neither loved Religion, nor yet the Prince Electour. When the
decree was Luthers oretion for the field.
made, and all men prepared the^ selves to the war, Luther set for the a
book in the vulgar tongue, an exhortation to the war, which he dedicated
unto Philip the Lantgraue. And after has declared the cause why he wrote of
the contrary argument in his young days, ye to war against the Turks were
nothing else but to resist God, which uses him for a scourge to afflicte
us, which sentence Leo the tenth had among other things condemned, for the
Bishop of Rome so often as he minded to procure a mass of money out of Germany,
used ever this color, to gather it for the Turkishe war, and had showed all
the reasons that moved him than, and among others that a Christen man ought
not to revenge nor resist evil, but to suffer all things according to that
saying of Christ, of leauinge thy rote, and again that the Emperor is not to
be excited unto war as the head of Christendom, Protector of the church,
and defendour of the faith: For the tytles are false and vain glorious and
injurious to Christ, who allone can defend his church: and the injury is
the more for that certain kings and Princes are most bitter ennemies to his
true doctrine, and therefore concludes that the Turk is not to be warred upon
or resisted, for the diversity of his religion, but because he robs and
spoyleth, and makes unjust war, The Pope ^^pared with yt Turk.
and brings in with him most shameful examples of life. By a comparison made
he proves, yt the bishop of Rome is nothing better tha^ the Turk, for as he
by his Alcorane, so has the Bishop by his decreetales quenched the doctrine of
the Gospel. That which he does by force, the same does the bishop by his
curse: but they both work reproach unto matrimony, and abide punishment for
the contempt of Gods law, which ordained holy matrimony, what time god gives
the^ over to their filthy lusts, and that they burn in most detestable
desires, and work most wickedly against the order of nature. Finally speakig
of the turkish power, he admonishes the^ not to be careless in warfare, but
to know how they have to do with a most fierce ennemy. These and diverse
other, such like things he treats of in that first book, but now what time
the state of the^pire, had at the request of thempe. and king Ferdina^do
decreed war, he co^piled an other work as I said, a warlike exhortation or
sermon, to thente^t that such ministers of the church as followed the wars,
might have some form and order, how to teach and exhort. First therefore
says he, that men may understand what is to be thought of the Turk, the
Scripture speaks of two houge and cruel Tyrants which shall destroy
Christendom, Two mighty Tyrants
before the last day of judgment, one through false doctrine, of whom
prophesied Daniel, and after him Paul: this is verily the Bishop of Rome. And
an other by power and force of arms, that is to say the Turk, of whom
Daniel in the seventh chapter speaks. Any pleasant life is not to be looked
for.
Those therefore that wylbe christians, let them pluck up their hearts and look
for no peace and quietness; nor pleasau^ter life from henceforth. For that
miserable time which he prophesied of before, is now come, but let us comfort
our selves with the coming of Christ, and with our final deliverance,
which immediately after those afflictions shall appear, and let us know for
certentie that all the woodnes and malice of the devil is powered wholly upon us
by the Turk, for never did Tyrante practyse such cruelty, as he does. After
he expounds the seventh chapter of Daniel, which is of the four beasts
coming out of the Sea, declaring that the Turkishe Empire is there described.
For this is that same little horn which sprang up between those ten horns of
the fourth beast. And albeit it is wonderfully increased, yet can it not be
that it should be in power like to the Roman Empire, for the Prophet does
there describe four Empyres only, which The Turk shall not be of such force as
were the Romans.
should succeade in order, and the last to be the Empire of Rome: therefore
shall there be none other that may be compared in greatness to the Romayne. And
for as much as Daniel did attribute unto him three horns only, which he
should pluck of from those ten, his violence from henceforth shall not
proceade much further, for those three are plucked of long since, Asia, Greece,
and Egypt, which being three of the greatest provinces in the Empire, the
Turk now possesses, with in the which limits the Prophet has included him,
wherefore there is good hope that from henceforth he shall possess no province
of the Empire: And where he is now so busy in Hongary, and also ready to
invade Germany, this is the last act of the tragedy, for it may be The last
act of yt Turk.
that he shall invade those countries, but he can not think that ever he shall
have them in quiet possession, as he has Asia, Greece and Egypt, for the
prophecy is plain and manifest. After this he treats of all the other
parts, prouokyng them chiefly to repentance, and exhorts them all to be
ready and wylling to obey the Magistrate commanding unto this war, and not
only to employe their goods herein, but also to serve with their bodies. The
prisoners also which A cousolatio^ of the prisoners with the Turks
either be now in the Turks hands, or hereafter shall come into the same
captivity, he comfort with many persuasions, and admonishes them to be
well ware of that feigned and pretensed Religion of the Turks, for he hears
say how many that have professed Christ do of their own accord fall into
their Religion, for that it has a certain show of virtue and holiness, and that
they suffer this bondage patiently, and serve their masters faithfully, though
they be profane and wicked, neither that they run away from them, or fordo
them selves for vnpatientnes and lothsomenes of that estate, but to bear
always in memory that same which Peter and Paul write of the duty of bound
servants, but what time they shall attempt war against the christians, to
hasarde their lives rather than to serve under the^, for they be murderers and
make war against the saints, as Daniell says, and shead innocent blood:
therefore must they chiefly beware that they be not partakers of so great a
mischief and wickedness. Unto this Oration he annexeth a manner of praying
against the Turkysh fury, and about the end, discoursing the vice that
reigns in this our time in all sorts of men he shows how Germany which
is so corrupted, and wholly infected, can not long continewe in prosperity.
And this form of prayer he prescribes.

Oeuerlasting father, we have verily deserved to be sore afflicted, The prayer
of Luther.
but punnyshe us thine own self Lord, not in thy wrath and displeasure, but
according to thy great mercy, for it is much better for us to fall in thine,
than into the hands of men and our ennemies, for thy merci is unspeakable and
infinite: we have certainly offended the, and transgressed thy commandments,
but thou know O heavenly father, how the devil, the Bishop, and the Turk,
have no rightnor cause to punyshe us, for we have trespassed nothing against
them, but thou use them as a scourge to whippe us, which have mo ways than
one, al our life time styred the up against us. They I say, have no quarrel
against us, but would rather that we should ever after their example offend
the most grievously, that through idolatry, false doctrine, lies, disceiptfull
and craftye iugglynge, with murder, theft and extortion, fornication,
adultery, and sorcerie, we might offend the majesty of thy name. This is the
thing that they most wish for, and because we confess and honor the God the
father, and thy son Jesus Christ our Lord and the holy spirit, one and
everliving God, that same is our offense and wickedness, for the which they so
grievously hate and persecute us. If we should forsake this faith, and fall unto
their lore, tha^ should we look for no displeasure at their hands. Uouchesaufe
therefore to look upon us, O God the father, and to send a remedy, for they be
more thine adversaries than ours, when they do tormente us, they tormente the,
for the doctrine that we profess, is not ours but thine. And Satan can not
abide it but wylbe worshipped in thy place, and thy word set aside, goes
about to feed us with lies: And the Turk also, in the stead of thy son
Jesus Christ, would place his Mahomet. Now, if this be sin, that we profess
thee, the father, and thy son, and the holy ghost to be the true and only
God, certainly than art thou a sinner, which so teach us, and requyrest
this dewty of us, and wha^ they for this cause persecute us, they do hate and
afflicte thee also. Awake therefore my God, and take in hand thy self to
aueuge thy sacred and holy name, which they defyle and deface, neither suffer
thou this injury at their hand, which punnishe not our sins and vices, but
seek to quench thy word in us, and do what they can, that thou should not
reign at all, neither should have any people, which might serve and honor
thee. Now touching the ofspringe and increase of the Turks, because many have
written, it needs not to note any thing thereof in this place: of a Of the
original of the Turks.
small beginning they have had a marvelous increase: Their first Emperor is
accounted Othomanne, about the year of our lord a thousand and three ho^dreth:
whom, after succedeth Orchanes, Amurathes, who first transported his army over
the sea of Hellesponte into Europe, and invaded Thrace. Than Baiazethes,
Cyriscelebes, Moses, Mahoniethes, Amurathes, Mahomethes, Baiazethes, Selime,
Solomon. About this same time, Alphonse Marquis of Piscare before mentioned,
sendyng a book to the princes of Germany, accuses, and The Marks of Piscare
accuses the French king.
blames the french king, which in so troublesome a time of the common wealth,
goes about to styre up strife, to thentente he might hinder the most noble
enterprises of themperoure and all the states, and pretends a light and a
forged matter, for Anthony Rincon and Ce. Fregose that should be intercepted,
unto whom, what thing has chauuced, he could not, after long and diligent
search find out. The French King, when he knew thereof, declares that he had
an exceadinge great iuiurie done him, to have his Ambassadors so cruelly
destroyed: The kings purgation.
of this thing has he often complained sore to the Bishop and to
themperoure, and has required that he might be satisfysed herin, but it was in
vain: And seeing it is so unworthy an act, he can not without the great shame
and dishonor of his name, neglecte it. After, the second of May, addressing
his letters to the Senate of Paris, to the end says he, that god may illumine
our hearts, and grant us the constancy of faith, and bring again those that
ere into the way of salvation, and send us peace through recompense, for the
injuries that we have sustained, by the usurping of our right, and the outrage
done to our messagers and ambassadors, or if in despair to have peace, we
must needs have war, that he would grant us victory: our request is, that
the people go a prosession and pray in all churches And that by some fyt
preacher the cause thereof be recyted to the congregation. Moreover in case any
there be that thinks not rightly of our faith and religion, neither will
promise amendment, we, command that he suffer openly for his offense. Not
long after he sends the Duke of Longuill to the prince of Cleave, who
leaving there a power in the somer season by the conduicte of Martyn van Rossen
looked for an occasion to do some exploicte. In the mean season, at the
kalendes of June, the bishop appointed a connsell at Trente against the first
of November, at the which time he commands to repair A counsel called at
Trente.
thither Patriarchs, bisshoppes, abbottes and such other like which either by
right or priuiledg have interest to be present at counsels, and are permitted
there to speak their mind. He exhorts also themperoure and the French king,
that either they would come them selves, or send their proctours, and to
command their bisshoppes to be there: but the bisshops of Germany he inuiteth
above all others, for that, for their cause chiefly, and at their request, is
all this pain and travail taken. In the month of July the French king,
with most hateful words proclaymeth war against themperoure, and in a
writing The French king proclaims war.
publysshed, gives his subjects liberty to spoil and distroy his contries
by sea and land, by what means so ever they might A littel before the Duke of
Longeuill and Martyu Rossen had made an inuaston into Brabant, and were a
wonderful terror to men unprovided and coming upon the sudden, had like to
have taken Andwerpe The Duke of Languile and Martin van Rossen invade Brabant.
and Louayne, but wantyng things necessary for munition, they could make no
battery, and marching forewarde, which way so ever they went, they diftroyed
al before them, with fire and sword, and extorted many. And thus making their
way by force, in August they join themselves with the kings son, Charles
Duke of Orleans, which warred that time, in the land of Luke. In this force
were four hondreth horsemen sent by the king of Denmark. Besides Danuillier,
Uirton, and Iuey, was taken also Lucemburge the chief city. The king him
self makes war on an other side, and marchinge foreward Perpigusan beseged.
with a strong Army, besegeth Parpignan a Town of Ruscinon in the mountains
of Pyrene. Moreover he moves war in Piedmount by the conduicte of William
Langey, and also in the borders of Flaunders, by the government of the Duke of
Uandome. So that he assailed his enemies in five sundry places whereby the
judgment of many it had been better for him to have set upon some one province
with his whole power, as the end also declared, for both he attempted Parpignan
in vain, and also when the Duke of Orleans was returned home, the Imperialles
recovered all again except it were Iuey. By this occasion they began to
fortify Andwarpe, where before it was easy to be won. When the king
pourposed to have wars, he sent again Poline to the Turk, to entreat him,
that he would send him a uanie into France: but where it was long or Poline
came there, Solomon differred the thing until the next year. During this war
the king sets forth proclamations against the Lutherians: Moreover the
parliament of Paris charge the Printers under a great penalty, that they
should neither prynte nor sell any books condemned or suspected, namely the
book of Calvin which is entitled the Institution of Christian Religion.
Further more at the request of the Inquilitour as they term him, the seventh
day of July he makes a decree, that the preachers shall admonyshe the people
to do their duty to the church, and if they know any Lutheriane or one that
thinks amiss in Religion to present him: for this is a work to God most
acceptable. And the Ministers of the church had an order prescribed, which
they should follow in that inquiry. For they were commanded to inquyre of
the promoters, whether The manner to s^rche out yt Lutherin^s.
they knew any man that would say how there was no purgatory: when a man is
dead to be either saved or dampened, or that a man is not justified by observing
of Gods commandments, that God only must be called upon and not Saints: yt
the worshipping of images, is idolatry, yt saints work not miracles, that
the ceremonies of the church profit nothing, that the laws of the church
do bind no man: that the knowledge of the Gospel is necessary for all men
without exception, or that it is a fond part of the common people to pray to
God in Latin: how the priest ca^ not forgive sins through the Sacrament of
penauuce, but to be only a minister, to pronounce the benefit of God which
forgeueth our sins: that the church can bind no man to mortal sin, or
that it is lawful to eat flesh at al times. This form of inquisition was
given privately to priests, but openly was set forth a proclamation, wherein
they were commanded to be presented and accused, which do neglecte the Rites
and laws of the church, or such as have books contrary to the christian
faith, and either give them others to read, or purposely let them fall in the
ways as they go, that they may be found, those that assemble in private
houses and gardens, and forge diuises against the laws of the chruche, and
they that receive such kind of men into their houses or gardens. They that
are privy to any such thing, are commanded to present them within six
days, to the doctors of Divinity, chosen by the Inquisitour, or else to
stand accursed. The Stacioners were also charged that if they had any thing
either prynted or written, that were in any point suspected, or that swarued
from the custom of the church that within six days they should bring it
before the^, after, none excuse to be taken. The same day that this act was
proclaimed, they had a general procession for the preservation of the realm
S. Genefeua
and of Religion: And saint Genefeua their trusty Gods was borne about with
such solemnity as I have before declared in the nynth book. And in these
days were certain brent in place Moberte for Religion. At the same time
Fraunces Landr^e, Uicar of S. Crois in Paris, taught the people syncerely, and
said no Mass for that he branke no wine: whether he did it of nature or of
purpose, I know not. Against whom the Divines had conceived a great hatred.
And after they had noted certe in things in his preaching, they propounde unto
him these articles. The sacrifice of the Mass to be instituted of Christ, and
is vayleable for the quick and dead: that we must pray to saints, that they
may be mediators and advocates for us unto Christ, how the substance of
bread and wine, is changed in the The articles of the Sorbe nistes.
consecration, that only preastes may consecrate bread and wine, and that the
whole supper of the Lord apperteineth to them only: Monastical vows must be
kept, that by the Sacraments of confirmation and unction, is received the holy
ghost. by prayer, fasting and good works souls are delivered out of
purgatory, that the laws of the church concerning fasting and choice of
meats do bind the conscience, that there is one high Prelate and Bishop of
the Church, whom al are bound to obey by the law of God, how many things
must be believed, and of necessity received, that are not expressed in the
scriptures, that the Bishop of Romes pardons do release the pains of
purgatory, that priests being never so sinful and vicious do consecrate the
Lords body, that all deadly sin must be confessed to the priest, and than to
receive of him the sacramental absolution, how man has free will, whereby he
may do good or evil, and rise from sin through repentance, how not by
faith only, but by charity and true penance is obtained the remission of
sins, how the church and counsel being lawfully assembled, can not err,
and therefore must be obeyed, how the judgment and interpretation of Scripture
apperteyneth to the church, if any thing be in controuersye. These things
would they have him to subscribe to, and confirm with his Seal. He a few
days after answers generally, that it is good and Godly, what so ever the
holy and catholyque church has taught in these matters, but they not content
with this answer, attempted greater things against him as afterward you
shall hear.

In this time also one or two Freers of saint Dominickes order, preached the
Gospel at Metz. But when the priests showed them Two friars preach the
Gospel at Metz.
selves sore offended, diverse citezens made petition to the Senate, that they
would not forbid the^, promysing al dew obedience. The there came also
William Farell, who taught first privately in the city, and afterward in a
certain Castle without. But what time the Emperors letters were brought,
wherein he commanded that they William Farell.
should alter nothing in Religion, but punyshe the offenders, the people were
forbode^ to hear any more sermons, unless the preacher werlicenced by the
Bishop and the Senate. This summer an infinite nombre of grassehoppers came
flieng into Germany, and the hither part of Italy. They were of a wonderful
grasshoppers in Germany and Italy.
bigness, and where soever they lyghted, they eat up both grass and corn.
Concerning the Duke of Brunswicke, of his most bitter inuectyues against the
Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and of the burning of certain places in Saxony,
I have spoken oftener than once: And now where he vexed with continual
invasions and robberies, Goslarie and Brunswicke, cities of the Empire
inlincked with the Protestants, and would not obey the decrees of the
Emperor and king Ferdinando, who at their request, had commanded him, to
cease from all violence, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, in the name of al
their confederates, make war against him, and with The Duke of Saxon and the
Lantgraue mouewar against the duke of Bru^swicke who flies.
in a short space, bring all his country into their subjection, and his
strong castle of Wolsebutell, standing not far from the city of Brunswycke,
wherein he put all his trust, they wanne by composition, he tarried not long
himself, but when they began to invade, he fled with his eldest son Charles
Uictor to the Duke of Bauier. In that forsayde castle were found sondrie
letters, whereby it was evident to see, what thing he and the Duke of Bauier,
the Bishop of Mentz, Heldus, and diverse others went about, but that shall be
after repeted in place convenient. The Protestauntes in a writing set forth,
declare a Large the causes of this their doing, and show how they did not
begin this war, but of necessity defended their fellows. In the fourmer
assembly at Spier they had entreated king Ferdinando that in the Emperors
name and his own he would command him to suffer the Goslarians to live in
rest by him, Ferdinando followed their minds, who at the same time had need of
their aid against the Turk, and sendyng his Ambassadors, warned him
sharply to surcease, but he answered contemptuously and proudlye, and would
not leave, whereupon ensued this desension before rehearsed, for they had showed
king Ferdina^do at Spier, that unless he obeyed his decree, they would not
suffer their fellows to sustain this wrong. At the Ides of July was an other
assembly of the Empire at Norynberg, for so it was decreed at Spier, because
of the war in Ho^gary. An assembly at Noriberg.
King Ferdinando was present, and the Emperors deputies were, Fridericke the
Palsgraue, the Bishop of Auspurge, Fridericke count Furstemberge, Hugh
Monforte, John Navy. Ferdinando propounds how the Emperor took it in very
good part, that they sent an army into Hongary, who had purposed to have been
at the same war him self with all his power, and therefore had called an
assembly of the states in Spain: but in this co^futation he fell into a great
sickness, and so was constrained of necessity to differ it till an other time:
And when he was now fully resolved of the matter, and how to have sent his
force out of Italy and Burgundye before, than brake forth thenterprises of
his enemies, in so much that he has cause to fear some peril not only in
I^aly, but also in Flaunders and Artoys. Whereof notwithstanding he has given
none occasion, who chieflye loves the common tranquillity: but as they know
well enough, how thenemies have ever sins the assembly at Spier endeavored to
levy men in Suyserlande, and in Germany, to begin the wars: thus is the
Emperor against his mind impeached and let, so that he can neither come him
self, nor send his force, which he has need of: for his own defense,
nevertheless he is fully minded, before the next year go about, to
return into Germany, and accomplish the war in his mind so long intended.
And that he will have on the Sea also a navy well prepared and furnisshed,
that the Turk being assailed with double war, may not bend his whole power
against Hongary. Moreover when he comes into Germany, he will leave nothing
unattempted, that may make for the godly and tolerable reconcileme^t of
Relygyon: And after complaining that almen did not obey the decree of the last
assembly: for some sent no soldiers, others sent: but not the full nombre,
some were sent forth without money, there wanted also of the munitio^ and
furniture that was promised, which things for because the captains made
complaynte of, he vewed himself and saw it was so. And for that the whole
journey was let herby to the detriment and danger of the empire, he is
commen unto this assembly not without his loss and hinderaunce, to require
the^ that in so needful a time, they would not fail the common wealth. Before
Ferna^do took his journey from Uienna, to come to the assemblye at Norinberge,
being advertised of the war of Brunswick, he sent a messager to exhort the^
to surcease. And now that he was comen to Norinberge, by common advise were
sent Ambassadors the so^me of whose oration was this, Ambassadors to the Duke
of Saxon and the Lantzgraue.
that they should not try the matter by force of arms, especially at this
time, for in case they did, it were to be feared lest ye Turkish war should
behindered, and civil warrestered up in Germany. Unto this the Duke and the
Lantzgraue made answer the.xi. of Auguste, out of their camp before the
Castle of Wulfebuttel, and recyting the causes of this enterprised defense,
declare that the thing might not otherwise have been done. And that albeit they
were driven of necessity to take this war in hand, to their great charges,
yet have they nevertheless sent aid to the Turkishe war, fully as much as
they were bounde^, neither would they fail also to do the like hereafter. And
if all other men would do the same, there should be no need to fear the
dissolution of the army: But the lack that is in many men, is reported by the
mouths and letters of diverse: which seeing it is so, and forasmoche as the Duke
of Brunswick could by non other mean be quieted, contemning both the
Emperors and king Ferdinando his commandment, and also the decrees of the
Empire, they desire them not to misconstre this their doing, for they seek no
man by this war, but him only, neither do they refuse when things be
appeased to send al their force to the aid of Ho^gary, as much as they are
able to make. This assembly ended the six and twenty day of August, a
penalty was set for such as obeyed not the decree of Spier, and certain other
things for the war requisite were enacted. There were no Princes there,
sauinge Walter the Master of Prussia, and the Bishops of Bamberge, Eistet, and
Trente, and themperours deputes before named. You have hard before of
Cardinal Contarene. He for his ambassade, had no great thank of the
Bishops and Cardinals, and Contarene in displesure with yt pope and
cardinals
was charged that he was not vehemente enoughe in resystynge the Lutheranes,
and that he had almost brought the commonwealth of Room in danger. Where as
many blamed him sore in his absence, Cardinal Fregose only stood in his
defense. Retournyng out of Germany into Italy, he came to Lukes, where the
Bishop Paul attended for the Emperors coming, to go into Barbarye. Than
going with the Bishop to Room, he was shortly after created Legate of His
death.
Bononie, where at the last he departed this year in thend of August not
without the suspicion of poison. When his friend Cardinal Fregose was also
dead a little before they that know him well, say that he believed ryghtly
touching man's justification, he was a man excellently learned and wrote a book
of the Magistrates and common welthe of the Uenetians. In this same month the
Chaunceloure of France, The Chau^celour of Fraunceput in prison.
william Poret by the kings commandment (who went tha^ to Perpignan) was
taken in the night, as he lay in his bed, and carried to prison. What time the
brute thereof came to Paris, al men reioised exceadingly. For in those four
years that he had been in that office, he had offended all sorts of men, and
from some lady of the kings court, came this misfortune to him. The
comdemnation also of the Admiral augme^ted the hatred, as before is said. He
was in a great, and in manner an assured hope to be made a Cardinal, and
therefore two or three months before, he would needs take holy orders, which
thing notwithstanding some me^ said he did, that forasmuch as he was in the
hatred of mani, he might the better bear it, and escape the danger of his
life in case that heat should at any time break out and boil over. This was
the third mockeri of fortune that chanced in France, with in a few months
together. For where these three before mentioned, the Constable, Admiral and
Chauncelour, were in the highest degree of dignitye. They burned in mutual
malice and declared by their ensample, the disceiptefullnes, vncertentye, and
slyppernes of woordly things.

At this time Otto, Henry the Palsegraue embraced the doctrine of the Gospel
The same did they of Heildessem.

I told you before of the counsel, the Bishop sent immediately letters The
Palsgraue receives the Gospel.
and Bulls thereof to the Emperor into Spain. Whereunto Caesar answers the
five and twenty day of Auguste. First he commends his endeavor and zeal
toward the common wealth, but it greueth him that the French king should be
compared unto him, for he is that prodigal child, but for him self which
never swarued The Empe. answered the Popo.
from his duty, he says he ought more derely to be embraced, for he has
refused no pains, peril, nor cost, that a counsel might once be had, that
the whole common wealth being pacified, they might set upon the Turk on all
hands. Contrary wise he minded ever an other way, wherefore he fyndeth some
lack in his letters. The other was wont to make his boaste that he had the
Cardinals at his beck. Wherefore he doubts whether the thing be true or
countreseared. But how soever it be, he rests upon a good conscience, and
both their doings are openly known. He him self has been ouergentle to him
and favored him a great deal to much. For all the labor he has taken these
many years is in vain: he has often been warned of his duty, sondrye great
injuries have been remitted, leagues with him have often times been removed,
but with all these things he is waxed worse, and utterly does abuse his
lenity and patience. Who brake the league and gave the occasion of war, he
has declared at Rome. What has happened since, he will utter now also. For
how friendly and desirous of peace he has been, hereby may easily appear, that
after the truce taken at Nice, he came into talk with him at Aegnes mortes,
and committed him self unto him, and the year followyng, he passed through
France to the great admiration, and not without the reprehension of many. For
seeing he has oftener than once broken his faith and is fickell and unconstant
in all his counselles, it was sure a great danger, to hazard his person upon
his fidelity and promise. Moreover he knows for certeintie that they
deliberated to deteine him at the same time. And where as many say that for the
rebellion of Gaunt, he must needs pass that way, that was nocause at all. For
that rebellion was stired up of a very few, and that of the basest sort of
men, and all the country remained in their allegeaunce and fidelity, and the
queen his sister could have remedied those matters. How beit where he was
prefixed to return into Germany through Italy, he was moved by his entreaty
to change his purpose, and went through France, which thing he is able to
prove by his own letters, and by the letters of his sons and nobles. For he
requested this thing of him so ernestly, yt he rekened he should be
dishonored, in case he took any other way than through France. And what time
he was with him in France, he affirmed many times, yt he would observe the truces
made But after he began to complain, that Millan was not redred unto him
according to the promise, where not withstandinge unto ye same promise was
added this condicyon, that he should restore his uncle the Duke of Sauoie and
do serten other things: And yet syns that time has he practiced against
him in sundry places, in Germany, in Italy, with the Turk, with John Uaiuod,
and his wife the widow, and with certain noble men of Hongatye, by whose means
the Turk had the city of Offen: And yet in the mean season he could full
well cloak his malice, and promise him great frendshyp, through a subtle
fetch and polycie, that he might tracte the time, and set upon him unware.
And than took he first occasyon, what time his ministers Fregose and Rincon,
were intercepted: In the which thing The enterprises of Fregose and Rincon.
how he would in deed have satisfied him, he himself can tell, which was
chosen vmpere in the arbitrament between them. This therefore did he pretend to
be the cause of a new trouble and disturbaunce of the weal public when he
had prefyxed it long before: But what Fregose and Rincon attempted by his
commandment, in Italye and Turkey, and what service they had oftetymes done
him, was known well enoughe. For they went about through treason to have
brought the Christen commonwealth into great danger: therefore could not they
inioye the benefyte of the peace Nicene, which had them selves infrynged the
publycke peace. Again they went by stealthe, and priuelye through Lumbardie,
with a company of out laws, which is death, by the custom of the
country. He blames sore the Marquis of Piscare, but he offered, to abide
judgment: And why he should refuse it, and also forsake other satysfactions,
it is not unknown, he certainly thinking he had been satisfied, passed over
into Barbary, and sendynge, his Ambassadoure commended unto him the publycke
peace and queyet. And albeit he made fair promises, yet did he attempt
diverse things against him, in Germany, Denmark and other places: he
intended also to invade Navarre. Again in the assembly at Spier, he did what
he could, to nurryshe strife in religion, whilst he promised severally to
either party his amytie and favor: he endeavored moreover to diswade the
states of the empire from the Turkisshe war, he sollycited the Turk, he sent
a power into Italye, and moved war against him, in Brabant, by Martyn
Rossenn, and in the land of Luke, by the Duke of Orleans, before the same was
proclaimed. The rest of his force he bent wholly against the Frontiers of
Spain: And this is the fruict that he gathers of his dylygence which has
given him so much of his will, and exhorted him so often unto peace: Furthermore
where he has suffered him, to deteine the arche bishop of Ualencene,
prisoner, and certain noble men of Spain to be outrageously iniuried by French
men at Auignion, has in deed been ouermuche sufferaunce. Now therefore is he
compelled of necessity to make resistaunce, what time he had left fear of
him, by reason of his most large and ample promyses, and also what time he had
prepared him self for the Turkyshe war, and therefore was resolved to
return into Germanye. The injury sure is great, and the damage not small,
that he has done upon his Frontiers, but yet is he not moved so much with
all these things, as for the calamity of the common wealth. For concerning
his own affairs, for as much as he does so often break conuenauntes, it is
much better for him to have open war, than to trust to any truce or
conditions which at the first light occasion, he will abholyshe and make
frustrate, for peace is oftentimes disceiptful, Peace is disceiptful.
for in the mean season does he practyse new deuyses, hurtful to the common
wealth, mayteyne factions and is wholly occupied, that when he is weary him
self of loss and charges, he may drive him than to resist the Turk. And
being of this disposition him self, he brings up his children in the same
disciplyne. Now is his ambition and unmeasurable covetousness so increased,
that it can not be The French king is accused of ambition.
hid. His Ancestors did usurp the French province, which was of the
dominion of the Empire. So now does he possess Sauoye and a part of
Piedmont, and so fortifieth the same, that it is very apparente, he entendeth
not to restore them. And his purpose was, not only to invade Lumbardy, but
also Parma, and Placence, and than Luke and Seine, after that also the dominion
of the church of Rome, to the intent he might thus have the way open to Naples
and Sicilie. It is no doubt, but this is his entente, and it may be easily
perceived by such things as he attempteth and practices in Italye. To be
brief his covetous desire is contained within no certain limits, but is great
and infinite, neither is it to be thought that ever he will observe
conuenauntes so long as any thing remains that he may take a way from others
and to convert to his own use. For with this disease and vice of mind is he
carried about, as with a Raging tempeste, that forgettyng all virtue and
Religion, he has lyncked him self in league with the Turk, and does
participate not only his counselles, but also his goods and fortune with the
enemy of our common wealth and now also makes his boaste full stoutelye,
that Barbarossa shall come into our Seas with a navy. Whether these things
do make for the reformation of the common wealth, and beginning of a counsel,
he ought of his wisdom to consider, his study has been ever, that there
should be no counsel had, for that he judged it to be most profitable so
for his own private commodity. Therefore did he this thing wayed and
considered, devise an other way to reconcile and appease the controversy of
Religion in Germanye, and herein had only a respect unto Gods glory, and the
dignity of the church, therefore let it be imputed to the king that there is
no counsel, who has ever impeched the same, and not to him, which has
taken in this behalf so much travail and pain: Wherefore if his holiness be
now disposed, to help the common wealth thus afflicted, he ought of duty to
profess him self his ennemie, who is the author of all trouble and
calamity, who moves and allureth the Turk to invade the Christen common
wealth, who leaves no way unassayed to accomplish his ambition and mind
most desirous to revenge. For sithe the chief care of Christianity
apperteyneth unto him by reason of his office pastoral, the thing it self
does surely require, that he should no longer suffer him to cause this
vexation and trouble, but declare him self to be his utter enemy. Which
thing if he would do accordyngly, it should both be most accepted of al good
men, and and also be very profitable to reteyne other kings in their duty.
For to have a counsel to recover peace, and establyshe the common wealth, this
is the only remedy, wherein if he will do his own duty unfeignedly, he will
not be behind with his part.

The fiftene Book of Sleidanes Commentaries concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The argument of the fyftene Book
THe Pope could not accord the Emperor and the king. War waxed hot betwyxt
England and Scotland. The French king appeaseth the rebellion of Rochelle.
In the assembly of Norinberge, Granuellane demanded for the Emperor aid
against the french king, who in a certain answer obiecteth to the Emperor many
things. Fraunces Landry is examined. Bucer is sent for to Collon to make a
reformation. The Pope would buy Millan, he incenseth the Clergy of Collon
against the Archebyshop. Laundersey is taken, and Dure is sacked, An assembly
is holden at Spyers, and greuouse complayntes made against the French king,
in so much that his Herald was sent back with threatninges. There the
Protestants accused the Duke of Brunswycke, and recite an Act of his doing
with a young damsel. The Duke of Sauoye accuses the king. The French
Ambassadors set forth there an Oration, which they should have made, in case
they had been admitted to speak in the counsel. At this assembly an accord
was made betwyxt the king of Romans and the Duke of Saxon. The The Princes
grant aid against the French king. After the Emperor besieges saint
Desire. The king of England with great force takes Boloigne. The Emperor
concludes a peace with the French king contrary to men's expectation.

When the war waxed hot on every side, the Cardinals sent to maks a peace.
Bishop at the xxvi. day of Auguste, sent Ambassadors two Cardinals to
treat of peace Michaell Uisense a Portugal, to the Emperor, James Sadolete,
to the king of France, praying them, to remitte their private miuries for the
common wealths sake, and frame them selves unto peace. He sends also three
Cardinals as Legates to the Synod at Trente, Paris, Poole, and Morone. The
Emperor both answers the Legate The Presydentes of the counsel at Trente.
Uisense, and also writes to the Bishop, almost the same in effect, that he
did in his former letters. How it is vain to make peace with him, that will
keep no conuenauntes: Therefore he aduertyseth him again, that he would
profess him self to be his enemy: For he has often said that he would
before avenged on him, that should break the tcuce, or make league with the
Turk. This is now only the surest and fittest mean to establysh the common
wealth. With these letters he sent away the Ambassador about the eyghtene day
of October. For as much as the Duke of Longeuille and Martyn Rossen, had levied
their army in the dominions of the Duke of Cleave, the emperialles, by the
conduiet of the Prince of Orange, invade Gulicke, and distroye the country
with fire far and wide, and take by composition, Dure the chiefest Town in
those parties. For Gulicke Dure is taken.
and Mounten came to the Duke of Cleave by his mother. At this time also the
Imperial army in Hongary, no exploite done, when they had attempted in vain
to win the Town of Pesta, retourneth home, and through infection dyed many
thousands. Duke Maurice of Saxonye served in this war voluntarily, a young
prince about xxi years of age, who on a certain day ryding out of the camp,
and but one man with him, meting by chance with certain Turks, fought with
them, and having his horse slain under him, was smitten to the ground. Than
his sernaunt being a gentel man borne, lay down upon his lord and with his
body covered the Duke, and defended him and bare of the stripes so long until
certain horsemen came and rescewed the Prince. And so he saved his life, but his
man having received many wounds was carried into the Camp, and dyed shortly
after. Thus ended the war in Hongarye. The bishop had sent aid of three
thousand footmen, which were led by Alexander Uitellius. At this time also
began hot war between England and Scotland, the occasion whereof was
ministered a year before, for that the Scottish War betwixt England and
Scotland.
king, when he had promised to mete his uncle, the king of England at York,
to make an accord touching their limits, being diswaded by his mother and
certain of his nobles, came not. And it fortuned that the Scotts had this year
in the beginning of december a great overthrow at a place called Solymosse. In
the which battle were taken the most part of all the lords in Scotelande:
For the which loss The Scotes taken at Solymosse.
the king took such thought, that retournyng home, he dyed within a few
days after, which was the day before the Ides of December when the eight day
before, the queen had brought him forth a daughter, Mary: which thing also
did greatly augmente his sorrow, for Their king dies.
that he wanted an heyremale: For in the year before he had lost two sons,
in sondri places, within the space of four and twenty hours: And he had to
wife Marye, daughter to the Duke of Guyse, of the house of Lorayne. When the
Scotts werre in this calamity, the French king sent them monye and
munition. After the king was dead the government was committed to James
Hamelton Earl of Arrayne, which was the kings great cosyn. The next place
unto him had the Cardiuall of. S. Andrews, most addickte to the king of
France. I showed before how Henry the Prince of Saxony had for him self and
his son Maurice, entered into league with the Protestants: But after his
death, Duke Maurice being moved herein, said how his father could not bind
him, neither would he be tied to the bonds of his father. When Henry Duke of
Brunswicke was expulsed, as before is said, he accused the Duke of Saxon, the
Lantzgraue and their consortes to the imperial chamber. Who being afterward
The Duke of Saro^ and the Lantzgraue refuse the judgment of the chaumber.
cited, in the month of December, do refuse their judgment in all things,
and sendinge ambassadors thither, declare this unto them, and also do protest,
that they do not refuse a lawful and ordynarye Jurisdiction, but take
exceptions to the Judges themselves, which are all of a contrary relygion,
which praise the decree made at Auspurge twelve years past, and have confirmed
the same by an oath which for the same cause dissent from them exceadingly, and
bear the^ great malice: which take them for heretics, and think them
unworthy to have any justice ministered: which by so^dry preiudices have often
times uttered and bewreyed this their hatred. In the conuentio^ at Regenspurg
it was decreed, that the chamber would this year in the month of January, be
reformed. This did the Protestants allow, so that men also of their rellgion
might be admitted to be of that nombre, which thing The Emperor granted them,
and king Fernando renewed after in the assembly at Spier, and appointed the
month of June for the same reformation, and by this mean obtained of them
aid for the Turkishe war. For if it had been otherwise, they told him that
time plainly, that they would not only bear no charges from henceforth
touching the judges of the chamber, but also would refuse hereafter to obey
their decrees. When therefore nothing was done hitherto, they as before is
said, sending Ambassadors, do refuse their judgment. And again the judges
after in a writing set forth, do reject that same refusal. They agreed in
their last metinge at Norrinberge, there to assemble again about the Turkish
war, the xiiii. day of November, but the matter was differred: And in the
The Duke of Cleauerecouereth Dure.
most sharp time of winter, the Duke of Cleave besegeth and recouereth Dure.
What time the French king beseged Perpignan, there arrose a rebellion at
Rochel an haue^ towenin Pantois verey famous and situated in a place right
commodious. It was ones possessed of Englysh men, but it was rendered French,
in the time of Charles the A rebellion at Rochelle.
first son and heir to his father John, The cause of that commotyon was for
a garrison placed there by the king, under the government of Iarnacke the
Admiral his kinsina^: And in other places also there aboutes, they were up for
a tribute of Saltepittes, and drove away with reproach the kings officers and
treasurers that came thither. So soon as the king understood it, he sent
thither a new garrison of horsemen and footmen: Iarnake also takes from them,
all their munition and armure, and kept the gates with watch and ward. The
last day of December followyng, the king him self came thither, 1543.
and the next day, setting in place of judgment, when both the Towns men,
and their neighbors about them, lay prostrate before him, and besought him
of mercy. Albeit, says he, what time I and my thildren, were occupied in
most weighty affairs, for the defense The kings oration to the^ of Rochell.
of our whole Realm and of you al, you forgetting your dewtie, that you owe
unto us, have made a rebellion and an uproar, in such wise, as we have just
cause to punnishe you, and for the estate of our person, and enormitie of your
offense, might drive you to fine: Yet for that we account it, no less
honorable and praise worthy for a prince The cleme^cy of king Frau^ces.
to extend mercy to his people, than it is honest for his subjects to remain
in their duty, and again because we set more by this your submission and
wyllyng minds, than by the rigor of the law, we do intend to forget the
injury that you have done unto us, and to have a consideration not so much of
your error and trespass, as of our own accustomed gentleness, upon this trnste
and confidence, that you will commit no such like fact hereafter. For else in
a stead of a gentle and merciful Prince, you shall have a severe executour of
justice, and that through your own fault, which doubtless ought to be
accou^pted no less, than that for the which in these last years past the
Gantois were handled extremely, when they were not only executed and punished,
but also lost their liberties for ever. Which example in deed though we might
follow without reprehension, because we have neither sustained less injury,
neither are inferior unto him in any thing, which has thus revenged his
grief. Yet for as much as we look to increase rather through the love,
fidelity and benevolence of our subjects, tha^ to be enriched by their goods
and substance, we do clearly forgive you this act, and restore you to your
former estate. Notwithstanding such things as you have freely and lyberally
given us, we do accept and reteyne. What so ever also has been taken from
you in this tumulte, we will that it be restored you again. When after this
Oration of the king there ensued a rejoicing and a confused noise of the
audience, by and by was heard a most sweet and plesaunt melody in the steple
of the head church of saynct Bartholomewe, testifying the public joy and
gladness. After that the Senate made the king a most costly supper. The next
day, the king being ready to depart, said to the chief of the people, we go
now into an other part of our Realm, to defend the same from the ennemy,
defend you this, as we trust assuredly you will do. Moreover if there be any
thing that apperteineth to the bettering of the commodity of your city, we
will not deny your request. The seuentene day of January king Ferdinando and
his two sons came to Nurrenberge to The assembly of Nurrenberge.
the assembly. And the eight day after came thither also Granuellan out of
Spain, who coming by Trente with his son the bishop of Arras, had exhorted
there the bishops legates. In this conuention the Emperor had substituted
for his deputies, Fridericke Palatine, the Bishop of Auspurge, John Navy. The
second kalend of February, king Fernando makes his proposition. And forasmuch
as in certain assemblies before, continual aid against the Turk has been
decreed, he admonissheth and requires them, that they will all condescend upon
this now, that nothing needful be wantyng: for it is reported of all men,
that he will return this year into Hongarye with an exceadynge great power,
and that he is provoked so to do, by certain christian Princes. And albeit his
countries be sore impouerished with almost continual wars, yet will he not
fail them for his part. And how great a matter it is, to defend Hongary,
Austrich, Morauia and other countries adioining to the same, there is no man in
manner, but knows. And for the better persuasion were red diverse letters,
sent unto king Fernando and others, from sundry places, all the which in a
manner pourported this, that the Turk prepared a new army, and a Navy, to
war both by sea and land. There were also the Ambassadors of queen Marie,
who governed the low cou^trye for the emperor, Wiricke Criechinge, and Uiglie,
Zwichem a Lawyer. They in a long oration accused sore the Duke of Cleave, that
through his aid and counsel, the French king, by the conduict The treatye of
Norinberge
of Martyn Rossenn, had made war in those parties, wherefore they requested
them to reduce and frame him to his dewtie that he might leave the possession
of Gelderland, and recompense the dommage don. After the fifte day of
February, Granuellan showed his commission. And what the good will of
the emperor was toward the public weal, he said it was no need to recite:
but he reioysed not a little, the last year, when it was she wed him, how they
made out their powers together ioyntely against the Turk, and would in deed
have been therepresent him self, and had prepared all things for the same
journey, but then did the French king and the Duke of Cleave move war against
him unlooked for: which thing certe^ly disapoynted his former pourpos, for the
force which he had intended to have sent against the perpetual enemy of
Christianity, he was constrained to reteyne about him, for his own defense:
especially seeing his enemies bragged also verey much of the Turkisshe Navy,
wherein they said came great soccour for them. But all this notwithstanding he
perseuereth still in the same mind, that he has ever ben of, and also
declared, and is determined to spend not only his Treasure, but also his life
and blood in the Turkisshe war, so that they will again aid him against
the French king and the Duke of Cleave. Whereunto both his will and zeal
toward the commonwealth, and also the state of this dangerous time onght to
persuade the^: How the French king has expulsed his uncle the Duke of Sauoie
out of his inheritance, it is not unknown: the same he intends to do also
unto others, astune and occasyon will serve. And for because themperoure does
let his violent enterprises, therefore does he bear him all this hatred and
malice. They heard right now, by the letters that were read, what he works
with the Turk, and what he practices in Germany, and how he seeks to hinder
the Turkisshe war. And forasmuch as the Duke of Cleave is joined in league
with him, and also distourbeth themperours most worthy exploictes, and is a
let to the saufgarde of Germany, it is requisite that aid be decried against
them both, that their insolente Rasshenes may be repressed. In the mean time
A supplication of the protestants.
the Protestants deliver a supplycation to king Fernando and themperours
deputies: wherein they make a long rehearsal, what has been don in Religion
these many years, how the peace was given at Norinberge, and how the judges of
the chamber have infringed it, how the emperor made them a prouiso two years
past at Regenspurg, and declared plainly his mind, and how a decree was made
there for the reformation of the chamber, and vpryght ministration of Justice:
what they also did protest than openly unless the decree were observed. And
seeing there is nothing redressed hitherto: And that the judges of the chamber
do still molest them after their wonted manner, first: for their defense against
the Duke of Brunswicke, secondly for not paying the stipendes of the chamber,
therefore have they refused their whole jurisdiction: which thing in deed they
protested long before in the open assembly that they would do. Now therefore,
if the matter be otherwise reported unto them, they desire them, to give no
credit: for they were constrained of necessity thus to do, and used lawefull
remedy, which both the law and equity it self does permit. For if they
should on this wise proceed, and usurp the authority of judgment, and
pronounce publycations and other penalties, the same would not be to them only,
but also to the public weal hurtful. For what time, through malice and
hatred kindled among the states, their whole treasure shall be consumed in
civil war, how fyt and profitable the same will be for the Turks, there is no
man but knows well enough. For how hard a thing it is, after that althynges
be exasperated, to quiet the matter, it may by diverse examples be showed. The
Turks increase by the loss of christians.
They verily do wish for nothing more, than that a fyrme peace, upright
justice, and public quiet might be stablished in Germany, certainly of the
dissension that is in religion arriseth all this grudg and diffidence: And that
dissension springs of that same well, for that the doctrine of the gospel, and
Gods true relygyon are prohibited, for that errors and open crimes are not
only not taken away or a mended, but also for ambition and lucre sake, are
defended and maynteyned. Therefore god being offended and provoked to wrath for
this unthankfulness, does plage us with great calamities, and will not cease
his hand, so long as we persevere in the same: They pray them therefore, that
they would apply their study hereunto, and at the lestewyse so travel in
this matter, that for relygion sake, there be no trouble moved, and that
justice may be ministered to all men indifferentlye: but for somoche as that
can not be, as the state of the chamber is at this present, they require, that
according to the old laws of the empire, and Themprours declaration, that
judgment may be reformed, and other judges appointed, and actions to remain
in the same state as they were in before the refusal made, and the judges to
be charged, that they observe exactely, the form of the reformation that
shall be, and attempt nothing against the peace makinges of former years: For
unless the thing may thus be ordered, and that they may have a sufficient
warraunte to have peace, they cannot consulte of the Turkishe war although
they desire to do any thing they may for the commonwealth. The matter being
long and mothe debated, when both king Fernando, and Themperours attourneis,
said, how the counsel was already appointed ar Trente, and Themperoure also
would come thither: And that the Judges of the chamber could not be removed
without their cause were heard, and that the redress, is already decreed, and
shortly shall take effect. And how they could not deny the Duke of
Brunswicke, by them expulsed, making claim to his own, to have the law,
neither that they had Aucthorytye to make any further grant. The
Protestauntes show them again, that they neither allow that Counsel, neither
will they come there, neither are they satisfied in other things, nor
sufficiently assured, neither can they take any further delyberation.
Notwithstanding Fernando and the other states make a decree for the The decre
of Norinberg.
fortyfying of the places nere to the Turks dominion, and for contribution
monye for the same, and appoynte the third day of July, for reformation of
the Chamber, ordeynynge that it should be redressed after the form
prescribed eleven years paste at Regenspurge, appointing a penalty for those
that shall refuse to contribute their aid accordyngly. But the Protestants
again do proteste, that they do not assente unto this decree, because it was
made without their advise, because there is no certain thing establisshed
touching the peace, and law, and because there is great pertialitie concerning
the contribution. When for Themperours cominge, the matter was like to tend to
a mortal war between him, and the Duke of Cleave. The Princes electours and
other states by their Ambassadors do entreat, and hardely at the last obtain
a trewes of Granuellan, not certain and determinat, but such, as should stand
at Themperours pleasure, so soon as he should set foot into Germanye,
whether he will approve, or refuse it, and in the mean season, Sittarde a
verey strong town in the frontier of Gulicke, should have been in the
Emperors possession, until he had declared what his mind were. The
intercessours promised this also, that they would send Ambassadors to mete with
the Emperor, to in treat him in the matter: And Granuellan put them in
great hope, that theye should receive of him a gentle answer. This treatye
thambassadours of Cleave, the chief whereof was John Ulatten, a noble man of
birthe and well learned, did well allow, and gave thanks to the
intercessours, for their pains taken: but in the mean while was a battle
foughten at the Town of Sittarde, the.xxiiii. day of March. And where as the
Duke of Cleave wanne the feelde, partly by reason of this victory, and partly
The Duke of Cleave refuses truce.
through the persuasion of the French King, that fed him with money, he
waxed obstinate, forsakynge the treuce, when his ambassadors were returned
home. The news of this prosperous battle, brought spedely into France, caused
great reioysynge, and at Paris by the Kings commandment, they sange Te
deum. The Dukes of Banier brethren by their Ambassadors, make intercession to
the Protestants in this conuentyon, and among other conditions they
propounde this also, that all the Duke of Brunsewickes lands, might be
committed to the custody of Themperoure, or certain princes of Germany, till the
matter be further examined: but herein could be nothing determined. In this
assemblye Christopher Bishop of Auspurge dyed of a soden paulsey, when he had
appointed to make The death of the bishop of Auspurg.
a feast on the next day. He was of the house of Stadious, a man learned and
peaceable, whom Otto Truckesse suceded. Here was a decree made, but not entered
of record as was accustomed, neither was it of authorytye. It was long or the
French King received Themperours Letters written to the Bishop of Room,
therefore now at the last he answers them at the full. Where Themperoure
would be preferred before him, as though he had well deserved The French kings
answer to the Emperors letters.
of the church of Room, it is a mockery and a vain thing. For neither are
Themperours auncesters to be compared with his, nor he himself also with him
in this behalf: certainly he is a good son, and much praise worthy, whose
Army did besiege, vex, and take prisoner, the father and good man of the
house, Clemente the.vii. and sacked the chief city of the whole world, and
polluted the Churches and Temples of God immortal by sundry ways, and left
there undone no kind of mischief, fylthy lust, and crueltye, who unto this
so great an outerage, gave also him self a prettye mock, what time he made
vows and supplycatyons in Spain for the delyueraunce of his father, whom he
most streyghtely deteyned at home captive: But his Progenitors kings of
France, ever syns Charles, Martell Pipine and Lewis, have studied always to
auaunce Kings of France most addicteth the pope.
and enryche the Bysshoppes of Room. He prayseth much his own diligence and
zeal to the common welthe, but the thing is far otherwise: if it be indged
a right: for through his order and conduite have many thousands of
Christians ben slain of the Turks, within a short space, in Hongary ones or
twyse, in the Goulfe of Uenise at Castelneufe, after that in Barbarfa, at
Argiers. Whither at the same time he said he must needs gooe, when in deed
he fled, and leafte Germany for appraye to the enemy than approchynge through
his fault, the young infant of John Uayuode, and his own brother Fernando,
and all the Realm of Hongary are fallen into this calamity: he tells with a
brauerye, as though he came to Aegnesmortes to confirm the peace: but if
there be any praise in this thing, it ought rather to be ascribed unto him,
which went first in to the Ship to him, and after also sent his children
thither, wherein surely there was great danger, both of him self, that can
trust no man, and also of Androwe de Anxie, his Admiral, a man of a subtle
and crafty wit. After he took his Journey through France, at his request
in deed, but when he had first by his Ambassador, letters: and Messagers,
craved this of him, and offered him Millan: he alleges nonne other causes,
but he was constrained of necessity for the Rebellion of Gaunte to pass that
way: where he says, how consultation was had, to have stayed him, it is
faulse, and never came into his thought: He did the Duke of Sauoye no wrong,
but when he denied him both his mothers dowarye, and in herytaunce, and would
not permit him to redeem Nice, and besides did evil entreat The Dukes of
Sauoye friend to the^peroure.
his Lieutenauntes and soldiers, he recovered by foorce of Arms, that he
could not get by law and equity especyallye, syns he wrought all things
in a manner at the Emperors pleasure, whose use and propertye is, to persuade
other Kings, subjects to reuolte, and after to bring them to miserye: As for
example the Dukes of Bourbon, Sauoye, the Prince of Salarne. And Duke Henry of
Brunsewicke: He is also chargeable and hurtful to his kinse folks and alies,
to Christierne king of Denmark, to Fernando his brother, and to him chieflye
which has married his eldeste sister: For that the Turk has of late
invaded Hongarye, and taken the chyefe City, it ought not to be ascribed unto
him, but to himself and his brother, which laid wait, for the young Heir,
Uayuodes son, and made war against him. And so answers to every point
of the Emperoures Letters, concerning the Turk, and his Ambassadoures sent
unto him touching the Germans Relygyon and counsel, that he will seem to be
in no fault, but to deserve well the Title of the most Christian King,
given long syns to his noble progenitors. And in fine desires the Bishop to
give no credyte to the sclaunderous report of his adversary, but to think
how there is nothing, that he will not be glad to do for the common welthes
sake and his, and for the Church of Room. A little before this time dyed
Willyam Bellaye of Langeis, of whom we have oftetymes mentioned, a man of
much honor and virtue, and an especyall ornamente The death and praise of W.
Bellay.
of the French Nobilytye, by reason of his notable learning, Eloquence,
Experyence, and syngular aptnes in all affairs, far unlike unto the most
part that follow the law, which seek only to auaunce and augemente their
riches: but he was of so noble a courage, that he had this respect only, how
he might through more virtue, win true renown, and serve his Prince
trewelye though it were to his own hynderaunce. I told you before of
Fraunces Lander, a preacher of Paris. When he had made a doubtful Frances
La^der co^mmitted to prison
answer to the articles propounded, and perseuered still in his Preaching,
two or three days before Easter he was committed to ward. This was done by
the procuremente of the Divines, which had accused him to the lieutenaunte
Criminell. Within a few days after the King came to Sangermane which is a
little Town and Castle by the River of Seine, five miles benethe Paris, and
His weknes before the king.
being infourmed of the whole matter, calls the Preacher before him. He when
he came thither, being put in fear by some men's words, which said how
the king was sore offended, declared not that constancye, which many men
looked for at his hand: And being carried again unto Paris the.xxix. day of
April he was enforced to recant such things as he had taught before. For on
that day in the Cathedral Church did assemble the Senators and judges of the
Parlamente, moreover all the Magistrates and officers of Paris, and a great
number of Divines. After the Church doors were made fast, and men set in Armure
to drive a way the people. When all were placed his opinions were recyted, and
being demanded of every one, what he believed therein, he answered as pleased
them, confessing how he had erred, and promyseth all obedyence from
hencefoorthe, and acknoweledgeth those Articles of doctrine, which fryste the
Divines, and after the Kings counsel propounded unto His recantation.
him, to be true and godly. After the same sort also they handled an other
Preacher, Depensius, though not with so great a solemnity: for when he had
at the first made his retractatyon nothing Depensius driven to recante.
plainly, he was compelled an other day in his sermon before the people, to
declare each thing distinctelye and apertelye, till the Divines there present,
were fully satisfied. In France lived Clemente Marotte, who in the vulgar
tongue surmounted far al Poets that either we before his days, or that lived
also in his time. He had no The praise of Clements Marot.
great knowledge in the latin tongue, but yet through the company of learned
men he profyted very much: Neither was there any thing almost in the
books of Poets, but he kneweit, so that out of their works he took much
and applied it to his purpose. Thus did he translate certain things covertly,
out of Tibullus, Propertius, and Ouide into his own elegies. And our of
Ga^^llus, he took the Marriage of Hercules, Duke of Farrare, and Senate
Armoricke Daughter to Jews the.xij. King of France. He translated also most
excellently the first book of Ouides, Metamorphosys. And in his later days he
bente all his writings, to holy scripture, and was prefixed to have expressed
David his Psalter in French meter, but Psalms translated by Marot.
taken away through sickness, he finished only fyfty Psalms, which now
remain, and are red not without thadmiration of his excellent wit: for
nothing is more pleasant than his style, nothing purer than his speech,
nothing apter or more pleasant than his Rythme, And he set them forth this
year at Geneua, whither he repaired, what time he might not safelye make
longer a bode in France, for suspycyon of Lutheranisme, he had prynted.xxx.
Psalms two years before in Paris, but with much diffycultye: for this might
he not do, before the Doctors of Sorbone had pronounced, that there was
nothing contained in that book, contrary to the Chrystyane faith. This
peradventure makes not much to our pourpos, but I thought good to commend the
name, of so excellent an Artificer also, to other nations, for in France his
memoryal shall endure to the last posterytie, and most men be of this opinion,
that it shall be right hard for any man to match him in this kind of
virtue, and as Tullye reports of Caesar: he makes all wise men a frayde to
write. Some others have taken in hand the same Argument, and in deed better
learned than he, but they do not attain to that fynes of perfectyon. In the
tenth book is mentioned of the Archebisshop of Collon, how he coueted to
refourme his church, and allowed The Archebisshop of Collon calls a
convocation.
not that Synod of his prouynce, notwithstanding that the book went forth
in his name. And after that, in the conuention at Rege^spurge, Bisshops were
enjoined, both by king Fernando, and also by the Bishop of Rooms Legate,
that every man in his own dyocesse should see a godly reformation to be had,
he calls a conuocatyon of his states, which are the clergy of the cathedral
church, the Earls, the Nobility, and Ambassadors of cities. The matter being
debated, they agreed all, that so godly and wholesome a work should be taken in
hand. Therefore he appoynteth certain to conceive in writing a draughte of the
reformation that shall be, and to espy out good men to be mynisters of the
church. This writing he sends to the Divines of Collon, and wylleth them to
judge thereof by the Scriptures, and to show their opinion, but where his
request was not sasatisfyed, and having not conuenyent ministers to instruct
the people, he sent for Martyn Bucer at Strasburg, who^ both John Gropper had
always commended unto him highly, and he himself also knew right well, by
familyar comunication. Who coming thither the last year in Decembre, in the
beginning of this year, at the commandment of the prince, began to preach
at Bomia, a Town upon the Rhine five miles above Collo^. After at the Ides of
March, the Bishop calls a new assembly of states, at Bomia, and requires
Bucer preaches at Bomia.
that they would consulte upon a godly reformation: But where the clergy had
assigned no man for this pourpos, the rest of the states desire the
Archbishop, that according to his own judgment, he would chouse mete men
for the thing. Wherefore he commits this charge unto Bucer, that he should
pen out the articles of the christian doctrine, and to thentent all things
might the better be done, The bisshops book of reformation.
he entreats the Prince Electour of Saxonye, that he would Join unto him
Melancthon. When he was commen and John Pistor from the Lantzgraue, and that
the work was fynished, the Archbishop sent it to the clergy of the head
church in Collon, which are all of noble Melancthon and Pistor come to Collon.
houses, and requires them, that they would ponder dyligently the doctrine of
that book. After at the.xxii. day of July, he calls an other Synod and
exhibited unto them the book of reformation, requiring them that every state
would chose certain, which might pervse that book over, and confer with his,
to thentent some tolerable and godly accord might in fine be had. But the
clergy before said, urged this obstiuately that Bucet especially, and certain
others appointed of late to instruct the people, might be dysplaced. After
they require a further time of delyberation, touching the book, and refuse to
confer with the rest. He, albeit he knew well enoughe for what purpose they
made this delay, yet to the end they should find no lack, grants them time
to consulte in. And where they spoke of removing of Bucer, and his companions,
he did not refuse, in case any man were able to conuicte them, either of false
doctrine, or of evil life: And at sondrye times offered them liberty to try
it, being ready to exhibit them before any lawefull or indifferent Judge. Wha^
the matter therefore stayed here, they prepare a contrary book, and in A book
called Antidagma.
title it Antididagma. In the preface of the same book, after a wonderful
raylynge against the Lutheranes, they affirm with express words, that they
had rather live under the dominion of the Turks than under a Magistrate, that
would follow and defend that reformation. The author and divisor of this
book, as they say, was Gropper. For he, albeit he was very familiar with Bucer
two years before at Regenspurge: Albeit that coming home from thence, he
commended Gropper forsakes the Gospel.
him maruelously, not only to the Archebisshop, but also every where to all
others, albeit he had written him many, and that most frendely letters, yet
when the matter was brought unto this point, he forsook his frendeship
altogether, and leaving his prince, by whom he had all his preferment, he
revolted into the tents of his adversaries. The same did Barnarde Hagie his
Chauncelour: which had both of them many fat benefyces. The divines of
Collon affailed Bucerfore, and rattled him up with many opprobrious words.
But he required, that the matter might come to disputation, and protested that
he would defend this doctrine against them in all assemblies. In his defense
also Melanethon set forth a book at the same time, and exhortinge them unto
modesty, shows them, what shameful errors they defend. Duke Moris of
Saxonye makes certain laws at this time, Duke Moris makes laws for ye
ministers of the church.
to be observed within his dominion. And first in deed he exhorts the
preachers and ministers of the church to execute their office diligently, to
preach the Gospel sincerely, and to shine before their stock with honest
examples of life, that they exhort men to prayer, and mutual love, that they
rebuke vice sharpelye, and sequester desperate persons from the communion of
the church, by the consent of the Magistrate, until they amend. And such as
will not thus be reformed, to present unto the Magistrate. Secondly, forasmoch
as youth is the store of the Church and the public weal, he founded three
Grammar He foundeth three scooles.
Scooles, at Misene, Merseburge, and Port. And in every place, he fyndeth a
certain nombre of Scolars, both their apparel and commons: And pays also
yearly stipendes to their Scolemasters. And to this use does he apply the
revenues of the relygious houses wherein Monks had dwelt, and such others. He
grants that the youth shall remain there, for the space of six years: of
the same lands He is beneficial to the University of Lipsia.
also he gives in Augementation to the University of Lipsia, two thousand
crowns yearly, and certain Rasers of wheat. Moreover he forbids beggynge,
and appoynteth an yerelye sum of monye in certain places to releue poor
householders. After this for such, as defloure Laws against deflowerers of
Uirgins, and adulterers.
maids, and mary them not, he appoynteth this punishment, that albeit they
set them forth afterward, and marye them to others, yet shall they be
committed to prison. And commands that aduouterers shall dye by the sword.
And noble men that marie such wives as they have accompanied with before, he
punnishethe thus, that he takes away from their children, that were borne
before the Marriage, the possession and profits of such lands as they hold
of him in fee. In the mean time themperoure coming out of Spain, arriueth
with his Navy at Genes. And the.xxvi. day of May addressyng his letters from
thence to the Duke of Saron, the Lantzgraue and their consortes. For as much
as they are already sufficientlye warranted by his proclamations for publyke
peace, and that also the reformation of the chamber shall now be shortly, he
exhorts them, they would not refuse to contribute their aid against the
Turk, of whose not only preparation that is exceading great, but also of his
coming, he is credebly certifyed both by letters and messaugers: He was
infourmed of all that was dooue in the conuention by Nauius, that went unto
him. At the same time also he calls a counsel of thempire at Spier, against
the last day of Nouembre. Departing than from Genes, he spoke with the
Bishop of Rome at Busset, which An assemble at Spier.
is a Town by the River of Tare, betwixt Placence and Cremone. There again
in like case as he did before by letters, he required him to proclayme himself
enemy to the French King: but he said how that was not expedient for the
commonwealth, and herin perseuered. The Bishop had given to his son Peter
Aloise, Parma and Placence, which he had obtained latelye of the College of
Cardinals, by an exchange made, and because these Cities were sometime the
Dukes of Millan, he required, that the Emperor by his authorytie would for a
piece of monye, confirm his son in the possession of the^, The Pope would
bye Millan.
and create him Duke of the same. But that did themperoure (which held Millan,
and would deminishe no part of his right) refuse. They say moreover how the
Byssho^ppes intent was, to have persuaded the emperor, for a sum vfmony, to
have made his Nephew, Octauian, Duke of Millan. The Emperor breaking of this
talk, that he might be no longer let, when he had delivered unto Cosmus
Medices, Duke of Florence, the Casteles of Florence and Liburne, which he had
until that time in his own custodye, receiving of him therefore, two hondreth
thousand ducates, he proceeds on his journey. Before he came out of Spain, he
had created his son Philip king, and gave unto him in marriage, the Lady
Marye, Daughter unto Philip created king of Spain.
John king of Portugal. This year also did Sigismunde, the son of Sigismund
king of Polle, mary the Lady Elyzabeth the daughter of Fernando king of
Romans. Henry the Duke of Brunsewicke going to mete The Emperor in Italy,
heynouslye accuses the Protestants at Cremoise. When The Emperor was now
coming out of Italy with his army, the Protestants, which had lately
received his letters dated at Gene, mete together at sinalcalde the.xxiiii.
day of June, to consulte of sending to him Ambassadors, of matters
apperteyning to the defense and keeping of the Duchy of Brunswicke, and to
their league, to solicit Duke Maurice, of the king of Swecia, of Otto Henry
Palatine, Wuolfange Prince of Bipounte, of the Bishop of Munster which than
desired all to be received into their league. This assembly ended the.xxi. of
July. And much about this same time, the Emperor and the King of England
make a league A league of themp. and the king of England against the French
king.
against the French King, which aided the Scotts, as before is said. But
this confederacy the Bishop of Rome took in marvelous evil part, and
therefore thought the French frendeship to be needful for him. When the emperor
was commen to Spier about the end of July, the Protestants send thither
Ambassadors, Fraunces Burcart, George Bemelberg, Christopher Ueninger, and
James Sturmius. The protest. ambassad, to themperor.
Being admitted the second of Auguste, they speak in a manner the same in
effect that they did before to king Fernando, the conclusion of their tale
was, that in case they might be sufficiently warrau^ted to have peace, if the
Judgment of the chamber might be reformed, as it was lately decreed at
Regenspurg, if the inequality of co^tributyng may be taken away, they will not
fail to bear their parts in public necessities: As touching the Duke of
Brunswicke, their desire is, that the matter may come to hearing, and they
say how they will prove manifestly, that he: which first had done open
iniurye to the cities of Goslarie and Brunswicke, to have benryghtlye expulsed
and driven out of his country. Hereunto Themperoure, by Nauius, in the
presence of Granuellane, two days after: that there was no more to be
required: For they were well enouge assured of peace by the fourmer decrees:
the judges of the chamber can not be removed before their cause be heard. In
the month now of October, inquisitio^ shall be made of them, and if any fault
may be found in them, they shall not escape vnpunnished: the moderation of
contributinge, can not be made, without the common assent of all states: let
them consider the present state of the public weal, and because it is a
matter of most danger, unless it be helped in time, let them give their aid
against the Turk, like as other states do. He must him self go now with
his whole force against the French King and the Duke of Cleave, to thentente
he may defend his subjects from Iniurye. The Duke of Brunswick urges sore
to be restored: therefore let them say their fantasye in that matter. They
desire to have this answer delivered them in writing, that they may the
better consider it, The Emperor was content, and the next day he went from
Spier to Mentz, so far the ambassadors followed him, and when they had
received the writing, they show Granuellan and Nauius, wherefore they are not
satisfied touching the peace, and because their desire is, that the cause of
Brunswick, might be heard, they have no further commission in that matter. The
archebisshop of Collon came to themperoure at Spiers to entreat for the Duke
of Cleave, but that was in vain: Themp. viage against the Duke of Cleave.
For excepthe would first depart from the posession of Gelderlande, The Emperor
would hear no mention of peace. And where the ambassadoure of Saxonye, by his
Princes commandment, made suite for the Duke of Cleave, to Granuellan, at
Mentz, and to persuade, did say how a private iniurye must be forgeuen for
the common welthes sake, especially now that the Turk inuadeth. The other
makes answer, that The Emperor will not go from his pourpos, what inuasyon
soever the Turks shall make. I told you before how they of Heldesseme had
forsaken the popisshe Religion, and entered into league with the Protestants:
Whom Ualentyne the Bishop of that City They of Hildisseme are accused to the
emperor.
had accused heynousely before to the chamber, and to king Fernando, and now
also to Themperoure, that they had changed the religion and Ceremonies of the
church how they had appointed new preachers to teach the people, put down
the Mass, punnisshed the followers of the old relygyon, how they have broken
and beaten down not only aultars and fontstones but also the churches, how
they have taken into their hands and custody all the mouables, goods and
Iuelles of the clergy, and that of late also they have setfoorthe gameplayes
to mock and deryde openly the Uirgin Marye, and other saints, that they
pourposynge to forsake his Jurisdiction, had lynked themselves in confederacy
with the Protestants, and constreyned Monks and such others to observe their
religyon through violence, and those that would not obey them, have put to open
shame, and also bannished. When The Emperor had heard this complaynte, the syxte
day of August, he writes unto them From Worms, and with a terrible
threatenyng commands them, to restore relygyon, and all other things into
their fourmer state until some public decree be establisshed in such
matters. Three days after, he addresseth his letters to the Senate of Collon,
how he hears that certain preachers Themperours letters to them of Collon.
labor sore to remove them from the aunciente religion, whom they
notwithstanding have stoutly resysted hitherto: which he was right ioyefull to
hear of, admonisshing them to persevere in the same, and keep the citezens in
their dewty. This shall be to him most acceptable, which he will also declare in
deed, in time to come. At the kalendes of June, the Bishop of Room writes to
the same effect unto the prebendaries of the cathedral church at Collon. In
the care and The Popes letters to the clergy of Colion.
sorrow of mind, which he has of the Archebisshopppes folly conceived, he is
greatly comforted with their stoutenes, and constancy which is not only to
themselves, but also to all their neighbors right wholesome: For next to the
immortal God, they deserve the thanks, that both that most noble City and
also the whole province, is in sayfegarde. Therefore he gives them right hearty
thanks, for standing so styffe in the cause, and whylest he lives, will never
forget the same. For albeit they did but their dewtie, yet for the thing it
self, and for the example he must needs confess, that he is much bounden unto
them. Notwithstanding they had need to be constant, for this cause chiefly
left if they should faynte, and that the Archebyshop should happily get the
upper hand, he would wreake his tene on them extremly. Therefore let them be
strong and stout in the defense of Gods name and the catholic relygyon,
and of their own lybertye and salvation, which that wicked Archeheretike
goes about to subuerte and destroy. They have no need of a counselloure, yet
would he also thruste as it were this spur unto them runnyng, and desires
them ernestlye, to take good head, that he which is un woorthye the name of an
Archbishop, do not infect that most noble City with his contagion: neither
that they take him for their Pastoure, but for an enemy: and he will not fail
to assist them both with his counsel and otherwise. These letters did John
Poggius, the Bisshops Ambassador to The Emperor sent unto them the. xxv of
August. A little before this time, the French King going with an army into
Uermandois takes a little Town of Themperours called Landersey, and makes
The French king fortifyeth Landersey.
it strong with fortifications, and garrisons, about the same time also,
Barbarousse the Turks Lieutenaunt, by the conduit of Poline a French man,
arrived with a great Navy at Tolloye, which is an haven town in the
province of France between Marselles and Nice. The turks Navy arriueth in
the province.
When the King knew of his coming, he sends the Duke of Uendome, Angiane,
with a force and with Galleis to assiste him. After they go both to Nyce, and
when they had taken the Town and the havon, the.xx. day of August, they
layesege to the castle. An other army The Castle of Nice beseged.
of Turks made incursyon into Hongarye, which took the town Quinquecclese,
and the city and Castle of Strigone, and Wanne, Stulweysenburge by assault.
The Bishop of Room had sent aid, whereof Baptista Sabella and Iulye Ursine
were Captianes: but they came so^ what to late, When the divines of Paris had
thus triumphed over Lander and Depensius, as before is said, they publyshe
those articles of Doctrine, propounded to the Preacher Lander, which in nombre
were xxv. The matter was sole^nely done at Paris the first day of Auguste and
the people being called together, as the manner is, by a trompet, those articles
were recited, and after also, by the kings commandment, were put in prynte,
and proclamation made, under a great penalty, that no man should work nor
teach against them, and a decree also added for the searching out of
Lutheranes. The divines moreover charge their students, that are called
bacchelaures Batchelaurs.
and others that study divinity, to follow this form, or else to be expulsed
their college. Against this their doctrine, Calvin wrote a book, which he
calls Antidotum, and paynteth them forth in their Abooke of Calvin against
the Sorbonistes.
colors, and much about the same time sets forth an other book in
French, of the relyques of Saynctes, to thintente that both this age, and
also the time to come may see, in to what a case relygio^ was fallen: but he
recyteth these things only, which unto him were known A book of the
relieques of Saints.
and wissheth that the same were done likewise in other countries. And of this
nombre are the Cribbe, Swaddling clothes and bearing clothe, the foreskinne and
blud of Christ, partly pure, partly delayed with water, the six waterpottes
that were at the marriage in the City of Cane in Galilee, the wine that Christ
made than of water, the stuff and furniture of his Maundie and last supper,
that he had with his Apostels, the Manna of the people of Israel: the Cross
the cane Nails, Sponge lance, Crown of thorn, Cote, Shoes, Handkerchef, and
tears of Christ: The Milk, Smock, Hear, Girdel, Slipper, Comb, and Ring of
the Uirgin Marie. The sword and bucklar of Michel tharchangell: The Scull,
Iawebonne, brains, and fingar of John the Baptiste: The Chair, Honlette,
Massinge garments and brain of. S. Peter: And then the bodies of Saints,
and that the same in diverse and sundry places. And he shows with what
veneration, the people worshipped these things, when the Pristes not without
monye let them have a sight thereof, and show them a far of, verey tryfles,
and things of naught, which if they be well considered, have nothing but craft
and colloure divised of the Pristes for lucre. But in vase Dutchelande, there be
two famous Cities in this behalf, Treuers and Achon, for hither they say, men
were wont to come to Two Cities full of relicies.
see relics, out of Hongary and Slauonye. What time those merchants set
forth their wares, but every seventh year, that thauthorytie and wonder might
be the greater. Themperoure came from Mentz to Bomia by water: There taught
Bucer at the same time, and Casper Hedio also, sent for thither newly from
Strasburg by the Archbisshop a man of a verey mild nature, and verey mete to
instruct the people. They were both in great danger, especially the
Spaniardes being thete, The Emperor also does will the Archebisshop by his
ambassadors, to send them a way: Melancthon was departed thence before: They
also not long after obteynyng license to depart, having taken order with the
ministers in the churches, retourn home again. After this The Emperor went to
Dure: And what time he came before the Town the.xx. of Auguste, the next day
he sent an Herald to sommon the Town, willing them to render it unto him, or
else he will attempt it by force. The soldiers within answer him
conte^ptuously, saying, that they are not affrayde of him, who was a good
while sense made bayte for fysshes: For the brute went how The Emperor,
Afalsereport of the Emperors death.
in his return out of Barbary, after the overthrow at Argiers, suffered
Shipwreake, and was drowned. And this opinion was so setrled in the minds of
the Cleauois, that they would neither credit them which said they had seen
him, nor scarsely those that had spoken with him. The Prince him self also was
likewise persuaded, by acerten fatal credulity. The French men were thought
to be authors and forgers of this vanity, lest the Cleauois should rele^t, and
for fear of Themperours power, fall to some composition. The Emperor receiving
this answer, when he had fortyfyed his camp and furnished it with all things,
the.xxiiii. day of August, before the son rysyng he begins to make his
battery, and after gives thassault, especyally by the Spanyardes, which were
exceadyng priest and wyllyng. They being often repulsed, and having lost many
of their men, never ceased, before they had taken it by force. The fortune of
the Towns men was such, as is wont to be, when the way and entry is made
by the sword. Howbeit here was wont to be showed the head of Saint Anne our
Ladies mother, and thither came yearelye a great multitude of people, at the.
xxvi day of July which is dedicated to that saint. But the Spaniardes being
victours, carried that head enclosed in gold with a great pomp deuoutely into
the graie Freres Church, lest it should be lost in that Ruin and burning of
the Church. After the Town was spoiled and distroyed by fire, The Emperor
Marchinge forewarde, had rendered unto him Gulick, and than Ruremunde a strong
Town of Gelderlande, situated where the River of Rure, and the Mase mete. For
the sodein distructyon of Dure, brought all men into a wonderful fear and
perplexity. From Ruremunde he goes to Uenlon. Thither at the last came the
Duke of Cleave to him into his Camp, accompanied with Henry The Duke of Cleave
craves pardon of themperoure.
Duke of Brunsewicke and the Ambassadors of the Archbishop of Collon. And
what time he humbly besought Themperoure to perdon him, the Duke of Brunswicke
also and the Ambassadors, ernestly entreated for him, Themperoure at the last
ryseth up, and appoynteth the Prince of Orange, and Granuellane, to prescribe
laws unto him. Therefore upon these conditions, he was received again into
favor, the seventh day of September. He shall not depart Condicio^ns to him
imposed.
from the relygyon of the Catholycke Church: if he have altered any thing,
let it be restored: that he promise his fydelytie and allegeaunce to
the emperor, to king Fernando and to thempire: that he do renounce the league
of France and of Denmark: He shall make no confederacy, wherein he shall not
except Themperoure, Fernando, and their heirs: He shall leave the possession
of all Gelderlande, and release the people of their oath. And in case any
place or places shall refuse to render, that he shall than aid the Emperor
to recover the same. The Emperor again restores unto him the Land of
Gulycke, latelye Conquered, except two Towns, Henseberge and Syttarde, which
he will keep for a time, till he have sum experience of his fydelytie and
Loyaltye. Whylest the Emperor went against the Duke of Cleave, the French
King Marches through Champagne toward the land of Luke: And sends for
the Lady Jane his Systers Daughter, which was despoused and solemnelye Married
two years before to the Duke of Cleave, to carye her to her Husband. She
went full sore against her will, as I showed you before. Howbeit she obeyed
the King her Uncle. The daughter of Nauaris sent to the Duke of Cleave.
The King appointed unto her, Cardynall Bellaye, Bishop of Paris, as a man
most meet to persuade with her, and keep her company all that Iorneye. When
she was commen now to the Soyssons, to go from thence to the King, word
was brought that the Duke of Cleave was subdewed. Wherewith being greatly
rejoiced, she saw then, that she need to fear the thing no longer, and
knew what would be the end thereof. Neither was she deceived at all: For the
King at these news was sore astonyed. And so she retourneth home, but he
nevertheless procedynge, takes the Cytyo of Lucemburge about the end of
September, and after delyberatyon had, fortyfyeth it. About this time also,
Henry the eyghte King of England confederated latelye with the Emperor,
sends him a power of men, by the conducts of Sir John wallop, Capytayne of
Laundersey, beseged.
Guisnes, which Ioynynge with Themperoures Army, beesege the Town of
Landersey. In the Month of October, Charles Rosset a Lawyer was sent by the
Emperor to Mentz, who there The preachers of the gospel thrust out of metz.
took order with the Senate, Monks, and Clergy for the observing of the old
relygion, bannysshynge the Preachers and others that were inclyned to the
Protestants, unless they should reconcile them selves within a certain time.
When Barbarousse had beeseaged the Castle of Nice in vain, and that
Themperoures power out of Lu^bardye The sege is levied at Nice.
also approached, which was led by the Marquis of Piscare, he leuyed the sege,
and somewhat sooner, than the time of the year required, he leads back his
Army to winter at Tollon: for that Town had the King assigned him,
commaundyng all the Citeze^s and inhabiters to avoid thence. This year was
much dissension Dissencion in Scotland.
and trouble in Scotland, the minds of the nobles being divided: For those
Lords, which we said were prisoners in England, being lib^^ally dismissed
of the king, furthered his cause as much as they might. But the Cardinal of
Scotland, who had great yearly revenues by benefyces in France, and the
Queen being Daughter to the Duke of Guyse, took the French Kings part.
After the The young Queen of Scotts affiaunced to King Edward.
death of the Scottish king. Henry the eight, was wholly in this, that the young
Queen of Scotts might be affianced to Prince Edward his so^. In the which
thing, those nobles that I spoke of, did him good service. And when they had
persuaded Hamelto^ the governor, they took the Cardinal, and besege the Queen
in a certain castle, and making the wrytynges, confyrme the marriage. But where
the French king disturbed this deuyse: And the Nobility also pitied much the
Queen's chance, and the gouernoure revolted to the other side, they brake their
conuenauntes. And the wars began again afresihe betwixt them and England,
as shall be declared herafter. The king of Denmark had also war with
Themperialles of the low country, The king of Denmark, warreth upon the^
perialles.
for King Christierne that was captive. And he axed aid of the Protestants,
but they say how this quarrel concerns not their league: for it was provided,
that in case he should have war for his religion, that then he should by
their common aid be defended. When the Duke of Cleave had made his peace with
The Emperor, he sends his Ambassadoure to the King of France and renounceth
his league, The duke of Cleave renounceth the French Leage.
and requires that his wife may be sent him, for whose passage, he has
obtained a saufe conduite of Themperoure. The king answers the Ambassador,
how there has been no let in him, that he has not both had his wife
delivered, and an Army also sent, but that it has been his own fault, which
certifyed, that there was neither open way for them to pass in those parties,
nor vitaile to be had: What soever he has promised, he has lyberally
performed, and so^what more also, than he was bounden: But he has not done
well, who forgettyng his noble lynage, and estate, has brought him self into
such bondage. As concerning his Nece, he may know what her mind and her
parents is: he is in nothing further bounden to him. When Themperoure had
establysshed things in Gelderlande in the month of October he came to
Landresey, with an exceadynge great army. Thither came also the French king,
with his whole force, and the thing was none other like but to have commen to
a battle. But when the French men had vytayled the Town, they The departure
of the Frenchmen from La^dersey.
went away by night so pryuely, that the enemy perceived it not, before it was
day light. Than at the length pursuing after them they over took the
rerewarde, and slew many. And because winter came on, The Emperor thinking good
to attempt no further, when he had sent a certain power to the sege of
Luce^burg, he discharges the rest of his army. Duke Maurice served the emperor
at Landresey of his own Duke moris
voluntarye mind, whereby he got much good will, and made the way to obtain
his friendship. In the winter season the Duke of Lorayne and certain others
entreat for peace, but that was in vain. Themperoure retournynge home from
Landersey, sent Fardinando County willyam forsakes the Frenchking
Gonzage, Uiceroy of Sicilie, to the King of England, that he might incense him
more against the French king. I have oftentimes mentioned of William County
Furste^berge: he being made a stranger with the French king, made suite by
Granuellan to come in to Themperours favor: And to declare his fydelytie, he
leuyed a certain power of foot men, in his own Iurisdictyon, and went in the
mids of winter to Lucemburge, and joined him self with The^perours Army.
But when the French men, by the conduite of the Duke of Longouile, had
vitayled them within, he departs without any thing done, after that many
were dead for cold and honger. I showed you before, how the counsel of
thempyre was appointed at the last of November: Wherefore the Protestants
assemble together at Franckfourd, to consulte before, what things they should
treat of in the whole assemblye. And where the matter was delayed by reason of
the French wars, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue in the month of
November addressyng their letters to themperoure, do advertise him, how they
will come to the counsel, if he himself will be there, and grant them
saufecounduite, for them, and their league fre^des. Whereunto The Emperor
answered, from Brusseles, the x. day of Decembre, that he would come doubtless,
and that in the month of Ianuarye, and sends withal a saufconduite.
Howebeithe excludes such as are addicte to his enemies, by promise, faith
or conuenaunte, signifyinge the privy espialles of the French king. Than in
the beginning of January, taking his journey he comes to Spire. The.xxiiii.
day of this month, was a great Eclipse of the Son, in the day time, so that
all men beheld it, not without great 1544.
wonder: This year also were three full eclipses of the Moon: A matter in deed
to be wondered at, and the which, as the astronomiers Three eclipses of the
moon.
say, has not chanced since the time of great Charles. Alexander Farnese
Cardinal, passing through France, spoke with Themperoure going toward
thassemblye, and took his leave of him at Worms. The cause of his ambassade
was thought to be, a treaty of peace. This assembly of Spier was exceading
great: For booth king A great Assemble at Spiere.
Farnando, and all the Princes Electours, which is seldom seen, and in manner
all other Princes were there, and among them also the Duke of Cleave. As the
Duke of Saxony was coming, which was the.xviii. day of February, the
Lantzgraue, the Archebisshop of Colo^. Friderick the Paulsgraue, and the
Uiceroye of Sicilye, went forth and met him. Two days after the counsel
began. And The Emperor propounds, for what causes leaving Spain, he is now
returned into Germany, and has called this conuention, he has sufficiently
declared by his letters dated at Gene: neither is it need to recyte, how much
he has evermore loved the Publyke weal, that all things put in order at
home, he might war against the common enemy of Christendom: but how he
has been impeached hitherto, and by whom, it is not unknown. For this last
year, by the procurement of the French king, the Turkisshe navy is comen into
the Sea of Ligurie, and has invaded the country of the Duke of Sauoye, a
Prince of Thempire, taken the City and haven of Nice, and with great force
beseged the Castle, and vattered it right sore. And albeit they were
constrained, through his Army approchynge to leuye their siege, yet have they
syns attempted other places of Thempyre, and of Spain also, and are now wholly
about to distroie all together. Therefore is the matter now brought into an
extreme danger, and unless they join their minds and powers to help it, it
is to be feared, lest Germanye shall acknoweledge and bewail his miserye al to
late. He has often wisshed to redress these euilles, but the French King
moving war against him insondry places, he could neither return into
Germanye, nor Join his power with theyres. And that the Turk does so boldly
invade Germany, and that the wars The causes of the turks prosperity.
also attempted against him, have had so evil success hitherto, the cause
has been, first, that he has been aduertysed from time to time, by the French
king, of the dissension in relygion, of the publycke and private dyspleasure of
al degrees, of the state of Thempyre, and what things are done therein.
Secondlye, for that he sees, how at the French Kings hand he fyndeth
favor, and socour ready, as it has not been only declared by witness and
letters, but now also proved in deed. For asmoche therefore as he styreth up
and armeth the common and most cruel enemy of all others against the
Christen publyke weal, he supposes, that they should esteem this war,
which he is constreyned to maynteyne agayste him, non otherwise, than if it
were attempted against the Turk: trusting moreover that they will not only
condemn his practyse and enterpryses, but also will The French king compared
to the Turk.
assiste him, to thentente that being delivered from the domestycall enemy, he
may dysplaye his whole force against the Turk. After this expostulatyng,
that the aid decreed for the Turkish war, was not sent accordyngly, for the
want whereof, the Turk has again this last year, prevailed, and taken
certain Towns and Castles in Hongarye, he requires them, that seeing the Turk
goes about to win Hongarye, that he may after invade Germanye, they would
consider depelye so weyghtye a matter, that they may have aid not oulye to
defend, but to invade also, to the end this most noyso^ plage may ones be
driven away from their wives, children, and natif contrie: declaring moreover
how willing he is, ye things amiss should be reformed, and emongs other the
judgment of the chamber. The same day king Ferna^do, by his ambassadors,
speaki^g many things The Protestants oration to themperoure.
of the Roades and invasions of the Turks, craves aid. After this
immediately, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue with their confederates
addressing their oration to the emperor, you know say they, most victorious
Emperor, how we have offered our selves ever syns the beginnynge, to
declare before this most honorable Senate, the cause of our defense taken
against Henry of Brunswicke: And be yet also of the same will and mind:
doubtyng not, but when the matter shall be heard, there shall appear unto you
weyghty and just causes, wherefore we were driven to it of necessity, and that
it is not lawful for him to be present here in the counsel of Princes.
Howbeit because we see him put himself in prease, to occupy a place in this
most noble consistorye, much against our wills, in as much as we can or
may, we do protest, that we neither take him nor acknoweledge him for a
Prince of Thempire, neither will that any right of ours, should through his
presence, be diminished. Whereunto the Duke of Brunswicke answers streyghte
way, by his Chauncelour. The The Duke of Brunsewicke accuses the
Protestauntes.
Duke of Saxo^, says he, the Lantzgraue and their fellows breakyng both gods
law and man's law, infringing the statutes of thempire, and the faith public,
by violence and open wrong, have spoiled me of my country: For the which
cause I have accused the^ to the Judges of the chamber. And seeing it is so,
they ought to have no place in the Senate of Thempire, and if they had any,
they have now lost the same, by committing that act, and are worthy, whose
company all men should eschew: But if it so be, that I must needs sit by
the^, in common counselles, I protest, that I do neither attribute this place
unto them, nor will therefore that the same should be prejudicial to my case.
The Protestants were very desirous even than to have recited the cause of
their enterprise, and the whole matter in writing, lest his complaynte
should appear to be true, or settle in men's hearts. But The Emperor, by
Fridericke Palatyne, and by Nauius, required them, forasmoch as the day was
far spent that they would differ it, affirming also that he would assign
the^ a day for the pourpos and so they followed his mind. And because as the
Princes sat in counsel, it fortuned that the Lantzgraue sat next to the Duke
of Brunswicke, the Prince of Palatine, John Suner, for the avoiding of strife,
arryseth out of his place, and sytteth down in the mids betwixt them both,
protestyng before, that the same should be no prejudice to him or to his
familye. Yt was thought he did it, at The^perours request. The day before the
Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue had entreated Fridericke the Paulsegraue and
John Navy, that they would so devise with The Emperor, that the Duke of
Brunswicke might not come in the common assembly: but it could not be obtained,
The Emperor alleging that he might not be excluded, unless the causes were
first declared. The French king knowing for certe^tie The French ambassade to
the assemble at Spier.
that The Emperor would make a grievous complaynte on him to the Princes:
determines a most honorable Ambassad, John Bellaie Cardinal, Fraunces Oliver,
chauncelour of Alenso^, Affricane, Malley presydent of Diuion: when these were
commen to Nance a Town in Lorayne, they remain there lookyng for Themperours
saufcondict: For the king, had sent before to Spier an Heraulte, for the same
cause with letters to The Emperor, and several letters also to the Princes
Electours, wherein he required saufe conduite for his Ambassadors. And when he
came to Spier about the end of Februarye, in his rich cote of arms, as is
accustomed, he was stayed by Granuellan, unto whom he delyuereth the king his
masters letters written to Themperoure, when he might not otherwise do, and
declares the cause of his coming, requyring that Thambassadours which are not
far of may according to the law of Arms have saufconduite, being commanded
to tarry within and dillige^tly watched, that no man should The French Herault
evil received at Spier.
come to speak with him, the fourth day after, he was dismissed with most
sharp words, that he had played a fond part, and was in danger to have lost
his head, which durst presume to come thither. For the king, being enemy to
Germany has not to do with in the lymites of Thempyre, neither is he worthy
to enjoy the law of Nations: let him return home therefore, and tell the
king thus: How there is no cause, that herafter either he or any other may
comefor him. And now in deed this fault is forgiven and perdoned, more of
themperours clemency, than of his desert, but let him take heed from
he^ceforthe: or else he will not escape vnpunnisshed: For he has don against the
law of armies, neither was it laweful for him to have comen into Themperours
habitation, without his leave and permissio^. And touching the letters which
he says, he has, the king has so well deserved of the Christen public
weal, and chefely of Germanye, that in this present state of things,
The Emperor neither will, nor ought to receive them, lest by his accustomed
manner of writing and promises, either he, or also others might be disceaued.
This answer was delivered unto him written in French. And thus was he sent
back with the kings letters written to The Emperor and Princes, and certain
horsemen were sent with him to conduite him to Nance. To this were not the
Princes made privy: And many thought it was done against the custom of
thempyre. This thing known, the Ambassadors were in a pecke of troubles, and
took great thought, how to return home without danger, and using the
counsel of Authony Duke of Lorayne, they went a way secretly in the night
season, and so returned into France. Whylest they yet remained at Nance, The
ambassadors return by night.
Christine, the Dukes daughter in law was sent to Spier, that the thing which
neither he could, nor certain others, that might she, which was Themperours
Nece, by his sister, through her entreaty and tears, and by a certain
commendation of her kind obtain, but yet was this in vain. For The Emperor was
wholly bent to have war: And his counselors said he must so do, to
mayntaine his estimation and dignytie. The Duke of Lorayne, albeit he was
addicte to neither, and had long syns couenaunted with them both, that he might
be a newter, yet for asmoche as the war was to be kept upon, his frontiers,
and saw, how that could not be done, without his great loss and damage,
was very careful for peace. The.ix. day of Februarye certain Priuces, through
Themperours motion, wryt letters from Spire, The princes letters to the Pope.
to the Bishop of Room, partly commendyng him, for that the last year, he
adjoined his force with Themperours, to rescue the Castle of Nice, partly
requiring him, that for as much as the enemy is now reparyng his navy at
Tollone, to repare again to Nice and to win that Castle, which should be a
great shame and a sore anoyeaunce unto Italy, the Church of Room and all the
commonwealth, he which is the father of the common welthe, and high Bishop,
would aid the Duke of Sanoye with his help and counsel, and of his syngular
wisdom would deuyse some means how that cruel enemy might be expulsed not
only from Nice, but also from those places, where he has havens and holds
for his refuge: for this should be a thing, both to God most acceptable, and
to the whole common wealth also most wholesome and profitable, with diverse
other perswations touching the same matter. To this the Bishop answers
the.xxvi. day of February: Theffect of his answer is this, that the castle of
Nice may be The Popes answer.
defended, he will be no less careful hereafter, than he has been hitherto,
trustyng, that as they are careful for it, so will they be no less mydnfull,
to take pains for the whole common welthe, for this shall best become them.
And after a long rehearsal of the aid of men and captains, which he has
sent into Hongary and Africa against the Turks, how he has wasted his
treasure in such affairs, how often he has sent Ambassadors, how often
traueled him self about the publyke weal, he says in fine, that like as
they commend unto him Nice, so does he commend unto them, the state of the
common wealth, which is sore afflicted and decayed. And the chief and only way
to help this matter, is, that the minds of Kings may be reconciled, The
mean to heal the common wealth
for out of this welsprynge proceeds all the discommoditie, that is in the
common wealth. And if dissension betaken away, the fourmer beauty will come
again: For before this grudge and displeasure, there were neither heresies in
Germany, nor Turkee in Hongarye, But so soon as the way was made through
civil discord, immediatelye sprange up heresies, factions, and hatred both
publyke and pryuate. And hitherto has also the counsel ben let and
hyndered. Therefore must we seek to recover the peace, that was before: And
after thexample of physicians, take away the first cause of ye disease: For
through peace, war and the Turk are put to flight. And by a counsel which in
peace may be kept, all heresies and what so ever is amiss, may be reformed:
Otherwise, let them not think that either Nyce can be defended from the
enemy or any part of Christendom kept fre from danger, but that all men
shall be wrapped in the same calamity and distructio^. In the month of March
the Paulsegraue Lewis prince Electour departed out of this life, and his
brother Fridericke did succeed him. The Princes electours and the other states,
through Themperours advise, the second day of April send letters to the
Swyses, The princes letters to the Swisses.
to diswade them from aydyng the French king, who to the utter decay and ruin
of Christen relygyon, has lincked him self with the Turks, and this last
year, has conducted their Navy, into the sea of Lygurie: where they have
warred upon the Duke of Sauoye, and taken Nice. And yet remain still in
France, intendiuge to work more mischief, to The Emperor and all his
countries. Wherefore they require them from hencefoorthe to suffer non of their
men to serve the French king, who for this wicked league with the people of
Mahomet, ought to be detested of all men, and taken for a common enemy. And if
any be gone to him already, to call them home again, and so to use them selves,
that it may appear, they do not neglecte the publycke preservation. Whilst
they consulted of matters propounded by Themperoure, The Duke, the Lantzgraue
and their confederates, the first day of April, before Themperoure, King
Fernando, and all The protestants accuse the Duke of Brunswicks
the states of thempyre, accuse Henry the Duke of Brunswick, of most heinous
offenses, and also recite in order by wrytinge, what harms and injuries he had
done to the cytyes of Brunswicke and Goslarye, their consortes, in whose
defense they were constrained, to repulse that unjust violence. After they
rehearse how these many years, his whole endeavor has been, to seek occasyon
to move war against them: and prove the same by the testimonye of letters,
which were found, as I told you before, when he was expulsed, in his
princypall Castle. In those letters, which he had written for the most part
all to the archbisshop of Mentz, to the duke of Bauier and to Heldus before he
was The tenure of his letters
dryue^ out, he wissheth often for Themperours coming out of Spain. And when
there was any hope thereof, than he braggeth and threateneth: And what time
The Emperor was come^, and slacked the matter, he complayneth of his lyngering
and delay, and be wayleth, that he and his fellows are not satisfied, and
that the league made at Norinberge was neglected, and lays all the blame
thereof in Granuellan, which is corrupted with money by the Protestants, he
raileth on him, and wissheth him a shamfull death for his demerites, and says
how the emperor is a sleep and can not be awaked. And that he uses his name
sometime, only for a clooke and a terror, as Faukners are wont many times to
show forth a dead hawk, to fear the foul withal. These and many other
letters of such like sort, wherein he utters his mind and affections, were
red openly. And much to the same effect had the Duke of Bauier and Heldus
written to him again. And for because Henry brother to Duke George of Saxony,
was in league with the Protestants, and had altered the religion, as before is
said, the Duke of Brunswicke had with letters and messagers solicited
The Emperor, to take away his lands, trustyng, that he should be set to keep
the possession of the contrie: hereof were the letters also recyted. Furthermore
they declare him to be a wicked man, The Duke of Brunsewicke conte^neth his
own religion.
and that he does contemn and delude the Bisshoppes relygion, which he will
seem to maynteyne, and prove it by a most euydent testimony. This Duke of
Brunswick had married the Lady Mary, sister to Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberge, who
had a gentlewoman waytyng upon her, of an excellent beautye, called Eve
Trottine, upon whom her husband doted in love, and when he had persuaded the
maid, he had by her diverse children. After to thentent the matter should not A
strange tale of the said Duke.
be perceived, and that he might use her company the longer, he gives her
counsel, to feign, as though she would go home to her pare^tes. And he
fournissheth her of horses, charyote, and althynges necessary for her Journey.
She departs, and where she was thought to have gone home, she was conveyed
into a Castle of his. And the captain was made privy to it before, what
thing should be done. And a woman or two appointed to wait upon her, whom he
most trusted. This Eve within a few days after she came thither, keeps her
bed, and fayneth her self sick. He had before caused to be made an Image of
wood, which did represente the head, neck and Boulke of a dead body, the
other parts were made and set out with lynen clothes, which the women had
stuffed and filled with earth and ashes, that it might seem proportionate, and
so set the Image of wood and the clothe together: for the cloth was so shape^,
that it covered also the otherpartes which were of wood. The body therefore
being thus ordered and lapped in the wynding shete, is laid forth on the
flower, straight ways comes one of the women to the parlour door where the
Captain was, and declares how Eve is dead. He by and by commands a coffin
to be made, to lay her body in: And to make men affrayde, that no body should
come nere her, they feign that she dyed of the plage, and perfume the house
with the grains of Juniper, and other sauoury things: After, is the corpse
brought forth, and with a solemn pomp carried to the graye Freres Church.
And there was honorably buried, with An Image buried in the sle^e of Eve.
mess and dirige. And the Freres pray for her all the year long, and desire the
people in their sermons to do the same. Moreover by the Dukes commandment,
there was a funeral made for her in the Chapel of the Castle, where it was
said, she dyed, and likewise in his head Castle of woulsebutell, which is
not far from the City of Brunswicke: for thither came also the report of
her death. And at this Obite or exequie was his wife the Duchess, with her
women and train of maidens, all in mourning apparel: thithere came many
Pristes that were sent for out of the contrye, which had a dinner made them,
and monye given in reward to every man somewhat, after the old accustomed
manner among the papists. In the mean time Eve, whose death so many
bewailed, lives and fares well in the Castle of Stansseburge, where
oftentimes the Duke visits her, and syus that time has had by her seven
children: he persuades his wife also to sygnyfye to her parents and friends,
that Eve is dead. But when it was bruted abroad that she was alive, and kept
in the Castle of Stansseburge, his wife which had also an Inkling thereof,
conceaueth a vehement suspicion, and inquyreth of the servants, how the
matter stood, but he forbad that any man should come at her, of those that
knew any thing: but this suspicion sticked fast in her mind, so long as she
lived, and writing often unto him, bewailed her miserye. This fact of his was
recyted emonges others in the same presence, to thentent all men might
understand, what opinion he had of his own relygion. The conclusion of their
accusation was this, to prove for how just and necessary causes, they
attempted war against him, who contemnyng the Proclamations of The Emperor, and
of king Fernando, had disturbed the Public peace, and had wrought all kind
of Iniurye to their fellows and confederates. The Duke of Brunswicke was not
present at this action, Themperoure so willing it: For the Protestants desired
that he might have been present, and herein had moved The Emperor. On Easter
Monday, which than was the.xiiij. day of April, Themperours soldiers, led by
the Marquis of Piscare, fought a battle in Piedmont, with the Frenchemen at
the Town of Carignane, and lost the field, and The French victory at Carignane.
many thousands of them were slain. The general of the French army was
Angian Duke of Uandosme, before mentioned. Whanreport came of that overthrow,
many men supposed that Themperoure would not have refused the treatye of peace,
but he was ernestly bent to have war, and made preparation accordyngly. The
Duke of Bru^swicke answers to the accusation of the Protestants, the.xxiij.
day of April. And powryng out a great heap of reproaches, obiecteth unto the^
conspiracy, rebellion, treason, extortio^, society wirth the Turks and
French men, and touching the letters found in his castle, he excuses as well
as he may, and if their closettes were searched, he says there might a great
deal worse stuff befounde. But the matter, concerning Eve his darlyng, he
touches but a little, to this reproach the Protestants make answer again.
And when Themperoure would suffer the matter to be pleaded no more openly, they
exhibit a writing, the same afterward does the Duke of Brunswicke. The
xxvij. day of April Charles the Duke of Sauoye, again by his ambassadoures
The Duke of Sauoye accuses the French king.
accuses the French king, and besides the violence and iniuryes of the foormer
years, he says, how he has styred up the Turks lieutenante, Barbarousse,
who being aided by the French men has taken by composition his City of Nice,
and against his fidelity and promise, spoiled it, and leadyng many away into
captivity, has set it on fire: he requires therefore, that they would help
him in this his extreme miserye especially, seeing the enemies are fully
prefixed to return to the sege of the castle. He has craved aid of the
Bishop of Room, and he has granted him only that trybut, which the clergy
are wont to pay him yearly: But that is a very small relief in this his
poverty, where he scarsely possesses the tenth part of his dominion. And
that he came not him self to the counsel, he excuses him by his age, the
long Journey, and the iminent danger of his enemy: And says moreover how he
is not hable to bear the charges, which has scant somuche as will find him,
his son, and his family. About the end of April the Swises assemble at
Bade^, The swysses answer the Princes letters.
make answer to the letters of the states of thempyre. How their captains
being demanded the question, affirm, that they saw no band of Turks in the
French camp, nor heard any thing thereof: For than would not they have
served. And that the French king, being of them moved herin, does complain,
that when he sent Ambassadors the last winter, they could not be admitted
which if they might have been heard speak, could easily have confuted this
slander: And that if Themperoure refuse not peace, he promises both the
Bohemers, that wrote to him in February, and also the Germans. his aid
against the Turk. Now as touching themselves, sum of them in deed are
bounden to serve the French king in his wars, by composition, some again are
only in league of amit(...) with him, and have been these many years, out of
whose dominions, if an^ run into France, it is done contrary to their will
and knowledge as the like may also happen in some places in Germany. But they
rekon it best, that the kings Ambassadors should be heard, and peace
establyshed: Wherein if they may do any good, they will with all their hearts.
This time did the king of England send a great Navy into Scotland. Who
chauncynge of a good wind, when they were arrived, Thenglishe Navy inuadeth
scotland.
take first Lythe, a notable hauon, after Eddenborough, the head city of
Scotlad. And when the Castle was kept against them which for the situation was
vnprenuable, they burnt it, in the beginning of the month of May. In this
Assembly Themperoure with a solemn ceremony created woolfang, Master of
Prusse, openly and gave him the arms aperteynynge to that office, which
Alberte of Brandenburge, the brother of George and Casimire, had enjoyed many
years, and marieng a wife usurped the same to him self, and was therefore out
lawed by the chamber, twelve years before as is declared. And Sygismunde King
of Poole, defended him as his Cliente. And now, what time an other was
invested, as I have said the kings Ambassadoure prote^ted openly, that this
creation was unlawful, neither that it ought to be any derogation to the
King his Master, under whose defense and protection is the Land of Prusse.
When the Ambassadors of Hongary had recited their misfortune and loss of the
year paste, they required aid of Thempyre: For now is the matter brought to
the verey extremity, and if they be now leafte destitute, they must needs
do, as men are wont in matters desperate, and for the which no man can blame
the^: they will accept right hard conditions, yea bondage it self rather, that
whilst other men sit still and look on, they should fall into present
destruction. How the French kings Heraulte was sent away from Spier with his
letters, it is before declared, when the ambassadors therefore were returned
home, ye oration, The oration of the French Ambassadors.
which they should have had before the states of germany, they set forth in
print. In the beginning, to get good will, they say how both nations have one
and the same original, neither can any thing chance unto germany which
apperteineth not as well unto France. Tha^ do they confute the reports of
their adversaries, as though the king with an other war should disturb the
common wealth, and have made league with the Turk, using a certain preface to
appeace the emperor. And affirm how the former war was begone, for that the
king could not obtain of the duke of Sauoie his mothers inheritance. And this
later, for ye kings ambassadors, which were slain against the law of all
nations: And yt the king has no league nor society with the Turk, but for
merchandise and common quiet, such as the Uenetians, Polonia^s and others have.
And albeit there were any league betwixt the^, it were not to be reprehended, for
asmoch as in times past both Abraham, David and Salomo^, Phineas, the children
of Tobie, and captains of the Machabeis Holy men have had leagues with men of
a contrary relygyon.
have done the like. After also themperours, Honorius, Co^sta^tine, Theodostus
ye younger, Justinian the second, Palaologus, Leo, Frederick the first and
second, have used the aid and succor of nations of a contrary religion. And
doubtless Frederick the second was even upon the shoulders of the saracens
carried again into Italy from whence the bisshopes of Rome had expulsed him.
They know, how great powers and aid the king has oftener than once promised
to the Turkish war: Hereof also the Bishop and Senate of Cardinals, are
good witnesses. The cause why the Turk invaded Hongarye, was for the
contentyon about the gouernemente: And after was moore provoked by the war in
Affricke for the taking of Towns: And where of late the Turkisshe navy came
into the Ligurian Sea, it is not to be imputed to the king: neither makes it
to the purpose, that Poline the kings servant was in the same: For thinte^t
of Barbarousse was to search and take Androwe de Aurie his enemy. And when he
could not find him, he beseged the castle of Nice, and that of his own
determination. The king in deed has taken trewes with the Turk, like as he
has at other times showed them, which is honest and hurtful to no man: for
the which he ought not to be blamed, consydering that the greatest men that be,
have also lately much desired the same. The state of the publyke weal is sore
afflicted, and for that is the king right sorry: And by this mean may peace
be recovered, if Themperoure will restore to the King that thing that is his
own right and in heritaunce: If they can bring this to pass, the king will
spare neither travel, cost, nor peril to defend Germanye from all foreine
violence. In the fourmer books you have heard how the Duke of Saxon would not
acknoweledge Fernando to be king of Romans: but in this conuention, that
matter went through in the The duke of Saxon is set through with king
Ferdinando
month of May, and the Duke promised to honor him accordingly. The Emperor
again, ratifyeth the Marriage conuenauntes betwixt him and the house of
Cleave, which ever before he refused, and permits, that in case the Duke of
Cleave fortune to dye without heirs malles, that the Duke of Saxon which had
married his sister, and his heirs males should succeed him yet upon this
condition, if before that chance, they shall agree upon religion. And for a
further band of amitye, Fernando, by Themperours consent, promises to give
his daughter Elenore in marriage to the Duke of Saxons eldest son, if a
reconcilemente in religion may be had, before she be marying able. This latter
thing was kept verey secret, and closely covered on either side, so that
neither the Lantzgraue and his fellows knew any thing thereof. For the
matter was done by a few counselors, and Themperoure used Granuellane,
Feruando Hoffeman, the Duke of Saxon, Pontane and Burcarte. The King of
De^marke also, sendynge his Ambassadors, fell to a composytion with
Themperoure, where before he had kept his power all the winter long for the
chance that might have happened, he seemed to forsake the French Kings
frendeshyp for the Turkyshe confederacye: for The French king hate^ of all men
for the turks society.
so much the Ambassadors did sygnyfye, in famylyar talk with their fellows.
Now will we return to the demaundes of Themperoure and King Fernando. The
matter being long and much debated, the tenth day of June the conuention
ended. The States of Thempyre, albeit they thought it much to be charged
with double aid, yet supposing that they should the better war against
the Turk, if the domestical enemy were first brought unto his bewtye,
granted to Themperoure monye to find four thousand Horsemen, and.xxiiii.
thousand footmen for half a year against the The states of thempire, decree
an aid against the French King.
French king. And with part of that monye Themperouce departs to his
brother Fernando, to thentente he should fortifye such places as are nere the
Turks: And for the Turkishe war to come, they agreed that money shouldbe
gathered of every man through out Germany, and all men to be seized after
their lands and goods, and no man to be exempted, and enacted that no man
should serve any foreine Princes, especyally the French King, and the
Magistrate permitted to execut those that were taken with the manner. Because
the controversy of relygyon could not in these warlycke affairs A decree for
relygion.
be treated on, it is differred till the next assemblye to be holden in the
month of December: In the mean season will Themperoure appoynte certain good
and well learned men to compile some godly form of reformation, and also
exhorts the Princes to do the like, to the end that through a Conference
made in the next assemblye, somethyng by common assent may be establysshed, to
be observed until a general counsel to be holden in Germany, or a prouincial
Sinode of the same. In the mean time let all men be quiet, and styre up no
trouble for the dyuersitie of Relygion, and that the Churches also, of what
relygion so ever they be, may inioye their commodytyes on either party, and
part of those goods to be employed to the fynding of the mynisters of the
Church, of free Schools, and the poor: the Of the chamber.
judges of the Chamber shall keep their place, until the time prefixed: when
the same shall be expired, than shall all be received into that number
indifferently without respect of relygion. The decre of Auspurge, and all
actions commenced against the Protestants for doctrine sake, the case also of
Goslarie and Minden, to hang in suspense, until the next treaty: The
Anabaptists to suffer punishment, long since for them determined: Yet shall
the magistrates assign learned and godly men to show them their error, and
call them again to amendment. The Catholics mislyked this decree, and
resisted it withal their force: But when the byshopes of Collon and Munster
held with the Protestants, and also the duke of Cleave and the Marquis of
Baden referred althinges to the^perours pleasure, which after long
disceptation, had devised this way, as a mean and tolerable for both parties,
They being well shortened of their nu^bre, say, that certe^ly they will not assent
to it, howbeit they will not prescribe the emperor, nor resyst his authorytie,
but are content to suffer it. Friderick the Paulsgraue, and the Marquis of
Brandenburge, Princes electours had entreated yt it might be thus decreed. The
protesta^tes desired also yt the duke of Bru^swickes case might have been
comprised in ye same decree, but it could not be obtained, and the emperor urged
the^, that either they should restore him, or else permit unto him the province,
by sequestration, til the matter be tried. And thereof he treated with the Duke
and the Lantzgraue, when they were present, and after their departure, much
more with their deputies. The Cities at the first refused the aid of the
French war, by reason of their intercourse and trade of Merchandise: But what
time the Princes had assented, and the French kings cause was full of hatred,
they subscribed also, though sore against their wills, especyally, that
were nere unto France. The Ambassadors of the Dukes of Luneburge and
wirtemberge refused also, but they were admonysshed privately, and chastened in
words, that they alone should not let the good will of the residewe. When
the La^tzgraue was ready to go home, and came to take his leave of
Themperoure, Themperoures gentleness to the Lantzgraue
he had most gentle intertaynement. And Themperoure said how he would not
trouble him at this time to serve against the French King, for this cause
only, that he would not bring him into hatred: but when this war is done,
he will go straight way against the Turk, and than will he make him his
lyeutenaunte, and general of all the war. And when he with a certain modesty
excused, and abased himself: as unmeet for such a charge you have done right
well or ever now, says Themperoure, both for your self and for the
others. And we doubt not, but that you can do us also right good service, and
with these words takes his leave of him most Frendely. He being full of good
hope, and ioyefull that he had Themperoure so much his good Lord, when he had
declared the same to certain of his Friends, retourneth home. Touching the
sequestration, after long and much pleadinge, they agreed that all the lands
of the Duchy of Brunswicke should be committed to Themperoure, as to the
high Magistrate, till the case were heard and determined, The duchye of
Brunsewicke committed to the^peroure.
either frendely, or by right and law. And that The Emperor should commit
the government of the Contrye either to the Paulsgraue, or to the Electoure of
Brandenburg, moreover to Duke Maurice or the Duke of Cleave. They that shall
not abide this order, to suffer the penaltye of breaking the Publycke Peace:
That Themperoure do aduertyse the Duke of Brunswicke to obey the same, if
not, to punish him according to the laws of thempire. These conditions at the
last The Emperor propounded, and herin perseuered, Tha^ did the protestants
ratify the same, as shall be declared herafter. The asse^blie being ous
finsshed, the emperor goes from Spier to Me^tz. Themperoures Iornoy into
France.
Now was all his army assembled in Lorayne upon the borders of France. And
about the^d of May, he had recovered the city of Luce^burg by composition. In
this war there served the emperor duke Maurice of Saxony, the Marquis Albert
with either of them a thousand Horsemen, moreover Count william of
Furstemburge, Captain of the footmen, and Sebastian. Sherteline all of the
Protestants relygion. Whylest The Emperor was at Mentz, there was taken in
Lorayne, Huberte Earl Richlynge, a Germane, that served the French king:
being brought to Mentz, he is condemned to suffer. The Countess his wife, when
she was comen thither, and fell down prostrate at Themperours feet could
find no favor. And now were all things prepared for the execution. At the
length was procured Maximylyan the son of king Fernando, whom The Emperor had
lately received: he in the end obtained his pardon, and saved his life. In the
mean time Barbarousse; either for that his bufynes required so, orheyng
persuaded by the king, or else fearyng, lest the French barbarossue
retourneth,
King should conclude a peace with Themperoure, retourneth home, and what so
ever places by the Sea side apperteyned to Themperoure or thempire, he inuadeth
and spoyleth: But from the Bishop of Romes lands he refraineth, as it is most
like, by the French kings persuasion. Themperours army marchynge forewarde,
takes the Town and Castle of Lyney, three miles from Barrey. And from thence
goes to Sandesyre, a French Town standing upon the river of Marne, which was
kept with a strong garrison, over whom Mounser Landren was Captain, who so
valeauntely the year before had defended the Town of Landersey from
The Emperor and from Thenglishemen. Whilst these things are thus a woorkynge,
The death^ of the Duke of Lorayns.
Anthony the Duke of Lorayne departs out of this life, not so much for age,
as for thought and care he took for this nere and almost domestical war,
whom Fraunces his son succeeded, which had married Themperours Nece,
Christine, as before is said. In this mean while the King of England sends
over the Sea to Caleis, the Duke of Northfolke with one Army, who marchynge
through Bollonois, went and beseged Moustrell, and here Maximilyan Countiede
Bure, by Themperours accord, served the King of England. And immedyately
after sent an other strong Army with the Duke of Suffolk, who laid sege to
Bollogne, and thither came the king The kings besegeth Bollogns.
in person. The French King had appointed Gouernoure there, Mounser Ueruyne a
man of honor. When The Emperor had environed Sa^desyre, with his army, he
makes the Batteri, and the Bretch onse made, gives thassault at yt Ides of
July, but where the towns men stood to their own defense most valeauntelye,
Themperialles were repulsed, and five hondreth Soldiers slain. Finally in the
second month, what time Landrey the gouernoure was slain with the fall of an
House, and the Gunners wanted powder, the Town was rendered. During this
seege, Renate, Prince of Orange being stryken with a great Piece, the next
day after, when he had made his Cosyn the Earl of Nassow his son, his heir,
he ended his life not without a great grief to Themperoure. That time were the
The death of the Prince of Drenge.
Protestants Ambassadors in Lorayne, that they might confyrme the couenauntes
of Sequestration, latelye propounded by The Emperor. And first they rested at
Metz, and after at Tullie, and sendynge diverse letters to The Emperor and to
Granuellan, they declared the rause of their coming: But Themperoure at the
last excusing him self by his warlyke affairs bad them go home again, and
differreth the whole matter to the next conuention of thempyre, or to some
other time more convenient. When Sandesyre was taken, the emperor, the.xxv. day
of August, marches on still, and leaving Catala^ne, a Town of Champagnie,
pitcheth his Tents by the River of Marne, on the other side whereof lay certain
bands of French horsemen in an Ambusshe. There Count Willyam of
Furstemberge, which Count willyam taken prisoner.
knew the sytuation of France, and every passage, goes forth in the night
and but one man with him, to search in what place of the river they might wade
over at a foorde and pass with their Army. And having a pesaunt of the
Contrie to be his guide, when he had found a forde, and was gone over on the
other side, he was intercepted by French horsemen, and carried in to their
Camp in great derysyon, and not without reproaches, for that he seruinge
there before, had carried a great deal of Gold out of France, and from
thence was sent to Paris. This thing chanced to Themperonre contrary to his
expectation, and held him long in suspense. The French king, because the
Swysses were not commen, eschewed the battle. And Themperoure procedynge
forth by the River side, daily auaunced his camp. In those: parties is the
Town of Eperney: There was much store of victualles, Munition, and other
warlycke furniture: which things, lest they should come into the enemies
hands, were conveyed in great haste down the River: All that could not be
carried away, was consumed with fire, the French men themselves Eperney brunte.
setting the Town a fire. Wherefore Themperoure, without resistance, marched
to Castle Theodoricke a Town by the same River, not two days Iorneye from
Paris. And albeit the French kings Ambassadors, sent to entreat for peace,
were in Themperours Camp, yet marched he forewarde never the less, and when
he was commen thus far, there arose a wonderful fear among them at Paris.
All men that were of any welthe fled thence, neither could they be kept back
by the kings proclamation, forbiddynge The fear and flyghte of the Parisians.
that any man should flee, and the vilest sort remained still. And therefore
was there some danger, lest the greatest City in all Europe, and exceadyng
rich also, should even through those same have been spoiled. In the same
Uninersitie is a wonderful nombre of Students, out of al countries in
christendom: they fled also, and the king had in deed proclaimed that all
alienes should depart immediatlye, under pain of death this was in the
beginning of September. A few days after the king of England having sore
shaken and battered Bollen. with his mighty ordenaunce; had it rendered unto
him, which neither his father, nor the kings of former time could Bollon
rendered.
ever win. For he did not batter the walls only with canon shot, and shake a
sondre the Castle and Bulwarks with, vndermynyng, which in winning of
strong places, is the common practice of other Princes, but also had great
and heuge Mortar pieces, which were shot of such a compass, that they fell
right down, and look where they lyghted, brake down all before them to the
ground, so that many were oppressed with the ruin that they made, and the rest
that loved their lives were driven to keep in caves and sellars under the
earth. At the last the.xxiiij. day of September, The Emperor makes peace A
peace concluded betwixt the emperor and France.
with the French king, when he was commen to Castle Theodoricke, a town of
the Soissons: the peace makers, of Themperours part were Gonzage the Uiceroye
of Sicilie, and Granuellan. And for the French king was Claudie Annebalde the
Admiral, Charles Nulley, and Gilbart Baiarde. And the conditions were these.
What soever has been taken on either side syns the trewes of The conditions of
the peace.
Nice, is restored again. The French king shall render to the Duke of Lorayne,
the Town of Asteney, for because it is under the protection of Lucemburg. They
shall aydeone an other, and Join al their forces together that the old
relygion and concord of the church may be restored. The French king
promises to aid The Emperor in the Turkissh war, with six hondreth men of
Arms, and ten thousand footmen. He renounceth the title and claim of
Arragonie, Naples, Flaunders, Artois, and Gelderlande. The Emperor again
renounceth his right to the County of Bollonois, Perone and other towns,
standing upon the water of Some: Moreover, to low Burgundye, and the contrie
of Macon: Than promises he to give in Marriage to the kings son, the Duke of
Orieans, the Lady Mary his eldest daughter, or else the daughter of his brother
Fernando, and whether of them he will give, he shall declare with in four
moneches: if he give his daughter, he promises for her dowary, Brabant,
Gelderlande, Lucemburge, Limburge, Flaunders, Holland, Henaulte, Artois,
Namures, Friseland, Utrecht, and all his dominions there, and also high
Burgundy, that after his death they may inioye and possess the same. If he
thus do, than the king for himself and his Children, renounceth his right to
Millan: And if it fortune themperours daughter to dye, having no Children,
than the Duke of Orleans departs from all that possession, and the right in
Millan remains wholly to the French king, and to Themperoure the right of
the House of Burgundy: If he give the daughter of Fernando, he grau^teth for
her dowarie the Dukedom of Millan, how so ever the marriage be, it shall be
accomplisshed within a years space. And the King shall wholly restore the Duke
of Sauoie. The King also is permytted to keep Hesdin: The Emperor promises his
whole endeavor, that peace may be made also betwixt France and England: As
concerning the Duke of Cleave, because the king and Queen of Navarre did
affirm that their Daughter never consented to that Marriage, but also
witnessed the contrary, after the solemn and accustomed manner, the French
King shall send that protestation to The^peroure within six weeks that some
thing may be determined. In this peace are comprised the Bishop of Room,
King Fernando, Portugal Polle, Denmark, the Uenetians, Swyses, the dukes of
Sauoye, Lorayne, Florence, Farrane, Mantua, Urbine, the Cytyes of Gene, Luke,
Senes, the Princes Electours, and all the states of Thempyre, that are obedyente
to Themperoure. This peace concluded, Themperoure dyschargynge his Army,
retourneth home to Brusselles. All men woondred at this peace making, For even
those which were Themperours friends, and famylyare with him, looked most
certainly for a Conquest before they went in to the Field, and made their
boast, that with in a few months, France should be theyres, or Three
most mighty enemies of France.
the king should be at commandment, who had three most mighty enemies,
Themperoure, the Germannes, and the King of England.

The sixtenth Book of Sleidanes Commentaries concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyste.
The argument of the sixtenth Book
The Pope by letters admonishes, taunteth, threateneth Themperoure his son:
and makes new Cardinals. The clergy of Colon resists the Archbishop:
Master Peter Bruly for preaching at Tournay, was brent quick. Whilst the
assemble was at Woormes, they of Merindolle and Cabriere, named Uandois be
sacked and burnt. The Pope notwithstanding the counsel by him called, burned
with desire to make war against the Protesta^tes. Luther writes against him,
and paynteth him in his colors. Grignian is sent to the Protestants, to
cause them to approve the counsel. The Archbisshop of Colon is cited to Room.
Open war betwixt the Duke of Brunswicke and the Lantzgraue: wherein the
Lantzgraue had the victory, the Palsgraue prince Electour, receives the
Gospel. Bruites of war are sown against the Protestants, a Colloquie was
ordained at Regenspurge, to dispute of Relygion: which broken the Counsel of
Trente is publysshed, and the sessions begin in the mean time Luther
departs out of this present life.

When the wars were hotest, the Bishop of The Popes letters to the Emperor.
Room, at the eyghte kalendes of Septembre, writes his letters to
Themperoure, wherein he rebukes him sharpelye, for vsurpinge, as he says, his
authorytie, and intermedlinge with the reformation of Relygion, which
nevertheless he does not ascribe to his own nature, but to the malycyous
perswations of such evil men as he has lately made league and friendship
with, he threateneth him with thexamples of Dathan, Abiron, and Core, which
would have taken upon them the authorytye of Moses and Aaron: And also of King
Ozias, whom God struck with Leprosy, for that he would attempt to burn
ince^se upon the Altar: he tells him plainly that he has nothing to do
with the reformation of Churches but the same to be long unto his office
chyefly, whom God has given authorytie to bind and loose: Than proves he by
ensamples, that such Emperors as have aided the Sea of Room and the
Bisshoppes thereof, God has ever rewarded with great gifts and benefytes, as
great Constantyne, Theodose, and Charlemaygne: Again such as have resisted
them, to have The enemies of the romish church
ben punnyshed with great misfortunes, as Morys, Constans, Phylyp, Leo, Henry
the fourth and Fridericke the second which came unto shameful ends, and
were some taken, some also slain of their own children: And that for such
disobedience, not only kings and Emperors, but also whole nations have been
plaged, as namelye the Jews and Greeks, the one for crucifying of Christ the
son of God, the others for contemnyng of his vicar: Moreover he wylleth him
to imitate the example of great Constantyne, who refused to be judge in the
Bisshops causes, Notwithstanding he could be content to use him as a
coadiutour, in matters of relygion, but herin to be head and governor, he can
not abide him. Finally he warns him from hence The Pope can abide no
superior.
forth to treat no more of relygion in the assemblies of Thempyre, but
refer that unto his indgement, and that he disanulle and abrogate all such
things as he has, through over much fufferaunce already granted, to those
rebels and adversaries of the Church of Rome, or else must he be constrained
to deal more roughly with him, than either his custom, nature or will also
can bear: Yet will he not neglect his dewtie: for the example of gods plage
upon Helithe pressed is ever before his eyes: Hitherto he has used the clementie
of a father, Themperoure is the Popes eldest son.
but if this will not serve, he must feel another way: therefore let him
consider, whether it shall be more for his honor, to assist his old age, in
recouerynge the tranqullytie of the Church, or else to favor those, that seek
the desolation of the same. It is thought, that the French king set him on to
write thus extremely, who made the matter odious by reason of the Englysh
league, to incense the bishop the more, for hereof comes it, that he writes
of the Society of euel me^. For they both are wont to swe and crave his
friendship right busyly both by letters Great princes swe for the Popes favor.
and ambassadors, especyallye in time of war, and each labors for him
self, that they may be to him most acceptable. About this time, Stephen
Bishop of Winchester set forth a book against Bucer, verey opprobrious and
bitter. Wherein emonges other things he defends the sengle life. This year
the Bishop created Cardinals, Christopher Madruce, of the Trente, and Otto
Truckesse Bishop of The creatyon of Cardinalies.
Auspurge, Germans: George Arminiack, James Anuebald, Frenchmen. Fraunces
Mendoza, Bartholomewe Cueua, Spaniardes, to gratifye the Emperor, Fernando,
and the French King. At the same time also he calls a counsel which had been hindered heretofore by reason of the wars, against the Ides of March in
the year A counsel is called.
following. And because The Emperor and the French king were now at peace, he
utters great gladness, and the writ, wherewith he renews the connsel
begins of that place of Scripture Letare Ierusalem-In these days also
comes forth a book of Luthers, touching the Lords supper, wherein he
renews the old controversy, Luthers book of the Lords supper.
and speaks many things against Zwinglius and the fellows of the same
doctrine. Which was answered by them of Zuricke, and that right sharpelye. I
told you before of Clergy and University of Collon, how they with their
whole force resists the Archebisshop in the reformation of religion: But
where as he proceeds, they sendyng The clergy of Collon to the Arche Bishop.
again Ambassadors and letters, require him to leave, and attend the decree
of the counsel, if not they must compain to the higher magistrate, and find
remedy, to quiet their conscience, and pacifye Gods wrath. They are loathe to
take that way, but if he goo forewarde, they must needs do it. When they
could not thus prevail, the.ix. day of October they assemble in the head
Church of Collon, and there recyte by writing among other things what has been done at Worms.xxiij. years past, what Luther by the common asse^t of all
Princes was condemned of Themperoure, what was decreed at Auspurge, what at
Regenspurge, and what latelye at Spyer. All these things neglected, they say,
how their Archebysshop Herman, has gone a new way to work, and has sent for
Bucer an Apostata and twyse polluted with incestuous marriage, a sacramentary,
and a defendour of that opinion, and to him has committed thecclesiasticall
function, and has appointed every where new preachers, lewd and evil
persons: by them also was a form of a refourmation divised, and set forth by
the princes commandment. All the which things they have ever to their powers
resisted, and often desired the Archebisshop, that he would stay until the
counsel, or at the least until the conuention of thempire, but all was in
vain. And now forasmuch as the state of the province is lamentable, and
tends to great unquietness, and he will not be persuaded, they of necessity
do flee to the last remedy, and do appeal to the Bishop of Room, and to
Themperoure, the high protector and advocate of Gods church and commit
They appeal to the Pope and Emperor.
all their thoughts unto their tuition. The chief of this assemblye was George
of Brunswicke, Duke Henry his brother, Provost of the same College. This thing
known, the Archbishop setting forth a writing, says, there is no cause of
Appellation: For he had done nothing contrary to his dewty: therefore he
rejects their appellation, and trusts, that they will leave their
enterpryses: but if not he will proceed not withstanding in those things that
concern gods glory, and amendment of Churches. And again in an other
writing, he confuteth their sclaunderous report of Luther and Bucer, and
affirms that he was neither privy to the condemnation of Luther, before he
saw it in print, nor consented to the decre of Auspurge. Luther was in deed
condemned at Rome, but his cause not heard, violently and tyrannically. But in
the decree of Regenspurge, he and all other Bisshops were enjoined to reform
their Churches. And he sent for Bucer through the means of Gropper, who so
often and so hyghly commended him, in whom he also could find nothing
blameworthye, And it is a great tooken that he should be an honest man, for
that Themperoure among many, chose him to be one of the colloqutours as a man
godly learned, and a lover of peace, the same judgment has he also of the
rest of the ministers of the church by him appointed. After the peace
concluded, The Emperor sent the Bishop of Arras, Granuellans son, and the
French king, Cardinal Bellaye, ioynctely to the king of England, to treat
a peace, but it was in vain, the king refusyng to restore Boloingue. In these
days also, the An Ambassade to the King of England.
Duke of Orleans and the Cardinal of Turnon, and Ladies of the French court
came to Themperoure at Brusselles, for a mutual reioysyng of the peace.
The Emperor had appointed the captains and bands of Spaniardes to winter in
Lorayne, and in the contrie there about. In Themperours provinces annexed to
the house of Burgu^dye, many were every where desirous to know the gospel, but
secretly, for fear of Themperours proclamations and punnishment. In those
parties is a Town called Tournoye, the chiefest among the Neruians. Thither
came a French preacher from Strasburge, being of Peter brulie
them sent for, one Peter Brulye, of whom mention is made, in the twelfth
book. When he was commen thither in the month of September, being gently
received, of them that sent for him, he began to instruct them privately. And
after, for the same cause, went to Lysle, a Town of Flaunders, and retourneth
about thend of Octobre again to Tournay: but now was the matter brought to
light, and search made for him throughout all the city and the gates kept
shut. Being therefore in present danger, and could be no longer hyd, the
second day of November, in the night season he was by serten of his friends let
down over the walls by acorde: when he touched the earth and satte down on
the ground, one of them, laining over the wall, as softly as he could, bad
him a dew, and whylest he thus leyned, he fortuned to thruste of a stone, that
cleaued not fast to the mortar, which falling upon him as he sat, brake his
leg: who vexed partly with the ache of his leg, partly for cold, when he
could not stir thence, satte still and bewailed his chance and misery. That
That heard the watchemen, and suspecting, as it was in deed, came unto him
take him and carye him to prison. When the brute hereof came into Germanye, the
Senate of Strasburge, sendynge their letters did entreat for him, the same did
also afterward the Ambassadors of the prote stantes, which were that time at
Worms, but that was somewhat to late. And before these letters came, which
were sent in the name of the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, he was
dyspatched out of the way. This was on the.xix. day of Februarye. The 1545.
Brulie burnte at Tourney.
manner of his execution was extreme. For he was brent in a small fire, that his
torment might be so mutch the greaeer. He confessed his doctrine constantlye
even to the last breathe: And as he lay in prison, comfortyng his discyples
by letters, which were fettred in chains, he exhorts the^ to be constant.
The sentence was pronounced against him, that he should suffer for
transgressing themperours commandment. For many years past themperoure had
set forth most streit proclamations, in all his dominyons there away, against
the Lutheranes. And they be red every year twyse, lest any man should plead
ignorance. When he was sent for out of prison to be examined, ye Freers that
were divines, axe him, before the magistrate, what his opinion of His
examination.
the sacrament of the altar, as they call it, of the mess, of consecration,
of adoration of the host, of purgatory, of the worshipping of saints, of
steewil, of good works, of Justification, of Images, of Baptism, of vows, of
confession of sins, of the Uirginitie of our lady. Whereunto he answered:
that the verey body and blud of Christ is there received, not with the mouth,
but in spirit through faith, and neither the substannce of bread nor wine is
changed: But when the supper is distributed to the congregation after Christ's
institution in the vulgar tongue, than are they verily consecrated, even by
the words of Christ. For that still and secret mutteryng wherewith the priests
do treat, and speak to the bread and wine, belongs rather to inchaunters
and charmers, than unto Christianes. The popissh mass to have nothing common
with the Lords supper, but to be a service invented by men, to the reproach
and iniurye of Christ: the adoration of the bread consecrated to be Idolatry:
For there is worshipped a creature in the place of the Creator, that he
knows not, nor can find non other purgatory, saving the blood of christ
which forgeueth us, not the trespass only, but also the pain dew for our
sins. Therefore the mass and other prayers, which are applied unto the dead,
are not only of non effect, but also wicked, for asmoche as they are instituted
besides gods word: Saints can not be better worshipped, than if we follow
their faith and virtues: What soever comes besides, is evil, and they,
whylest they lived, would permit no worship to be done unto them. Therefore
ought they not to be called on as mediators, for that the same honor
apperteyneth only to Christ: through Adames sin man's nature was wholly
corrupted, and the will weakened, so that without Gods grace, it can do
nothing that good is: Howbeit a man regenerate, does through Gods motion, as
a good tree bring forth good fruictes: How it is faith that brings unto us
salvation, yt is, when we trust unto gods promesses, and believe stedfastlye,
that for Christ his son sake, our sins are forgeuen us. Traditions,
whereunto the minds of men are bounden, are not to be received: To have Images
in ye churches, is a thing full of danger, for Idolatry: Baptism is a sign
of the league, that god has made with us, whereby he testifies yt he forgeueth
our si^nes. It is a sign also of continual mortifying, and of a new life,
which ought to follow Baptism. That this Sacrament ought to be received of al
men, and not somuche as little children to be kept from the same, which are
also partakers of the godly promission. There ought no vow to be made, that is
either besides Gods word, or else cannot be performed by man: How every
man ought daily to confess his sins unto God, and crave his mercy: moreover,
if any scrupulositie trouble his conscience, to axe counsel of the minister of
the church, for his comfort and consolation. But that Auricular confessinge of
Sins, has neither testimonye of Scripture, nor yet can be performed, but
is a tormentynge of the mind right peryllous: Of the perpetual virgynitye of
our Lady, he nothing doubts. Concerning all these things, a few days
before he stood forth, he wrote unto his wife, and to others of his friends,
that required this of him, using the service of his sister. And when he was
condemned to dye, he aduertiseth his wife in an other letter, with what kind of
punnishmenthe should end his life the next day, and also comfort her,
showing her, that the condicyo^ of a disciple, ought not to be better than his
masters, and gives her certain instructions and precepts of living. The
divines of Paris had made decrees of relygion two years past as before is
recyted. And now by A conuentio^ of divines at mellon.
the kings commandment, they mete at Mellon, which is a Town in an Island of
Seine, ten miles above Paris. The king was thereby in the Castle of Fountain
blewe, and had commanded them to assemble, that forasmoche as peace was
concluded, and the counsel should shortly ensewe, they might after
consultatyon had, resolve upon such artycles, for the Church expediente as
might be thought mete to be defended, in the counsel, and publycke Show place
of al Chrystendome. The end of which consultatyon was this, that allbeit the
altercation among them was great, yet would they alter no jot of those
things, which they had before setfoorth at Paris. After the example of the
Parisia^s, the Divines of Louaine also draw out articles, and after, by
Themperoures permission, set them forth, The Articles of Lovayne.
to the number of.xxxii. of the same sect for all the world, as be the
Parysyans before rehearsed. Those does ye Emperor by his proclamatyon
confyrme and ratyfye, publyshynge his letters thereof the day before the Ides
of March. The Divines writ, how they took this pain the more wyllyngly,
for that they knew the same should be well accepted of The Emperor, who had
hertofore required of the^ a much like thing. In the composytion of the
pease, it was agreed, that The Emperor and the French King, should to the
vttermoste of their power, restore the old Relygyon, as they term it: And
those things that we have now recyted, seem to tend to the same end. And
the Cardinal of Tournon, which went with the Duke of Orleans into Flanders,
is thought to have furthered much that matter. But Luther answers them of
Louain with contrary theames, Luther answers the^ of Louayne.
and calls them heretics, and bludsuckers, who teaching wicked things,
that can neither be defended by reason nor scripture, do ad to vyolence, and
persecute with fire and sword: For both they and also the Parysians propounde
only bare propositions, and prescribe what they will have followed, but
allege no place of Scripture to prove it, and incense the magistrate to
persecution. The assembly of Thempire was than at Woormes. Themperoure being
diseased of An Assemble at worms.
the gout, was long or ever he came: He had their his deputes, the Cardinal
of Auspurge, and Fridericke Counte^ of Furstemberg. The xxiiii. day of March,
king Fernando, in Themperours absence, propounds. Wherefore this conuention is
called, verily for the establyshyng of relygion, the law, and peace, and for
the Turkisshe war. He shows how Themperoure wysshed to have been here in
person, but has been let hitherto by reason of syckenes, and yet intends
to come, so soon as he has recovered health. And because he will not longer
hinder the common consultation, therefore has he required him to commence the
thing, chieflye concerning the Turkishe war, for the which cause
Themperoure made peace with the French king, to thentente that all things
being pacyfyed, relygyon may be quyeted and reformed, and after, all force
and power be prepared against the Turk. And after he has declared what
travel The Emperor has ever taken to procure a counsel, first with Clement
the.vii. at Bononie, after with Paul the. iii, at Room, Genes Nice Luke, and
now lately at Busset. And because it is now brought to pass, and already in
hand at Trente, Themperours advise is, not to treat of Relygyon in this
Conuention, but to attend upon the procedynge of the counsel, or if there
shall be none, than before the end of this assemblye, to appoint an other
conuocatyon of Thempyre for the same pourpos. But now requires them especially
to co^sult of the Turkishe war: For he is aduertysed by sundry letters and
messengers that the Turk is coming into Hongary with a greater power tha^
ever he did, to thentente he may after invade Germany. Let them co^sulte
therefore, whether they think it mete to move war against him or defend
only, and what they shall determyne, to signifye the same to themperoure, who
has persuaded the bishop of Rome and the French king to the Society of this
war, and trusts also ye others will The Protesta^tes make answer.
not be behynd. Whereunto the protestants, and with them also the archbishop of
Collon and the Palsgraue electour, the third day of April make this answer.
How this co^uentio^ was appointed chiefly for religion: and how yt in fourmer
conue^tions an entry and access has be^ made to come unto an agreement. And
therefore is there more hope now yt they should wholly accord. Wherefore they
would right gladly begin first with that matter and the state of Germany does
require, it should be so, who if the fear of God be before their eyes, they
doubt not to have good success. Howbeit, if either the weightines of the
thing, or the shortness of time, or else the present danger of the Turk, will
not permit it: yet shall it be needful that the decree concerning peace be
further declared: For peace is in deed granted to religion until the
counsel, but they do not acknowledge this counsel of Trent for a lawful
counsel, The counsel of Tre^t unlawful.
such as has been promised in the cou^selles of thempire: And why they do not
accept it, they have often times heretofore declared. Therefore have they need of
peace, who do not depend of the popish counsel, which may take place, til
ye matter be godly and christia^ly, determined. And because a firm peace can
not be had, except the execution of the law were ministered indifferentli: and
how that should be don, it was in the last conuention at Spier decreed. They
for their parts are ready to accomplissh the same: Therefore if these two parts
may be decided they will not refuse to consulte of the Turkisshe war. The
rest of the princes and states, among whom were the archebisshopes of The
devise of the popish Princes.
Mentz and Treuers, do determine, that the case of religion shall be referred to
the counsel already sommoned, and the chamber to be establisshed according to
the ancient laws of thempyre, and judgment to be given after the law
written: and that certain should be chosen out of the whole number to confer
of the Turkish war. To that of the Protestants, king Fernando and the
Emperors deputes make answer, how the decree made at Spier touching peace,
pleased them well enough than without exception, where as the counsel was that
time called, and should begin shortly after: In to the Senate of the Chamber
also, should mete men be received, according to the decree made at Spier. And
seeing it is thus, reason would that they should require no more, but confer
with the rest of the Turkyshe war. They again say, how it was inacted at
Spier, first that there should be no troubled move for Relygion, secondlye,
that this dissension should be accorded, through a godly and friendly
disputation. For upon this foundation rests the peace of Germanye, neither
would they have found any lack at all, if the matter might thus have
remained. But now, inasmoche as the Bishop has called a counsel, to let
and disturb this reconcilement, wherein he alone with his adherentes, has
power to determyne, by whose decree also, most men affirm, that the foormer
pacification should be finished, they have need of a further assurance: how
they have evermore refused, and that by solemn protestation, the Bisshoppes
counsel, and have many years since set forth books declaryng the causes of
the same. Now albeit there were non exception made of this thing at Spier, yet
in case they should have war with the Turk, it is requisyte, that first all
things be quiet at home? For the people must pay monye to this war. But by
what equity, or by what countenance can a man exact money of his commons,
unless he put them in a sure hope, that they with there wives and children
shall live safely at home in their Religion. For even for this cause do they
war against the Turk, that every man's goods, the common wealth, and true
religion may be co^serued: But to war with the Turk, and in the mean season
to be in danger at home what great differente is betwixt these two. Therefore
have they just cause to demand a further suerty: Concerning the chamber, they
are contented, as they have said, that it be established according to the
decree of Spier: And touchi^g the charges of the same, they will consult with
the rest. They contended about these things from the beginning of April, til
it was the.vii. day of May. And than, hearing, that The Emperor had taken his
journey, king Fernando differred the^ till his coming, and also required them
in the mean time to consult with the residew, of the turkish matters. The
princes were not there present, neither Protestants nor catholyckes save only
the Cardinal of Auspurge. The French king sent thither his ambassador,
Grinian, Grinian the French ambassador.
the governor of the province in France. In whose absence, arrose great
persecution in those parties. There be in the French province a people called
Ualdois. They of an aunciente custom, do not acknowledge the bishop of Rome,
and have had always somewhat a more The Ualdois.
pure doctrine, and after that Luther flourished, got unto the^ gredely a more
ample knowledge. For this cause were they often co^playned upon to the king, as
though they conte^ned the magistrate, and would make a rebellion. For this kind
of accusation many use now a days, more odious than true. There is of them
certain Towns and Uillages, among the which Merindolum is one. Sentence was
given against the^ five years paste at Aignes, which is the high judgment place
of the The cruel sentence at Aygnes.
province, that all should be destroyed without respect, that the house should
be pulled down and the village made eue^ plain with the ground, the trees also
should be cut down and the place made altogether a desert. Howbeit though it
were thus pronounced, yet was it not tha^ put in execution, by the means of
certain men that persuaded, the king to the contrary, and among the^, William
Bellaye, who was at the same time the kings Lieutenaunt in Piedemount: But at
ye last, this year the.xii. day of April, John Miners, president of the counsel
at Aygnes, John Myners.
calling the senate, reads the kings letters, commanding the^ to execute yt
sentence given. Which letters, this Miners had obtained by the means of
cardinal Tourno^, through a fyt sollicitour, Philip Cortin. The Cardinal of
tournon.
Therefore where he received the^ in ye month of Januarie, he showed them not
by and by, but kept them for a time convenient to work the feate. When the
letters were red, certain of the Senate were chosen to execute the matter: when
the Presidente Miners promised to assist, Miners presidente of Aygwes.
for that in the absence of Grmian the gouernoure of the Province, he ruled the
commonwealth. Now had he every where by the kings commandment mustered men
before, for Thenglish wars, but he used them for this his pourpos: Moreover
at Marselles, Aygnes, Arles, and other great Towns, he took up all that were
able to wear armure. He leuieth a power against the Ualdois.
Then had he aid sent him out of Auingnon and the places there aboutes of
the Bishop of Rooms dominion. Wherefore the first impression was made, not
upon the Merindolanes, but on the country about the Town of Peruse. And at
the Ides of April Miners, guarded with a company of nobles, and captains,
comes to Cadenet: but in the mean season, certain Centurious set upon a
village or two by the River of Druence, and there distroying al with slaughter,
spoilyng and fyrynge, drive away a great number of Cattle. The like also did
others in sondrye places at the same time. The Merindola^es seeing all burn
round about them, leave their houses and flee in to The merindolans flee into
the woods.
the wooddes, and with a wonderful fear rest alnight at the vilage of
Sanfalese. And than were the inhabiters there ready to fly also. For the
Bishop of Cauallon, deputy to the Bishops Legate, had appointed certain
captains to go and slaie them. The next day, theygo a little further, and
hide them selves in the woods: For there was danger on every side, and Miners
had commanded under pain of death, that no man should aid them with any
thing, but that they should be slain without redemption, whersoeuer they
were found. The same proclamation was of force also, in the Bishop of Rooms
dominions thereby, and it is said, how the Bisshops of that Country did find
a great part of that army. Wherefore they went a werye and a paynefull Jorney,
carrying their children upon their shoulders, and in their Arms, and in their
swaddling clothes, and that did many women great with child. And when they
were comme^ to the place appointed, thither was already resorted a great
number which had lost their goods, and saved themselves by flight. Not long
after it was showed them, how Miners came with all his power to give the
charge upon them. This was in the evening. And because they must go through
rough and combrous places, they take counsel to leave there behind the women,
and children, and a few others to keep with them, and among them the
ministers of the church: the residew were appointed to go to the Town of
Mussie. And this did they upon hope, that the enemy would show mercy, to the
multitude A lamentable departing.
of women and children, being destitute of all succor. What sighs there were
fetched, what imbracynges, and what lamentation, every man may easily
perceive. When they had gonne al night long, and passed over the great hill of
Leberon, they might see many Uillages and Fermes set on sire. After this
Minerius diuidyng his army into two parts Marches him self with the one
toward the Town of Merindolum: And having knowledge by espiall, which way
the Meriudolans were fled, sends the other part of his army to hunte them
out. Before they came into the wood, one of the soldiers moved with pity,
runs before, and from the top of an high Rock, where he judged that the
Merindolanes satte underneath, he casts A soldioure, gives them warning.
down two stones, and afterward calls unto them, though he could not see
them, that they should immediately flee from thence. And at the self same time,
came two of those that went to Mussie, to show them that their enemies
approached, and so cause the minister, and the resydew of them that were leaft
with the women, to Run their ways, showing them a narrow way through the
wood, whereby they might escape all danger. These were not so soon gone, but
the Soldiers came straight ways in a great Rage, and drawing out their
swords, with a great outcrye, bad kill these Heretics. Nevertheless they
seeing no men among them, absteyned from slaughter at that time. But when they
had done great outrage, and spoiled them of their money and vittayle, they
lead them away. Their pourpos was to have handled them more shamefully, but
being let by a Captain A Captain defends the women.
of horsemen, which coming in the mean time, threatened the^ with
punisshment, and commanded them to go straight way to Miners, they forsake
that filthye enterprise, and leauinge the women, drive a way their botye and
cattle. The women were in number about five hondreth. In the mean season
Miners came to Merindolum, and fyndyng it without dwellers, spoyleth and
sets it on fire, showing before A cruel fact of Miners.
that one very cruel example. For fyndyng there one young man, he commanded
that he should be tied to an Olive tree and shot in with dagges. After he
goes to the town of Cabrier, and battereth Cabrier yielded.
it with his ordenaunce, and using the service of Captain Polyne, that
brought in the Turks navy, he persuades the Towns men, to open their gates,
promisyng that they should have no harm. But a while after when the soldiers
were let in, they were all slain, without respect had, either of age or of
womankynde. Many fled into the Church, and some to other places, diverse in to
the wine sellar of the Castle. But being brought forth into a meddowe and
stripped naked, they were slain each one, not men only but also women great
with child. Miners also shuts a fourtye women in a barn A terryble example
of crueltye.
full of straw and hey, after sets it a fire and burns it: And where the
sely women put of their clothes therewith to have quenched the fire, and when
they could not, ran to the great window, whereat the hey is wont to be cast
into the Barn to have lopen out: but there being kept back with pickes and
Iauelyns they were burnt all together: this was the.xx. day of April. This
done, Miners sent part of his army to win the town of Cost: wha^ they
were marching on their way, they were found out, who I told you a little
before, were fled into the wine sellar of the Castle. Whereupon was Raised an
outcry, and as though there had been, treason the soldiers are called back,
and distroy them all. The nombre of them that were slain within the Town and
without, were about eight hondreth. The infantes that escaped their furye,
were baptized again of their enemies. When all things were dispatched at
Cabrier, there was sent a power to Costa: The lord of that Town had denysed
with the Citezens before, that they should carry all their armure into the
Castle, and cast down their walls in four sundry places: If they would do
this, he promises them to obtain of Miners and that easelye, that there
shall be no displeasure wroughte there. They beeinge persuaded, follow his advise,
after he departs, as it were to entreat for them, and going not far, he
meteth with the soldiers: They march one notwithstanding, and the first day
they were yet repulsed: The next day they assault it with a great violence, and
having burned all the suburbs about it, take it easily for that the night
before many escaped over the walls by cords. After the slaughter committed,
they ran into an orchard by the Castle, and there the women and maids that
were fled thither for fear, they rauissh every one, and when they had kept
them there enclosed a day and a night, they handled them so beastely, that
those that had great belyes, and the younger maidens, dyed shortly after. In
the mean season the Merindolanes, and diverse others, that wandered in the
woddes and mountains, being intercepted, were either sent to the Galeis, or
slain, many also dyed for honger: Moreover, not far from the Town of Mussie
before named, certain went and hid themselves in a cave under a rock, to the
number of. xxv, but being bewraied, they were smothered with smoke and burnt
all: so that no kind of cruelty was omitted. Nevertheless diverse, which had
escaped this bouchery, came unto Geneua, and other places nere. Therefore when
report hereof was bruted in Germany, it offended the minds of many: And in deed
the Swyses, which The Swisses entreat for the Ualdois.
were not of the popisshe relygion, entreated the king, that he would show
mercy to such as were fled: but the King says, how there was just cause for
him to do as he did, neither ought they to be more careful what he does
within his dominions, or how he punishes offenders, than he is about their
affairs. In the year before these men A sharp answer of the king.
had sent to the king a confession of their doctrine comprysed in writing.
Whereof yt articles were of god the father, creator of al things, of the son
mediator and advocate of mankind, of the Holy spirit, the comforter and
instructour of all treweth, of the church, which they The confession of the
Ualdois doctrine.
say is the fellowship of all gods elect, whereof Jesus Christ is head: of the
ministers of the church, whom they would should be removed, unless they do
their dewty: of the magistrate, whom they grant, to be ordained of God, to
defend the good, and to punnysh the transgressors. And how they owe him not
love only but also tribute, and custom, and no man herein to be excepted, even
by the example of christ who paid tribute him self: of baptism, which they
say is a visible and an outward sign, that represe^teth unto us the renewyng
of the spirit, and the mortifycation of the members: of the Lords supper,
which they say, is a thanks giving, and a memory all of the benefit received
through Christ: of matrimony, which being holy and instituted of god, ough to
be inhibited to no man, of good works, which they say, we must observe and
exercise, as holy scripture teaches: of false doctrine, which, because it
leads us a way from true worshippyng, they say, it ought to be eschewed:
to be brief, the order and rule of their faith, they affirm to be the old
and new Testamente, and do protest that they believe all those things, that
are contained in the creed of the Apostles. Finally, they desire the king to
give credyt to this declaration: for incase he be otherwise informed, it is not
true, and that they say they will prove, if they may be heard. That time was
the king occupied with affairs of war, and therefore the matter slept: but
when peace was made, it was renewed, and through the prouocatio^ of many,
brought to this wonderful cruelty. I showed before of the Spaniardes, whom
The Emperor had placed in Lorayne for the winter season. They, after they had
wrought much evil in those parties, by Themperours commandment depart
thence in the month of April, and trauelyng by Strasburge, when they had
there passed over the Rhm, they go through Sweuia into Austriche, about three
thousand footmen. At this time ended his life, Lewis the Duke of Bauier, the
brother of Wyllyam, having no children. For so it was accorded, that he should
not marie, for the keeping together The death of Jews Duke of Bauier.
of thinheritaunce. The Duke of Brunswicke and he were exceadyng great friends:
For they were the chief captains of the league that was devised against the
protesta^tes: And when Henry of Bru^swicke was driven out of his country, he
fled first unto him. After this, the.xvi. day of May came The Emperor to
Worms. And the next day after, Cardinal Farnesius: What was the cause of his
coming, Cardinal Farnesius his coming to worms.
I am not able to say, but it was thought for certentie, that he came to styre
up war against the Lutheranes: He did nothing openly, and coming from
Room, he passed not through the land of Wirtemberge, but when he had stayed
a time at Dilling, a Town of the Cardinals of Auspurge upon the River of
Danubius, he turned an other way. King Fernando had written to the Duke of
Wirtemberge, that for his sake he would let him pass sassye, and show all the
favor that might be: he made answer that he had rather, he would take some
other way, nevertheless, to do him pleasure, if he were disposed to pass
that way, he would not let him. But he, as I said, took an other way, and
came to Worms, one day after the emperor. Themperoure, so soon as peace was
made with the French king, solicited other princes also to further and help
forewarde the Counsel. And for this cause only sent ambassadors to the king
of Themperours Ambassador to the king of Poole.
Polle requyring him to send his deputes to the counsel of Trente: who
among other things said, that for asmoche as The Emperor supposed, how the
Protestants, which had been even stubburne, would not forsake the confession of
their doctrine, exibited at Auspurge nor also obey the publycke decrees of the
counsel, the thing it self required, that kings and princes should take the
matter in hand, and if they do not obey, to be avenged on them, as the
disturbers of the publycke weal: and all godly relygion. And where as he,
among others, has the comendation of a godly and a christian king,
Themperoure prays him, to think upon the Turkisshe war, subcribe to the
counsel of Trente, and if the Protestants will not beframed to amendment, to
assiste him with his aid and counsel, as also other kings have promised. The
king of Polle again made au^swer, how he desired that he might see that day,
when chrystian kings and The kings answer to the emperor
Princes, all ciuille war and discord laid a part, should bend their
whole power at ones against the Turk: For then would he be none of the last.
And as concerning the counsel and the Protesta^tes, he will do all things
that may profit the publycke weal and tra^quillitie of the church, neither
if need repuyre, will in great danger fail Themperoure his Friend and alie.
The same time it was The pope most desirous of war.
written from Rome, how the Bishop, notwithstanding that he had called a
Counsel, and sent his Legates thither, was so desirous of war against the
Lutheranes, that hereunto he promised aid of. xii thousand footmen, and five
hondreth horsemen. And that priuelye, also he hired Centurions and Captains.
And when it was showed him again, how the time was far spent, and no great
good could be done that year, and how they must tarry for some better occasyon,
he declared the same immediately to his captains, and put them in hope of the
next year following. On the morrow after the feast of Pe^tecost, A friar
obseruaunte, stireth The^peroure to war.
a Friar obseruaunt, an Italian, made a sermon before The Emperor, king
Fernando, Cardinal Farnesius, the Bishop of Auspurg and Granuellan, and in his
sermon making a digression to the Lutherans when he had inueyhed much and
spoken dispitefully against the^, it is time no we, says he, most victorious
Emperor, that at the last you do your office: certainly it has been delayed
over long: for the thing should have been don long since. God has blessed you
with many great gifts, and ordained you defendour of his church. Wherefore
extend your power and dispatche out of the way that pestiferous sort of
men: For it is not lawefull for them any longer to behold the son, which do
thus pollute and confound althynge: Neither say that you will do it: For it
should have been done already, already I say, and long syns: therefore may there
be no longer delay. For how many thousand people do you think to be in danger
of everlasting salvation, through their madness? All the which God shall require
at your hands, unless you find the remedy. It is said how Granuellan was
much offended with this Trompete, either for that he feigned so, or else for
that he saw, how it was a warning to the Protestants. Not many days after
this sermon, Farnesius departs secretly by night, and retourneth to Rome with
great expedition. In these days Luther setforth a book in the vulgar toungue
entitled against Luthers book against the Pope.
the Bisshoprycke of Room ordained by Satan, in the which book he answers
first to the Bysshoppes letters, whereby with so vehement words, he diswadeth
Themperoure from the reformation of relygion, like as you have heard before.
After those places of scripture, which the Bishop does usurp to establyshe
his supremacy, he confuteth most abundantly, and applies them to make
against him. Before the book he set a picture, which by and by declares the
so^me of the argument. The Bishop sytteth in an high chair, with his hands
joined and stretched out in solemn apparel, but he has ass ears: And
about him are many deuelles, of diverse shapes, whereof some set a triple crown
upon his head, with a tourde in the top of it: others let him down by cords
into hell under neth him, hortyble to be hold, some bring wood and colle:
others as right seruyceable, stay his feet that he may descend rightly and
softely. Not long after came forth certene theames of his, which he had
heretofore disputed of the three gouermentes, Ecclesiastical, politycke and
Oeconomike. Luthers themes of three gouernmentes.
Which he says God has ordained against the furye of the Devil: but he
utterly excludes the Bishop from all these, for that he condemns and
oppresses the Gospel, for that he brings, under his subjection all laws,
and even the civil law: And in asmoche as he forbids matrymony to whom it
pleases him. Therefore he calls him the beast, which is named in Germany of
the bear The wild beast.
and the wolf together. There is nothing, says he, more fierce and cruel
then she. Wherefore when a token is given, and that she is once heard of,
streyghte ways all men get them to their weapons to the intent they may kill
her: And if hapely she should take a cave or any enclosure, and governor or
Judges of the soil, would exempte her; or also defend her, she should be
persecuted notwithstanding, and he that should let or disturb the hunters
might be slain lawefully. After the self same sort, must the Bishop be
resysted, if he do attempt and move war, like a wyld and a rauenyng beast,
with what aid someuer he is mayneteyned. For they that will serve or help a
thief, ought to look for the reward of the thing which they deserve. Tha^
did he also send forth an other picture, very fond in deed, but yet as it
were a prophesye of the thing to come. The Bishop in his prelates apparel
sits upon a great sow with many dugges, which he Luthers picture against
the Pope.
diggeth in with his spurs: having two fyngers of his right hand next his
thume stretched right up as the manner is, he blesses such he chances to
mete with: In his left hand he holds a new smokinge tourde, at the smell
whereof the sow lyfteth up her snowte, and with her wide mouth and nose
thirlles catches after her pray: but he in derysion, blamyng the beast full
bytterly, I shall ride thee, says he, with my spurs, whether thou wylt or not. Thou haste troubled me long about a counsel, that thowe myghtest rail
on me at thy pleasure, and accuse me franckelye. Behold now, this same is
that counsel, that thou so greatly desyrest: by the sow he sygnifyeth
Germany. These tryfles of his, many mentaunted, as unseemly for him, and not
verey modest: But he had his reasons why he did so, and was thought to have
had a greater foresyghte in things. And certainly in his books are diverse and
sundry prophecyes, whereof the end prooved some true, the residew as yet are
in the hand of God. In the mean season Themperoure takes order with
Granuellan and Nauius to be in hand with the protestants touching the counsel
and the Luther a prophet.
Turkish war: but after long decision nothing could be concluded. Grinian
the french Ambassador, for because he understood not the latin tongue,
conprysed his matter in writing, and uttered it by an The ignorance of Grinian.
interpretour, the.xx. day of June: the sum of this oration was to exhort
them al to the counsel. This Grinian was a nere friend to the Cardinal of
Tournon who is thought to have been the occasyoner of this Ambassade, for he had been with Themperoure at Brusselles, as I said before, and had treated of
matters concerning the counsel. And than was it thus agreed, that the king
should send an Ambassador, to exhort them to the counsel, which Themperoure
and he had already approved: for this was thought to be a mean to make the
Protestants afraid. At this time dies Fraunces Duke of Lorayne, leaving
behind him a young son: Charles, a child of two The death of Fraunces Duke
of Lorayne.
years old. The Duke had a brother called Niclas Bishop of Mentz between him
and the childs mother Christien, Themperours Nece, arrose a contention about
the wardeshyp: All the Nobility favored him more, and lothed the woman's
government, but through The^perours mediation, they were both appointed
gardins, yet so, as the mothers authorytie was chiefest. In those days also
departs the Daughter of Ferdina^do, which was married two years before to the
son of Sigismunde king of Polle. But out of Spain was brought The birth of
Charlesso^ns to king Philyp.
glad tydinges, of the birth of Charles Themperoures Nephewe, the son of
king Philip, for the which cause the Spaniardes made great Joy at worms:
But a few days after came word that the mother of the child was dead. To
Themperoure being at Worms came the Marquis of Piscare, and brought with him
certain of the chief inhabiters of Millan. It was thought, how The Emperor was
than determined to marye the Daughter of King Fernando to the Duke of Orleans,
and therefore had sent for these men to understand the state of Lumbardie,
which he had promised to give him for her dowarye. Whylest Themperoure held
this assembly, the Duke of Brunsewicke goes to the French king. That time
did Fridericke Rifeberge levy a certain power of footmen, in the Borders of
Saxony for the king of England: Henry of Brunswicke espying that occasion,
promyseth and persuades the french king, that incase he will give him money,
he shall easily find the means to scatter the^ again. And so gets of him
certain thousands of Crowns: but he neither The Duke of Brunsewicke gets
monye of the French king.
let Rifeberge, and converted the monye received, to war against the
Protestants, as shall be declared herafter. Unto this conuentyon came no Princes
as I said before, but after The^peroure was there, the Paulsgraue Electoure
came also, and at the request of the Protestants, makes intercession. But
when The Emperor saw, how they would grant nothing to the Turkisshe war,
unless they obtained their request concerning the counsel and the chamber,
he sends an Ambassadoure to the Turk for trewes, Gerarde Ueltuniche, a man
Themperoure takes truce with the Turk.
very well learned, and expert in toungues. During this conuention, the
Senate of Mentz makes inquirye after such as by the old custom, had not
received at Easter, and banisshed them the Town, that were found herein
culpable. I showed you before how the clergy and University of Collon had
appealed to Themperoure and bishop, The clergy and university of Collo^
against their Archbishop
that they might hereby hinder thenterprises of their Archebisshop: but where
he still proceeded, and would not displace the preachers and ministers of the
church which thing they chiefly required, they renew their suit to
Themperoure, making of him a grievous complainte. Therefore about the end of this
conuention, Themperoure by his letters published at Worms, receives them into
his tuitio^, and charge al men under the pain of outlawyng, that no man
disturb Temperourciteth the archbishop.
the^ in their religion, right or possession. Again in other letters he cites
the archebisshop, that within.xxx. days he come him self or send his proctour
to answer to the accusations. And in the mean time commands, that he
intermeddle not, nor alter any thing, and if he have changed ought, to
restore it to his old place. The same commandment also gives he to the
Townesemen of Andernake, Bonna, Lyntz and Campene: for in these places chyefly
had the Archebisshop appointed Preachers to instruct the people. Again
the.xviij. day of Iulye, Paul the.iii. cites him after the same manner, that
The Pope cites the archbishop of Colon.
within two months he appear before him at Room: he cyteth also Henrye
Stolberge Dean of the Cathedral Church in Collon, and his Colleges, which
were all of noble houses, James Ringraue, Fryderycke Weden, Chrystopher
Oldenburge, Rychard Rauier and Phylyp Obersten: For these both loved the
Archbishop, and allowed not the suite of the rest. The Bishop of Room had
diverse years paste mislyked much the Archebisshop, which was chiefly long
of Uergeryus Bishop of Instinople, who being Ambassador in Germany and
coming on a time to Collon, when he heard that he was about the reformation
of his church, he rebuked him sore both by words and letters, and accused
him when he came at home. After long disceptation concerning peace, the
Chamber, and the Turkish war, Themperoure, the fourth day of August makes
an end of pleadynge. And because many things could not be here determined,
unless the Princes had been present themselves, he prorogeth the whole treaty
until the month of Ianuarye next followyng, and than commands all the
Princes to come to Regenspurge, unless they be let by syckenes: and says
he will be there him self: And forsomuche as he desires, that the
controuersye in relygion might once be accorded, he appoynteth an other
conference of learned men, and four collocutours on either side, and two
auditors, commaundynge them to be at Regenspurge at the kalendes of December
and to begin the matter before the assemblye of Princes shall repair
thither. Then he recyteth the decrees of peace of the fourmer years, and
confirms them, commanding that no man attempt any thing The decre of Auspurg.
to the contrary: After he takes order how the money granted in the year
before to the Turkysshe war, should be leuyed and reserved, the reformation
of the Chamber he differreth till the next conuention. That part concerning
the conference of Learned men the Catholyckes refuse, neither would they assent
to Themperoure herein: the rest they do not refuse. But the Protestants do
repete the fourmer treatye, and say that the fault is not in them, that they
had not treated of Relygyon, and that they had said before touching the
refusal of the Counsel, and the Chamber they infer agayue, and urge the
decree of Spyer made the last year, and where as this decree of Themperoures
dissenteth from that, they proteste that they do not admit the same. How the
ambassadors of the protestants followed themperoures camp the year past,
and how the emperor differred it till an other time, I showed you before.
Whersore in this assembly the matter was thoroughly determined upon conditions
before mentioned. And when the duchy of Brunswicke was by sequestration
permitted to the emperor, he by and by commands Henry ye duke to try the
matter by the law, and abstain from force of arms: but he will not assente
thereunto, and hereof makes protestation: And what time themperoure again
charge him extremelye under the The frowardenes of the Duke of Brunswick.
pain of outlawing, that he should obey thorder taken, he not only disobeyed
it, but also wrote again bitterly, and raileth upon his counselors,
especyally Granuellan, and Nauius, and not content herewith secretly began to
gather men, that he might recover that he had lost, as a little after you
shall hear. Themperoure goes down the River of Rhine from Worms to Collon:
And from thence retourneth to Brusselles. The Bishop of Collon being cyted to
appear before Themperoure, where soever he were, or to send his Proctour
within.xxx. days, Albeit that for the old custom of Germany, and by the
priuelege of the Princes Electours, he was not bounden to seek the^peroure
without the limits of thempire, yet sent he thither his proctour, which
should defend him. That time was the war hot betwirte France and England:
And was mayneteyned as well by sea as by land. And the French king with much
a do builded a forte, The warr^ of France and England.
nere unto Bologne, upon the Sea coast, intending to cut of their vitayle: And
was driueu to find an Army there, till the work was finisshed, which
nevertheless was at the first disco^sited with a great deal less power of
the Englissh men through the co^duite of the Earl of Herforde, and lost their
tents and caryage. And it grieved the protesta^tes to see these two kings at
such mortal war together, which so many years before had been at peace.
Wherefore knowing that it The Protestants send Ambassadors into France and
England.
should not be displeasaunte to neither party: They send Ambassadors, into
France, Christopher Ueninger, John Bruno of Nidepo^t, and John Sturmius: Into
England, Lewis Bambache, and John Sleidan. Who coming to Amiens the tenth day
of September, hear there of the death of ye Duke of Orleans which was departed
ye day before. He should have been either son inlaw or allied to the emperor, as
before is declared, and as it were a most sure bond of perpetual friendship.
But The death of the duke of Orleau^ce.
what time the marriage was in manner appointed to be kept, he died of a short
sickness being a young man of.xxiii. years of age. At the self same time Duke
Henrye of Brunswicke being furnisshed with the The army of the Duke of
bru^swick.
French gold, as before is said, hyreth bands of soldiers as secretly as he
can. Which after they were assembled besides Uerded, about a thousand and
five hundredth horsemen, and eight thousand footmen. He goes to Rotburge, a
Town belonging to the city of Breme that he might join the munition of his
brother Archebisshop of Breme, and his own to gether, but that labor was
lost: For the Senate of Breme had sent thither before, men to defend the
place. Marchynge therefore through the country of Luneburge, where he did much
hurt by the way, he comes into his own province and takes the Castle
Ste^brucke by composition, after he works much mischief in the country,
spoylyng and fyreyng the houses: And sends word to the Cities next him as
Brunswicke, Hanobrye, Minden, Breme, and Hamburge, that they should recompense
him for the iniutyes done, and forsake the conspiracy of Smallcald, for so it
was his pleasure to call it, or else he threateneth the^ with utter destruction.
And other force of his about eight hundredth horsemen, and three thousand
fotmen, whau they had spoiled and burned the country of County Deckelburge, a
fellow of the Protesta^tes, and done much harm, they passed over the river of
Uisurge, and join themselves unto him. Wherefore he goes, and besegeth
Warolbuttell the chief castle of his dominion, and constrayneth the people in
all places to give him their says by an oath. In the meanetyme, the
Lantzgraue, at the commandment of The Lantzgraue goes against him
his fellows, gathers in his own country, to the nombre of seven thousand
men, and three enseignes of foot men, and about a thousand and six hundredth
horsemen. With this power, and with.xxiii. pieces of ordenau^ce, he marches to
Northeme, thither came unto him duke Ernest of Brunswicke, the son of Philip,
sent by the Duke of Saxon, with a thousand horsemen, and three thousand
footmen, and six thousand of them that were leuyed in his owe dominyon, and
with xii. field pieces. When the Duke of Brunswicke understood this, leavynge
the syege of the Castle, which the garrison within defended manfullye, he
turned an other way, and scrapynge together all the monye he might get,
pays the soldiers, which were ready to slyppe aside, and after marchynge
forward, encampeth himself at Calfelde, which Uillage was a mile from the
Lantzgraues camp. In this troublesome state Duke Ericus of Brunswicke and his
mother a wydowe, John Marquis of Brandenburge, son inlawe to Duke Henry, with
certain others entreat for peace. But the Lantzgraue and the Saxons say, how
they can do nothing herein but by the consent of their fellows. Therefore do
they make suite to duke Moris praying him to persuade the Lantzgraue his father
inlaw. He follows their request, and when he came into the Camp, the Duke
Moris entreats a peace.
xvi. day of October, he propounds the whole matter, and desires that he
might be permytted to treat the peace. But the Lantzgraue excuses the
matter as he did before. The next day certain bands of Horsemen of the Duke
of Brunsewyckes came nere unto Northeme, and skermyshed with the Lantzgraues
Horsemen, but being repulsed with shot, they return into their Camp. The
same day at night. Duke Mauryce sollyciteth again, the Lantzgraue. And for
because he has promised Duke Henrye and his friends to take pains in the
thing, he desires to have some condycyons propounded, which if Duke Henry
shall refuse, he may honestly leave the matter. The Lantzgraue than
propounds such condicyons, as there was no doubt but they would be refused.
Duke Morys sends Chrystopher Ebleb and Comerstrate, a Ciuilyan to make him
the offer. In the mean while came word, how the Duke of Brunswycke was
coming with all his power, to get the hille that was nere unto the
Lantzgraues Camp. But the Lantzgraue came first thither, and leaving three
bands of Horsemen and certain enseygnes of Footmen to defend the Camp, he
remoueth his whole Army unto the same Hylle: Not long after they began to
skyrmishe on both parties. Whylest these things were a working, the
Ambassadors of Duke Mauryce return, they show him how A skirmishe betwirte
the Duke and the Lantzgraue
Duke Henrye answered franckly, and commits him self wholly to Duke Moris,
and will no more impugn relygion from henseforth, the matter being debates to
and froe, when Duke Moris was verey ernest, the Lantzgraue shows him how
this is the only way to have peace, that he put in sufficyente warrantyse for
Relygion, that he yield himself into the custodye of Duke Morys, and deliver
his whole province unto him, and look what Duke Morys shall judge him to pay
for the charges of that war, for the harms done, and of the controuersye
betwixt him and the City of Goslarye, the same to be ratifyed, these
condycyons does the La^tzgraue permit that Duke Morys, as intercessoure
shall propounde, which if he will receive, after conference had herin with the
Duke of Saxon and the Cities that be nere, he says shall be concluded. With
this commissyon Duke Morys sends again his Ambassadors: who, whattyme they
returned, bring word that there is good hope, but in this hurly burly and
conflictr together, there can nothing be ryghtly do^ne, and therefore had need of
a trewes during the treatye. Than was it almost night, and by the
Lantzgraues permission, trewes was taken from that time till the next day at
night. In the mean season goes Duke Morys, and talks with the Duke of
Brunswicke, that he might persuade him: But he clean refuses all those
condicyons, and propounds others far unlike them, and in communication The
vanity of the Duke of Brunswick.
with some of Duke Mauryee counselors, within these three hours, says he,
it shall appear, whether the Lantzgraue, or I be Lord of the World, as
Haunyball said to Scipio. He also brake the truse made, geuyng the charge upon
the Lantzgraues forragers. Wherefore, the Lantzgraue hearing, what condicyons
Duke Henrye had propounded, he breaks of all the treatye, and thanked Duke
Moris for his pains, the.xx. day of October the Duke of Bru^swicke by his
counselors, proves, again Duke Moris, and requires that they may mete
again in a conuenyent place betwixt both camps: but the Lantzgraue would not.
Than Duke Moris proclameth war also against the Duke of Brunsewycke, which
thing he told him before, that he would do, unless he agreed of the peace,
sendynge to him his letters from Mulluse. After this when it was far in the
night, the Lantzgraue sent before Conrade Hauste^, with eight guydons of
horsemen, and about twelve thousand footmen, with the ordenaunce: he him
self with the rest of his force follows after, accompanied with the two
Dukes, Moris, and Ernest. When the day began to appear, the forewarde came to
a certain strayte upon the top of an hill not far from the Duke of
Brunswickes camp, after also the Lantzgraue with the resydew of his army. Here
was a sore conflict, and by reason of the straytnes of the place, which could
not be passed but one way only, the fight was a good while doubtefull: But in
that same instant the Lantzgraue shotynge of his Ordenaunce, A conflicte
betwixt the Duke and the La^tzgraue.
repulsed the enemy. After taking delyberation, when they had found other
places also where they might pass through, the La^tzgraue auaunced some part
of his army, and shot among his enemies, with his great pieces. There the
Duke of Brunswicke sends a trompet to Duke Moris, and desires a
comunication: but the Lantzgraue making no answer; first brings through all
his army, than sets them in order of battle, and discharges his pieces at
them. Than again come other two messagers from Duke Henrye, making the like
request: unto whom the Lantzgraue made answer that other condition of peace
was there none, but that the Duke and his eldest son must come and yield
themselves unto him: If they so do, well and good, if not I will prove, says
he, what I can do: this show him, and conclude briefly. Here goes Duke Moris
in hand again with his father inlawe, all the army says he, is conueyhed
through: Now what hope is thereof peace? I will, says the other, that Henry and
his son shall submit themselves unto me: If they shall refuse, I will try
it by battle. When he had this answer, Duke Moris goes again and speaks
with Brunswicke. But the La^tzgraue nevertheless prepares for the battle,
and still shoutyng of his ordenaunce, approaches nere his enemy, and stays
about five ho^dreth passes from him, and sends word to Duke Morys by
Co^rade Hauste^, how he cannot be in quiet, for that he fears, lest through
occasyon of talk, Duke Henry should escape away, Duke Moris says, how he
must needs tarry till he have spoken with him, and prays him so long to
absteyne. A little while after he retourneth, and shows how Duke Henry with
plentiful tears, be wayleth his myserye, and will render him self and his
son, and desires him, that he would use no cruel words toward him. When
the Duke was commen and his son Charles Uictor, the Lantzgraue said unto
him: If I were in thy power, as thou art now in mine, thou would Duke Henry
and his son yield themselves.
not suffer me to live long. But I will use thee a great deal better, then
by thy deserts: what came into thy mind, that thou would not obey the
Emperor, refusyng the sequestration? for certenlye by this mean, thouhadst
well provided for thee and thine, speaking on this wise, he appoynteth the^ both
unto kepers. But in this mean while, the Lantzgraues army, had like to have
bickered with the enemy, and had not the Lantzgraue and Duke Moris with great
expedition runnen betwixt them, there had been a wonderful slaughter. The Duke
of Brunswickes army, pourposed to depart wholly to gether in one company, but
because there was danger, lest by occasyon they should attempt some new
enterprise, the Lantzgraue follows them, and ouertakyng them upon a plain,
compels the^ that they should tear in pieces their enseignes, and promises
him upon their fydelytie, that they should not serve against him nor his
fellows, within these six months. Than takes he a way from the^, all
their munition, to the number of. xviii, pieces with all that thereunto
belongs, and marching foreward, recouereth the Castle of Ste^brucke, and
swears the people to be true to him, and commands to give God thanks for
the victory. Then he punnisheth John Schamburge, and Otto Ritberg, Earls, for
aydyng his enemy, and so discharging his army, retourneth home. In this time
dies Albert The death of the Cardinal of Mentz.
Cardinal of Mentz, and Sebastian Husestene succedeth him. And the Bishopric
of Maydenburge had John Alberte, his cosen germayne, which was his suffragan
therebe fore. A report was afterward bruted by Duke Maurice, as though with
disceiptefull and captious words, he should have brought the Duke of
Brunswicke into bondage: that known, he sets forth a writing, and
shows for what cause, being required of the Duke of Saxo^ and the Lantzgraue,
he could not deny them, and recyting the whole matter in order, declares
that he sustayneth injury: And yet nevertheless entreats that he may be
delivered: But Luther in a book set forth, exhorts the Princes, that they
would not let go their prisoner: For this victory without bludshed, was given
them of God. And in manner about this time, County William of Furstemberge,
when he Count willyam delivered.
had been prisoner at Paris, until now, paying.xxx. thousand crowns for his
ransom, was delivered, and passing through Flaunders, when he had declared
his mysfortune to Themperoure, retourneth home. Themperoure wylleth him to
espy out some mean, whereby this damage may be recompensed: And herin
promises him his favor and good will. When Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke and
his son were taken, the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzssaue immediately signifye
to the emperor by letters the whole matter: and inasmoch as he, conte^ninge all
his proclamations, had disquieted Germany with a new war, they require, that
both he and his fellows, for breaking the publycke peace, may be outlawed,
after the form and conditions of the Sequestratio^ before conuenaunted. After
this, the last of October, ye The Lantzgraues letters to the^peroure.
Lantzgraue accusing county Ritberge to the emperor, and making mention of the
former letters, when he had made the same request, he says, how after the
Duke of Brunswicke was taken, he found sondrye letters of great importance,
and of secret deuyses in his tents, which show well enough, that he went about
some great mischief, either against him, or king Ferdinando: For among
others, there is an epistle, which a prince electour writes again to him, how
he may not upon such conditions come into that league and co^federacy, but
that it is rather his dewty, to utter such manner of counsel: which doubtless he
would have done, had he not promised him upon his fydelytie to have kept it
close. Wherefore let him move him no more in the matter from henforth, for if he
do, it shall be no counsel: these and such other like things has he to show.
If now he shall think, that anythynge concerns his person, he may send
some trusty man of his, and he shall show him the letters, and let him have a
copy of the same. The Emperor being that time at Bruges a Town in Flaunders,
the syxte day of November sends to the Lantzgraue Nicolaus Conricius with
this Themperoure to the La^tzgraue.
message. He hears, in what sort the Duke of Brunswicke and his son came
into his hands: And albeit he would have wisshed, that he had accepted the
condition of sequestration, yet seeing the matter is common to this point, he
supposes it not needful, to punish him moreover for breakinge the publyke
peace: his trust is also, that he will so moderately use this victory, that no
man shall need to fear his vyolence: he admonyssheth him moreover, that
according to the auncyente custom of Princes, he do entreat his prisoners
quyetlye and honestyle, neither that he enforce them to any unreasonable
condicyon or unworthy for them, but permytte, that the matter may be
frendelye and indifferentlye heard. Wherein verelye he, for his office and
place will omytte nothing: And because neither he nor his confortes need now
to fear any further danger he requires him to dyscharge his Army and
observe peace: And if he have ought to say to any man, for the Socyetye of
war or aid minystred, he would try it by the Law, and he will do herein
that shall be reasonable. When Conricfus had thus declared the.xviii. day of
November, the Lantzgraue the same day au^swered him at Cassels. For as much as
the Duke of Brunswicke and his fellows have more ways than one broken the
imperial decrees, he trusts that Themperoure will plainly declare in how
evil part he takes this their doing: one of the chiefest of his adherentes,
is Otto Earl of Ritberge his client, who^ he has punysshed therefore: therbe
also diverse others, of whom he might justly be avenged: but to thentent
The Emperor and all men should clearly see, how littell he and his fellows
love trouble, he has done nothing to them, and has discharged his soldiers.
And seeing it is thus, and that he took in hand a nedeful defencion, he
desires ernestyle, that Themperoure would bannishe the Duke and his fellows:
for though he be taken, yet are his adherentes to be punyshed notwithstanding
which also will show themselves still like enemies: His prisoners are entreated
metely lyberally: touching the rest he will confer with the Duke of Saxon and
his fellows. The Ambassadors which I told you before, were sent by the
Protestants into France and England, do as they had in commission, but at
the same time also The^peroure sought to make a peace A treaty of peate
beetwirt france and England.
and appointed a day at Bruges, for the Ambassadors of both kings to mete.
And the French king sent Mounser Annebalde the Amirall, and the king of
England, Stephen, Bishop of Winchester: But they could not accord. In the
mean season the Ambassadors of the Protestants wrought so much, that both
the kings were content to have a further treaty. Therefore they send
ambassadors, the French king to Arde, the king of England to Cales and
Guysnes. They mete in the mydde way betwixt Arde and Guysnes the.xxvi. day of
November, in tents pitched in the plain field: And when the Ambassadors of
the Protestants had propounded certain co^dicions of peace, the matter was
long, and much debated betwyxt them. The French me^ would have Bologne
restored, and especially urged that the Scotes might be comprised in the peace.
But both these did the Englishmen utterly refuse. Than was the matter reported
by letters and messagers to either king, but after much entreaty there was
nothing fynisshed. Wherefore the syxte day of January the Ambossadours of the
1546.
kings and Protestants depart, and return home. The next day after the
Frenchemen vitayled their forte, that the king had builded nere unto Bologne.
When the Englisshemen would have let that they fought together and many were
slain on both parties, and after The king of England warns the Protestants
of the danger.
was the fort vitailed. What time these a^mbassadours of the Protestants were
in England, the king by way of communication told them, how they were like
to have a fore and a mortal war: thereof was he most certain: He warned the^
also, to write of the same to their confederates. And after one of his
counselors which was than in high favor, declared as much to one of the
Ambassadors, naming also certain practicioners and messagers, by whose means
chiefly the thing was wrought. Moreover the king seemed to take in marvelous
evil part, that The Emperor had the year before made peace with the French
king, and was so much the more offended, for that as he said he made war with
the French king through his procurement, by reason of the Turkisshe league.
In the month of Ianuarye the Protestants conuented at Frankeforthe, there
they consulted of the counsel of Trente, of augementyng their league, for the
charges of the war of Brunswicke, how they will not forfake the Archebisshop
of Collon, how to solicit The Emperor, in the assembly of the^pire, that he
will grant peace for relygion, and refourme the judgment of the chamber. In
this co^uention the Ambassadors of the archbisshop of Collon complain of the
iniuryes of the Clergy, and of the commandments and citations both of
The Emperor and also of the Bishop of Room. In the mean season the
Paulsegraue prince electour, ordained every where ministers of the church and
preachers The Palsegraue ordeineth ministers in his Churches.
of the Gospel, he permits also the whole supper of the Lord, and the
Marriage of pristes: And the tenth day of January in stead of the Popissshe
Mass, was service said in the head church of Nedelberg, in the Duche tongue.
Wherefore the Protestants, sending an Ambassade, rejoice thereat, and geuinge
him thanks, that he answered the Archebisshop of Collon his Ambassadors so
frankelye: they exhort him also to proceed, and to profess the doctrine
confessed at Anspurge, and to do his endeavor that in the next assemblye at
Regenspurge, the peace and law may be establysshed. Whereunto he answers,
that he has be^ ever desirous of peace, and will be, so long as he lives: for
the Archebisshop of Collo^ he is right sorry, that he is thus molested,
especyally in his old days. Therefore what time they shall send their
Ambassadors to Themperoure, and to the Clergy and Senate of Collon to
entreat for him, he will also send his with them: he had trusted these many
years to have had some agreement in religion: but in as much as he sees how the
matter is daungerously differred, neither is their any great hope, he could
no longer delay the wisshe and expectation of his subjects. Therefore has he
begone a reformatyon of relygion, which he pourposeth to anaunce furthermore,
and to profess it openly. At the seuententh day of Ianuarye, at Wesell mete
the Ambassadors of the Princes electours, which are named of the Rhine, those
be Mentz, Collon, Treuers, and the Paulsegraue or Count Palatyne: for the
dominions of all these stretche unto the Rhine. The Paulsegraue urged the
Archebishopes of Mentz and Treuers, that they would send their Ambassadoures
with his and with the Marquis of Brandenburges, to entreat for the
Archebisshop of Collon: but they fearing to get displeasure, refused it. At
this time a rumor A brute of war against the Protestants.
was noysed abroad, that The Emperor should secretly mind war. Wherefore the
Lantzgraue writing his letters to Granuella^ the.xxiiij. of January, says
how it is reported not only in Germany, but also sygnyfyed out of Italye,
and otherplaces, that Themperoure, and the Bishop of Room make preparation to
war upon the Lutheranes, and will maynteyne the counsel, and beegynne the
wars in the spring of the year, and how they intend to set upon the
Archebysshop of Collon with the force of the low contrie of Germany, upon the
Saxons, out of Boheme, and to invade high Almaigne with the power of Italy:
How The Emperor will also have ten thousand foot men and certain trouppes of
horsemen, to guard him, and conduicte him to Regenspurge. This brute is not
only spread abroad commonly, but is also reported of head Captains and
Centurions, whereof some make their boast that they have received money of
the^peroure already: And seeing Themperoure has peace with France, and has
also taken trewes with the Turk, as some do affirm, many men do marvel to
what use and purpose, he should wage men to war: Neither he nor his
consortes, whylest they consider the peace making of Norinberge, confyrmed
after at Regenspurge Spier, and other places, can be easelye persuaded, to
believe it should be true, especially since they have done right good service
both to the emperor and to king Ferdinando against the Turk, and other
enemies also: Howbeit he thought good to declare these things friendly unto
him, which are sygnyfyed to him and his fellows, by many letters and
messagers: For it may be, that the like things are reported to Themperoure by
malycious persons, of him and his confederatours, which may raise a
suspicion, cause trouble, and put them both to charges: he doubts not, but
that he will make him an au^wer. And in as much as he has been ever hitherto a
counselloure of peace, he desires him, that from henceforthe also he would
persuade Themperoure to the same. Granuellan wrote an answer to this the
Granuellan his answer to the Lantzgraue.
seventh day of February: How Themperoure has neither made any compacte with
the Bishop, leuyed soldiers nor given money to any Captain. Albeit that if
he should have some force about him, no man ought to marvel there at, in this
dangerous time, and doubtful state of things, when the kings and Princes
nere about him do moustre their men: for who should reprehende this in him,
if he fore see that his countries sustain non iniurye: but he says, the
report is untrue, as is also the rest of the ten thousand men, that should
guard him to Regenspurge: For Themperoure is now ready to take his journey, and
that with a small treyne. And after he has declared how desirous ever
Themperoure has been of the peace and tranquillity of Germanye, and to be yet
of the same mind still, he shows also how frendely and gentlye he has
used the Archebisshop of Collon, and finally wissheth to the universal commonwealth, but namely of Germany, all things safe and fortunate. About the end of
January, the Lantzgraue, and Fridericke the Paulsgraue, prince electour, mete
at Frankeforte. They of Auspurge receiving intelligence out of diverse places,
of the warlicke preparation of the emperor and bishop of Room, had sent
Sebastian Scherteline a man of war, to them Sebastian Scherteline.
addicted, unto the Paulsegraue and Lantzgraue, who should instruct them
privily of al such matters. After therefore he had spoken with either of the^
severally, he brought to pass, that they both came thither to consulte, and
the Paulsegraue was also accompanied with Otto Henry his cosyn germane. A few
days after came thither also the Protestants Ambassadors out of France and
England, and report their ambassade to ye La^tzgraue and his fellows. The
next day, which was the fourth day of February, the Lantzgraue departs
thence, and goes to the Archebisshop of Mentz, newly created, which was but
one Germane mile of, and among other things, entreats him, yt in the next
assembly of Regenspurge he would give his advise and counsel for the
tranquillity of Germany. And shortly after was dissolved the conuention of
Franckefort, and by a decree made the Protesta^tes sendyng their ambassadors
to The Emperor and clergy of Collon, entreat for ye archebisshop. Duke Moris
of Saxony was not in league with the Protestants, yet had he an ambassador
there, Christopher Carlebice, a gentelma^ verey well learned, who immediately
after the conuention ended, went to Themperoure: the same time was Themperoure
in Gelderlande, who before had been aduertysed, that the protestants, had
conspyred against him at Franckeforte: neither wanted The Protestants accused
of conspiracy.
the matter setters foreward, which, as the common saying is, powered oil upon
the fire, and would say, how these assemblies of states and Princes, were kept
to his contempt. Nauius was sent by the^peroure to the Archebisshop of Collon:
And came from thence to the Archebisshop of Mentz, and to the Paulsgraue, and
by the way fortuned to talk with Renarde Count of Solmen, a man of war and
of stout courage, touching the present state of things, and how Themperoure
is advertised. And where the Earl told him again what things were bruted of
Themperoure throughout Germanye, he utterly denied it, and said it never came
in themperours mind: for so much he loves peace, that al his own affairs
set apart, he will now to the counsel of thempire: neither doubts he, but if
the La^tzgraue would come unto him, he should be friendly used, and his advise
is that he do so in any wise: for so may he, both pourge himself and his
fellows, and because happily he will not go to Regenspurg, know Themperours
mind, presently, and confer with him, of the common wealth: by this means
also may all suspicion and distrust be taken away, which is raised by
misreportes on either side: And if he desire to come to The^perours speech, he
shall dee well to come with a small company that he may declare thereby, what
faith and consydence he has in Themperoure. When the Lantzgraue was
aduertysed hereof by Count Solmense, the.xx. day of Februarye he writes to
Nauius and to avoid suspicion, he shows him partly, what was done at
Franckefurte, after he declares, how a report went of Themperoure, that he
should prepare to have war: And among other Captains, had appointed
Marquis Albert, to levy a thousand The Lantzgraues letters to Nauius.
horsementhowebeit the Earl of Solmen, upon his report, affirms it to be
untrue. And because Granuellan also writes the same, he will rather credit
them, than such flyeng tales, as are talked a broad: For he and his fellows
hope well, that The Emperor will not shrink from the conuenauntes and decree of
Spier especially, seeing there is no cause given, why he should so do: And to
come speak with The^peroure, he will not refuse, but first he must confer
with his leagefrendes, of whom some he would have present at the talk, and not
many. I showed you before how Themperoure had appointed a talk The coll(...)
quie of the learned me^ at Rege^spurg.
of learned men at Regenspurge, and had commanded them to be there all at the
beginning of December. After he proroged this day to the Ides of December.
Thither came (sent by Themperoure) Peter Maluenda, a Spaniarde, Eberard
Billicke a white Friar, John Hoimester an Austen friar, John Cochleus, Divines,
and as many hearers. From the Protestants came Bucer, Brentius, George Mayor,
and Erard, Schuepsius divines, and with them also other sour auditors. At the
kalendes of January, came the presidentes of the disputation, Moris Bishop of
Eistet, and Fridericke Count of Furstemberge. And at the length began the
conference, the.xvii. day of January: And the presidentes speaking of their
charge, and things concerning themselves, require the divines, that in so
grave and holy a business they would not follow their affections, but treat
syncerely, having the fear of god before their eyes, and a respect to
concord. And herin promise their pains fidelity and vprightnes. After they
recite how The^perours commandment is, that the doctrine of the Protesta^tes
exibited in times past at Auspurge, should in this communication be treated
of, omittynge those three first articles, of the Trmitie, of the incarnation of
the word, and of original sin. For the two first are out of controversy;
and this last has been sufficientlye debated already: But that all the
residewe be treated upon in order, of iustyfycation, of forgeuenes of sins,
of fulfylling of the law, of faith, of good works, of deserte, of the
Sacraments, of purgatory, of praying for the dead, of the veneration, and
invocation of saints, of relics, of Images, of monastical vows, of the
marriage of priests, of choice of meats, of holy days, of thecclesiasticall
traditions of the church, of the power of the keys, of the sacred order, of
the authorytie of the bishop of Room, of bisshops, of general counselles.
These things once declared, the Protestants considering with what adversaries
they were matched, request that all their talk and treaty might be written
out by notaryes, to thentent The Emperor and princes may understand the whole
matter, and the arguments, and probations of either party. Contrarywyse the
presidentes say how that should be to long a work, and that it should
suffice, if the chiefest points were noted only: Again they say how
nothing of that which is done, may be uttered, and assign the forenoone for
the disputation. After much debatyng, it was agreed, that two on eythersyde
should commit all the talk to writing, and that the same should be laid up
into a cheste fast locked, and showed to no man, except the rest be present,
and yet to be kept in silence. These things doethe presidentes agree to, so
that The^peroure be content, of who^ they said they have no commandment in
this behalf. The protestants also accept it upon condition to signifye the
same to their Princes, whom it concerns to know, and have willed them to
write to them hereof. Wha^ this order was taken, Peter Malua^da, a doctor of
Paris begins, Maluenda treats of justification.
the first day of February, and in his preface speaking much in the
commendation of Themperoure, he discourses at large the article of
Iustifycation after the scoole manner. But Bucer interruptinge him, said how
that was against the law of the conference, and order prescribed by
Themperoure: the confession of their doctrine lies before him: he may take
the chapter of iustifycation, and if he have ought to say against it, let
him confute it in order, or obiecte, and he shall be answered. He nevertheless
proceeds, and so concludes, that he attributes much to freewyll, and said
that a man is not justified by faith only, but also by hope and charytie. The
next day Bucer declares, how the article of iustifycation was accorded in
the talk Bucers answer.
at Regenspurge a year since, and shows what Themperoure and the resydewe of
Princes and states decreed touching the same, and desires that the same be
enrouled among the Records.

Then followyng the order prescrybed by Themperoure, he repeteth the same
Article, and deuideth it into four parts: that a man is not iustyfyed before
God, through his own works or merytes, but to be freelye iustyfyed by
Christ, through faith, what time he believes both that he is received unto
grace, and that also his sins for Christ are forgeuen: how Christ with his
death has made satysfactio^ for our sins: that God does impute faith, for
righteousness. These things he does confyrme and declare by the testimonies of
the scripture, and shows in what things he agrees with Malue^da and what
not, and confuteth his arguments. After Maluenda, the Carmelite Billicus
takes place, and confuteth among other things spoken of Bucer, that also of
justification, and denies that ever it was accorded. The.xiii. day of
Februarye, Maluenda answers Bucer, and concludes these three things, that
works do dispose and prepare unto justification: that charytie is the fyrme
justifying: that the works of men justified do accomplisshe iustificatition,
and deserve eternal life. Whylest they were treating about these matters,
the.xv. day of February came Themperours letters, co^maundyg them to receive
Julius Pflugies Bishop of Numburg, Pflugius among the Presidentes
among the presidentes, that the number of Collocutours and additours be not
augmented with extraordinarye men, and that there be none other scrybes
appointed, but such as the presydentes had chosen, that all promise to keep
silence by an other, and to utter no part of the conference to any man living,
before it be reported to Themperoure, and states of Thempire, that to the
things accorded either part shall subscribe, and such as remain in
controversy, to be noted with few words. When the letters were thus
recyted, the protestants answer among other things, that they can not
observe that point of so strayte keeping of silence, for because they are
commanded to aduertyse their Princes from time to time, of the state of the
dysputation. Whereaboute was much contention, whilst the presydentes said,
they must follow Themperours commandment: And the Protestants again
alleged that they might not swerve from the commandments of their Princes.
Wherefore the presydentes at the last, write unto Themperoure what their
request was But in the mean season the Duke of Saxon who lyked not the
conditions of the disputation, after he had heard thereof, sends for his men
home again, to understand the whole matter. And when they were gonne, Bucer
the.xx. day of March departs also, to declare, The colloquie dissolved.
what was done, to the Lantzgraue. Which thing the presidentes took very
vnpatientely: And where they had before given warenynge to such as were
present, to remain still, now, that diverse were slypped away, they exhort
and charge the rest in any wise to attend Themperours answer: But they say,
that seeing their chefeste fellows are gonne, it is but inuayne, for them to
tarry: And if the disputatyon shall contynewe, they promise not to be absente.

The Papystes afterward in their Books setfoorthe, rail upon them betterlye
for the same cause: But those Bucer answers at the full, and what soever is
to be said of the iustifycation of man, he treats most largelye. With the
Ambassadors of the Protestants, sent to Themperoure to entreat for the
archebisshop of Collon, Ambassadors to the^peroure, for the archebisshop of
Collon.
were joined the Ambassadors of the Paulsgraue and the Marquis of
Brandenburge, electours. Theffect of their request was this, that Themperoure
would refer his case, to the resydewe of matters of Relygion, and stay the
process commenced by his Clergy: For if any violence or wrong shall be offered
him, they sygnifye, that they can not neglecte him. When the Emperor had
heard them at Utreyght the.xxvi. day of Februarye, the second day of March,
he gave them an answer by Nauius, declarynge what good will he had borne him
hitherto and how frendely he had aduertysed him what he should and ought to
do, which he has contemptuously despised, trusting to a vain appellation
which can take no place: Nevertheless taking their Ambassade in good part,
for that he supposes it to proceed of a zeal of peace and reconcylement of
Relygion, he is content, the rather at their request, to use in this matter,
the advise and Counsel of Princes in the next assemblye at Regenspurge:
Whyther he is now ready to go, and desires that their Princes would come
thither themselves in like case: for albeit he is troubled with syckenes, yet
to thentente an end of controuersyes might once be had, he will refuse no
travel and pain.

About this time dyed Alphousus Daualus the Marquis of Piscare, gouernoure of
Millane, and in his place succeeded Ferdinando Gonzaga, that before was Uiceroye
of Sicilie, I showed you before Gonzage go uernour of Millane.
how the Counsel was differred, at Trent until the Ides of March. Thither
sent the Bishop three Legates John Marimou^tayne, Marcelle Ceruine, and
Reinalde Poole, Cardinals, thither came also from Themperoure, but not at the
day appointed, James Mendoza, a The Popes Legates in the counsel of Trente.
Spaniarde, who after he had spoken much in the commendation of Themperoure,
and of his great good will and zeal toward the Counsel, and the Church of
Room, he excuses his absence and promyseth his endenoure and furtheraunce in
his name, and where as the Bisshoppes be not yet commen out of Spain which
Themperoure called, he says it must be ascrybed to the far and payneful
journey, this: was during the assemblye of Worms. The Cardinals hereunto make
answer, albeit they never doubted of Themperours zeal toward Religion, yet
was this oration of his to them right acceptable. And in as much as the
Bishop, the true vycare of Christ, and successoure of Peter, Prince of the
Apostelles, after conference had with Themperoure, has appointed this
Counsel for the refourmatyon of the Public weal, namelye of Germanye their
trust is that the Emperor will see there be nothing decreed at Worms
concerning relygion, but that al things be referred to the counsel: If it
should be otherwise, not only the ancient custom of the church, but also
the law both of God and man should be infrynged. Moreover it should be an
evil president, and would deface the whole dignytye of the Counsel: As
touching him self, his presence and person is to them right acceptable.
Where therefore many were long or they came, nothing was done that year, but
that certain Freres made sermons to the Bisshoppes, in the time of Aduente.
Preachinge Freers. A bull of perdonnes.
The Bishop also sendynge forth a bull of indulgences at the Ides of
December, says that the miserye of this time is such, by reason of the
ouerflowyng of heresies, that albeit he take never so much labor, travel,
and pain for the common welthe, yet can he scarselye satyssye him self:
therefore has he called a counsel, that the wounds of the Church might be
healed, which are made by wicked heretyckes: And because the saluatyon of all
men consysteth therein, and again, that the fathers of the counsel being
helped by the prayers of others, may to God be the more commended, he
exhorts al men in general, that immediately they frame themselves to
repentance, confess their sins to the priest, and that three days in the
weke they tame their body with fasting, and the same days to be present at
the divine service, or in case they be sick, and can not, than to give some
thing to the poor, and let the poorer sort oftymes say over their Pater
noster, and after receive the Sacrament. Unto all that obey this, he grants
pardon and remission of their sins, and commands all Bishops, to declare
these things to the people. After the seventh day of Ianuarye, when the
number of Bysshoppes was well increased, The beginning of the counsel.
they began the Counsel: And when all were commen into the Cathedral
Church, and mass done, the foresaid Cardinals, the Bishop of Rooms
Legates had an oration to the fathers written, wherein they declare how the
counsel is called for three causes chiefly, The oration of the popes Legates.
that heresies may be weded up by the roots, that the dysciplyne of the
Church may be restored, and that peace may be recovered. And say how the
whole blame of all this present calamytie, is to be imputed to the Clergy:
for what heresies, war or disorder soever there is, they have given the
occasyon of all these euylles through their auaryce, ambition, and naughty
living: therefore is it the just judgment of God, that they are now thus
contemned, troubled and afflicted, yet not according to their demerytes: for
there is not one of them that does his duty, therefore they admonisshe
every man to acknowledge his fault, and study to appease Gods wrath, The^
was(...)g of Esedras and Nehemias.
through the repentance and amendment of life, vsyng herein the example of
Esdras, Nehemias and other Capytaynes, who at their return, admonisshed
earnestly the people of Israel, that confessinge theirs and their fathers
offenses, they should call to God for mercy. Then come they to declare their
own duty, which are Judges in this case, how they ought to be free and
void from anger, hatred, frendeshyp, and give nothing to affections, but to
ascribe all honor unto god only, who with his angels beholds this
congregation, neither can any man's thought be hid from him; therefore must
they work syncerely, and exhort the ambassadors of kings and princes to do
the same. After this oration, was red the decree of the sinod, by John Fonsseca
bishop of Castremarine, a Spaniarde. In this al christians are warned, to
amend their life, fear God, many times A decree of the Sinode read.
confess their sins, go often to church and pray to God for public peace:
And that all Bisshops and other pristes be addicte to prayer, and also every
seventh day at the least, which is called Sunday, say mass and make
intercession for the high bishop, for Themperoure, and for the whole common
wealth, that they fast moreover, and give aulmouse to the poor: That in the
head church there be mass song weekelye upon the thursedaie in the honor of
the holy ghost, that in mass time almen be attentife unto the priest, and
refrain talking: Moreover that the bisshoppes lead a sober life and not fare
sumptuously at their tables, and that they do eschew all light and Idle talk,
and use their family to do likewise, that in speaking, in apparel, and al
behavior they may show an honesty. And in as much as the Synnode has this
respect chiefly, how the darkness of errors and heresies, that have so many
years overwhelmed the earth, being driven away, the light of the treuth may
shine forth, al there be warned, chiefly the learned sort, that they consider
diligently with them selves, by what way this may best be brought to pass:
And that in geuyng their voices, they follow the decree of the counsel
Toletane, that they do it modestlye, not clamourouselye, that they be not
contentious, nor obstinate, but pronounce all things temperately and quietly:
there was an other sitting the fourth day of February. Wherein was nothing
done, The second session of the Synod.
saving that they confessed the articles of the faith, and a day appointed for
the third metynge, the eight of April. For they heard of more that were
coming, and therefore thought good to tarry for them, that the Authority of
their decrees might be somuche the more. Whylest this was done at Trent,
Luther was sent for, to go to the Earls of Mansfelde, to set an agremente
betwixt them, which were at controversy Luther chosen arbiter.
for a piece of land: he had nouer accustomed to treat of such affairs, and
had only applied his study all the days of his life: But because he was
borne at Issebie, which is a Town of ye Earls of Mansfelde, he could not but
take so much pain for them and for his country. Before he came to Issebie,
which was in the later end of Ianuarye, he felt him self skant well at ease:
Yet did he accomplysshe the thing he came for, and sometime preached in the
church, and received also the communion. But the.xvii. day of February, he
waxed sore sick in his stomach: he had with him three sons, John, Luther is
sick.
Martin, Paulle, and certain others of his friends, emonges them also, Iustus
Jonas, the minister of the church at Halles: And though he was weak, yet did
he both dyne and suppe with the rest. Whylest they sat at supper, speaking
of so^dry things, he moved also this question among others, whether that in
the life everlasting, we shall know one an other. And what time they were all
desirous to learn that of him: what, says he, chanced to Adam? He had never
seen Eve, but Whether we shall know each other in the life to come.
what time God shaped her, he was cast into a marvelous deep and sound sleep:
But awakyng out of the same, when he saw her, he axeth not, what she is, or
whence she came, but says, she is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones. But how knew he that. Uerely being full of the holy ghost, and
replenisshed with the true knowledge of god, he spoke thus. In like manner shall
we also in another life be renewed by Christ, and shall know more perfitly our
parents, wives, children, and what so ever is besides: than Adam that time
knew Eve. After supper when he went a side to pray (as he was accustomed) the
pain of his stomach began to increase. There by the advice of certain he drank
of an Unicornes horn in wine: After, he slept quietly in the trindle bed of
the stowfe by the space of an hour or two. Than awakyng, he goes to his
chamber, and lays him down again to rest, and biddyng his friends good
night, that were with him, he wylled them to pray to god, that he would grant
us to keep still the doctrine of the gospel: For the Bishop, and the counsel
at Trente are a workynge some great mischief: When he had thus said, and al
was hushte, he slepeth a good while, but the force of his disease increasing
upon him, at after midnight he complayneth of the straytenes of his stomach,
and perceiving that the end of his life drew nere, he calls to God with these
words. O god my heavenly father, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, God
of al consolation, I give the thanks, Luthers last prayer.
that thou have revealed unto me thy son Jesus Christ, who^ I have believed,
whom I have professed, whom I have loved, whom I have set forth, and honored,
whom the Bishop of Room and all that wicked rabel do persecute, and
dishonor: I beseech thee my Lord Jesus Christ, receive my soul: my heavenly
father, although I be taken out of this life, albeit I must now leave this
body, yet know I assuredly, that I shall remain with thee for ever, and that
noman can take me out of thy hands. Not long after this prayer said, when he
had The quiet departure of Luther.
ones or twyse commended his soul into the hands of God, as though he had
fallen a sleep, by little and littel he departs out of this life, without
any pain of his body that could be perceived. And thus he dyed in his own
natyfe country, which he had not seen of many years, the.xviii. day of
Februarye, to the great lamentation of many. The Earls of Mansfelde were
desirous, that he might have been buried in their country, because he was borne
there, but at the commandment of the Prince electour, he was honorably carried
to Wittemberge, and buried the fyft day after: of years he was about. lxiii
for he was borne the year of our Lord a thousand.iiii. hondreth Luthers
birthe.
fourscore and three, the tenthe day of November, of right honest and good
parents, John and Margarite: he learned his first prynciples at home, from
thence being sent to Mayde^burge, and then to Isenacke, he far excelled all
his fellows. After he came to Erford, and gave him self wholly to the study
of logic, and Philosophye: And when he had been there a while, making neither
pare^tes nor fre^des privy to it, he professed him self into the College of
Austen Freres, and applied all his study to the scripture, forsakyng the law,
which he studied before. That time was an University newly erected at
Wittemberge: wherefore Stupicious, of whom mention is made in the first book,
having the charge hereof, brings Luther thither to read divinity. Than was
Luther sent to Room by the conuente of Luther sent to Rome.
his order, about a suite that hanged there in the law. This was in the year
of our lord.M.D.x. When he was returned home, through the motion of his
friends he commenced Doctor, at the charges of Duke Fridericke. What force and
ple^tie of eloquence was in him, his Luthers eloquence in the Dutche tongue.
works do sufficiently declare, certainly the Dutch toungue he beautifyed and
enryched exceadingly, and has the chief commendation therein, and has
translated out of the latin toungue, such things as were thought impossible,
and expresses the matter with most apt and proper terms, and many times by
one word he sets before your eyes the whole matter. He writes in a
certain place of the Bishop, how he has polluted the Lords supper, and
has also applied the mass to them that be dead: he says he has pearsed
with his mass not only in to all corners of Christendom, but also into
Purgatory it self: but he uses the Dutche word, which represents that
noise, as is wont to be made, when a man does rattle or shake together a
number of dead men's bones, or cast about among them, he was of courage
invincible. What time he began first to preach against pardons, he knew
not what the matter mente, as he him self confesses, The invincible
consta^cie of Luther
and did that thing only, and therefore wrote than verey lowly, both to the
Bishop and others: but when he had profited in the knowledge of scripture
daily more and more, and perceived that his doctrine was agreeable to Gods
word, he withstode the violence of his enemies, and the malice of the whole
world with a most stout courage, and like awalle of Brass remained still
immovable, despysynge all danger. When Themperoure held a counsel of the
states imperyall at Auspurge, immediately after he was crowned at Bononie, by
Clement the seventh, a terrible tempest was like to enswe, as in the seventh
book is specifyed. Than did he couinfort both his Friends privately, and all
others openly, and applying to this purpose the.xlvi. Psalm. God (says he)
is our sure castle and Bulwark: that old enemy of mankind, takes the
matter in hand now with all his force and power, he lays to all his
munition: And indede our powers is but small, neither can we long sustain so
great a violence: Howbeit that noble champion, whom God him self has chosen
unto him, he has put on Armure, and fyghteth for us: If you are, who that is?
know forcertentie that he is that Jesus Christ, who must needs have the
victory and conquest: And albeit the whole compass of this world be full of
Deuilles, yet are we not affrayde, but with a most assured confidence do look
for a ioyefull success: For although Sathangnasshe his teethe, and rage never
so fiercely, yet shall he nothing prevail against us: For he is judged
already, and through the word only, falls down all his armure. This word
shall not The victory and conquest of the word.
the adversaries take from us but will they nyll they, shall leave it behind
them: For he is in our tents and army, who with his spirit and gifts
defends us: if they take away life, goods, wife, and chilchildren, take it
patiently: For they win nothing thereby, and for us is prepared a kingdom
everlasting. This Psalm, which at that time he applied to relyeue sorrow
and heaviness, when he had translated it into the vulgar toungue, somethynge
wrastynge the sense, he made it also in meter, and set a note to it very
consonant to the argument, and a mete tune to styre up the mind. And so ever
since that time this Psalm has also been much song among all others. And
that there was such a decree made at Auspurge, he ascribes all the blame
thereof, in a book setfoorthe afterward, to Clement the seventh, and his
Legate Campegious: but speaks all honor and good of Themperoure, whose name
and authorytie they used for a clooke, and reports him to be blameles,

The seuententh Book of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of
Religion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the
fyfte
The argument of the seuententh Book.
John Diaze being sent Ioinetly with Bucer, to the colloquie of Regenspurge, is
murdered of his own brother Alphonse. The Lantzgraue coming to Themperours
speech declares unto him the conditions of the counsel, which the
Protestants require: and afterward making his excuse that he cannot come to
the assemblee, takes his leave friendly of The Emperor. Sentence of
excommunication thondereth at Room against the Archebisshop of Collon.
The^peroute, covertly makes preparation to war in Germany. Those of the
Counsel of Trent make their decrees, and Peter Danes is Ambassador there for
the French king. Themperoure, soliciteth certain cities of Germany and also
the Swysses, through polycye to do them to understand. The Protestants having
intelligente hereof, take them to their weapons. The Tenure of the league
betwixt the Pope and The Emperor, is recyted. The Emperor is so urged by the
Pope, that he lets alone the Turk, and falls upon the Protestants. The
Castle of Erenberge and Tonauert surprysed. Themperoure by his letters
Patentes bannissheth the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue. The Popes army
comes to aid Themperoure.

A Little before was mention made of the conference John Diaze a Spaniard.
at Regenspurge. John Diazius a Spaniarde went thither with Bucer. He had been
many years a student at Paris, in the divinity of the Sarbonites: but when he
had red the books of Luther and others and dilligentlye studied the
scriptures, that doctrine began to wax vile to him every day more and more:
And at the last to thentent he might profit so much the more, leaving Paris, he
went to Geneua, where Calvin was minister of the church. And when he had
there remained a while, went to Strasburge: and because Bucer perceived in him
much learning, and an ernest zeal, a few months after, when he should go to
the disputation at Regenspurge, he moved the senate, to appoint him to be his
companion and fellow that journey. Coming therefore to Regenspurge in the month
of December, he goes to this Peter Maluenda, whom he knew at Diaze goes to
Maluenda
Paris. He as one amassed, bewayleth and lamenteth to see him in these parties,
and that in the company of the Protestants, which will trihumphe more of one
Spaniard allured unto their opinion, than of a Few Spaniardes love the Gospel.
great meany thousands of Germans. And therefore began to admonish him, that
he would have a respect to his name and not so shamefullye stain and spot his
country and honest family. Diazius answers him modestly commendyng the
Protestants doctrine, and so departs for that time.

And wha^ he came again a few days after, as was accorded, Maluenda planteth
al his ordenaunce, that he might, to put him in fear: And speaking many
things of the authority of the bishop of Room he rekeneth up at large, how
dangerous a thing his curse is. Again, because Themperoure should come thither
shortly, he advises him, not to tarry his coming, which perchance will be
dangerous for him, but counsels him to go mete him by the way, and
fallinge down at the feet of Themperours confessor, crave perdon for his
offense, and promises to be a furtherance to him herein. Whereunto Diazius
answers stoutely and throughlye: And says how the doctrine of the
Protestants is consonant to the doctrine of the Apostels and Prophets, and
lamenteth the miserye of Spain his not if country, which is in so great
darkness: he rebukes Maluenda and his fellows which impugn the manifest
verity, and give Themperoure evil counsel, and ernestly warns him to
leave, he refuses his counsel, and shows him how he will, through Gods help
profess this wholesome doctrine, and will refuse no danger of his life
therefore. When Maluenda saw him so strongelye confyrmed, thy coming hither
(says he) is in vain: For here shall be nothing determined. And if you list
to do any good openly, as you seem to boast, you should have gone to Trente.
After this metinge, Diazius came no more in his company. But Maluenda, writing
his letters to Themperours cofessour repeteth the whole matter, and exhorts
him most ernestly, to help the disease in time. When these letters were
delivered, there was a Spaniard by, Marquina, which came lately from Room.
Who understanding the accusation, began to excuse Diazius, Marquins excuses
Diaze.
whom he knew very well. And after a few days he retourneth home again, and
declarech the matter to Diazius brother, Alphonsus, a Lawyer at Room, what he
had heard of Themperours confessor. In the mean season Diazius went from
Rege^spurge to Nuburge a Town of Otto Henry the Paulsgraue, standing by the
River of Thonawe twelve miles above Regenspurge: the cause of his going
thither, was to ouersee the correction of a book that Bucer sent thither to be
prynted. His brother Alphonsus kyndled with the tale of Marquina, and happily
also with the letters of some others besides, His brother Alphonse coeth into
Germany.
immediately prepares him self to take his journey, and in great have comes
first to Auspurge, and from thence to Regenspurge. And wha^ he understood,
where Diazius was, he hastes thither. And to him that marueled not a little
at his sodan coming declares the cause. After he uses in a manner the self
same arguments and reasons, as did Maluenda at Regenspurge. When he had
assayed that in vain he The traytorous mind of Alphonse.
promises him a great yearly pension out of his benefyces, so that he will go
with him to Room: When that would take no place another: After certain days, he
confesses himself to be vanquisshed, and fayneth as though he loved the
doctrine of the gospel, and exhorts him, that leaving Germany, which has
abundance of learned men, and needs not his travel he would go with him
into Italye where he may profit many. First they shall come to Trent, there be
many men of singular learning and judgment, which will be right glad of his
company: After they will go to Room and Naples, and so shall it come to
pass, that when many shall be ryghtly instructed of him in sondrye places in
Italye, by this occasyon the same doctrine may be set forth also in Spain:
therefore he prays and besecheth him, to follow his advise herein: he
promises to bear all his charges, and what so ever is needful besides.
Diazius stricken with great joy and gladness, reioyseth both for his own
cause, and also for his brothers: And sendyng his letters to Regenspurge, unto
Bucer and the rest requires to have their counsel. They write again, and
admonisshe him, that he go not with him. Wherefore Alpho^sus put quite beside
that hope, desires him at the least wise to go with him as far as Auspurge.
Whylest this gere was a brewyng, Bucer comes to Nuburge, intending to go
home, as before is said, and counsels him not to stir one foot thence.
And he himself departs not before Alphonsus was gone, which was the.xxv.
day of March. But the day before that Alphonsus went thence, he talked with
his brother most curtoisely, he exhorts him unto constancy, and thinks him
self a happy man, which has profited so much in a few days, through his
talk, in the true knowledge of God: he prays him, that he would write unto
him often: and promises all good will, and causes him to take.xiiij. Duckates,
whether he would or not, and thus with sheding of tears on either side, he
departs, riding in a wagon to Auspurge, six miles from Nuburge. The next
day tarying and lettinge Alphonse retourneth to Nuburge to kill his brother.
the wagoner, by flattering words and rewards, that he might be before him,
takes the same way that he came, and bying an hatchet by the way of a
Carpenter, the.xxvii. day of March in the dawenyng of the day, he comes
again to Nuburge, and leaving his horses without the gate, with the post of
Auspurge, who^ he brought with him, he goes into the Town, accompanied with
his man a murderer, and comes to his brothers lodging. His servant, lest he
should be straight ways known, had put on the apparel of a messe^ger, that
posteth with letters, and going before knocks at the door, and axeth for
Diazius, unto whom he has letters: And being let in, goes up to his chamber,
but Alphonsus tarried benethe at the stayre foot, watching, that no man should
let their enterprise. Diazius awakyng, and hearing say that a messenger was
commen from his brother, leapeth out of his bed, and having nothing upon him,
but his clooke cast about him, and his night gere, goes forth into a
dynyng Chamber next where he lay. By and by comes he with the letters, and
delyuereth them: it was skarce light day. The effect of the letters was this.
How he was very careful for the danger he was in: let him be well ware of
Maluenda, and such other enemies of the Gospel. Whylest Diazius was reading
this, the Murderer standing behynd his back, lets drive at him with an
hatchet that he had hyd under his clooke, with all his might, and struck him in
on The murderer kills Diaze.
the right side of his head up to the healue, so that he having suddenly his
brains thus cloven a sonder, never spoke word. The murderer leaves the Axe
stickyng still in the wound, and getting him quickly down the stayres,
immediatlye with the principal his master hastes out of the Town. There
leaping upon their horses, that were ready before the gate, when they were
common with exceadyng great speed to Bothmey, which is a bayting Town in the
mid way beetwixt Nuburge and Auspurge, taking fresh horses, which they had
least there pourposely, they come to Auspurge. In the same chamber with
Diazius ded ly, one Claudius Cenarcleus, a young gentleman Cladius Senaclyus.
of Sauoye. But the murder was so secretly done that he in the next chamber
perceived nothing, until such time as he heard the spurs strike on the
stayres when the murderer ran hastily down. Tha^ he arysyng, came forth,
and saw that miserable and heavy sight: the brute of his mischeuous deed, and
fact most horrible, was immediately spread abroad throughout Nuburge, and
diverse of the princes servants, that loved Diazius, took their horses and
pursued after them: when they were common to Auspurge and could not find
the^, being clean out of hope, they determine to return back again: But
one of them, which was elder and stouter than the rest called Michell
herffer, rides forth, with wonderful speed, and as they were at rest in a
village, for werines of their journey, he gets before them, and came sonner
than they to Insprucke, and declares the whole matter to the Maiestrate: And
when they came also not long after he caused them to be apprehended, and
accuses them of murder, and writing to his Prince Otto Henry count Palatine,
aduertiseth him where and how they were taken. Whereupon the Prince sent two of
his counselors from Nuburge to Insprncke to playde the case. They taking
post horses, came thither at the kalendes of April, and to put the matter out
of doubt, they bring with them the night cappe of Diazius the bluddy hatchet
that slew him, and his brothers letters. But to fore they came there Alpho^sus
had gote^ leave to write to his fre^des in what case he stood. The second day
of April, when the Ambassadors of Nuburge were common before the magistrate
and had informed him of the whole matter, they required that they might be
put to executyon, or if they will stand in the denial of the fact, that they
might be racked. The magistrates referred the matter to other judges. When they
came before them, the murderers were permitted to take advocates to plead for
them: by those was the matter differred from day to day: At the last were the
plaintines commanded, to exhibit their accusation in Latin and in Spanisshe:
After this came Themperours letters, as he went to Regenspurge, wherein they
were Themperours letters for a paracide.
commanded to surcease and let the process alone: for he and his brother will
have the hearing of the matter at Regenspurge. When they could obtain none
other answer, Otto Henry and the electour of Palatine entreat the Senate of
Insprinke, upon a sufficient pledge to send the defendauntes to Nuburge where
the murder was committed: but they make their excuse by The^perous letters.
What time this murder was done, Themperoure came to Spyer, going to
Regenspurge, and by the way, as he was at Bipounte, which is a Town of
Prince Wuolfangus the Paulsgraue, his wife, the La^tzgraues The^peroure
visits the Lantzgraue his daughter.
Daughter, lay in Child bed: whom The Emperor went to visyte, and geuyng her
most gentle and comfortable words, deals great rewards among her women:
but having no woorthye gift ready at hand to give the Lady her self, he
sends it back from Spier, whyther he came at the end of March. The
Lantzgraue was admonisshed by Nauius (as before is said) to mete with
Themperoure by the way going to Regenspurge: the same word was sent him by
Granuellan, in the month of Februarye, when the^peroure was at Utrecht upon
the Mase. Wherefore receiving saufeco^duite of The^peroure, he came to Spier.
Thither came also the Paulsgraue The Lantzgraue comes to the^peroure.
Electour, and wyllyam Mansbach, ambassador to the Duke of Wyrtemberge, this
was the.xxviii. day of March. Than goes the Lantzgraue to Themperoure, and
talking with him privately, by his Chauncelour, when he had told him the
cause, and occasion of his coming: It is not in one place, nor in Germany
only, but also in foreine Nations reported, most mighty Emperor, that
through the Bishop of Rooms procurement, you should mind great displeasure
to the Protestants: There goes abrut also that at the conclusyon of the
peace, you should have persuaded the French king to aid you in punnisshyng the
same: Moreover, that you solicit the Turk for a trewes, that you may so
much the easelyer, bring your pourpos to pass, and therefore (they say)
the Bishop has called and commanded a counsel, that upon the decrees made
in haste, the matter might be put in execution: and it makes us the rather to
think this report to be true, to see how ernestly and busyly the suite
proceeds against the Archebisshop of Collon. And certainly, forasmuch as we
have aided you chargeablye against the French king and the Turk, and offered to
do more, as was declared at Spier, because we have done more also then ever
our aunceters were accustomed, moreover inasmuche as you have granted us large
warrauntes concerning the peace and the law, both at Regenspurg and at Spier,
these things chance to us now beyond all expectation. Yet we trust, that
before you depart out of Germany, you will cause that relygion be established,
after the prescripte of Gods word, by a provincial counsel of Germany,
and in case the dissension can not be thoroughly accorded, yet that the peace
which was promised us at Spier, you would command to be wholly observed, in
such wise, as it be neither changed nor taken away by the decree of any
counsel.

Hereunto Themperoure answers by Nauius: How sondrie reports have commen
to his ears of them also, that they should attempt some enterprise, yet would
he not credit the same, especially after he had heard his letters, written
to Nauius, and now also believes it much less: As concerning that which he
spoke of the French king, there is no man able to prove it: he has pease
with him only, and nothing else: It is the guise of France to brave and brag
of matters that be vain: he moved the Turk of a trewes, chiefly for the love
of Germany: for seeing that in sondrie assemblyes of Thempire, they complained
of the great charges, and the pouertye of the people, he thought this the best
way to relyeue them, that during the time of the trewes, they might consulte,
how to make war against him, and to set an order in Religion: but herein as
yet, is nothing determined, for hereof must he confer with his brother
Fernando: the Counsel, which they have so many years required of him, is now,
through his great suite and labor, assembled: And what so ever he has done
therein, he has done it of a good affectyon to the public weal: And where
some perchance takes it otherwise, it is not well done of them: he has
used the Archebisshop of Collon frendlye, but he could abide no delay at all:
What is his preparatyon to war, he sees presently: there is no man with him,
but his household servants, neither does he gather any power: And the cause
why he sent for him, is for that he supposes him to be a man that desires
peace: And therefore requires him, to declare his fantasye, how Relygion may
be appeased, or what he thinks may be obtained of his fellows. And if he
list not now, he will appoint of his counsel, to co^ferre with him in ye matter.
The^ the Lantzgraue speaking himself, if it lay in me, noble Emperor, to
do any thing for the welthe of The Lantzgraue to theperoure.
Germanye, and maynteynge of Amytye beetwene you and the states of Thempire,
certainly I would spare no pains, and for this cause chiefly came I hither: I
wisshed surely to have had some more of my fellows here, but that could not be
for shortness of time. The Duke of Saxo^ is to far of, and James Sturmius is
troubled with sickness: I believe right well that you have heard sondrye
reports, but doubteles the trewthe is so as I wrote to Nauius, for there was
no consultation had against you at Frankefurte, but we treated only, how we
might both persevere in our relygion, and also repulse unjust violence. Of
the French king it was showed us, that for the affinity of the Duke of
Orleans, the king had promised you aid against us: Many wise me^ marueled,
that you sued to the Turk for trewes, and supposed that no light cause moved
you so to do, especially having peace with the French king: but now
forasmuch as you say it is done for the common welthes sake, I have nothing
to obiecte against it: For Germany had need long since to have been unburdened
of such charges: we desired a counsel, the treweth is so, but the same to be
free, godly, and holded in Germany: And why we do not What counsel the
Protestants desired.
esteem this of Trent to be such, we did sufficientlye declare it unto you at
Woormes: For to show any way how to accord relygion, I may not, without
the advice of many fellows, and I perceive well I should have but small
thank of neither party: yet will I not refuse to confer with your counsel
herein, so it be not prejudicial. I have in deed no hope in the counsel, where
all others secluded, the bisshoppes only, and such others as be the Bishop of
Rooms sworn men shall determyne all things, but I suppose a synod of
Germany should not be unprofitable: for as yet other nations differ much from
us in opinions and doctrine. And the thing is so far entered in Germany, that
it can not be altered: Therefore were there nothing better than if you would
permit relygion there to be free, yet so, as all men should observe the peace.
I suppose, you ordained the colloquie at Regenspurge of a very good intent,
but I hear by some that were present, Freers be disturbers of peace.
how there be certain bitter Freers, which call again in questyon, the
articles already accorded, and be of so naughtye a life withal, that there is
no good to be looked for at their hands. The Archebisshop of Collon is
doubteles a goodman: And what so ever he does in this matter, he supposes it
to be his duty, especyallye, sith the decree of Regenspurge enjoined him to
refourme his Church: And that reformation, he caused to be made as temperately
as might be, taking away no more tha^ was nedeful, and in the church goods he
altered The book of reformation at Collon.
very littel. And his book is agreeable to the holy scripture, and confirmed
with the testimonies of the ancient Doctors Tertulia^, Auste^, Ambrose and
others which were nerer the time of the apostles: wherefore if any violence
should be offered him for this matter, the same might be awarnynge to others,
that had altered a great deal more. (Than says Themperoure) I leave the
treaty of Franckfurte, for I neither believed the tales that were told me,
neither have I given any occasyon that it should so be. And I have not
procured the counsel for other intent, then to profit the commonwealth, not
mynding, that if any thing be there decreed, there should any wrong be done to
the protestants therefore: for even for this cause was appointed the conference
at Regenspurge, the beginning whereof was very well, in case it had proceeded.
The Archebysshop of Collon, albeit he had promised to surcease and differ the
matter, proceeds nevertheless, and that by rigor, and compulsion, he puts
out the ordinary curates, and puts in others at his pleasure, he handeleth
the Clergy extremely, he stays and witholdeth the revenues and customs of
the Chanons, and is to precise in all things, so that I am constrained, to
assist the Clergy complaining unto me of their iniuryes: that the talk
between you and my counselors should not be prejudicial therewith am I well
contented. Hereunto again the Lantzgraue, that you bear so good an affection
toward Germany, and my league friends, most victoryous Emperor, I am right
glad and joyful, and beseech God that you may persevere herein: And surely if
according to your excellent wisdom, you do well consider, and way with
your self, what a commoditye Germanye is to your magnificence, to your
Realms and provinces, you shall find, that there is nothing more to be wished
for, then that all states should be glad of you their supreme Magistrate: And
that you again may have them still loving and obedient, For certainly if it
fortune, that Germany should be weakened, the same wylbe chiefly to your
discommoditie: And as touching my Lord of Collon, the matter stands even so
as I said before: Inasmuche as he is a Sheparde, he would feign have his
flock fed with good and wholesome food: And thinks his duty to be no
less. Therefore has he caused a form thereof to be set forth: And they
that are now his adversaries, were at the beginning most gredye of this
reformatyon: and now it is commen to pass, they refuse it, and draw
backewarde. Here themperoure interruptynge, ah (says The Archebisshop of
Collo^ is accoumpted unlearned.
he) what should that good man refourme? he scarselye understands any Latin:
And in all his life he never said but three masses, whereof I heard two my
self: he is not learned. But he reads over diligently the Germane books,
(says yt La^tzgraue) and as I am well assured, he understands religion.
Again the^peroure: to refourme is not to bring in a new faith and religion.
Neither does he (says the Lantzgraue) grant, that he has received a new
Relygion, but he has renewed that old, that was leafte of Christ and his
Apostles: And where he has displaced certain Curates of the church, and placed
others, the same aperteyneth to his charge and office. For if the person be a
naughty liver, or unlearned, it is surely the Bisshops part to substitute an
other in his stead, that is fyt for it: For within the jurisdictions of diverse
Bisshoppes many churches lie Uacant, as I am able to say, being destitute of
Curates, where the people are fed with no kind of doctrine, nor governed by
no discipline, but like brute beasts live a barbarous and dissolute life:
where he has taken somewhat of his The ignorance of the people for lack of
teaching.
Clergy, he has this reason for him, that he employed a great some of gold
on the Turkisshe and French wars. And it is the manner of Thempire, that the
Prince shall for this cause, command his subjects to pay: therefore this
thing deserves no blame at all: And where it is commonly bruted, that he did
this for relygion, that had his adversaries invented to bring him in hatred.
The next day at the Paulsegraues lodging, mete the Lantzgraue, Granuella^,
Nauius, and Masbacke. There Nauius began the talk, and repeteth some A
communication of the La^tzegraue and others.
part of The^perours communication the day before, declares wherefore they
are now met, and shows how desirous Themperoure is of peace, and where
for the same cause he appointed a conference at Regenspurge he says the
divines went a way. Then answered the Lantzgraue that of their departure from
thence, as yet he knows nothing, but the Duke of Saxon and he were advertised
by letters, what unreasonable conditions were offered them at the beginning,
when they might neither have their scrybes to write, nor see the copye of the
treaty, nor yet be permitted to write any thing home: they heard also how
vntemperately the Freers that were collocutours Freers vile in life and
learning.
handled the matter, which both would over throw the articles, that were there
before reconciled, and took away all hope of concord, and with the dishonest
examples of life, where offense to many: Whether their divines departed
therefore, being in despair of the matter, as yet he knows not, but certainly
they were not called thence. The^ talked Granuellan, and first speaking much of
Themperoures good nature, and love of peace, he partly excused that of the
conditions of the disputation: And where they were prohibited to sygnifye
ought home, he says that was done without Themperours commandment. There
the Lantzgraue exhorting, that these things set a side, they would come to the
present matter, commends the decree made at Spier in the year paste
concerning peace, and order of law, and declares that a provincial counsel
of Germany, were most expedient to accord and quiet Religion, and in as much
as Italyans, Spaniardes, Frenchemen, dissent so far from the Germans
doctrine, in his opynion a general counsel should be to little porpos. Not
withstandyng how soever the matter fall, and though none agreement can be made,
yet shows he how they ought to observe the peace, and that the decree of
Spier might not be abolisshed: For now was the state of relygion such in
Germany, that whosoever would assaye to extinguish it, must distroye innumerable
thousands. Which should be both an exceading great loss to Themperoure,
whom the force of Germany has auaunced, and also to other nations, that love
them not, chiefly the Turks, a great rejoicing and commodity. The decree of
Spier, says Granuella^, was made but for a time, neither was the fault in
Themperoure, that it was of no more force: but whom it was long on, it is
known well enough: In private counselles of several natyons, there has been
redress made only of vices and manners, but of faith and religion, no mention
made. And now are all things full of disse^tion and sects, where touching the
faith, all are not of one opinion: Wherefore this disceptation concerns not
only the Germans, but al other christen people in like case: The most part
of the Divines are froward men, stubburne, and obstinate, with whom the case
can not Divines stubburne and obstinate.
be dipatched: Therefore must princes and noble men be at the skannyng thereof,
and and certain mean way in relygion found out: for you your selves do not
permit religion to be free: For such as are of a contrary opinion to you,
are punisshed with imprisonment and by the purse. And seeing Themperoure
desires chiefly a concord, he may in no wise grant that thing, which is
ungodly: For if all things were permitted to the common people, Than should
not the Magistrate live in saftie. I do unwisely (says the Lantzgraue) to
reason of so weighty matters, my fellows being absent: notwithstanding, by
cause the matter is not handled to any prejudice I will proceed: I suppose that
Themperoure made the decree of Spier for a good intent, and where the
adversaries of the same, were then content to suffer it, and so promised, they
may not now go back with their words: Again, inasmuch as we gave
Themperoure strong aid against the French king, we trust surely, that the
thing, that was then agreed upon, and confirmed with seals, shall not be
broken. Moreover, there is nothing that ought to let a provincial counsel: For
we profess the same faith that the Apostles, the counsel of Nice, and
Athanasius did, and our divines are agreed upon the chief and principal
articles: there was in deed a controversy among them concerning the lords
supper, but the same is now appeased: for there is none but confesses that
the body and blud of Christ is there truly received: There be anabaptists,
Dauidians, and I know not who besides, whom in deed we do punnish. Therefore is
it not nedeful that foreine nations should be present when these things shall be
determined nevertheless, if they gave themselves to the knowledge of the
truth, it were chieflye to be wished for: That certain mean opinions should be
establyshed, and that by men of honor. I do not greatly resist, but I think
that ca^ hardly be done with out divines: but if the sincere preaching of the
gospel and the whole supper of the Lord, and the marriage of priests might be
permitted, as in time paste Paphuntius persuaded in the counsel Nicene, I
suppose a concord might be establisshed: I know no place, where men be
constrained to come to our religion: we do not suffer a contrary and a sundry
doctrine in the self same place, but we compel no man, kill no man, nor
spoil him of his goods: And in case men of our relygion might remain
harmeles in your dominions, and might have their Churches severally, assuredly
I could be content for mine own part, to suffer youres to have their
Churches in like case, with in my rule and dominion: but for as much as you
will not grant to the same, we desire also to have our doctrine equiualente:
Therefore look what I said before of the decree of Spier, and the prouincyall
Counsel of Germany, the same do I take to be best now also. If there be any
man, says Granuellan, in all the world, that loves peace, assuredly it is
Themperoure, who indede for the Bishop of Rooms pleasure, will not swerve one
hear breadthe from equytye: He has kept also the decree of Spier, not without
the great offense of the other party, and also of the Bishop. ^ea, Nauius
and I do sustain no small displeasure for the same cause: In a Counsel
provincial, I cannot see who should be Judge: For all men do not understand the
scripture after one sort. And because that in the Conference of learned men,
there appears small hope, doubtless some other means must be found: Some
Articles are indede accorded, but again there be more yet in controversy.
Moreover those that be accorded, Bucer does interpret more largely than the
thing it self permits: and if they should now rest here, it were easy to
judge, what would be the state of Thempyre at the length. I like it right
well (says the Themperoure ought to compel the Pope to do his duty.
Lantzgraue,) that you say how Themperoure hangs not of the Bishop his
sleue: And would God he might bring the Bishop to his duty: In times paste,
Bisshoppes of Room did honor The Emperor as their supreme Magistrate, And now
Emperors ar bounden to them by an oath: In all controversies Gods word
ought to be chyfe judge, which is not obscure, so that che mind of men would
frame themselves accordynglye. For it shows unto us sin, provoke us to
repentance and amendment of life, and preaches unto us Christ, who has
taken a way the sins of the world, in whose name also God the Father is to
be called upon, that he woolde grant us his holy spirit: Uerelye this
faith and Doctrine has ever been, and still remained in the Church, as the
Lords Prayer, the Creed of the Apostles: And diverse Songs beesydes
accustomed in churches do instruct us of the benefit of Christ: neither must
we here consider, what the greatest multitude weneth but The end of Scripture.
what the trewthe is. For at Jerusalem also, what time diverse of the Apostles
and disciples would have had the heathen people that had received the Gospel,
circumcised, Peter and Paul, James and Barnabas, were of a contrary opinion,
and the error of the residew showed, did abrogate that yoke of the law. At
the which time, the greatest The best things please sewest.
part of that congregation, gave place and obeyed the judgment of a few, that
were in the right. We verily do not prescribe other nations, but covet only,
that the Germans might agree within themselves: to treat of mean ways, I
could be content, so that they swarued not from the decre of Spier concerning
the establisshment of the peace and law: and in other things it is to be
seen, what may be establysshed by Gods word, and what may not. But I would
have also my cosen and friend here, the Paulse grave, who has been at many
assemblies, and knows much of matters past, to speak his opinion herin.
Then he, speaking of Themperours good will and disposition, The mind of the
Paul's grave.
says how the conference had at Regenspurge, was well and to much purpose
begone: And if it were renewed, and the articles already accorded, no more
decided, he thinks they might come to some tolerable agreement in the rest.
Themperoure (says Granuellan) desires aco^corde very much, as has been
often repeted: And except that be establysshed, it will surely redounde to the
damage of the publycke weal: And albeit The Emperor has not thus much profyt
by thempyre, albeit he has not his health also, yet for the love of Germany,
has he taken his journey. He has taken no secret counsel, either with the
French king or with others, neither comes he to crave aid, but to provide
generally for all men. Both France and England levy great force of men,
which is greatly to be suspected: Moreover The Emperor has to do in Spain,
by reason of the death of his Daughter inlawe: Yet all these things set a
part, he goes to the assembly. But if no Princes come thither, what shall he
do there alone? There is much calling and crying on hyn to refourme things,
and yet will they not come to the place appointed for consultation: Therefore it
should do well my Lords (speaking to the Paulsgraue and the Lantzgraue) if
you, which are two of the chiefest, would go thither. Albeit says the
Lantzgraue, that Themperoure has no great revenues out of Thempire, yet, in
as much as he has aid always thence against the Turk, against the French
king and others: And for that the dignity of Thempire, gets him great
authorytie What profit has the^peroure out of Germany
among other kings, and that he may leuye there always force and power at
his pleasure, and may assemble great armies in Germany, where others may not
do the like, how much is this to be esteemed? Our adversaries are more
clamorous than we, yet will they not follow good counsel. For we both allowed
ye decree of Spierand the articles accorded five years since at Regenspurge, we
desired to have enrolled for matter of record, and admitted also, al
reasonable conditions of the last conference: contrary wise they, did none of
al these, neither would they be brought to any co^formitie: but with open
protestation, at Worms, refused the communication. Now can not I go to
Regenspurge, the charge will be so great. There is also a matter in
controuersye between the Electour of Saxonye and Duke The Lantzgraue is arbiter
beetwirte the Dukes of Saxon.
Moris, which because their counselors can not determyne, it is put to my
arbitrament: Nevertheless I will send Ambassadors to the assemblye with
large commission. Thus departing, a few hours after, comes Nauius again to
the Lantzgraue, he tells him how this days talk has pleased The Emperor,
and solliciteth him again, to come himself to Regenspurge, also he enquireth
of him, whether he would talk again with Themperoure the same day in the
euenyng? he refuses not, and when he came, Themperoure gives him thanks by
Nauius, first, that he came thither, secondely, for that he The^peroure
thanketh the Lantzgraue
sees that the Paulsegraue and he are both desirous of a concord: Howebeit,
he supposes the Collocutours will return again to Regenspurge: if they do
not, he will send for them again: but in the mean time, he requires him,
that he would come him self to the assembly, though not at the beginning, yet
toward the later end. He him self has verily, all other affairs laid a
part, tarried these three years in Germany, to thentent he might quiet the
same. Whereunto the Lantzgraue answered, that of the departure of the
Colloquitours, he heard not before this day, he has also recyted the causes,
wherefore he thinks it was done: But if it be his desire, and that his
fellows be content, that the same Divines of the contrary part do return
again, his also shall not tarry from thence: But for him self, he may not goo
thither, for that he has been at great charges in the war of Brunswicke, and
has lately married a daughter, and is chosen vmpere between the Dukes of Saxon
and for that he can not go thither with out a great company, and because that
through his absence, his country might be in danger by the confederates of
the Duke of Brunswicke his prisoner. Than says The Emperor, that his intent is
not to burden him with vnnecessarye charges, but he desires him ernestlye to
come, for that he supposes, how his presence would further the whole
consultation, and that the Saxons and others might be so in couraged: And there
is no cause that he should be any thing affraide of Duke Heuries fellows: For
neither is their power so great, and though they should attempt any thing,
yet would he let it, and not suffer that any man shall disturb the publycke
quyetnes. The Lantzgraue again recytyng the causes, says he can promise
nothing, nevertheless he will send Ambassadors, which shall travel for
peace: which if they can not in all things obey and gratifye him, he desires
him not to take it displeasauntelye, neither think it to be don of any
obstinacy or malice, but for fear of gods displeasure: For this life time
is verey short and uncertain, therefore must they think of an euerlastingnes.
The Emperor again speaking of his own pains taken (says) the matter of
Saxon may be differred: therefore let him come, and set all lettes a part: for
he him self being present, might both counsel and cause his league friends
to show themselves tractable, and be a mean, that the beginning of the treaty
may be reasonable. After this the Lantzgraue complayninge of diverse, that had
aided the Duke of Brunswicke, makes a brief rehersall of the whole matter,
and how he was taken, (and says) how Duke Morys and he, do sustain by them
great iniurye: For they are light persons, and borne to styre up trouble:
among whom Friderick Spedius told him yesterdaye, that if he would hear
him, he Spedius a blabbe.
would open certain secret, and privy devises that are now a working: but in
as much as he trusted not to the man, he refused to talk with him, and wylled
him, to sygnyfye unto him by writing such things as he would have told him
presently. When the Lantzgraue had this declared, The Emperor was marvelous
angry with Spedius: wherefore after this communication had among them, the
Lantzgraue The Lantzgraue takes his leave of the Emperor
taking his leave of Themperoure, was bad farewell right frendely: And went from
thence to Hedelberge, and after home. And Themperoure went straight to
Regenspurge. And the self same time, that is to say, at the kalendes of
April, the Ambassadors of the Protestants, assemble at worms, to consult of
the whole matter. But because Themperoure sent away the Lantzgraue so gently,
they receiving letters from him of the same, who in the mean time had reported
the matter to the Duke of Saxon, the.xxiii. day of April depart, that they
might consulte of the same matters at Regenspurge, whyther they must go to the
imperial assembly. In this conuention they of Raue^spurge entered into league
with the Protestants. The eight day of April was the third sytting of the
fathers in the Counsel at The third session in the Syneode at Trente.
Trent. There are recited the books of the old and new Testament, and are
commanded to be taken for sacred and holy, no part nor jot of them omitted:
And the old and common translation of the Bibell is only commanded to be used
in churches and Scooles: It is also decreed, that no man interpret the holy
scripture after his own se^ce and understanding, but that al me^ follow herin
the consent of the church, and of the aunciente fathers. Moreover Printers are
commanded, that they prynte or set forth nothing, but by consent of their
ordinary Bishop: Furthermore it is forbidden ye any man shall use the terms or
testimonies of scripture to triflyng things or vain fables, about
superstition inchauntmente or witchecrafte, or also in ralyng and slanderous
libelles, and a day was appointed for the next syttyng, at the seuententhe
day of June. Themperours Ambassador there at the The oration of the Emperors
ambassador.
same time was Fraunces Toletane: and when he had spoken much in Themperours
praise, and had declared moreover, how ioyefull that day was to Themperoure,
wherein the bishop of Rome co^menced the counsel, he shows, that he is joined
in commission with Didaco Mendoza, who having caught an ague, is returned to
Uenise to his old Ambassade, and promysing his service he says, we must
pray to God that he would long continue this consent of minds in the Bishop
and Themperoure, that is so godly and wholesome for the publycke weal, to the
intent that vices reformed, and evil weeds plucked up by the roots, the
Lords field may receive the ancient tillage. In the eleventh day of April
the Bishop addresseth his letters by Hierome Franch, whom he sent than back
to the Swysses, unto the Bisshoppes of Sedune and Chur, and to certain Abbottes
in those parties. How he has called all the prelates of Christendom to a
general counsel at Trent: And it is reason, that they which, represente The
Popes letters to the Bisshops of Sedune and Chur.
the Church of the Swisses, should come thither chieflye: For the people of
that nation are unto him more derely beloved than the rest, for that they be as
it were the peculiar children of the Sea Apostolic and defendours of the
Ecclesiastical liberties: and to Tre^t are commen already, verey many
Bisshopes out of Italy France, and Spain, and the number increases daily:
Wherefore it is not semely, that those which dwell so far of, should
preuente them that are nere hand: A great part of their people are infected
with Heresies, and had so much the more need of a Counsel: Wherefore let them
now with dilygence, recompense this slackenes, and get them thither
immedyatelye, all delay set a part, unless they will incur the penaltye,
by the Laws prescribed, and the crime of neglecting their dewtie, and plain
dysobedyence. The rest shall his Ambassador tell them, unto whom he prays
them to give credyt. The clergy and University of Collon, followed their
suite at Room against their Archebysshop verey ernestlye. Wherefore the Bishop
of Room the.xvi. day of April, for as much as forgettyng his own saluatyo^,
he has offended diuersesly, against the ecclesiastical rules and doctrine,
against the traditions of the Apostles, rites and ceremonies of the christian
religion, in the church accustomed, contrary to the censure of Leo The
Archebisshop of Collon excommunicated by the Pope
the tenth, setfoorth against Luther and his fellows, he does excommunicate
him out of the communion of the church, and depriueth him of his
Archebishopricke and al others his benefices, priueleges, and dignities, and
commands the people of his iurysdiction, in general, that from henceforch
they obey him not, he releaseth them also of their oath by the which they are
bounden to him, and commands him to silence, and awardeth him to pay to the
contrary part costs and do^mage. With them of Collon joined the Bishops of
Liege, and of Utreiche, and the University of Louain, this sentence was after
imprinted at Room, in the month of August. When The Emperor came to
Regenspurge, and was infourmed of the whole matter by the presydentes
The^peroure comes to Regenspurg
of the conference, he took the going away of the Divines in most evil part,
and dispatching his letters through out Germany, complayneth greatly thereof,
and exhorts the princes most ernestly to come themselves. From the
Protestants came Ambassadors only: but thither came Duke Moris Ericke Duke of
Bru^swicke, John and Albert of Brandenburge, the Bishops, of Trent, Auspurge
Bamberge, Wirciburge, Passawe, and Hildesseme. About the end of May came also
king Ferdinando. The second day of June, ye Protestants go to Themperoure and
complain of the murtheryng of Diazius, and desire that the murderer may
suffer accordyngly: The Emperor, The murder of Diaze unpunished.
(says he) will consulte with his brother: Ferdinando moved also, makes the
like answer. With the Protestants then were the Ambassadors of the
Paulsgraue, of the Archebysshop of Collon, of Mu^ster, Norinberge, Regenspurge,
and Norling. The third day after, Themperoure calls before him all the
states, and declares the cause of calling this conuention, and after he has
complained much of the absence of the Princes, he fyndeth him self no less
grieved that the Collocutours were so sodaynely broken of and departed:
wherefore inasmuche as he coueteth greatly, that Relygion might be set at some
stay in Germany, he desires their advise and counsel, what is further to be
don herein: moreover how the judgment of the chamber may be reformed, and he
unburdened of the charges thereof. Finally, he shows them how for the relyfe
and quiet of Germany, he has through the means of the French King, taken
trewes with the Turk for one year, but seeing the trewes comes out at
October next, and as his brother king Ferdinando tells him, is broken also
already, and he knows not what wylbe the end thereof, he supposes, that they
shall be feign when time requires to give him that aid, which heretofore they
promised, and he will, for the defense of thempyre, mynister all the help and
counsel he is able.

The Princes Electours were wont to consulte and confer together: But at
this time the Ambassadors of Mentz and Treuerse, forsake the Ambassadors of
Collon, Palatyne, Saxon and Brandenburge, Adiuision among the electours.
and revolt to the Catholics, and after conference had with the^, they
approve the counsel of Trente, and exhort Themperoure, that he would
maynteyne the same, and persuade the Protestants, that both they would go
thither, and also submytte them selves, unto the decrees and judgment of the
Synod: But the Protestants desire Themperoure, that he would establyshe a
fyrme peace, and vpryghte justice, that he would refer the cause of Religion
to a laweful counsel of Germany, or assembly of thempyre, or to the
conference of learned men to be had upon certain condycions, and show how the
counsel of Trente is not the same, that has been promised by the decrees of
Thempyre. Whylest they consulted about these matters, behold it The brute of
war against the Protestants.
was bruted a broad that Themperoure, King Ferdinando and the Bishop of
Room made great preparatyon for wars. For insomuche as Themperoure had
peace with France, and trewes with the Turk for this year, the oportunytye of
time seemed fytte, to work their feate in. Certain Bysshoppes, and Themperours
Confessoure, with whom the Bishop of Room had practysed, were thought among
others to have been a great occasyon hereof. Wherefore, when Themperoure was
fullye resolved to have war, the.ix. day of June, he sends the Cardynall
of Trente in great post haste to Room, in message to the Bishop, to procure
the aid promised: two days after, he dispatcheth away Captains and
chieftaynes with money, to go levy men incontinentlye. He had before
commanded Marimilian the Earl of Bure, to bring him out of the low countries,
all the force he could get, both of horsemen and fotemen: he commands also
Marquis Albert, and Marquis John of Brandenburge, The falsehod of Marquis
Albert and John of Brandenburge.
and Wulfangus, the master of the order in Germany, to gether bands of
horsemen. And those two, though they were of the Protestants religion, and
Marquis John also in league with them, yet for as much as themperoure said,
how he attempted that war, not for religion, but against certain rebels,
they promised him their service: And Marquis John had married the Duke of
Bru^swickes daughter, that was prisoner with the Lantzgraue, The Ambassadors
of the Protesta^tes, being troubled to hear of these matters, and taking care
for the common danger of Germany, desire the other states of thempire, that
they would go with the^ to themperoure, to entreat, that he would have no
war: but that was in vain: especially the ambassadors of Mentz and Treuers
utterly refused them. The Lantzgraue, who had The Lantzgraue is circumspecte.
good espialles every where, se^dyng often his letters to Rege^spurge, advertised
them, what intelligence he had out of sundry places, and admonished them, that
the bands of horsemen, which for the suspicion of war they had hired
before, should be still retained, and new taken up and provided: but they, for
as much as the^perours demaundes pretended no likelynes of war, but Lenity
and desire of peace, thought verily there should have been no war that year:
But what time the thing it self declared, that the brute was not vain, when
now not only in Germany, but also in Italy powers were levied, and moreover
the force of Spaniardes did approach, the.xvi. day of June they go to
Themperoure, and for because all places are full of warlycke motions, they
inquyre of him, whether these things be don through his commandment: For in
as much as the report goes, that he myndeth no war against the Turk nor
other foreine Prince, they marvel to what end all this preparatyon tends.
And with them were the Ambassadors of Collo^ and Palatine: hereunto had
themperoure appointed Nauius to make them answer. With what love he has
embraced Germany, ever since he first, was Emperor, it is no need to recyte:
And is now of the same will also, neither has he any other pourpos, but that
peace and justice may be observed in the^pyre, and that all states may be
reconcyled: herein such as shall obey him, he commanded them to look for all
good will of him, and against those that shall do otherwise, he says how he
must proceed according to his right and authorytie. The next day addressyng
his letters The^perours letters to the Cities of the Protesta^tes.
to diverse Cities that were in league with the Protestants, especyally to
Strasburge, Norinberge, Auspurge and Ulmes. I doubt not (says he) but you
know well enough, how derely beloved Germany, the common country of us al,
has been to me always, what travel and pains, I have taken, and what
charges I have been at, not with out the great damage of my realms and
kingdoms, to the intent that weighty and dangerous dissension of religion,
might be appeased. Wherein doubtless I have not sought mine own private
commodity, but always don my endeavor, that offenses taken a way, Germany
might be in quiet: For this the decrees do testifye, so often by me renewed,
albeit that certain do enterprete these things otherwise, and do falsely
ascribe unto me the contrary. Moreover in this my gouernemente of the commonwealth, I have had evermore an especyall care for the preservation of the free
Cities, that they should not be oppressed by certain, which if they might
find an occasyon, to bring their purpose to pass, would not fail to do it.
Which thing I suppose, you, as you be wise me^, have marked, by former acts
don: Now, though certain men have oftentimes attempted diverse things to the
hynderaunce boothe of you, and of other states, and of me also, The^perours
craft.
yet, in as much as I could not without a great stir redress them, I have
suffered hitherto, in good hope surely, that I should at the length reap
the fruit of this my pacyence and lenitye, to the profyt of the publycke
weal: which doubtless had so commen to pass, had not some men by secret and
wonderful polycyes let this agremente, certes not for this cause, that
either they love Relyon, or respect gods glory, but that under a certain
pretense of holiness, wherewith they might cloak their wickedness, they might
oppress other states, and bring their goods and lands into their own
hands: For the revenues of some they have usurped already, and violently
deteyne the same, to the great iniurye of many. And now that they have
brought the matter to this pass, that justice set aside they now fear
nothing, they shoute now at my office, by more ways than one, and raseshely
demynisshe the same, for this intent certainly, that they may subdewe the
states of Thempyre, and especyallye the Cytyes, partly by force, and partly
by crafty means. Whose talk makes me to believe the thing to be certainly
true, when they brag, as I am credebly infourmed, and threate^ also, that
they will attempt force and war against me. The same thing is wytnessed by so
many of their forged sedytions, and famous lybelles and pictures, which they
setforthe, to reyse sedition, and inflame the people against me. Therefore can
I have no hope, that ever they should, through my lenity and patience wax the
better, and amend, or leave these insolent faccio^s. For certainly hitherto I
have so littell profyted by this mean, these many years now that they are not
only become nothing at all the better, but also worse then themselves, more
obstinate, more rebels, and desperate. Which thing certainly tends to the
destruction of the publycke weal, and unless a remedy be found, it will come
to pass, that Germany shall fall from his ancient lybertye, into a most
grievous bondage and tyranny: but that may I neither bear nor suffer any
longer, neither ca^ it by any mean be excused, though I would. Wherefore, to
the intent my dygnytie may be preserved, that peace and justice may consist in
their virtue and strength, and that the iminent danger may be repulsed, from
the Empire, and from your heads, I have prefixed to bring those disturbers of
the commonwealth to their duty, and to restore Germany, to her old beauty
and liberty. Which intent of mine I thought good to sygnifye unto you, that
you should give no credit unto such, as happily shall brute a broad, that my
purpose is otherwise For I do assure you upon my honor, that I do it for
none other respect, the^ for the same that I have now declared. Therefore I
trust also that you will not fail me herein, that both their boldness may be
repressed, and that your dignity may also be recovered. If you shall thus
do, I bed you look for all goodwill at my hands, which I will further
declare, incase you send me an Ambassadoure touching the same: the like thing
in effect, he wrote also to the Duke of Wirte^berge. The same day, wherein
these letters were in dited, Granuellan, and Nauius call unto them, the
ambassadors of the cities beforesaide, and speaking to every of them
severally in manner after one sort (say) how this war is not meant nor
prepared against the Cities but against certain rebels, that have committed
treason, and infringed themperours authority, which have taken the possessions
of certain Princes and bishops, which in deed by occasyon, will not spare the
cities neither: Wherefore look they show their faith and allegeaunce to
The^peroure, and aid not his enemies, that Themperoure have no cause of
displeasure against them, unto whom he wissheth well^ let them write this
whom with speed, and exhort their cities to remain in their de wtye:
Themperoure will also write unto them, and like wise send ambassadors. The
same day at Trent, it is ordained, that in A statute of Trente.
the Abbeies of Monks and Chanons, there be some learned man appointed to
read a lecture of divinity, and herunto some benefyce assigened out in stead
of a pension: And that no man be admitted to the office of reading, but of
whose learning, manners, and life the Bishop or Abbot be certain of: And
because the preaching of the Gospel is nothing less necessary, than the
readyng it self, the Bisshops and al other prelates of the church, are
commanded to instruct the people, or if they have any lawful impediment, to
substitute others that shall: Moreover the headpristes and pastoures of the
people are charged, at ye lest every sunday, to declare unto men those things
that are necessary for salvation, and that they exhort them unto virtue, and
fear them from vice and syn: And a penalty appointed for such as neglect
their duty. The Bisshops also are admonished to note dilligentlye, what
things are taught, and incase heresies or absurd opinions be sown abroad, to
use the remedy by the laws prescribed. After are decrees made of original
sin, and say that the whole spot thereof is taken A decree of oryginal sin.
away through baptism: And that there remayueth in deed in them that be
baptized a motion to sin, or concupiscence: And albeit Paul sometime calls
it sin, yet is it not done because it is sin in deed and properly so, but
because it inclines to sin: But the Uirgin Marye is not comprysed in this
decree, and that is to be observed, which in time paste was ordained by Bishop
Sirtus the fourth of that name, Than is the next day limited to sit in,
the.xxix. of June, Now did this Sixtus the fourth make a decre, wherein he did
excommunicate them as heretics, which teach that the Uirgyn Mary was
conceived in oryginall sin, and that the day consecrated by the church of
Room, in the memoryall of her conceptyon, ought not to be kept holy. This
decre is written in that part of the Bishops law, that is called extrauaga^tes.
In this foresaid counsel and sitting, Peter Danese, ambassador to the French
king, made an oration, and speaking The oration of the French ambassador.
Danese.
many things of the deserts and godly zeal of the kings of France toward
the Church of Room, beginning from king Clodowey declares, how king
Fraunces descendinge of the same progenitors, is in no kind of duty
inferyour to them, who was lynked with Leo the tenth in a continual bond of
amytie, and likewise with Adrian, Clement, and now with Paull the third, which
in all this tempestuous storm of Religion, has been well ware, that no
alteration has been within his dominions, for that he would have the whole
judgment of the matter to be referred to the church, for albeit he be of his
own nature most merciful; yet has he put them to most grievous torments,
which by a certain private rashenes, have assayed to diminyshe the state of the
church, through the which dillygence and severity, he has this obtained, that
he delivers now unto them all France in peasable wise: For in it, is no new,
nor strange doctrine, which is not of ancient custom and old discipline
confyrmed. And where he has always thought it profitable for the publycke
weal, that in the church, there should be one, namely the bishop of Room, as
the successor of Peter, unto whom all others, as to the head, might refer
all their doings, he has been evermore careful, that this magistrate might
still keep the supremacye: and albeit he has often times with large offers ben
moved to the contrary and to He vnderstandith this of the king of England.
follow thexample that an other has showed before his eyes, yet could he
never be removed from his pourpos, and of late when the counsel was called,
and that he heard how certain fathers were there assembled, forthewhich he
commanded certain of his chief Bisshops to repair thither, and when after a
few decrees were made and brought into France, he appointed him and his
fellows to come and declare his lykyng opinion touching the same: Therefore his
first request is, that they would ones establishe in general, what thing in
relygion is The French kings ^^qu^ste.
to be followed and believed: And again that for thecclesiasticall persons,
they would prescribe a most sharp disciplyne of life and manners: What so ever
they shall decree, let the^ put no doubt, but that through his commandment it
shall be observed in all France. Moreover, for as much as the kings of
France have done very much for the church of Room, that they would not
suffer, any thing to be dimisshed or altered, the possession whereof the kings
of France have had ever since Lewis surnamed Pius, the son of great Charles:
Finally, that of all the French Churches, whereof he has the patronage left
him of his elders, they would confyrme all ryghtes, priueleges, and lybertyes.
With the letters before mentioned, and with further credit also, came Lazarus
Schuendius to Strasburge, ye.xxiiii. day of June, when he had by the way
spoken with the rest of the cytyes. An answer of them of Strasborough to
the^peroure.
But the Senate, sendyng him away, not long after wrote unto the^peroure, and
for that they made no direct answer to Lazarus, they say it was for the
straungenes and difficulty of the thing, which did not concern the^ only, but
others in like case. Now where he says, that he bears such a love to
Germany, they give him great thanks, and besecheth him to persevere in the
same, and suffer not him self to be styrred up to ciuyll war: where he
complayneth moreover of certain, that do not their de wtie, neither show their
dew obedience, they were sorry to hear it, yet they trust, that there be none
of their Religion culpable in so great a crime: For the fault has not ben in
us (say they) that relygion has not ben accorded. For you know right well,
noble Emperor, how willinge and confyrmable we have been, to have a
recontilemente, both five years paste at Regenspurge, and also since and
before at all times, where certain others, through thaduise and persuasion of
the Bishop, have refused the same, and referred althinges to Room: But the
Bishop intends through violence and power to reteyne still those great
errors for the which arrose all The Pope and Tyrante.
this dissentio^ in the church and does so handle the matter in all things,
that we may not commit the cause unto his judgment: whereby it may well be
perceived, that we sustain wrong, if any man should lay the blame in us, that
this controuersye is not appeased. And where it is objected unto them, that
they should seek to pluck the church goods in to their own hands, under the
pretense of relygion, it is unfriendly said: For you have heard and known,
Caesar, why our fellows could suffer no longer that monkishe life in their
dominions, which was grown so far out of order, and how they have converted
the The clergy abused the church goods.
same to better uses, as fyndyng of Scooles and releuing of the poor. Where
again it is well known, how men of the contrary relygio^ heap up the
church goods, and abuse them to all voluptuousnes, and yet nothing spoken of:
furthermore, you your self have made decrees, both at Regenspurg, and lately
at Spier, how, for a common quiet, those goods ought to be used: Now incase
there be any man, that has not observed a measure herein, we doubt not, but
if the same were called forth, and heard speak, he would abide judgment, and
give none occasyon, that Germanye should therefore be laid waste through
war. They object to our men, that they have subverted the ministration of
justice: but you are not ignorant, most mighty Emperor, wherefore they have
co^playned of the judges of the chamber, and how ernestly they have desired a
redress, which albeit, it has been often promised, yet never came it to
effect. Therefore for the preservation of peace, you did displace them lately
at Spier, taking order how the Chamber should hereafter be established:
Which order we were always content to obey, and so declared at Worms: but
our adversaries did utterly refuse it (and said) they had rather have no
judgment at all: therefore is all the blame of this matter to be imputed unto
them: Finally we could never perceive that ever any of our league fre^des did
aspire or covet your office, or went about to oppress others, or else boasted
or threatened to work any kind of violence. And certainly we believed that
these things be beaten in to your head by the Bishop of Room and his
ministers for the hatred, which they bear to relygion: Howbeit we do suppose,
that you have perceived our good will toward you, by the wars which you have
had with foreine nations: And would god he that incenseth you now against us,
had borne you ever the same good will, that we do: for then had The goodwyll
of the Protesta^tes toward the^peroure.
some wars either not ben attempted at al, or else much sooner ended. Now in
those seditions and wars, that have chanced in Germany, since you were
Emperor how they have demeaned themselves toward you, and how frankly our
men have given their aid against the Turk, it is openly known, and chiefly
for the defense of your countries of Austriche. Forasmuch therefore as we
doubt not, but those states are free, and giltles in those crimes, which are
reported unto you, and if they might be heard, were able to declare their
innocence, before you and all others, we most ernestlye require you most
merciful Emperor, and father of the country, and for the love of God, and
for the preservation of Germany beseech you, to lay aside this so great
preparation, and to call them before you in judgment, that are so heynously
complained upon to your hyghnes, according to the ancient manner to your
predecessors accustomed, which we trust that you will not omit, And if you
thus do, we put no doubt, but that you shall soon perceive how they have
suffered iniurye, and bear there great good wylles toward you. And in this
consultation, behold, we beseech you, the miserable state of Germany, both by
reason of the continual dearth of things, and also for that terrible and
cruel enemy the Turk: consider what fydelytie both their elders have showed
to your auncetours, and they also unto you and to king Ferdinando your brother,
when both against the Turk, and against your other enemies they have sent
you more aid tha^ any other have done, which they do not refuse to do now
also: Ponder and weye with your self, what a mortal war this wylbe, what
calamity and euilles shall redounde thereby to the innocente people, as
children, infantes, women and such other like: And do not, through their
persuasion, which for mainteyning their rule and power, do malygne An heap
of euylles of civil war.
our men, bring the matter to that pass, that the noble country of Germany,
or any part thereof, unto you doubtless most addicted being wasted through her
own force, and sore afflicted, be not able any longer to resyste, and
withstand the Turkishe violence. Wherefore we right humbly beseech your
excellencye, that you would complish our request: we shall take the same in
stead of a great benefyte, and if there shall be any man, which after the matter
heard, will refuse to obey you contrary to law and equity, we will not only
not allow his doings, but will as much as lies in us, aid you, our high
prince, and Magistrate, given us of God, and evermore show all dew obedience.
Duke Moris which came to Rege^spurg the.xxv. day of May, The^peroure had
secret talk with Duke Moris
after he had long and much talked with themperoure privily, departs the.xx.
day of June. But what theffect of their communication was, the thing itself
shall after declare. When the Ambassadors of the Protestants saw that all
things tended to war and violence, neither that they could with out danger,
either consult of things needful, or write home to their states, they
co^ueyhed themselves one after another, and returned home. At the Ides of
June, Themperoure sent his Ambassador, John Muschet, treasurer of high
Burgundy to the Swysses, and in the preface speaking of his love and
Themperours anbassadour to the Swysses.
zeal toward the common wealth, namely of Germany, and desire of peace: he
says therbe certain princes of Germany, which under the pretense of the
Gospel, do many things seditiousely, and subvert al laws, that when there
is no judgment, they need not to fear what they do: Whose boldenes now has
so far proceeded, that they atte^pte things against his office and dygnytie,
and threaten him with war and violence, and are non otherwise like, but that in
his abse^ce, they intend to invade and oppress the common country: for the
which considerations, he is constrained to move war, that for the dignity
of his place and office, he may repulse the danger from the common wealth, and
restrain them from doing such outerage, neither distrusteth he, but that God
will further his enterprise: And supposes also, that other states whose wealth
consysteth herein will assiste him with their aid ad counsel: wherefore he
requires them, that they would not be otherwise persuaded by his adversaries,
which hatefully and spitefully deuyse many things against him, neither that
they atempt any matters through their persuasion, or permit ought to be done
with in their limits, whereby this his enterprise might be impeched or
hindered, For this war is taken in hand for the wealth of al Germany, and for
non other cause: Let them remain therefore in the old amytie and league, which
is betwixt them: For he will do nothing to the contrary, nor suffer that any
of his shall, and when occasion shall serve he will show them all love and
favor, as in deed he has done hitherto: which thing may be diuersely
perceived, but chiefly in this, that he never made league, with other kings
and states, but they were comprised in the same. The Cities of high Germanye,
and the Duke of Wirtemberge, hearing of Themperours answer that was given The
Cities of Wirtemberge puton armure.
by Nauius, as before is specifyed, immediately sendyng their letters to the
Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, the captains of their league show what is
needful to be done, and promises al their aid and fidelity, do levy as
many bands of fotmen, as they were able to make: and were in the field the
first of al men. And their army was divided in two parts: the one company
was the Dukes of Wertemberg containing.xxiiij. enseignes of foot men, and
among the^ were many noble gentle men: The other was hired of the Cities. When
all these were assembled at Ulmes, the.xxi. day of June they march to
Gunsperge, and the next day when they were mustred, encamped in several
places. Their Captains were John Hedecke, Scherteline, Balthazar Gutling,
Sebastian, Besserer, Matthew Langemantell, John Harder, and Joyce Roseberge.
They do first bind the powers of the Cities, by an oath, as the manner is,
charging them to follow and obey Scherteline, until the Princes them selves
come, that be Captains of the confederacy. Than going to the Dukesmen, when
they had done likewise, they appointe Hedecke their captain, after the same
sort. That done, Balthazar Gutling a noble man borne and The oraiion of
Balthazar to the soldiers.
counselor to the Duke of Wirtemberge, by the consent of the rest, speaking
to his princes soldiers: My derely beloved fellows (says he) Satan's Uicar
the Bishop of Room intends again to kindle such a fire, as shall inflame
and burn all Germany, the natyle country of us all, and utterly distroye the
same: For both the wonderful hatred that he bears to true relygio^, and
also the desire of vengeance, for the calamytie received in the fourmer years
by the Almaignes, when Rome was taken and sacked, do move him herunto.
Therefore has he styred up Charles the most puissaunte Emperor, to attempt
war against our princes and states, that are lincked in a godly league,
trusting, that through violence and great cruelty, they shall compel them to
the service and obseruaunce of their wicked and deuelish religion. For it is
reported for certentie, how that proud and detestable bo^dslaue of the Devil,
has levied already no small force both of horsemen and foormen, which he will
send to The^peroure: We hear for a treweth also of yt approaching of
Spaniardes: But what euilles will enswe to our common country, by foreine
soldiers, what distructio^, and mischief, every man of understanding may
easily perceive: Therefore our princes, and states, forasmuch as they knew it to
be their dewtie, not only to repulse al violence and injury from the people of
their dominions, but also to travel and forsee, that they be not desceaued
with false religion, and run in danger of everlasting da^natio^, are wholly
prefixed, through gods help, to defend this war, which is moved against the^,
not only beyo^de al expectation, but also contrary to conenauntes and promise.
And therefore have hired you and others more with all the speed that might be: but
in as much as the chieftanes of the leage are yet absent, and will be hear within
these few days, the most noble prince of Wirtemberge, Duke Ulriche, to
thentent that in the mean time, the whole matter may be governed by an order,
neither that yt enemy may epsy any occasion to hurt us, has appointed to be
your Captain, John Hedecke a man of a noble house and parentage. Wherefore him
you shall obey, and so demean your selves in all things, that the same
worthy and notable fame, which our elders in times past have gotten in sundry
battles, foughte^ with foreine nations, not without much ma^hod and bludshed,
may be also bequethed to our ofspryng and posterytie: Al otherthynges we shall
commit to almyghtie god, who doubtless in this so just a cause, and godly
defencion, will prepare such means for us, as unto his divine majesty, shall
seem good and expedient. I told you before how the Protestants ambassadors
departed from Regenspurge when there was no longer place of consultation there:
But now that their army was leuyed, as we have here showed they assembled at
Ulmes, to consult what is to be done. Wherefore the.xxi. day The Protesta^tes
letters to the Uenetians.
of June, they adresse their letters to the Duke and state of Uenyse and
complaining of the injury of the Bishop of Room, desire them that they would
not suffer his force to pass through their dominion, and if the Bishops
power should be augmented, they show by the examples of fourmer time, what
they, and other people in Italy may look for. They dispatche their letters
also to the most of the noble men in Germany, and admonish them, that they
do not stop the soldiers, that repare unto them. Again, because they of
Rhatia and Tirall, were sore vexed, for the coming of foreine soldiers, the
last day of June they exhort them by their letters, not to suffer them to
pass, and hereunto promise them aid. They are also assistaunce of the City
of Norimberge (but they say) they cannot, for that they have skante me^
sufficient to defend their own frontiers. Moreover they command Scherteline
the second day of July, to invade the enemies that were in mustering underneath
the Alps. And finally send Ambassadors to the Swisses. I showed you before of
the Cardinal of Trente, who^ Themperoure sent so hastily inpost to Room.
Wherefore through his A leage beetwyxte the Pope and the Emperor
soliciting, the league, which before was conceived and penned, the xxvi.
day of June is decreed upon these couenauntes. Forasmuch as Germany has now
these many years perseuered in great errors, in so much that a great danger is
to be feared thereby, for theschewing whereof the counsel was called at Trent and
commenced the last year past in the month of December: and the Protestants
do reject the same, and say it concerns them nothing, therefore has the
Bishop and Themperoure, for gods glory, and for the preservation of the
publycke weal, but chiefly of Germany, concluded between them selves upon
certain co^dicions. And first in deed that Themperoure shall prepare an army
and althynge needful for the war, in the month of June next enswyng, and
that he be furnished with all things, and that such as refuse that counsel,
and maynteyne those errors, he reduce by forte of arms to the old relygion,
and obedience of the holy See: but yet that he do endeavor and prove al means,
if he can bring it to pass without war: That he make no peace nor
composition with them, that shall be prejudicial or hurtefull to the church or
relygion: The Bishop, besides those hundredth thousand Dukates, which he
has already defrayde, shall lay down as much more at Uenise, which after
his Lieuetenauntes shall imploye upon the wars and to no other use: And that
if no wars be, he shall receive his money again: Moreover he shall furnyshe
The Emperor in this war with twelve thousand fotemen of Italians and five
hondreth light horsemen at his own charges for a half years space, over which
power, he shall place a Lieutenaunt Captains and Centurions: And if it fortune
the war to be finished, before the end of six months, to take the
commodity thereof: It shall be lawful for Themperoure this year, by the Bishop
of Romes permissio^, to take the one half of the church goods in Spain,
moreover it shall be lawful for him to sell as much Abbey lands in Spain, as
shall amounte to the sum of five hundredth The church goods in Spain to be
imployde herein.
thousand Dukates, and all this only for the mayntenaunce of this war, but
yet upon condition, that he lay to the^ again in mortgage so mutch of his
own lands: And because the thing is strange, he shall make them sufficient
warrantise, at the arbitrament of the bishop: If any man will impeche or let
this their enterprise, him shall they jointly resyst with both their forces,
and the one help theother, and they both to be bounden thus to do, so long
as the war shall endure, and six months besides, after that the war
shall be finished: it shall be free for every man to join him self unto this
league, and to be both partaker of the charges and the gain: This composition
also shall the Senate of Cardinals confyrme, and that which is spoken of
June, to be understand of the month of June this present year, wherein they
both have subscribed now to the leage before conceived. The copy of this
confederacy the Bishops legate, Hierome Fra^ch showed after to the Swisses,
as shall be declared in his place. About this time was a peace concluded between
France and England, Peace betwixt france and England.
and the French king permits the king of England to enjoy Bologne until
such time as he has paid him his money dew. And where at the same time
Henry the Dolphin had a daughter borne called after Isabell, for the better
confyrmation of that frendeshyp, the king of England was desired to be
godfather at the fountstone who sent his deputy into France. Sir Thomas
Cheynie knight, Lord Warden of Cinke ports. Then also was the Cardinal of
Saint Andrews The Cardinal of Scotland slain.
in Scotland in his own Castle about diner time, slain by a certain
gentleman, whose brother he had evil entreated for Lutheranisme. And he that
did the murder fled into England. The third day of July the bishop of Rome
sends his letters to the Swisses, and threatening upon them kindness, for the
frenship that had been between The Popes letters to the Swisses.
the^ and his predecessors, he bewayleth, that some of the^, are through the
disceipt of the devil, and law breakers, plucked from the apostolical relygion
and from him, as the most dear children out of the bosom and arms The tears
of the Crocodile.
of a most loving father: Notwithstanding it is the great gift of God, that
many of them have perseuered constant in the faith toward god and the church,
to thinte^t verily that others, which through the talk of wicked men, have been
disceaued, should have an example set before their eyes, and at the length
convert unto the religion of their forefathers: for it is a great token of gods
goodness, that in this discention of religion, they be at peace with in
themselves, wherein other places, for this occasion has been great sedition and
tumultes: The which to appease, he has ever since he was first bishop, used
al ye gentle remedies he could devise, and now also is fled to the last refuge,
calling a general counsel at Trent, a Town of Germany, within the limits
whereof, this evil sede of heretics has chiefly increased: unto the which
Town they might safly com, and there defend their matters, if they would: for
he trusted, that inso sacred a senate, to the which always all christen kings
and nations, have attributed very much, and in the assemble of so many
bishops, which through the instinctio^ of the holy ghost, should treat of
religion, no man would be so wicked, that he would not submit him self to so
great an authority, and which should not incontinently casting away his wicked
opinions, embrace the judgment of the catholic church: And that he has now
also the same opinion of them, and by reason of their concord at home, has
good hope that so many of them as have continewed faithful and constant, will
obey the counsel, and that the rest, which of no set purpos, but through a
certain credulytie, have been brought into error, will not dispyse the
authority of the counsel: which thing that they would do, and come unto the
counsel, as unto a certain heavenly Senate, over the which God himself is
presydent, he exhorts them most ernestly, as he has done also before: And
says how it has been a great grief to him, that diverse in Germany, yea,
of the same number, that are called Princes, which not only do proudely and
insolently contemn the counsel, but also bayte it with cursed and raylyng
words, and say how they will not obey the decrees thereof. But he was chiefly
sorry for this cause that through the contumacie and disobedience of these
obstinate persons, he is driven to attempt the matter by war: For he could
no longer The Pope attempteth the matter by force of arms.
suffer ye loss of so many souls, which through their heresies, perished
daily, nor yet the oppression of christians, whereof that other belongs to his
office pastoral, and this to the dignity of the degree wherein he is placed:
And whyleste he was thinking upon a remedy, and prayed God, to show him the
way, it chanced luckely, that The Emperor, a prince of most godly zeal,
offended with the like faults in a manner, that he was, thought good to avenge
the cause of religion, against those wicked heretics, by force of arms: For
where as by his intercession and means, a counsel was granted unto Germany,
it seemed unto him, that such as refused and contemned that, despised also his
doing and authority: wherefore this occasion offered even of god, he took
hold of it right gladly, and prefixed him self to further this noble myde of
Themperoure, as well with his own treasure, as also of the church of Rome: for
if he should otherwise do, and handel ye thing negligently and slackly, there is
no doubt, but god would require at his hands, as of their father, the souls of
somany children, as were lost through the falsehead of heretics: and for this
cause does he open his mind and counsel unto them, that they may see, with
what carefulnes he is vered, and may join their prayers with his, that is,
with God and religion: They have don verily many godly acts, but never non
more noble then this, if they will keep the old amity with god as their elders
have don, if they show to the church of Rome, which has ever don for them,
their old love and fidelity, if in this now so godly a cause they will give
their aid and assistaunce: Which thing he desires them: grealy, they would
do: The ambassadors of the Protestants in the upper part of Germany come
from Ulme to Baden to the conuentio^ The Protestants Ambassadors to the
Swisses.
of the Swisses, and declaring their message, were delaied to ye month of
August. Their requests were, that they would suffer no foreine soldiers to
pass through their country, and that they would permit their men to serve them
in their war, if the thing so required. At this time also, they of Brunswicke,
Goslarie, Hildessem and Hanobrie, at the commandment of the Duke of Saxon and
the Lantzgraue, Raze Wuolbutel, the chief castle of the Dukes of Brunswicke,
which they had hitherto kept with a garniso^. The Paulsegraue, prince electour,
in this The Paulsgraue axeth the cause of the war.
hurly burly makes suite to themperoure at Regenspurge, by his ambassador,
Sir Wuolsie Affesten, knight, to know what is the cause of this war and
against whom the preparation is made: he desires him also to leave war, and
beseech him to give him license to be an intercessour in the cause. A few days
after, the emperor makes him answer by Granuellan and Nauius, that it is not
hard for him, to know both what is the cause, and whom the war concerns.
After, he recites the same things in effect that he did before in his
letters to the Cities, A pretense of moving war
that they obey him not, that they have practiced things against him in
Germani, and in foreign nations, under the pretense of religion, how they will be
bounden to no laws, take other men's goods and possesons both sacred and
profane, styre up other states to Rebellion, reiecte the Decrees of Thempire,
and work altogether by crueltye and a kind of Tyrranye: Therefore he
purposes in this War to appease not only relygion, but all other
displeasures in like case, and restore peace and liberty unto Germany, and
such as shall do their dewtie to defend through his protection, and those that
be disturbers of ye common quiet, and be oppressors of liberty to punnish
sore and extremly according to their demerites. This answer of Themperoure,
the The Palsegraue seeks to reconsile the protestant to Themperoure,
Paulsgraue, the tenth day of July, when it was brought him the day before,
sends to the Duke of Saxo^, the Lantzgraue, and the Duke of Wirtemberge, and
declaryng the common danger, that hanged over Germany, especially by the
strange soldiour, if the war should wax mortal, he besecheth them, to
condescend and grant to as much as they may: For albeit the likelynes of
things is sharp and sorrowful to be hold, yet he supposes, that in case
they would make their submissio^ to The^peroure, and follow his mind in certain
things, it would be agreat furtheraunce to bring the matter to a concord. And
these be things, whereby he perceives Themperoure will be appeased, first if
they will crave perdon for their offense, secondly, if any man has don any
thing unjustly, that it be amended: finally, if they possess ought of any
other man's, that they would permit that to Themperoure, or to some other as they
shall think mete: Wherein if he may do any good, he promises his faith and
travail. In the mean time the Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue, to whom this
soden tumult chanced much unlooked Duke of Saxon and the Lentzgraue prepares
to war.
for, especially, for that the emperor lately departed so friendly from Spier,
being advertised of the whole matter, with great diligence gather their forces
also, and warn their fellows to do the like, and not to suffer themselves to
be diswaded, through the crafty counsel of certain. And when they were
assembled to take counsel, the fourth day of July sendyng their letters to
themperoure, we have heard (they say) most mercyful Emperor, by our
Ambassadors sent at your commandment to Regenspurg, how what time they had
heard of preparation Their letters to The^peroure.
for war, the fellows of our league and religion did solicit you
dillygently, that you would force, that Germany sustained no do^mage: And albeit
you answered so at that time, that we might well suspect something, yet were we
in a good hope, yt the same war had not ben moved against us, or any state of
thempire, for so much as being called of you to that asse^blie, we sent our
ambassadors thither with full authority who also consulted upon your
demaundes, and showed, what their advise was, in so much as we could suspect no
displeasure: moreover that answer of youres, does concern things past, but
yet to come, whilst you say that you will establishe the commonwealth, and
according to your authority, punnishe those that shall be disobedient: Wherefore
we could not think, that before you had published your demaundes, and before
we had made any answer, you would have prepared war: But at length, when by
many conjectures, and chyefely by your letters, adressed to certain princes
and Cities, and also by the words of Granuellan, and talk of Nauius, we
perceived that your purpose was to punyshe certain Princes that were
disobedyent, and the brute was every where, that the war was bente against
us we took it in deed heuely, and greuousely as becomes us no less, and
thought good to send this epistle to you, to pourge our selves. And first,
we are truly able to affirm, that we and our leagefrendes have always dorne
the common charges imposed upon us more than others, when some also have gonne
free: Moreover, the aid, that you desired in the last assembly at Spier, we
found the means that you had them granted, and performed the same our
selves: And now that after all these services done, we should be charged with
disobedience, it does not only grieve us, but is also much displeasaunt and
bitter: We would have wished surely, and it had been also reasou, that we should
first have been accused and heard, before it had commen to hand strypes and
that our accusation had been thus blased abroad: For so should we both easily
have proved our own innocencye, and confuted their sklaunder, that of us to
you have thus co^playned: How lovingly you dealt with us, both lately at
Spier, and also five years since at Regenspurge, it is openly known, so that
to us can be objected no rebellyon, or deed unworthy: we will omytte that, at
your request, we put the possession of the Dukedom of Brunswicke, to
arbiterment one year paste, and were in danger thereby to have lost our lives
and goods: Furthermore you are not ignorant, what time you were created
Emperor at Frankefurt, in what sort you bound your self to Thempyre, what
you promised by a most sacred oath, how The^peroure perjured.
your doings should be according to the laws of the Empire, wha^ any such
crime, as you now object unto us, should be laid to any man's charge: And where
you intend to work violence against us before our matter be heard or
known, we will commit that unto god, and when we shall hear, of what
matters you do accuse us, we shall so make answer, that all men shall
understand, that we both suffer iniurye, and that you also, through the
instigation of the Roomish antichrist, and the wicked counsel of Trent, do
attempt this war, to the intent both the doctrine of the gospel, and also the
liberty of Germanye The authors of this war.
may be oppressed, and will prove that there is none other cause: the condition
and state of our things requires, that we should thus much declare unto you:
you shall take it therefore in that part. For it had been a a great deal more
pleasant for us, to have gratifyed you, and approved our favor and
diligence. Themperoure, the seventh of July, writing The^perours letters to
the Archbishop of Collon.
letters to the Archbishop of Collon, for the wealth of Germany, (says he)
that is to say, that common quiet, right, and equity, the dignity of this
our office and liberty of Thempire may be recovered, which things in deed,
certain seditious persons, have almost expulsed out of the common wealth and
unless they should be restrained, would take them clean a way, I am
constrained to attempt war, that I may reduce them to their dewtie: And for as
much as I hear say, how they go about all that ever they can, to allure
you, and others to their fellowship, I command you, first, that throughout
your whole province you let proclaim, and do foresee that no man serve in this
war, unless he serve me and my captains such as shall have commission to
show, secondly, if any be gonne forth already to serve, that you call them
again immediately, and command them to tarry at home, and attend upon our
commandment: And such as will not obey, that you punnish them extremelye,
and so demean your selfs, that I may perceive, that you love the quiet of
Germany: except you thus do, know for certentie, that it shall be to your great
danger, and loss of all that you have. These letters, when the Archbishop
had received, he published in all places, and commanded they should be obeyed:
Besides he gave commandment that they should pray in Churches, that God of
his mercy would turn away the great danger that now hanged over Germany.
At the same time the Protestants se^d their ambassadors, to the kings of
France and England, newely reconciled, making suite to them for aid. After
the Duke and the La^tzgraue had written thus to Themperoure privately, as
before is said, at yt Ides of July, they set forth a public writing also,
wherein they The^perours polycie.
declare, how this war is made against Religion, and this to be
Themperours intent, that under a serten pretense of rebellyo^, and as though he
would punnysh but a few, he might pluck away the fellows of the league, one
from an other, and so much the more easelie at the length subvert them all.
And hereof they bring many proves, and report what king Fernando, what
Granuellan, what Nauius and others spoke privately at Regenspurge, verelye that
the contempt of the counsel was cause of this war. Moreover (they say) how
Themperoure sent commandment to them of Rauensburge, which had lately
received the doctrine of the Gospel, that within a few days they should for
sake their enterprise, or else would he give their City and Lands to be
divided among the Soldiers: but the Messager was called back with the
letters by the way, lest it should come forth a broad that the war were
against relygion: Forasmuch also as the bishop of Rome has given sentence
against I ye Archbishop of Collon, for the reformatyo^ of doctrine and has
deprived him of The Cardinal of Auspurge the firebrand of this war.
his dignity, and for that The^peroure in a manner does and threatens the
same, does not yt sufficiently declare the cause of the war? For it is a
common brure, how their drift is, yt the Cardinal of Auspurg, who has set this
matter a fire, shall through violence be substituted in his place: It is
reported moreover, that when they be vanquished, bands of Soldiers shall be
placed in all parts of Germany, which in Themperours name, shall see the
decrees of the counsel concerning relygion maynteyned and put in execution:
Furthermore, it is written by diverse men, how the Archebysshop of Toledo
chiefly, and such other prelates in Spain, do give a great sum of monye to
this war which they would not have done, if it had not ben for religion: It
is well known also, what manner of decree was made at Auspurge.xvi. years since,
what time Themperoure protested, that he could not abide this sect and
doctrine of Luther, but that to distroye the same utterly, he would bestow all
his force, treasure, life and blud also: For if they were once oppressed, as
God forbid, than should it quickly appear, whether they would spare this
religion, and would not rather slaye the ministere of the church, enforce
their wives and their children, and restore Monks and Freers and all that
relygious rabbell: But Themperoure may not lawfully work force against any
state, nor bannish any man, before his cause behearde, nor bring foreyn
soldiers within the bonds of Germany, or chaleng to him self any inherytance
or succession belonginge to thempire: For he is bounden to these conditions,
and has confyrmed them by an oath: For if it were lawful for him to do
otherwise, the state of the publycke weal could not long endure: And what
cause of displeasure should have against them, they cannot in the world
perceive: For touching me (says the Duke of Saxon) what so ever dissension
was between him, his brother Fernando, and me it was wholly quenched, two years
paste, at Spier, and for a nerer friendship, the lady Elenore daughter to king
Ferdinando, was promised freely to my eldest son, so that we could agree in
religion. The same did Themperoure than co^fyrme, and what time I should
return home from that assembly, he sent to me into my own lodging
Granuellan and Nauius, and with most large words offered all good will and
friendship to me, and my children and my whole country. And what great crime
have I committed since that time, that he should inte^d this cruelty against
me? But doubteles the matter is eue^ so, as we have showed you before: because
we refuse the bisshoppes counsel, we incurred displeasure: But reason would,
that he should not imagine these things against the house of Saxon: For he
knows, how, after the death of Maximilian, mine uncle Duke Fridericke, having
the crown imperial offered him, through his voice Duke Fridericke chosen
Emperor.
and means gave it unto him, to omit in the mean time many other benefits
which the house of Saxon has employed on the house of Austriche. And in case
he were offended for putting Julius Pu^ugius from the Bishopric of Nunburge,
I have in books setfoorthe declared my right and title of Patronage, and if
The Emperor would appoynte indifferent judges, offered to abide their judgment.
Now concerning my own part (says the Lantzgraue) I was thoroughly
reconciled to him five years since at Regenspurge. And for that I intended a
few years past to have warred on certain Bisshops, and for that afterward I
did help my cosyn the Duke of Wirtemberg, to recover his own, all this and
what so ever I had happily don besides against the law written or decrees of
Thempire, either privily or apartely, it was for given me, and wrytinges made
thereof, confirmed with hands and seals: Therefore can not I devise or imagine
what should be the cause of this grudge: Again when I spoke with him now
lately at Spyre, he showed him self so frendelye both in words and
countenance, that I could perceive no spark of displasure. And it was
couenaunted five year since at Regenspurge, that if he should attempt any thing
herafter against the Duke of Cleave, that I should not meddle in the matter:
After, he moved war against him, and I kept touch and promise: And than what
time he received the same Duke again to his favor, which was before
Uerlone, he perdoned all yt had served or assisted him with aid. But if he
should take in evil part our absence, that we came not our selves to
Rege^spurge: we have both made our excuse, the Duke by his Ambassa, dours,
and I by present talk with him at Spier. But what is then the lybertye of
Germany, or state of ye public weal, if we must have war therefore, when
both in others heretofore, and also in this conuention now at Regenspurge,
many other Princes are absent: And as for the war of Brunswicke, we are not
to be blamed: For it is lawful for all men, to save them selves from
violence. We have often It is lawsul to repulse a violence.
times desired in sundry assemblies, that his vyolence might be restreyned:
but more than words and letters we could obtain nothing: And yet in those
letters, which Fernando at our request wrote hereof to Duke Henry openly, were
other letters enclosed, whereby he might easily perceive, that he neded not to
obey the others. These Letters were found in the castle of Wuolsbuttell,
subscribed with the kings own hand, and are forth coming, and need be:
But in case the like severity had been extended to the Duke of Brunswicke, as
themperoure shows now unto us, albeit we have not deserved it, there had been
no war at all: But in as much as he impugned us, who for the profession of
the Gospel do sustain great hatred, they could wink at his myscheuous
acts. And The^peroure knows, how we committed the province taken, to
gardience, and for the defense taken in hand we offered our selves to abide
the order of the law, and arbitrament by him appointed: if he would have taken
the same way, and had not, forsaking the Arbiterment and contemnyng Themperours
order, attempted a new war, but would have tried the matter with us by the
law, the way had been easy enoughe. For if we, being convict in judgment, had
not obeyed, than should The Emperor have had just cause to put the law in
execution: but now, that he should thus do, he has not at al. Finally, from
the time that this Duke and his son were taken, themperoure did never demand
thing of us for the same: therefore there is no cause, wherefore we should be
accused for negletynge our dewtie. And in case it should be ascribed to us,
as though we should impeache the law, then have we to much wrong. For in
as much as of many years now, those only were received to be judges of the
chamber, which hated our religion most bitterly, for that The judges of the
Chamber be Papists.
the same judges, all co^positions set a part, gave sentence against us and our
fellows in matters of religion, and also in civil causes would let us have no
justice, we did, as we might do even by order of law, necessarely and
lawfully refuse them, as suspected and our adversaries, protestyng that we would
declare more at large the causes of the refusal, before chosen judges. Therefore
can there nothing be imputed unto us in this be half: Moreover two years past
it was decried at Spier, that the chamber should be establyshed uprightly, and
why it was not so don, it cannot be ascribed to us nor our fellows: And it is
not unknown to themperoure, how the last year in the asse^blie at Worms there
did no man resist this decree of his more, than they themselves, which will
seem to be loyal and obedient princes, for this intent verily, that where as
they be our adversaries, they might be our judges also. We do hear moreover
that this is laid to our charge as much blame worthy, that we seek to allure
unto us certain of the Nobility: But marvel it is, that we should be reproved
for this matter: For it is to be found and proved, that this has been always
the manner in the days of our forefathers, that they should join unto the^
not only the gentelmen of their own countries but the bishops also: And though
there wersom fault therein, it is therefore lawful to move war against us, our
cause The leage betwixt the three houses.
not heard, and albeit, that in the league of in heritaunce, which is between
the houses of Saxon, Brandenburg and Hesse, the emperor is excepted, yet ought
this to be so taken, if he do not abuse his authority. Wherefore, let Albert
and John of Brandenburge, cosins, who have promised to serve The Emperor against
us, consider with themselves dilligently, what they do, and remember their
oath, wherewith they are bou^de^: we would they should have this knowledge and
warninge, as they also, which being our clientes, take wages under the^ in this
war. Neither are they excused, if happily they will say, how the emperor is
pourposed to punnish certain princes for disobedience: For they knew
themselves, how there can be no such thing imputed to us justly: But if
Themperoure had accused us of any crime, as reason would have required, and that
we could not have confuted the same, he should not have neded to use all these
polycies, and solicit our fellows to withdraw themselves from us. For if he
could have showed our offense, they would have forsaken us, of their own
accord, and in a cause that had not ben good, few would have a biden the common
danger. Furthermore, what time we with the rest gave him aid two years since,
against the Frence king, he promised than, that when that war should be
finished, he would go into Hongary himself against the Turk. And now do
the Turks invade Hongary, and the places there aboutes with great force and
power, as in deed it is reported of many, and doubteles therbe in those parties
both at Offen and Pest great garnisons of Turks: But the poor men's lives of
yt country are neglected, which are now cast unto their enemies, as a pray,
and in the mean while they seek how to make slaughter in Germanye, and that
all thing may swymme full of their blud, that profess Christ. And seeing it
is so, we trust surely, that most men will pity and lament our case, and will
not assist our adversaries, which seek only to extinguish the doctrine of the
Gospel, as they have done in all others places of their dominions, and bring
us into extreme bondoge, but will be content for reasonable wages rather to
follow our camp, than theirs, wherein is the Romish Antichriste, and his
adherentes, whose chyfe endeavor The Intent of the Papists
is this, that even with the slaughter of all Germany, they may establish
again, and confirm their wicked and deuelishe doctrine. And in as much as
after much intreatinge for peace being of no crime as yet co^uicted, we are
enforced to war, to defend our selves from violence, we trust that God will
assist the treweth against lies and in this his cause, will be our high Emperor
and enseigne bearer against the wicked devises of the bishop. Unto him verily
do we commit the whole matter, and beseech him, to confound the cruel
counselles of blud thirsters, and ever more and more to auaunce the majesty
and glory of his name. The same day they write to John Marquis of
Bra^denburge: And because he is both in the league of the Protestants, The
Protesta^tes letters to John marquis of bra^denburge.
as by his own letters can be proved, and again in private confederacy with
them of old time, they admonish him, that he wear no armure against them,
but do according to the conuenauntes and bond of league: for otherwise they
will utter the whole matter, and declare openly, how far against his dewtie,
are his doings, Whereunto he answers, how he serves Themperoure, he does
not deny, forasmuce as he has put him out of doubt, that he warreth not
against religion: he is indede of the Protestants league, but only by mean of
the confession of Auspurge: As touching the pryuate league, therein is
Themperoure excepted by expressed words: And seeing it is so, there is no
cause, why they should be offended with his seruics, or to say that he does
ought against his faith and promise. When that answer was given, they set
forth a publycke writing, and among other things, they confute that, which
he said of the confession of Auspurg, and prove by his own letters, that he
is bounden to help them and their leagefrendes, if the matter should come to
such a pass, albeit that any man did pretend and feign an other cause of war
against the^, as the^peroure now does. Wherefore they admonish dilligently
alme^, but chiefly captains and soldiers, yt they serve not under him, which
has broken his faith. At ye Ides of July the bishop publishing a writing, and
speaking much of his care and zeal toward ye The Popes bull against the
Protestants.
common wealth, and men's salvation, of the counsel begone already of the
obstinacy of heretics, which contemn and refuse the same, and have moved
war against all godly men, he exhorts all men in general, to fast and
pray unto God, confess their sins, and every man chose him a ghostely
father where he list, and than receive the sacrament, to the intent that god
entreated, may prosper this war, which Themperoure and he have nedefullye
attempted, to root out Heresies, and restore the peace of the Church. And
albeit Themperoures intent was, that leuying powers in every place as secretly
as might The diligence of the Protestants in leuying their army.
be, he might set upon the Protestants, before they were provided, yet was
their diligence so great, and the courage of men so cherefull to defend this
war, that at the.xvi. day of July the Lantzgraue was in the field with his
men, not withstanding that in the low Duchland, Count de Bure had in manner
his whole army in readiness, neither was it certainly known, whom he would first
invade. Before the Lantzgraue marched out of his own country, he sent William
his eldest son of.xvi. years of age, to Strasburge, an exceading strong The
Lantzgraue sent his son to Strausburg
City. At his departure from home, the Duke of Brunswicke his prisoner, sent
him word, that if he would give him the hearing, he would open unto him, what
time it was devised, and what thentente and pourpos of this war is: But the
Lantzgraue, who supposed he said it but for a craft, either to lesson his own
offense, or to get him liberty, refused to talk with him: And he would utter
it to no man but to him self alone, The first explocte that the Protestants
did in high The first enterprise of the Protestants.
Germay, was against the enemy under the Alps. For where it was reported by
sundry messagers, yt the bishop his power having already almost passed ye
Alps, approached nere Germany, they thought good to prevent them. And thus
stands the case. They that come out of Italy, do pass by Trent, to
Iusprincke, a Town of king Ferdinando. From thence is there two ways to go
into Bauier, either down the River of Oeno, by Copsteyne, or else on ye left
hand over the mids of the Alps King Fernando has almost at the going out
of the Alps, the Castle of Erenberge situated upon an exceadyng high The
Castle of Ere^berg.
mountain, and the nature of the place is such, by reason of the straitnes and
holownes of the way, and the headlong and pitchehill stepenes to look
dowewardes, that who so has this passage, may prohibit, beit never so great
an army for passing that way. Wherefore in the month of July thither went
Sebastia^ Scherteline with a mean power at the commandment of the
Protestants Ambassadors, assembled at Ulmes, as I said before, and by the
way taking Fiessa, a Town of the Cardinals of Auspurge, which stands on
the river of Leyche, the tenth day of July, takes also that foresaid passage
and Castle, by composition made, with the soldiers of the garriso^ within. His
intent was, to have marched on through the Alps, and to have taken also
Insprucke, and fortyfyed it with a strong garryson: For so should he have kept
both ways, whereby they come out of Italye into Germany, and so should he have
shut up The Emperor from having eyter soldiers or vitalles out of that
parties: But in this great tumulte, when by the commandment of king Fernando
all men were called to armure in the county of Tirol, there came a great power
to Insprinke, under the leadyng of Fraunces Castelalte, governor of Trent, who
leaving a gariso^ to defend the Town, kept those ways Sherteline retireth.
and passages. Wherefore Scherteline placing soldiers in the Castle of
Erenberge, and Town of Fiessa, retireth, and with his force repareth to the
army assembled in high Germany about the River of Danubius called in duche
Thonaw. The army which Count Hedeck led, takes Dilling, a Town and Castle
of the Bishops of Auspurge, by composityon, and swears them to be true to
him the.xxiii. day of July. About the same time, Maurice Bishop of Eistet,
sends Ambassadors to the Chieftaynes of the war, praying them, that they
would spare him and his: he promises also to give them passage through his
province, and vitaile by couenaunte. Beneth Dilling is the Town of Donauerde,
which being sommoned to render, had refufed. But Donauerde taken.
what time the army came before it, and the ordenaunce was planted, they
yielded unto the protestants. In the mean season the Duke of Saxon and the
Lantzgraue march forward with their army, and passing through Frankome, when
the Bishop of Wirciburge, had put them in sufficient suertie, not to stop
their vitaile, they went and joined with their fellows. At the same time in
their Camp were the Ambassadors of the Marquis of Brandenburge prince
Electour, and of Duke Moris, sent about the permission of an in treaty: but
where they referred the matter to their fellows, there was nothing done.
Certain rich men, that dwelt at Auspurge, had packed up their short ends, and
were gonne out of the City: And because the brute went, that they lent
Themperoure money, the ambassadors that were tha^ at Ulmes, sending their
letters and Messagers to the Senate of Auspurge, show how unworthy a deed
this is, and admonish them ernestly, that they would sorsee, that the like ben
not don hereafter. The Senate makes answer, how they had long before, given
out their money for interest, as their manner is, because it should not be
unoccupied, knowing not of the wars: But now they suppose there is no man,
that gives out his monye to lone, nor none shall be suffered to do it
vnpunnished, if they may know it. All this time was themperoure at Regenspurg,
and besides three thousand Spaniardes, and about five thousand Themperours power
fotemen of Almaignes, and seven hundredth horsemen, he had no more power commen
to him at that time. He had sent for the Spaniardes out of Hongary: And it were
the same, which after the peace concluded with the French king, wintered in
Lorayne, and after went through Germany into Hongary as I showed you in the
last book. The peace lately made between France and England, chanced
luckely for the Protestants, for that the Almaignes which had served the
French king, came unto the^, through the co^duite of Count Bichling, and
George recrode, which was client to the Lanzgraue. The Emperor, yt xx. day of
July, by his letters patens does outlaw ye Duke of Saxo^ The duke of Saxon and
the Lantzgraue ar out lawed by The Emperor.
and the Lantzgraue. In the beginning he accompteth at large, what pains he
has taken hitherto, yt Germany might thoroughly be quyeted, what decrees he
has made for the same, that no force should be don to any man, for any kind
of matter, but that al things might be don by law and custom: Again, he
shows, how the states of thempyre be bounden to him, and what fidelity they
ought to perform. But all these things (says he) neglected, John
Fridericke Electour of Saxony, and Philip, Lanzgraue of Hesse, by a certain
rash boldenes, have at all times, as much as in them lay, hindered all our
travail and pains taken for the public weal, neither have they ben
obedient, and have not only them selves resisted us, but have also intised
other states to do the like, and with them to make unlawful co^spiracies. And
the Lantzgraue certain years past, pretending a cause I knew not what,
attempted war against some of the chiefest states of thempire, and inuading
their dominions, did extort agreat sum of money. And after, they both
together, set upon an other prince of thempyre, the cause not known, and drove
him out of his province, and kept it to them selves. They have also gotten
into their own. government, sundry Bishoprics and offices as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, the Lords whereof are of an auncyente custom under
the jurisdiction of Thempyre, and have their place in the consistory among
other states, and as yet also, though they have often complained and sued to us
in all assemblies, they deteine them still in that servitude. They have also
spoiled many of their goods and yearly revenues, and received into their
tuition the clientes and subjects of others. And now lately also, through a
certain singular boldness, have solicited diverse states, that they should not
come at this conuention, to the intent they might let our procedynges and bring
us in contempt. And all these things do they so much the more boldly, for
that they contemn judgments, and neither acknowledge nor fear the
magistrate: For through their fault the high judicial place of Thempyre is
taken away: the laws keep silence, and of a long time now there has been no
justice ministered, to the great loss and damage of many, and after a strange
example, such as has not ben heard of before. And that which is worste of
all, they work all these things, The Protestants accused of treason.
under that goodly and pleasant name of Religion, peace, and liberty: For
these use they, as clokes, to cover their doings, where they desire nothing
less, than either the agreement of relygion, or of Germany the peace and
liberty: certes they can prove by never a place of scripture, that it is
lawful for them obstinately to resist their high Magistrate in any case: but
the contrary is most manifest, as well by holy scripture, as also by autenticke
historyes, that those ancient professors of the christen doctrine, which
confirmed their faith, not in words only, but also by their deeds and death,
did obey heathen princes. Wherefore doubtless they ought much less to deny us
their dewtie, under the pretense of religion. And when they deny that, they
declare evidently, that their intent is, to take from us the crown imperial,
scepter, and all our authority, and usurp the same to themselves, and when
they have confounded all things, to oppress religion, law, peace, and
lybertye: And thus auaunced hyghly, with new honors and possessions, to bring
all men under their tyrany. For this do their words testifye, full of malicious
threatninges, and also their famous libelles and pictures dispersed into all
places, to the great mockerye and contempt of our name Moreover, they have not
only made leagues against us, in those their conuenticles, but have also
styred up foreign kings against us, and secretly aided the same with their
help and counsel. There be sum olso that cantel what they have attempted, to
induce yt Turk into Germany. Which thing is the rather to be credited, for
that the same should be verey fit and commodious for their pourpos. Wherefore
by these their doings, they break their allegeaunce, that they owe unto us,
and infringe the dignity of our office, they reiecte all decrees, which they
never esteemed otherwise, than if they had be^ made for this intent, that others
might not repulse violence from them selves, but that it were permitted to the^
only, to do injury to all me^. Therefore they have fallen into that most
heinous crime of treason, and into the condygne punishment for such an
offense by the laws prescribed. And because their doings beknowen, there is
no need to declare the^. And albeit yt through the authority, yt we have, we
might have punnished them long since, according unto their demerites, yet for
the love of peace, and to avoid trouble, we have favored them very much,
granted to them often in many things, more also than became us, and herin have
oftener than once hurt our own conscience, and minished our authority, and
not well provided for others. Thus did we five years since at Regenspurge,
deal most gentlye with the Lantzgraue, and two years past at Spier with the
Duke of Saxon, of this hope verily, that they being vanquished through our
great lenity, patience and clemency, should at the length leave their ungodly
devises, and should need of no extreme remedy. But where in deed I perceived,
that this did no good at all, and that they abused our gentleness, inasmuche as
contemning the decrees of thempire, and breaking conuenauntes, they proceed
obstinately, and through a licencious lust to rule, take other men's lands and
possessions, and will be bounden to no laws: But seek, to subvert the whole
state of ye public weal. And certainly, unless they be first put to silence,
neither can Relygion be accorded, nor the other parts of the common weal
established and reformed, we are constrained to use against the^, the
authority, that god has given us. And because their rebellion is manifest,
insomuch as they themselves cannot deny, again, for that they work by
violence, and will abide no judgment. Therefore do we outlaw them, as false
rebels, seditious (of treason guilty) and disturbers of the common quiet, and
we are prefixed to punnishe them, as they have deserved, to thintente we may
have liberty by them afterward, to establish the common wealth, and do such
things, as properly concern our office: therefore we straytly charge and
command, that no man aid the^ in any case, neither take their part: they
that shall do other wise, shall in curre the danger both of life and goods:
And let such as are happily gone already to serve them, return as soon as
they possible can. But let all men give their aid unto us, and find no let or
cauillation through any league, or private conuenauntes. For we make all these
things frustrate. Moreour we release all the Nobility and commons of their
dominions, of their allegeaunce and oath, whereby they are bounden to them, and
assure them to be in saftye, if they do obey: But such as shall refuse, to
be punnyshed, in like sort as they. The.xxii. day of July, Gerarde Uelduuiche
is sent again from Regenspurg to Constantinople, from whence he was but
lately returned. The Emperor, when nothing could here be determined, prorogeth
the conuentio^ of the^pire until ye kalends of February in the next year
following: of the bishop of Romes letters, sent to the Heluetia^s, The Popes
letters to the Swysses.
I have showed you before: which after the Bishops legate, Hierome Franch had
received, he sent them from Lucers, and writes to them, also him self
the.xxv. day of July. That three days since were delivered unto him the
letters of the Bishop and Senate of Cardinals. And albeit they are in a manner
of the same effect, as were his former letters, yet, for that they conteyne
somewhat more, he sends them now a copy of the same with speed, and at the
next conuention, he will show them the principal. And forasmuch as in the
same league, which lately now at the end of June the Bishop and Themperoure
made, there is leafte also aspace for others, that will come into the same
confederacye, moreover, because it was couuenaunted, that Themperoure should
try, whether that his adversaries, and enemies to the Church of Room, might
happily with out war be reduced to their dewetye and amendment, the Bishop
does ernestlye require of them, that they would pronounce with express
words, whether they will be of this league, and whether they will obey the
decrees of the Counsel of Trente: And where they have appointed him a day, at
the next assembly at Baden wherein they will make him an answer to his
former demaundes therefore he has now written to them also, to the entente
they may consulte in the mean season. Therefore he does beseech them, in
the blud of our savior Christ, that they would dilygently consider with
themselves, what a noble and famous act this wylbe, and how profitable for
them and their ofsprynge, if they would both help to quench this fire in
Germany, and approve also the decrees of the General counsel. Where the
bishop uttered the cause of the league, sum men suppose The Pope brings the
Emperouro into hatred.
it to be done of him for a crafty polycie that he might by this means put
Themperoure to his narrow shyftes. For it is most certain, that he took it
verey displeasauntely, that Themperoure pretended an other cause of war, as
shall be declared herafter. At this time Alberte, son to the Duke of Bauer,
maryeth the Lady Anne, the daughter of King Fernando, and the Duke of Cleave
the lady Marye and other of his Daughters. For when the Duke of Cleave had
Marriages in the broyle of wars.
long looked for the Daughter of Nauaire out of France, in vain, as before
is said, the Bishop of Room granted him a license to marye an other.
Wherefore he maryeth these same, and both marriages were solemnised at
Regenspurge in the mids of the vprores and tumultes of war: either Marriage
did concern a new bond of amity. A day of syttyng was appointed for the
fathers at Trent, as before you have heard at the end of July, but the matter
was defferred till the beginning of the next year, as in his place shall be
declared. There were at Trent besides the Cardinals, the Bisshoppes legate
and the Cardinals of Trent and Pacher a Spaniard, four The number of the
fathers at tre^t.
Archebishops.xxxiii. bishops, and of them two French, five Spanishe, and one
Slauonishe, the residew were all Italyans. Doctors of divinity,
relygious.xxxv. of others yt had not professed religion, twelve, for the most
part all Spaniardes. But among those four Archebishops, two of the^ bare
but the name only, Olans Magnus of Upsalya, and Robert Uenaut, a Scotte. And
that chanced thus. Wha^ The king of Swecia receives the Gospel.
Gustaue king of Swecia, nere unto Denmark, altered relygion, which was in
the year of our lord about a.M.D.xxxvii. John Magnus, Archbishop of Upsalya,
who mislyked that alteration, forsaking the country fled unto Room, and came
thither with a mean company. Afterward going to Uenyse, he became Suffragan to
the Patriarche of that City: But in fine waxing werye of that state, he
retourneth to Room, and being brought to an exigente, and a verey low ebb,
what time he had sold his horses, and in a manner put away all his
servants, the Bishop of Room placed him, in the Hospytall of the holy
ghost, wherein he ended his life full poorelye: there was with him his brother
Olans. Unto whom the Bishop gave that Archebishopricke of Gothlande, though
it were out of the precinct of the Church of Room, and commanded him to be
at the counsel, and gives him.xv. crowns a month to pay for his board, the
other, a Scotte, when he had infourmed the Bishop of the Archbishopricke of
Armacane in Irelande, he obtained of him the name and title thereof. This Scotte
was blind, and yet did not only say mass, but also would ride in Post.
Wherefore the Bishop would have these two in the counsel, for ostentation only,
as though those two nations so far of, the Goths and Iryshemen, did
acknowledge his Authorytie, where they in verey deed, had nothing but the
Shadow and bare name of the thing. It is mentioned before how Duke Moris, after
private talk had with The Emperor, departed from Rege^spurge: when he was
common home, king Fernando followyng shortly after, he goes unto him to Prage.
After, the first day of Auguste, The^perours letters to Duke Moris.
The Emperor sends to Duke of Moris From Regenspurge, a copy of the
proscription before rehearsed, and writing his letters commen to him and to his
people, he reports in a manner the same things, that are comprised in the
table of on Lawerie. And because he is allied unto the outlawes by kindred and
affinity, so nere, that he may happily claim some right in their lands and
possessions, he charge him most ernestly, that he assist him with all his
force, to win their countries, yea, and that he get all him self so soon as
he can, and hold it for his owneryght, for else will it come to pass, that all
shall be his that can catch it, who so ever he be, neither shall the right of
consinage or compactes profet him any thing. And again, for contemnynge his
Emperors commandment, he shall incur the same penalty, that the others
do, he commands also the Gentelmen and the people, to obey his
proclmatio^, and to serve their Prince faithfully, upon the like penalty. The
letters written to Duke Moris were commen also to his brother Augustus. Now was
the whole army of the The Protestants letters to the Duke of Bauer,
Protestants comme^ to the River of Danubius. There the Duke of Saxon and the
Lanzgraue and counselors of the war, write their letters to Willyam Duke of
Bauer. the.iii. day of August: to speak much of The^perours preparation to
war, it is no need: For he knows the whole matter. And albeit they have
omitted no kind of duty toward The Emperor, and supposed there had been no
cause of displeasure, yet have they heard long since, both by his answer,
and also by the talk of others, that he intends to war on the^, as though
they should be disobedient, where as yet they are neither convict of any crime,
nor have done wrong to any man: And beit so, that the offense were most true,
that he imputes to them, yet were it not lawful for him, before the case be
examined, to attempt the matter by force of arms: but this enterprise of his,
is against the right and laws of The^pire, against covenant and custom of
former time: For if The^perours had any matters against any state, the same
has be^ ever accustomed to be examined openly: Now, he knows, how of many
years there has been means devised, that Germany might lose her liberty. And
without all doubt, this war also tends to such an end: And albeit they
have always hitherto perceived in him a desire to mainteyne common liberty,
and although he lately promised many things touching his good will to wards
them, and sent them word that he would not suffer the foreine soldiour to pass
through his country, yet is it reported unto them, that he has given them
way already, and also vitayle and munition: which thing greueth them not a
lyttel, and suppose, that he is persuaded, so to do, through false sclaunders.
But where as by their writings lately setfoorth is declared abundantly, how
injuriously the Emperor deals, and how many couenauntes, as well public as
private, are in this one thing broken, they trust yet, that in the defense of
lybertye, he will assist the^ with his aid and counsel, especially, seeing
he put them in hope of the samethynge now lately by his messager. Therefore he
shall do well to command Themperours soldiers to depart out of his Towns
of Roene and Ingolstad, or else to permit them to place as many of their men
there also. And that he gives them free and safe recourse through his
country, and relieve them with victualles, and assure them hereof by
wryttynge. And albeit they think he will not say them nay, yet they desire
an answer within syue days: For if he should otherwise do, than must they
do as their counsel shall serve them. At the seuenthe day of Auguste, in
Machlin (a veraye fair Town of The^perours in Brabant) gunpowder that lay in
a Tower upon the walls, catching fire through lyghtning, first ouerthrewe the
same Town from the foundation, and the^ lighted upon the houses Lightenyng
caused of struction at Machlin.
within the City and without, above five hondreth pases in circuit, whereof
some were burnt, some overthrown, many shaken in pieces and turned
vpsydedowne, and of the same houses many heuge and exceading great stones flewe
threscore pases of through the violence of the powder, which so tearyng a
sonder the houses, and shaking and breaking the glass windows in every
street, defaced in a manner the whole city, it singed trees and turned them up
by the roots. In that calamitye perished two hondreth persons, or there
aboutes, partly consumed with fire, partly by the ruin and fall of houses,
stones and tyles ouerwelmed, besides those that were sore wounded, and yet
escaped death, whereof the number was great. Many of them two days, and three,
sum four days after were found and drawn out of the sellars and caves
underneath the ground, whereunto they were fled, diverse of them dead, which
perished, either for honger, or for lack of breathe some a live, which fynding
their vitayles laid up, sustained their life. Moreover a great number of
horses, and other beasts were burnt up stables and all. And the wall itself,
where the Toure stood, was thrown down flat with the ground, above two
hondreth pases in length. At the.ix. day of August, the Swisses mete again at
Baden, and the fourth day after, makes answer to the protestants The Swyses
answer to the Protestants,
Ambassadors, whom they appointed to be there at the same time, as before is
mentioned, not all the Swisses, but such only as were of the popish religyon.
Who said they were very sorry, that this war was moved between Themperoure
and them, neither was there anything that they had rather, or wished for more,
then peace. Therefore they would not intermeddle in this war to nor fro, nor
incline themselves to either party, howbeit, they would keep out foreine
soldiers, and not suffer them to pass through their dominion, and stay their
own men at home, as much as in them lies: And for the same cause have given
strayte commandment already, that no man go forth to serve in the wars,
but attend upon the Magistrates pleasure, and look to the defense of their
country: yet this notwithstanding, many are gonne a warfare, whom they have
taken into wages: which thing is a great grief to them: therefore they desire
them, to discharge the same, and suffer them to return home again: Besides
the former demaundes, the protestants required of them this moreover, that
they would not enter into that confederacy of The Emperor and Bishop of Room,
nor aid the^ with any men, whereunto the bishop especially moved the^, but
that they would assist them, which were constrained to defend unjust war, and
repulse from them violence. And reporting many things of the Bishops
iniquity, who will both rule the counsel, and be judge also, and holds the
same in a place set for iniurye, upon occasyon speak of the death of John
Diazius, and The death of Diazius is unpunished.
show how that destable murder is not only to this day unpunished, but is so
much commended of many also, as though it were worthy a great reward: which
thing is a warning to them, how dangerous and unmeet it is for them to come in
such places, where their aduersaties have all the government, and among
them, the bishop of Tre^t, lately made Cardinal, depely bounden to the Bishop
by more ways than one. For as much as the Protestants with all their force
were at the water of Thonawe, Themperoue which as yet was not fully
fournished, in the beginning of August, leaving Regenspurg with a garnison,
went to Landshut, a Town of the Duke of Bauers, by the River of Isara, and
pitcheth his tents without the walls. The Duke of Saxon the Lantzgraue and
their fellows, sendyng their The Protestants proclayme war. against
the^peroue.
letters from Donauerd, the eleventh day of August, declare of what mind they
are toward him, after the manner and law of Arms, and the last month (say
they) we made our purgation to you by letters, Emperor Charles, of such
things as we are accused of: And albeit reason would, that either you should
have laid a side your warlike furniture, or at the least have declared the
cause of the war, and hearing us speak likewise should have don according to
the custom of Thempyre, and your faith promised by an oath, yet forasmuch as
you do nevertheless proceed, we are also compelled to put on armure to bear
of this unjust violence much unworthy your person: For that you now seek to
extinguishe the doctrine of the Gospel, and liberty of thempyre, by sundry of
your acts it may be proved. For you know your self, what manner of
consultations, you have had now many years, with that Roomish Antichryst, and
foreyne kings, that you might either join them with you, or incense them
against us. And again, without the advice of the Princes and states of
Thempyre, you have taken trewes with the Turk, contrary quite to your
promise. For what time Germany gave you aid, two years paste, against the
French king, you affirmed, that the same war being finished, you would go
your self with an army against the Turk: But now have you made a
composition with him, verily, to thinte^t you might the better accomplish the
thing which you have intended against us. And now in this conuention at
Regenspurge, you have set a new color and face of the matter, speaking much
of your own industry and zeal to the common wealth and country of
Germany, and of the contumacie of certain others. Whice doubtless was done of
you for this intent, that you might sever us one from another, that are
confederated for relygion. For you are not able to charge us with any fault of
neglectyng our dewtie, and distrusting your cause, you have not sommoned us to
appear, and come to our answer before the Senate of thempire, yea, you did not
somuche as once name the parties: The crafti(...)s of themperoure.
and yet in the mean season, writing your letters to diverse Princes and
Cities, you dissembled full craftily, as though you attempted not war against
religion, but to punnishe certain rebels. But it is manifest enough that you
shoot at relygion, and appears hereof sufficyently, in that you solicited the
Bishop for a counsel, wherein, besides his clientes and adherentes, no man may
have place, nor liberty to speak, There were a very few, that were somewhat
frank in speaking, Liberty is exiled out of the counsel.
but a mean was found that they were called away, and worse placed in their
stead. What manner of decrees also, ye fathers at Tre^t have made now, it is
known to al men: wherefore this is not the counsel, that has been so often
promised in the assemblies of Thempyre, as we showed you the last year at
Worms. And the same things we said than, we will, should be now repeted:
Moreover that it is your pourpos, to compel us, to approve the counsel, it is
to be proved by the Bishops letters lately sent to the Heluetians, wherein he
complains sore of diverse in Germany, which reject the authority of this
counsel, and says how this is the cause, for the which he attempteth war:
And because you were also prefixed to war for the same matter (he says)
how it chanced to him luckely, and therefore would imploye thereupon, all the
force and treasure of the church of Room and his own also. Wherefore seeing
the Bishop has uttered that pretensed purpose of youres, which you would have
cloked by an other color, who can doubt any longer, but that you prick at
relygion? Certainly we know our selves faulty in nothing, which either we would
not should be heard openly, or that we can well answer: but it had concerned
your office, after the example of your predecessors, to have called us before
the Senate of Princes, and likewise, to have heard our reasons. Neither did
it become you thus to use us, to call us to the assembly, to propound of the
common wealth, to axe our advise and counsel, and in the mean while to
prepare war against us. For what kind of thing is this, to leave the Turk,
and to bend all the furye and rage of war against us, as though we were a
great deal worse than he? But we trust assuredly that God will impeche and
hinder this so unworthy a fact: For if there were any grudge or displeasure
between you, your brother Fernando and us, the same was wholye forgeuen at
Cadame, Uienna, Rege^spurg and Spier: Therefore you may paynte and set out the
matter as much as you list, yet know we for certentie, that there is no
other cause, but that true relygyon should be oppressed, and Germany lose her
lybertye. You write in deed to diverse, and go about to persuade, as though
you desiered greatly, that the doctrine of the Gospel might be auaunced, but
the opinions of the university of Louayne, confyrmed by your judgment, again
the execution of Godly men within your Realms, and dominions. The articles of
the University of Louayne.
And this confideracie made with that Romish Antichrist, declare and show well
enoughe what your intent is, verily even this, that you might recover and
establysh again all kind of Papistrie, quenching the true doctrine, that we
professed at Auspurge. And seeing the case is thus, and that we made our league
for this pourpos, that we might persevere in this Relygion, and defend it
ioyntely together, although any man else should pretend some other cause of
displesure, against any of us, we were driven of necessity to stand to our
own defense, which both Gods law and also the law of nature does permit
and grant us. And albeit, that by reason of this your enterprise, we are in
nothing bounden to you, and therefore neded not to declare unto you any part of
our mind, yet for a further assurance, we renounce the allegeaunce and dewetye,
whereby we were bounde^ to you, not that we would deminishe the right and
commodity of the^pyre, but rather preserve and mainteyne the same. This
therefore we protest openly, and that in solemuwyse that we are of this mind,
that we purpose to repulse from us, this war of you, and your fellows. For
in so godly and honest a cause, we ought to refuse no peril. They sent these
letters by a young gentelman and a Trumpeter, as the manner The^peroure would
not receive the Protestants letters.
is, to themperoure in his camp before Landshut: Which he did not only refuse
to receive, but also cummaunded in pain of their life, to carry it again where
they had it: And added this moreover, that if any man from henceforth came
unto him from them, he should insteade of a chain of gold, be rewarded with
an haulter. Then delivers he unto them the Table of prescription before
said, and gives The table of prescription.
them a most straight charge to deliver the same to their princes. Before they
sent this epistel, it was debated, how themperoure should be termed or spoken
to. And the Duke of Saxon would not have given him the name of Themperoure, for
otherwise it is not lawful to war with him: but the Lantzgraue was of a
contrary mind. And either of them had soothers, and vpholders of their saing.
And at the length this mean way was divised, that they should call him, as it
were he, that used the place of Themperoure. After they consult, whither to
go: some said, to Landshut, where Themperoure was: but when they that were
expert in the knowledge of the country, had showed them how they must go
through fennes, where the ways were so narrow, that oftentimes, by the space
of a mile, there could go but one horseman at once, alteryng their purpose,
they determine to go to Regenspurg, where Themperoure had leaft a garnison and
munition: For there was both a place commodious to incampe in, and if
themperoure would come to rescowe them that were beseged, they might try the
matter with him in the plain field. Wherefore removing their Camp, they march
foreward, howebeit verey flowly. And in manner about the same time, which was
at the Ides of The Popes army comes to the^peroure.
August, arrived at Landshut the Italians or Bishops force, which were right
welcome to Themperoure, who being advertised by espiall, of the progress of
his enemies, sent diverse and sondrye messagers, exhorting them to make haste.
The footmen were teen thousand, and five hundredth demilaunces. Over al these
had the Bishop made his nephewe, by his son, Octauius Farnesius, general.
Under him served many noble Captains, Alexander Uitellius, John The Captains
of the said army.
Baptiste Sabello, Ssortia Palauicino, Fridericke Sabello, Paullus Uitellio,
July Ursine Alexius Lascaris, Hierome of Pise, John Mary of Padowaye, Niclas
Plumbine, Niclas Petilian. With this power also Cosmus Medices, Duke of
Florence, sent two hundredth horsemen at the conduite of Rafe Balion, and
Hercules Duke of Farrare, a hundredth, by Alpho^so his bastard brother. The
bishop had joined with Octauius, the Cardinal his brother, Alexander
Farnesius, as it were to epsy what Themperours doings were, and also to be
aspurre unto him to prycke him forewarde, if need required. When Farnesius
departed out of Italy, he should say as it is reported, that he would make
such a slaughter in Germany, that his horse might swymme in the bludde of the
Lutheranes. Not long after came also the Spaniardes, whom themperoure had
called out from Naples and Millan, about six thousand, old and expert
soldiers all. Theyrechieftaynes were Philip Lauoye, Prince of Sulmone, Aluar
Sandey, Alfonse Uiues, James Arzie. Themperours lieutenaunte was The Capitaines
of the^peroures army.
Fernando Toletane, Duke of Alba: ye next place after him had John Baptiste
Castalde. The Cardinal of Auspurge was head commissioner for vitayle. There
served The Emperor also, Maximilian of Austriche, Emanuell Philiberte, son to
the Duke of Sauoye, Ericus Duke of Brunswicke, and Philip the son of Duke
Henry prisoner, George Duke of Megelburg, George Duke of Brunswicke, brother to
Henry, a man of the Church, Friderick Furstemberg, and Renard Solmen, Earls,
with diverse others. In the te^tes of the Protesta^tes, were John Ernest Duke
of Saxon, brother to the Prince Electour, The princes of the Protestants ca^pe.
and John Fridericke the electour his son, Philip Duke of Brunsewicke with
his four sons, Ernest, Albert, John, and Wuolfange, Fraunces Duke of
Luneburge, Wuolfang Prince of Anhalde: Christopher Henneberge, George
Wirtemberge Albert Mansfelde with his two sons John and Uolrate, Lewis
Oetingen with his son of the same name, William Furstemberge, Christopher
Oldenburge, Hubert Bichling, and John Hedecke, Earls all. Moreover Record, and
Rifeberge, and eight Enseignes of Swisses. Wherefore when all these forces were
commen together, besides that power which Cosite de Bure brought out of the
low country, the Emperor remouyng his Camp, marches toward Regenspurge.
That known, many began to suspect, that he would into Meyssen and Saronie.
Wherefore they made Bridges and transported their army over the River of
Thonnawe. And when they had marched a little way toward Norgouia, they had
intellyngence that Themperoure went from Regenspurge to Ingolstad. Then
tournynge again over Rough an uneven ways they repare to Dannbius, lest
The Emperor should take Nuburg, which is three miles above Ingolstad, and
Donauerd, and so should have the way open into the land of Wirtemberge. When
they were comen to Nasielse, the next day the Lantzgraue went forth with
no great company of Horsemen, to take the vieu of Ingolstad, knowing not that
Themperours army was there. For he had heard only of a few Spauiardes, that
lay therein garrison, The Lantzgraue rioeth forth to espy.
and them would he have provoked to escarmouche: But whylest he marches, there
appear certain horsemen of the Princes of Sulmone. The charge being given,
diverse were slain on both parts, but yet more hurt and taken. It was known
by them that were taken, that Themperoure would encampe the same day at
Ingolstad. This fact of the Lantzgraue, the Electour of Saxon took
displeasauntly and greuousely, and if he do the like hereafter, without
making him privy to it, he protests, that he will depart. After marchynge
forth a little way with their whole army in such order, as if they should
have fought a battle, they retired with their soldiers, to their camp. The
same night followyng, when men were in their first sleep, the Spaniardes enter
the camp where Count Hedecke lay, who was appointed under the Duke of Saxon,
and kill The Spaniardes invade the Protestants ca^p.
to the number of an hundredth of his fotemen, and lost diverse of their own
men also. Wherefore there was a great uproar throughoute all the camp, which
by reason of the darkness, was also more increased. The next day, which was
the.xxix. of August, certain Centuryons and Captains were sent out to vieu
the situation of their enemies Camp. Upon whom the horsemen of Italy breakyng
out of an Ambushe, gave the charge sodaynely. And when many were slain on
cyther side, they returned again, without their purpose. Wherefore the next
Morning the Lantzgraue, accompanied with a few others, chosen out of the
whole number, goes forth to know some certentye, and fyndyng a foorde,
where the Horsemen that were sent out before him, said there was nonue at
all, he retourneth back to the Duke of Saxon, and shows him, how Horsemen
may pass the River. The last day therefore of Auguste they were agreed to
setfoorthe in the morning as soon as day appeared, and to take the higher
ground, where in times paste stood the watch Tower of Ingolstad, and there
to plant certain pieces of Ordenaunce to shoute into their enemies Camp, to
see if they can perauenture provoke Themperoure to battle. When it was far
forth night, the Duke of Saxon aduertysed the Lantzgraue twyse, at sondrye
times, that Themperoure was departed, and how his Camp smoked: But he, geuynge
no credit to that report, sent forth Whilliam Schacht with five bands of
his own Hersemen, to keep the foorde, and to make Brydges for the Munition and
footmen: shortly after follows he with his whole power, and Munition in
great haste.

When he was commen to the watersyde Schachte showed him, how Themperoure was
not removed out of his place. When he had sent the Duke of Saxon intellygence
hereof, he marches to the hylle beforesayde, and there planteth part of his
Ordenaunce. He places his men also on the left hand and on the right: The
same did the Duke of Saxon, when he was commen thither with his company.

The eightenth Book of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of
Religion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the
fyfte
The argument of the eyghtenth Book.
THe Earl of Bure passes the Rhyne, by means of the Archebyshop of Mentz. The
counsel of the Lantgraue is not allowed to set upon the Emperor. The Switzers
will not meddle in this war: Wherefore the Duke and the Lantgraue solicit
the Bohemers: and answer fully to the accusations and dissemblinges of the
Emperor. They remove their Camp to cut the way from the Earl of Bure.
Peter Strosse keeps not promise, to lend them money. Touruert being rendered
to the Emperor, Duke Maurice holds an assemblee of his states against the
Duke of Saxon, unto whom the Lantgraue answers. The Duke of Saxons country
is set on fire and destroyed by the Hongarians, and Duke Moris surpriseth
certain of his towns. Fourtene Martyrs brent at Meanx. The Protestauntes having
levied their camp, are pursued. The Duke of Witte^berg and certain cities make
their peace with the Emperor. The father of Trent, establish the Article of
the institution of man. After the death of king Henry the eight, the Gospel
had fre passage in England. Marquis Albert is taken prisoner by the Duke of
Saxon.

When Maximilia^ the Earl of Bure, of who^ is mentioned before, had assembled
all the power The Earl of Bure leads an Army to the emperor.
he could, in the low country, which were four thousand horsemen, and ten
thousand fotemen, and emonges them certain bands of Spanyardes and Italians,
which had served the king of England in his wars against France, marching
forward with the same out of Braba^t in the month of August, passes over the
Rhine above and beneath Mentz, whersoeuer he could get shipping,
notwithstanding that the Protestauntes had laid a power on the other side, at
the leading of Christopher Oldenburge, and Riseberge, which should have stopped
their passage. The Archbishop of Me^tz, was thought to have helped much in this
matter. When the whole army of the Protestauntes was come to the forsaid
place, they shot of al their ordinance into themperours ca^pe most terrible.
Even there the Lantgraue, calling before the Duke of Saxo^, ye counselors and
captains of y^ war, if I had y^ government alone, The bold and profitable
counsel of y^ Lantgraue.
says he, as I had what time I restored y^ Duke of Wirte^berg, I would first
undertake to give y^ charge upon the^nemy with ii. legio^s, and bring ye pio^ners
to cast down their tre^ches, and that done, assail the^ with the whole force and
power, but herein whilst thopinio^s of me^ were diverse, and some diswaded y^
thing, as full of most peril, and others misliked not y^ same, so yt there were no
danger to be feared of the towns men, which had great store of shot and
munition, and that the horsemen were also at the first charge given: nothing
was attempted. Which thing doubtless is so much reproved of many, that this
same error is thought to be the cause and beginning The cause of the Protest.
misery.
of their calamity, and of the Emperors victory. For they far excelled in
horsemen, and than was the Emperors camp entrenched but with a low ditche
only, so that it was but of small force. But what time the Emperor had
sustained the shot and brunt of that day, the next night followyng he so well
fortified his camp, that after he was of better confidence, and might endure
more easily all storms that came. But they say, how in this so great a
danger the Emperors heart and Fear in the Emperors Camp.
courage was wonderful good, and not only declared no token of fear him
self, but also boldened others exceadingly, and offered to take such part as
they did. How the Emperor solicited the Switzers by his Treasurer of Burgundy,
I showed in the last book. Unto those requests was answer made in the
assembly of Baden, holden in the month of August, as before is mentioned. How
they will not infringe the league that they The Swisses answer to the Emperor.
have with the house of Austriche and Burgundy. Moreover, they will call home
again, such as are gone forth a warfar, and unless they shall obey, punyshe
them accordingly. Thus answered those nine towns, that are of the popysh
Religion: But they of Zurich, Bernes, and Basil, and also the Schafusians, for
as much as the Emperors and Bishops letters did not importe one, and the
same cause of this war, again, in as much as the copy of the Emperors and
Bishops league, which was showed them by the Bishops Ambassador, spoke
plainly, how this war was attempted, to root out the Religion of the
Protestauntes, they told the Emperors Ambassador, that they would take
deliberation in making an answer, and attend, until such time as the
Emperor had advertised them, whether he would permit them to keep still
their Religion in safitie. When the Emperor hard of The Emperor to the
Swisses is a Gospeller.
this, the seven and twenty day of August, he addresseth to them his letters
out of the Ca^pe before Ingolstad. Where they have not made the same answer,
that the rest have done, he can not perceive the cause, and supposes yt this
is done through ye craft of his adversaries: For he hears how in the former
assembly of Bade^, they went about to persuade with them, as though he had moved
war, not to punish rebellious princes, but against certain cities, to thinte^t
yt through ye bishops aid, ye doctrine of ye Gospel and also ye liberty of
Germany might be oppressed, he hereth moreover, how they have solicited the^,
not only for aid against him but also concerning a league, whereof as he
understands they have put them in good hope, and that in the next assembly,
they shall make the^ a direct answer: And as touching the cause of y^ war, for
as much as they have understood the same, as well by his private letters
written unto the^, as such also, as he has published openly, it needs not
here to be repeted. For that he has either molested any man for Religion sake,
or given occasion of rebellion, it can not be showed nor proved: but yt
straight ways from the beginning of his preparation unto war, he treated
fre^dly and gently with diverse more also, tha^ was decent for his person, to
do to men of so mean estate and degree. Nether can this excuse their rebellion,
for yt the bishop of Rome does assist him, for not only the Princes of Italy,
but certain also of Germany, and diverse gentlemen of right noble houses, and
emonges the^ some of the religion and league of the Protestauntes, do aid him
now, and will venture their lives, and spend their blud in this war: Which
doubtless they would not do, in case the matter stood as these seditiouse The
Profestau^tes one against another.
persons do falsely report. And yt they have always gone about, under the
pretense of religion, to resist their high magistrate, to oppress religion
and the liberty of Germany, and bring al other states into their subjection,
it is by many of their doings so well known, that it needs no further
declaration. For verily under the sweet name of Religion, they have allured
into their co^federacie ye chiefest cities of Germany, and through their Force
ought not to be used in Religion.
force, and furniture, have gotten the lands and possessions of others. How
they now also go to work, and compelle other Princes subjects to take their
parts, and disturb many in their religion, and enforce them to another kind
of life, cast also diverse in prison and fetters, and threaten them cruelly,
and rob and spoil churches, the thing it self declares. For this is the
very cause, why they covet to have them in their league, that by this mean
being made stronger, they might the more easily accomplish their pretensed
purpose: he doubted not, but they also perceive these things, and understand
right well, what incommoditie, or discommoditie they may look for, by their
society. And seeing the matter is thus, and inasmuche as they are not ignorant
both of his good will and also of the causes of the war, he trusts that
they will refuse their league, and keep their soldiers at home, and call home
such are gone to serve into the war, under a set penalty, and do nothing
contrary to the ancient leagues, and by the example of the residue, observe
peace and amity. For this shall both redounde to their own praise, and shall be
to him also right acceptable. unto the which letters they write again after the
same sort as they answered thambassadour before, and desire him to accept in
good part their delay in answering: And in as much as he affirms, that this
war is nether to oppress Religion, nor yet ye liberty of the country, they
say how they will do again none other wise tha^ shall become the^: For if any be
gone out of their confynes a warfare, the same is done without their leave and
knowledge as often times it chances: And their manner is, not to call the^ again
that go forth without their license, but what time they return home, to
punish them. And as they did move the Swisses, so likewise the Duke of Saxon
and the Lantgraue solicited the Bohemers: but they made such answer as The
Protestauntes se^d to the Bohemers.
it appeared well, yt their minds were already persuaded through thaccusation of
king Ferdinando. When they perceived this by their letters, about the end of
August they write again, and show them manifestly, that this war is attempted
against religion, and sent unto them the books which have been lately set
forth concerning the same, and require the^ to work no displeasure against
them, and last to signify unto the^, what they intend to do. About the same
time also they publish a writing, wherein they say how they are advertised by
them that are credit worthy, how the bishop and Antichrist of Rome, an
instrument The Pope hireth men to poison other.
of the devil, and author of this war, who in certain years past, by his hired
ministers, set many towns of fire in Saxon, has now sent forth impoysoners,
to infecte their wells, and standing waters, to the intent that the same which
war and yt sword can not distroy, these may dispatche with their poison.
Wherefore they do admonish universally al me^, but chiefly their own subjects,
to wait narrowly, that such men be apprehended, and being put to torture, when
they shall have tried their mischief, that they suffer accordingly. And within
a few days after, the Duke of Saxon his son, John William, in his letters
published, gives warning to his country, yt they take diligent head to the^
selves. For lately not far from Weynmar a town of Turing, a certain Italian was
taken of suspicio^ who confessed that he and diverse others had money given
them at Rome in the bishops name, yt they should, with fiering and poison, do as
much hurt in Germany as they possible might. Concerning their outlawyng, and
how the emperor sent a copy thereof to ye Duke and to ye The Protestauntes answer
to the table of outlawery.
Lantgraue, I have showed you before: Wherefore wha^ they had received it, in
their ca^pe at Ingolstad, ye second day of September, in ye defense of their
honor and estimation, they answer in a very long writing. That he so highly
commends his zeal and good will tomany, it is nothing but dissimulatio^: for
since the time he was first chosen Emperor, he has always sought means, how
to bring it in bondage. For this was verily the cause, why he leaving Spain
and his other countries, has returned so often in to Germany, and been at so
importunate charges. Of like sort is the same, which he speaks of religion.
For his purpose has been always, ye having opportunity he might oppress the
sincere doctrine. For so often (say they) as he granted peace unto us and The
Emperors craft toward the Protestants
our religion, he did it craftily, for a time only, until we had given money to
serve the public uses and necessities of thempire. After he called the
decrees made, in doubt and into question, and held the matter so long in
suspense, till he had made peace with the French king, and taken truce with the
Turck, and that the bishop and he espiyng a time convenient, had appointed the
counsel of Trent, and concluded upon a league: but hereof will we bring
probations. Five years past at Regenspurg, he made a decree of religion, and
where as in diverse points we misliked the same, he declared his mind more at
large, and gave it us in writing sufficiently: The same in other assemblies
after, his deputies and king Ferdinando did confirm. And yet two years since,
in the co^uention at Spier, when mention was made thereof, he said, how he did
remember no such declaration. The last year in the co^uention at Worms, the
Bishop of Hildesseme, said openly before all the Princes, how the emperor
promised the catholics, yt the decree of Spier should take no place after the
French wars. A few months past, when he went to the conuention at
Regenspurg, Granuellan spoke it to me, says the Lantgraue, in the presence of
the Paulsgraue, of my counselors, and the Ambassador of the Duke of
Wirte^berg, how that decree of Spier was applied unto the time: And that now
the emperor can not longer mainteyn the same against the other states. Six
years past at Hagenaw, king Firdinando, when he shows his commission The
Emperors decrees made for fear
to the catholics, said, that unto us should no decrees be observed: For they
were made for fear of the Turkish war, what time he had need of our aid.
What think you? Was not this a goodly cause and a fetch to supplant us and our
fellows. They confess the craft the^ selves, whereby they licked us of our
money. Therefore it is plain, that he intended always the distructio^ of
religion, as the late co^federacie declares and tarried but only for a time to
serve his purpos, and because he would appear to have ye matter lawfully
decided, he was ever in hand with us, yt we should submit our selfs to ye bishop
of Romes counsel, but why we might not so do, it is sufficiently declared i^
our books set forth of And his purpose was, to maintain and execute the decrees
of the counsel, for the accomplishement whereof he had long before solicited
certain foreign Princes: but fearing lest by this mean he should set in his top,
all that cleaued to religion, he pretended an other cause and fained rebellion,
that he might withdraw our fellows, and when he had vanquished the chiefest,
might after compel the residue to obey his commandment. And albeit that he
and his brother thought to keep marvelous secret this their subtle and crafty
counsel, yet through the singular goodness of God, it comes to light daily
more and more. For the Bishop himself, by his Ambassadors declared to the
Switzers, the cause of the war, and copy of the league. Whereby it is
manifest that not, they alone, but al other that profess the same doctrine,
are in the like danger, and that this is their endeavor, to restore papistrie
in all places. Let all men judge therefore how truly this matter was handled,
when lately in the conuention at Regenspurg, they went about to persuade, and
concluded also, that for the appeasing of religion, they would use lawful and
quiet remedies. He told me him self says the Lantgraue, lately at Spier,
that he was in no The dissimulation of the Emperor.
league with the Bishop: The same affirmed Granuellan. This is verily that same
fatherly mind and affection: This is that zeal and love of peace, whereof they
speak so much. Did ever man hear of the like thing, that he would persuade
the Princes quite contrary, to that which he has had so long prefixed in his
mind? We know right well, what duty the Princes owe unto the Emperor, and
again, what he ought to perform unto them: For as we are bounden to him, so
is he again bounden also unto us: And where as our cause not heard, he does
outlawe us, and seeks to put us besides our lands and possessions, in that he
breaks the bond of the civil law, whereby the patron is bounden again to
his cliente. Now where he charge us with rebellion, it is nothing, and he
him self knows, that he does us wrong. For even for the same cause, says
the Lantgraue, he gave me thanks lately at Spier for that I have omitted no
diligence to appease religion. But where he says, that I prepared war, and
punyshed certain states by the purse, I deny it not, and there was just cause
so to do: Nevertheless it is openly known, how through the mediation of Lewys
the Paulsgraue, and Richard the Archbishop of Treuers, all this matter was
quietly ended: he him self also, writing his letters, all be it he had taken
the matter displeasauntly, yet for as much as I had discharged mine army,
signified that he required no more: Again, what time he spoke to me of the same
sixtene years since at Auspurg, I made my purgation in such sort before king
Ferdinando, Friderick the Paulsgraue and certain others, that he was content and
satisfied. Wherefore he ought not to make that mattir any part of occasion of
this war. And where as I restored Ulriche Duke of Wirtemberg, at the
intercession of George Duke of Saxo^, and The Archbishop of mentz, I was for
that matter reconciled by composition, which he ratified. And after at
Regenspurg, upon his faith and assurance, he took away clean and abolyshed al
displeasure. Now he speaks also of ye war with the Duke of Brunswick: but
the cause thereof we have expressed in wrytting, and after that, in a most
frequent audience of the Empire, he him self being also present, we declared
more at large two years paste. The Duke that time made answer, but the
Emperor refused to hear our confutation of the same. And why would he not
hear and examine dewly the whole matter, and by the advise of the Princes,
have taken some order in the thing? Certainly because he desired aid for the
French and Turkyshe war, of a purpose he let it sleep, and would have it put
to gardens, and herein we fulfilled his desire at Worms, and were content that
Frederick the Paulsgraue and his Cousin John Simmer, should keep and govern the
province by us taken, until such time as the matter should be lawfully decided
and determined. That done, he assured us, that the Duke of Brunswick should
also assent to the same, and writing his letters, charged him earnestly, that
he should obey, but he co^temning his commandment, raised war against us,
and was taken therein, as it appears by a writing set forth by me and Duke
Maurice. Therefore did we nothing in this war contrary to our duty, nothing
against the laws, and herein we appeal to egall judgment. But here by it is
to be seen, what favor he bears to Religion. For albeit that the Duke of
Brunswick contemned his commandment most rashely, although at what time he
heard of the sequestration, he spoke of The Emperor many lewd and opprobrious
words, yet, because he The Duke of Bru^swi(...) a bitter enemy to ye
protestants.
was a most bitter enemy of our Religion, he did althyngs unpunished. Where he
says, that we have brought certain under our subjection, it is far otherwise,
and we have often made answer to the same. This in deed may be well verified of
him which has brought under his jurisdiction diverse provinces of the Empire,
and also Byshoprikes, and against this present war, has assembled nobles and
gentlemen, that he might al lure them to him for our destruction. This verily
we grant, that we have received diverse into our tuition and fidelity, that if
they should be in danger for the doctrine of the Gospel, we should defend
them: And that we suppose to be our duty, for God commands to succor the
afflicted. And none have more need these many years now of help and defense,
than those that are taken for Lutherians. But in other things that do not
concern Religion, we defend them not, no, we have always exhorted them to give
the magistrate their right and honor due. He obiecteth to us, that we should
have exhorted some not to repare to the Assembly: But that is both vain and
absurd: For where as our Ambassadors were lately assembled at Worms, and he
went to Regenspurge, we commanded the^, that (al other things set a part)
they should go also to that assembly. Unto all other assemblies of thempyre,
either we have comen our selves or always sent our Ambassadors. Concerning that
he says of the chamber, and judgment, it has been often confuted heretofore.
Moreover he makes mention of an Heathen Magistrate, to declare that we might
not resist him. But we have not only done our duty, but also more than we ought
to do, and have given him more, than ever our auncesters have accustomed, to
our great loss and hinderaunce: And that he has no cause of complaint at all,
it shall appear by that we shall here recite.

A certain Ambassador of the French kings sent unto him The french Ambassador
disswadeth the Emperor from this war.
lately (by occasion fell in talk of this war) He says, it is a very great
enterprise that he takes in hand, and advises him to consider with him self,
how great is the force of Germany, and how much danger is in the thing: And
if perchance one or two have offended, there may a mean be found, how to
pacify the matter without war. Whereunto he made this answer, there needs
no pacifieng of the matter: For he will conquer Germany, or hazard all that ever
he has in the world. The Emperor will co^quer Germany.
For the power thereof is not so great, that he needs much to fear it: For
twenty years since and more, has he laid the foundation of this matter.
Oftentimes they have given him aid, in sundry and many wars, lately also
against the king him self. They have been at great charges, in many asse^blies
of the Empire. Moreover in sundry wars they have lost a great number of their
me^, and so is their strength decayed. And al theft things has he done for
this intent, that Germany might he distitute of power, and void of force and
strength: therefore is this time commodious to work this feate in. He that
heard this talk of his by the mouth of the Ambassador, an honest man and
worthy of credit, reported the same unto us. Why should he than impute the
cause of the war to us, seeing he has intended the same, of so long time
before? When we were than private persons, and drowned in the dregs of the
Romish Religion? And if he had stand to his decrees and conuenauntes, than we
would have done our duty: but in as much as he has broken the same, and the
chief obedience is dew unto God, let him ascribe the fault unto him self. For
considering that he inte^deth destruction both to Religion and liberty: he
gives an occasion, whereby we may resist him with a good conscience. For in
this case is it lawful to resist, as it is to be proved both by sacred and
profane histories. For God is not the author of unjust violence, God is not
the anctour of wrong.
nether are we bounden to him otherwise, than if he fulfill the conditions, for
the which he was created Emperor. He grau^teth that he has agreed with us
privately, and that is to us a great pleasure to hear: Wherefore the^ does he
move war for those matters, for the which once a faithful agreement was made?
For it can not be proved that we have committed any rebellion, either before or
after the same compositions. But thus the case stands. He made a decree at
Worms.xxv. years past, and set forth a proclamation, against Luther and such
as embraced his doctrine, and appointed most extreme punishment. And that same
act now in this war he intends to put in execution. His Crown and Scepter
we never coueted: For we are content with our own lands and revenues, and
pray God, that in his fear, we may keep and maynteine the same. If it be true
that he says, why have we so often given him aid, and lately but two years
since, against the king of France? For the which desert and benefit he ought
in deed to forget al displeasure, though no reconcilement had been made. We
never reported him evil, but for the opinion of his virtue, have al ways
commended him highly. And as for famous libelles and pictures, nether have our
divines nor yet any others set forth against him: Yea our divines and learned
men have ever more extolled him with great praises, and exhorted the people in
their sermons to do the same, and pray to God for his preservation.
Perauenture they have set forth somewhat against the bishop of Rome: but there
was no cause why we should inhibie them so to do. But how vilaynously and
slau^derously Cochleus, and Hadamar, the White friar of Collon, have rayled
against us, our fellows, and divines, even now at Rege^spurg, when the The
Rabble of Papists.
assembly was holden to appease the controversy, it is manifestly known. He
obiecteth unto us conspiracies, and conuenticles wherein he does us great
injury, as in all other things. For we are borne and bred in Germany, where
men be far void of such crafty devises, as have been wrought against us these
many years past, and now first bewray them selves. Howbeit that we might
defend our selves against unjust violence, we made a league, and deny it not,
and did it only to defend our selves, and to injury no man, and wherefore we
made it, we have now in two several writings declared. And five years since
says the Lantgraue, when I went through with the Emperor at Regenspurg,
Granuellan said then to me, and to my chauncelour, how the Emperor was nothing
offended with our league, but could be content also, that we should receive in
to the same as many as we would. After he speaks in dark words, as though
we should have moved the Turk to invade Germany: But this shall the thing it
self confute. For we have always given aid against the Turk, yea more than
ever our progenitors have done, and that at such times as we were not
bounden, for that the couuenauntes were not kept, and when diverse others,
which had promised aid performed nothing. But you have heard already how he
and his brother have devised so with the Turk, that he might oppress suddenly
us only and our fellows. He had aid given him lately by a public decree
against France: Than he promised, that when that war should be finished, he
would go straight against the Turk. After he made peace with the enemy,
without their knowledge, with whose money he had made war, and behold now, he
be^deth al his force against us. Is it not a goodly matter to se the munition
brought out of Austriche to the war in Germany, and in the mean season to
suffer Hongary to be over run with the Turks? The seditions, co^spiracies,
and treasons, wherewith he charge us, are none at all, nether is there any
other cause of war, than the same before rehearsed. He says, he has granted
us over much, and wynked at our doings, to the grudge of his own conscience:
but this is feigned also. For his desire was long since to have made war
against The Emperor pretended this war long before.
us, and could not, being impeched hitherto, and was of necessity constrained
to differ it, till he had quieted the Duke of Cleave, the king of France,
and the Turk. For what his mind has been, those extreme and most grievous
executions of godly men in his countries do declare. And that also he agreed
with us heretofore, we now first perceive, that it was done for this intent,
that being dispatched of other affairs, he might intent, that being dispatched
of other affairs, he might inte^d this war only. Whereof assuredly I could
suspecte nothing, says the Lantgraue, by reason of the great good will and
humanity that he showed me lately at Spier. At the which time also Nauis
wylled my Chauncelour, that in any case this talk might be kept secret. Finally
the end of his accusation is, to pluck our fellows from us. And therefore
ascribes unto us Tyranny, extortion and disturbaunce of the clergy, but
undeservedly. For we punysh extortions and murder in our dominions extremely,
and thereby have purchased no small hatred to our selves. But lately that
innocent man, John Diazius, was so cruelly and detestably murdered, as never
man was, from the beginning of the world until this day: That Fratricide his
brother apprehended and accused. Certain Princes made request that so horrible a
fact might be punyshed: but what insued thereof, the matter it self declares.
He imputes the cause of all displeasure and trouble unto us: But his decree of
Worms The decres of Worms was the tro^pet of this war.
was cause of all together, whereunto our adversaries cleaued as to a most sure
foundation, especially the Duke of Brunswick, which made a confederacy with
diverse, before the conuentio^ of Auspurg, where as, what manner of decree was
made, it is openly known. Certainly those cruel and fierce words there
pronounced, caused us to make the league and co^federacie that we are in at
this day. The Bishops adhere^tes have been evermore busy with us, in all
assemblies, and would have compelled us to the choice of meats, and holy days
of their own making. Moreover we permitted the Emperor at Auspurg, when he
promised us fair and largely that he should appoint preachers. But it is
known well enough, how wicked and how ignorant men he assigned to that office.
It is an ancient custom The custom of thempire in asse^blees.
of thempire, that wha^ any Prince is minded to return home, from thassemblie
he may do it by the Emperors leave. How be it, my father (says the Duke of
Saxon) what time he was at Auspurg, could not obtain license of him to
depart, and heard it also reported, that in case he prepared to go, he should
yet be stayed against his will. And albeit my uncle Friderick had done much
for him, yet would he never, as long as my father lived confirm him in his own
Dukedom, only because of the decree of Worms and Religion. Seeing therefore
that the cause of this war is manifestly known, we desire all men to give no
credit to the contrary, and defend with us their common and native country.
As for our own subjects and clientes, whom he has released of their
allegeau^ce which they owe unto us, we doubt not but they will do their duty
unto us as they are bunden. The protestau^tes letting slip that occasion of
fight at Ingolstad, as before is said, and remaining there three days after,
when the Emperor in the mean season had fortified his Camp strongly, the
fourth day of September, they removed thence, that they might encountre with
the The Protestauntes remove their Camp.
Earl of Bure, or stop his passage: Notwithstanding that some were against it,
and said how they need to go no further to seek the enemy, which was in sight,
and before their eyes. They pitched the next time at Neuburg, which they had
fortified with a garnison before, two days after they marched to Donauerd. The
tenth day of September they enca^ped besides Uending, a town of the Earls of
Oeting, sending from thence espialles to bring them some intelligence of the
Earl of Bure. That perceiving the Emperor, sent advertisement to the Earl, who
turning out of his way, and marching from Norinberg to Regenspurg, came to the
Emperor at Ingolstad in safitie. Wherefore the Protestauntes being frustrated
of their hope, the third day after return unto Donauerde. Hither came unto
them Christopher Count Oldenburg, and Friderick Rifeberg with two legions, and
the Earl of Bichling with five enseignes of foteme^. In the mean time the
Emperor removed his camp to Nuburg: And when no aid came, the soldiers of
the garnyson rendered the town. The Emperor pardoned them al, taking
stipulation of them, that they should no more wear armure Nuburg re^dred unto
ye Emperor.
against him. Than the report went, how the Emperor would to Auspurg. Wherefore
the Germans pass over Thonawe, to let him of his journey: But when he
leaving a garnison at Nuburg, marched toward Marxeme, they return back into
their former camp. I told you before how they had sent Ambassadors for aid
both into France and England, but that was in vain. And the king of France
in deed excused the matter, for that having made peace with ye Emperor, he
said he could not. How beit, for that he would not have the Emperors France
de(...)ed to aid there Protest.
power increased, he desired Peter Strosse (a Flore^tine, a man of war and
exceading rich) to lend them three hondreth thousand crowns, and to the
intent he might the easelier do it, he pays a great sum of money, that he
ought him. He was content, for as much as they of Strasburg, Auspurg, and Ulmes
became suerties, and goes forth with John Sturmius, that was sent Ambassador
into France, to the Princes in their camp at Donauerde. When he came thither,
he was honorably received, and departed in such sort, as he would assuredly
defray the money: but when the time came, that he should disburse it, he could
no where be found in all France. Many men suppose that this was wrought by the
policy of the Cardinal Peter strosse disceaued ye Protesta^tes.
of Tournon. Who for the hatred he bare to Religion, wyshed all adversity to
the protestauntes, and was than chief in authority with the king. About the end
of September, the protestauntes write again to them of zurick, Bernes, Basil,
and to the Schafusians, and show them what the emperor inte^deth, and The Prote.
write to the Swisses gospellers.
what danger they shall stand in also, in case he get the victory, and will
them to consider, whether it be not wisdom for the^, to declare them selves
ennemies to the Emperor and bishop of Rome, and after to invade the Emperors
country next the^. If they will so do, they promise them all aid and
fidelity. Whereunto they make answer. How not they only, but all the rest of
ye Swysses in like case, have a league by inheritance with the house of
Austriche and Burgundy: out of the which Their answer to the Protesta^tes.
countries, they have all their wine and bread corn: Which league if they
should them selves infringe, the Swisses their fellows, which be of a
contrary Religion, should have just cause to assiste the Emperor and king
Ferdinando, and to open the strayte passages in the Alps, which they have
through their great labor shut up and closed, and so join with their
ennemies. Moreover, winter is now at hand, so that albeit they would never so
feign, yet can they do no great thing this year, and if they should leave
their own country naked, it is to be feared, lest others would take
possession in the mean season. Therefore it is much better that they tarry still
at home: For so shall not their fellows styre, as they have already declared.
It is not unknown, that they bear them right good will, and wyshe them to
prosper, after their own hearts desire, howebeit they think it not mete for
the^, to enter into so great danger. And therefore desire them to take it in
good part.

The Emperor remoueth from Marxeme, to Donauerde: but fyndyng no place
convenient to encampe in, he tourneth on the left hand, and the third day of
October, marches to Monheyme. It fortuned than to be a great myste, and the
escoutes that were sent out to know which way the Emperor went, brought
contrary reports: but in fine, when Lewys the Earl of Oetinge, brought certain
word that he was passed with a great part of his Army over the River of
Wernize, they followed after immediately about two of the clock at after none,
and toward night, pytche their Tents, not passing half a mile from the
Emperor.

Hitherto came unto them messengers from the city of Norling who seeing
the emperor so nigh, required aid, who were answered The Emperors and the
Protesta^tes camps nere together.
frankely. The nex day again it was a myste. The forewarde led the Duke of
Saxon, the La^tgraue the middle ward, and George Malspurg and Rifeberg the
rerewarde. The Duke of Saxon marching forward with five legions and with many
troppes of horsemen, approaches nere unto thennemy, and there was ryding and
pricking and coursing up and down on both parts. When it waxed clear,
the emperor perceiving ye the vantwarde kept on ye way toward Norling, and
that the rereward was not come yet in sight, he auaunceth al his horsemen, as
though he would give the battle. The Lantgraue therefore being in the mids,
what time ye whole army of his enemies made toward him, asks counsel: some
advised him to follow ye Duke of Saxo^, but because the reward was yet far
behind, which through his departure, he saw should be like to fall into the
lapse of their ennemies, he thought not good to depart, but sending messe^gers,
both to haste them forward, and to call back the Duke of Saxo^, he kept the
hills, that he was upon, and stired not. In the midway betwixt both armies was
ye River of Egra, which was in deed but small, yet hard to pass over, especialy
for the emperor, if he would have foughten the battle. Unto this river was come
the Earl of Bure with his power. And when it was very like, that they should
have joined in battle, the emperor calls him back, and commands him
straightly to go no further. Thus they returned both into their camp, and the
protestauntes pitched not far from Norling. On the next day certain troops of
themperours horsemen, ride nere unto their enemies, and gave the^ a very hot
skirmysche. In this conflict was hurt Albert Brunswick, the son of Duke
Philip, going unadvisedly after he had well tippled: Albert of Brunswick hurt.
he was carried to Norling, where he died not long after. The Emperor remaining
there certain days, sends in the mean time Octauius Farnesius with his own
force and with the Almaigne fotemen and munitio^ to take Donauerd. Fortune
favored the man's devise: And setting forward by night, when he was come
thither as soon as day appeared, and was auauncing his ladders to scale: the
towns men yielded them selves. The soldiers of the Garnyson were feign to
Donauerd rendered.
save the^ selves by flight. This done, the emperor marches to Donauerd. The
protestants intent was, to have assaulted the Emperor in his camp, but his
departure altered yt purpose, and it is thought how the emperor had some
intelligence thereof by espial. In those days the Duke of Alba, sent to demand
of the Lantgraue, why he kept so much the hills and mountains? why comes he
not down into the plain field, and try the matter in battle? The Lantgraue
sent him word again, how The duke of Alba rau^teth ye La^tgraue.
he and his fellows were five days together in the plain fields before
Ingolstad, and offered battle: why would he not fight? Why did he not bicker
at Norlinge, where he tarried for him the whole day? Whylest this was done in
Sweden, there fell a great alteration in Saxony. How the Emperor had devised
Alteration in Sauonte.
with Duke Maurice at Regenspurg, and Ferdinando at Prage, again, how the
Emperor commanded him to invade and enter in possessions of the Electours of
Saxony and the Lantgraues countries, it is before specified. Whereupon Duke
Maurice in the first beginning of the war, retourning home from Regenspurg,
calls a conuention at Chemnice of all the states within his dominion, and
there co^sulteth what is needful to be done. They counsel him to know
certainly of the Emperor, Duke Maurice consulteth against the Protest.
whether he will permit them to keep their Religion safely, secondly that he,
and the Marquis of Brandenburg Electour, should make intercession. And in case
they may be in assurance for Religion, and that intercession will take no
place, they exhort him, that in as much as he is bounden in all other matters
besides Religion, to obey the Emperor, he would sit quiet, and hire a power to
defend his country. Unto the which thing they promise him aid, and chouse
syx out of the whole number, to assiste him at all times with their advise and
counsel: But when themperours commandment before said came, unto him, and
king Ferdinando also mustred men in Hongary, and levied a power in Boheme, he
holds another assembly of his states at Fridberg the eight day of October.
There he recites ye former treaty, and says, how after their advise, the
Marquis of Brande^burg and he have solicited the Duke of Saxon and the
Lantgraue, to permit yt they might entreat the matter, and have earnestly
admonyshed them also, what peril is in the thing, and that they would ponder
it diligently. How be it as yet in deed they have received no convenient
answer, and libelles are set out, and the matter come to hand stripes, and
they have bickered together, and have had sundry small co^flictes: and albeit yt
they have at diverse times required his aid, yet forasmuch as the emperor has
given him sufficient warrau^tise for religion, therefore has he, following
their counsel, stired nothing, but has kept soldiers for ye defense of his
province, and conferred in matters of counsel with the six chose^. But now is
the time so troublesome and perilous, yt the those^ say, how they are not able
to bear so great a burden: wherefore at their request, is this asse^bly
called. For the^perours commandments are brought unto him, which he will
show them, that are sore, and of most importance, and of such sort, that in
case they be neglected, the whole country thereby is like to come in a
wounderfull danger. Moreover, the Bohemers and their fellows prepare war,
and are comen out of their country al ready, purposing to invade the province
of Duke John Friderickes. And albeit that he has first by letters, after, by
his Ambassadors, last of al going him self also, entreated king Ferdinando to
the contrary, yet could he obtain nothing. And in as much also as he supposes
that the same is done by Themperours commandment, he neither may, neither
lies it in his power to resist it, he would in deed right gladly, that the
civil war being once appeased, the Turkish violence might be repressed. How
beit they know in what sort both countries be lincked together in hope of
succession. And how he has silver mines also common with the Prince Electour.
And to suffer all these things to be plucked away from the house of Saxony
and Silver mines common to ye Dukes of Saxon.
to come into a strangers hands, it should be a great grief to him. Moreover,
the whole country lies so intermingled by per celles, that in case foreine
soldiers should invade his Cosyns province, it were a danger lest his
country should also sustain great hurt thereby. They se also, how it is not
good, that foreign nations should remain in these parties. And seeing the matter
is thus, he desires them both in his own, and also in his brother Augustus
name, that they would way the whole case diligently, and help him with their
aid and counsel. And he eftsoon will omit nothing, that shall be his duty ta
do again for the^. The matter being debated, they condescended, immediately to
aduertyse the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, of the Emperors commandment,
of the preparation of king Ferdinando, and to desire them both, that for
avoiding of destruction, they would permit that Duke Moris might enter into
the possessions of their country. For so should they both eschew The
unreasonable request of Duke Mauris counsel.
foreign war, and keep safe their Religion, and after, when matters appeased,
a great deal more easily obtain the same again at his hands, tha^ of
others. Therefore writing their letters to this effect the eleventh day of
October, they desire them to way with them selves the whole matter, and be
comfortable to this counsel, which is doubtless the best, that may in this
troublesome time be given. They required also the La^tgraue in his letters,
that he would persuade the Prince Electour to take ye same way. Duke Moris
wrote also his letters to ye Lantgraue his father in law, of much like
inportaunce. And because the foreine soldiour was now at hand, he says, how
he must of necessite provide, that Saxony be not ouerrunne. After that, he
promyseth him much good will and amity, and shows that he desires nothing
that is his. He says moreover, how the king of Polle will be a petitioner to
the Emperor, which thing he is glad to hear of, wherefore let him so be
content, and not be exasperated with any words, and likewise to persuade the
Electour, neither that he refuse to submit him self to the Emperor. For this
is in manner the only way to come to a reconcilement, and that he will also
help to make a peace. To the conuention at Fridberg, John William the
Electour, son of Saxony, when he heard of the preparation of king
Ferdinando, sending Ambassadors, requires Duke Moris, that according to the
league of inheritance, he would join his force with his, to save the common
country from danger. Duke Moris says again, how he has spared no pain,
that the matter might have been appeased. And seeing he has taken that labor
in vain, and that they be now in armure, he may do nothing against the supreme
Magistrate, whom also that ancient league does except. It was song or ever ye
protestau^tes heard of the Emperors going to Donauerd. The nex day there
purpose to go to Lawging a town upon the River of Thonaw three miles above
Donauerde, and that by night: but when they were uncertain, whether the Emperor
were gone forward, and if they should leave him at their back, many said it was
danger lest he should take Norling, and after by the vale of Remsie, invade
the land of Wirtemberg, altering their purpose, they remained there one day.
This took Scherteline displeasauntly, as likewise other things, and going to
Auspurg, from the which Scherteline departs from the protest auntes.
city he was sent forth into the wars, he leads away ye garnison that was
at Lawging, and returns no more to the field. In the mean season the emperor
marching forward from Dona uerde, takes by composition Dilling and Hochstet,
and shortly after, Lawging, and Gundelfing, by ye river of Brent. Wherefore
having gotten the possession of the water of Thonawe, he had great commodities
to serve his purpose, and leaving algarniso^ at Lawging The Emperor wins
the River of Thonawe.
when he had passed over Brent, he pitcheth his Tents at the village at
Sontheyn, in ye way to Ulmes, which was three miles from ye same place.
The.xiii. day of October, the protesta^tes at the length removing their camp
when they heard that the Emperor kept on his journey toward Ulmes, the nex
day came to Sieng a town by the same River a little above Sontheim, so as the
water was in the mids, betwixt both armies, As they stayed here, and had not
yet pitched their Tents, they epsy certain horsemen on the top of the next
hill. Amongs the which was the emperor him self, who rode forth with the Duke of
Alba to escoute abroad, the same day the Duke of Saxon had ye forewarde, and
hastes spedely toward the enemy, and sends also word to the Lantgraue, to
make haste after him: But what time the enemies fled, he slacketh the matter,
and tarieth for the Lantgraue on the hill. There as it is thought, was lost The
occasion of taking the Emperor lost.
again a most goodly oportunititie of well doing. For there was no foorde to
ride over the River, and but one bridge in all those parties, and though the
Emperor peradventure had escaped by the same, yet had his chief Captains been
in great distress, as they them selves afterward ar reported not to have hid.
The Emperor omitting his journey to Ulme, lest that leuing his enemies behind
his back, he should lose the vital of Thonawe, he goes another way to work,
and at the Ides of October, in the next wood he lays an Ambusche, of three
thousand Arcubusiers: And when the Prince of Eulmone had offered A warlike
policy of ye Emperor.
them the skermysche with his light horsemen, and the charge being given,
infayning that he fled, had allured them to the wood side, they by and by
break out of the^buscheme^t and discharge at them. That seeing the Lantgraue,
came straight ways to rescue his company that were in danger, which were
four bands of horsemen. Wherefore there was a sore conflicte all day till it
was night, and the field pieces were brought to the bickering. This while the
Duke of Saxon abode with the army, that in case the Emperor should in this
tumulte have assaulted their Camp, he might be ready to give him the repulse.
When this would take no place, the Emperor attempteth the matter by a Camisade
in the night, and chouseth out of the whole nombre the fotemen of Almaignes and
Spanyardes, and An other policy.
commands them to put on white shirtes over their harness, he appoints
them also horsemen, and the Duke of Alba to be their Captain, and sends them
forth at night as soon as the watch was set, that they might go still and
closely to their enemies camp: And he him self immediately after, follows
with the rest of his power. When they came thither, they perceived that the
number of the watchemen were increased, and that they were up in armure.
Wherefore this enterprise was in vain, for as much as they understood the
matter by espiall, a few hours before. For the want of forage and vytayle,
the Pestilencein the Emper. Camp.
time of the year, and continual rain, they died sore in themperours Camp,
and about this time also Cardinal Farnese departs out of the Camp homeward
with certain bands of Italian horsemen. The Emperor also for the same cause
was compelled to change his place, and return into his old ca^pe besides
Laweging, the day before the kalendes of November. Unto the letters of the
states of Duke Moris dated at Fridberg the.xi. day of October before said, the
Lantgraue answers the xx. day of ye same month. How he is heartily sorry that
The Lantgraue aunwereth the states of Duke Moris.
war should be attempted again those countries, and much more that in common
danger, they do join their forces together, after the example of their
elders. And where they do not consider that this war is against Religion,
that seems to him great marvel, seeing that both the Bishops letters to ye
Swisses, and the league made betwixt him and the Emperor and showed unto the
Heluetians by the Bishops commandment, do openly testify and plainly
declare the same. For since that league was made, great forces have commen to
the Emperor out of Italy, and all the Italians that are taken do affirm this
certainly, that they were purposely sent, to war against the Lutherians.
Moreover, their fellows of the same Religion are in this war much more cruelly
handled than any others with spoiling, firyng, and robberies: That the women
and maidens are wickedly defloured, and young children and infa^tes, The
cruelty wrought by the papists.
have their hands and fete cut of, even for the hatred of this doctrine. Where
the Emperor has warraunted them for Religion, it is but dissimulation. For in
case he were demanded whether he would, that Luthers Religion should be
submitted to the authority and decrees of the Bishops counsel, there is no
doubt, but the craft would sone appear. Wherefore let them not trust to his
promise. And where they are affrayd of themperours sentence of outlawyng them,
he marueleth greatly, where they know, that the same is not lawful for him so
to do, unless the parties had first been sommoned, and conuicte in judgment.
But the greatest grief of all is, that the noble house and people of Saxony
should be thus divided: For if they were of one mind, and would join their
forces together, the danger that is so feared, might easily be repulsed. He
has verily talked with the Electour herein, but he is nothing agreeable to that
way, which they do show. For if he should, at the change of fortune,
require the like of Duke Moris, he doubts not, but that both he would refuse
it, and they also would counsel him to the contrary. Wherefore he does not like
their counsel, and the worse, for that Duke Moris has lately written to them
both, how he was sorry to hear it bruted, that he should covet to possess his
co^syns province. For the report was untrue and injurious to him, and therefore
prayed them not to credit the same. When they had received these letters, they
were contented with that excuse, and thought no more of the matter: And if he
should now sease upon his country, they se, what men would judge, he desires
therefore, that they would impeche the thing, that it were not done: For
otherwise not only forreyne war, but civil also will ensue upon the same. For
in case he sustain any injury, by reason of the Emperors proscription,
neither he, nor his fellows, which stand in the same case can not but help
him. And than what will be the end thereof, it is not hard to judge. Therefore let
them endeavor, that the houses of Saxo^ and Hesse be not divided, but that Duke
Maurice do assiste him and his fellows. For this shall be chiefly for his
honor and welthe also. He wrote the same day also, to Moris of like effect,
and admonishes him, not to way the Emperors proclamations, and outlawyng,
but call to his remembrance, what the Electour and he have done for him and his
father. For where as Duke George his uncle had made his will that the emperor
should possess his whole province until his brother did The Proie. benefits
to Duke Moris
forsake the Protestauntes Religion, he knows, what benefit than he received
of them both. Moreover, where Duke George gave unto his father a yearly
pension, and that there was some fear, least he would have denied the same,
for the hatred he bare to Religion, the Protestauntes than promised him, that
if it so came to pass, they would of their liberality give him as much
yearly. Wherefore let him surcease of his enterprise, and attempt nothing in the
Duke of Saxons province without his love and leave. For otherwise, he shall not
want his fellows aid. The Ambassadors of Pole were in deed in the Emperors
Camp, and have signified to the Duke of Saxon and him what they have done: But
the conditions are of such sort as they make nothing at all for peace. And of
like importau^ce, the councillors of the war, write to Duke Moris and his
states, and proteste, that if any force be done to yt Duke of Saxon, they will
not neglecte his injury. The Electour him self, made them none answer at
that time, as shall further be declared hereafter.

The same day also the Lantgraue and the counselors write The Proie. letters
to the cities.
to the cities of Maydenburg, Brunswyck, Breme, Hamburge, Goslary, Hildesseme,
Goting, Hanobrie, Embeck, Minden, and to the Duke of Pomerane, Dukes of
Luneburg, and to Prince Anhalde: They show them what danger is toward Saxony,
but chiefly to the Electour, unto whose frountiers the ennemies are comen
already: The beginning comes of king Ferdinando, who has enforced the
Bohemers unto this war, and Duke Maurice takes his part, and pretends a
cause for that the Emperor has outlawed him: howbeit, they have send to Duke
Moris, that he should not meddle, for than shall not the Duke of Saxon want
help. And in as much as that whole country stands in present danger, and
the Duke asks help of them, they can not but aid him. And were in mind
once to have delivered him part of their Army, which they have together, but
because their ennemie is not far of, and are in good hope that the matter shall
shortly be tried by a main battle: Wherein all their welthes do consist, they
thinck it not wisdom at this present, to make them selves so much weaker. For
this is the fetch of their ennemie, that being molested with other wars,
they should not auaunce their whole force against him. And seeing ye case
stands thus, they require them, that in all their names they would send him
aid of fotemen, so sone as they can to Wittemberg and Weinmar, and that also
the rest of the money which is dew by the league, they pay unto the Electours
son and counselors, for the case is common to them all, and when their
fellows are ouerrunne, the like misfortune will the sooner chance unto them. I
have spoken before of the Bohemers: They served Fardinando in deed, howbeit
full sore against their wills, by reason of an ancient The Bohemers served
against the Duke of sax on unwillingly.
league that they had with the house of Saxon. And again for that they said how
this war was not nedeful, and many thought that the Electour also had wrong.
But Ferdinando brought them to it, and sent for a power out of Ho^gary and
Silesie, so that he might constrain them whether they would or not. The horsemen
of Hongary are commonly called Hussares, an exceadyng Hussares.
ravenous and cruel kind of men. Wherefore leuing their force also, when they
were now passing out of their own limits, Sebastian Weittemulle, general of
the army, sending his letters, the.xx. day of October, proclameth war to the
Duke of Sarons people. For that certain years past, their Prince seized
Ferdinando his depute proclaims to Saxony.
into his hands the Abbeye of Dobrilug, and that he renou^ced lately his
fidelity to the Emperor and his confederates, breaking the league, that was
between the Bohemers and the house of Saxon. And albeit the thing requires no
declaration, for as much as he is outlawed by the Emperor, yet, lest any
thing might appear to be omitted, he would for his discharge give them this
advertisement. About this time the Ambassadors of the Protestauntes assembly
at Ulmes, for common co^sultation to be had. And where as out of Saxony came
diverse messages, of the state of things there, the Electour sending his
letters the.xxvii. day of October, charge his Ambassadors that were at Ulme,
to declare the whole matter to their Fellows, and require them to consider his
case, for as much as he The Duke of sarons request to his fellows.
has spared no peril nor pain, that he might defend this higher part of
Germany from destruction. The counselors of the war, a few days past sent
word to the cities of Saxony, that they should help him: But what they will
do, he is uncertain, and though they would, yet fears he greatly, that they
shall not be able to resist so great a multitude of enemies, and that there is
danger, lest or ever they be ready, the enemy will have invaded his country.
These things therefore let them require of their fellows, first, in as much as
it should be a great grief and discommoditie for him, in this extremity, to
leave any longer destitute his wife, children, and people, that they would give
him counsel herein. Moreover, that they would grant him more aid, whereof
the Lantgraue, and the counselors of the war have put him in hope already.
Finally that they do make no peace with the ennemy before he have recovered yt
he has lost. Hereunto the Ambassadors answer franckly, and chiefly they
entreat him that he would tarry with the army, till the Emperor shall have
broke up his camp for this winter, and show what danger it should be if he
now departed. And if Ferdinando and Maurice do him any wrong, they promise him
aid, and say, how there is no doubt but his fellows both Princes and states,
will according to their league, be faithful and helpful to him, and will
conclude no peace before he have recovered his own. And in case he thought
good, they would also, in like manner, as the Lantgraue and counselors of the
war have done, signify so much to Duke Maurice. They trust also undoubtedly
that such states as be of their co^federacie in Saxony, will do their duty
herein.

The foresaid.xxvii. day of October, Duke Maurice writes Duke Maurice letters
to the Electours.
his letters from Dresda to the Prince Electour, that what the Emperor has
commanded him to do, and in what peril the matter consists, he has heard
lately by the letters of the states of his country. And now for so much as
the Emperor has assured him and his people concerning Religion, therefore is
he determined to the intent that both the Emperor may be satisfied, and that
his right also may remain unto him whole, through the advice of his counsel,
to find the means, that his land and province do not come into the hands
of strangers, and this does he, both in his own and also in his brother.
Augustus name denounce to him. And if in time to come, he shall be again
reconciled to the Emperor and king Ferdinando, he will not refuse if they will
suffer it, that the states of his jurisdiction shall treat betwyxt them both
for an order in the whole matter. The self same words he writes also to John
William, the Electours son, and warns him to see the letters adressed to
his father, conveyed to him. In the mean while the Bohemers, and Nussars, make
invasion into Uoetiande the next cositrey of the Electours, sleying, spoiling,
The Electours country ^nuaded
burning and rauishing out of measure. But the Bohemers tarried not long, for
because as I said before, they served vnwyllyngly, and at the eleventh day of
November, forsakyng their enseignes, slyppe home every man. But the Hongarians
and such The Bohemers slyp away.
others as Ferdinando had hired, join them selves unto Duke Maurice, who
takes by rendering, first Swiccauie, after Ecne berg, and Aldeburg, and for the
most part all the Electours towns, and swears them unto him, saving Gothe,
Isenack and Wittemberg. The news thereof being brought into themperous camp,
styred up great joy and gladness, which the Emperor declared by a great peale
of ordenaunce, as is accustomed. In these days the Emperor changes his
Camp again, for like causes as he did before and chouseth a more commodious
and dry ground, that he might somewhat refresh the poor soldiers, and releue
them also with vitaile. All others for the most part counseled him, that the
soldiers might retire unto places where they should winter. But he him self
was of opinion, to continue the army in the field, and maintain war. All
men for the most part cried out upon Duke Duke Maurice (...) of ali men.
Maurice, which served him so sknekyshely, whom he ought to have honored as
his father, who was in a manner ye only author of all that he had, and he to
requite him with such unthankfulness: And there came forth in his reproach and
dispraise, both libelles and verses most bitter, which charged him with
falsefying his faith, with treason, and most ingratitude, and so much the
more, that he would do nothing herein at the entreaty of neither his wife nor
his father in law.

That thing known, he publishes a writing, to purge him His excuses.
self, and shows, what manner of Religion is in his country, what he has
promised the people, and how for the furtherau^ce of Religion, he has founded
certain Schools. After he says, how the Emperor has assured him and his
people, and not him only, but other Princes also concerning Religion, and
preservation of the liberty of Germany, neither is he of will, that any thing
be done violently, but that the cause may in lawful wise be appeased,
according unto many decrees of the Empire already enacted. Wherefore he gives
credit to his promise and letters, by the ensample of those Princes, which do
now serve him, and do not only at home, but in the camp also, and a warfare
profess this Religion. For such as be familiar with him, and are daily in his
sight, may easily know his mind, and in case they perceived any such thing,
without all doubt they would not tarry with him. And where as the bishop aydeth
him, that is done, for because the war is attempted against the^ that are the
chiefest adversaries of his errors and authority: neither is it so much to
be considered, what moves him, as what is the Emperors mind, which makes
the war. Wherefore seeing that Religion is assured, he sees no cause, why he
should not obey the emperor in all other things: For Christ commands to give
both to God and also to the Emperor, that which is his. What travel and pain
he has taken, that this matter might without civil war have been pacified,
it is not unknown to the Emperor, to king Ferdinando, and to diverse others.
But where as no peace could be granted, and the Emperor sent out straight
commandment to sease upon the lands of John Friderick, and that also king
Ferdinando having levied the forces of Hongary Boheme and Austriche, was ready
to invade, and would not be entreated, but sent in his army; and had taken
already certain silver mines, which were common between his cousin and him, he
was driven of necessity to provide, that they got not the resydue, or invaded
further. And what his purpose was, he first declared boeth to the Lantgraue, to
the Duke his Cosyn, and also to his Son. And seeing it is so, he desires that
no man mistake his doing, nor credit such things as shall happily be reported
Duke Maurice nothing coucious.
by him: For in mainteyning of Religion he wylbe constant, and has none other
respect in this thing than that the lands and dignities of the house of
Saxon should not come into strangers hands.

About this time began again persecution in France. There Persecution in
France.
is a town in those parties called Melda, ten miles from Paris the bishop
thereof in former years was William Brissonet: Who being desirous of purer
doctrine, appointed good preachers and instructours of the people, excluding al
freers. And what time for the same cause the divines of Sorbone procured him
some danger, he showed no constancy, but refused his enterprise.
Notwithstanding the remnaunt of that doctrine remained in the minds of many,
and this year about three score towns men consulting of the matter, chouse
them selves a preacher of the word, and assembling in private houses, when the
Sermon was ended, on certain days, they receive the Lords supper; after the
order of the Gospel, and Christ's institution.

This thing could not long be kept secret, especially, sithe that diverse also
came to them out of the country. Wherefore, being taken when they were all
together, they are put in prison, and after their examination, carried to Paris
in carts. There receiving sentence of death, and carried home again, fourtene
of them, bounden to several stakes, were burnte quick all at one time, the
residewe were whypped and bannished. As they were retournyng home ward from
Paris, one comes runnyng to them out of the next village, and exhorts them
to persevere to the end. Wherefore being apprehended, he suffered like
punyshement as the others did. Before there were brent, they were put on the
torture, to the intent they should utter the fellows and followers of their
doctrine, but they could extorte nothing out of them.

Many supposed this to be done of purpose to break the amity, that was than
in knitting between the king and the Protestauntes. Duke Maurice letters of
defiaunce to the Duke of Saxon, were delivered in the Camp the syxt day of
November. In the fourmer book I have showed you, how the Bishop, the.xvi.
day of Apryll, gyuing sentence against Tharchebyshop of Collon appealeth from
the Pope.
the Archbishop of Collon, deprived him of al his ecclesiastical offices. Now
where he heard first thereof for any certentie, the fourth day of November, as
he himself mentions, a few days after setting forth a writing, and
declaryng the causes, why he can not acknowledge the Bishop for his judge, who
is accused already, both of heresy and idolatry, he appealeth from that
sentence, unto a lawful counsel of Germany, and when the same shall begin,
he says he will persecute his suite against the Bishop.

The Protestauntes Ambassadors, which I showed you before, were assembled at
Ulme about the end of October, when they could not agree in sentences, in the
month of November they went to the Camp at Gienge, that the consultation
might be the easier. There is propounded, for so much as some fellows of
their religion give no aid, and of their co^federates, they of Luneburg and
Pomerane, and certain others, and again the rest of the States and cities in
Saxony help not much, and nothing is brought out of France, and by reason
that the soldiers do daily slip away for the time of the year, and other
discommodities, the army is deminished, they must chouse one of these three
things, either to give the battle, or depart the field, retyring the
soldiers into places where they may winter, or else make peace and truce. The
matter being debated, they condescended to make mention of peace, and they
assigned Adam Trotte, who through the cause of the Electour of Brandenburg, had
access to Marquis John his brother, to break the matter. But where as the
Emperor, which by espiall knew thoroughly before all their case and
discommoditie, and had lately received glad tydiuges out of Saxony, propounded
verey hard conditions, it is determined, that all the rest of their force
being led into Saxony, a thousand horsemen, and eight thousand fotemen,
should winter there in certain places, at the cost and charges of the Duke of
Wirtemberge, and the cities of the upper parts of Germany. After the three and
twenty day of November, they retire, making first a decree, that an other
Ambassade should be sent into France and England. And at the two and twenty
day of Ianuarye, to mere again at Frankefurte. And thus was the war
governed nothing luckely, of the which misfortune this was The unlucky
success of the Protest. war.
thought to be the the principal cause, that the matter was not wrought by the
order and will of one.

For where the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue were in authority egall, it
chanced that many goodly oportunities, through disceptation, were omitted. The
same which was Authority cannot bear equality.
also decreed of placyng their Soldiers, came to none effect. when many
refused to be contributaries any longer. After the Emperor had intelligence of
their departure, he makes forth horsemen immediately to understand of their
journey. And shortly after commands the Duke of Alba and the Earl of Bure to
follow, and he him self also goes forth with the Horsemen of Germany,
leaving the fotemen, and commanding them to remain. The most part of the
protesta^tes were already in their camp, where they should rest al night: But
the Lantgraue, albeit he led the forward the same day, yet he tarried with the
Duke of Saxon, and either of the^ had ten guidons of horsemen only, and about
five hondreth gu^ners. With these they stayed upon an hill, and planted ready
such field pieces as they had with the^. And thus abiding their ennemies, when
it was almost dark night, the Emperor calls his me^ back, and than went
they also softely forward till they came to their Camp be besides Heydenem,
in the land of Wirtemberg, escapyng most present danger. For if the Emperor
had The peril of the Protest.
given the charge, they which were so few in number, in comparison of their
ennemies, had been all either taken or slain, and so they let not to say them
selves afterward. But the emperor, who knew not what force they were of, and
supposed them to be many mo tha^ they were, was nothing hasty on the^. And the
same night commanded he the fotemen to march forward and follow him, to the
intent verily, that he might have foughten with them the next day: But they as
I said, going secretly away by night, were now come to their Army. Wherefore
the Emperor retourneth to his Camp, and there made his abode two days, to
refreshe his soldiers. After, because he supposed that they would winter in
Franckonie, a fertile and a plentiful country, he thought to prevent them.
After therefore that he had taken by rendering, Bophing, Norling, the cositie of
Oeting and Dingelspulle: he hastes with great expedition to Roteburg, a city
of the Empire standing by ^he River of Duber. The Lantgraue going to the Duke
of Wirte^berg, after he had delivered his force to the Duke of Saxony,
retourneth home. And at the kalendes of December came to Franckfurt. But the
Duke of Saxon, although he wanted the Senewes of war, yet marching forward
with his army, he battred Gemund, a town in Sweden, and has it rendered to
him, and causes the Senate to give him a sum of money, which was gathered
of every man. After, the twelfth day of The Duke of Saxon ^^acteth money of the
Papists.
December he came with his Army before Frankefurt, and gets of the^ nine
thousand crowns: And imposes to the Archbishop of Mentz forty thousand. And
proceeding on still, he handles the rich Abbot of Fulden, and certain others of
the Romish Religion, after the same sort. The Lantgraue returning home,
sends his letters to Duke Maurice, his son in law, signifiyng that he will
come to him, so that he will assure him by saufe conduite: For he would
entreat a peace betwixt him and the Duke of Saxon. Duke Maurice does assure
him in deed, and sends him letters of the same, but therein were so many
conditions, that he thought not good to go, but sent Ambassadors, Herman
Hundelsuse, and Henry Lersuer. And all be it they labored the matter ernestly,
yet could nothing be concluded. Whilst Maurice said, he might not accord,
without The^perours consent, and the Duke of Saxon, which had his army ready,
would have no delay, but yt he would attempt war against him. Therefore when there
was no hope of peace, the Lantgraues soldious return home. Howbeit Recrode,
that brought fotemen of Almaines out of France (as before is said) remained
still with the Duke. When the Emperor was at Rotburg, he sends away the Earl
of Bure, and gives him in charge, to find some mean to get Franckefurte.
After, about the Ides of December, writing his letters from thence, to Ulrich
Duke of Wirtemberg. Al beit, says he, that for the war, which certain The
Emperors letters to the Duke of Wirtemberg.
years past, the Lantgraue and you attempted against my brother, king
Ferdinando, and taking of the Dukedom of Wyrtemberg, reason would, that I
should have punyshed both him and you extremely, yet did I forgive you all the
injury and penalty, and showed you all favor. And now of late, about the
beginning of this war, although your deserts were far otherwise, in as
much as you exercise Tyranny, not only upon your own people, but also over
certain states and cities of the Empire, neither will obey any law or
judgment. I sent to you an Ambassador a man of honor, which should declare
unto you the cause why this war is enterprised, and also require you to sit
quiet, and than should you look for all favor at our hands. But al these
things neglected, and not regarding the allegeaunce that you owe unto us, you
have associated your self with outlawes and their confederates, and have
incurred the like crime of Rebellion, as they have done, and first have taken
certain towns of my brother Ferdinando, and of other states, and than of mine
also, and of the Empire upon the soden, with men of their own faction. And not
content with that, when these things were a workyng, you denounced war
against us, by a certain mallaparte boldenes, and with most opprobrious words,
have hurt our fame and estimation, going about to take from us, this degree of
highest honor and dignity, and deniyng unto us the fidelity, streyghtways
with your conspiratours, durst lead forth an Army against us, doing
outtrage unto many clientes of my brother Ferdinandos and mine. Whereby you have
fallen into the penalty, which is dew unto perjured outlawes, and conuictes
of high treason. And seeing it is thus, and all be it we have just and lawefull
cause to be avenged on you most extremely, according to your demerytes, yet
for our accustomed clemency, and that the miserable people may be spared. We
strayghtely charge and command you, that immediatlye upon the syghte hereof,
you do submit unto us your self, your country and all that you have in the
world, without condition or exception, that we may order and use the same at
our pleasure: For unless you shall obey the same, we shall persecute the and
thine with sword and fire. For those letters which you sent four days
since, do not content us, neither be they sufficient to pourge or excuse thine
offense. He sends a copy of the same his letters unto his subjects also,
and charge them to obey him no longer, but send Ambassadors unto him to
know further of his pleasure, he releaseth also their allegeaunce and oath,
whereby they are bounden to him. This if they will do, he will provide, he
says, that they shall live in a better state hereafter: If not, he threatens
them with like punishment.

What time the Emperor wrote this, the Duke of Alba was with his army at the
borders of the country of Wyrtemberg: But Duke Ulriche was going to his
Castle of Tuel, standing upon an high hill without the Region, and where the
Emperors letters were delivered unto him by the way, the.xx. day The Dukes
letters of submissio^ to Themper.
of December, he writes unto him most humbly and with great submission. For
that he is brought thus into his high displeasure, he is most heartily sorry,
neither could there any thing have chanced unto him more grievous. And where as
diverse had entreated for him, and he him self also acknowledge his fault,
and craved pardon, he had good hope, that his displeasure should have been
appeased. And the same hope he reteyneth still, for that he has tried and
experienced his cleme^cy, which he is wont to use, toward all suppliauntes.
For hereof armo examples than one, showed not many years since unto certain
Princes, which happily gave somewhat more occasion of displeasure, than he has
done. But in case he would have heard his Ambassadors, he doubts not, but
that he would have written much more gently. Wherefore he craves his mercy,
and besecheth him for Christ's sake to forgive him, and not work any
extremity against him, being a miserable Prince. nor yet against his poor
subjects.

About this time came unto the Emperor the men at Arms of Naples, to the
number of five hundredth, at the leading of John Baptiste Spinello. After this,
the Emperor goes marching to Hale, a town of Sweuia, unto him lately
reconciled. Thither came unto him Fridericke the Paulsgraue The Paulsgraue
asks pardon of Themps.
Prince Electour, he had aided the Protestau^tes with four hondreth horsemen,
which came unto them at Ingolstad.

Wherefore he goes unto the Emperor, and shows him that this was not done to
resist him, but to fulfill a league whereby he was bound to the Duke of
Wyrtemberge.

The Emperor takes him up sharply, and accompting how much he had done for him,
blames him sore. Nevertheless he remitteth the offense, and warns him, that
hereafter, he do recompense this fault and error, with a more trusty
fidelity. Alitle before the wars, when the Paulsgraue intended to have set
an order in his churches, he had sent for Paulus Fagius, a man learned and
eloquent, to come to him from Strasburg, to Hedelberg, Paulus Fagius.
that he might be a guide in the doctrine of the Gospel, and show the way unto
others. But in this success of the Emperor, all that was there begone, was
quite dasshed. A few days after came to him Ambassadors from Ulme, who after
Ulmes reconciled to the Emperor.
they had made their submission and craved pardon, were reconciled. This city
was of chiefest force and authority in all Sueuia. Wherefore their breaking of,
from their fellows, was a great matter, but they writing their letters to their
fre^des at the end of December, signify how the cause why they so did, was that
the Emperor was pressed to have beseged their city round about, and they were
utterly forsaken of their fellows, and saw no man's help that was able to
defend them against so great a power. Moreover, for that certain of the
chiefest of the confederates sued unto the Emperor privately to be reconciled.
The Emperor condempneth the^ in a hondreth thousand crowns and twelve pieces
of ordenaunce, and put into their city ten enseignes of fotemen. In this mean
while the Earl of Bure, inuadeth the Lantgraues dominion, liyng above
Franckfurt, and the town and castle of Darmestat, he wynneth partly by force,
partly by surendrie, he fireth the castle, and spares the Darmstat won.
people: For none defended it but the inhabitauntes, and a company taken out of
the country. After, he passes by Franckfurt. And where as he was out of hope,
to win the same by violence, especially that time of the year, and his
soldiers in so evil plyght he sends away part of his army before to pass
over the Rhyne, and wills them to tarry him at Mentz. And when he thought
nothing less and was now returning home behold, they of Franckfurt, sending
Ambassadors, offer to render, These of Fra^kefurte render to therle of Bure.
and say they will be at commandment. He without any tariyng, turns backward
with them, and entryng the town with his army, brings them in subjection to
the Emperor: And as he was a Gentleman of a plain nature, when the Senate gave
him a supper, he iested with them, as it is reported, for rendryng so lightly
and timourously, saying, how they of Darmstat are worthy to inhabit
Franckfurt, and they to be removed and dwell at Darmstat. Which town in
comparison of Franckefurte is but a village. Howbeit the cause why they did so,
among others, was for that they saw how Ulme, and the Duke of Wirtemberg,
should be reconciled. And again fearing lest the mart should be taken from
them, for all their wealth stands by the same. Neither were they ignorant,
that they of Mentz and worms, labored for it to the Emperor, either city
for them selves, to have it from them. After, sending Ambassadors, they are
received again into the Emperors favor, paying him four score thousand
crowns. When the Duke of Saxon was come with his army to his own fro^tiers
the.xxii. day of December, sending his letters to the states of Duke Maurice,
where as I made no answer, says he, to The Electours letters to the states
of Duke Maurice.
your letters bearing date the.xi. day of October. I did it purposely, and
would tarry to se the end: but what has been done in the mean time, it is
openly known. Howbeit, by reason of the Cosynage, league, and amity that is
among us, and for my benefits toward your Prince, certainly I looked for no
such thing, either of him or yet of you: Nor I would never have thought, that
ever he would have used me and my people in such sort as hs has done: Much
less, that you would give him such counsel, as should tend to the
destruction of the whole country, and your own dommage also. But I think
this time seems unto you convenient, wherein should be uttered the crafty
devises and counselles of certain of you, contrived many years since, but of
God always repressed. For consider with your selves, what an act of yours was
this, when you counseled Duke George, to disherite his brother and his
brothers children, because of their contrary Religion, and to make the Emperor
and king Ferdinando his heirs, unless they would profess and restore the
bishops Religion. And where as the will and legacy took no place, but the whole
inheritance was reduced to his brother Henry, and the doctrine of the Gospel
retained, that was chiefly wrought through the means and industry of me and
my league friends. And albeit that he professing our Religion, entered into our
league also, and wrytynges made of the same, and sygned, as well in his own as
also in his sons name, yet did you, for as much as your first hope was
frustrate, move him, as much as you might, to swerve from this his covenant.
And when he was departed, his sons also followed the steps of their father,
undoubtedly through your counsel. And like as that inheritance, against your
wills descended unto Henry and his sons, so did also the frendshyp, that I
had with Henry, not a little grieve, you and full often have assayed that the same
might be vntwyned. Neither was your enterprise altogether frustrate, and that
which you could not bring to pass whylest he lived, you have now at the last
obtained of his sons, especially of Maurice, of whom I had conceived in my
mind most hope of virtue and frendshyp. For five years since, not long after
he was made a Magistrate, you styred him up against me, which had not deserved
that at his hands, and that in such wise, as the matter wanted not great
danger. And albeit that the tempest was blowe^ over, through the mediation of
the Lantgraue, and a bond made, that no such thing should be attempted
hereafter, but that the matter should be ordered on both parties according to
thauncie^t league, yet have you, in my abse^ce persuaded him and his brother
Augustus, to sease upon my province. Which thing assuredly greueth me so much
the more, for that he, both writing and receiving again right friendly letters,
did signify no such thing. Again, that he would do nothing herein at the
request of the Lantgraue and his fellows. The calamity of the innocent people
and of my subjects greueth me, and that The calamity of Saxony.
exceadingly, whom he bringing foreine, cruel, and barbarous soldiers, has
plaged with robberies, spoiling and murder. It greueth me also, that the
ministers of the church and preachers, ar every where driven out and put to
flight, yea virgins and matrones defiled: Which autragious cruelty, I doubt
not but God will ones avenge. But much more greueth and troubles me, the
handlyng of the thing so traitorously, spitefully, and unlooked for, attempted
through your counsel undoubtedly, which after the example of the traitor
Judas, are hired unto it with bribes and rewards. There is a cause pretended,
why he should take possession of my lands, for that Charles has so
commanded, and Ferdinando urges him. But Cosinage and nere aliaunce, and the
league and conuenauntes which are commen to both houses, ought to be preferred
far above their proclamations. For touching al things, that concern not
religion, Charles, Ferdinando and I were agreed long since, and the crimes that
are ascribed to us, are false, and we are troubled for Religion only. If his
commandment do move you, why does not the unworthiness of the thing it self
move you more? Why did you not consider, whether your Prince might lawfully
execute so wicked a commandment, and grounded of no reason? But you brought
to counsel with you a cankred mind, and long since corrupt with affections, and
you and your Prince, liked my Dukedom better, than you did equity it self,
or true judgment. For otherwise reason would have showed you, in as much as
we are condemned, and came not to our answer, that the same outlawing or
prescription is against the laws, decrees and conuenauntes whereby he is bound
to the Empire. Maurice also might easily have seen, that it had not ben lawful
for him, to obey so wicked and wylfull a commandment, and should have
regarded more the preservation of the cositrey: But he had rather walk in the
fotesteppes of wicked Doeg, and Duke Maurice follows Doeg.
with a feigned necessity of duty, cloak and cover his fact. Neither makes it
for the matter, where you say that he would have done no such thing, had not
Ferdinando approached my land with an Army. For the matter is far otherwise,
and it has been reported to me by credible men, first, that you your selves
and Maurice through crafty and subtle counselles moved all these things to
the Emperor and Ferdinando, at Regenspurg, and also at Prage, as the time it
self hereafter will bring to light. Moreover, that the same was not done by the
common assent of all, but that this mischeuous act was contrived, by a few
chosen out of the whole number. Now therefore, in as much as through the
goodness of God, I am returned home with my army, I am fully determined to
requite your Prince with like thankefulnes, and to attempt all things which
are requisite for my defense, and recovery of my province. In the which thing
verily, I will so revenge me upon you, especially which were authors of so
mischeuous a counsel, according to the wickedness hereof, that you shall well
understand, how cruel was the injury and wrong that I have sustained. It
greueth me suerly, that the matter is come to this pass, and I am sorry for the
dommage of the common country. But sithe the beginning comes of you, and the
thing it self requires that I should defend mine own from violent wrong, I
proteste, that what evil so ever shall hereafter come thereof, it is not to be
imputed to me. If there be any of you also, fre from this misdede, that will
try their innocence before me, it shall be lawful for them so to do: I will
use them courtesely and gently. The king of Denmark aided not yt Protesta^tes.
The king of Denmark, albeit he was a co^federate, yet gave he no aid to the
protestauntes.

The Emperor removing from Hala to Hailbrune, and receiving the towns men
into favor, sends the Duke of Alba to invade the land of Wirtemberg, as is
said before. He taking 1547. Conditions imposed to yt Du. of Wirtemberg.
certain places by rendryng, does verey much harm. But through the suit of the
Paulsgraue, the Duke of Wirtemberg, the third day of January, is reconciled
upon these conditions. For so much as he is sick and can not, let him send
Ambassadors, to make his submissio^, and desire the Emperor mercy: The Same
shall he do in person within six weakes he shall observe the Emperors
decrees concerning the common wealth. He shall give no aid to the Duke of Saxon
and the La^tgraue, but assist the Emperor, that the proclamation of outlawry
set forth against them, may be put in execution. He shall permit the
Emperors ennemies to have nothing to do within the precinct of his dominion.
He shall make no league at any time, wherein both the Emperor, king Ferdinando,
and the house of Austriche, shall not be comprised: If any of his subictes shall
fortune to serve against the emperor, king Ferdina^do and the house of
Austriche, he shall punish them most extremely. Moreover he shall bind the
nobility by an oath, that none of them serve against him. As often as it shall
please the emperor to pass through his country, he shall make him way for all
things. The munition which his fellows have left within his province, he
shall deliver every piece with the furniture: Toward ye charges of the war,
he shall pay three hondreth thousand crowns, the one half out of hand, and the
residue within.xxv. days: For assurance he shall deliver, Asperge, Kirchene,
Schorendorffe, that the Emperor may place in them garrisons at his pleasure.
He shall compound with such as he has iniuried in this war, if he can not,
he shall stand to the Emperors arbitrament. Both he and his son shall
follow the custom of the court of high Burgundy, when they shall have any
matters in the law in those parties. He shall not be avenged upon his
subjects, which have rendered unto him. That the Title of king Ferdinando
remain unto him whole. That within six wekes his son Christopher, and his
people do confirm and ratify the same. That his brother George shall not
inioye the benefit of this peace. What time these things were drawn out in
writing the third day of January, as before is said the Ambassadors of Duke
Ulriche, Balthazar Gultting, Lewis Frauenburg, and John Fesler a Ciuilian, the
fifth day after came to Hailbrune, and falling prostrate at Themperours feet,
say, how the Duke is let by sickness, and can not come, and has given them
in charge to make his excuse. And how he confesses his fault openly, and is
wonderful sorry for the of fence committed, and desires for Gods love, that he
might be received to mercy, and that no extremity be showed to him, and his
poor subjects. For he does both ratife the conditions of peace, and also, as soon as he is able, will come him self to require the same, and will never
forget so great a benefit. Hereunto the Emperor makes answer by Nauius.
Forasmuch as he acknowledges his fault, and asks pardon, he is satisfied,
and says, how he will of his mercy spare the people and pardon his offense,
so that he observe conuenauntes, and from henceforth omit not to do his
duty. After them came the Ambassadors of Memming, Bibrach, Rauensburg,
Kempten, and Isnen, and making their humble supplication, desire pardon
Thecities of Protesta^tes. send Ambassadors to yt Emperor.
of their fault, and that they have offended him, they say it is to be
imputed, partly to their own error, partly to the occasion of others. And
that they fly now unto him for refuge, as unto the welspring of mercy, and
beseech him, that he would forgive them, and restore them to their old
estate, and to deminishe nothing of their privileges and fredome. The Emperor
than byndeth them by an oath, that they be faithful unto him from henceforth,
that they obey the same laws, that other states do, that they forsake the
league of the Duke of Saxon and the Lantgraue, and aid them with no kind of
thing, nor make no league against him from henceforth. This done he takes
them to mercy, and conde^pneth the city of Meming, in fifty thousand crowns.
Before they came into the Emperors The Emperor will hear no mention of
Religion.
presence, they desired to be assured not to have their Religion chasiged. But
Nauius, whom the Emperor used chiefly for interpretour in such matters,
warned them in any wise to make no mention thereof: For incase they did, the
Emperor would surely ascribe it, to a certain distruste they had in him. For at
the beginning of the war, he declared his mind here in sufficiently:
Therefore let them hold them content, and require no further assurance. And
this was thought to be done for this intent, lest, if they should have had a
nay, it might appear, that an other thing were intended, than the Emperor had
published in his letters before. But and if it should be granted them by
express words, the same should offend the Bishop of Rome, whose purpose was,
that by this war, the doctrine of the Protestauntes might utterly be
extinguished.

In these days arose a rebellion at Gene, against the house Rebellion as Genes
against yt house of Aurie.
of Aurie, the Prince whereof at the same time was Androwe, the most expert man
on the Sea that than lived, and through the Emperors auaunceme^t, the chiefest
of that common wealth. The chief captain and ringleader of this uproar was
Count Fliscane, and in the same, among others, was murdered the Cousin of
Androwe Iohannine Aurie, a man of a great courage. And if the Earl of Flisca
had not chanced to slip into the Sea, and drowned, it is thought, that there
would have been a black day, and much evil done: But when he was gone, the
fellows of that conspiracy, shranke away immediately, and streightwayes after
that Tempest followed a great Caulme. The Emperor affirms the Farnesians to
be the authors of this enterprise, especially, the Bishops son, Peter
Aloisse, Duke of Placence, as shall be declared in his place.

The sitting of the fathers at Trent, which should have been at the end of
July, was adiourned until this time, and the xiii. day of January, what time
the fathers were assembled in the Cathedral church, as their manner is, they
make a decree, of the justification of man, and there are they condemned, which
affirm, that since the fall of Adam, man has not had fre will, A decree of ye
counsel at Trent of justification.
that man is justified by faith only, and in that Christ imputes
righteousness, and say that justification is nothing else but a confidence in
Gods mercy, who forgiueth sins for Christ's sake, or say it is necessary,
that a man believe assuredly, and doubt not, but his sins are forgeuen, and
that he is of the nombre of Gods elect, and such again as say, that a man is
not able to keep the commandments of God, no, though he be justified, which
say that justification received is not kept and increased through good works,
which, after baptism, affirm that iustifications lost, is recovered by faith
only, with out the sacrament of penance, and say that a penitent sinner has
his offense wholly forgiven, and that there remains no punishment for the
same, neither in this world, nor in the life to come, through purgatory,
finally which affirm that these decrees are a derogation to Gods glory, and
to the merits of Christ. When the Duke of Saxo^ was coming with his Army,
Duke Maurice fortifieth Lipsia with a garnison, and burns the suburbs. The
same time came the there above a thousand horsemen of the Hongarians. The.xiii.
day of January, began the siege, but the towns men defending them selves The
Duke of Saxon be segeth Lipsia.
most valiauntly, about the end of the same month, the enemy departs
without his purpose. Howbeit the town, with the number of shot that went of as
thick as hayle, was wonderfully rent and torn, and utterly defaced. The Duke
of Saxon departing from thence, did not only recover shortly after all that he
had lost in the countries of Thuring and Meyssen, but also wan all Duke Maurice
towns, saving only Lipsia and Dresda: He brings also into his possession the
Byshoprike of Magdeburg Maurice loses his towns.
and Halberstat, making a composition with the Bishop, John Albert. The day
before he assailed Lipsia, king Ferdinando commanded the Bohemers, that they
should take armure and go aid Duke Maurice. They obeyed him in deed, but
after they returned home without commandment: Wherefore the king at the end
of January commands them again likewise. There did the commons of Prage,
which city is of most authority in those parties, desire the Senate, to sue
to ye king, that he would stay that commandment, which is both against The
Bohemers refuse to war in Saxony.
their liberty, and such as they can not honestly obey. For there is no
cause, why they should have war, with the Prince Electour of Saxon. And in
most things, their religion is all one with his. Moreover, he has always
showed him self like a noble Prince, and aided them against the Turks.
Whereunto Ferdinando made answer, among other things, how the war was
attempted against him not for religion, but for rebellion. And where they say,
how he has given great aid against the Turk, the matter is far otherwise:
For he sent messengers to ye Turk, a few months past, which might procure
him to move war, to Hongary and Boheme, and that he should take no longer truce,
and that he should infringe the same which he had granted. And to the intent
the thing might have the better success, he would not fail, to invade on the
contrary side. When the emperor understood, how the matter went in Saxony, and
was advertised by sundry letters of Duke Maurice, he sends certain bands of
horsemen and fotemen to aid him, at the leading of Marquis Albert, and than
commands the forces of Spaniardes and Italia^s to follow, whereof Sandey and
Marignane were captains. Marquis Albert departs from Hailbrune with his
company, the.ix. day of January. The Emperor also remoueth Marquis Albert sent
to aid Maur.
from thence to Ulmes: by ye way they of Liudaue and Esling were reconciled to
him. Of the bishop of Rome it is told before, how he gave sentence and deprived
tharchbishop of Collo^ of his ecclesiastical fu^ction. Wha^ he thus did, he
gave away al his right and authority at the self same time unto Adolphe Earl
of Schauenburg, Adolphe substituted to Herman Archebyshop of Collon.
whom a few years before that: the Archbishop had among all others, chosen
unto him for his Coadiutour. Wherefore the Bishop sending his bulls, warns
all the states of ye country to accept and acknowledge him for their
Archbishop. Moreover he urges the emperor, that he should execute his sentence.
And where as the Archbishop being at sundry times admonished, to leave of his
enterprise, said ever, he could not do it with a safe conscience. The Emperor
having almost now gotten the victory, sends to Collo^ Ambassadors, Philip
Lalenge, governor of Gelderla^d, and Uiglie Zwicheme a Lawyer. By them he
calls an Assembly of the States of the whole province, that coming at a
certain day, they should forsake their Archebyshop Herman, and go to him that
before was his Coadiutour, unto whom they should show al fidelity and
observance as to their high prelate. The Clergy in deed was ready to grant
unto it, for they were the very occasion hereof. But the Nobility, and many of
the Clergy also that were of noble houses, and again, the Ambassadors of
cities, declare that it is not lawful for them, to forsake him, whom they have
so long time obeyed, and so many years found a good and a Godly Prince, unto
whom they owe their faith, and allegeaunce by an oath. The matter stickyng at
this hard point, the Duke of Cleave his next neighbor, for the avoiding of
further trouble, sends his Cou^sellours thither to make entreaty. Which
after long and much decision, obtain of the Clergy, that they will be quiet,
till such time as the other States may declare the whole matter to the
Archebyshop. Wherefore Theodoricke Manderschitte, and William Nuenarie, Earls,
the chiefest of all the nobility, were sent unto him. Who through their
singular wisdom and eloquence, do persuade him, that for the compassion of the
people, lest the whole country should be distroyed with war, he would be
content to give place. What time therefore he had released all men of their oath
and allegeaunce: Herman leueth his byshoprike.
His foresaid Coadiutour, whom he had loved as his own brother, does succeed
him. This was the.xxv. day of January. The Archebyshop had a brother, named
Fridericke, who I told you in the tenth book had been Bishop of Munster, and
was now prouoste of Bonna. He was also deprived of his office, and that had
Gropper, for his Share. The like chanced to Count Stolberge, Dean of Collon,
who had defended the Archebyshop right constantly. By and by through Gropper
had the spoil of Friderick.
out the whole Province, by the commandment of the new Bishop, the Religion
again was altered, and what so ever Bucer had set forth, quite abolyshed. When
the Ambassadors of the Protestauntes, had been with the French king, they
went into England that they might bring the same to pass with them both. But
now was king Henry sore sick, and his disease increasing, he departs out of
this life about thend of January in ye.xxxviii. year of his reign, wha^ he had
by legacy The death of Henry the eight king of England
made his son Edward of.ix. years his heir, and after him had substituted his
daughter Mary, by his first wife, and Elizabeth by his second wife. Howbeit,
before he died he conde^neth Thomas ye duke of Norfolk, whose authority was
always great unto per And beheaded the Earl of Surrey his son, for speaking
certain words, over much suspected of the king liyng sick. After his death
insued the alteration of Religion, as hereafter you shall hear. For albeit he
had expulsed out of all his dominions, the Alteration of Religion.
Bishop of Romes authority, albeit it was death if any man did acknowledge
him, for the chief head of the church, albeit, that in the common prayers of
ye church, he detested him as a Tirau^t, King Henry banished the Pope but not
popery.
and very Antichrist, yet kept he still the popish religion, as hereto fore
has been declared. He had caused his son to be well instructed from his
childhode, and when he should depart, he appointed him counseilours, to the
nombre of.xvi. and among them, Edward Earl of Herford, the young Princes
uncle. Unto whom afterward, because it was supposed, that he would be most
faithful to him, was committed chefest part of his protection by the rest of
the counsailours, and an honorable style given him, that he should be called
the Protector of the king and his Realm. He was also created Duke, when the
king had given The Duke of Somerset
him the Duchy of Somerset. He both loved the Gospel, and did his endeavor
also that the same might be received, and moved the king his nephew to embrace
it in like case, and herein had a companion and helper, Thomas Cranmer,
Archebyshop of Thomas Cranme primate of England.
Canturbury, a man of notable learning, and primate of England. About this time
also dies the wife of king Ferdinando, Queen Anne, the mother of many
children: For whom the Emperor makes a funeral at Ulme. In the mean season
they of Auspurg, moved by the example of their fellows and by their They of
Auspurg make their peace with The Emperor.
own danger together, and having intercessours fit for the purpose, and
amongst others Anthony Fugger, are received into the Emperors favor, being
condemned in a ho^dred and fifty thousand crowns, xii. great pieces of
ordenaunce furnyshed, and to find a garryson within their City of ten
enseignes of footmen. In the City was Captain Scherteline, and had served
them many years for their wages. Whom the Emperor and Sherteline most hated
of Themp.
king Ferdinando hated chiefly, for taking the Castle of Erenberg upon the
Alps. Wherefore, albeit the Senate entreated much for him, yet, seeing the
Emperor did stiffly refuse, and other wise would not accord, he was constrained
to fly the country, and so went with his hole family to Constaunce, a city
in ye borders of Swisserla^d. During the siege at Lipsia, the Electour of
Brandenburg entreats a peace, and sending Ambassadors to the^ both,
requires the^, that he might be permitted to take The Electour of Bra^denburg
entreats a peace.
up the matter. The Electour was content, but Duke Maurice blaming him sore, ye
he made so sharp war, ye sixth day at ye length he answers somewhat strau^gly,
when he saw that the town was able to hold out thennemy. Wherefore the Marquis
immediately does signify the same to the La^tgraue, praiyng him to persuade
Duke Maurice. And for so much as this civil war in Saxony can not well be
appeased, unless that public war of the emperor should cease also, he desires
him, that he would give his mind here unto: and the rather persuade him, he
shows him, in how great danger he stands. How that all his fellows for
the most part are already reconciled to the emperor. And how the Duke of
Wirtemburg has accorded upon most strait conditions. How the emperor
prepares a new army. And in as much as he alone is not able long to resist so
great a power, he admonishes him, yt he would not refuse to submit him self,
and condescende unto these conditions, which he him self has conceived, and
sent him now by his Ambassadors. For in as much as for many causes themperours
mind is sore irritated, the thing it self requires, that with a certain
humble submission he do crave pardon. Wherefore let him have a respect to him
self and his children and to the common multitude, and drive not the nail to
the head, neither bring the matter in to extreme danger. He writes also the
same in effect to the Duke of Saxony. The Emperor, a little before, that the
Protestauntes departed in November, had appointed certain, to levy The Emperor
leuieth a new army.
straight ways a new Army, and to make war in the next parts of Saxony,
lest the States and Cities there, should aid the Duke and the Lantgraue. Over
this Army, which was to the nombre of.xxi. thousand fotemen, and a thousand
and two hondreth horsemen, he made general, Joyce Grunninge, Governor of
Selande.

They compel Conrade Earl of Deckelburg, in league with the Protestauntes, and
the cities of Osnabruge and Mynden, and the Earl of Lippen, with certain others,
to obey their commandment, and take the Castle of Ritberge, and march from
thence to Breme. This was in the month of February. Here served the Emperor,
Philippe Ebersten Earl, Christopher Urisberger, Frideriche Spedie. When the
Electour of Saxony heard of the Emperors success, addressing his letters
The Elect. of Saxons lettern to the^ of strasburg.
to the Senate of Strasburge, the.xiii. day of February, he signifies unto
them how he has recovered his own, and won almost all that Duke Maurice
had in the countries of Thuring and Meyssen, and caused his Nobility to be
sworen unto him, and has allotted unto him ye by shoprick of Maide^burg And
where as the Duke of Wirtemberg, and the most part of yt cities in upper
Germany, have compounded with the emperor upon conditions most unreasonable,
and omitting the mention of religion, have promised the emperor aid against him
and his fellows, that has chanced unto him beyond al expectation, and is
altogether repugnau^t to the manner of ye league. How be it he heard say how
they remained constant, and that was great pleasure to him. Wherefore let them
hold on, and fainte not, and do as becomes confederates, and if the thing
require so, let them defend and maintein the^ selves with the aid of the
Swisses and the French king, his desire is assuredly, to show them alloue and
fidelity, but he is let by domestical war, wherein if God will make an
end, to his commodity, they shall not want his help. The Ambassadors of the
states and cities of Saxony, be already assembled at Maydenburg, with whom he
treats of those matters, for the which the conuention was appointed at
Franckfurt, and his trust is, that they will perform their duty, especially
the cities, and will not forsake the co^federatie. At the Ides of February
comes to Strasburge an Ambassador from the French king, Mendoza, a Spaniard,
an exile, and promises Mendoza, Ambassa. from the french king to Strasburge.
largely: But the Senate had already decreed, to send to the emperor an
Ambassade for peace. And so he departed with out any thing done. The
Ambassadors to the emperor were James Sturmius, Matthie Pharrer, and Mark
Hagie. The cause of their Ambassade was, that going to Ulme, they should know
for certentie, upon what conditions the emperor might be co^pounded with.
The Emperor had than of his counsel. Anthony, bishop of Arras: For his father
Granuella^, was gone to Besanson, and Nauius the same time had changed his
life for death. In whose room afterward succeeded George Selde a Ciuilan, and
to The death of Nauius.
him were annexed, by reason of so much business as was in Germany, John
Marquard of Bade^, and Harry Hasie, who had been consellour before to the
Paulsgraue, and very lately to the prince of Bippount, right expert in matters
of Germany. King Ferdinando, to the intent he might styre up the Bohemers, that
King Ferdinando moves the Bohemers to war.
refused to serve, as I said before, the sixte day of February, marches
forth with Ferdinando his son, and comes to Letmerice, a Frontier town of
Boheme. What time he tarried there a day or two, for the nobles and states of
the realm, he had a long Oration. And for as much as Duke Maurice, desires
his help, he exhorts them to put on Armure, as well for the ancient league
between both the people, as also for that they are the^perours clic^tes. And
because diverse say, that their liberty herby is infringed, he promises the^
assurance, yt it shall be no hinderau^ce to the^ in time to come. The states
which than were present, say, how they can determine nothing, with out the
consent of the rest. They require him therefore, so shortly as he can, to call
them altogether. Certain others of them promise their service and duty. Those
were governors of towns, unto whom the king gave thanks, and to the others
declared at large, how this was no time to stand in question, when the thing
it self requires a present remedy against the ennemie: What time the war
shall be finished, he will not refuse to call an assembly, and will deminishe no
part of their liberties, wherefore let them stand content, and follow him. At
the length fearing his displeasure, when the king had taunted the^ somewhat
sharply, they gave their assent also, and in case they serve not in person,
they promise to find others. About ye Ides of February, the nobility, and men
of Prage, writing their letters, pray the king, in so much as he perseuereth
in his commandments after a new and strange example, that against the.xx.
day of March he would command all the states to be at Prage. Or if he can
not, in case they do assemble than, and determine some thing, they desire him
not to take it displeasauntly. He again, recites what was done at Letmerice,
and promises an assembly against the.xviii. day of April, and warns them in
the mean time that they attempt nothing, neither assemble together in any
wise. The fourth day after they had thus written, The league of the Bohemers.
they make a league, to maintein their liberty. After that Marquis Albert was
come into Saxony, Duke Maurice assigned him to lie in the town of Rochlice.
The revenues whereof had the Lantgraues sister a wydowe, daughter in law to
Duke George. That known, John Fridericke Prince Electour, who was than at
Aldenburge, three miles from the same, at the kalendes of March, sends
before Ernest Duke of Luneburge, and Uolrate Earl of Mansdfelde with certain
guydo^s of horsemen, and after them Recrode with his legion of foteme^ by night.
He him self with the rest of his army follows after. In the next morning
before it was day light, a few horsemen, sent before to escoute, did set upon
the watch, and some they took, the rest fled into the town. In the suburbs
were four enseignes of fotemen. They accompanied with certain horsemen, The
winig of Roclice.
going forth as soon as day appeared, give ye charge: But having the repulse,
they return back into the suburbs. But when the Electour was come with the
rereward, and shot of his ordenaunce into the town from the next hill by, the
foteme^ also entering perforce, fyred the suburbs. Those forsaid enseignes of
fotemen fly away by the bridge, and the horsemen also through the River of
Mulda. wherefore the fotemen, which already possessed the suburbs, go to the
assault of the town with a lusty courage win it, spoil it, and takes the
ordenaunce from ye ennemy. Whylest these things were thus a working, Marquis
Marquis Albert taken prisoner.
Albert seeks which way he might escape, and takes the Ryner, but he was
intercepted by ye Duke of Luneburg, and brought to the prince Electour. The
garrison within the town was six enseignes of fotemen. They putting them selves
into a ringe, by ye help of the other horsemen, stand to their defense, but
vanquished with a multitude they were taken all and striped out of their
armure. And wha^ they had made promise not to serve against the Duke of Saxon
and his fellows, of six months after, they were so let go without rau^som.
The horsemen poursuing after those.iiii. enseignes of footmen that escaped
over the bridge, did slay a great number of them: which were all for the most
part, Italians and Spaniards. Marquis Albert had, (what of King Ferdinando, and
what of the Emperor) as good as a thousand and five hundred horsemen, ten
enseignes of foot men, and.xiiii. field pieces. They fought from the break of
the day till none. The Duke of Saxon lost not many of his men, and among
them, Wuolfie Theodorick, a man of a noble courage who being stryken with a
gunne, left his life a few days after. The nombre of them that were slain
within the town, was accounted a thousand, without the town and in the River
three hondreth. After the conflict, the Electour with Albert his prisoner
retourneth to Aldenburg, and after signifies the whole matter into Boheme, and
shows that he will do nothing against the league, and desires to have those
punished, which had attempted against his subjects with sword and fire. The
Duke of Wirtemberg had condicioned, so sone as he might for his sickness, to
come make his submission to the Emperor, he comes therefore to Ulme, in the
month of March, ^han he The Duke of Wirtemtemberg craves pardon of the Emp.
was not yet recovered, and sitting in his saddel, by the Emperors permission,
in as much as he could not remove nor bow him self, by his cou^sellors kneling
for him, he desires to be pardoned of his fault, promising from henceforth
aldew obedience. When the emperor hereunto had made a gentle answer, he
departs immediately, and for the war of Saxo^, he goes to Norling. Whilst
the Duke of Wirtemberg on this wise made his submission, there was a great
resort and concourse of people, which having thereof knowledge before, came
thither flocking thick and threfolde. In those three forsaid places of the land
of Wirtemberg, the Emperor had placed garrisons a good while before, for the
most part all Spaniardes.

The nyntenth Book of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of
Religion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the
fyfte
The argument of the nyntenth Book.
THe fathers of Trent make their seventh sessions. The Emperor having accorded
with them of Strasburg, marches forth with his army. Fraunces the French
king dies shortly after the king of England. The counsel of Trent is divided.
The Duke of Saxo^ taken in battle, notwithstanding his condemnation to death,
remains constant in Religion. Wittemberge being rendered, the university is
destroyed. Suite is made for the agreement of the Lantgraue, who coming to the
Emperor is stayed prisoner. King Ferdinando appeaseth them of Prage. A
commotion at Naples by reason of the Spanish inquisition. The coronation of the
French king is described. The city of Maidenburg is outlawed. An assemblee is
holden at Auspurg. Peter Aloesse the Popes son, is murdered. The Duke of
Somerset wynneth a great battle of the Scotts. When the Princes of the
Protestauntes were vanquyshed, the cities were made afraid. Strife aryseth for
the imprysonyng of the Lantgraue. Request is made that the Fathers should
return to Trent: but the Pope and such as were gone to Boloigne le grass,
stood styf in their opinions. in so much that there is great disordre in the
counsel of Trent.

THe third day of March, was the seventh The seventh Session at Trent, of ye
Sacraments.
Session of the fathers at Trent. In this are conde^pned al such as either say
there are fewer Sacraments of the church tha^ seven, or that al were not of
Christ's institution, who deny that one is of more dignity than an other, who
say, they be only external signs of grace, or that righteousness is received
through Christ and faith who deny that grace is given through the receiuinge
of the same, who say that through Baptism, Confirmation, and orders, is not
imprinted in the soul a spiritual token or mark that can never be scraped
out, or ye al men have like authority to minister the same, or that the
accustomed ceremonies of the church, in the administration of the same, may be
omitted, or altered, which say that the doctrine of the church of Rome,
mother and maistres of al others, concerning Baptism, is not sincere, which
say, that Uowes made after Baptism, are of no importau^ce, and are rather a
derogation of the faith which they have professed. And say that Confirmation is
an Idle Ceremony, and was in times past nothing else but an instruction of
youth, and deny that the virtue and instinction of the holy Ghost, is not
present at Confirmation, which ascribe the co^firmyng of children not to
bishops only, but take it to be the fu^ction of any other priest. After this,
decrees are made of ecclesiastical benefices. That Bishops and other Prelates
of the church Of ecclesiastical benefices.
be lawfully begotten, that they be of years, manners and learning sufficient.
That no man, of what estate or degree soever he be of, do enjoy do Byshoprickes
than one, and they that possess many, may keep still which of them they
list, and within one years space shall put away the rest. That such as have
cure and charge of souls, be them selves resident, neither let them substitute
others in their place, unless it be for a time, and so, as if they have
declared a cause of their absence to the Bishop, and he has allowed the same,
whose part it shall be to forsee, that the people be not neglected, and that
priests offenses be punished, and such vices as reign among them, be
straightly corrected. After was the.xxi. day of April assigned for the next
assembly. When king Ferdinando was come to Duke Maurice at Dresda, the eight
day of March, he writes to the Bohemers, how John Friderick is prefixed to
invade them. Therefore let them take heed to their matters, and obey
Weittemulle, whom he has appointed his deputy in his absence. The
Ambassadors of Strasburg, which as I said, went to They of Strasburg
compounde with the emperor.
Ulme, returning home, where the Senate did not mislyke the conditions
prescribed of the Emperor, they are sent again to conclude thoroughly. As they
were traueling, they find the Emperor at Norlyng, there liyng sick of the
Gowte, and the.xxi. day of March, making their submission, they were
reconciled. The conditions were very tolerable. For neither the Emperor
charged them with any garrison, and was content with xxx. thousand crowns, and
demanded not above.xii. pieces of ordenaunce. The Prince Electour of
Brandenburg, was an ernest suter for the Lantgraue, and also preferred the
matter to king Ferdinando. But the conditions were most unreasonable. Those
were, that he should allow without exception al Conditions offered to the
Lantgraue.
the decrees of the Empire to be enacted hereafter, that he should give one of
his sons for a pledge: That he should release the Duke of Brunswicke Henry
and his son, and here in stand to the Emperors arbitrament. That he should
aid him against the Electour of Saxony and his fellows with certain centaynes
of horsemen, and eight enseignes of fotemen at his propre costs and charge,
for the space of syx months. That he do submit him self to the Emperor,
and confess his faults openly. But these conditions he refused, and unless
they were mitigated, in as much as he can not with his honor assente unto
them, he signifies in his letters to his friends, that rather he will abide
what fortune soever happen. The Emperor, the same day that he accorded with
them of Strasburg, departed from Norlinge, toward Nurrinberg. And the next
day after, adressing his letters to the States of Duke Maurice, for as much,
says he, as John Friderick, that outlaw, retourning home by flight, has not
only recovered those places, which Maurice Prince Electour took from him by
our commandment, but such also as my brother Ferdinando had seized in those
parties, for that they were under the tuition of Boheme. We are entered verily,
upon our journey to repress his boldness and rebellion. Wherefore we will that
you first, foresee, that in such places, whereby we shall pass with our army,
there want nothing that is necessary, and that the soldiers be well used.
Moreover, that contemning all the others commandments, you perform unto
your Prince al love and due obedience, as in deed you have done hitherto. For
even for this intent have we taken this war in hand, that his fiersenes
being oppressed, peace and quietness may be for you recovered. The same day
also he writes to the counselors and governors of Prage. How he is prefixed
to be avenged upon John Fridericke according unto his demerites: Let them
provide therefore, that his camp may be vitayled out of their country.
The.xxiiii. of March, the nobles and cities of Boheme, which had lately made
a league, when they were assembled at Prage, as it was determined, they make
warlike laws, and such as are requisite for the wars if need require, and
commit the chief government to Caspar Phulgius. About this time king
Ferdinando, Duke Maurice, and his brother Augustus came with Caspar Phlugius
Captain of the Bohemers army
their forces to Priccie. Which the Bohemers took in displeasure, that they
were entered already upon their Frontiers. Wherefore they require Ferdinando by
their letters, that he would not suffer strange nations to invade their
country: For the example is strange and perilous. They write moreover to
Duke Maurice and his brother Augustus, that they depart immediately out of
their limits, without any hurt doing. For otherwise will they do, as their
counsel shall serve them. Whereunto Ferdinando answers the.xxvi. day of
March, how they shall not need to fear: For they are come only into those
parties, to the intent they might join them selves with the Emperor now
approaching. Again, he writes to them of Prage, that they bestow no
superfluous cost: For the Duke of Saxon is retired. The electour had sent into
the land of Boheme an Ambassador, Nicolas Minquit, to renew the ancient
league: But he falling sick by the way, when he was not The Duke of Saxo^
sends an Ambassador in to Boheme.
able to go to Prage, writing his letters desired them to send some me^ of
credit to him, with whom he may treat and conclude. When these letters were
received, the Noble men of Boheme, write to the Duke of Saxon from Prage,
the.xxviii. day of March, signifieng what Minquit required, and how desirous
they be, to gratify him herein, and grant, that reason would, it should so
be. How beit they are impeched by reason of this troublesome time, and present
disquietnes. For Duke Maurice and his brother are come with their force into
Boheme, intending to do some mischief, and all through the procurement of king
Ferdinando: praying him not to take this so, as though they would not that the
league should be renewed. For they will both keep the same, and persevere in the
old amity, as well as if it were already renewed. They will also do their
endeavor, that it shall be confirmed again as soon as may be. For therefore is
this power lenied, and force prepared against them, for that they refuse to
break the league, and to move war against him. They require him therefore, yt
in case Duke Maurice do proceed, he will vouchsaufe to aid them. If he shall
this do, there is no danger so great, that they will refuse to venture upon for
his preservation. They say how Ferdinando is now at Priccie, and from thence
will march with his army into the Uale of Ioachime, as it is reported. If he
so do, they are purposed a few days after, to march with their army, and
lead the same thither as need shall require.

The last day of March saving one, they write to ye Lords of Morauie,
exhorting the^, according to their mutual league, The Bohemers letters to the
Morsuians.
that they would take armure and come to them with speed, to the intent their
common country may be defended from that wicked and Sodomiticall kind of men,
the Spaniardes and Hussars, buggerers, which the Emperor and king Ferdina^do
bring with them.

Fraunces the French king, when he had reigned.xxxii. years, he ended his
life the last day of March at Rambolet, The death of the French king.
which is a days journey from Paris. Whom his son Henry succeeded, a man
about.xxviii. years of age. He immediately sends for the Constable, Annas
Momorancie, who had for the space of six years lived a private life out of
favor, and restored him to his former dignity, and had him in great
estimation. Again, such as were in chiefest authority before, partly grow out
of favor, partly are displaced, and committed to prison. Alteration in the
court of France.
Those were the Cardinal of Tournon, Anebalde the Admiral, Grinian, the
governor of the French province, the Duke of Longeuale, Bayarde, Poline, and
especially she, which had been the kings darling, Madame Destampes. The death
of king Fraunces chanced unfortunately for students and learned me^. King
Frau^ces the fauiour of learning.
For he loved all liberal sciences, no man better, or that showed more
liberality to auaunce the same. Through long use and custom, he had gotten
much knowledge. For dining and supping his talk was commonly of learning, and
that most earnestly using many years for ye same purpose James Coline, a
learned His knowledge.
man, and in the vulgar tongue most eloquent. And after him Peter Castellan.
Of these two had he learned, whatsoever was written in the books of Poets,
Historiographers, and Cosmographers. Moreover he knew perfitly, whatsoever
Aristotel, Theophraste, Pliny, and such other like, have written of the
nature of Plants, Herbs, Beasts, Metalles and Precious stones, and by daily
use and hearing did remember them. He was wont also to devise much of the
Mathematical sciences, and to reason often of the Scriptures. About his table
stood always the notable men of each degree. And in as much as the talk was
inferred of sundry arguments: it was hard, but that one or other would always
propounde some matter: And that might every man do lawfully, in case he were
any thing known. The example also, and this desire of the king excited men
unto great diligence, that they might in reasoning before him, deserve praise.
In his own tongue he was always accounted right eloque^t and grave. Throughout
Greece and Italy he had The notable library of king Frau^ces.
that sought and copied out for him the works of old writers. And he made a
goodly library, which yielded certain notable books afterward. The keeper
whereof was Castellan. Alitle before his death, he had sent to the Duke of
Saxon, and the Lantgraue: for the mayntenaunce of the war, to either of the^ an
hondreth thousand crowns, and what time he departed, ye money was scarsely
delivered. About the same time also, the Ambassadors of the Protestauntes
return out of England into France, that they might finishe up the rest of
their matters. And like as they found king Henry there when they first arrived,
so now, retourning from thence, they find king Frau^ces extremely sick.
Wherefore this happened also to the rest of the Emperors good fortune, that
those two most mighty kings, which neither wanted opportunity, nor (as many
men than supposed) will also: to impeche and hinder his enterpryses, died both
in a manner at one time. That force of the Emperors, which after they had
oppressed certain noble men, and The death of two kings was happy for the
Emperor.
taken the city of Mynden (I said) went marching to Breme, at the end of
this same month, had such an overthrow, that he lost the chief captain of
the war, Grunninge, governor of Selande. And when the power of the Bremers
was increased by the access of Hamborough men, Urisberger, who after The
overthrow of the Emper. army.
the death of Grunning, had then the chief government, removing his camp, and
fetching a long circuit about, for the fennes that lay in his way, began to
beseige the city on the other side. Thither came shortly after also Ericus
Duke of Brunswyck, whom the Emperor at the Ides of March, sent away from him
at Norlinge, to the intent he should levy a new power of horsemen and
fotemen, and lead them into those parties. The Emperor removing from Norling,
to Norinberge, went from thence to Egre, a town of king Ferdina^dos in the
borders of Boheme. The king had at sundry times admonished the city of Prage,
their weapons. The residue of the states by them thereof advertised, the fourth
day of April, write again. That the cause why they have put on armure, and
led forth their army, is to defend their country from unjust violence,
especially in his abse^ce. And pray him, to entreat the emperor, that he war
not against the Duke of Saxo^, but suffer that his case may be friendly debated.
They desire also to have a parliament, as the promise was. At the which time the
Emperor coming to Egre, and the. vi^. day of April, when Ferdinano and
Maurice were come yt day before, he writes to all the states of Boheme, The
Empe. letters to the states of Boheme.
and repeting briefly what he had written in the month before, shows the^,
that he seeks only the Duke of Saxon. Wherefore let them bring forth their
vitayle, furnishe them of corn, and return home. As concerning religion,
they need not to fear, for in all this war, he has molested no man for
religion. At the same time the commissioners that were at Prage, dispatching
their letters into all parts, warn the states most earnestly, that they
would put on armure, and come with all haste possible, to desend their
country, for the matter is brought to an extreme danger. Ferdinando the
eleventh of April, answers their Ferdinando to the Bohemers.
last letters from Egre, of like effect in a manner as the Emperor did.
Therefore let them leave their enterprise, or else will he find the means to
repress their rashenes well enough. Where they entreat for the Duke of Saxon,
he can not a little marvel: For he has not deserved so, neither of the
Emperor, nor of him, nor yet of the land of Boheme. Touching their request
for a parliament, he will do herein as shall become him. In the mean time the
Duke of Saxon takes from Duke Maurice Fridberge and Misen, a town by the
River of Albis.

And about this time the Fathers that were at Trente, remove Part of the
counsel of Trent flitt to Banonie
to Bolonia la grace, neither after that session wherein they treated of the
Sacraments, made they any decrees at al. The cause of their departure (as it
is said) was, for that the air of this place was not greatly wholesome, after
the opinion of Hierosme Fracastor, Physician to the Fathers of the counsel,
who had of the Bishop of Rome therefore, threscore duckates a month. The
Emperor took this matter most displeasauntly, and commanded the Bishops
and Divines of his dominions, not to remove from thence one foot. Whereupon,
part of the counsel was at Trente, and an other part at Bononie. What time
the Emperor marched from Norlinge to Norinberge, the Earl of Bure, which kept
Frankefurte with twelve enseignes of fotemen, and about four hondreth
horsemen, being sent for, came thither. And when he was come again to
Franckefurt, the.xii. day of April, he puts two to Two executed at
Frankefurte.
death, whereof the one John Uerden, was of the same town, the other William
Gelluse, was a subject of the Lantgraues. The cause of their execution was, for
that they were said to be sent by the Lantgraue, that they should bye of a
Smyth the keys of one gate, that they should set the town on fire in four
sondrye places, that they should drive in Iron nails into the Canons and other
great pieces, so that they might not be shot of. That whylest others were
quenching the fyres, they with the help of their fellows should slaye the
Earl of Bure and his family, the Consul and the Senate. That they should
infecte the wells of the town with poyso^, especially that, which served the
Earls kitchen, and an other which is in the Court. After came forth a
wrytting, pourporting how they confessed in prison this co^spiracie, and
perseuered in the same wha^ they were led to execution. But the Lantgraue
pourgeth him self, The Lantgraues purga^^on.
and affirms that since that time that Franckefurt came in to the Emperors
hands, he has attempted nothing, and co^futeth the crimes objected with many
weighty words: he had at sundry times in deed commanded Geluse, to
understand, which way the emperor and the Count of Bure marched with their
army, and but that thing only. But in case they being vanquished by the
sharpnes of the torture and extremity of ye pain, have spoken Unreasonable
torment isaperillous matter.
yt is false, and have not iniuried others only, but him also, he desires,
that the same be not wrasted, to his disdain and hatred. For all racking and
torture, that exceadeth a mean, is uncertain and perilous. A probation whereof
is, that such as they before had nominated to be fellows of their conspiracy,
after, when they were had to the place of execution, declared them to be
innoce^tes. The.xiii. day of April, the commisioners of Prage write again to
the states of the Realm, and warn them ernestly to cleave unto the league,
that they have with the house of Saxon. They complain also that diverse have
infringed ye same already. Wherefore they command that from henceforth no man
offend against it. The same day they send letters to king Ferdinando,
beseching him, that neither he nor the emperor, would be offended with this their
warfare. Moreover, that he war not against the Electour of Saxony, first, for
the mutual league, secondly, for that he desires the matter might come to
hearing. The self same day, Ferdinando sends John Bishop of Olmuce, and
certain other counselors to the parliament Ferdina^dos Ambassad. to the
Bohemers.
at Prage, which he had assigned at the.xviii. of April. By the^ he makes
his excuse, why he can not come. Again, he requires them to abolishe their
new league, and lay a part their armure and weapons: for otherwise can not
the counsel be holden free. If this were denied, tha^ had the Ambassadors in
commandment, that they should treat no further. But if they did obey, than to
proceed as was prescribed them, not to determine any thing, but refer al to
him. The Emperor the same day departs from Egre with his whole army,
accompanied with his The Empe. journey against the Duke of Saxon.
brother Ferdinando, who had with him of men at arms six hondreth, of the
Hussares a thousand, and ten enseignes of footmen. There were also the two
brethren Maurice and August, with like forces. When he had marched continually
ten days together, at the length the.xxii. day of April, he comes nere unto
Misen, where the Duke of Saxon was. Who having intelligence thereof, forsakes
the town. And when he had fyred the bridge, he pitcheth his Tents nere
Mulberge, by the River of Albis. But the Emperor fearing lest he should have
retired to Wittemberge, the strongest and chiefest town of his Dukedom, saw he
had need to make haste, commanding therefore his army to march forewarde,
when they had reposed them selves one day, the.xxiiii. day of Apryl, they come
to the water in the morning by times. The Duke of Saxon had placed certain on
the contrary bank with field pieces, to let the Emperor, that he should
neither make a bridge nor find a foorde to transport his army. And also might
defend that bridge which they them selves had there ready made of boats and
small vessels. But what time they saw the Emperor come with his whole army,
and a force of Spaniardes to the number of a thousand, rushed into the water
with a great violence up to the chynne, and holding their arms above the
water, and shot of fiersly their pieces. They cast fire into the boots which
were partly burnt therewith, and by little and little shrink away from the bank
toward the myddle stream. There certain Spaniardes, threw them selves into
ye River naked, carieng their swords ouerth warte in their mouths, and thus
swymming over all most to the other side, lay hold on those boots, which
(carried down with the stream) the Saxons had broken of, from the rest of the
bridge, and although they were shot at with many pieces, and wounded sore, yet
they bring them away. Of those vessels, and such others as the emperor brought
with him by carriage, was made a bridge over the River, so that the fotemen and
carriage might pass. In this tourmoile of things, ye Duke of Saxon, who that
time was hearing of a Sermon, sendinge his carriage before, follows him self
after, and marches toward Wittemberg. But the emperor, which saw how ye whole
matter rested in speed, finding a foorde: first commanded the Hussars The
Emperors celeritie in ouerta king yt Du.
and all other light horsemen to pass over, after goes he him self also with
the horsemen in complete armure, and tariyng nothing at al, neither for the
carriage nor foteme^, hastes on still, And three miles beyond yt River of Albis,
at ye wode of Lochan, he ouertaketh the Prince Electour. There, after he had
encouraged his men through an exhortacio^ unto battle, he gives yt charge: His
army was divided into two parts. In yt forward were the Duke of Alba, Lanoie,
Anthony Toletane, Baptiste Spinelle, and Duke Maurice. The rerewarde led
the emperor and king Ferdinando with his two sons, and the Duke of Sauoye his
son. The Duke of Saxo^ might well have resisted all this force, and perchance
have disco^fited the same, in case he had had The Empe. fights a battle with
the Duke of Saxon.
his whole army together. For there was a great part of his force at
Wittemberge, and strong garrisons left in every place. And William Thumserne
with his power was absent, neither could all the rest be put in order in so
great expedition of the emperor. Wherefore, being at the length vanquished with the
greater number and multitude, when they had fought till it was night: He him
self receiving a wound in the left cheke, in defendyng him self ma^fully, was
taken, and brought first to ye Duke of Alba, The Duke taken fighting.
and after presented to the emperor. Into whose sight wha^ he was come, I yield
my self prisoner to you says he, most merciful emperor, desiring you that I
may be kept and used like a Prince. Am I now thy Emperor says he? I shall
handle thee as thou have deserved. But Ferdinando took him up with sharper
words, and charge him that he sought to dispossess him and his children of
all that ever they had. With him was taken also Ernest of Brunswick, Duke
Philippe his son: The Electours eldest son, although he was sore wounded,
yet escaped and came to Wittemberge. Of prisoners the number was great. They
that escaped by flight, to the number of four hondreth, recovered Wittenberg
for their refuge, among whom was Count Bichling, and Recrode. The horsemen
following the chase make great spoil, and take all the munition and carriage,
that the Duke had sent before. Than did the Duke of Alba commit ye Duke of
Saxon and Duke Ernest of Brunswitck, to the custody of Alphonse Uines. What
time the Emperor came nere unto Misen, which was the.xxii. of April, and
again, the next day and the same day that he passed the River, and fought the
battle, and certain days after, the Sun looked pale and dim, and was
environed as it were with a certain darkness, so that the A perdigieof the Sun.
sight was sorrouful and grievous to behold, in so much as they which were a
great way out of Saxony, and knew nothing of this matter, judged that it did
pourtende and signify some great trouble. And this was not observed in Germany
only, but also in France and England, and that this was so in deed, many
thousands can testify. Of Ferdinando his Ambassadors sent to ye conuentio^
at Prage, I have spoken before. The Peers of the Realm, hearing their
demaundes, make answer, that where they have made a league, and put on armure,
it is neither done amiss nor against ye custom of Boheme. Again they
determine to send an Ambassade to king Ferdina^do, which might declare yt same,
and also require him, to entreat the emperor for the Duke of Saxon. But tofore
thambassadours were sent, came news from king Ferdina^do, of themperours
victory, and how the Duke was taken. Then changing their purpose, they promise
corn and vitayle, and desire the king, to make means to the emperor, that all that army may be led into Hongary against the Turcke, of whose coming report
went daily. And that other kings also might be moved unto yt society of this
war. Which thing if it may be brought to pass, they will not be behind with their
parts. When yt Duke of Saxon was taken, the emperor marches to Witte^berg, and
came thither with his army the.iiii. day of May The Duke condemned to lose
his head.
and three days after, he condemns John Friderick to lose his head, as he
says for treason. But he, when he heard thereof showed no sign nor token of a
mind discouraged, but answered now he had thought the Emperor would not have
dealte so with him. Nevertheless, if this be prefixed and determined, he
desires, to have certain knowledge, to the intent he may take order in matters
concerning his wife and his children. The Prince Electour of Brandenburg, after
he had heard of the battle, takes his journey immediately, and coming to the
ca^pe the sixth day of May, does mitigate the Emperors mind, so that altering
his sentence, he saved the Dukes life. Wherefore the Emperor propounds
conditions, which after the Duke had confirmed the.xviii. day of May, he
redeemed his life. Among others was written this also, that what so ever the
Conditions whereby the Duke redeemed his life.
counsel or the Emperor should decree concerning Religion, he should approve.
But where he would in no wise assente to that, and perseuered in the same, and
herein respected no danger, the Emperor commanded that part to be crossed
and blotted out. And the rest of the conditions were these. That he renounce
the dignity of Electourship, for him self, and for his children, and permit
the Emperor to dispose it at his pleasure. He delivers up to the Emperor
Wittemberge and Gothe, the second fortress of his dominion, yet so as he may
take a way all his stuff and provision, saving the munition, and the third
part of the vytayle: The Emperor permits the soldiers of the garrisons to
depart, yet without enseignes. The Duke of Saxon freely releaseth Marquis
Albert without rau^some, and restores such things as were taken from him. The
Emperor again sets at liberty Duke Ernest of Brunswick, taking first a
promise of his fidelity. The Duke of Saxon restores such things as in this
war time have been taken away from the Earls of Ma^sfielde, the Marquis of
Prusse, and them of Solmen. He renou^ceth his title of Maydenburg, Halberstate
and Halles. He promyseth to obey the judgment of the chamber imperial, when
it shall be established by The Emperor, and to give toward the charges thereof. He
assenteth that Duke Henry of Brunswick and his son shall be delivered, neither
will he commence any action against them. He forsakes all leagues made against
the Emperor and king Ferdinando, neither will he make any from henceforth,
wherein they, their provinces and fellows shall not be comprised. The Emperor
does confiscate all his lands, and gives the same to his brother Ferdinando,
and Duke Maurice, yet so, as Duke Maurice shall pay yearly to him and his
children fifty thousand crowns. If the Emperor think good, the Duke of
Saxo^, by the promission of Maurice, shall keep still the town and Castle, of
Gothe, with all the profit, howbeit he shall raze the Castle, and not fortify
the town: For so much as the Duke of Saxon is greatly indebted, to the intent
those debtes may be paid, which were dew, before the league of Smalcalde,
Duke Maurice shall give to his children as a subsidy an hondreth thousand
crowns. Moreover he shall pay such other debtes, as depend upon the lands
confiscated, and given to him by the Emperor, and and by this mean shall the
suites and controversies betwixt them have a final end. The Duke shall
attempt nothing against them, that have served the Emperor in his wars, nor
yet against the king of Denmark. He shall observe the laws and statutes, that
the Emperor and the states of the Empire shall decree. For as much as he is
released of execution and bodily punishment, he shall remain from henceforth
in the custody of the emperor, or of his son, prince of Spain. The goods
before mentioned his children shall use and enjoy, so that they and the people
also do ratify the conditions of peace. Out of this peace are exempted Albert
Earl of Mansfield and his children, Count Bichlinge, the Ringraue, Recrode and
Thumserne, who nevertheless, if he shall discharge his army within this
month, shall be therein comprehended. Before these things were conditioned, the
Emperor out of his camp before Wittemberge the syxte day of May, summoneth
An assemble of thempyre at Ulmes.
all the states of the Empire, to mete at Ulme at the Ides of June, to the
intent to make a league. He sends thither Ambassadors, the Cardinal of
Auspurg, Marquis John of Brandenburg, Lirane and Henry Hasie. The same does
king Ferdinando. Unto that which the commissioners of Prage, King Ferdinandos
letters to the Bohemers.
had lately said, concerning the league made, as though it were no new thing,
nor against the custom of the country, Ferdinando answers from the camp
before W^^^emberge at the Ides of May. That it is plainly a new and a strange
enterprise, and which appertains utterly to his injury. Moreover he
declares what they have attempted in his absence, and how many ways they have
rebelled, and by sundry reasons goes about to prove, that this same league was
made against the Emperor and him. Wherefore he charge and commands them,
to abolyshe and defeat the same, to restore unto every man his seal again,
and deliver a copy of their league to his Ambassadors: Unless they obey
this accordingly, he will do as his counsel shall serve him. Albeit the
Emperor had accorded with the Duke of Saxon, as before is said, yet the
garrison that kept Wittemberge to the nombre of three thousand soldiers, and
the citezens also refused to render, except the Prince him self did so
command them. For the towns men feared chiefly the oultrage of the
soldiers, when they might see in a manner of the town walls what hurt they
did in the country, especially the Spaniardes and Hongarians. The Duke of
Saxon therefore the.xxi. day of May, when his brother, his son and certain
counselors, came out of the town to him, does release them of their oath
for the wars, and commands them to depart thence, before three days be
ended. When this commandment was given, the towns men make request to the
Emperor, that he would bring in no foreine soldiers. Witte^berge rendered.
He made them promise, and kept it, and gave them moreover authority, to keep
out all such as should prease to enter without his express commandment. When
they had surrendered, ye Duchess of Saxon, Sibille of Cleave, going forth with
her son, and her husbands brother, comes into the camp, and making her
supplication most humbly, besecheth the emperor with plentiful tears to be
good to the Duke her husband. The Emperor enterteined her right courteously,
and put her in good comfort. After he licenseth the Duke to go into the city
there to remain eight days with his wife and his children. The same day that
the soldiers issued out of Wittemberge, at the Duke of Saxons commandment,
which was the.xxiii. day of May, the Emperor sent in Almaigne foteme^ at the
leading of Nicolas Madruce. Two days after king Ferdinando and his two sons,
came into the town accompanied with the Electour of Brandenburg, and Duke
Maurice, to see it only, and making no long abode retourneth into the camp. At
after none also the Emperor him self enters, and when he was come into the
Castle, he saluteth the Duchess, and again comforting her, wylleth her to be
of a good chere.

I showed you before of the death of Fraunces the French The burial of king
Fraunces.
king. Who the.xxiiii. day of May, was buried in the church of saint Denis,
consecrated for the burial of kings and with him his two sons, Fraunces and
Charles, whereof the one departed.xi. years past, and the other two years
since, as before is said, and remained unburied hitherto. In the mean season
that the funeral was in preparing for king Fraunces, his picture for a certain
space appareled with rich array, with his crown, Scepter, and other
ornaments, was laid upon his bed, whereunto at certain hours both dynner and
supper was served, with like solemnity, as was accustomed being a live. After
were these garments taken away, and mourning apparel put on. There were
continually present.xlviii. Monks, such as are commonly caled begging Freers.
Those sange Masses and Diriges for him, without ceasing. About the dead corpse
were set.xiiii. great tapers, and over against, stood two aultars, whereupon
from the first day light, till it was noone, was said Mass continually. There
was also a chapel just by, wherein were burning innumerable Tapers and lights.
About the chariot wherein the coarse was carried, went.xxiiii. Freers with so
many Tapers. And before them, went five hondreth poor men, in mourning
apparel, with every man a torche. Besides other nobles of France, there were
present.xi. Cardinals. The funeral Sermon made Peter Castellane, Bishop of
Macon, of whom is mentioned before. He, among other things declares how
the king was prefixed to build a College, wherein all arts and tongues should
have been red and taught. And that six hondreth should have been found there
to learning. And to the same use, had assigned out fifty thousand crowns
yearly.

I showed you before how Duke Ericke of Brunswick went to Breme: Howbeit at
the.xxii. day of May, he departs from the siege, to defend his own country
from spoiling. The same did Urisberger, which led an other part of the army,
and they first agreed upon a place, where they should mete again with their
powers. This Duke chances upon his ennemies. Which Duke Erick discomfited.
was the force of Hamburge, that came to aid the Bremers. They fought sore
till it was within night, and in fine: Duke Erich being discomfited, and driven
back with his horsemen into ye River of Uisurge, lost many of his men.
Nevertheless, he him self escaped, but lost all his munitio^, and after
coming to the Emperor, laid all the fault in Urisberger, that came not to
help him. With the Bremers and their fellows, were Count Albert of
Mansfelde, Earl Hedecke, Thumserne, Conrade Phenninge, and diverse others. But
after the Duke of Saxon had co^dicioned with the Emperor, al these forces
slipped away. Whilst these things are a doing: the Electour of Brandenburg
and Duke Maurice, entreat diligently for the Lantgraue. And to the intent the
thing might the more conveniently Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenb.
entreat for the Lantgraue.
be accomplished, they send for him to Lipsia: but where the Emperor would in
any wise, that he should submit him self without condition, and deliver all
his Castles and munition also, he retourneth home without concluding any thing,
and the same day comes to Weissefelse, four miles from Lipsia. The next day
by the way ryding, as he talked with Christopher Eblebe of the conditions that
were propounded, and of his fortune and estate. If I knew, says he, that the
Emperor might be entreated, to suffer me to return home again, and to let
me have one of my Castles furnished with ordenaunce, I could be content for a
common quiet, to Raze all the rest, and deliver all the munition accordingly.
Than says Eblebe, I will report this tale unto Duke Maurice, and within a
few days, will either repare unto you again, or advertise you of the
certe^tie hereof by letters, in the mean season I desire you to surcease from
other devises. Going therefore unto Duke Maurice, not long after, he retourneth
with letters to him from Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburge, bearyng
Duke Maurice letters to the Lantgraue.
date the fourth day of June out of the camp before Wittemberge, which were
of this importance. That so sone as they understood more of his mind by
Eblebe, they became again peticioners to the Emperor, and what they have
obtained, that does the copy it self and conditions of peace, which Eblebe
brings him, declare. And in as much as the conditions are tolerable, they
doubt not, but he will admit the same, especially considering in how great
danger he stands. Their advise is therefore that he refuse them not, but
submit him self to the Emperor without condition: For he needs not to
fear, lest the Emperor should burden him with great things, or deteine him
prisoner, for they will become suertie for that matter. And if any thing should
chance unto him, besides that which is contained in the copy of peace, that
he shall now receive by Eblebe, or if he should be deteyned still in
captivity, they will not refuse, to abide the same fortune, and being called
upon by his children, will offer them selves to make him recompense. And for
Religion he shall have the same assurance, yt they, and Marquis John, have
already. And seeing it is so, and in as much as this composition shall be not
only for him self, but also to the common wealth expedient, they heartily
require him that he would come withal expedition, and bring with him the Duke
of Brunswick and his son, and receive the conditions, and follow their
assurance and fidelity herein. And let him not be afraid, that his prisoners
should be taken from him by the way. For they will bear him out of all that
danger, and when he shall be entered on his way, he shall mete with horsemen of
theirs, that shall conduite him in saufetie. The copy of the peace was this.
That he do submit him self and his province to the Emperor without
condition, that he come to the Emperor him self, and humbly require to be
pardoned. that he behave him self to the Emperor from henceforth obediently,
and according to his duty. That he observe such decrees as the Emperor shall
make, for the preservation of the common wealth. That he send aid against the
Turk, at all such times, as other Princes do. That he forsake all
confederacies, but namely the league of Smalcalde, and deliver to the Emperor
all such kind of wrytinges. That he make no league at any time, wherein shall
not be comprysed the Emperor and king Ferdinando. That he do forbid the
Emperors ennemies to come within his dominion. If the Emperor like to punish
any man, he shall not take upon him to defend the same. He shall give the
Emperor leave to pass through his country, when the thing shall so require.
That such subjects of his, as shall serve in the wars against the Emperor,
or king Ferdinando, he punyshe extremely. And such as do serve at this
present, that he call them home again, so that with in these.xiiii. days they
forsake their enseignes, and unless they obey, to make the^ forfeate all their
goods, which shall than come to the Emperors use. For the charges of the
war, he shall pay to the Emperor within four months an ho^dreth and fifty
thousand crowns. That all such Castelles and fortes as he has, save
Zegenheme or Cassell, he shall raze them down to the ground, and the garrisons
and and Captains yt he shall place in the same, he shall swear to be true to
the emperor, That hereafter he fortify no piece, but by the consent of the
Emperor. That he deliver to the Emperor immediately all his munition, the
Gunnes with their whole furniture: Of the which the Emperor shall grant him
so many as shall be sufficient for the defense of that place, which he will
permit him to keep. That he obey the judgment of the chamber, which the
Emmperour shall establyshe, and bear his part towades the charges of the same.
That he set at liberty Henry the Duke of Brunswick, and his son, and render
unto him his province, and release his subjects of their oath, and compounde
with him for the harms done. That he restore such things as he has taken
from the Marquis of Pruse and from others by force. That he attempt nothing
against the king of Denmark or any others, for that either they aided him not,
or that they took the Emperors part. He shall deliver all the prisoners, that
served under the Emperor, without ransom. He shall answer all men, that
will try any matters with him in the law. These conditions shall his sons
also confirm. The same shall his Nobility and subjects do likewise, and if
he shall not observe conuenauntes, they shall apprehende and deliver him to the
Emperor. For all these things the Electour of Bra^denburg, Duke Maurice, and
Woulfange, the Paulsgraue, his sons in law, become suerties, and except he
accomplish the premises: The Lantgraues sons in law.
promise to bend and join all their forces against him. When he had received
and perused these things, by the common advise and consent of all his states,
the Lantgraue admits the same: yet so, as he desired a further declaration
in diverse points. The sixte day of June, when the Emperor should remove his
camp, he calls again his soldiers out of Witte^berge. And immediately Duke
Maurice puts in his, and the same day calling the Consulles and Senate into
the Castle, says: that he will demishe no part of their privileges and
liberties, and so causes them all to be sworn to him. For Wittemberge is the
principal town of the Electourship, which the Emperor had lately given to
Maurice, confiscating all John Friderickes Witte^berge a town of electorship.
lands, as before is said. The townsmen, and the Nobility after this: desire
Duke Maurice, that he would repare their Scoole, which was fallen in this
tumulte of war. This promises he to do, and commands that the country men,
The Scoole fallen there.
which were fled, to be sent for again, and promises them stuff for the
building, and Wheat for seed and bread corn, to the poor, freely, and to
lend it unto the rest. Than puts he Julius Perflugius, in possession of the
byshoprike of Numburge, and displaceth Nicholas Amstorfe, instituted by Duke
John Fridericke, as is mentioned in the.xiiii. book. Moreover Lazarus Schendie
was sent with a force of men, both to raze the castle of Gothe: And also to
deliver Marquis Albert, that was there in captivity. The last winter, the
Archebyshop of Maydenburge had made a composition with Duke John Friderick and
given place to him in his province. But at this change of fortune (when both
the Emperor and also the clergy took it in evil part) he had a Coadiutour
assigned him, Fridericke, son to the Prince Electour of Brandenburg. King
Ferdinando retourning from the Camp of Wittemberge into the land of Boheme,
stayed a while at Letmerice, a frontier town there. From thence at the
beginning of June, he wrote his letters to all the states of Boheme. Wherein he
complains again of the league, saying that the same is made against him.
Wherefore he commasideth them to forsake the thing, and that every man write
unto him severally, what his mind is therein. For he knows that many have
fallen for lack of experience, whom he is minded to pardon, and to moleste no
man, but such as have committed high treason against his Princelyke Majesty.
When the states were come to Ulme, the Emperors Ambassadors before named,
recite with a long circu^staunce how greatly The treatis of Ulmes.
the Emperor and king Ferdinando have traueled for the peace of Germany, as well
in public as also in private affayr^s. But ye Duke of Saxon and the
La^tgraue, having no respect to the same, have not only rebelled them selves:
but also procured others to do the like, and breaking al law and equity, have
tourmoiled al things in Germany. Therefore has the emperor been driven, by
reason of his office and dignity, to attemp war not without the great
danger of his life, and loss of goods. And what harms these rebels and
outlawes have done to the lordships of Mentz, Maydenburg, Halberstat, Eistet,
Auspurg, Fulden, Stolberg, Mansfeld, and the city of Gemund, in this war, it
is to well known. And in as much as the emperor seeks all means that Germany
might have quietness, he thinks it very requisite that some league were made,
concerning the peace thereof. Of the same mind is also king Ferdinando, and
will come both into this co^federacie, to the intent that both this present
tumulte, and if any other shall hereafter arise, it may be lightly repressed.
For even for the commodity of the common country, they will omit no
diligence. And look again that they should do the like. This co^sultation of
theirs, was interrupted by a vehement plage. Wherefore at the length, they
remove to Auspurge, where as the emperor was prefixed to hold a great
assembly, as shall be declared hereafter. When the emperor had taken order for
things at Wittemberge, he remoueth to Hale in Saxony, a town by the River of
Sale, to go from thence in to Hesse, unless the Lantgraue did compound.
Wherefore the Lantgraue standing in this perplexity, when he saw no better
remedy, trusting to the assurau^ce of Duke Maurice and the Marquis of
Brande^burg, he takes his journey, and the. xviii day of June, he comes to
Hale in the evening, ryding in the mids between Duke Maurice, and the
Electour of Brande^burge, The Lantgraue comes to the Emperor at Hale.
which went to mete him at Numburge. One hour after, came thither also Duke
Henry of Brunswick, that had been prisoner with his son Charles Uictor, and
his second son Philippe, and Duke Erricke of Brunswick, who after that he was
overthrown in battle, came thither, as before is said. The next day in the
morning Christopher Carlebice coming to the Lantgraue, exhibiteth the
composition of peace, that he should subscribe to it. In the same was added,
that the Emperor might interpret every article thereof. Wherefore the
Lantgraue, in as much as that was not in yt copy that thelectour of Bra^denburg
and Duke Maurice sent, shows the bishop of Arras, that he might not subscribe
thereunto. He says how it was omitted through the negligence of the writer, and
again urges the same, so he followed his mind. Tha^ does the bishop of Arras
require more of him, yt for as much as he will have assurau^ce for religion, as
Duke Maurice and thelectour of Bra^denburg, ar assured, he again to warrau^t
and promise the emperor, yt he will obey ye decrees of yt counsel of Trent.
Contrariwyse he says, that never was this thing mentioned to him before, nor
contained in yt composition of peace. How he had rather want themperours
warrau^t, that he also should need to make no assurau^ce. And wha^ they had long
co^tended about it, and threatenings also given, how the emperor was already set
in the hal, and tarried for him, and took this delay displeasauntly. Therefore,
let him make speed, lest peradventure he conceive some extreme displeasur
against him. At ye last the La^tgraue subscribeth with these words. How he
would obey the decrees of a fre, godly, and general counsel, wherein should as well
be reformed yt head, as the rest of the members, in like case as Duke Maurice
and the Marquis of Brandenburg should do. For they had promised him not to
shrink one whit from the doctrine professed at Auspurg. This done, about. v of
the clock at after none, when the emperor was set under his cloth of estate at
home in his own lodging, the two Electours beforesaid, bring the La^tgraue
before him, who, wha^ he came nere unto the emperor, falls down upon his
knees, and next him his chau^celour Guntherode, which reciting by writing as
follows. The Lantgraue kneleth to the Emperor.
For as much, says he, most mighty Emperor, as the Lantgraue in this fourmer
war, has sore offended your highness, so as you have just cause to be avenged
on him, for this is he heartily sorry. And therefore, as he promised before, he
submits him self to your will and pleasure, and also most humbly besecheth
your Ma. after your great cleme^cy to pardon his fault, to redress the
outlawery dew for his offense, to restore him to his old place, and receive al
his things into your faithful protection. This will he accept in stead of a
great benefitie, and will declare unto you from henceforth al fidelity, service,
and dew obedience. The Emperor, after he had paused and taken deliberatio^,
answers her unto by George Selde. That albeit he has deserved most grievous
punyshement, as it is both openly known, and he The Emperors answer.
him self also confesses. Yet is he content, both of his own benignity,
and for as much as certain Princes have entreated for him, that he shall escape
the outlawerie and the punishment that he has deserved, and nether to suffer
perpetual imprisonment, nor to be indau^gered furthermore than is in the
composition of peace prescribed. He pardons also his Nobility and subjects,
so be it that they keep conuenau^tes, and will acknowledge from henceforth this
his so great a benefit. There were present at his submission, Maximilian of
Austriche, Philibert Prince of Piedmount. The Duke of Alba, the Marquis of
Prusse. The Bishops of Arras, Numburge, and Hildesseme, the Dukes of
Brunswicke, Henry Ericke, Charles and Philippe, the Ambassadors of Rome,
Boheme, Denmark, Cleave, and of certain hauon towns, besides many others of
the nobility. The Lantgraue, which had thought all had been saufe and well,
gives the Emperor thanks, and where he suffered him The Lantgraue is driven
into the net unwittingly.
to knele very long, he arrose unbidden. A little while after, the Marquis of
Brandenburg comes to him, and shows him that Duke Maurice and he must suppe
with him, at the Duke of Alba his lodging. And yet could ye La^tgraue perceive
nothing. Wha^ they came to the Duke of Alba, they suppe, and after supper, Duke
Maurice and the Marquis fall to talk with the Duke of Alba, and the bishop of
Arras. In the mean while to pass away the time, the Lantgraue plays at the
cards. When it was now far in the night, Duke Maurice and the Marquis of
Brandenburg call him unto them aside, and by the mouth of Eustace Schlebie
declare unto him, how they have al their life time, dealt faithfully as
becomes Princes to do, and if they have promised any thing, have performed
the same diligently. And lobed also to have found the like fidelity in
others. But now do the Duke of Alba and the bishop of Arras tell them, ye he
must remain there that night prisoner: Which is the greatest grief The
Lantgraues captivity.
to them that ever chanced. Howbeit they will speak with ye Emperor him
self, and trust that he shall not be detained. Than he said, how he looked
for any thing sooner, tha^ that this should have happened, how he came thither
trusting upon their assurance. And that they know well enough, how they are
bound to him and to his children. Wherefore let them discharge their bond and
promise. And when he must needs tarry, Duke Maurice and diverse of the Marquis
cou^sellours, abode with him all that night. The next day they go to the emperor
and make a grievous complaint, and show how much it concerns their
estimation. For in case they had conceived the least suspicion in the world of
this matter, neither would they have counseled him to have gone thither,
neither would he ever have come there, where he should have lost his
liberty. Wherefore they require him to have some consideration of the^ that
were intercessours, and let him go at liberty, which thing they have
promised him upon their fidelities, that he should. The Emperor says, that
in deed he made a promise to restore him again unto liberty, but not
immediately. For his meaning was only herein that he should not be kept in per
petual prison. From him they went to his counselors, chiefly to the Bishop of
Arras. They after long and sharp contention, show the Lantgraue that he may
depart: Right gladly says he, so that I may be conducted home safely. Here do
these two Princes entreat again for his saufe conduite, but al in vain. Two
days after, it is showed him, that he must wait upon the Emperor forth. That
he utterly refused to do. And says he will not go one foot with him, unless
he be drawn forth by violence. Than Duke Maurice and the Marquis entreat him
exceadingly, and beseching him that he would not refuse to go. And to persuade
him the more, they take him by the rightha^d, and in the presence of diverse
noble men make him promise, yt they will not depart from the Emperors court,
before he be delivered. And ryding forth with him to Numburg, they go after to
the Emperor, to make suite for him. Three days after, which was the.xxv. of
June. They send unto him Carlebice. And where as they follow the emperor no
further they desire him not to take it displeasauntly: For he has utterly
forbidden the^ yt they should not. For if they do: he will send him into Spain.
Nevertheless if that.C. and fifty.M. crowns were paid, and that he make him
assurance to perform the rest of the co^uenau^tes they perceive so much, that
he should be delivered within a fourtenight after, and how they will shortly ride
to thassemblie at Auspurg, and will omit no ernest pains, nor diligent suite
for him. He, which took his chance most vnpatie^tly, says yt for the payment
of y^ money and rasing of his castles, he will devise and care for, and trusts
that look what they promise, shall be performed. After ward passing out of the
borders of Thuring with the Spa^iardes wha^ he came to Greuetalle, he shows the
Duke of Alba ye letters of saufeco^duit, and assurau^ce by obligation: he
says, how the emperor granted nothing to ye intercessours, but of perpetual
imprisonment. Why tha^ says ye Lantgraue, what measure or end may this
captivity have, or wtin what time shall it be expired? Although says he, he
detein you prisoner.xiiii. years or longer, yet shall the emperor do nothing
against his promise. But he to ye intent he might sooner recover his liberty,
not long after, paieth al his money, defaceth his castelles, and delivers his
ordenau^ce. But the number of the battering pieces which the Emperor gate
partly of him and of the Duke of Saxon, partly of the The number of great gun
res taken from the Protst.
Duke of Wirtemberge, and the cities in upper Germany, was great. And as it is
reported, to the number of five hondreth. Whereof he sent afterward diverse to
Millan, some to Naples, and some into Spain, the residue he bestowed in sundry
places of his low countries belongyng to the house of Burgu^dy, as monumentes
and tokens of victory. The Lantgraues captivity, Ebleb a noble Gentleman, that
was messenger betwixt took most heuely, and as many men judge, for very
thought Ebleb dies for sorrow.
and sorrow, died shortly after. The Emperor had intended to war upon the
city of Magdeburg on the River of Albis two days journey benethe Wittemberge.
For they in manner only did not compounde nor agree with him. But at the same
time Henry the French king took up men in Germany, by Sebastian Uogelsberge,
about ten enseignes of fotemen. That matter did the Emperor suspecte. Wherefore
both for this cause, as it is thought, and also for that he supposed they might
be repressed by an other mean, departing from Hale, he took his journey into
the higher parts of Germany, and the.xxvii. day of June he se^deth the Marquis
of Marignaue to aid his brother Ferdinando with eight enseignes of Almaigne
fotemen. That time was Ferdinando at Letmerice, attending for the opportunity
of time to work his purpose: And hearing of themperours success and taking of
ye Lantgraue, at ye kale^des of July, writing his letters to Prage, he
commands them to be before him in the castle of Prage the sixth day of July,
there to make answer. After he came thither with his force, he declares in
open consistory, Ferdinando comes with his army to Prage.
their whole doings past, and how many ways they have trespassed against
him, and says how they have committed the offense of treason, and
commands them to answer unto every point. There do they in most humble
wise submit them selves to his will and pleasure, and desire him not to try
the matter with the^, neither by law nor otherwise. Whereupon the king, when
Ferdina^do his son, August brother to Duke Maurice, and certain others were
suitors for them, the.x. day of July propounds these conditions. At the next
assembly, they shall utterly abolishe ye league made, and pluck from it every
ma^s seal. That they deliver unto him al their charters, and writings The
Bohemers subdued by Ferd.
of their Fredom and privileges, to thinte^t he may correct some, and such as
shall like him grant unto them again, and confirm the^. That they deliver also
al ye writings concerning fraternities and fellowships, for yt diverse of the^
have ministered occasion of trou Moreover that they deliver up their Castelles
and fortresses with all their jurisdictions and customs, and again all the
wrytinges of ye league that they have both made with others, and also with John
Fridericke. That the same excise of Bear, that was promised for three years, be
paid from henceforth continually. That they bring all their munition and
warlike furniture into the Castle, and all their private armure into the town
house. If they shall thus do, he says, he will spare the multitude, except
diverse, which he will reserve unto such punishment as they have deserved, and
deteyne them prisoners, for the commodity of the common wealth. When the
matter was reported to the commons, after he had released about fifty
prisoners, it was concluded. Certain of the Nobility being sent for, where they
did not appear at the day prescribed, sentence was pronounced against them, to
lose both life and goods. Certain other cities and Noble men, followyng the
example of them of Prage: do submit them selves without condition. But Caspar
Pfluge, whom the confederates (as I said before) had made their general is
condemned of treason, and proclamation made, that who so could bring him quick
or dead, should have five thousand crowns in reward. After at the next
conuention, when they had disanulled their league, and broken their seals: he
obtained of the^ in a manner all that he had demanded.

Whilst the Emperor triumphs in Germany, there arose Sedition at Naples for
yt Spanish inquisition.
a sore sedition at Naples, the cause whereof was, that Peter Toletane, the
Uiceroye, would after the Spanish manner, inquire of every man's faith and
Religion. The citezens took this impatiently, which lothed the Spanyardes
government also before. And after much slaughter on both parts within the
city, the Spanyardes at the length prevailed, by reason that they kept the
fortes and Castle. Wherefore some they put to death, the residue they banyshed.
This Spanishe inquisition, which is so universal at this day, was first
ordained in those parties, by king Ferdinando and queen Elizabeth, against the
Jews, which after Baptism kept still their laws, and ceremonies. But now
since the name of Luther was published a broad, it is practiced against all
men in general, which be never so little suspected, and that both sharply and
suddenly. In these self same days, seven Cardinals of France, by the The
Cardinals of France seen to Rome.
kings commandment go to Rome, and there be commanded to remain, till they
receive further aduertiseme^t. The same was thought to be done for this intent,
that through their means the Bishop might be wholly inclined to the kings
friendship, and if he should fortune to dye (for he was already four score
year old) an other might be chosen, that favored the king of France.
Howbeit some said this was wrought through the policy of the Conestable, to
get them out of the way: that he might rule the king alone, for they all in a
manner would be at the kings heles, whethersoeuer he went. The Bishop had a
little before sent his legate into France, Hierome Roman with a most large
commission to grant many things, which are forbidden also by the laws and
decrees of the counsel. He created also Cardinal at the same time, Charles of
Guise, the son of Duke Claudie, Archebyshop of Rains, in whom he knew the
king delighted much. Again ye French king, to purchase further amity offreth
in marriage his bastard daughter, about.ix. years of age, to Orace Farnese, the
Bishops granchilde by his son. The Emperor removing from Hale, comes to
Bamberge that being so nere, he might be a greater terror to the Bohemers, and
a strength unto his brother. Whilst he was here, the third day of July, he
calls an assembly of the Empire, and commands that all mete at Auspurg An
assemble at Auspurg.
the first day of Septembre, the Princes them selves in person, the residues
Ambassadors with full authority. And says he was let by the wars, that
he held not a co^uention at the kalendes of February last past, as he had
determined at Regenspurge. But now that he has the authors of trouble in his
custody, he would no longer differ, but that the corrupt members of the common
wealth may be healed. And the consultacio^ shall be of such matters, as should
have been treated upon at Worms, and a year since at Regenspurge. This
conuention should have been at Ulme, but for the infectio^ of the plage, the
place was changed, as before is also mentioned. After from Bamberge he goes
to Norinberge. As he there was he receives into favor certain cities of
Saxony, and the.xvi. day of July, he publishes a writing, wherein he declares
what has been done with the Lantgraue, and upon what conditions he has
pardoned him. And because that he is careful, lest that many should happily
through ignorance work violence to his lands and subjects, therefore, at his
request, does he straightly charge and command all men to absteyne, and if
they have any matter against him, to try it by ye law. In this self same Duke
Maurice entreats liberally the Divines of Wittemberge.
time, Duke Maurice sends for Melanchthon, Pomerane, Cruciger, divines of
Wittemberge, and receives them right gently at Lipsia, and speaking much of
his zeal toward religion, commits unto them the order both of the church
and Scoole also, requiring them to proceed after their wonted manner, he
appoints them stipendes, and as they them selves write sends the^ away not
without great rewards. For Pomerane in a little book that he set forth after,
commends highly his liberality and gentleness.

The French king that succeeded his father at the kalendys of April, the.xxv.
day of July, comes to Rains to be crowned. The coronation of the French king
and the manner thereof.
And being received before the cathedral church with thr(...) Cardinals, he
is led to the high altar, and after he had kissed there the relickes of
saints enclosed in gold, and said his prayers he goes to supper. After supper
retourning, and making his prayers again, when he had confessed his sins to
a priest, he departs and goes to bed. The next day he sends certain of
the nobility to entreat the Abbot of saint Remige, that he would bring the
box of holy oil, which they say came down from heaven. After resort to the
church those that are called the Douzeperes of France, which are twelve in
number. The Bishop of Rains, Landune, Langres, Beauuois, Noion and The twelve
Peers of France.
Challon. Than the king of Navarre, the Dukes of Uandome, Guise, Niuerne,
Mompenser, and Anmalle. These represented the Dukes of Burgundy, Normandy and
Guienne, moreover the Earls of Tolouse, Flaunders and Champaine. Of the
Bishops were chosen two, Langres and Beauuois, also two Cardinals, to go
fetch the king to the church. When they came into his chamber, after certain
prayers said, they lift up the king liyng on his bed, as the ceremony is,
and accompanied with a multitude of priests, lead him to the church, and the
Conestable bears before him the sword drawn. The king, what time he had
prayed before ye altar, was led by the Bishops to his seat. And in the
mean while, till that box comes the Archebyshop of Rains. After he had
finished the prayers contained in the book of ceremonies, sprinkleth with holy
water the king and all the rest. And when word was brought that the box was
coming, which in the absence of ye An holy box sent down from heaven you may
be sure.
Abbot, the Prior of the monks brought, sitting upon a white hambling palfrey,
and accompanied with the Monks of his order, and the Noble me^ that the king
had sent for it, as before is said: the Archebyshop with the other bishops,
goes to mete him at the church door with the cross borne before him, and
there received of him the box, delivering him a gage to restore it again. And
when he came again to the altar, the king rising out of his seat, does him
reverence. After the Archebyshop goes into the reuestrie, and there being
solemnly decked in his pontificalibus, comes forth and takes his oath and
fidelity of him, by the which after an ancient custom, kings are bound to
the church. Than is the king led to the altar by two Bishops. There putting
on other garments, he kneleth down, and is girded with a sword, which he, as
they term it, has consecrated with many prayers. After this, the Archebyshop
prepares the oil in a redines, and whylest the other priests sing their
service, prays softly with the king, lying both grusselyng on the ground.
Than he annointeth the kings head, breast, and both shoulders, and the elbowes
of either arm, in saying that accustomed prayers. That done, the king has put
on him new garments, like a minister of the church, and is anointed in the
palms of his hands. After he lays both his The king is appa^eled like a
deach.
hands on his breast, and puts on hallowed gloves, as they call them. But
the Archbishop puts a ring upon his finger, and delivers him the Scepter
in his right hand. And in the self same moment the Chauncelour calls forth
the Douzeperes. In their presence, the Archebyshop takes from the altar the
crown of Charles the great, and when the Peers have touched it, sets it on
the kings head, and brings the king into a royal throne, which is made in
an higher place, the whole company of Nobles followyng. And there having ended
his prayers, kisseth him. Likewise do the Peers and Nobles, and making a great
shoute and acclamation, pray all, God save the king, and to rejoice men's
hearts, the Trompettes blow. After is gold and silver thrown among the
common people. Than goes the Archebyshop to Mass. And after that the Gospel
is done, the king carries to ye altar, certain pieces of gold, bread and wine.
And wha^ Mass is ended, receives the lords supper after their manner. And
than go al to dinner. For this use and purpose, to the intent nothing should
disquiet this coronation, the king would seem to have hired the Almaigue
foteme^, through the conduite of Uogelsberge, as before is mentioned. In the
mean time the Emperor demands of the residue of the states imperial,
money for the charges of the wars, which, he says, was chiefly attempted
for their sakes and the wealth of Germany. Moreover, all the Nobility and such
as serve with the Protestants, are put to their fine throughout all Germany.
And the sum of that money, which the Emperor The Empe* e^acieth money in
Germany.
levied of the Princes and cities, as well of the Catholics as Protestauntes,
amounts above.xvi. hondreth thousand crowns, as appears by accomptes made.
And some also them perour refused as rebels, and utterly denied them his
favor. And among others, Doctor George of Wittemberge, Albert Earl of
Mansfelde, John Hedecke Earl, Lewys Count of Oeting, the father and the son.
For he punished him in such sort as he gave all his lands clearly to his other
sons, Friderick and Wuolfange, whom for their fidelity and service done
him, he favored. So the Earl of Oeting exiled with his wife and the rest of
his children, and turned out of all that ever he had: came to Strasburge, and
after that, wandered up and down many years in sundry places, until an
alteration of time came, that the Emperor forgave them, as shall be spoken
hereafter. Furthermore, the Emperor by his letters publyshed, outlaweth them
of Maydenburg. And also king Ferdinando, for the They of Mayde^burg outlawed.
war attempted against his countries, does exact money of ye Protestauntes,
especially the Cities, and fleseth Auspurg and Ulme, of a great some of money.
After he commenceth process against the Duke of Wirtemberge for his whole
Dukedom, as though he had broken fidelity and conuenau^tes, made in four mer
years. Neither did it avail him any thing at all, that he had so lately
redeemed peace of the Emperor upon most strayte conditions. Likewise the
Cardinal of Auspurg, does extorte also of the city a great quantity of gold.
Moreover the Cardinal of Trent asks them money, saying, how he aided king
Ferdinando with men, to recover the passage in the Alps, taken, as is said,
by Scherteline. The Emperor also moves the Swisses unto a new league: Yet
does he exempte, Basil, Zuricke, Schafuse and certain others, for that he said
they apperteined The Emperor moves the Swisses to a league.
to the Emperor. They by one assent make answer, how they have a league
already, with the house of Auslrich and Burgundy: whereunto they cleave surely,
and other confederacy will they none make. The same do they look for again of
him also. About the end of July, the Emperor comes to Auspurge, with the
Duke of Saxon prisoner. And the Lantgraue he left at Donauerde, guarded with
Spaniardes, which did many things daily in his contempt and mockery. This was
an armed assembly. For there was a ga(...)ison in the city before, An armed
assemble.
of.x. enseignes of sotemen. And in the country round about were forces of
Sparnyardes and Italians. Of whom to be void and free, they of Meming paid
thirty thousand, and Kemptem, twenty thousand crowns. Besides, there came out
of nether Germany about syx hondreth horsemen, whom the Emperor bestowed in
the country nere unto the city. Twelve enseignes of Spaniardes, when they had
wyntered a while at Bibrach, they were led into those parties that border on
the lake Brigantine. At Wisseburg a town of Norgouie, wyntered seven hondreth
horsemen of Naples. Gerarde Uelthuiche, who went to the Turk, as I said in
the.xvii. book, retourneth to the Emperor the.xii. day of Auguste, having
made truce for five years. After the Emperor came to Auspurg, he takes the
head church and certain others to him self, and leaves the rest for the Senate
and people: But his chaplains before they would say any service in their
churches, pourged and hallowed The churches new hallowed.
them again with many ceremonies, as suspended and polluted with Lutheranisme.
The Emperor appointed preacher in the Cathedral church, Michell Sidonie,
Suffragan to the Archebyshop of Mentz. He amongst other things, made diverse
Michel Sidonie a great masmonger
sermons of the sacrifice of the Mass, which after he set forth in print. And
where as in their churches came in manner none of the citezens, the catholics,
as it is reported, offered money to the porer sort to come and be present at
their service. This assembly was marvelous great. All the Princes Electours
were there, and amongst them Adolphe Archebyshop of Collon, and Duke Maurice.
Thither came also king Ferdina^do, and the Cardinal of Trent, Henry the Duke
of Brunswick the Duke of Cleave, the lady Mary the Emperors sister, and his
Niece, the Duchess of Lorayne, wydowe. At the kale^des of September they began
to sytte. There, when Maximilian of Austriche, had in the Emperors name made a
short preface, the Emperors Secretary declared by writing, what things should
be there decided, which were chiefly two, how Religion might be accorded, and
the controversies about the same appeased. And again how the chamber should be
established, and the law there ministered, wherein he requires them to give
their faithful advise and counsel. The tenth day of this month, Peter Aloise,
the bishop of Romes son Paul the third, was slain at Placence, at home in
his own house, and shortly after Peter Alois the Popes son slain
Ferdinando Gonzage, the Emperous lieftenaunt in Lumbardie, takes the city.
The news hereof within a few days came to Auspurge. And as the matter was
reported to the Emperor, the same story as they said, was communicated also to
the Princes, and delivered unto them in writing. The whole discourse redoundeth
to the infamy, and disprayse of Peter Aloise. And thus the case stands, as
the same writing specifieth. When after the exchange made, Peter Aloise was
created Duke of Placence and Parma, he did many things contrary to law and
equity, and through his rigor offended all sorts of men. And among others,
he deprived Hierome Palauicine Hierome Palauicine.
of all his lands and possessions. And where he to eschew the danger, fled
to Creme, a town belonging to the State of Uenise, he cast his wife and his
children in prison. Where as the same matter was like to grow to some great
co^motion, the Cardinal of Trent, who bare good will to ye house of Farnese, by
his letters written, entreats the matter: but ye Duke answered frowardly.
His son Octauius came after to Trent, retourning from the Emperors camp
homeward. Unto whom the Cardinal declares the whole matter, desyring him to
be a peticioner to his father in the same. He promises so to do, and after
lets him understand, that Hierome may be received again into favor, so
that he will come him self, and humbly require pardon. And where it was to be
feared, lest contrary to faith and promise, some greater mischief should be
wrought against him: the Cardinal, with a small train goes to Creme, and
sends for Hierome to come speak with him. But he fearyng treason, came not
before, he knew assuredly that it was the Cardinal. When they had talked and
conferred together, and the Cardinal promised largely to travel in his cause,
they take their journey both together. And the Cardinal sent one or two of his
company before, to advertise the Duke of their coming. Than does he contrary
to that Octauius had signified send plain word, how he can not restore him.
And albeit the messengers sent, being men grave and witty, spoke many things to
mitigate his fury, yet perseuered he still in the same. Wherefore ye Cardinal,
when he had brought Palauicine again to Creme, retourneth to Trent. Now had
certain of the Nobility before this, which hated him also, conspired his
death. They hiring certain desperate murderers, wait an occasion, and many
times severally come abroad A conspiracy against ye Popes son.
with the same guard after them, and each of them pretend to do it for their
private enemies. And in the mean season every of them demand of their men
privily, whether they wilfaith fully take their part in revenging a wrong done
unto them, as they said, by the Dukes Steward. Who promise their service not
only in that, but also to kill the Lord himself. About this same time, his
father Paul the third, writes unto him, that he should take heed to him self
the tenth day of December: For the stars do prognosticate unto him some
great misfortune the same day. For the bishop was much given not only to
Astrology, but also to Negromancie, as it is certainly affirmed. The Pope a
Negromancier.
When the Duke had received his fathers letters, he was in fear and
carefulnes. And when that day was come, he goes out of the castle, in his
horse litter, with a great company to view the fortification of the town, that
he had begone. The conspiratours were there also: but when they could not
there accomplish the thing desired, they stay, and when he returned home,
wait upon him, and as it had been of duty, go before him, to the nombre
of.xxxvi. And when he was come with his horselitter into the castle, they
pluck up the draw bridge immediatlye, that no mo should follow after, there
by and by they approach him with their swords drawn, and calling him bitterly
tyrant, sleye him within the horselitter, and murder at the same time with
him, his chaplayne, the master of his horse, and five Almaines of his guard.
After they run up and down the castle and spoil altogether, finding great
treasure and sommes of money, which he had appointed for the fortificatio^ of
the city. In the mean time was a great concourse of people about the castle,
inquiring what the matter meant, that they heard such noise and crying within:
They make answer from above, that they have killed the tyrant, and recovered
the ancient liberty of the city. But where they could hardly make them to
believe the thing, when the citezens had warraunted their lives, and assured
them of pardon, they hang out the dead body by a chain over the wall, and
after they had swynged it a while to and fro, they let it fall into the ditche.
The people came running to it, iobbed it in with their The hatred of the
citezens toward Peter.
daggers, and spurned it with their fete. So great and mortal hatred they bare
him. After, co^sulting of y^ matter, they advertise Ferdina^do Go^zage by their
letters sent in post, what was chanced, give the^ selves wholly to the emperor
tuitio^, and desire to have aid sent the^ with all speed. Who sending thither a
garrison in have, takes the city, and swears the^ to be true to the emperor.
After, he writes of al things to the emperor, desiring to know his pleasure
herein. They of Parma were also moved to submit themselves unto the emperor. But
they sending letters to ye Bishop of Rome, say they will still remain under his
obeysaunce, and refuse not, the Father being slain, to do homage to his son
Octauius, and acknowledge him for their Prince. This is the sum of the news,
which were reported to be sent unto the Emperor, and whereof the states were
made partakers. But others declare y^ matter to be far otherwise, and say it
was pourposly done, and that a few hours after, y^ the murder was committed,
Go^zage was at ye gates of the city with a garrison: but I can affirm nothing.
How soever the matter was, al me^ confess, yt Peter Aloise was a very wicked
and a mischeuous fellow, and there be books in Italia^ which recite his
ungracious and detestable lusts, among the which, this is one of all others
most notable, whereby he is said to have enforced and buggered with The
monstrous lusts of him.
Cosmus Cherie, Bishop of Fanen, by the aid of his servants that held him.
Which filthy act so inwardly grieved that other caytif, that shortly after he
died for sorrow and shame of the very thing. And some do suppose that he gave
him poison, that he should not utter that wretched deed to the emperor. The
Bishop notwithstanding, loved his son derely, and applied his whole study to
auaunce him in honor. And where oftentimes he heard of his lewd prankes, he
took it not very grievously, as it is reported, and would say this only, that he
learned not these vices of him. I showed you before how the fathers of the
counsel leaving Trent, removed to Bononie. And the same did the Emperor take
in high displeasure. And coming to Auspurge, The counsel of Trent of two
parts.
caused the Senate of Princes to write to the Bishop herein. Wherefore
the.xiiii. day of January, sending him their letters, they declare the
perilous state of Germany, which they say might have been eschewed, if a
remedy had been found for the disease in time, that is to wite, a general
counsel, for the which the emperor has oftener than ones ben a suter, that he
might have procured ye same within the precinct of Germany: to the intent the
bishops of the same country whom it chiefly co^cerned, might there be present.
For where their jurisdiction is great, it is not expedient, yt they should,
especially at this time, be far from their own charge. At the length through
themperours industry, when no man would come at Mantua, nor Uice^ce, a counsel
in deed was called and begone at Trent without the borders of Germany, which
rather belongs to Italy. For ye which cause also few Germans came there.
Neither could they especially in time of war, when al ways and passages were
stopped and closed up. But now that this tempest is blown over, and the ship
at the hauons mouth, and all men were brought into a very good hope, besides al
expectacio^, that the counsel should thus he removed or rather divided, wherein
the preservation of the common wealth consists it greueth them not a little:
because of ye danger that is like to ensue thereby. For these.xxvii. years has
Germany ben tormoyled with new and pernicious sects and opinions, and the
bishops in manner bear no authority. And in this dissolute oultrage, and
confusion of things: innumerable thousands are in danger of their salvation.
Briefly, through this same pestilent evil is infected and corrupted,
whatsoever before was clear, and the states of thempire plucked a sonder, do
observe no friendship among them selves. In these so many and great evils
their only refuge is to the Apostolical church. Wherefore they heartily pray
him, even for the wealth of Germany: that he would restore the counsel. Which
if he would, there is nothing, but he might look for at their hands. But if
not, they cannot see from whence they should seek remedy. For storms and
tempests arrise on every side, which all to repulse, God has ordained the
holy church of Rome as a certain bulwark and rock most strong. Let him have
therefore a consideration of their requests, and think no less but it may be,
except he provide for the contrary, that some other means and devises may be
found, to dispatche this matter. For the rest, they pray him, to take these
things in good part: For their duty and state of time compels them so to
write.

In these days also the Englyshmen vanquish the Scotts in a maigne battle,
and slew of the^ many thousands, at the Muskelborough field.
conduict of the Duke of Somerset the kings uncle. The cause of the war was
the same, that was before, during the life of king Henry, that is to wit, for
that the Scotts would not give their Queen to wife unto king Edward as their
promise was. After this victory the English nation wan a great part of
Scotland, and enlarged their limits far. Concerning the Emperors
demaundes, all men were not of one opinion. For the Electours that were of the
clergy do urge the counsel of Trent without condition. But the Ambassadors
of ye Paulsgraue, Duke Maurice and Marquis of Brandenburg, refused not the
same, sobeit, it were fre and Godly, wherein the Bishop should not be judge, and
should release other Bishops of their oath, and that their divines also might
have license to reason, and the decrees already made be retracted. But all
other Princes and states were desirous that the counsel might be continued,
that the Protestauntes going thither by saufeconduict, may be heard and
constrained to obey the decrees of the counsel. The Emperor hearing al their
minds, the.xviii. day of October. answers, and desires them al to submit them
selves to the counsel, and treats with the Paulsgraue and Duke Maurice
severally, that they should give their assent. And the Paulsgraue in deed was
put in fear unless he consented, by reason of the The Protestauntes intised
or feared.
late offense in the year before, where as that sore was not thoroughly healed.
Duke Maurice again, which both coueted yt the Lantgraue his father in law
should be delivered: And was also much auaunced of late by ye Emperor, saw
well he must needs do some thing. Wherefore wha^ the emperor had by messengers
sent betwixt promised largely of his good will toward the^, and desired
instauntly that they would commit the thing to his fidelity, they at the
last the.xxiiii. day of October consent thereto. The rest were only cities,
which saw what a dangerous matter it were to submit them selves to the
decrees of the counsel without exception. With them did Granuellan and Hasie
entreat long and much. And the mean while it was bruted throughout the
city, how they were frantic and out of their wits that refused the thing
which all the Princes had than approved. There were heard moreover
threatenings that they should be scourged worse than they were of late. In fine
a mean was found, that both the Emperor was satisfied, and they also
assured. For being called before the Emperor. They say it is not their part
to correct the aunswers of Princes and deliver him with all a writing, wherein
they testify, upon what conditions they do admit the counsel. The Emperor
hearing their tale, answers them by Seldie, how he is verey glad and
joyful, that after the example of others, they refer the matter unto him,
and give their consent with the rest. So did he attribute more unto them, than
they desired. For they did not assente to the reside we, but to avoid
displeasure, they would find no fault with the sentence of the Princes. And
yet lest any thing should be prejudicial to them hereafter, they declared by
writing, in what sort they lyked the counsel, that in time to come might
remain a testimony of their minds. This was about the end of October. And
the same time came thither King Ferdinando, and after also the Electour of
Brandenburge. The Emperor therefore immediately in the beginning of November,
sent the Cardinal of Trente to Rome in post, to move the Bishop to call
again the Synod to Trente.

In the month of November, Christine, wife to the Lantgraue, his sons and
certain choice counselors in their letters Letters for ye Lantgraue to themper.
written to all the Princes and States of the Empire, declare, by what means
he was taken at Hale, coming thither under saufe conduite. And in as much as
all the conditions by ye Emperor prescribed, that could or ought to be
performed, are accomplished, the money paid, the Duke of Brunswick and his son
set at liberty, all the letters of the confederates exhibited, the oath of ye
nobility, and assurasice of ye suerties made. al his munition delivered, and
his fortes rased. Moreover, in as much as they are ready, neither refuse they
to be pledges themselves until such time as ye rest be fulfilled also, they can
not wout the great grief and vexatio^ of mind se him in this miserable case and
For before he went to Hale, he was in no such case but that he might have kept
his castelles an honest time against the force of the ennemy. And that also can
the Emperors commissioners, which saw the things afterward, testife. But
for the compassion he had of the people, chose peace before war. Wherefore they
most heartily pray them, to entreat the Emperor in his behalf, and find
the means, that being shortly restored to liberty, he may return home. For
in case he should be longer d^teined, it would be doubtless to the utter decay
of his health. And to have the better success in their suit the Lantgraues
wife came her self to Auspurg. And both her self, and also by Duke Maurice
and the Electour of Brandenburg, solliciteth the Princes to sue for him. Which
thing known, the Emperor, before intercession was made, the.xxv. day of
Noue^ber, declares to ye states, that he hears what report is made The Empe.
answer to the states.
unto the^. And in as much as the talk of men is diverse, he will declare unto
them the plain truth of the matter, and so recites from the beginning, how
often, and by whom the Lantgraue had been sued for. And how he answered the^
al, that he should yield and submit himself without condition, raze his
castles, and deliver his munition, and than he told Duke Maurice and the
Marquis of Brandenburg, that he should neither suffer Toe conditions whereby the
Lantgraue submitted himself.
bodyly punishment, nor be detained in perpetual prison, or further punished
in his goods than was in the composition of peace prescribed. This was the
thing only, and in none other hope did he put them, as they can bear witness.
And after declares how he came to Hale(...) and submitted him self unto him.
And how he has been since entreated, nothing against promise. This tale of
the Emperor the same day, the states do report to Duke Maurice and the
Marquis. The next day they make such answer, as they neither blame
the emperor The answer of Du. Maurice and the Marquis.
greatly herein, neither will much contend whether the fault were in the
counselors or how the matter was mistake^. But how someuer the matter was,
for a common quiet and peace of Germany, they did persuade the La^tgraue, when
they suspected nothing at all of imprisonment or captivity, to come unto Hale,
desire pardon, and not to refuse the conditions of peace. and that he has lost
his liberty, and is kept prisoner hitherto, not without ye great peril of his
health, how much yt is against their honor and estimation, every man sees well
enough. Therefore they require the^, to be petitioners with the^, and entreat
the emperor, yt he would rather have consideration of the^, which have done
faithful service to the Empire, than of the Lantgraues offense, and not to
suffer them to run in obloquie and sclaunder, but restore him unto liberty,
especially since the conditions are all in a manner fulfilled, and the Emperor
put in right good assurance for the rest. Thus therefore with one voice and
assente they made intercession. The Lantgraues wife had entreated the Lady
Regent the Emperors sister to be a mean for him: But it auailed nothing. And
because Duke Maurice and the Marquis of Brandenburg, said how they were bound
to the Lantgraues sons by deed obligatorie, so long as he was detained, the
Emperor sends John Lirane to the La^tgraue at Norling, whether as ye
Spaniardes had carried him. And wills him to deliver all the wrytinges of
assurasice and deeds obligatory. He says, that they are not in his custody,
The Emperor requires the w^itinges of the Lantgraue.
but kept by his sons and counselors. Albeit he should write yet were it in
vain. For they told him when he came away, that they would not depart from
them, unless he were first delivered. Nevertheless if he might know of the
Emperor any certain time of his deliverance: he would do what he could, that
they should be delivered. The Emperor not contented with this answer, takes
from him all his servants, except one or two at the most. About the end of
November, Peter Martyr, a Flore^tine, leaving Strasburg, where he had taught
five years, to his great commendation, having leave of the Senate, Peter
Martyr goes in to England.
goes into England, being sent for by the Archebyshop of Canturbury, at the
kings commandment, and is appointed to read the divinity lectour in
Oxforde. He had a compaignion of this journey, Barnardine Ochine of Seen. Who
being had in great estimation among the Italians for his eloquence and
virtue, forsaking the monastical kind of life, gave him selue to the doctrine
of the Gospel. And coming first to Geneua, and after to Auspurge, set forth
certain Sermons in print. And much about the same time were the six articles,
made in the life of king Henry, as is said in the.xii. book, disanulled A
reformation of Religion in England.
by act of parliament. And Images and pictures removed out of the churches.
This was the beginning of reformation there. The.ix. day of December the
Cardinal of Trent in the presence of the bishop, and a great Senate of
Cardinals, propounds his matter, as he was commanded, and with The oration
of the Cardinal of Tre^t
many weighty words declares, what perils and pains the Emperor has taken
for the counsel, and now is the matter brought unto that pass, as he says,
through his industry, and authority, that all states will obey the counsel.
Wherefore he requires for Gods love, in the name of the Emperor, king
Ferdinando and the whole Empire, that he will command the fathers that are at
Bononie to return to Trent, to finish up their worli begone, right necessary
for the common wealth. More over that he send an Ambassador or two into
Germany, that by their advise some mean how to live well may be establyshed
till the end of the counsel, and that there may be a reformation of the
olergie. Finally, let him consider also and decree, that if the Bishop chance
to depart during the time of the counsel, whether the authority of Election
shall be in the Fathers of the counsel, or in the Cardinals, lest happily if
the matter shall so come to pass, it may styre up new commotio^s. The fifth
day after, that the Cardinal of Trent had thus played the orator: James
Mendoza, by the Emperors commandment, in the same audience, speaks to like
effect. And says, that if the Bishop make any delay or excuse, he has in
commandment, that calling to him the Ambassadors of other kings and
Princes, he should openly proteste, that the counsel is corrupted. The same
day being the.xiiii. day of December, The Oration of the bishop of Rains to
the Pope.
the Archbishop of Rains, that was made Cardinal the so^mer before, sent by
the French king to Rome, made a long and a flattering Oration to the Bishop
and the Cardinals in the praise of king Fraunces and other kings of France,
but chiefly in the commendation of Henry the new king, who, as he says
nothing degenerating from his most noble progenitors, bears such a zealous
affection to the church of Rome, that he makes not only his submission, and
as a most loving, The French king contendeth with ye Emperor for eldership
and obedient child, offers him self in to the bosom of the same: but also
as the first begotten son of the church, and chief captain of the Christian
nation, promises in the defense and maintenau^ce of the dignity hereof, to
imploye all the force and power of his Realm, his own treasure, and person
Roialle, with many such other things full of great assentation. The French
king understanding well what rancour and malice the Bishop bare in mind for
the slaughter of Peter Aloise, and saw that through the removing of the
counsel from Trent, the displeasure was increased, he judged this a time
convenient, wherein he might frame all things to his commodity and purpose.
Wherefore sending oftentimes Ambassadors to the Bishop, he promised him
assistau^ce, and encouraged and strengthened his mind. When the Bishop had
heard the requests of the Cardinal of Trente, and of Mendoza, he says he
will consult with the fathers that be at Boloigne, and also make relation of the
thing unto other Christen Princes. Wherefore when the Cardinal of Trente could
get none other answer, he retourneth home, leaving there Mendoza, whom the
Emperor had commanded to finishe up the rest. And the.xvi. day of December,
the Bishop writing to his chief Legate in the counsel, John The Popes letters
to his Legate.
Mary Mountane, Cardinal, signifies, both what the Cardinal of Trent, and also
James Mendoza had demanded in the Emperors name, and how he, after conference
had with his Cardinals, thought mete to confer also with the fathers of the
counsel, lest any thing should be done rashely. And to the intent that the
decrees already made, as well that of removing the counsel, as also the rest
might wholly remain. Therefore, says he, for so much as I am both careful
for the wealth of Germany, and for the Emperors sake would have no long delay,
I command you, that calling for the assistaunce of the holy Ghost you
declare the whole matter to the fathers. And what answer shall be made to the
Emperor, you write hither with all speed. Cardinal Montane, as he was
commanded, brings the matter in counsel, after writes again to the
Bishop. Albeit the counsel were lawfully removed from Trent to Bononie. Albeit
that in the session of the Fathers, the same day, that the decree was made of
removing the Synod, al me^ were openly warned, to repare to Boloigne. Although
he, and the other Fathers, writing their letters after to Trent admonished the^
lovingly to take their journey, yet do some remain there until this day.
Which thing verily aperteineth to the contemt of the counsel, and offends
many. Therefore the Fathers do not see, how they should, saving the dignity
and estimation of the Synod, consulte of their return, unless that such as
be at Trent, do first come to Bononie, join the^ selves with the residue, and
acknowledge the authority of ye counsel. Again, it is needful, that the
Fathers be put in assurau^ce, that Germany will submit it self to the
counsel, and allow the decrees thereof, that either are made already, or
heafter shall be, in such sort, that they be retracted of no man. Moreover, in as
much as the brute goes, that it shall be a counsel to the people agreeable, the
fathers desire also to have assurance in that behalf. For if that should take
place, all order and manner of counselles since the Apostles time unto this day,
should be changed. They desire also to know, how they shall be assured, yt they
may all there safely and freely remain, and when they shall think good,
depart thence, no man to let them. Finally this assurance is also requisite,
that when for certain causes it seems good to the most part, it may be lawful
for the Fathers to go some where else, and remove the counsel. Furthermore,
when it shall appear, those matters to be sufficiently answered, for the
which the counsel was called, the fathers may be at liberty to surcease and
make an end. These are the things which the fathers, after great
deliberation, when they had called for the grace of the holy spirit, have
answered unto his requests, praiyng his holiness, to take them in good worth.
When these letters were delivered, the Bishop, the.xxvii. day of Dece^ber, at
after Mass, sends for the Emperors Ambassador Mendoza, into the senate of
Cardinals, and shows him, what the Synod of Boloigne has answered, whose
opinion The pope to Mendoza the Emperors Ambassad.
he says, is not misliked either of him, or of the Cardinals, as consonant
to right and reason. For his part there is nothing that he would not wyshe to
do for Germany. And this can the Emperor witness. For nothing that concerned
the duty of a good pastor, and a most loving father, has been of him
omitted. He perceives in deed what the Emperor, what king Ferdina^do and the
States of the Empire require, but he supposes how they desire it in such
wise, as it may stand with the peace and commodity of other nations, and with
the liberty of the church. When Mendoza saw how the Bishop took that
company at Boloigne for the counsel, he was fully minded to have protested to
the contrary immediately. But through the intercession of certain Cardinals and
the Deane of the College, he was content to advertise the Emperor of this
answer, and to awayte for his letters, and differ the protestation until
the.xx. day after. When therefore Mendoza had signified the whole matter to the
Emperor: The Bishop also made answer to the former letters of the Germane
Bishops, at the kalendes of January. Wherein he commends their virtue, and
interlaseth his own praises among. He 1548. The Popes letters to the Bishops
of Germany.
shows how desirous he has been ever of a counsel, and first called the
same at Mantua, after at Uicence, and last at Trente, whither came many
Bishops of other nations, but few or none out of Germany. Moreover, what
wholesome decres were there made and how proftable for the common wealth, and
that they departed from thence without his knowledge, yet does he defend
their doings to be lawefull. Further more he defend their doings to be
lawful. Furthermore he discourses The pope is ignorant of all things.
at large what the Cardinal of Trent, and Mendoza demanded in the Emperors
name, whose requests, in as much as they were with theirs agreeable, he would
not answer, before he had answered the Emperor. Finally, where they say, it
is to be feared, lest if he be slack, other means will be found, that can not
move him, for as much as he has omitted no part of his duty, whom God has
placed in this seat of dignity, as it were in a hyge watch toure, to have
charge of the whole slocke, but especially of those that go astraye from the
rest. Again it may be that new devises shall be attempted against The pope is a
watchman
the authority of the Sea of Rome. For Christ him self the architectour
thereof, what time he laid the foundation of ye church of Rome, did
prognosticate of great storms, but that their enterprise should have any lucky
success, he fears not, for that Christ has builded the same upon a most
strong Rock. Diverse have heretofore attempted the like thing, whom God The
consta^cie of the Romish church.
has made an example for all men to behold. And if there be any at this day
which are not affrayde of the plages and punishment of others, set before
their eyes, he sore lame^teth their case, for the destruction that will ensue.
Howbeit he exhorts them chiefly to remain and persevere still in that faith
virtue and constancy, which they have performed hitherto. And suffer no
counselles to take place in their co^uentions against the dignity of the
church. When therefore the Bishop and Synod assembled at Boloigne, dwelt still
in their opinion. The Emperors The Emp. Ambassad. sent to Boloigne le grass.
Ambassadors for the same cause sent to Bononie, Frau^ces Uargas, and Martin
Uelascus, the.xvi. day of January, wha^ they had desired a Senate, they come
before the co^sistory. There was present Cardinal Mountane, and about.xliiii.
bishops and prelates of the church. There Uargas recites his commission
wherein the Emperor had given him and his fellow authority to plead, which
he had also exhibited lately before. And beginning to speak, was interrupted
by Cardinal Montane President of the counsel. In this commission and writing,
the Emperor calls it not the counsel, but conuention of Bononie. Wherefore
says Cardinal Mountane, albeit this assemble is not bound to hear your
Oration, forasmuch The Popes Legate to ye Emperors Ambassad.
as your commission exhibited does not concern this holy Synod, yet, lest any
man should have any cause to complain, we refuse not to hear you, yet upon
condition, that this pleading do neither hinder us, nor profit you, and that
it shall be free for us nevertheless, to continue, and proceed in the counsel,
and to appointe such punishment against al disobedient rebels, as by holy
laws and constitutions is determined. After this, the Emperors Ambassador
Uargas, desires to have this recorded The Empe. Ambassad. to ye fathers.
in the common records, that he was impeched and let that he could not
speak first. Afterward in as much, says he, as you have already seen the
Emperors letters of credit, now will I declare what our commission is. We
appear here before you to treat of a matter most weighty, and not only we: but
also the whole common wealth of Christendom, with earnest prayers do beseech
you, that you would show equity in the same. For all men judge this certainly,
that in case you will obstinatly persevere in the opinion, which very
uncircumspectly you have ones embraced: it will turn to a marvelous calamity
of the common wealth. But if you will surcea^e, and be ordered by the emperor,
all things shall luckely succeed. Which thing that all men the better may
understand, we shall repete the whole matter more depely. For so shall it
appear, how fowly you shall err, unless you alter your purpose. And how
great good will ye Emperor bears to the common wealth. And herein will add no
word of our own, but will tread in the fotesteps of the commandment we have
received. There again Cardinal Mountane, I am here also (says he) president
of this The malapertnes of ye Legate.
sacred counsel, and deputed Legate of Paul the third Bishop of Rome, the
successor of Peter, and Uicar of Christ in earth. Here be also these most
reverend fathers, to proceed in the counsel, lawfully removed from Trent,
unto Gods glory, and salvation of mankind. Wherefore we desire the Emperor, to
alter his sentence, and assiste us in this matter, and command the disturbers
of the counsel unto silence: For he is not ignorant that who so ever they be
that are any let or impediment to holy counselles, do deserve most greuouse
punisheme^t, by the prescript of the laws. But how so ever the matter falls,
and what terrors so ever be threatened, yet will we cleave fast to the
liberty and dignite both of the church and counsel, and of our own also.
After when Uargas had openly recited the letters of their commission, his
fellow Uelascus reads the protestation. In the beginning is raccomted, how
oftentimes the The letters of protestation from the counsel.
Emperor has desired a counsel of Leo, Adriane, Clement, and last of Paul
the third, what time the Germans were erneste suitors to him for the same.
Again how Paul the third first at Mantua, after at Uicence, finally when it
could not be kept in those places, appointed the same at Trent, by the assent
of the Emperor and the other states: for so much as the same place was
commodious for Italians and Spaniardes, French men, and Germans, and wanted
not things needful. Therefore what time this seat was chosen for the Synod:
The Bishop sent thither Cardinals, Parise, Morone, and Poole. And in the
Emperors name also came the Bishop of Arras, and his Father Granuellan and
James Mendoza. But where as that time seemed not to the Bishop convenient
enough, the matter being differred, again there came new Legates from Rome,
Mountane, Crucei, and Poole Cardinals. And from the Emperor the same Mendoza
and Fraunces Toletane. The Ambassadors of other Princes came also, and others
out of all parts repared to Trent in great number. And at the same time, the
Emperor had war in Germany, chiefly for the defense and maintenance of
Religion, that such as he could not rule by reason, he might compelle by force
of arms. And what time he having lucky success in his wars, had in a manner
vanquished all, and had called into the way again such as contemned the
counsel before time, behold you, which usurp unto you the name of the
Legates of the Sea of Rome, suddenly without making the Bishop privy, as you
say your selves, faining a cause I can not tell what, do propounde of removing
the counsel, and giving scarsely any time to consulte in, depart from Trent
in great haste, where as many worthy and virtuous fathers did not assent, but
said how the cause of this flitting was not reasonable, and protested that they
would remain at Trent. In the mean season the Emperor going into Saxony,
vanquisheth the ennemy at Albis, and takes both the Captains of the war in
battle and by submission, and nevertheless both before and after the war
was finished, he desired the Bishop often by letters and messengers sent, that he
would command the Fathers to return from Boloigne to Trent. For otherwise
would the matter be dangerous. After, he called a conuention at Auspurge,
wherein, at the Emperors request, the Princes and all states with whole consent
did approve the counsel of Trent, and promised that they would obeie the same
with out any condition. When he had this obtained, he sent forth with the
Cardinal of Trent to Rome, which might declare these things to the Bishop
and Senate of Cardinals, and in the name of the whole Empire might require
the continuance of the counsel at Trent. He commanded the same thing also to
James Mendoza his Ambassador. But the Bishop took delay in aunsweryng, and
thought mete first to consulte with you, and received an answer from you full
crafty, subtle, and captious, and eftsoon did answer the Emperor
vnsittingly, and by his starting holes and backsteppes declares well enough,
how little he cares for the common wealth. For to prove the cause of removing,
there had neded witnesses worthy of credit. The Emperor, king Ferdinando and
the Princes, sending their letters and a most honorable Ambassador, declared
what the opinion of all States was concerning the counsel. But omitting their
testimony, the Bishop would rather give credit to vile and abiecte persons.
How many tedious and painful iourneis has the Emperor taken for this
counsel: The Emp. carefulnes for the counsel.
And what costs and charges has he been at? And shall all these things be
lost? Upon most weighty and necessary causes, at the request of ye Emperor,
through the suite of the Germans, and by the assent of other Christian
Princes, was the counsel both called and also co^menced at Trent. Wherefore
with out the public authority of al states consented thereto, it may not be
holden else where. For there was no cause of remouynge the same, but some thing
was invented for an excuse. Uerely certain agues and infection of the air. And
herein they followed the advice of certain Phisicio^s, but chiefly of their
maids The Authors of removing the counsel.
and cooks. But how trifelyng and vain a cause that was, the thing it
self, and end declared. You say that you departed not making the Bishop
privy: But his letters written unto you, and answer sent to the Emperor do
testify far another thing. Certainly you ought not to have removed or
changed the place, without the consent of the Emperor, unto who^ is committed
in charge the tuition of all counselles. But you went so hastily away, that you
rejected such as said how you ought first to ask advise of the Emperor and
Bishop. And if you must needs have removed, at the lest you should have
observed the decrees of holy counselles, and have remained within the borders
of Germany, to the intent the Germans, whose cause was chiefly in hand,
might come to the counsel safely. But now have ye chosen Bononie, a city in
the mids of Italy, and subject to the church of Rome, whether you are
assured that the Germans will not come. And therefore have you chosen the
same, that to the decay and reproach of the universal weal the counsel might
either be dossolued or handled and used at your pleasure. The Emperor therefore
requires, and that most earnestly, that you would return to the same place,
which before contented all men, especially since all things are safe and
quiet, neither remains there any further cause of fear. Which thing if you
shall refuse, I do here in the name, and by the commandment of the Emperor,
proteste this removing of the counsel to be vain, unlawful, and the whole
doing to be void and of none effect. And do also testify ye answer of yours,
to be fond and full of lies, and ye the commodities yt hereafter shall ensue to
the common wealth, are not to be ascribed to the^but unto you, and affirm
moreover that you have no authority to remove the counsel. And in as much as
you have neglected the public health of men, the Emperor as Protector of
the church, will take charge thereof, so far forth as he may by the laws and
and decrees of holy fathers. When he had red these things, he delivers the
copy of the Protestation written, and requires that it may be recorded for
matter of record. There Cardinal Mountane, by the consent of the Fathers,
speaking gravely, declares that they are not well used, Mountane stricken with
a fury.
and takes God to witness, and says how they are ready to dye rather, than
to suffer such an example to be brought into the church, that ever the civil
Magistrate should at his will and pleasure comptrolle the counsel. The
Emperor in deed is the eldest son of the church, but neither Lord nor
Master. But he and his colleges are Legates of the Sea Apostolic, and refuse
not presently to render an account both first unto God, and after also to the
Bishop of their Ambassade. And that more within a few days their Protestation
shall be answered. In manner to the same effect, and about the same time,
Mendoza, when letters were come from the Emperor, whereby he was commanded to
proceed, did proteste at Rome before the Bishop and Cardinals, calling
thereunto, as he was cemmaunded, the Ambassadors of foreine kings and Princes.

The twenty Book of Sleidanes Commentaryes, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte
The argument of the twenty Book.
THe treaty is of a controversy, whether the land of Prusse belong to the
king of Poole, or to the Empire. The Pope makes an ample answer to the
protestation before made by Mendoza: Whereof the Emperor being advertised,
leaving all hope of a counsel, begins to set forth his Interim. The
Protector of England, writing to the Scotts in ample wise, demands their
Queen. Uogelsberge is beheaded. The Emperor in his camp before Wittemberge
gave to Duke Maurice the right of Electourshyp, and now creates him with all
solemnities. Bucer refuses to subscribe to the Interim. The Pope himself
condemns the Interim. Likewise do some of the Electours and Princes: Certain
also refuse it, al though that the Emperor had caused it to be proclaimed. The
Duke of Saxon prisoner with great magnanimity refuses it. The Lantgraue by
letters set forth in his name, makes semblant to consent thereunto, to be
delivered. Whilst the Masseis abolished in England, the cities and towns of
Germany are solicited to accept the Interim, and above all others
Strasborough, yea with threatchynges.

IN the fourmer books is declared, how Albert of the house of Brandenburge did
homage to the king of Polle, how he altered the state of the common wealth in
Prusse, and was therefore outlawed of the chamber. Again, how the king of
Polle in common assemblies of the Empire, had oftentimes sued to the Emperor
and other States, that, in as much as he was his Cliente, they would reuerse
his outlawerie. But where as nothing was obtained unto this day, and in this
great victory of the Emperor it was to be feared lest the matter should have
come to further danger, the king of Polle unto this assembly sends an
Ambassade, the chief whereof was Stanislaus Lascus. He, in the month of
January, delivers to the Emperor and Senate of Princes, an Oration written,
the effect whereof was this. How the cause of Prusse had been oftentimes
debated. The oration of the King of Pols ambassador.
But for as much as it has been always differred until other assemblies, he
is now commanded, again to declare the same. And the kings trust is, yt
inasmuch as they have at al times made him gentle answers, ye cause it self
being rightful they will have some consideration, and mind of him, yet not not
as Judges, but as Princes worthy all honor and reverence. And first of all,
says he, I will speak diverse things, of the order of Prusse, to the intent
the thing may be manifest. In times pait the kings of Polle gave a great part
of Prusseland to the order of knighthode in Dutche land, upon condition, The
beginning of thorder of knight had in Duchland.
that they might have their service against the enemies of christendom. But
they very unthankful, breakyng conuenauntes, turned their force against there
own Lords. So had they oftentimes war, and oftentimes their conuenauntes
were renewed: Which by reason of antiquity, it is not requisite to rehearse.
But that which in manner chanced in our memory I shall recite.

King Casimire, father unto Sigismunde, subde wyng them in a great battle,
brought them to conditions of peace. Than The victory of King Casimire.
among other things it was accorded, that from henceforth they should
acknowledge the kings of Polle, for their Magistrate, geuyng the^ their
fidelity by an oath. But afterward certain Masters of that order brake
conuenauntes, geuynge them selves in to the tuition of others. Of the which
Albert of Brandenburge was one, who being bound by conuenaunt to do homage
unto the king his Uncle, within the half year, would not. Wherefore the king;
albeit he loved peace, yet was of necessity constrained to attempt war. And
albeit they never joined in battle with their whole forces, yet by Roades
made, fyryng, spoiling, and escharmoushing, was much harm done, in so much
that Alberte being to weak, came unto the king to take truce. But at the self
same time came a force of Germans to aid him. For the which cause he
departed without concludyng the same, and began to renew war. But not long
after, being of them forsaken, where he did but dissemble before, than was he
constrained in sadues to entreat for peace. Which being ones concluded by the
mediation of certain, it was conditioned that he should give his faith to the
king by an oath, and do all things as becomes a faithful and trusty Cliente.

It is certain therefore that the land of Prusse, has ever since the memory of
man, and from the time, they first received Albert received into the tuitio^ of
the king of Pol.
the Christen Religion, both by the law of arms and also by sundry
conuenauntes, aparteyned to the Realm of Polle. For if any others have made
any title or claim to it the same has been through the arrogancy and wrong of
ye masters of thorder, who being through y^ kings permissio^, Germains borne,
have about oftentimes to entitle others in the right of Prusse. Which thing
assuredly has bred much distention betwixt the Germans and Polonians, and
caused also this same decree, wherein Duke Albert was outlawed. But what right
have they to outlaw an other man's cliente? For in yt he came not to judgment
when he was sited not of his judges, that ded he by the kings commandment,
unto whom all the fault is to be imputed, in case there be any at all. But if
he should be outlawed for this cause, that he acknowlegeth the king for his
Magistrate, that were very unreasonable, that any man should suffer punisheme^t
for doing his duty. Wherefore most triumpha^t Emperor, and states most noble,
the king does hartly require you that this unjust and unlawful decree of
outlawery, prescription may be repressed. Neither is there any cause why any
man should think, that ye king would for any ambition or desire to enlarge his
kingdom, bring Prusse under his subjection. For he that has refused most
Goodly provinces, that have been freely offered him, how should he come then into
the suspicion of this matter? Certainly that country is not so much worth unto
him, but that, if he might with his honor, he could be content to forgo it:
But since it does properly belong unto his dominion, he can not other wise do.
For the cause, why oftentimes trouble and co^te^tion has rise^ about it, was
ever through Prusse belongs to Pole
the fault of the Masters of the order, as I showed you before. And God in
deed has often plaged their bold enterpryses. And these things knew right
well, most noble Emperor and king Ferdina^do, your grandfather Maximilian, who
remembering the injuries, which he and his father Friderick, received of them,
made a faithful promise to king Sigismunde, what time they met at Uienne, and
promised as well in his own as in your names also, that he would give no
manner of aid unto this order. And this did Maximilian, after no new example,
but followyng the trade of his ancestors. For both the Emperor Sigismunde,
metyng with king Ladislaus, gra^dfather to the king my Master, did not this much
only, but also promised aid against them. And ye Emperor Friderick, your
great gra^dfather The war of Emperors and kings of Pole against this order of
knights.
joined his force and power with Casimire, the father of king Sigismund,
against Matthie, king of Hongary, and this foresaid order, of one co^federacie.
And although that king Casimire, being let and impeched with ye wars of this
order, could send the emperor Fridericke that time no aid of men, yet did he
aid him with money, so much as his covenant was. Whereby it is evident, how this
order has always ben enemies to ye house which has ever been linked to Polle
with bonds of leagues and affinities. Whereof king Sigismu^de requires you to
have some consideration. For in case there be any of the same order, that
think them selves bound, to fight for the christian faith and Religion, there
is nothing for them to do in Prusse. For all that be round about it, do
profess the christian religion. Therefore must they seek unto other places,
where they may exercise them selves. For now of many years, Jerusalem is
possessed of a barbarous ennemy, for the defense of the which place, it is
said how this order was in times past instituted. Constantinople also is kept
of the same nation: Here lies their work and business. Or if this be thought
over old or to far of, there are many strong cities of Christendom won
lately. Why do not these worthy knights go thither, that they might either
recover that is lost, or defend the rest from the ennemy? But if they delight
more in civil war, than every man may judge, how unworthy they are of that
name. But thus the case stands: this order has been always without order.
For the which A disordred order of knights.
cause also they were expulsed not out of Prussie only, but out of Boheme like
wise, well nexe an hondreth and fifty years past. And yet has no man
hitherto desired the same places, out of the which they were expulsed, as
common and vacant to be given them. But only Polle sement fit to be molested
herein, which ought most of all to be favored. For albeit that order has
offended many, yet has it done most hurt of all to the Realm of Polle. For
saving a few of the first, scarsly were there any masters of that order that
did their duty, but contrariwyse, for the most part, leaving the Barbarous
ennemies, have turned their weapons against their Magistrate, kings of
Poolle. And not yt only, but have brought into their confederacy also the
Tartarians, a cruel kind of people, and mortal ennemies to all Christians,
as is written of Michell Cochmester. Wherefore if any man would make the
rekening, and consider ye pains, perilles, charges, wars, tumultes,
battails, slaughters and desolations, whereof this order has chiefly been cause
of, he shall find yt it is hardly so much worth. And ye kings desire is, that
there might ones be an end of these evils. For if any man should attempt
war against Albert Duke of Prusse, the king will not altogether sit still and
see him take wrong, for as much as he is both Uncle to him and Patron. There
are threateninges and menaces brought to the kings ears, which doubtless he
is sorry to hear. For he loves peace and quietness, but chiefly the concord of
Christendom. How be it in case any man shall attempt violence, he will in
deed unwillingly put on Armure, yet for all that will he do it, to defend him
and his. He desires the frendshyp of all Princes, but chiefly yours most
mighty Emperor and king Ferdina^do, and wysheth the same to continue for ever.
He has often times heretofore entreated you by letters and messengers, that
the prescription decreed against Duke Albert, might be abolyshed. But where the
same is not done hitherto, he does not so much impute it unto you, as to the
adversity of time. But now that always are made plain, and lettes taken
away, he supposes, you have occasion now to perform the thing, which you
have right franckely promised, when not by one lettre or two, you have
signified how that you were more ready in will than in power to gratify him.
But in case this order will not cease, but steare up war and trouble, he
trusts that after the example of your progenitors you will keep assuredly
the conuenauntes of Maximilian and Fridericke Empeperours. An other thing that
I have in commission, apperteineth to the cities Danske and Elunige. For these
albeit they be under the dominion of Polle, yet are they called to the
assemblies of the Empire. Wherefore the king requires that they be not so used
hereafter, but since that no man besides him has to do with them, they may
from henceforth be suffered to use his own laws. When the Emperor had heard
his demaundes, he made relation thereof to the states of the Empire, and gives
a copy of the Oration to Wuolfange Marquis of Prusse. Who the.xxiii. day of
January makes answer in the vulgar tongue, and after a certain preface. In
this, says he, rests The Oration of the Marquis of Pruse.
the whole controversy of the matter, whether Prusse be under the dominion of
Polle, or of the Empire. If I shall prove the later to be true, the matter
shall be easy to determine. And thus stands the case, most triumphant
Emperor, most mighty king, and most noble Princes and states, as I shall
declare. About four hondreth years past, when a public war was attempted
against the Barbarians, which vexed sore the men of our religion throughout al
Asie and Affricke, this order, whereof we speak, was instituted, which both
Emperors have liberally The Original of this order of knighthode.
auau^ced, and the high Bishops also confirmed. After the knights of this same
order for the space of certain years, kept great wars in those parties, for
the universal Christen weal, but in fine having a great overthrow, they were
discomfited and dispersed into sundry places. At the same time it The Duke of
Muscouia
fortuned that Conrade, Duke of Moscouia, was grievously assailed by the
Prussians being than the ennemies of Christen Religion. And when he was no
longer hable to maintain wars and defend him self against them, he sued
first to the Bishop of Rome, that he, setting forth a celestial and immortal
reward, as the manner was, would encourage men to this war. After he adjoined
to him this order of ours, and gave them all the country of Culmen borderyng
upon Prusse, and the rather to encourage them, gave them all the land of Prusse,
to hold for ever. This deed of gift the Emperor Friderick the second
confirmed, and permitted Herman Salcie, that than was Master of the order, to
move war against the Prussians, and if he did subdue them, to inioye their
land for ever. This was in the year of our Lord, M.CC. xxvi. Thus verily did
my order, through the aid of the Emperor, Bishops of Rome, and Princes of
the Empire continewing the war by the space of liii. years, at the last
conquer the land of Prusse, and bring it to the christian Religion, beautified
it with certain Colleges and Byshoprikes, and builded therein also both Castles
and Cities, that there might be in those parties as a wall and fortress of
the Empire, and a refuge for the Nobility of Germany. And so has part of the
same Region remained in our government, unto the year of salvation, M.CCCC.
l. and an other part thereof till Albert of Brandenburg. After what time the
Lituanes and Tartarians together, made war against the Polonians and
Moscouites, our knights remembering their profession and order, took armure and
clean disconfited the Lituanians, inuading far within their limits. For the
which cause we had long time peace and amity with the Polonians until such
time as a certain Prince of Lituania was created king of Polle. Who to avenge
the loss and shame of his nation, moved The Prince of Lituania, made king of
Pole.
war against us suddenly, and aided of the Barbarians, did very much hurt.
But being of our men repulsed, and put besides, and a great part of his Realm,
had no joyful end of that war, in so much as he made his complaint to the
counsel of Constance. After came forth a decree that such part of Polle as our
men held by the law of arms should be restored. Thus being again revived,
he forgot the benefit received, and renewed war, and contended that certain
provinces of our order, belonged to the dominion of Polle, And albeit that
through the intercession of the two kings of Hongary and Boheme, the matter
was taken up yet the sore brake out again, and at last the case was referred
to the Emperor Sigismunde, who approved the fourmer composition, that the
kings had made. Howebeit the king of Polle could not rest thus, but attempted
war again, which the.xxiiii. year after was accorded A composition of peace
at Tournie, when Ladistaus was king. In the which composition of peace, he
forsakes all suite and strife, neither calls he him self Lord or inheritour
of Prussie, and byndeth all his successors, that within one years space after
they come to the Crown, they shall swear to accept and ratify the same
peace, and compelle the bishops and other states of the Realm to take the
same oath, and that every tenth year this oath should be renewed. This was
also co^dicioned at the same time, if any king of Polle shall hereafter move
war upon the Master of Prussie, that the people be not bound to obey or
assiste him, but that peace be continually kept on either party. And this
composition was confirmed with two hondreth Seals, as it is to be showed. Yet
did not ye peace endure above.xiiii. years. For in the year of our
Lord.M.CCCC.I. the people, making The people rebel.
a rebellion, conspired against the master. And albeit that the Bishop of Rome
and the Emperor Fridericke the third, did outlawe them. Albeit the master
desired that ye matter might be heard, yet did they so little regard all this,
that about.lxx. towns and castles revelled in one day. Unto this conspiracy
of theirs joined him self the king of Polle, Casinure, father to Sigismunde,
and brought us unto such a perplexity, that Lewys Erlinsusie who than was
master of the order, constrained through fear of the present danger, as a
most constant man might do in such a case, to the intent he might both hepe
still his province, and also save him self in the same, accorded with him upon
conditions most unreasonable, without the authority either of the Bishop or
the Emperor, or yet the states of the Empire. The conditions of this peace
among other things are these. That the Masters of Prussie from hence forth
shall within six months after he be chosen Magistrate, come The conditions of
peace betwixt ye king of polle and the knights.
unto the king of Polle, and by an oath acknowledge him for their Souraigne,
and shall aid him against all men, they shall also receive into the order
as well Polonians as Germans, and shall admit them to bear office, and for
such lands as they shall win hereafter, to do homage to the kings of
Polle. Which conditions verily do not only concern the private loss and
rebuke of my order, but also the public damage and reproach of the Empire and
Nobility of Germany, Wherefore, since that time have there been masters.
Which considering the unreasonableness of the thing, have made grievous
complaints hereof to the Bishops of Rome and Emperors, yet have they been
constrained to swear. And certainly Prussie remained in the tuition of the
Empire, till Friderich of Saxon, and Albert of Brandenburg, were Masters of
the order. For they would do no homage to the kings of Polle, for that neither
the Bishop nor the Emperor had confirmed that composition of king Casimire.
And that in the year.M. CCCCC. the Emperout Maximilian in the assemble at
Auspurge made a decree, wherein he commanded them to give their faith to the
Empire only. And where after to appease the controversy, Maximilian had
appointed a day at Passawe, in the year a M.D. x. sending thither
Ambassadors, there could be nothing at all concluded. Whereupon ensued that
last war. Moreover Albert him self.xxiiii. years past in the conuention at
Norinberge as a Prince of the Empire had his place among others, and signed
the decree there made. Wherefore it is evident that the king of Polle has no
right to Prusse, and that it was not lawful Prusse belongs to them year.
for Albert to withdraw him self unto his tuition and protection. Now where
the Ambassador reproves my order of unthankfulness and breakyng of
conuenauntes, herein he does us wrong, and it is to be proved by old
wrytinges, that scarsely have any kings of Polle kept touch and promise
with us. Was there ever writing seen confirmed with mo Seals, than ye same
whereby we accorded with king Ladislaus? might there any more assurance be
made? And yet breaking the seals and writing, the war was renewed against
us. This recompense had we of them for restoryng unto them Sarmatie and a great
part of Lituania. He named certain Emperors of fourmer time, and says how
they were offended with our order. But the truth is far otherwise. For
Sigismunde did not only sequestre strife and give sentence with us, as before
is mentioned, but also gave us aid against the enemy. Again the Emperor
Fridericke, what time the people rebelled, as I said before, showed us all the
favor that might be, and banyshed the co^spiratours, and for the same cause
held an assemble of ye Empire at Norinberge, in the which conuention a decree
was made to aid us. The like good will and favor did Maximilian she we us.
For he neither would that we should swear to the king of Polle, and therefore
both in his own name, and also of the whole Empire he wrote sundry letters to
king Sigismunde, and made than a decree for us right honorable. This orator
proceeds, and in the way of mockery, demands of us why we do not recover
Jerusalem and such other like places? surely I am not so clean without
experience, but I could taunte again, nevertheless by reason of this
honorable audience I will refrain, and will ask him but this question only.
First why ye king of Polle does not recover those places, which the Prince of
Moscouia has taken from him within these few years? Which are in comparison
as much as all Prussie. Again, why in so great fortune, he does not defend
his own limits from the daily invasions of the Tartarians? Uerely these are
plages for breaking his fidelity. He says, our order in times past was
expulsed out of all Boheme. Why he should thus say, I know not, unless that
by this example he would show, that they might also lawfully spoil us of our
goods, and turn us out of lands and possessions. For the destruction of ye
time touched not only our order, but pearsed also through out all the land of
Boheme, and was extended upon the^ chiefly, The commotion in Boheme for the
doctrine of John Husse.
which followed the old Religion, what time great tumultes were raised there
for the doctrine of John Husse. Dur order has warred with kings of Polle, I
confess it, but that ever they gave the occasion of war, I deny utterly.
For they never attempted war, but either to defend their right, or else to
recover their own. He says, we have made leagues with the Cartarians. This
may well be verefied of them. For it is manifest, that they have used their
aid, against men that profess the Christen religion. Again the situation of
the country declares easily, whether the Tartarians lie more commodious and
nerer us, or them. And that which he spoke last of the cities Danske and
Eluinge, is grounded upon no reason: For either city is of our dominion and
belongs to the Germane Empire neither has the king of Polle any other title
there: than that which he has obtained through the rebellion and treason of
the citezens, as it may be proved by sundry reasons. And seeing these matters
are thus, most redoubted Emperor, most mighty king, and States most
honorable, I beseech you, that ye sentence already given, may be put in
execution. For this to obtein at your hands, ought both the equity of the
cause, and dignity of the Empire, and State of Religion, and the honor and
all so commodity of the Nobility of Germany. The Ambassador of Polle, had
prepared a contrary writing, but did not exhibit the same. For when the reasons
were heard on both parts, certain were chosen out of the whole no^bre to
examine the matter, whose determination was, that the sentence pronounced
against Albert should be maynteined. But yet considering the great difficulty
that would be in the execution of the same, they refer all to the Emperor.
And shortly after king Sigil munde departed, for pure age, when he had
reigned.xlii. years. He was son unto king Casimire, as before is said. He
had The death of Sigismsid king of pole
three brethren. Whereof Ladislaus was king of Ho^gary and Boheme, the father of
king Lewys and Anne. John Albert, and Alexander, when they had reigned in order
after their father Casimire, leaving behind them no children, passed over the
government to their youngest brother Sigismunde. Unto whom now succeeded his
son of the same name, who had married ye daughter of Ferdinando king of
Romans.

I showed you of Mendoza in the fourmer book, how he protested at Rome
concerning the counsel. Whereunto, at the halendes of February followyng, the
Bishop, calling a Senate of Cardinals, made this answer. What time Mendoza,
thou The Popes answer to Mendoza.
saidest how the Emperor had commanded thee, to make protestation against the
counsel, thou made us right sorrowful. But after we had more diligently
wayed the letters of thy commission, we were comforted again. And first I will
speak of the cause of our grief and heuines. For that manner of protesting is
after an evil example and chiefly used of such, as are either revolted wholly
from dew obedience, or have begone to waver therein. Therefore did it grieve me
exceadingly, which have always borne a fatherly love to the Emperor, and as
becomes the pastor of the church, have ever desired concord. And it grieved
me and the Senate of Cardinals so much the more, for as much as at this time
we looked for nothing less. For the Emperor has made war with his
adversaries and the ennemies of the church, and has done it through the aid
of mine army. And albeit Mendoza thou semest to esteem this lightly, yet ought
it to be accepted for a great benefit. For the The war finished by ye Popes
army
aid was exceading great, that I sent, in so much that it far surmounted the
ability and power of the holy treasure, and came to him most in season. What
thing therefore could less be looked for, than that after the victory obtained,
and that so lately, the Emperor should render unto me such fruicte of Godly
zeal and benevolence? Uerely, that the end of the same war, should be the
beginning of protesting against me. Certes, it has chanced unto me, that the
Prophet complayneth of, that lokyng to gather grapes, I should find wild
beries. I have ever since the time I was first called to this dignity
pastoral, with earnest study tilled, cherished the emperor, as a most noble
plant, that I might once have a plentiful vintage. But this enterprise of his
has almost taken away from me al hope of fruicte. Thou have heard the cause
of our grief: hear also, how we were relieved of the same. Thou, as though
thou had had authority given thee, to proteste against me and this sacret
senate, have so used the same, as is neither unto us honorable nor mete or
condign for the Emperor. But in the letters of commission, there is not one
word, that shows it to be themperours will, that thou should thus proceed.
I say there is not one word, to the intent thou may better understand it,
that gives the authority thus to do. The Emperor commands his deputies at
Boloigne, that they should proteste thus before our Legates there which have
changed the place of the counsel. Which after thou did perceive once done,
thou would use the same manner of protesting here also in our presence. But
herein have thou passed the bonds of thy commission. And if thou have not
perceived this before Mendoza, acknowledge now at the last having warning. For
the emperor commands yt to protest, not against us, nor before this presence,
but against our legates, yt were autours of that removing. Wherefore the emperor
has done herein the duty of a te^perate Prince, which has stayed within those
bonds and limits, and would not that ye protestation should be made before me,
whom he knows to be the lawful and only judge of al such causes. For if I
had refused to have heard the matter, than should be have had just cause of
protestation. But thou Me^doza, not taking the way yt thou should have done,
did not desire me to examine the matter, but requirest yt I should disanul ye
decree made of removing the counsel, and command the greatest part of the
fathers to give place to a few, ye remained at Tre^t. And what thing can more
deminish thauthoritie of the whole counsel than this? Had it not ben much more
reasonable yt those few which are at Trent, if they had any cause of complaint
of the fathers which be at Boloigne, should have made the same unto me?
Certainly, I would neither have refused their requests tha^, nor yet would at
this present. Where therefore it is certain, yt themperours mind is not
co^sona^t or agreeable to your fact, we have cause to give God thanks, which
rules his mind after this sort. We may rejoice to our selves, and thou thy
self may be glad for thy Princes sake. And albeit yt by this same, which is
said already the fou^datio^ of your plead is so fallen, yt I need not to
answer thy protestation, yet, lest ye through silence I might appear to
acknowledge thine accusatio^s, and by the same thing of send many, especially
such as be ignorant I will confute the^ all. And first what time you have set
this mark before rhine eyes, yt thou might declare me to be negligent to
draw backward, and seek delays, you the counsel should not be holde^, but
the emperor to be careful for the common wealth, Uigilaunt and industrious, and
wholly addicte to the keeping of the counsel, thou procedest in speaking thy
pleasure. Assuredly I do not, another ought I to envy the Emperors praises.
And if thou had stayed The Empe. praises set ye Pope a fire.
there, I had had nothing to answer. But in as much as thou do extolle
him, to deprave me, so laud and commend him, that thou myghtest bring me in
contempt, whylest thou say, that he has desired a counsel, not of me
only, but also of my prodecessours, Bishops of Rome. The thing it self
requires, that I should answer thee to the same. For if this were always
the Emperors mind and desire, that a counsel might be holden, of the same
mind have I been ever as well as he. Again, as I am his elder in years, so
have I desired this thing before him, as the most honorable Cardinals can
tell, which were of the same number at that time. And when I was chosen
Bishop, I continued of the same mind still. And having the least occasion in
the world, I called a counsel, first at Mantua, and after at Uicence. But
thither came none at all, and hither but very few. And the Legates, which I
sent, tarried there half a year, lokyng for the other Bishops, which I had
summoned, sending a broad letters and messengers into all parts. Howbeit thou
say, that these cities were not commodious for other nations to repare to,
but that Tre^t was fit for the purpose. But al men know that Trent is not to
be compared unto these, neither in quantity, nor plenty of all things.
Therefore the incommoditie of the place was not the let, but the wars of
Princes. Now consider with me, whether was more fervent in this behalf: The
Emperor, which let the counsel with warlyke tumultes or the Bishop,
which was ever a peace maker, who never aided any Prince in war, saving the
Emperor only, and that in the same war, which seemed to open the way unto
the counsel? Whether the Emperor were constrained to war, and brought unto
it against his will, I dispute not. But certain it is, that the counsel was let
by the wars.

I come unwillingly unto this comparison, because the contention is of the
praise of virtue, which is al dew unto God alone, but thou Mendoza have given
the occasion. I will not be tedious, and will only warn thee to consider every
year of my byshoprike, and mark well what care and study I have taken. For
verily these two things have been ever before my eyes, to make peace amongst
Princes, and to keep a counsel, and herein have spared, neither cost nor
pain, for all mine old age. But neither do thou reprove any thing, before
the counsel, and blamest only my Legates, in that they removed to Boloigne
without my knowledge. Moreover this does offend thee, that I call the
congregation of the Fathers at Boloigne, a counsel, and thynkest that they
sustain injury thereby, that remain at Trente. But what evil is in that? For
thus all men speak, how the Counsel is removed from Trent to Bononie.
Wherefore if I should do the duty of an vpryght judge, I ought so to call it,
till I know it to be otherwise by contrary probations, especially sithe the
most part of the Bishops are gone with our Legates thither. For not the less
part, as thou affirmest, but the greater, ought to prevail in doubtful
matters. And it is evident, that the Counsel has power to remove else where.
But whether it were lawfully removed, wherein is all the controversy, I reserve
unto my self the judgment So I will, and so command.
of that thing, which is offered me. And in the mean time do attribute unto
that congregation, the name of the Counsel. But thou affirmest those, that
were causers of the removing, to be unto me addicted. Thynkest thou this thing
worthy of reprehension? Than thou praysest such as remained at Trente, for
because they favor me not. But consider what danger herein is. For of this
thing are wont to arryse dissentions, and scismes, unto the church most
perillouse, what time the Bishops withdraw them selves from the obedience of
their high Prelate. But if you understand by addicted, such as be factiouse,
that will take my part, whether it be right or wrong, verily I know none
such. For I have none other partakyng, than that which is the part of a father
toward his children, or of the pastor to ward his flock. Neither has there
chanced as yet any such controversy in the Counsel, that I neded any such
addicted and vowed men. But this I require of the Bishops chifly, that they
provide for the liberty of conscience, and gave an especial charge to my
Legates, when they went unto the counsel, that they should se in any wise, that
the bishops should have no cause to co^plain of taking away from them their
liberty in giving of voices. You find much fault also, that I can not be
persuaded by no requests of the emperor, nor of king Ferdina^do, nor al ye
states of the^pyre, and gatherest hereby, ye I take no care for Germany,
especially, when the emperor has through his great labor and pains brought to
pass, that such as were lately swarued from the church, do not now refuse the
decrees of ye counsel, so it might be continued at Trent. Certes I never
refused by determinate words, but that they might return to Trente, so that
the same may be lawfully done, and without offense of other nations. But how
desirous I am of the health of Germany, hereof it is evident, that twyse I have
called a counsel thither, twice A counsel called at Trent twice
sent my Legates, which after they had at the first time, by the space of
seven months, looked chiefly for the coming of the Germans, Parise, Morone
and Poole Cardinals, thou know thy self, how there came none at that
time. Thither came in the Emperors name Granuellan, the Bishop of Arras, and
you your self Mendoza, and you can all witness, how great was the patience of
our men in abiding for the rest. But what was the end thereof? Not so much as
you your selves would tarry. And albeit my Legates entreated you, that at the
last one of the three might remain, for an example to others, yet alleging a
certain excuse, you departed not many days after. Again two years after, in a
time more commodious, they met there again. And I sent Legates thither,
Mountane, Crucei and Poole Cardinals. Thither came you also, and Fraunces
Toletane. And you remember how long was the expectation, and how many months
were consumed in vain tofore they could begin. And after they were come to
the matter, and many wholesome decrees were made, you know how few of them came
the there, that chiefly neded that remedy. Of the Bishops came none at al: A
few of them sent their proctours. Briefly there appeared no signs nor tokens
that they would come to amendment.

And when many resorted thither out of Spain, France, Italy and further
Provinces, out of Germany, which was next of all others, hardely came there
any one. But now you say that the state of Germany is otherwise, and that the
Emperor, whose power and authority is now augmented, does undertake that in
case they return to Trente, all the Germans will follow the decres of the
counsel. I believe, Mendoza, if it be true thou say. But if the Germaynes be
of that mind, why do they not plainly submit them selves to the counsel,
where so ever it be. And yet I would not that this should be so taken, as
though I passed greatly in what place the Synod be holden. But you so stick
unto Trente, that unless it be finished there, where it first began, you will
say that Germany is undone. But take heed what you do. For whylest you bind
us to the walls of one City, you do injury to the holy Ghost.

In old time God ordained Jerusalem, as a peculiar place, wherein he would be
worshipped, for it pleased him tha^: but wha^ the ceremonies and shadows of
the law were abolyshed. After that our savior Christ, the sun of
righteousness shone forth he would be served in all places. Therefore you bring
in a new bondage, when you would compel us to a place. But seeing that Germany
should be cured, it is needful that the counsel he kept there. why than, if
the Danes, Gothians, or Britans be vexed with like diseases, should every of
them have a general counsel kept in their own countries? No not so: For in
assembling of counselles, there is not so much consideration had of them, for
whom the laws are made, as of those which do make and prescribe the same.
They be Bishops and other fathers, whose commodities are chiefly respected.
For it is to be The fathers must be provided forwel
proved by sundry examples, that counsels have oftentimes been holden, out of
the countries where the heresies sprange up what, whether were not this an
unreasonable thing, that (...) Germaynes only should take upon them to appointe
the place of the counsel, and the Election and liberty be taken away from all
other nations? This is to declare, that this bitter protestation of yours neded
not. But now to the rest of the same, you say how the auswere we made unto
the Emperor was unsitting and full of lies, and grounded neither upon right
nor reason. These things are irreverently spoken, and herein thou do us
wrong, but because thou bryngest no reason, I can not answer thee
distinctely. How be it, I suppose it greueth you, that we desire the decrees
may be ratified, and they well assured that shall repare to the counsel, that
the same manner and order of pleading be still retained which has remained in
the church from the Apostles time unto this day, finally, that the saufe
conduicte be ready. But in these demau^des is nothing strange or unreasonable,
and are wont to be provided for as well by laws of the Bishops as also of
Emperors. Now where you say, that whatsoever incommoditie shall arryse in
time to come, the Emperor will ascribe it unto me. And also in this my
negligence will take upon him the charge of the church. Uerely so far forth as
God will give me grace, I will so demean my self, that I will give no just
The Pope may be weak and negligent
cause, to be thought negligent in matters concerning the church.
Nevertheless, if it so fortune, through the imbecillitie of man's nature, I
shall not be offended, if my negligence, may styre up and sharpen the
Emperors diligence, to succor the Church, so that he stay him self within
the precinct and limittes prescrybed, that is: If he follow herein the rule
of right and laws of the holy Fathers. Finally, as concerning the chief point
of your Protestation, where you contend the removing of the counsel to be
unlawful, in as much as the effect of all the controversy thereon depends,
I take unto my self, the examination thereof, by virtue of my power and
authority, and commit the hearing of the same to the most worthy
Cardinals, Parise, Burges, Poole and Crescent. And command, that in the
mean time whylest they do examine the thing, no man what so ever he be,
attempt any thing to the contrary. And also charge the fathers, as well that
be at Bo nonie, as also at Trent, that if they have any thing to say or
allege in this matter, they do it within this month. And lest I should seem
in any point to hinder the commodity of Germany, I will not refuse to send
mine Ambassadors thither, such as may cure the infirmity of their people, if
I shall under stand the same not to be unthankful to them and to the Emperor.
Besides all this, when the judgment is ended, in case it shall appear, that
they did not well to remove unto Boloigne I will devise by all means, that the
Synod may be continued at Trent. And at few words, will do what I can, that
in fine the ancient Religion may again be restored to Germany.

The Cardinal of Trent was before this returned to Auspurge, as I said. When
the Emperor than, hearing his talk, and also receiving letters from Mendoza
dated at Rome, about the end of December, saw but small hope of the counsel,
the xiiii. day of January declares the matter to ye states, in what case it
stands, and how he has signified to his Ambassador Mendoza, that he should
make protestation at Rome, concerning the removing of the counsel. After the
same shall be done, he will get them the copy to write out. And albeit the
hope of the counsel is not utterly to be neglected, yet, by reason of ye long
delay which is like to come betwixt, he thinks it to be requisite, and
necessary, that in the mean time there be some mean found, to conserve the
peace of Germany. They have in deed committed unto him the charge of this
matter: but he thinks it expedient, that out of the whole nombre be chosen a
few good and well learned men, to have the doing hereof. And he will also
appoint certain to consult with them. Wherefore he requires them to be wylling
hereunto, and al affections laid aside, to consider what commodity it were
for the common wealth, and every of the^ also that a reconcilement were made.
Let them call to remembrance, how before this dissension, Germany was the
most florishyng Region of all others: and as a mirror and a spectacle for all
nations to behold. Let the^ consider moreover, that where he took so much
travel and pain, that the counsel might be continued at Trent, that he ded the
same of his duty, and of a singular zeal to the common country. Therefore were
diverse chosen to treat of the matter: but when they could not agree, the whole
matter was referred to the emperor. Wherefore he appointed certain, to pen
articles of doctrine, ceremonies, and reformation of the clergy. Those were
The Auctours of the Interim.
July Pflugie, Bishop of Numburge, Michaell Sidonie, John Islebie Agricola,
who.xviii. years past had defended the doctrine of the Protestauntes with
Melanchton and Brentius, as is written in the seventh book. These therefore,
write a Ihon Isleby a reuolte.
book of Articles, but very secretly, and when they had been long about it, and
had printed it sundry times, at length, exhibit the same to the Emperor, as I
will show you hereafter. Ioachim the Electour of Brandenburg, which labored
sore for a reconcilement, devising first with James Sturmius, entreated the
Senate of Strasburg by his letters, that for the cause of Religion they would
send unto him Bucer. For in as much as the Bishop had withdrawn the counsel,
the Emperor had taken an other way, and that there was great hope of a
reformation. Whereupon Bucer is sent, who taking his iurney privily about the
end of January, when he came almost to Auspurg, Bucer is set for.
stayed there, till the Prince sent for him. In the former book is declared,
how the Englyshemen overcame the Scotts in a mighty battle. But where the
Scotts would not relent, nor change their purpose, and trusted to the
French kings promesses, the Duke of Somerset, Protector of England, and the
rest of the counsel, the first day of February, write unto the^ a long
exhortation unto peace. Albeit, say they, it were requisite, The counsel of
England write to the Scotts.
that the beginning should proceed of you, which in the cause are inferiors,
and go by the worse. And albeit we possess a great part of your dominion, yet
can we not but admonish you of your wealth and preservation. The last year
before the battle, we provoked you to peace and amity, and declared what our
mind was, but yt writing was suppressed by your captains and governor of
your Realm, and not suffered to come to your hands. For so that they may do
well them selves, they care full little what chances unto you. Wherefore, if
they shall now also use the same disceiptfulnes, and not suffer you to
understand any part of our will and counsel, in this writing we do openly
proteste, that we have omitted no part of our duty. England has oftentimes
kept war with Scotland, and that exceading great. And there is no doubt,
but they that Ciuille war between England and Scotland.
shall read the histories, or hear of the feats done, would marvel much,
that the people of one country and langage, should be at so great dissension
among themselves, and would account it a thing chiefly to be wyshed for, if
the whoale Island might by some mean agree in one, and be ruled by one
government. But al men do confess, that there is no redier way here unto,
than by marriage. And this way God having compassion upon you, has showed you,
and offered you a most goodly occasion as it were into your bosom. Your king,
when he had broken his promise, and had an overthrow in battle, died shortly
after, whether it were for sorrow, or for some other cause. He had three
children, two sons and a daughter, and they indede might have been a let, so
yt there should not have been made an attoneme^t betwixt us. But God took the^
away both in a manner in one day when they were infantes, and left but one
inheriter, a daughter, borne a little before ye death of her father: And unto us
has given a king of great exspectatio^, Edward, son and heir unto Hery ye
eight. What do you not se a bond prepared of a perpetual and ever lasting
amity between us? It has been oftentimes wished for, but in these eight
hondreth years past, chanced never so good an opportunity. And this can not
they deny, which hinder the peace amongst you. But by this mean say they, we
would procure to our selves lordship, and to you bondage. But ye have we in our
letters sent to you ye last year past, sufficiently confuted, and now take God
to witness, that ye king is minded to join with you in most assured
frendshyp. If you shall refuse, and provoke us again to war through your
frowardnes, unto whom shall the fault of common euilles be ascribed? You have
promised the daughter and heir of your Realm in marriage to our king, by common
assent of parliament. Writings were made of the same and confirmed with the
common seal of the Realm. Many and The daughter of Scotland assiau^ced to yt
king of England.
great assuraunces were devised, and you were contented to put in pledges, till
they came both to lawful age. These wrytinges of yours are in our custody, as
a perpetual witness against you. At all the which things, Hamelton, Earl of
Arraine, governor of your Realm was not only present, but President also and
chief doer. But the same, after the Cardinal of Saint Andrews, and certain
other prelates of the Clergy had put him The governor of Scotlanda leage
breaker.
in fear and terror, and showed him again great hope an other way, he broke
his faith and conuenauntes. In whom assuredly, of what so ever evils is
chances in the mean time the whole blame is to be imputed. In that you have
lost so many fortes and Castelles, that after the battle foughten, you wanted
so many thousands of your men, that we have so far invaded your Realm, it
is chiefly to be ascrybed unto him. But what end at the length do you look of
this obstinacy and vuloyaultie? Having the victory, we offer you peace. We
possess a great part of your kingdom, and yet make England common to you. The
same that men vanquyshed are wont to suffer as a great ignomie, that what time
they are united with the people that have the victory, they should forsake and
lose the name of their own nation, that do we freely grant unto you, and
refuse not to receive yt ancient name of Britains, common to both nations.
What thing, for the love of God, can of us be more performed? Will not as men
judge this, that we have just cause to war, when they shall know that so
liberal, so reasonable and honest conditions could take no place with you? We
set open for you always to come unto our friendship, neither do we expulse your
Queen out of your Realm, but will also establish her and her daughter in
England. Again, we intend not to abrogate your laws: For both England, and
France, and the Emperors countries also, do use sundry laws. They that seek
to hinder the peace, do put you in such fear: But they provide only for
their own commodity and pleasure, and care not for your wealth. But turn
you away your eyes and mind from them, and consider the state of your common
wealth. You have a maid, inheritour of your Realm, she must doubtless mary at
the length. Therefore she shall either be married to one of your own nation: or
to some foreine Prince. If she mary at home, our right and title remains yet
nevertheless unto us whole, and that thing will styre up civil tumultes and
dissension. If she take a stranger, ye shall both have us your continual
ennemies, and in a How miserable is it for ye Queen to mary a stranger.
most miserable bondage shall ye serve a foreine nation. You must seek for
aid that is far from you. And the forces that shall be sent, it can not be
spoken, what hurt they will do you, and how prowdely and arrogauntly they will
deal with you. For thus will they be persuaded, that in their aid and defense
consists your whole preservation. What? they will take from you, your Queen
and Princes, and tra^sport her whether they list, and if they shall have war
on any side, as it may be they shall, they will be wholly addicte to defend
them and theirs, and not care for you, but leave you unto us for a pray. And if
it fortune that they send no soldiers, but cap only. They shall prescribe and
command you, and if any thing shall be well done, will have all the praise
thereof. But if any misfortune chance, the whole storm shall light in your
necks, that lose your life and blood. What danger also it is It is danger to
use forain aids.
to use foreyne aids, a domestical example may teach you.

The Brytaines, the people of this same Island sent for the Saxons in times
paste to aid the^, and after by the same were expulsed out of their country,
and driven into the mountanes The Britanes expulsed by yt Saxons
and fennes. Some time there dwelte betwyxt England and Scotland, the Pictes,
a fierce and a warlyke people, whom the Scotts after they had a while
defended from the ennemy, The Pictes, by yt Scots.
at the length so oppressed, that their name remains not at this day. Did
not the same happen to the French men by the^ of Frankonie, to the Greeks not
long since, and to the Hongarians in this our memory, when they used the aid
of the Turks. etc. Did not the Gothians in time paste, by the same mean win all Italy, and the Lumbardes the whole country, that now is called Lumbardie?
Long not you, and ye wise be, to prove the insolent pride and arrogancy of
the foreyne Soldiour, but compare that infinity Rabble of euylles, with
marriage, infinity, and an honorable peace. And herein set before your eyes.
The manner and example of Nations nere Cou^tryes united by marriage.
unto us. The Emperor Charles the fyft, by this mean possesses Spain and
Burgundy. The French king by the same mean has annexed little Brytain unto
the crown of France. The like also do other nations. For there be but two
ways, whereby wars are finished, that is either by force and victory, Two
ways, to finish war
or else by marriage. If you hate force, why do you not admit the other, which
is offered you, and which once you conuenaunted and granted to? We are not
ignoraunte, who they be, that diswade you from wholesome counsel. Uerely this do
certain of the Clergy, and the governor of the Realm also. But take you head,
lest they which so often have broken their fidelity, do lose your whole
liberty, lest they being corrupt with brybes as with the hyre and reward of
treason, deliver up your Castelles and Fortes to Strangers.

Which thing, when they shall do, they will feign in words that they do it,
to the intent that they shall defend them from us, but in very deed, that they
being assured through their aid, may them selves bridle you as they list. And
than who sees not in what case you and your Realm shall stand in? O
miserable and wretched frowardnes. We are enclosed on every side with the
Dccean Sea, as with walls and ditch most strong. If there were only the
agreement of minds amongst us, there wanted nothing to high felicity, and
we might than establyshe a most florishyng Monarchy. But if this way move
you nothing, at the least wise let the calamity lately received, and the
mysery now hanging over your headdes persuade you. Let the fear of Gods
vengeance also move you. For God is the revenger of faith and conuenauntes
broken, and detesteth al desire of war, and plageth the same with grievous
punishementes. We desire your Queen as is conuenaunted, and the way of peace,
which God of his infinity goodness has showed the same we follow, and wyshe
that you also would walk in the same steps. And if we can obtain nothing we
protest that of necessity we must attempt war, and through Gods conduite,
whose word and voice you contemn, we will prosecute our right with sword and
fire. Wherefore if there he any good men amongst you, which are sorry for the
calamity of their country, which think that faith and promise is to be
kept and observed, they may come unto us safely, whosoever they be we shall
show them all love and favor? That the traffic also of marchau^dise may
freely be used amongst us, the king has lately provided and set forth by
proclamation, to the intent there might be a token of his benevolence toward
you. And if he shall perceive this benefit to be well employed, he intends to
bestow upon you greater, and has commanded all these things to be signified
to you in his name. In ye former book, I showed you of Sebastian Uogelsberg,
which brought the French king out of Germany ten enseignes of foteme^: Who in
Autumn returned home, and discharged his bands. For that he served ye
French king, the Emperor took it grievously and displeasau^tly, and seking an
occasion, he commanded Lazarus Schuendie to se if he could apprehende him. Who
coming to Wisseburg, where he had a house, took him and brought him to
Ausburge. Uogelsberg apprehended.
Straight ways was he put upon the Rack, and examined by torture of diverse
others that were had in suspicion before, as though they favored the French
party. And although that through a valeaunt stoutnes both of body and mind,
he uttered nothing for all the tourment, yet, for that he was reported to have
been in society with rebels, to have broken the Emperors proclamations, and
devised crafty counselles, he was condemned to die, and two other Ce^turions
with him, James Mantel, and Wuolf Thomas. Wherefore ye seventh day of February,
he was brought forth into the marketh place, four days after he came thither.
There were certain enseignes of fotemen in ar mure, and great resort of people.
When he was come into the higher place of execution, loking about him with a
bold and stout His consta^cy at his death.
courage, for as much as the noblemen of all degrees looked out of the wyndowes
and houses on every side, he saluteth the^ with great reverence, and speaking
of the kind of his life, declares how he has heretofore served the Emperor
in his wars, and says the only cause of his death is, that yt last year, he
brought the French king a force of men, what time he was crowned at Rains. Now
was this Uogelsberg of a goodly and comely personage, and where he showed no
took at al of any terror or fear of death, he allured all men to behold him.
After him were heheaded the Ce^turions before named. Two judges gave the
sentence, which follow the Emperors court and camp always, the one
Biruiesca, a Spaniarde, the other a Germane, Niclas Zinner, both lawyers. He
had blamed Schuendie, as though he had been circumuented by him. But they
setforth a writing and declare wherefore he was executed, excuse Schuendie, and
affirm that he did nothing but the Emperors commandment and proteste that
accusation to be false. At this time through out France, but chiefly at Paris,
was burning and persecution Persecution in France.
renewed for Lutheranisme, where contrariwyse in England they consulted
utterly to abolishe the Popish mass. The Emperor as I said before, had given to
Duke Maurice the dignity of Electourship and the greatest part of the Duke of
Saxons country, in the camp before Wittemberge. But in this conuentio^ by a
public and solemn ceremony, he puts him as it were inpossession, and
receives him into the tuition of him and of the Empire, which thing he had
promised him tha^. This was done the xxiiii. day of February, which was
The^perours birth day. And that cerimony was after this sort. In the market
place was builded a pauilion of bordes, of a great breadth, wheru^to The
ceremony whereby Duke Maurice was created Elect.
they went up by steps. Thither came the emperor about three of the clock at
after none, accompanied with ye Princes Electours. After he goes from hence
into an house by, and puts on his solemn Robes, both he, and the Princes
Electours. From thence he comes forth again and sits down under his cloth
of estate. Likewise do they, every man in his place, on the backside over
the emperor upon a stage were placed the Trompetters. Than comes forth ye first
band of Duke Maurice, and run their horses to themperours pauilion, as the
manner is. In ye mean season Duke Maurice with an other band staieth right over
against them, accompanied with a number of Princes, and next before him
were.xii. Trompetters. Immediately issued out of y^ same band, Henry ye duke of
Bru^swick, Wuolfa^ge prince of Bipou^t, brother to ye elector of Palatine. And
albert ye yo^g duke of bauer, and when they had coursed their horses to ye
place before said, they alight, and go up to the^ per(...) humbly require hi,
yt he would aua^ce duke moris for ye common benefit of thempire, to ye digniti
of electorship. Themperor co^sulti^g with thelectors, makes answer by
tharchbishop of (...)e^tz yt he is co^te^t so to do, in case he will come hi^
self, and dema^d ye same, when he had received yt answer, duke Moris comes
riding forth with the hole troop: before him were born.x. enseignes with the arms
of as many regio^s, wherein he desired to be invested, wha^ he was come up
before themperor, he kneled down upon his knees, and desires y^ same, Hoier
earl of Ma^sfeld was sent of his brother august, to make ye like request.
Wherefore themperor answers by tharchbishop of me^tz, cha^celer of thempire.
Forasmuch as they both have don hi^ faithful service, he will give unto duke
Moris and his heirs males, or if none be, to his brother Augustus, and to the
heirs of his body, thelectorship of saxony, and al ye lands of Iho^ Friderick,
so much excepted as is already granted to his children. Afterward, tharchbishop
of Me^tz reads ye oath, wherwt thelectors are bou^de^, and wha^ Duke Moris
reciting it after him, had sworn, themperor delivers unto him the sword, and
with this ceremony puts him as it were into full possession. He gives thanks,
and promises al fidelity and obeisa^ce. After, those ba^ue^rs of arms before
mentioned, when duke Moris had received the^ of themperor, were thrown down
amo^gs the people, as is accustomed, al these things might Duke Iho^ Friderick,
behold out of the house, where he lodged: and did so without fail: for it was in
the same market place. Bucer, who was sent for to Auspurge, came at the last to
thelector of Bra^de^burge. And now was the book finished, which I showed you
before was co^piled of religion: which the marquis delivers to Bucer, The
Marquis of Bra^denburge of fended with Bucer.
and desires him to subscribe. When he had red it over, for yt he saw the
bishop of Romes doctrine therein established, he said, he could not allow the
same: Thelector took this displesa^tly, and was much of fe^ded with him, and
judged the writing moderat, for so had Islebie persuaded hi^. Granuella^ also
urged Bucer by messe^gers, and if he would subscribe, promised hi^ ample
rewards: and when he might not preuail Bucer is in danger.
by large promises, he began to threate^ him, so he returned home, not without
danger, sor throughout all the la^d of Wirtemberge were ba^ds of Spaniardes, as
before is said. In the month of April tharchbishop of Collo^, lately made
priest, sa^g his first mass, as they term it. Whereat were themperor, king
Ferdina^do, and of other Princes a great no^bre. After, he makes them a most
sumpteous dinner. About this time also came to Auspurge Muleasses, king of
Tu^nes, Muleasses King of Tons.
whom the Emperor.xiii. years paste had restored to his kingedome, and
expulsed barbarous, as I showed you in the ninth book. Now had his eldest son
put out both his eyes, and usurped the crown: wherefore like a miserable exile
he came hither to themperor out of Barbary. And not long after came thither
also his second son. The book co^piled of religion treats first of ye state
of man, before and after The co^tents of the Interim.
his fall of our rede^ptio^ by Christ, of charity and good works, of ye
co^fide^ce in ye remissi^ of sins, of the church, of vows, of authoriti, of
ye ministers of ye church, of ye high bishop, of the sacraments, of the
sacrifice of the mass, of the memorial, invocation and intercession of
saints, of the memorial of such as have died godly, of the communion to be
annexed to the sacrifice of ceremonies, and use of sacraments. And these things
amongs others are taught, yt those works, which besides the commandment of
god, are godly and honestly wrought, which are commonly called ye works of
superogatio^, are to be co^me^ded: y^ man Worckes of superogatio^,
cannot without distrust of his imbecility, believe yt his sins be forgiven: how
ye church has authority to interpret ye scriptures, and out of the same
together and setforth doctrins, power to minister ye law, and to judge of
doutful matters by a general counsel, and to make laws: and yt there is one
high bishop, which is above al y^ residue, for the prerogative granted to
Peter: unto who^ the government of the universal church was committed of
Christ, yet so, as other bishops also have part of the cure every man in his
own church, yt by co^firmatio^ and chrisme is received y^ holy ghost, so yt they
may resist the deceits of ye devil the flesh and the world, and that the bishop
only is minister of this sacrament: how the sins must be rehearsed to the
priest, such as come to memory. That by satisfaction, which consists in the
fruits of repe^ta^ce, especially through fasting, praying and almosgeuing, are
cut of ye causes of sins, and temporal punishment, either taken away, or
mitigated: that holy vnctio^ has been in the church since the time of the
Apostles, yt either it might help the body, or the mind it self against the fiery
darts of the devil: wherefore it must be used, what time the hour of death
apeareth to draw nere: how marriage contracted without the co^se^t of the parents
ought to be ratified, but yet are the children to be admonished in sermons, yt
they follow thaduise of their parents: how christ at his last supper did
institute ye sacrament of his body and blud: first, that the same might be
received of the faithful, as the holsom meat of the soul, secondli, yt it might
be offered up in memorial of his death: For there be in all.ii. sacrifices of
christ, the one, blody upon the cross, the other, wherein, under ye form of bread
and wine, he him self Two sacrifices of Christ after these in terimistes.
offered up unto his father, his body and blud, and after, delivered y^ same to
his apostles and successers to be don in ye memorial of him unto the worlds
end: by ye first was mankind reconciled to god the father, but through this
same yt is not blody, Christ is represe^ted to his father not yt we should again
deserve yt remission of sins. but yt we might apply unto our selves y^
reco^cileme^t prepared by ye death of Christ, and yt in this sacrifice, wherein
we celebrate ye death of Christ: ye morial of saints must be renewed, yt they
may make intercession for us to god the father, and help us by their merits: we
must also remember the dead, and commend the^ to almightye God. After this is
prescribed yt the old ceremonies accustomably used in baptism, be still
observed, the xorsisme, renouncing, confession of the faith and Chrisme.
Moreover, yt in the ceremonies of the mass, there be nothing changed: that in all towns and great churches there be said daily.ii. Masses at the least, and in
the country and villages one, especially on holy days: and yt in the cano^ of
the inasse, nothing at all be altered, and that all the rest be observed, after
thold usage: yet if any thing be crept in, yt may give occasion to
superstition, let it be taken away: Let vestments, ornaments, vessels, crosses,
altars, ca^dels, and images be kept still, as certain momuments: let not those
ordinari prayers, and godly singing of Psalms be abrogated, and where they be
taken away, let the^ be restored: let the obits for the dead be kept after the
manner of thold church, and also saints holy days, yea, let the^ be
worshipped also, unto who^ it is decreed yt supplication should be made: The day
before Easter and Witsontide, let the water in the fo^tstone be hallowed after
a solemn manner: let riot be refrained, and to the intent to stir up the mind to
godly exercises, certain daie^ let me^ fast and abstain from flesh: finally,
though it were to be wished, yt there be diverse and many ministers of the church
found, yt would live chaste, yet, for yt many have wives every where, which they
will not forsake, nether can this now be altered without a great tumult,
therefore must we tarry herein for a decre of a general counsel: likewise The
Interi permits Priests to keep their wives still.
are we co^te^ted to bear with the^ yt receive the Lords supper under both
kinds, yet so, as they shall not reprove others yt do the contrary. For under
either kind the body and blood of Christ is contained wholly. After this sort was
the book setforth at the last, as after you shall hear, but not so pe^ned at
the beginning. For it was often corrected, An evil co^piled book often corrected.
and the copy yt Bucer saw was somewhat purer. Wherefore, after it had been tossed
long, and much among the states of thempire, it was sent also to Rome. For
albeit yt al papistry in a manner was therein established, yet for as much as
certain things were permitted to the contrary part, they thought it first
expedient to make the bishop privy. Who after openet(...) themperor by cardinal
Stoudrate these notes or any inaduersio^s. That a priest which has taken
ordres should mary and execute Notes of the Interim by ye Bishop of Rome.
still y^ holy ministry, was never hard of: yt the use of receiving ye Lords
supper under both kinds, is abrogated, nether has any ma^autority to permit yt
liberty, saving ye bishop of Rome, and the sinode: yt the folowers of ye old
religion are not to be bou^de^ unto these doctrins but if any Lutheranes will
forsake their opinions, they are not to be refused: That of the.ii. masses
ought only to be understand of ye Lutheranes: yt the singing of Psalms ought
to be restored in all places: yt on holy days they must celebrate ye memorial
of the patron of the church: that such as are priests already, or hereafter
shall be, must abstain from Marriage: that a spedy restitution of the church
goods and jurisdiction must be made: For the Robbery is manifest, nether must
they follow herein thordinary process of the law, but determine of y^ thing that
is evident, and execute the matter by regal power. When this ce^sure was
inferred, tharchbishops of Me^tz, Treuers and Collen, unto who^ it was
delivered, answer the^peror directly after the same sort, and especially urge
restitutio^, declaring the same to be right necessary, if christian religion
should be maintained, and in places where it is abolished, should again be
restored: Moreover the common peace ca^ not otherwise be established: wherefore
it is chiefli to be provided yt religious houses be wholly restored. And in as
much as the spoil and extortio^ is manifest, they must go spedeli to work, yt
gods service may withal speed be recovered: Finally they desire him to take
these things in good part, and with his protection to defend the members of the
church. The.iii. other electors, were not of the same opinion, especially
Thelectors dary opinion.
ye Paulsgraue and Duke Moris, yet either of the^ had causes, why they should not
gainsai themperor. The rest of the princes, which were for the most part
bishops, answer in like manner as did the iii. Archbishops. As for the cities
there was no great account made of the^. The Emperor therefore at the Ides of
May, calls all the States before him. And in the preface speaking of his
zeal toward Germany says, we perceive by manifest arguments, and by the
thing it self, ye neither the peace can be established, nor law and justice
ministered, unless the controversy of religion the first appeased, which has
now many pears sturred up thempire much grudge and dyssention, hatred,
discord and civil wars. This has been verily the cause, why by many
co^ue^tions and co^fere^ces we have often sought a remedy: But in the mean
time not only in Germany, but also into other nations and people of
Christendom has this same co^tageous infection pearsed, in so much that there
appears no more present remedy, than a general counsel: which at the length at
your request, we procured to be holde^ at Tre^t, and moved you also at ye
beginning of this conuentio^, to submit your selves to thauthoritie of y^ same.
And that y^ charge might be committed unto us in ye mean season, to devise
some godly means, whereby they might live quietly ye mean while in Germany,
which co^te^tatio^ and co^fyde^ce of youres, was unto us both tha^ and now also
right acceptable. What time therefore we gave our selves wholly unto this
carefulnes, and demanded your opinions, we than perceived not without the
great grief of our mind, that the disagrement in religion was thoccasion of
all the former evils. And unless it be foresene, hereafter wylbe. Wherefore we
thought it not good, to leave the matter in that troublesome state, until the
decree of the counsel, but that it ought to be brought to some moderation,
especially, since yt oftentimes new sects did arise. Whilst we were po^dering
these things, certain of high degree and nobility desirous of peace, and lovers
of the common weal, exhibit to us in writing their opinion concerning
religion, and promise due obeisa^ce. We than receiving y^ writing, delivered
the same to certain good and learned deuines, yt they should among the^ selves
consider al things diligently, which after they had perused it, made report,
that y^ same being well understand, did not impugn the catholic religion and
doctrine, nor ye laws and co^stitutions of the church, two opinions only
excepted, whereof the one is of the marriage of priests, the other of the Lords
supper: but said it was well devised, to establish the concord of Germany: which
thing dousles unto us should be most of all acceptable: for what more joyful
thing could happen, the^ to se al states in minds agreeable, follow one and the
same form of Religion? And seeing it is eue^ so, we require such as have
observed hitherto ye laws and custom of ye catholic church to their great
commendation, that they persevere in ye same, and alter nothing, as they have
promised us heretofore: And those also which have changed their religion, we
desire most earnestly to pass with the other states, and profess the same
religion yt they do, or else to co^fyrme their doctrine after the order of this
book, and in every point to follow the steps hereof, and besides that to
ordain nothing: but to stay within these bounds and limits, and neither by
writing nor preaching to attempt any thing to the contrary, but obedie^tly to
atte^d the decre of a general counsel: and that the same may be had as shortly
as is possible, we will endeavor with al diligence: and now ar occupied in this
thing wholly, how to conceive a form for the reformation of the clergy. Wha^
he had spoken thus by his secretary, as is accustomed, he commanded the book
to be red. There tharch The craft of tharchbishop of Mentz in a proving of y^
Interim.
bishop of me^tz, which occupies ye chiefest place among thelectors, not
seking what thopinio^ of stats should be, arises up, and as it were in the name
of al ye rest gives unto the^peror for so much travel, pain, care diligence,
and love of y^ country, imortal thanks: and in as much as they have already
committed the thing to his fidelity, and now pains has be^ taken therein, he
says it is reason, yt they should with most willing minds, acknowledge the same,
and obey the decre. This thanks giving did the^peror take for a common assent
and co^firmatio^, and after would admit none excuse, as I shall herafter
declare, and commands the book to be set forth in print both in latin and
duch also. The iiii. day after, he declares to the stats with how much labor and
cost he has restored peace un to Germany, and because the thing it self
requires yt it be also provided for in time to come, he supposes it very mete
and necessari, and some great treasure of money beleuied, and in certain
places be kept the common treasury, that if it fortune at any time, any
commotion to arrise within the Empire, or without the same may be always in a
readiness. And when a few days had passed between, king Ferdinando
raccompteth, how he for weighty causes, which they King Ferna^do requires
monet of the states.
them selves understand well enough, and need not to be recited, sendinge an
Ambassade, made truse with the Turk for five years, whereof one is past: And
albeit he has commanded his men, to do nothing to the contrary, yet he
requires them nevertheless to give him that aid which they have already
promised, to the intent that if he break couenauntes, he may be easily
resisted: Again, inasmuch as he does fortifye his frontier Towns, with strong
garrisons, that he also be negligent in this behalf: Therefore is he purposed to
fortifye in all places, and to keep garrisons: but for the intolerable charges
of the wars in these former years, he is not hable to sustain so great a
burden: Wherefore he requires them, that whilst this truse shall endure, they
would pay the money yearly to be imploid unto these uses: For this concerns
the quiet and preservation of them all. In the mean time Maximilian, the
eldest son of king Ferdinando, departinge from Auspurge, goes into Spain,
Maximilian marieth his cosen.
to take in Marriage, the Lady Mary, the Emperors eldest daughter, his cousin
Germane. The Cardinal of Trent was sent with him, and a few months before,
the Duke of Alba. At the end of May the horsemen of Nalpes, that before were
in Norgouia, come into the contrie near unto Strausburge, and there remain by
the space of three Months, and hardly can it be expressed, how arrogantly
they used them selves. Many times would they come into the City, neither
wanted that thing great suspicion. Duke Moris not long after the Emperors
decree was setforth, departs thence: But Marquis Ihon of Brandenburge, the
brother of Ioachim the electoure, goes to the Emperor, and king Ferdinando
standinge John Mark. of Brand. refuses the Interim.
by, besecheth him to favor him in this matter, and speakinge somewhat of his
service toward him, says, that he upon this affiaunce chiefly served him
in this last war, for that he had assured him touching Religion. The
Emperor shows him how this is the consent of the states imperial, and
says that no man ought to swerve from the same: he replied again, that all
had not assented, and answered him plainly that he could not with a good
conscience praise the same decree, and still urged his promise and covenant.
When the Emperor might not prevail, he commands him to depart, which men
suppose to be done for this cause, least he should through his example and
talk confirm the minds of others. Wherefore the same day toward evening, he
takes his journey homewardes, and in all his dominion altered nothing. The
Prince Electoure his brother, who endeavored always to please themperoure,
made no assistaunce: Nor yet the Paulsgraue having the Emperor at the same
time not his very good Lord. The Ambassadoures of the Cities, such as were of
the confession of Auspurge, when they were urged, did entreat, that they
might first advertise their Senates, to the intent they might answer
according unto their minds: which thing was permitted them to do. The
Emperor commanded Wuolfgange Prince of Bipount, of The co^sta^ce of the Duke
of Swebrig
the house of Palatine, which had his Ambassadors there, to come him self:
And when he came, he does instaunt him to confirm the decre. He says, he
knows none other Religion save that, in the which he was borne and brought up
in unto this day: Wherefore, he requires him, to have some consideration of
him, and says he will do herein whatsoever he may with a safe conscience. The
Emperor for that time lets him so depart, but afterward he urged him
sharply by letters and by messagers, as shall be rerited in his place. Whilst
the Senate of Auspurge consulted, the Emperor places soldiers through out
the City. There was a right famous Minister of the Church Wuolfgange
Musculus: he, saying Musculus departs to Bernes.
Godliness go to wrack, and the Senate tunorouse, and could not approve the
book, departs from thence, to Bernes in Swisserland. At Hale in Sweuia was
Ihon Brentius. He was in great danger two years past, what time, as the
protestants returned The labor and peril of Bre^tius.
home, the Emperor came unto Hale, and now was in much more danger. For then
a little before the Emperor came thither which was in the beginning of
Decembre certain Spanish souldioures, coming into the Town, went
straightwaies unto his house, and require to be let in, or else threaten much
cruelty. Which being received, did many things fierselye and arrogantlye.
Wherefore he bids his wife and his family, having none other place to repare
to, to get them into the hospital house of the City, and a little after
follows he him self, leauinge one at home to give them vitailes and things
necessary. But the next day comes a noble man of Spain, which was of the
Clergy, and thrusting them out at the doors, keeps the whole house to him
self, and going into his study, searches all things. There, when he had
found certain letters written to Brentius from his friends concerning the
trouble of this time, he seeks to procure him much displeasure, when he had
vttred the same to his Country men. Wherefore, he followinge the advice of his
friends, in a cold and sharp winter night, conueieth him self into the
country, least by his presence he should hinder his Citezens. But when the
Emperor was come thither, and showed clemency, and seemed to be nothing
offended for any kind of Doctrine taught there, Brentius at the last
returned thither, and executed his srunction unto this time, that the
Emperor would have all men to receive the decree made concerning Religion.
For being commanded as many other learned men were thorowout Germany, to
declare what he thought of that book: Albeit he understood The pleannes and god
lines of Bre^tius.
his own danger, yet, to the intent he might perform his duty to the
congregation, he pronou^ceth the same to be contrary to the Scriptures, and so
declares it by writing. Which after yt it came into the Bishops hands,
Granuellan in themperours name, comanded thambassadours of Hale, that they
should find the means, that he might be brought bounden to Auspurge. But
being admonished by his freindes, he steppeth a side into the country by: And
not long after comes to Hale a band of Spanierdes: the Captain whereof
goes immediately to the house of Brentius, and seeks every where diligently,
if he might find any pray to carry away: but the most part of his stuff was
conveyed by his friends and alies, unto another place. Thus therefore he, which
had taught there xxvi. years, was exiled: And his wife also, though she had a
grievous sickness (whereof she died shortly after) was banished withal his
family. Wherefore she His wife and his children banished.
pore wretch wandered up and down with.vi. children, and knew not where to
become, or to have any refuge, all men were so sore afraid of the Spaniardes:
And this thing augmented her disease and sorrow, that she knew not in the mean
while, what was become of her husband. But when Ulrich, Duke of Wirtemberge
hard of the misery of Brentius, all be it he him self was in great danger,
yet gave he relief secreatly to him and his family. Furthermore the Cities of
Sweuia following all for the most part the Emperoures authority, promised to
accomplish his commandment. Wherefore the preachers every where removed out of
diverse places, least they should commit any thing unworthy their profession.
Andreas Osiander Godly preachers flee.
for this cause leauinge Norinberge, went into the land of Prusse: Spire and
Woormez had but either of them one, which fled also to save them selves. William
the Earl of Nassowe, suffered Erasmus Sarcerius to depart for ye same cause:
Moreover the Duke The fearfulnes of yt duke of Wyrtemberge.
of Wirtemberge, in whose country were garrisons of Spaniardes, every where, as
has been said, when the commandment came from the Emperor, caused the Book
setforthe to be recited in the Pulpit, and commands that no man do any thing
to the contrary, and if any man will say Mass, he gives them liberty, and
charge his subjects, that they disturb no Priest, and puts away those
Ministers of the Church, which would not allow the book. Among whom was
Erardus Schueffius. The Emperor by The constancy of the duke of Saxony.
Granuellane and the bishop of Arras moved the Duke of Saxon captive to obey
the decree, and follow the doctrine of the Book setforth. And albeit they
assaid him with fair promises, and showed him some hope of deliverance, yet he
perseuered constante in his opinion. And the last year, says he, among the
conditions which the Emperor propounded, this was written also, that I
should approve the decrees that should be made by him, and by the Counsel
concerning Religion: but when he perceived that I could not be induced through
the terroure or fear of any pearill, to assent, he released the same
condition, and after that never moved any thing to me concerning religion.
Which certenlye I took than in stead of a great benefit, and being cased
hereof as of a most weighty burden, all the other conditions, which the
Emperor at his pleasure determined on my parson and all my goods. I suffered
the more easelye, and with the better will, trusting that from henceforth I
should be permitted to keep my Religion free: but now, for so much as he
urges me again, and commands me to subscribe, I do hear protest yt I was
so brought up in my youth, and after by the reading of holy scripture so
confyrmed, that I do believe this doctrine to agree thoroughly with the wrytinges
of the Prophets and Apostles, neither can it be convicted of any error. For
the which cause verelye both my father and I, and certain other Princes,
exhibited in times past a confession of the same doctrine comprised in
wrytinge, and referred it to a lawful counsel, considering therefore that God
has illuminated me with the knowledge of his word, it is not lawful for me
to forsake the truth known, unless I would purchase to my self everlasting
dampnation. Wherefore if I should now admit this decree, forasmuch as the same
does in many and most waightye He that does against his conscience, procures
to himself hell fire.
places dissent from the holy scripture, I should condemn the doctrine of
Jesus Christ, which I have professed hitherto. And in word and speech should
allow, that I know to be naught and wicked. But what thing else were this,
than with painted and glosynge words to delude the divine Majesty, and the
Emperor also? Than the which thing, what more wickedness can be committed? For
this is that same sin against the holy ghost, whereof Christ Sin against the
holy ghost
has so diligently warned us, which shall never at any time be forgeuen. And
saying it is so, and that my conscience is tied with these bonds, I most
earnestly and for the mercy of God, which he gave unto mankind through the
oblation of his son, pray and beseech, that the Emperor would not take in
displeasure this my refusal. For where as I do retain the doctrine professed
at Auspurge, I do it for my souls health, and setting all other things a
part, do imagine how after this miserable life, I may be made partaker of the
life and joy everlasting. I hear say moreover how it is reported to the
Emperor by diverse, as though I nothing regarded religion, but sought for a
vain glory, and what thing else I know not: I beseech you what thing could
happen to me in this world, more to be wished for, especially being thus gross
of body, then liberty, then to return to my wife and children, than quiet
and rest at home? And I take God to witness, and than will also, what time he
shall take an account of us all for our doings, that I respected The Dukes
godly mind.
nothing else, than that, through the true worshippinge of God I might enjoy
the inheritance of the heavenly kingdom. Which thing I heartily desire that the
Emperor would certainly believe and be fully persuaded of me. In all other
things my will has been always ready to gratify him, and ever shall be, and
the infidelity and promise which I have made him, that will I keep as
becomes a just man, and borne of noble parentage. Furthermore I beseech him
to remit all displeasure, and at the length to deliver me from this continual
captivity. That I be not reported the first of all other Princes that should
lead his life with him prisoner. Where he perseuered thus constant and
immouable, they began to handle him somewhat more hardly, and took from him his
books of Scripture Cruelty showed to D. of Sax. Prisoner.
and was commanded on days forbidden to abstain from flesh: The same
preacher also, whom by the Emperors license he kept until this time, when he
saw present danger hanginge over his head, he changed his apparel, and
conveyed him self away privily. At the same time came abroad out of the
Emperoures court letters which the Lantzgraue was said to have written to the
Emperor. In those he says, he has commanded his wife and cou^selloures,
that they should fulfill all the reast of the conditions, and satisfy such as
complain for the war past: Again he says, how he has the book written
of Religion: And albeit there be many things which he does not well
understand, and the which he cannot affirm by the scriptures, yet, for so much
as they ground their things of antiquity, and authority of holy fathers, he
will not make him self wiser then they, and does both allow that writing, and
will devise also, that his subjects shall observe the same. After this he
offers him his faith and service, whether he shall war with the Turk, or
with the Bishop of Rome, or any forain kings, or with the Swishes, or else will
use him in Germany: but he besecheth him for the love of Christ and all
saints, that he would lay away all displeafure, and set him at liberty: For
now has he been deteyned prisoner a whole year, and suffered punishmente
inoughe, and is brought to extreme misery. Moreover, for a further assurance
he will give his two sons pledges, until he be fullye satisfied. And
whatsoever way he shall prescribe, that will he be ready to accomplish. But he
prevailed nothing for all these prayers, and was oftentimes by his kepers,
which were Spaniardes, removed from place to place, first from Donauerde to
Norling. Than to Hailbrune, after Whilst the Mass is set up in germanye, it
is put down in england. Thobstinat mind of winchester.
to Hale in Sweuia. Whilst the Emperor attempteth these things in Germany,
the Mass is abrogated in England by act of Parlaiment. And not long after
was apprehended Stephen, Bishop of Winchester, who contended that the laws
which were made in the kings noonage, were of none effect. He was commanded
the year before to keep his own house, and not to come abroad: but being newlye
enlarged, when he was thought to have thaimged his opinion, he made a Sermon
before the king and his counsel, in the which when he had declared his mind,
he was committed to ward.

The Emperor the. xiiii day of June commands to be red unto the Clergy
the form of reformation, as they call it. In the The Ecclesiastical
reformation of the Emperor.
which were contained these Chapiters following, of ordeininge of the offices
of the ecclesiastical state, of Monasteries, of schools, of hospital houses,
of the ministration of Gods word, of the ministration of the Sacraments, of
the Ceremonies of the Mass, of the Ceremonies of the Church, of the
discipline of the Cleargye and laietie, of the Plurality of benefices, of
visitations, of Saints, of excommunication. And among other things are
these setfor the chiefly, that such as come to take holy orders be diligently
examined of their belief, of manners, and learning, but especially of heresies
spread abroad chiefly in this time, and whether they believe the same that the
catholic, apostolic, and Church of Rome does believe: The inquisition of
manners is commanded to be made, as s. Paul prescribes in the third chapter
of the first Epistle to Timothe but that same, which Paul among other
things admonishes, that the minister of the Church should be the husband of
one wife, which could well govern his house, and had obedient and faithful
children, is clean omitted: That no man be admitted to the office of a Bishop,
except he be first Priest, or promise to receive the reast of the orders so
shortly as is possible: That Bishops take cure of their sheep, and feed them
with doctrine and with the sacraments: That they also visit often their
Churches, and ouersee that other Ministers do their duty, that the wolves do
not wortye the flock: That the monastical life be instituted again, in
places where it is left: That in schools be nothing taught, except it be
agreeable to the Catholic Church: That the Sacraments and Ceremonies of the
Church be ministered in the Latin tongue, least if the people understand them,
they should come in contempt: That the Canon of the Mass remain whole, and
be spoken softlye, to the intent those tremblable mysteries may retain their
ancient dignitye: That in accustomed Ceremonies nothing be aultered: The
tre^blable mysteries of ye Mass.
that Salt, Water, Herbs, the Paschall Lamb, new fruits, also Temples,
Churches, Chapels, Chalices, Aultares, Coopes, Uestmentes and Uessels
belonginge to the Church be hallowed through Prayer against the deceites of
the Devil, and inchantmentes: That Tapers shall burn in the Church, and
Incense be sacrificed.

Moreover that supplications be made at the Churches dedicated to Saints: let
the Cleargye live temperatelye and sobrely, and eschew whoredom: let them put
away their Concubines, or else be punished: That the civil Magistrate shall
assiste the Bishops, that a reformation be made of manners and Discipline.
And that the Ecclesiastical liberties may be wholye maintained, let the
Saints in every diocese be put in ure again, and kept twice every year,
wherein shall inquisition be made of every man's manners and vices, such as
may not otherwise be reformed Excommunication.
shall be excommunicated: let al men flee their speech and company, and not to
be received again into the Communion, before they humbly desire forgiveness,
and promise amendment. This reformation being red the day before said, the
Bishops after a little deliberation, do confirm, and say that shortly
after they be come home, they will keep Saines: how be it in diverse things,
they desire that the Bishop of Rome may be moved to give his assente. This
book also was after put forth in Printe. I showed you before of the
Ambassadoures of the Cities, how they signified the matter home: but whereas
they of Strausburge, which were the chiefest of them, were long or ever, they
answered. The Emperor calls upon them by Granuellan: who the.xxviii. day
of June sends for the ambassadoures, whereof James Sturmie Menes made that
Strausburge should receive thinterim.
was the principal, and there by Henry Hasy, which was interpretoure, says:
how they know in what sort the states requested the Emperor, and put him
in trust to devise some mean which might be observed till the Counsel:
which thing he has done accordinglye, and has caused learned men to
compile a Book, which all the Princes, a few excepted, and the chiefest Cities
have approved: And whereas they and certain others entreated themperoure that
they might advertise their Senate at home, he granted them, and has looked
ever sense for an answer. And that he has heard nothing hitherto, he is
somewhat offended, and therefore has commanded him to know what their
meaning is. They, when they had declared the cause of their long scilence
exhibit Their aunsweare.
letters addressed to the Emperor from the Senate. How they wished for
nothing more, than that they might gratify him in all things: but they and
their Citezens were persuaded, that in case they should thoroughly admit this
decre they should both hurt their own conscience, and also osfe^d God most
grievously: and seeing he of his wisdom can consider, how terrible a thing that
were, they desire him for Christ's sake, that in so waightye a matter, which
concerns not lands or goods, but the salvation of their souls and life
everlasting, he would have some consideration of the^, and as he has done to
others of the contrary part, so he would permit also that they might use the
Religion confessed at Auspurge, until the decree of the general counsel as
often times in assembles has been determined, and not compel them to profess
otherwise with their mouth, than their heart thincketh: and they will again
foresee, that in their City be nothing done irreverently or against Religion,
and that evil opinions take no place. And that no cause of complaint be given
to their neighbors, When Granuella^ had heard these letters, he says, how
the Emperor has had alwais a good opinion of their City: and for as much as
all for the most part have commended and ratified the decree made, let them
not think to be exempted. For they are commanded to admit no such kind
of answer: therefore is this Supplication in vaiue: wherefore let them
answer plainly what the mind of the Senate is. Hereunto they say: where
the matter was committed to the Emperor, that did they and the other
ambassadors understand evermore of Politic matters, and not of Religion, for
that they supposed, it to be always referred to the counsel, that there both
parts being heard, the determination might be made: but in this book are
determined in a manner all articles of religion: whithe if they should now
admit, without any due examination before had, or the learned men of their part
heard speak, than should they be no longer in controversy, neither neade they
the authority of the counsel: and where diverse Princes and states have allowed
the decree made, it is no marvel: for the same is for their commoditye: for
those have al things permitted them safe and whole, but they have Uyolence is
not to be used in religion, but reason and truth.
a form of religion prescribed them, and are commanded to forsake those
opinions, which have been ever in controversy, the matter never heard: where
notwithstanding in all assemblies, yt whole cause has been referred to a
general counsel: For certainlye to compel any man that he should do any thing
against his conscience is a heavy matter, yea though he be in error, before it
be detected: They suppose that there be many good men on both parties, which yet
notwithstanding may differ in opinion and judgment: against whom no force is
to be used, but the matter to be decided by reason, truth, and arguments:
Wherefore consideringe that in all other things, which do not concern
Religion, they commit unto the Emperor whatsoever they have, they desire him:
that he would prefer unto him this one suite of the Senate: They know, how
great the Emperoures power is, and what danger they take up on them in case
he will attempt to try the matter by force: wherefore unless they were
parswaded, that God would be greuouslye offended with the confirmation of this
decree, it were stark madness, if they should not obey him herein. There
Granuellan, when he had repeted their former sayings, affirms, how they, at
what time they were reconciled to the Emperor, promised to observe such
things as he should enacte for the wealth of the Empire: of the which sort is
this decre made by the advice of learned men, and by the most part approved,
therefore may it not be refused, forso much as it agrees and consents with
the Church: and will they take so much upon them, that they should think to
se more than the whole Church does? And should make a departure from the
reast? They ought not to have altered Religion, but by the common consent of
the whole world: wherefore if they have none other commission, let them know of
their Senate, whether they will obey or no? Where they say, how they understood
it only of Politic government, when the cause was committed to the Emperor,
it skilleth not how they understood it, but how the most part of the states
took the thing. Again they say, how they and such other like Ambassadors,
were estranged and excluded in manner from all consultation, neither were they
called to counsel tha^, what time this cause was referred to the Emperor:
wherefore they did not otherwise take it, than before is said: yea and certain
Princes also took it after the same sort: what time they made their peace with
the Emperor, they took upon them no obseruaunce, for that they feared least
the same should in fine be applied unto religion: which thing is not unknown
to his son, the bishop of Arras, who then also in the Emperoures name
promised, that the whole cause of religion should be referred to a lawful
Counsel: but where he says how this decree must be received as a common act
of the Empire, they do refuse no burden of the common wealth, but this
present No man ought to be compelled to his faith.
cause do the concern their souls health, and life everlasting: and again,
the whole burden of the decre should reast upon the godly people for the other
multitude, which contempne religion, cares nothing, what be ordained: but no
man ought to be constrained to embrace his faith: they put no doubt in the
Emperor, but he loves peace and concord: yet nevertheless, if this way be
taken, that men shall be compelled against their conscience to speak and do,
it is much to be feared, least so sudden an aulteration do raise up great
commotions. That book was in deed compiled of certain learned men, of whom some
had the knowledge of the truth: for the same does well appear: but certain
others have intermixed many things, which are not consonante to the scriptures
and doctrine of the fathers, as it is to be proved, if place were permitted to
speak it: They have made no separation from others, but in the chiefest
articles do agree with the true Church: wherefore they desire him again, that
the letters might be delivered to the Emperor, to the intent they might so
advertise the Senate: For other thing have not they in commission to say. Than
began he to speak more angerly and urged them with the decree, and made a
digression to other things, and said how the nobles in France made their
boaste, that they of Strausburge would not admit the decre: which thing was
reported to the Emperor, and raised some suspicion the conclusion was, that
he said how the Emperor required a plain and direct answer: and that no
man is in deed to be enforced unto any faith: but that is to be understand of
such as are no Christians: for those that do deny the faith, which they once
professed, may be compelled to it by the fire. Whereunto the ambassadoures
answer, what brute the Frenchmen have raised they know not, but certain they
are, that the Senate has as yet made no decree, nor any thing else done, than
this same which they now do solicit: seeing therefore they refuse to deliver
their letters to the Emperor, they will no further entreat them, but make
report to the Senate: by fire may a man be taken out of this life, but can not
be compelled thereby to believe otherwise: and thus ended their talk. They had
treated with the Ambassadors of other cities seuerallye in sort much like, and
menaced them with threatninges, and assigned a day, by the which they should
make answer, and commanded to tarry till they had answer, brought them
from home, but no such thing was prescribed to the Ambassadoures of
Strausburge. Touching the monye which the Emperor required to be levied for
chances to come, the states, though much against their wills, approved and
promised also king Fernando every year duringe the truse, an hondreth
thousand crowns: but they desire the Emperor again, that he would take
away his Garrisons, and discharge his Soldiers, which were placed over all
Germanye, and did much hurt both in town and country, and releue the pore that
complained much thereof, especially since all thing is now quiet and peaceable.

The Emperor says there be urgent causes wherefore he can not at this time
discharge his forces: and concerning the hurt done The Emperor will not
discharg hy^ souldioures.
there is none to his knowledge: for seeing he does pay them, it is aagainste
reason, and his will also, that they should do any man wrong: such like
thing has been reported to him heretofore, but when inquisition was made,
there could nothing in a manner be found: Nevertheless he will do what he
can to know the certaintye: For no man shall escape unpunished, that has
ought offended. At this time also the states do grant that the Emperor may
at his pleasure constitute the judgment of the Chamber, and join unto them
other judges for assistaunce. And they them selves promise to bear the charges
of the same. Of the treatye begone concerning a league before said, the
winedinge up was this, that the Emperoures provinces, which he has in
Germanye and low Dutchlande, and all that belong to the house of Burgundy,
should be under the tuition and defense of the Empire, and be contributaries
unto public affairs, yet so, as they may use their own laws and
jurisdiction: And that Germanye shall again look for the like aid and
defense of the Emperoures Provinces.

The.xxi. Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the syfte.
The Argument of the.xxi. Book.
THe authoures of the Interim are rewarded, which nevertheless many impugned,
whereof the Duke of Saxon is accused. They of Constance were so urged to admit
the Interim that ambushes of fotemen were laid to surprise the City, which
at the last receweth the Interim. They of Strausboroughe make their purgation
to the Emperor. A commotion chaunseth at Bourdeux. The despair of Spiera is
recited, and the conversion of Uergerius. The Scottishe Queen transported into
France. Maydenbourge is setforth for a pray. The Admiral of England is
beheaded, they at Strausboroughe are at contention with their Bishop. They of
Wittemberge are accused to be Adiphoristes, to wit, indifferent or newters. A
disputation in England touching the Lords Supper. Ueruine is beheaded in
France. Pursuit against them of Maidenburge, the death of Pope Paul, and the
horrible acts of the same. The description of the place of election at Rome,
and the manner of chusinge the Pope. Mass again at Strausborough, a
proclamation in in France against Lutheranes. Pope Julius and his little
Cardinal.

THe last day of June the conuention was dissolved. In the. xix book I showed
you how the Emperor persuaded all men, to submit them selves to the Counsel,
and that on his warrantise, who would se that thaction should be lawful: Now
therefore a decre is made, that the counsel should be continued at Tre^t, and
the Emperor says, he will devise, that it be there recomme^ced so shortly as
may be. Which thing wha^ it shall be brought to pass, he requires that they
all, especially of the clergy, and of the religion of Protestants, which come
thither under his saufeconduit: for he will take order, than the (...)promise
(...)sawefull counsel repeted.
whole matter shall be godly and christenly decided and determined, according to
the holy scriptures and doctrine of the fathers, all affections laid apart, and
that they the^ selves also shall be hard speak so much as shall be thought
requisite. After, are other decrees red, as is accustomed, especially that of
religion, and a strait charge given, that al men obey the same, as was also
before declared at the Ides of May, the.iii. authors of the book are before
named: of who^ Iho^ Islebie received for his pains taken a liberal reward
both of the Islebi rewarded of themperoure.
Emperor, and also of king Ferdinando: And Michel Sidonie afterward was made
bishop of Merseburge in Saxony. Whereof arose a jest, how they defended the
bishop of Romes oil and chresme, as an holy thing, and necessary to salvation,
to the intent they them selves might thereby be the better gresed and auoynted.
Not long after the Emperor sent his letters to the princes that were absent,
especially unto those, where he thought most need was, and commands them
immediately to obey this decre. And the tenth day of July he writes to Erasmus,
bishop of Strausburge to see the thing which he had brought to pass through
his great travel put in execution, and if he wanted convenient ministers, to
take them else where. The report of this decree was incontinentlye spread abroad
far and wide. And the Uenetians make proclamation the.xix. day of The decre
of the Uenetians.
July, that whosoever have any books, wherein is any thing written against the
catholic faith, they bring them unto certain men within.viii. days: for
after shall inquisition be made, and such as have deserved, shall be punished:
and to the promotours they promise a reward and to keep their counsel. The
Bishop of Rome has his ambassadors there continually, as in kings courts
also: They with the eyes and ears of many do se and hear much, and
oftentimes are causes that such decrees be made: but yet the Senate of Uenise
uses this provision, that they suffer not the Bishops or inquisitors The
wisdo^e of the Uenetians in matters of religion.
of Rome to give sentence of judgment, but join with them always their
officers and lawyers which shall hear the examination and se that nothing be
done malitiouslye or cruellye against any man within their jurisdiction. This
law made they in the year of our Lord.M.D.xxi. what time those inquisitours
used great cruelty against pore men in the country about Brixia, as though
they had been inchauntors, and had meddled with the devil: and now sense Luthers
doctrine was depely roted and spread abroad, the same law is of force still,
though the bishops gnashe their tethe at it, and would never so fain have it
abolished. About this time did the French King send aid into Scotland against
the English men, and among others the Ringraue with a force of Germans. But
the Emperor banisheth the Earl of Bichlinge, Huberte, and Sebastiane
Scherteline al in one writing, and shortly after Who were out lawed by the
emperor.
the Ringraue, count Hedecke, Recrode, and Riseberge, and also desires all
foreine Princes, that they would not maintain them, but gratify him herein,
and bids them when occasion shall serve, to look for the like at his hand.
The Lady Jane, daughter to the King of Nauerre, which was affianced and
Married.vii. years before Daughter of Navarre married to the Duke of Ua^dome.
to the Duke of Cleave, as we have specified, is now joined in Marriage with the
Duke of Uandome, a Prince of the blood royal. Elenor the French Queen, sister
to the Emperor, leaving France, goes into Flaunders. Duke de Ammalle son to
the Duke of Guyse, when he had been a long suter to the Emperoures Nece the
Duchess of Lorayne, he marieth the Daughter of Hercules, Duke of Farrare.

About this time, Jews Auila, a Spaniard, setforth in print the history of the
Germane war, done by the Emperor, written The story of Jews Auila, of the
germains war.
in the vulgar tongue: where he speaks of the taking of Marquis Alberte at
Rochlice, he says how he was so entangled with the wantounesse of women, that
he could not prosper. The same book came forth afterward in Italian, Latin
and French. Although the Emperor had most straightlye commanded, that no
man should in any wise impugn the book set forth concerning Who impugned the
Interim.
Religion, yet were diverse wrytinges published, which did condemn the whole
Doctrine thereof, and warned meune to beware and eschew the same as a most
present Pestilence. One of these was Caspar Aquila, chief minister of the
Church of Saluelde in Thuringie. Thoccasion why he wrote, was Islebie, who
retourning home from Auspurge, gloried much in the book by the way, and said
there was now a golden world toward, and that Aquila had also assented: After
he heard of this, he answers most vehementlye, and reproves him for his
liynge, and affirms the book to be full of erroneous opinions.

And in France also Robert, bishop of Abrincen wrote against Robert of
Abrince^ wrote against thiuterim.
it, how be it after a contrary sort, and chieflye dispiseth the book, for so
much as it permits Priests to marrye, and the common people to receive the
whole Supper of the Lord, and so takes occasion to inuey against Bucer with
most opprobrious words, for maryinge his second wife. Moreover one Romeus
general of the Austen Friars at Rome wrote against it for the same purpose.
Thus does the book incur reprehension on every side. The Emperor sent an
ambassador to them of Norinberge, and to certain others to persuade them unto
this decre. When he came by the way The godly constancy of the Duke of Saxons
children.
to the duke of Saxons sons, he moved them hereunto, but they constantly
denied it: wherefore at his return to the emperor, he declares the whole
matter: whereupon the emperor solliciteth again the Duke their father prisoner,
and complains of his sons how they contemn the decre lately made, and
suffer men to speak against it both in their preachings and wrytinges: he
requires therefore that he would treat with them, to content him in either
thing. Whereunto he makes answer, how he lately declared the cause, why he
him self could not allow the doctrine of the book setforthe to Granuellan and
the bishop of Arras: wherefore he can not persuade his sons to do that thing
which he him self can not with a quiet conscience: he besecheth him to take it
in good part, and defend both him and his children. This constancy of his, and
magnanimiti in so great adversity The duke of Saxon beloloued of almen.
got him great love every where amo^gs al men. Like as in Saxony they of Breme
and Maidenburge, so also in high Germanye only they of Constance, borderynge
upon the Swisses. were not yet reconciled to themperor: but at the last
obtaining a saufco^duit they send ambassadors to Auspurge to treat a peace.
Themperor propounds They of Co^stance write to the Emperor.
right hard conditions, and amo^gs other things also, that they should admit the
book setforth, and after that to frame their religion. Thambassadors require to
have the conditions mitigated: but that was in vain, and are commanded to make
answer by a certain day. That known the Senate writing their humble letters ye
xiii. day of July, do beseech him, yt they be not constrained to do any thing
against their souls health, and their own conscience: how they se their own
danger, and are in a great parplexitie: for unless they do obey, they stand
in pearill to lose both life and goods: but if they should follow his appetite,
they must abide the vengaunce and judgment of God. Wherefore let him spare
them, and put not them pore wretches to so great an extremity, especially
saying they have no more offended than others, and have for thempire, and for
the house of Austrich, suffered in time past exceeding great misery, and now do
refuse no charge that ca^ and ought of them to be performed: and although their
treasure is very small, and their substance not great, yet will they give for
amends.viii. M. crowns, and.iiii. great pieces of ordenaunce: but they
beseech him, to permit the same Religion, which they have kept now these.xx.
years, until the decre of a lawful counsel, and unpose no heavier burden to
the City, than it is hable to bear. Their bishop, Ihon Wesel, who was also
called Archbishop of Londen, as is mentioned in the.xii. book, had threatened
the^ sore at Auspurge, after the Emperors book was setforthe: but within a few
days he died of the same disease, that he prayed might fall upon them, yt is of
a sode^ palsy. Where they say, how they have sustained great damage for the
love of the house of Austrich, thus it stands. The Emperor Maximilian, by
the aid of the Sweuical league, whereof we have spoken in the fourth book, made
war with the Maximilian warred against the Swisses.
Swisses: wherefore the City of Constance, being than of the same league, and
lies next them received much displesure. The Swisses were aided by them of
Rhoetia, of Seon, and Sa^maurice which were lately made their fellows, and
also by the French King Jews the.xii. At the length by the intercession of
Jews Sfortia Duke of Millan, the matter was pacified about the year of our
Lord a thousand and five hundredth. Maximilian had in Marriage Mary Blancke the
sister of Sfortia.

Themperor, the third day of August, calls before him the consuls, and all
the Senate of Auspurge, and diverse others of ye chiefest Citezens, and by
Seldus the Ciuilian, speaking much of the good will and zele that he and his
progenitors have borne to them, he says their commonwealth has now these many
years been evil and seditiously governed, the cause whereof has been, that men
of none experience and crafts me^, for nothing les mete the^ to have
government, have been chosen senators: wherefore he, who bears good will to
their city, to the intent this evil may be remedied, displaceth them al not for
any reproach unto them, but for the common welthes sake. After he commands
their names to be red, who^ he has appointed The Emperor makes new
Senatoures.
senators, of the which no^bre were the Welsers, Relingers, Bu^tgarners,
Fuggers, Pe^tingers: who^ he binds after by an oath, and assigns unto every
of the^ his office and function, and commands the^ straightly yt they love the
common wealth, obei the decre of religion, and be unto him obedient. He does
also abrogate al fraternities, and commands under pain of death, yt from
henceforth there be no conue^ticles or asse^bles He abrogateth fraternities.
made. And commands yt al wrytings of gildes and fraternities, of privileges
and fredo^, be immediately delivered to the new Senate, and commands this
state of public weal to be proclaimed by an officer of arms, and gives
charge under pain of death, yt no man do impugn the same. The Senate gives
him thanks, and promises al due obeisa^ce. In the mean while yt these things
were in doing, all the gates were shut, and the soldiers set to ward. There
had been a long suit many years between the Lantzgraue, and William the Earl of
Nassow, for the lordship of Chats: which now at the length themperor in these
days decided, giving sentence against the Lantzgraue. The.v. day of this
month, the emperor answers thambassadours of the City of Constance by the
bishop of Arras, and sends them away without their purpose, and because he
sees them so little careful for peace, he says, how he will devise an other
way. The same day the Spaniardes, which we said went into Spanyardes go to
co^sta^ce.
those parties to the nombre of three thousand fotemen, go strait to Constance.
And departing from Uberlinge, part of them pass through the woods, to the
intent at the spring of the day, what time they knew the people were in the
Church at the Sermon: they might invade the City, part again remained in the
woods, lokinge for the opportunity of time. And it fortuned, that.iii. watchmen
of the Town, hearing an noise in the wode by, as they went further to see what
the matter was, chanced into their hands.

Whom the Spaniardes took, and manacing them with death, if they made any
sign or token, lead them away with them.

After they couche them selves in a piece of ground, by the lake side very
closelye: yet were they espied, and the watch men that then were in the
Suburbs beyond the Rhine, give knowledge to their Captain, that there was
some ambush laid. He immediately signifies the same to the consul: this was
at.ii. a clock after midnight. The consul by and by calls the Senate, and
commands al me^ to arm them selves, though no man knew what the matter was.
In the break of the day, the Spaniards by little and little do appear, yet but
few, to know what nombre of watchmen there were. There again the captain of
the watch signifies to the consul, that he provide in time: for when there is
danger at hand. Wherefore yt matter was debated, about four of the clock were
sent out of the City about two hondreth Citezens into the Suburbs. After
they were come forth, and found in manner nothing, they begin somewhat to
slack: but behold when it was now day light, the Spaniardes with their
ordenaunce beat down a timber wall, that divided their ditche in the mids,
and by the same ditch being than almost dry, assault thick and fiersly the
watchmen of the town: straightway also those which we said remained in the
woods, showed them Constance assalted.
selves in like case, and by great force and violence break open one of the
gates, but the Citezens fought most valeauntly, and shoting of their
ordenaunce, slew their Captain, Alpho^se Uiues, by and by at the first
incountre. But when they were scarsely able to with stand the force of so great
a multitude, by little and little they retire and on the bridge over the Rhine
they fought a long time, and hardlye at the last were received again into
the City: and where the ennemies battered the gate sore. They discharged at
them the great pieces of the walls, and from over the gates, and slew many:
whom they by and by tomble of the bridge into the Rhine and when they saw how
their labor was in vain, they recule back into the Suburbs, and set the
Bridge end on fire, to the end the Towns men should make no salt out.
After, when they had fulfilled their filthy lust, they gather on a heap the
dead carcases of their fellows, and burn them and the suburbs together, that
no man should understand how many were slain, of the towns men were killed
about an hondreth. When the alarm was given at Constance, as the manner is,
the Swisses that were near neighbors, came in their armure to healpe them,
but the governor of their Country, who at that time was of Lucerna, called
them back under a great penaltye, for hatred he bare to Religion. How the
Ambassadoures of Strausburge reasoned the matter with Granuellan, it is before
declared: at their return home after thasse^ble, they report the whole matter
to the Senate. After deliberation, the Senate writing their letters to
themperor in French, for that he The Emperor delited in the French tongue.
most deliteth in that tongue, our ambassadors, say they, retourning lately from
the co^uentio^, have declared unto us what has been done. And had sent us the
book written of religion long before. Their desire was, most puissant Emperor,
before they departed from Auspurge, to have exhibited to your highness a
supplication in writing: but the same would not Granuellan receive: for the
which cause we write unto you at this present. And first certe^ly we desire
nothing The letters of strausburg to the Emperor.
in the world more, the^ to gratify you in all things: but touching the decre
of religion, thus it stands, calling unto us the deuines of our city, we have
perused it over, right diligently: and albeit there be things in it, which do
not utterly dissent from the holy scriptures, yet in as much as they are so
written, yt in many things a furcher declaration is required, it should be very
hard for us and troublesome so to receive the^. For we are most thoroughly
persuaded, that our doctrine and ceremonies are agreeable unto gods word, nether
ca^ we without gods displesure and hurt of our conscience forsake or alter ye
same, before it be duly examined, and our men also heard. For this has been
the custom since the beginning of the primitive church, that such doutful
matters as are in co^trouersy, should always be discussed by lawful counsels.
This way also seemed evermore best in all conuentious of the Empire, that the
whole matter should be permitted to a Godly Counsel. Wherefore we beseech
you of all loves, and for the blood of Christ that was shed for us, that
the decrees of the^pire may take place in this thing, and that we may keep
this religion, until the thing be determined by thautority of a lawful counsel.
For there can no better way be found nor more profitable to establish peace, or
longer to endure, but in case you shall refuse this our request, and require of
us obedience herein, we desire you most earnestly, yt our deuines may first be
hard, to the intent they may declare in what places we do judge ye same decre to
swerve from the holy scripture, which if they may be permitted to do, we trust
assuredly yt both you shall understand thequity of our cause, and will mitigate
ye same decre. Certainly we do nothing frowardly or obstinatly, but yt fear of
God and consideration of our souls health moves us thus to entreat you. For in all other things we shall so demene our selves, yt you may rightwel understand,
in how great estimation we have your most excellent majesty. with these
letters, and with further co^missio^ was Jews Grempie a ciuilian sent to
the emperor: But he makes him such like answer as he does to others, and says
there can be none other thing determined: nether is now time to stand in
question, and that in the counsel they shall be hard sufficiently. Wherefore he
gives commandment, yt within a month, they show plainly their minds. After
the way before mentioned took no place, themperor in letters published, does
outlaw them of Constance. There began much business in the city: for the
remembrance of the late danger, and thexpectation of the misery to come
troubled the^ excedingly, especially since there appeared no man's help nor
succor. There were diverse also of the citizens which with their lewd talcke did
heap on all these matters: the Senate therefore constrained through their
opportunity, entreats certain Princes, and also the Swisses by letters, to be
means for them to the Emperor. The Swisses therefore immediatlye call
assembles, and agree to it: but those that are of the Romish religion promise
under this condition, if they shall receive the decree of the Empire lately
made concerning Religion, and admit again the Clergy into the City.
Wherefore when the Citezens did sore urge it, the Senate does publish the same
decre: after they go to it by voices, and they prevailed, which said it was to
be received, For they all cried out they were utterly undone, in case they
should longer remain in that state: and that themperors power was exceading
great and almost infinite, which they were never hable to resist. When this
ordinance was made by the people, the Senate aduertiseth the Swisses what was
done. They send ambassadors to the Emperor, to feel his mind, whether he
could be conte to suffer an intercession: and also entreat him to use them
with mercy. The Emperor made them such answer as they might easelye
perceive, that he liked not their suit. For he said he maruailed greatly that
they would do any thing for such as were outlawed. Wherefore many within the
City, that misliked the alteration of Religion, got them unto other places,
among the which was Ambrose Blaurer the chiefest minister of the church
there. The Lindauians which dwell over against Constance on the other Ambrose
Blaurer.
side of the Lake, had answered the Emperor before right stoutly: but now
being afraid, by the example of their neighbors, they receive the decree also.
When the Ambassadoure of Strausburge was returned home from Auspurge, and had
informed the Senate of themperors commandment. There was called a great court,
as they term it, which is never wont to be done, but in matters of great
difficulty and most weighty importance. They be in number. iii C.xx. of every
tribe. When they gave their suffrages, yt most part thought mete to stand to it
stoutly, and not to receive the decre: after a few days, they consult again:
there their voices were somewhat abated, and permitted to certain chosen
Senators that At Strausburge they co^sult of the Interim.
they should devise the best way for the commonwealth. The horsemen of Naples,
were not far from the City, as before is said: And where themperor at the same
time departed from Auspurge, it was thought verily yt he would have come to
Strausburge, and that was a terror to many men yt chanced lately at Constance,
wherefore very many both gentlemen, Merchants, and diverse others, fearinge to
lose their substance, and loath to displease themperor, when they had in ye
Senate house renou^ced their fredome of the city, went to dwell else where, not
without the reprehension of many. The Emperor removing from Auspurge, and
leaving there a garrison, for the alteration of religion and state of the
common wealth, marched with the rest of his force to Ulme. When he was come
thither, he displaceth the Senators and ordeyneth new, and commands the
ministers of the church to prison, amongst the which was Martin Frecht, for
that they refused the decree of Religion. The Senate being wholly addicted to
The Emperor, receives the decree. During the conuentio^ at Auspurg, at the
request of Granuellan, they had desired Frecht to repare to Auspurg, and help
forward the cause of Religion, and to be either with Plugius, Sidonie, or with
Islebie. Who, for that he suspected ye matter, and that no man of other cities
was there of his vocation, refused it. Being after commanded to declare his
mind what he thought of the decre made: he comprised the same in writing. And
now when the emperor was come to Ulme, ye Senate calls for him and the other
ministers of ye church, and asks their opinion. They answer as before, and
show what thing in the decree The consta^cie of the Ministers.
they like and what they mislike. Being demanded, where the preachers of
Auspurge have received the same by an oath, and yet nevertheless preach the
Gospel, why they can not do likewise? They say, how they neither know what
they have done, neither is it their part to render an account of other men's
doings. They verily at the first, what time they were admitted to this
vocation did promise by their fidelity, to preach the doctrine of the Gospel
purely and syncerely, without the traditions of men. If the Senate now do
mislyke that way, they require them, to release the^ of their oath. Being
commanded to go home, at after none they are called for again. There certain
chosen men of the Senate say unto them, the Emperor this day does arreste you
prisoners, and you shall forthwith be carried to his palace. God strengthen you
with his spirit. They for as much as it pleases God so, say, they will
refuse no peril, and pray for them again. Thus departing out of the Senate
house, they were led by Sergeauntes to the court, thynkyng that they should
have come before the Emperor. After long expectation, and great resort of
people, they were carried to a Senators house called George Besser, where
Granuellan and the Bishop of Arras lodged. At the last, being let in, after
long debate, when Granuellan did instaunte them to obey ye Emperors decree:
and they declared why they might not so do, they were taken up with sharp
rebukes. After, the residue were commanded out, and to go a little aside, and
tha^ they assay Frecht with gentle But where he perseuered still in his opinion,
they treat also with the rest severally. Of the which four remained
constant, two revolted. With Granuellan and the bishop of Arras, were also
Pasius and Seldus. Immediately they were fettered in chains and carried to the
common Geale with Spaniardes and German soldiers, over whom John the Earl
of Nassow was captain. And as they passed by Freights house, his brother George
chanced to look out at the wyndowe, and being desired of him to look Freight
carried to pryso^ with others
well to his wife and his family, he prays God to strengthen him and his
fellows, and bids them be of good comfort, for the which saying he was
also carried to prison. This was the.xvi. day of August. Thus being detained
four days, the fifth day, wha^ the emperor went thence, being fast bond in
chains, they were carried in carts to Kirchene, and guarded with.CC. Spaniardes.
There when they had remained by the space of eight days under Altestege
Captain of Germans, they were committed to ye custody of Madronio a captain
of Spaniardes. From Ulme came the emperor to Spire, at thend of the month of
August. Whilst he was there, came one from him to Strasburg, to fetch away yt
xii. great pieces which they had promised to give him yt year before. The day
before the kalendes of September, the bishop of Rome, at the request of
the emperor, sends into Germany three bishops, of Fane, Uerone, and Ferento.
What their co^missio^ was, shall be declared in their place. The Emperor making no
long abode at Spire, when he came to Mentz, he went down the river of Rhine
into low ducheland, and leads away captive the Duke of Saxon, and the
La^tgraue, who was lately brought thither from Hale in Sueuia, wha^ his wife
had eftsoon ben an humble The Duke of Saxon and the La^tgraue led away
prisoners.
suter for him, and put them in suerall boats. There is by the River of Rhine
a town of the Lantgraues, called Sanguner, and a Castle set upon the top of
a stepe hyl. When the Emperor came hither, he was benighted and rode at
Ancker, and setting a land the watchemen only, commands all the rest to
remain within board. The Senathe of Strasburge was commanded as is said
before to answer within a month. When the emperor therefore was come to Spire,
Ambassadors were sent unto him the second day of September. James Sturmius,
Matthew Giger, and Lewys Grempe. Finding him not at Spire, followed after unto
Mentz. And what time they had given knowledge to the emperor of their coming,
and ye Germain cou^sellours were out of the way, which served The^pe. in those
affairs, they were bid follow to Collo^. In yt mean time yt bishop of
Strasburg, se^ding letters to yt clergy wtin the city, yt of September,
wills them to obey the decree of thempyre, and ordeyne the thing after the
form prescribed. And with all sends themperours letters touching the same
matter, which I said were written the tenth day of July. Moreover, he writes
to the Senate also, that they would not impeche them. Thambassadours of
Strasburg after they were come to Collon ye. viii day of September, exhibit to
the emperor, from the Senate, an other epistle written in French, of this
importance. Al be Letters of Strasburgh to Themp.
it, most triumphant Emperor, what time we were reconciled unto you. We made
no promise to observe such things as should be decreed. Albeit we never assented
that the cause of Religion should be handled on this wise, yet, in all things
yt we possible may, we are ready to gratify your Majesty not only in civil,
but also in divine matters. We perceive well enough that your highness and the
rest of the Princes will have no consideration of our doings, and that it is
reason, that we should follow your fotesteppes. Yet this notwithstanding, we
beseech you eftsoon to consider, that for so much as every man must render
unto God an account of his own doing, we have just cause to be careful for our
salvation, and to forsee, yt we do nothing at any time against our conscience,
for which cause also we were in very good hope that after you had heard our
divines, you would have mitigated the decree. But considering that you refer
us to the counsel, and say how the matter shall there be debated according unto
holy scripture, we are thus contented. And least we should seem contentious or
obstinate do not refuse, but that the Bishop of Strasburge recitueth yt Interim.
our city may set forth that order of yours in certain churches with us, by men
of his faculty. And we shall devise with him for the churches, neither will we
disturb him in any thing, neither for bid the citezens to repare thither, but
yt it may be fre for every man to follow such religion as he shall think good
him self, yet under this condition, yt we may have again a few churches in ye
which Gods word may be purely taught, and the sacraments ministered, as it is
dece^t, and that in ye vulgar tongue. We will provide also yt the people shall be
kept in order, and that nothing be otherwise done than is semely. Again we
shall command yt holy days, and fasting days be kept, and will suffer nothing
to be done, either in sermons or other places yt may be any offense unto
others. And for so much as this doctrine has now these many years ben so
depely roted in men's minds, that it can not without yt hurt of conscience, be
taken away so suddenly. And again, for so much as by this mean, which we have
showed you, your highness decre may take place amongst us, we beseech you in ye
hartiest manner yt we can, to grant our requests, and to suffer us in this
religion until the time of the counsel. Which shall be both a most tha^keful duty
unto God, and make chiefly for yt peace of our city and whole Province. After
the emperor had heard this letters And besides such things as James Sturmius
with his great eloquence declared at large, he made answer by Seldie, and
speaking many things of his zeal toward Germany, after long debating, at yt
length he sends the^ away after this sort, that they should go through with
their bishop, yet upon this condition, that if they can not agree, they should
stand to his arbitrament. When the emperor was come into Brabant, it was his
pleasure to have the Duke of Saxon with him, but the Lantgraue he sent to
Audenarde, a town in Flanders. On the borders of Braba^t, he discharges all
those forces that he brought with him from Auspurg. I have spoken before of the
judgment of the chamber imperial, how the states permitted the emperor yt he
should establish the same. The first day therefore of October, as The reformation
of the Chamber.
before was enacted, it is renewed, and three Advocates are displaced for
suspicion of Lutheranisme, and all the rest amongst other things were
commanded, that they should persevere in ye doctrine of ye catholic church, or
else to be removed from that place. There began Henry the Duke of Bru^swicke to
co^mence suite against the Protesta^tes, for ye former war what time he was
expulsed. He had in deed conditioned, wha^ he was delivered out of prison and
that by an oath also, yt he would attempt nothing. But he went from that
conuenaunt, and not he only, but also tharchbyshop of Mentz, the master of
Prussia, the Earl of Nassow, and Reuart count of Solmen, with others, moved
suit against yt La^tgraue. The me^ of Co^sta^nce, lately outlawed, where as they
were in great perplexity, and saw no way how to save the^ selves, flee They
of Co^stance, give themselves to the house of Austrich.
unto yt last refuge, and give the^ selves to the house of Austriche for ever.
Whereupon king Ferdinando receives them into his tuition, and sends thither
immediately a noble man to be their governor. Who about the mids of October
propou^deth unto them these conditions. That they shall acknowledge Ferdinando
and his children and heirs for their Lords from hence forth, and show unto
them al faith and dew obedience, and shall not reuolte from them at any time,
neither make any league or confederacy. Such laws and statutes as Ferdinando
and his deputes shall make, concerning Religion and other matters, they shall
throwly obey. In war and other affairs, they shall be ready at all times to
aid and serve king Ferdinando, his children and heirs obediently, as the rest
of his subjects. The same conditions afterward they receive by an oath, two
days after, the governor calls the Senate, and demau^deth of them, what is
the sum of their common treasure: that their gunnes with all their fourniture
be brought into an account. He commands also, that no towns man do wear
any long sword, that no man presume to come to the fortifications, nor where
the watch is. That their names, which during ye war admonyshed the city of
danger, be revealed. That an inuentory of their goods be taken, which are
absent, and flit from thence, and that the same be detained. That they deliver
up all public writings. And that some man that is expert therein, declare
whereunto every of them aperteineth. After this, he commands all the
ministers of the church to depart out of the city within eight days. In this
month Augustus, brother unto Maurice Duke of Saxony, takes to wife the lady
Anne Augustus married a wife.
the daughter of Christian king of De^marke. In the co^uenau^ts of marriage it
was condicioned, that Duke Maurice, should assign him his portion, not out of
the lands of John Fridericke, but of his own inheritance. The same time was
a great co^motion in Guienne, for saltpits and customs. The head city of all
that country is Burdewx, a great town, of much wealth, and lies open to the
Sea, which in time past was under the dominion of England. They also chiefly
rebelled, and had slain ye kings A co^motion at Burdeux
Lieftenaunt. Wherefore when so shrewed an example was showed, and the thing
tended to a further danger, the French king sent thither the Conestable of
France and Duke Danmal with a power of.xxxi. enseignes of foteme^, whereof.xi.
were Almaignes, and a force of horsemen. Which thing once known they of
Burdeux, make means to ye Conestable, and say yt they are contented, that he
shall enter with the Frenchmen armed, but they beseech him not to suffer the
Germans to come within their city. He made answer, yt they should not
prescribe him: the Germains serve the king as well as the rest. Therefore will he
do herein, as he shall think good. And albeit they set not open the gates of
their city, yet has he keys wherewith to unlock yt same. Wherefore thus he
entered the, xix. day of October. And wha^ he had placed his men here and there
in due order, and also planted his ordenaunce in place convenient, first he
commands the citeze^s to bring forth al their armure and weapons, and the
same to be carried into the castle, so were spent two days. The third day they
began to make inquisitio^ from house to house, and a great number of The
slaughter that was at Burdeux.
sedicious persons were apprehended. After they came to an horrible slaughter:
For they were not executed with one kind of death. There were also brought
forth.xiiii. Gentlemen, with haulters about their necks, whereof one or two
were executed. But the Almaine Captains made intercession for the rest, and
begged their pardon of the Constable. This soroufull and bluddy spectacle
lasted.xii. days. And besides those that were put to death in this time, very
many were also condemned to the Galees. Moreover all wrytinges, wherein their
fredomes and privileges of the common wealth were contained, were burnt all,
they themselves making the fire. And because they had murdered the kings
Lieftenaunt, the Constable drives them to scrape up the earth, wherewith he was
covered and buried, without any tool, even with their nails and fingers. When
they had thus scraped ye dead coarse out of his grave, the same was buried
again with a great and solemn pomp of Freers and priests. All the citezens
follow after to the number of five thousand, with every man a candell in his
hand. And as they came before the Conestables lodging, the Bear was set down,
and stayed between times. Than do they fall down there upon their knees, and
with a lamentable cry beseech him of mercy, they deteste their own offense,
and give thanks unto the king, for that he has not punyshed the same more
extremely. When all these things were finished, the.ix. day of November they
depart thence, leaving behind them a garnison. About this time there chanced
a marvelous thing in Italy. There is besides Padwey, a town belonging to the
state of Uenise, called Citadella. Herein dwelte a citezen named Frau^ces
Spiera, an expert man in the law, and a great pleader Fraunces Spier a Lawier.
of causes. Who with a wonderful fervent zeal, began to embrace the doctrine
of the Gospel. And when he profited therein daily more and more, he declared not
only at home among his friends, what he thought of every article, but also
abroad among all men wheresoever he came. This thnig could not long be hid,
and at the length was reported to the Boshop of Romes Legate, which was than
at Uenise, John Case, Archbishop of Beneuento. When Spier understood this, he
perceived easily in what danger he stood. When he had therefore taken long
deliberation, and co^sulted every way, what was best to be done, at the last he
resolved, being sent for, to go speak with the Legate. Wherefore going to
Uenise, and confessing his error (as he thought, or else said for fear)
craves pardon, and promises obebience from henceforth. The Legate, although
he were glad of this voluntary confession, yet for an example to all others, he
commands him, that retourning home he do openly such things as he has
spoken before. He was content: And albeit he began even than to repent him of
his doing, yet His recantation.
through the instigation of his friends, affirming that ye whole hope not of
him only, but also of his wife, children, and substance consisted herein, he
did obey. But shortly after he fell into sickness both of body and mind, and
began to despair of Gods mercy. Therefore by the advice of his friends, he was
carried from Citadella, to Padwey, that he might have ready at hand both help
of good Physicians and comfort of learned men. The Physicians, John Paulus
Crassus, Bellacata, Frisimelega, as soon as they saw him, judged by and by the
disase to come of a vehement thought, and that there was no better remedy, than
the consolation of the mind. Wherefore many learned men resorted to him daily,
and by the testimonies of holy scripture, which declare unto us the great
mercy of God, they endeavored to cure his mind. But he said, he could not in
deed deny these things, howbeit they concerned him nothing. For in as much
as he had once abiured the truth known for fear of peril, he affirmed that
he was appointed to everlasting tourmentes, and that in his mind he felt and
saw them already, neither could he love God, but hate him exceadingly. And
here in he perseuered neither would he now eat any more meat, Spier would
receive no comfort.
and when it was crommed into him by violence, oftentimes would spitte it out
again. It were long to recite all things, which either he him self spoke,
or other men alleged out of the holy scriptures, to bring him from
desperatio^. What time therefore all their counselles were spent in vain, and
both the infirmity of his body, and also the anguysh of his mind increased
daily more and more, he was carried home again, and there He dies in despair.
died miserably in the same state and desperatio^. As he lay sick at Padwey,
there came often to comfort him amongst many others Peter Paul Uerger, Bishop
of Instinople, which is in Histria, a town under the dominion of the state of
Uenise.

It has been declared in the fourmer books how the Bishops of Rome Clement,
and Paul have used the service of Uergerius before in germany. Certes he was
in high favor with king Ferdinando, whilst he was in Hongary, in so much that
when his daughter Catharine was borne, Uergerius, and George Marquis of
Brandenburge, and John Archebyshop of Lunden, were her godfathers at the
fountestone. But after he revolted from the Bishop of Rome by a wonderful
occasion. A wonderful conversion of Uergerius.
When he was sent for to Rome from the conference of Wormez which was in the
beginning of the year.M. CCCCC. xli, as before is said. The Bishop going about
to make new Cardinals, appointed him also amongst others. But there were
some that privily whispered in his ear, yt he was now through much
familiarity with the Germains become a Lutherane. After that Uergerius had
heard this by Cardinal Ginucius, unto whom the Bishop had told it, he was
maruelously astonished. And to the intent he might pourge him self, he goes
home into his country, and begins a book, which he entitled, against the
Apostatas of Germany. And whylest to confute their arguments, he tourneth over
diligently the books of his adversaries, and pondering depely their reasons:
he feleth him self taken and vanquished. Than casting away all hope of his
Cardinalshyp, he goes to his brother, John Baptist, Uergerius vanquisshed with
the force of truth.
Bishop of the city of Pole, and reciting the whole matter, asks his
counsel. His brother being afraid at ye beginning, lamenteth his case much.
But after he was persuaded by him to apply him self to the searching of the
Scripture, and had considered diligently that article of justification,
comparinge the sentences together, he gives place, and judges the bishop of
Romes doctrine to be false. Whereupon they reioysed the one to the other. And as
the very duty of Bishops is, began to instruct the people in Istria, and
preach diligently the benefit of Christ imployde upon mankind, and declare
what works God requires of us, to the intent they might call men again to
the true Religion. But there sprang up many adversaries, especially Freers,
such as are called obseruauntes, who reported the thing to the inquisitours,
the chief whereof was Anniball Gryson, and joined with him in commission Hierome
Mutius, Inquisitours against Uergerus.
which after wrote an inuectiue against Uergerius, and not that only, but set
forth a book also, wherein for the Hatred of Religion, he diffameth Germany with
most sclaunderous and railing words. When Grison was come to Pole and to
Iustinople, he rusheth into men's houses, and searched if they had any books
prohibited. Than, when he had spoken many things in his Sermon, he cursed all
those, that would not present such as were suspected of Lutheranisme. Yet he
promised a less punishment unto such as would come to amendment, and of
their own fre will ask him pardon. But on those that would not wyllyngly
confess their crime, and were after accused of others, he said he would be
avenged by fire, and entringe into every house, feared all men. Wherefore there
were found diverse that accused them selves, and for fear refused nothing: Of
the which number the rycher sort pryuely, and poorer openly were constrained
to confess their error. Such as confessed, how they had red the new
Testament in the vulgar tongue, he dissuaded most earnestly to abstain
hereafter. Than, the common multitude, whose minds were stryken with fear,
accused one an other full busely, without any respect had, either of kynred,
frendshyp or benefits. For the son spared not the father, nor the wife her
husband, nor the cliente his Lord and patron. The complaints were all for
the most part of triflyng matters, such as one reprehended in an other for
superstition. Hereunto were added preachinges against the doctrine of
Uergerius. And on a certain day, when there was a great audience of people
assembled in the head church of Iustinople. The inquisitour Grison, which
said mass than pourposly, gets him up into the pulpet in a rych vestiment,
and amongs other things to the intent he might thrust in his sting, at this
time says he, and these certain years past, you have had many storms and much
unseasonable weather, which destroys one while your Olives, an otherwhyle
your Corn: And now marreth your Uines, now eftsoon your cattle and other
goods. And the cause of all these euilles comes of your Bishop, and the other
sort of Heretics. And never look for any better, unless they be first
restrained. Therefore the next way is to set upon them and stone them. Through
this their violence Uergerius was constreined Uergerius repareth to Mantua.
to repair to Mantua, unto the Cardinal Hercules Gunsage, with whom he was
familiarly acquainted. But where both diverse at Rome, and also John Case, ye
Bishops Legate with the Uenetians, admonyshed the Cardinal by letters and
messengers, that he should no longer maintain such a man, he goes to Trent,
where the counsel was holden at the same time, to make his pourgation. When the
Bishop of Rome knew thereof, albeit he had rather have had him deteyned
prisoner, yet least any suspicion should arise namely in Germany, as though the
counsel were not free, he writes again to his Legates there, that they
permit him not to have any place in the session, but that they command him
to depart from thence. Being after this sort repulsed, he went to Uenise.
Here He isputont of yt counsel
the Bishops Legate before named, exhorts him by all means that he would go
to Rome: But he, which understood his danger, refused. Than the other a few
days after commanded him in the Bishops name, that he return no more to
Iustinople. Therefore went he to Padwey. And whylest he there was, he beheld
this miserable example before rehearsed. Wherewith being wehemently moved, when
he had seen presently the wrath of God, wherewith that wretched man was stryken,
he began more and more to be confirmed, and than he determined plainly, to
forsake contrie and all that ever he had, and go into volu^tary exile rather,
and to be in place where he might freely profess Christ. Which he did within
a few months after, and taking his journey out of the country of Bergome he
came in to Rhetia, bordering vpont the same. And when he had preached the
Gospel there, and also in the vale of Tely that joins Uergerius preaches yt
Gospel in Rhetia.
next unto Italy, certain years, Christopher the Duke of Wirtemberge sent for
him to Cubinga. Before he departed out of Italy, the Bishop of Polle his
brother was dead, and it was suspected that he was poisoned. Moreover many
notable me^ besides Uergerius, saw Spiera in the same state, and amongst
others Matthewe Gribalde, a Ciuilian of Padwey, who compry sing in writing the
whole matter which he presently saw and heard, set it forth in printe. As
Uergerius did also, and Sigismunde Gelowe a Polonian, and Henry Scotte. The
Archbishop of Beneuento, before mentioned, compyled a book of The abominable
filthynes of an Archebyshop.
Buggery, and so filthy as nothing can be devised more. For he is nothing
ashamed to extolle and praise the most detestable vice of all others, yet
commonly used in Greece and Italy. In the mean time the Archebyshoppes of
Germany, especially of Mentz, Collon, and Treuers, every man in his own
diocese hold conuocations, to the intent to refourme their churches after the
order prescribed by the Emperor: For this had they promised him to do. In the
province of Collon Bucer had taught before, as in the.xv. book is specified,
and there were diverse ministers of the church, that had married wives. But
although the Emperors decree did permit the marriage of priests, till the
counsel should determine the same, yet said the Bishop of Collon, how that
appertained only to the Lutherians, and not to such as followed the church of
Rome. Wherefore by a decree made, he disanulleth matrimonies contracted, and
declares Married priests pluct from their wives
them to be incestuouse, and commands the children be gotten of such to be
bastardes. The Archebyshop of Treuers has but a small province, containing
only three Byshoprykes, Metz, Tully, and Uerdon. There neded no such law. For
the priests in these places, had rather have co^cubines tha^ wives. But in the
Archebyshopryke it self where there appeared to be more danger, he decreed as
his fellows did. The jurisdiction of Mentz, is most large. For under him
be.xii. Bishops, and almost all Hesse is also win his province. Therefore he
began to instaunt and urge them to obey ye Emperors decree. Like wise did the
Archebyshop of Treuers, who had also some jurisdiction there. But the
Lantgraues sons, and the other rulers and counselors, heard these things
with deaf ears. The Archbishop of Mentz sent also to Fra^ckfurth his
suffragan Michel Sidonie. Who first hallowyng the churches there, preaches and
teaches after his manner. The Bishop of Auspurge compelled certain priests that
were not constante, to abjure their religion and doctrine. I spoke before of
the Frenchmen, which in summer went to aid the Scotts. They at the last bring
away in to France, Mary the young Queen, daughter and heir to the king that
dead is, being tha^ syx years of age, that they might The inheritour of
Scotland led into France.
thus take away from the Englyshemen all hope of optaynyng her. This year yt
Bishop of Rome created Charles Uandome, a Frencheman, Cardinal. After that
Maximilian of Austrich, was arrived in Spain, and had married the lady Mary
themperours daughter, Phylippe the Emperors son, a young Prince of.xxi.
years of age, being sent for of his father, prepares him self to take his
journey. And leaving behind him his cousin Germane, and the same his brother in
law, to govern The Empe. son comes into Flaunders.
the common wealth in his absence, when he was embarked and had set up sail,
the.xxv. day of November he arriueth at Genes with fifty Galeis, and as many
ships of burden, by the conduite of Androwe Daurie, who had transported
Maximilian, accompanied with a great number of Nobles, and amongst others the
Duke of Alba and the Cardinal of Trente. A few days after his arrival, he
remains wout the walls in the house of Androwe Daurie the Admiral, in the
mean time yt the Ships were vnlading, and preparation made in the city. The
second day of December, he entered and was received most sumptuously, and
being there furnyshed as well of money as all other things mete and requisite
to travel by land, he departs thence the eight day after, and passing by
Alexandria and Pauie, goes to Millan. At Pauie were the great battering pieces,
which the Emperor had taken from John Fridericke Duke of Saxon, and sent
thither, as before is said. At Millan, where he arrived the.xix. day of
December, were set up in every place triumphant arkes, pageo^s, and images,
with honorable posies written. At his entering were ready to receive He is
received at Milla^
him the Duke of Sauoye, the Ambassadors of Uenise, Florence, Ferrare, and
Seines. About this time at Bruisselles, died Maximilian Earl of Bure, of a
disease in the throat called the Quinancie, when his Physician had told him
before as they say, the very hour of his death as soon as he saw him, whose
name was Andrew Wessel. I showed you before of Duke Manrice, how after the
decree of Religion was red, he departed from Auspurg. When he was come home, he
assembleth the Nobility and the other states. And propounds the whole matter
at Misene, declaring unto them what the Emperors mind is. They urge the
Emperors promise and his also, and require instauntly, that they may be
suffered to keep still the Religion professed at Auspurge. After it was agreed,
that the divines of Wittemberge and of Lipsia, should be called to counsel.
Wherefore they met first at Beg, after at Celle, last, at Iuterbock. Thither
came also John Islebie sent from the Marquis of Bra^denburg. Here was a decre
made of things indifferent, such A meting of Divines in Saxony.
as are called Adiaphora, the last conuention of all was at Lipsia. Here was a
form of Religion written, which all men should observe under the dominions
of Duke Maurice. Which book afterward bred much contention, as shall be
declared in his place. In the mean time the Emperors son proceeds on his
journey, and passing by Mantua and Trent, he comes to Auspurge, and so to
Spire. After he passes through the la^d 1549.
of Luke to the Emperor his father, accompanied amongst others with the
Cardinal of Trent: The Emperor had sent to mete him in Germany a goodly
number of Horsemen, at the conduite of the Duke of Arescot. Duke Maurice going
forth to mete him as far as Trent, rode forth with a small company to see
Mantua and Uenise, and was most honorably interteyned of the Senate. He
entreated diligently the Prince of Spain that he would be a mean to the
Emperor for the Lantgraue his father in law, which after also he signified
unto him. and for as much as the other had promised right gently, he byddeth
him be of good comfort, yet nevertheless admonyshynge him to dissemble the
matter, and not to be acknowen thereof. At this time was much trouble in the
parts of Barbary and Africa. For one Zeriphius (as they say) arrising of a
small beginning, Civil wars in Africa.
and atteyning to a kingdom, had erpulsed Fesanus a king by him out of his
Realm, who came after to the Emperor at Auspurge, complaining of his
misfortune, and desyryng aid. Nicolas bishop of Metz, the son of Anthony Duke
of Lorayne, and Tutour to the Duke his Nephew, as I showed you in the xvi.
book, forsaking ecclesiastical order, married one of the house of Eckmount,
which was an inheritour in Brabant. So the Bishoprike returned to the Cardinal
of Loraine. In what sort the Ambassadors of Strasburge treated with the
Emperor at Collon, is before declared. When they were returned home, shortly
after they began to conferte with the Bishop, who calling before him the
Nobility, shows them what the Emperors pleasure is to have done, and
commands them all to obey. He charge also straightly the Clergy of
Strasburg, to follow the same. And where he propounded over hard things, the
Senate the.xii. day of February, sending Henry Cope, Ambassador with letters
to the Emperor say, how they have treated diligently with their Bishop, but
Strasburgs writes letters to the Emperor.
that he propounds such conditions, as if they should admit, they can not
retain those things, which the decree lately made at Auspurge, does
permit and grant them. For after much debating we have, says they,
declared unto him, how we shall give commandment to our citezens, that they
shall observe the holy days, and absteyne certain days from flesh. Moreover
we have been in hand with the Ministers of the church. And certain of the^ we
suppose will of their own accord leave the office of preaching. Wherefore it
shall be lawful and free for him, for all us, to establyshe Religion according
to the order prescribed at Auspurge. For we shall be no let unto him, and will
also command our citezens, to do nothing to the contrary. And seeing it is
thus, we beseech you most victorious Emperor, that you would permit us
ministers of the church, eue^ such as be married amongst us, and put us to no
further extremity, especially considering that we will both show all
moderation, and give none occasion of offense.

I showed you before of them of Magdenburg, how the Emperor had outlawed them:
And where they refused the decree of religion, lately published, the
displeasure was augmented. Where upon the Emperor sets forth against them
new proclamations, and makes them a pray unto all men, and earnestly They of
Maidenburg are made a pray for their god lines.
admonishes the Princes and states that are their neighbors, to make war
against them, and to annoye them by all means possible. It has been told you
before, how the Emperor caused ye preachers of Ulme to be apprehended. They
were at the length, in the seventh month, enlarged the third day of March,
and set at liberty, wha^ they had paid for their charges. At this time yt
state of England waxed troublesome. Edward Trouble in England.
Duke of Somerset, yt kings uncle, and Protector of the Realm, had a brother
that was lord Admiral, of whom he had conceived a suspicio^, or at least was
content so to be persuaded, as though he did aspire to yt crown, and would bring
yt king under his custody. The Admi. of England b. headed.
Wherefore he commands him to be apprehended, and after examination had, he
was condemned to die, and yt xx. day of March was be He had married Queen
Catherine, the last wife to king Henry the eight, and that same also increased
the suspicion much. But the emulation and envy of a woman was thought to have
been the greatest occasion of this misauenture. The Bishop of Strasburge again
warns the clergy, to obey the Emperors decree. There is a church of
saint Thomas the annual revenues whereof, are, by the consent of the Senate,
employed upon preachers and learned men, which teach and bring up yougth.
With the^ he traueled chiefly, and desired to know, with in what time they
would obey the Emperors decree, and satisfy his expectation, moreover what
mete men they had for this purpose, and what ornaments of the church were,
yet remaining. They take a time for a further deliberation. Thomas Cranmer,
Archebyshop of Canturbury, and primate of England, Thomas Cranmer a furtherer
of learning and Godliness.
a man of excellent learning, was wholly given to further good learning and
auaunce Godly religion. Who seeing the state now of Germany, and the danger of
learned men there, solicited with sundry letters Bucher chiefly, and Paulus
Fagius, most expert in the Hebrew tongue, to come into England, promising them
all love and friendship. Wherefore by the consent and will of the Senate, at the
first of April, they take their iurney, that they might there sow the sede of
pure doctrine. Their coming was most acceptable both to yt king him self,
Bucer and Fagius cominto England
and in manner to the whole Nobility and people. And what time they had stayed
a while with my Lord of Canturbury, they were both sent unto Cambridge, to be
readers there. The first day of April, Philippe of Austriche enters into
Brussels, with a wonderful pomp, where his father that time was. There were
the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice and the Electours of Brandenburg, sent to
solicit the suite unto Prince Philippe and the Cardinal of Trent, who was a
great friend to Duke Maurice. And albeit they put the Lantgraue, which was than
at Audenarde, in good hope, yet was nothing brought to pass. And a little
while after, when the La^tgraue being sickely would have eaten flesh on a
certain day forbidden, the Captain that guarded him, coming in the way,
turns up the dishe botome, and casts the meat on the ground.

At this same time the Bishop of Strasburge, in the eight The bishop of Strasb.
sings his first Mass.
year at the least, takes holy orders, as they term it, and says Mass, he
calls a convocation of all his Clergy at Taberne, and makes Decrees
commodious for their purpose.

After this he sends messengers to the Senate of Strasburge, requiring them
to reedifie the Aultars, and to give him liberty to appointe the Mynisters of
the Church. That they would release the Clergy of their Oath, restoore all
their privileges, and render again the ornaments of the churches. But he
commands the Thomistes, to answer directly, whether they will obey the
Emperors decree, or no? They speaking first of the reverence they bear to the
Emperor, after, of their duties and vocation at large, declare unto him, what
every man teaches and does, that is to wit, divines, Philosophers,
Logicians, Rhetoricians, and such other like, which are al not only
profitable both for the Scole or youth, but also necessary. Than show they by
whom they were admitted into the College, by the consent of the Senate, and
after a long declaration, they desire him very lowely and lovingly, that he
would not disturb this order so well establyshed, nor will them to be
occupied with things less needful. Contrarywyse the Ambassadors allege,
how that College was not founded for such exercises of Scolars, neither ought
the old order to be changed. If there be any amongst them, which find
themselves grieved, and can not obey with a good conscience, the Bishop surely
is not he, that will persuade them to do any thing against their wylles, but
that it shall be lawful for them to give place, and as the common saying is, let
them either drink or depart. For in case the Senate will have professors of
Arts and learning within the city, it is reason that they find the same, and
bear their charges, not of the abbey lands, which were aunciently appointed
to an other use, but of their common treasure. The Bishop and his predecessor
have now been many years impeched in their jurisdiction, but this may no
longer be suffered. Thus when they had much contended in words, they departed
without any thing concluded. And the Senate, when they knew thereof, make
intercession to the Bishop, and in their most gentle letters desire and pray
him, that he would at the least have some consideration of the yought, who
takes great profit and rypenes of the wit by the same Schole. Thus was the
matter by letters and messengers sent betwyxt, long and much debated, till at
the last it was taken up by arbitrament, as heafter shall be said. The Bishop,
which was ever accounted to be of a mylde and a quiet nature, was not thought
to have done this so much of his own accord, as through the instigation of
others that were about him, which affirmed that this occasion of recoueryng
his jurisdiction was not to be neglected, and said moreover that unless he
were earnest in yt matter, he might fear the^perours displea He used for his
chief doer in these cases, Christofer Welsinger a Ciuilian, who sometime was
student in the university of Wittemberge. Again the clergy of the head
church of Strasburg, had for their advocate John Tischel a doctor of yt civil
law.

In the last book is mention made of Wuolfgange Prince of Bipounte, how after
the decre of Religion was enacted, he was The duke of Swaybrig molested for
Religion.
sent for to Auspurg. Whom the Emperor had pressed with so^ dry letters, that
he should obey the decree. And for so much as he had referred the matter to
the Bishops, the Emperor demands of him, whether he will ratify the
decree? And whether he will displace the ministers of the church, that will not
obey the same? Whereupon he writing his letters to the emperor in French,
repeteth in few words, what was done in the somer before at Auspurg. And
says, how at his return home, he set forth unto the people that part of
the decree, that concerned holy days and fasting days, commanding the same
to be observed. How he has also red over diligently oftener than once the
decree of Religion: and grants that therein are many things which are
consonant to his faith, by the which he looks for eternal salvation. And that
there be many things also, which differ much from the same. Nevertheless he
has charged the preachers and ministers of the church, to way every thing
diligently, and after to declare unto him how they suppose the thing may be
instituted. But where al they with one voice affirm, that they can not allow
the same in all things with a quiet conscience, he thought it not his part, to
compel them to work against their conscience. Wherefore he required the
bishops. yt they them selves would take some order in it. But what thing they
have answered, he has certified heretofore, being in good hope, that nothing
more of him should be required. But now says he, in as much as you will have a
direct answer, most mighty Emperor, I will say, what mine opinion is. And
first His plain troth.
as concerning the religion, rites and ceremonies, which have been certain years
observed within my dominion, verily I was borne and brought up in the fame, as
I have also showed you before, Caesar, eue^ until this day; and never heard any
other kind of doctrine moreover I have bestowed my study and pains therein, and
so far forth as my wit is able to conceive, it appears plainly to be
agreeable unto Gods word. For this must I needs confess, seeing I am asked the
question, least I should both hurt mine own conscience, and little regard my
salvation. This is the consideration also why I can not approve y^ decre,
otherwise most willing and ready after yt manner and example of mine
ancestors, to do any thing for Howebeit, your highness, which is the supreme
Magistrate, may determine herein, what shall seem good unto you. It is wholly
at your pleasure. This only I beseech you that I be not constrained to do
against mine own judgment, nor yet the people that be under my dominion. As
touching the ministers of the church, I desired you in my last letters, that
they might tarry through your license for the christening of children, and
visityng of the sick chiefly, till others were substitute in their place.
Notwithstanding if you shall command them to depart immediately, not abydyng
till others come, albeit the same shall be a great grief and hynderaunce to the
people, yet shall it be done accordingly. For many of them are gone already, and
in those things that may or ought to be performed, I know that all loialtie
and obeysaunce must be showed you. What time in the dominions of Duke Maurice,
there was a great appearance The Inter. confuted by them of Lubeck and others.
that Religion should be altered, the ministers and preachers of Lubeck,
Luneburge, and Hamburge, compiled a book, wherein they confuted at the full the
book and decree of Auspurge: Whereof the chief author was John Epine. Moreover
the doctors of Maydenburg, Nicolas Amstorfe, and especially Matthie Flacie,
borne in the city of Albone in Slauonie, and Nicolas Ganles, bend them selves
earnestly against the divines of Wittemberge and of Lipsia, and in many little
books set forth, do reprehende them, as though they should deal
dissemblyngly, and should through their indifferent, or mean things set open
a way to the Romish Religion. Finally they Adiaphora.
place this as a general Rule, that all rites and ceremonies, al though they
be of their own nature indifferent, be no longer mean things, when force, an
opinion of holiness, and necessity byndeth men, and when occasion of wickedness
thereby is given. This Flacie had been certain years, Phillippe Melanchthons
scholar, but in this contention, he went to Magde^burg, setting forth a book
afterward, wherein he declares the cause of his so doing. Furthermore they of
Hamburge addressinge their letters to them of Wittemberge, especially to
Melanchthon, do recite what they call indifferent or mean things, and
declare in what cases they ought to be admitted, desyryng them also to write,
what thing they would have comprysed under that name, to the intent men may
have some certain thing to follow, and not to waver in their minds, and least
that name of indifferent things give occasion to sondrye errors, which may
crepe in by little and little.

Unto ye which epistle Melanchtho^ makes answer, and amongst other things
says, how some bondage is to be borne withal, so it be not annexed to
wickedness. The Archebyshop of Mentz, Melanchton defends yt Adiaphorist.
in the beginning of May, holds a counsel provincial. The decrees whereof he
sets forth in a book afterward. Likewise do the Archebyshoppes of Treuers
and Collon, who has also a large province. That book among other things
establysheth for confession, that no man be admitted to the Lords supper,
unless he be first confessed. Of the hallowyng of Salt, water and other
things, which through exorcismes and prayers, are prepared, as they say, for
the use of faithful men. Of the Relics, of the invocation and adoration of
Saints, of Pilgrimages, of prayers for the dead, of pourgatory, of fasting,
and choice of meats, of the canonical hours, as they term them, of the
tremblable mysteries of the Mass. Unto this Synod came Maurice Bishop of
Eistet: The residue sent Ambassadors. But that ordinance of hallowyng and
consecratyng, aparteineth to many matters. Every seventh day, which is called
the Sunday, when there be many people in the church, the priest exorciseth, as
they term it, first Salt, after Water. And when he has mixed the salt and
the water together, he The force of holy water.
sprincleth the people withal. And this sprinklyng is thought to give health
both of body and soul, and to drive away the disceiptes of the devil, and
cleanse not only men, but also things without life. For it is cast upon the
ground, and upon stones, and thrown into dead men's graves, and the priest
prays God to give it that virtue and strength. After the same sort also is
salt handled at the christening of children. And when it is consecrate, the
priest puts it into the chyldes mouth, and commands the devil to come
out, and thrice ducketh the infant in the water, and with oil, wherein he
dippeth his thombe annointeth the breast and shoulders of the child. Women also
after their childebed, wha^ they come to be churched, at their first entering in
at the church door, are purified with this water. Finally, it serves for
many, uses, but chiefly, when they have to do with spirits in the night, and
practice coniuryng. And they hallowe with certain prayers, whatsoever
apperteyneth to the apparel of Priests. Moreover the water of the fountstone,
tapers, candels, palms, the Paschall lamb, as they term it, made of wax,
Eggs, Flesh, Chese, Bako^, Flowers, Herbs, and fruictes of trees, and upon
all these things is cast the foresaid water. When any church must be builded,
the Bishop or his suffragan lays the first stone of the foundation, and
Hallowyng of churches.
throws on salt water. And when it is edified, he goes thrice about it, and
first he sprinkleth the upper walls, than the middle, and after the lowest of
all. And with his crosiers staff makes the sign of the cross upon the
highest walls, that the devil do not approach. After entering into the
church, when certain songs are ended, the priest stroweth ashes after the
similitude of a cross. Which done, the Bishop with his staff writes Greek
letters in the ashes, at the left side of the cross: and Latin letters on the
right, and afterward casts on an other water, mixed with salt, wine and
ashes, wherewith he sprincleth the church again, and exhorts the people to
bountefulnes and liberality. In like sort are the belles used. And first
forsouth, they must hang so, as the Bishop may go round about Hallowyng of
belles.
them. Which after he has said certain Psalms, he consecrateth water and
salt, and mingleth them together, wherewith he washes the belle diligently
both within and without, after wypeth it dry, and with holy oil draws in it
the sign of the cross, and prays God, that when they shall ring or sound
that bell, all the disceiptes of the devil may vanyshe away, hayle, tho^dryng
lightening, wyndes and tempests, and all intemperate weathers may be aswaged.
When he has wipte out the cross of oil with a linen cloth, he makes seven
other crosses in the same, and within one only. After saying certain Psalms, he
takes a pair of sensours and senseth the belwithin, and prays God to send
it good luck. In many places they make a great dinner, and keep a feast as it
were at a solemn wedding. And they hallowe their aultars thus. They take oil,
cresme, a pound of Franke^sense, a pan with hot Hallowyng of aultars.
coals, salt, water, wine, ashes, hyssope, one canuas clothe to wipe with, and
an other finer and softer, to cover with: five crosses of wax, a chalice,
mortar, two tapers, finally whatsoeaperteineth to the furniture of the altar.
In the mean season the Bishop and the priests say certain Psalms and
prayers. Than does he sprinkle the altar in five sundry places, so bestowyng
the water, that it represents ye sign of the cross, than goes he seven
times about the altar, and casts thereon water tempered with wine, hyssope,
and Ashes. Moreover, he tempereth mortar with water, and powers it out about
the altar. Straight ways are brought forth solemnly the relics of
Saints, which after they be sensed, are again said up in their place. After
the Bishop swingeth the altar thryse about with the sensours, which than he
delivers to yt priest, who senseth continually, til the hallowyng be al
finished. And when he has drawn out upon the altar three crosses of oil in
several places, he powers out the oil and suppleth it in, and taking five
small pieces of Frankensence, and as many crosses made of wax, he places them
here and there, and after sets them on fire. The ashes that are gathered
thereof, are kept for holy things. Finally, he anoynteth the four corners and
edges, and also the forefront of the altar, and sings mass. But the oil
and chresme as they call it, is made every wheare on Maundy thursday in the
passion weke, next before Easter.

These were in times past had in great reverence and estimation with all men.
But when Luther and after him others taught, how al creatures were consecrated
by the mouth Luther brought in contempt the popysh ceremonies.
of God, what time he created the whole world, all this gere came in contempt
and mockery, as full of iugglyng and trompery. Now therefore the Bishops of
Germany having the wind at will, restore the same and bring them home again,
as it were from death to life. And touching the making of holy water as they
term it, there is a decree in the Bishop of Romes law, which they ascribe to
Alexander, the fifte Bishop after Saint Peter, to the intent the thing may be
of more credit and authority, by reason of the antiquity thereof. How The
Popes Legates to yt Emperor.
the Bishop of Rome had sent three Bishops into Germany, it is spoken of
before. When they came to the emperor at Brusselles, the.xxv. day of May they
declare first their commission. In the beginning the Bishop of Rome recites
how full of care he is, for them, that have torn the Lords cote. Howbeit two
things do comfort him chiefly. First, for that Christ him self did
prophecy, that Satan should assault the church, but yet in vain.
Secondarely, that by a general counsel may be taken away al such things as
are wickedly crept in. And for so much as ye fruict of the counsel is come
already to other nations, but amo^gs the Germains as yet is nothing done, by
reason of diverse dissentio^s in religion there, therefore has he, partly of his
own mere motion, and office pastoral, partly also at themperours request, by
the consent of the Senate of Cardinals, sent forth certain bishops, which
have authority to receive unto grace, such as ar willing to return into the
bosom of the church, and to promise them al joyful things of his clemency
and great benignity, so that they be content to receive laws and not to
prescribe. Which benefit verily he grau^teth to al men in general, no degree at
al, nor also no crime of that sort excepted though it have continued never so
many years, yet so, as they yt be such offenders, do confess their errors
and sins to some catholic priest, and do such penance as he shall therefore
inioyne them. But for open confession, abiuring, and satisfaction, by the laws
prescribed, he does utterly remitte, and forgive them. He has given also to
the Bishops that be his Ambassadors full power and authority, to unloose
such as are bounden to the Lutherians, by conuenasit promise or oath, from
all those bonds, to absolve monks that be fallen into heresy, and have
forsaken their houses, and to permit them, changing their coats to serve in
an other vocation of the church. Moreover to give pardon to eat milk,
butter, chese, eggs and flesh, having The Pope grants license to eat
flesh.
a respect to the place and person. Finally to permit the^ to receive the
whole Supper of the Lord, who laying aside all other errors, shall allow the
decree of the counsel of Constance, which will openly confess, that there is
as much received under one kind, as under both, and that the church erred,
not for making that decre of one kind only. And that this may be granted
them, for a certain time, as shall be thought mete, yet so, as they them selves
do this severally at an other time and place, and not at the same time, when
others do receive under one kind only. Lastly, they have authority to
compounde with the possessioners of church lands, for the fruictes received
and spent, so as they will depart from the possession from hencesorth.
Furthermore to punish obstinate persons by the censure of the church, and
herein to crave assistaunce of the Magistrates. And likewise to chouse and
substitute Bishops throughout Germany, which shall put the thing in
execution. These Ambassadors of Rome followynge this commission; in such
places as they thought most needful did substitute Bishops, whereof the Bishop
of Strasburg was one, whom they commanded to execute things before rehearsed.
And so finally to receive into favor ecclesiastical persons, if they first
would forsake and put away their wives. And me^ say, how they went to the
Emperor, to have conference with him touching the measure and manner of
execution. And after they understood, that it was not possible for them to go
unto al places, which had need of remedy, of necessity they suborned others.
This grant or indulgence, as they term it, of the bishop of Rome, the
Emperor sends immediately to the bishops of Germany, and warns the^ all
severally, to handle the matter gently and peaseably, and that they first try
and The Archbishop of Meiz to the councelloure of yt Lantgraue.
and assay al ways, by fair speech, exhortations and prayers, before they
come to excommunication and cursyng. Wherefore the Archebyshop of Me^tz
addressing his letters both to diverse others and also to the governors and
counselors of yt La^tgraue. And speaking many things of his cure and charge
pastoral, and of the Emperors faith and dilygence, requires them to exhibit
this order sent from the Bishop of Rome, to the ministers of the church,
commanding them to obey the same. The preachers being moved herein, say how
their doctrine is consonant to the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, the
The Godly answer of yt Preachers.
life it self in deed does not aunwere to the profession, but yet do they
acknowledge no error in their doctrine. Wherefore they have no need of the
Bishops indulgence. They have preferred marriage before the filthy sengle life,
according unto. Gods word, neither can they forsake their children and wives,
whom Christ him self commands to embrace with all love, fidelity, and
benevolence. Where there churches do receive the Lords supper wholly, the same
is done by the commandment of Christ, and after the custom of the primative
church. And they will admit no alteration herein. In the month of May, was an
open disputation at Oxforde, between Peter Martyr and An open disputation at
Oxforde.
the Divines of the same university, concerning the Lords supper, and the
presence of Christ his body. These conclusions did Martyr set up and defend.
That the substance of bread and wine is not changed. That the body and blood
of Christ, is not carnally or corporally in the bread and wine, but to be
united to them sacramentally. Afterward there was set forth a book of the
same, wherein the presidentes of the disputation, appointed by the kings
commandment, do sufficiently declare, that Martyr had the maistrie in that
contention. The tenth day of the month of June, the Queen of France was
crowned at Saint Denis, as is accustomed, by the Cardinals of Bolon, Gwise,
Chattilion; Uandome and Bourbon, for all the rest were at Rome. The.vi. day
after, the king with a marvelous goodly train and richely apparrelled, enters
into Paris the The king is received in to Paris.
head city of his Realm, where he had not been yet seen openly since the
death of his father, and two days after him the Queen. Whiles he soiourned
there, diverse were put to execution for Lutheranisme, which, as it is said,
he beheld him self. After Erecution done in his sight. The king commands
to go on procession.
that, the fourth day of July, he commands to go on procession in every
church. The next day after he publishes a writing in prynte, declaring this to
be the cause thereof; that he might give God thanks for his manifold benefits
employed upon him. And that he might pray to God for the preservation of him
self, his wife and his children, and of the whole Realm and common wealth,
and commend unto him the souls of godly me^, but chiefly the kings of
France, his progenitors, and his father lately departed, after whose example,
he was fully prefixed to undertake the defense and tuition of the catholic
faith, Religion, the authority, and liberties of the Sea Apostolic, and
ministers of the church: amongst the causes this also to be one principal,
that it mygh be openly known how much he abhors them, which contrary to
Christ's commandment, contrary to the traditions of the Apostles, and consent
of al antiquity, deny the presence of the body and blood of Christ, which
take away all virtue and strength from Baptism, penance, good works, and
Sacraments, which do utterly contemn the authority of the church and order
archepreistship, which reiecte the praying, adoration, and relics of
saints. Moreover that by that devout supplication he might testify what his
opinion and mind is, verily, that after the example of his progenitors, and
by a certain imitation of inheritance, he does so think and believe of all
opinions, as does the Catholic church the Creed of the Apostles, the first
counsel of Nice, and many other counselles of the holy fathers. Further more,
that he is fully determined to bannish out of his realm and dominions, the
heresies long since condemned, but in this time partly reuined and partly
invented by Luther, Carolostadius, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, Melanchthon,
Bucer, Calvin, and such other Archeheretikes, monstrouse and pestiferous
persons, and to punish most extremely such as shall offend herein. This
writing setforth in the vulgar tongue, he sends abroad into all parts of
France, commanding the^ to go a procession in all places, and declare the
same unto the people. Not long after he beheaded Monsour Ueruine, for rendering
Ueruine beheaded.
the town and castle of Boloigne to the king of England, as is spoken in
the.xv. book. And his father in law Mouns. Dubees, an aged man, which was
governor of al Boloignois, and one of the four Mreschalles of France, he
condemns to perpetual prison. He had diverse months past, solicited the
Swisses to renew the league which they had made with his father. And although
the Emperor by letters and intermesse^gers did greatly dissuade them, yet they
nevertheless, for that they thought it more expedient for their purpose,
assente there unto, first in deed those that are of the Romish Religion, and
the Lepontians and Ualesians, and after also they of Basil, and the
Schafusians, whereat many men marueled greatly, by reason of those foresaid
proclamations and executions. For most men supposed, that they ought not to
enter into league and society with him, which so cruelly persecuted the true
Religion, and condemned their churches and doctors by name. But they of Bernes
and Zurick, followyng the counsel of Zwinglius, as I have showed you in the
third and sixth book, abstained from this league. The convocation of Lipsia, is
before mentioned. A co^uocatio^ at Lipsia.
But where many said and complained, that the Romish Religion was by little and
little restored, Duke Maurice, the fourth day of July, addressing his letters to
his lieftenauntes, says how he hears that there be many, which partly for
overmuch carefulnes, partly being so persuaded by others, fear, least the old
errors should one after an other be restored. And that certain ministers of the
church, with other busy brains, and troublesome persons, are not fre from
this sclau^der. He has verily at so^dry times heretofore declared by open
writing, what his mind and purpose is, and for those sclaunders does repete
the same again, to the intent he may show and testify, that he has an
especial care of Religion. Wherefore he desires those, which either for
lightness of belief, or through the persuasion of others do fear an alteration,
to lay al fear aparte, and give credit to this his writing and testimony. And
as concerning them, that bring up such reports, let them not think, to
escape unpunished, if they so continue. Howbeit out of the decree lately made
at Lipsia, were gathered certain chapters by his commandment, which should be
taught and preached. Let them inquire therefore and learn to understand,
whether the ministers of the church do follow this form, or whether they
reprehend the same in their sermons. What so ever it be, he commands the^ to
aduertyse him, and if any doubts shall arise, to repare to yt divines of
Wittemberge and Lipsia, and that these things be declared unto the people. In
these days departed ye La^tgraues wife, mother in law to Duke Maurice, which
pined away through care and sorrow for her husbands imprisonment. About this
time the people rebelled in England for two causes. One was for lands and
commons enclosed. For the people complained, Rebellion in England.
that the Nobility had taken in much ground, which before lay common, and had
enclosed and imparked the same for dear, and for other private uses. The others
in Devonshire demanded the same also, but they were chiefly offended with
thalteratio^ of religion, and would have the syx articles, whereof is mentioned
in the.xii. book to be restored. What time therefore they flocked together in
armure, and the matter was full of danger, neither would admonitions take any
place. The king and his counsel, though most unwilling, send forth a force
against them, and disconfite the^ in sundry places, and certain thousands were
slain.

The French King espiyng this occasion which gaped after Bolain that was lost,
prepares an army spedely, and partly by force, partly The French king steals
fortes.
by surrendrie, takes certain castles and fortes, by sea coaste betwixt Bolain
and Caleis, and by that means puts the soldiors of Bolain to an extremity.
The Lords of England took this misfortune most grievously: and because the
Lord Protector ye kings uncle had the gouernmente, the whole fault was
imputed to him that he had not in time furnished the places with things
necessary. This blame and envy increasing daily, the protector in the beginning
of Octobre, was by common assent of the nobles, appreheded at Windsore, where
the king was at the same time, and brought to the Tower of London prisoner. The
Lords afterward declare unto the people the causes, and charge him with evil
government of the common wealth, and setforth a proclamation of the same in
Print, whereunto for a further testimony, every man subscribeth his name:
among the which, Ihon Earl of Warwick was principal. In the mean while,
that the French king attempteth these things against the Englishmen,
the emperor leads about his son through King Philip invested in Flaunders.
Flaunders, Henault, and Artois, and swears the people to be true and loyal
unto him. After they both return to Andwarp about the.viii. day of
Septembre. There was themperors son received with Pageauntes and shows most
sumptuous, not only by the Towns men, but also by marchaunts strangers,
Spaniardes, Italians, Germans, and English men. After this accompanied with
his aunt the regent, he goes also into the other provinces and receive their
fidelity by an oath. I told you before of the Senate The Senate of Strausburge
do co^pounde with their bishop.
of Strausburge, how they sent an ambassador to the Emperor to abate the
controversy, they had with their Bishop, wherefore by themperors permission
there were chosen certain arbitrers on both parties. When they were met in the
monthe of October, after long disceptation, the Senate permits the
Bishop.iii. Churches that he may establish therein Religion, according to the
decree lately made. Moreover, he receives the Cleargye into his faith and
tuition. The Bishop again couenaunteth and grants to the Senate, the
College of Saint Thomas, for the maintenance of the schole, and the rest of
the churches. The Clergy also pays to the Senate an yearly tribute and some
of money, in other things they obtain their immunity and fredome. The Emperor
setforthe proclamations The pearil and fear of them of Maiden burge.
against them of Maydenburge, as I have declared before, and called on the
states in Saxonye for aid: many refused not, so yt the other states not only of
Saxony, but also of thempire would do the same. The men of Lubecke and
Luneburge, by consent of themperors deputies, going to Maidenburge, assaied to
make a reconcilemente, but all in vain. At that tune did no man impugn them
openly: but for so much as they were outlawed: they were evermore in danger,
nether might they without pearill of life and goods depart out of yt city: For
it was lawful for every man to try fortune against them. Therefore the Senate,
where they had before co^plaind of thiniuries of their neighbors by public
letters. Now they setforth another writing unto al men in general, but chiefly
to their next neighbors, and say how they are selanderously reported, Their
Purgation.
as though they should arrogantly and proudly demean the^ selves against
themperor and thempire, and that they should forsake peace, and write many
contumelious things: but herein they sustain great wrong: for they do
acknowledge Charles themperor for their supreme magistrate, and have openly
proclaimed that nothing be said a miss against him or any state: nether is
there any other cause of displeasure say they, than that we profess the
Gospel and word of Why they cannot get pardon.
God: for the other slanders are devised and forged by their enuemies: how
desirous they be of peace, it is not unknown to them, which have been at a few
of the last conuentions: for they do not only understand, but also know by
experience, how sweet is ye name of peace, and how comfortable a thing it is:
and again what evils war brings.

Moreover, it should be grievous and displesaunt to them, if their neighbors
should for their sake, be in danger, or receive any damage: Furthermore they
do confess that neither is it lawful for them, neither is it in their power,
obstinately to resist the emperor and thempire, but that being driven of
necessitye, to defend them selves and theyrs from injury, they have beaten
down certain buildinges, and have taken certain holds, small towns, and
villages in the time of war, not minding to keep them for them selves, but
that they should not come into the hands of foraine nations: neither do they
refuse to render the same again, so that their neighbors do attempt nothing.
And that there is two causes chieflye, wherefore they can not obtain peace:
first, for that they do retain the doctrine of the gospel, and refuse that
Romyshe Idol. Secondlye, for that the conditions of peace propounded, are to
them not only grievous, but also intolerable, and altogether such, as cannot be
performed.

For if they should betray their liberty, given the^ by themperor great Otto,
the first of that name, and the which they have received of their elders, and
maintained unto this day, it can by no reason be defended or excused in time to
come: Now also it appears, and is manifestly seen, what thing the authoures
of the book made at Auspurge intended, and where about they went: for they
indeuonred to pluck away from men the chief article of doctrine of
justification, the very force of salvation: They called in doubt also the
Lords supper, and marriage of priests: Moreover they teach the invocation of
dead men, and what so ever depends of the same: furthermore they go about to
restore all papistry, as has been declared of many excellent learned men:
certainly this so great a wickedness would not be winked at, or passed over in
silence, yea God is to be called on with continual prayer, that he suffer not
the glory of his name to be thus polluted: for assuredly it is an heavy and a
sorrowful sight, that men should be violently enforced to false Religion and
Idolatry, the ministers of the church cast into prison, or with their wives
and children driven into exile, some also myseserablye slain: it is as much to
be lamented, that albeit these things are openly seen, especially in the
upper parts of Germanye, yet there should be men that dare affirm, that
Religion is not impugned: How be it, is no news: for ever since the world
began, the state of good and godly men has been always to suffer
affliction: Again there be many examples both in the old and new Testamente,
that declare the constancy of holy men, which they used, when Kings and
Princes setforth their Proclamations contrary to Gods word: For in such cases
was this always of force, that is written in holy scriptures, how we ought
rather to obey God than men. This has Chrysostom, Austen, Ambrose, and
other holy men not only taught, but also performed in deed, when Emperoures
commanded any thing against the commandments of God: in like case are
they at this present: They se the danger they are in, and yet may not otherwise
do: for they must sooner abide all pearill, than to praise and receive manifest
errors.

It is written of Gordius the martyr, who being requested of The saying of
Gordius the martyr.
his friends, when he was carried to execution, that for sauinge of his life, he
would forsake his opinion, aunsweared, that the tongue ought not to speak any
thing in reproach of him that made it: the which thing as well apperteineth unto
al me^: For this is the opinion both of the aunciente Church, and also of
certain of the first They betray the truth yt hold it in silence.
Bishops of Rome, that they do not only betray the truth, which teach false
Doctrine, but also such as dare not profess openly and defend the truth
known: wherefore the whole case must be committed to god, nether ought they,
either for yt pleasure of any man or fearce of any peril, to forsake the
profession of yt Ueritie, but to set before their eyes thexample of Daniel, who
contrary to yt proclamation of king Darius, worshipped God with the windows set
open on every side. Certes, he might have done the same priuatelye and
closelye, without any danger, but for as much as the same thing concerned the
profession of his faith, and glory of gods holy name with a great and a
constant courage, he called upon God openly, and had no respect of any
danger, which being procured for him by his adversaries, lighted after on
their own heads.

Wherefore they beseech all men, to attempt no force nor war against them,
which are members of the true Church, and that they would follow herein the
steps of the Christian Souldioures of former time, which in deed would not
obey, when themperoures in the wars required their service against the
Christians, as is to be proved by the example of Saint Moris the martyr: how
greuouslye also God was offended with the Israelites for that they being afraid
of the multitude of their ennemies did not healpe their weak fellows, is
expressed in the book of judges, that it might be a doctrine for all men, not
only not to forsake in their necessitye the brethren and fellows of their
Religion, but also to aid and succoure them: They doubt nothing, but yt good
men will be moved by these things: For God lives, and is immortal, which
has full often in times past showed the mighty power of his right hand, and
now can also declare the same. They desire them also heartily, that they would
cause these letters to be exhibited to the Emperor, to king Ferdinando, and to
other princes and states, and also to make intercession for them, that no
extremity be wrought against them: for they will refuse to do nothing, that may
be godly and honestly performed: they require moreover, that they would commend
them unto god by their prayers, to thend verily, yt through the xample of the
Ninevites, they may from the bottom of their hearts bewail their sins, and
heartily sigh unto God, that they may boldly profess this doctrine of the
gospel, which has now these.xxx. years been preached, and may set it forth
with the godliness of life, that they may show the worckes of love unto all men,
but chiefly to the ministers of the church, now banished and exiled, and to
their children and wives and such other miserable people: And that they may
keep this wholesome doctrine pure and safe from the deceites of them, which under
the pretense of restoringe Ceremonies, do now bring in again the whole rabble
of the Romish doctrine. In the month of Octobre, Fraunces Duke of Ma^tua, the
son of Duke Fridericke, marieth the Lady Katherine, daughter to Ferdinando
King of Romans. After, the tenth day of Noue^bre departs out of this life
the bishop of Rome, Paul the third, The death of pope paul the third.
when he had lived.lxxxii. years. The day before he died, he released the
customs which he had imposed upon Saltpits and diverse other things, not
without the sighing of the people. Certain months before, he had treated
with the Emperor for the restitution of Placence: but that was in vain: and
if he had lived longer, he was thought verily, that he would have taken the
French kings part. For ever sense the murder of his son Peter Aloise, he
imagined how to be revenged. His body was carried into the chapel of bishop
Sixtus, and there remained.iii. days. Many people resorted thither to kiss
his fete, which were put out A book in Italia^ against the Pope.
at an Iron grate, as the manner is. Before he left his life, there came
forth an Italian book against him sore and vehemente, under the title of
Barnardinus Ochinus, but compiled as it is thought, of others, with a preface
to Aschanius Colomnois, whom he had banished.

This book among other things, which were over long to recite, adressinge
his talcke toward him, and calling him Antichriste, In the time that
Innocentius was bishop of Rome, thou wast, says he, committed to prison, a
prelate most abominable, for two detestable murders, and for committing
Paracidie, that is to wit, for poysoninge thy Mother. and a Nephew of thine,
that the whole inheritance might descend unto the. And after be^ing set at
liberty, where you were nothing ashamed to sue for the Purple His Sister a
whore made him cardinal
hat, a man of so great wickedness, and were thrice repulsed by the college of
cardinals, your own natural sister. Iulia Farnesia, at the length obtained
your suit. For where she threatened the high bishop, that she would be no longer
at his commandment, the bishop Alexander the sixth fearing her anger and
displesure, chose you into the fellowship of cardinals. After this also you
poisoned an other sister of youres, which was more than half whorishe, after
the custom of your familye. When you were ambassador in the province of
Aucona, what time Iulye the second was bishop of Rome, full naughtely you
begiled a maid of the same city, dissemblinge what you were: For making her to
believe, that you were a gentleman, attending upon the ambassador, you defloured
her, which shameful act the maids uncle, Cardinal of Aucona, charged you
most earnestly before Cleinent the seueth than Prisoner after the city was
taken. Nicholas Quercey took the with his wife Laura Farnesia The monstrus
lechery of the Pope.
thy Nece, and gave the a iobbe with his Dagger, that the scarre thereof
remains to this day. What should I speak of thy Daughter Custaunce, with
whom thou haste so often offended? For to the end thou might have her more
frelye at thy pleasure, thou did poysone her husband Bosius Sfortia. Who
perceiving your wickedness, took such an inward thought, that he was never seen
merry after. In filthy lust assuredlye you pass far the Emperors Commodus
and Heliogabalus: and that may be well proved by so many bastardes as you have.
Lot lay with his daughters ignorauntly, and when he was made droncke: but thou
sobre have meddled not only with thy Nece, but also with thy Sister and
daughter. Now that same which thine ungracious son Peter Aloise did to the
Bishop of Fane, how shameful is it to be spoken, and how horrible a crime. When
Bishop Clemente was detained prisoner in the Castle Aungele, and sent the
Ambassador to the Emperor for recovering of his liberty, thou would not
take thy journey, before he had given the Bishoppricke of Parma to thy Nephew
Farnesius, who than was but ten years old. That done, you disceiued him
nevertheless: for when you came to Gene, you fained your self sick. But what
Marchaundise haste thou made with the Church goods being Cardinal? And since
thou waste The Popes ravening.
made Bishop, living God, how filthelye haste thou consumed the goods of the
Church of Rome? Art thou not ashamed to have bestowed the high office and
gouernemente upon thine ungracious Son, with forty thousand Ducats yearly,
and as much in a manner to thy Nephew Octauius? I speak not what unreasonable
substance, thou have wasted upon all the women of thy house, and upon thy
Neces Sanflorians After thou dare make mention of the Turks, which are like
now to invade pore Italy. Which thou do for this intent. that thou might
have some occasion to polle the people, which under thy gouernmente do
sustain a most heavy and intolerable burden. Thou did sell to the Duke
of Farrare Mutina and Reso. Thou have aliened the Cities of Parma and Placence
from the church of Rome, which were never begotten by the, and the which
Bishop Clemente was verily ashamed to do. To the intent thou might enrich
thine own house and family, thou have handled others contrary to right and
equity, and such as could not, or refused to bear that burden and bondage,
thou have persecuted with war, that do the Perusines declare, amongs others,
and Ascanius Columnois. He that takes yearly of his subjects more than
ordinarye, iii.C. M. Ducates, he that often imposes new customs, one while of
Salt, an other while of other things, he that exacteth now the tenthes, and
now the moytie of the fruits, he ought verily to be taken for the enemy of
Christen blood. The Turkish navy during your bishoppricke, sailed by the costs
of the Church of Rome without damage, and that not long sense, what time
Barbarous entered into our seas. Wherefore that secreat traffic, that thou
haste with infidels, cutteth of from the all occasion, that thou can not
hereafter pretend yt name of the Turkishe war. And yet in the mean season,
you dare be bold to taunt the king of France, for kepinge friendship with the
Protestants, and the Emperor with the King of England, is it not a great
shame, that thou should wholly depend upon Astrology, Paul given to
Astrology and coniuratio^
and Necromantie? the thing can not be denied: for the expert me^ in these
sciences, thou have auaunced with honors, gifts and promotio^s, as Cesius,
Marcellus, Gauricus a portugal, with others. Which thing undoubtedly does
manifestly reprove the of ungodliness and misbeliefe, and is a cause sufficient
enoughe, for which thou ought to be deposed from thy seat. Many such
other like things are contained in the foresaid book, which is to be had in
Printe. Now let us return to the dead coarse. The.ix. day after began the
burial to be made nine days together. In the mean An assemble of Cardinals
to choose a new Pope.
season the Cardinals that were absent repare to the City with all speed,
Trent, Mantua, Cibo, Montane, Auspurge, Auria, Urbine and all these were at the
burial. The first that came thither was the Cardinal of Trent. For he was
than at Mantua, at the marriage before mentioned, when word was brought him,
of the Bishops death. The funeral charges did amount to the some of fifty
thousand crowns. The.xviii. day of Nouembre, when mass was done, they went
into the Conclaue, as they call it, to choose a new bishop. The fourth day of
December, Cardinal Pacieco a Spaniard came thither from Trent, and the.xii. day
came Cardinal Bellay, Uandome, Chastilion, Guise, Tournon, and at thend of yt
same Month, Bolon, Ambois, Lorayne, after also Bourbon, a man of great years,
Frenchmen all, and many were at Rome before, whom the King had sent thither
two years past, as I showed you in the.xix. book. And in so much as we are
come to this place it shall not be a miss, to declare here certain things.
There is a Palace at Rome in Mount Uaticane, joining to the Church of Saint
Peter, wherein dwell the high Bishops, and there, when occasion serves, they
do call the Senate of Cardinals. In this palace among other buildinges, be
five halles, and a galary three score and ten pases long, and two Chapels.
These together make that same that is called yt Conclaue. The one chapel is
appoyn^e^ to say Mass in, and to take their voices in. The other, and the
foresaid Haulles, the Cardinals have their mansion. And at this time after the
death of Paul, for as much as the Cardinals were in nombre fifty and four,
there were so many chambers prepared. The Conclaue in times past had many
doors: but now were they all shut up, sauinge one door only. Moreover there be
no glase windows, but in the chapels, and they be of such an height, that no
man can reach them. Wherefore nether air, nor light pearseth thither, but
burn wax lights both day and night. Now have they their chambers builded.
xiiii. foot wide, xvi. foot long, and.xii. foot deep, nether of brick, stone,
nor timber, but of cloth, either Uiolet or Grene. And because some be more
commodious then others, they draw lottes to avoid displeasure and envy. Every
hall has.ii. rows of Chambers. In this space, and within these limits, must
the Cardinals keep them selves, with their family and household stuff. And
every Cardinal is allowed.iiii. Servants, to lie in his chamber, and always
to wait upon him, whilst the reast make the beds, and do other things
necessary. Again there be.xii. appointed in general, which make clean the
chambers, and convey the filthe and ordure to a place assigned. Those that be
once within, are compelled to remain unless they fall sick, and when they be
once gone out, they are received no more in, except they be cardinals. When
they be come in to the Conclaue, to the election, straightwaies are chosen.iii.
or iiii cardinals, which shall provide all things necessary, and answer the
ambassadors of Kings and Princes. They have one key of the same gate that I
spoke of, the Nobility of Rome has an other the third have the bishops. And
the fourth, the masters of the ceremonies. This gate is not unlocked, after
they be once comen into the Conclaue, unless it be at the coming of some
cardinals. And The masters of ceremonis
in the same gate is a little wicket, whereof the masters of the ceremonies have
the kay, and at the time of dinner and supper it is opened only. For than is
the meat brought in by the same from the kitchins, which are without, and there
be ready certain bishops appointed for the same purpose, which search diligently
every piece of meat, that there be no letters conveyed therein privily. Of the^
does masters of the ceremonies receive the dishes, and deliver the^ to the
cardinals servant, in at the same wicket: for no man else may be suffered to
approach near. The meat is served in earthen platters, and the wine in flage^s
of glass, and are daily brought in new. For look what vessels are once served
in, the same of an old custom are the fees of the masters of the ceremonies,
who gather the^ up right diligently. For they be fine both in stuff and
workmanship, and are sold dear. This time watched without, not far from the
palace, gate, v.C. fotemen, Italians, at the leadinge of the county of The
custody of yt Co^claue
Petilia. Again the guard of the Swisses, that served Paul the third, and the
light horsemen. After, the gentlemen of Rome, than the ambassadors of Kings and
Princes, last, and next to the gate, the Bishops before mentioned, that are
searchers of the meat. For the defense of the city, were placed.iiii. M.
soldiers at the co^duit of Oracius Farnesius, besides that in the private
houses of Cardinals, and noble men were also certain bonds of soldiers. Now
will we speak of thelection. Albeit they were wont in old time to enter into
the conclaue the x. day after the bishops departure, yet now after the death
of Paul the third, the matter was differed until the.xix. day, which was
the.xxix. day of Nouembre, as before is said. That day the cardinals entering
into the conclaue a little before the evening, bind unto them by an oath, the
nobility of Rome the capitaines and centurions, appointed to the defense of the
city. after they resort every man with his family into his own chamber, and
command all others to depart out of the conclaue. Some of the cardinals be
bishops, some priests, and other some deaco^s. Before they went to the
election, certain laws were recited, which they the^ selves use to make,
according to yt state of the time. They do concern the fredomes and privileges
of the cardinals. First therefore The oaths of the cardinals
they be all sworn, that if it be there chance to be chosen Bishop, to
observe all those things exactly. Moreover that they will choose him, whom
they shall think most comfortable for the commune weal. After they go to the
matter. This was the second day of December. There, the masters of the
ceremonies by ringing of The manner how to choose the Pope.
a little Bell in the conclaue, calls them al to Mass, that finished there
is brought unto every cardinal a chair, and therein a piece of paper containing
the names of all the cardinals. After this, before the altar of the chapel is
set a table, covered with a purple cloth, where upon is set a chalice, and a
silver bell, and about the table, six stoles. And every cardinal writes his
voice in a little paper and afterward foldeth up and signeth it in such sort,
that his name only, which is chosen, does appear. Than every man arisinge in
order, goes and kneleth down before the aultare, and when they have prayed,
they put the Paper into the chalice, and sit down again in their places. That
done, two Bishops, so many Priests, and as many Deacons, sit them down upon
those six stoles. The first bishop takes out of the chalice all the papers in
order, and so delivers them to the first deacon: who unfolds the same, and
with a loud voice, reads the name of the elected, but not also of
thelectaure. There by and by the cardinals which have every one of the^ papers,
wherein all their names be written, as I said before, add unto every name that
is red and pronounced the nombre of voices given to the same. The account being
thus made, the first priest, who has also a paper containing the names of the
cardinals, does pronounce how many voices every man has. If the nombre be
not such as is required, the papers are cast again into the chalice. Than does
the other deacon ring the silver bell: straightwais comes the masters of the
ceremonies, that tarieth without, and bringing in a fire pan with coals,
burns all those little papers. And every cardinal may at one time, give
four several voices to didiuers men, but that chances seldom. And this
verelye is the manner of their election: Now let us return to our purpose.
The Cardinals being thus enclosed, the second day of Septe^bre, as before is
said, begin the matter, how be it they went to it but slowly, for that they
heard say, how the Cardinals of France were coming. Many men supposed, that
they should have seen a new bishop of Rome, before Christmas, but their
expectation was vain, The Cardinals were all divided into three parts or
factions, Three factio^s of cardinals.
whereof one was with the Emperor, another with the French king, and the
third was of the Farnesians. The Frenchmen would have chosen the Cardinal of
Traues, Saluiate, Rodulphe, Lorayne, or Theatine. And the imperialles, Pole,
Burges, Carpes, Crucey, Moron or Sfoudrate. And of Poole and Saluiate, there
was a great brute raised in the City. For all be it they would that the thing
should be kept very closely, as before I have said, yet for as much as often
times diverse went out of the Conclaue, either for cause or faining of some
sickness, it is could not be kept secreate, in so much as it is said, how the
Emperor and the French King, were advertised of all that was done. And the
cause which Cardinal Poole obtained not the place, was through the means of
The cause why Pole was not Pope.
Cardinal Theatine, who said (as it is reported) that he smelled of
Lutheranisme. For many both in Italy, and others also, bear witness, that he was
of a right judgment concerning the true Doctrine, as is said in the tenth
book. At the same time were very many Pilgrims were at Rome, which were come
thither out of diverse countries and nations, to thentent they might at the
beginning of the new year, which was than, as it is commonly called, the year
of Iubeley, receive clean remission and forgeuenes of their sins. Upon
Christmas even, they resorted all to the porche of S. Peter's Church, hoping
well, that the same, which is called the golden gate, should have been opened by
the new Bishop. And albeit that long delay was to them very displeasaunte, yet
thought they not good to depart before the election were paste. And that
matter The year of Iubiley.
stands thus, Bonifacius the.viii. Bishop of Rome, in the year of our
Lord.M. CC.xcv. ordained the year of Iubiley first of all men, and
commanded that it should be renewed every C. year, and promised unto all such
as should than come to Rome, and there make their devout prayers, at the
Sepulchers of S. Peter and Paul, full remission of al their sins. After his
death when this distance of time served over long, Clement the sixth reduced the
same unto fifty years. Whose decre also remains, wherein he commands the
angels, that they should carry up into the heavenly kingdom, such as died in
the time of this Pilgrimage. And Sixtus the fourth decreed, that this benefit
should be granted to men every.xxv. year. When therefore the year after the
incarnation of Christ, a.M.D.and L. was at hand, Paul the third, a few
months before, sent abroad his letters unto all nations, most earnestly
exhortinge them, not to let pass so goodly an occasion of vnburtheninge the^
of their sins, and obteining the kingdom of heaven. He him self also
reioysed much, that he had lived unto this time, and said that day would be to
him most delectable, wherein he should deserve so well of mankind, but this his
joy was not effectual, for a few wekes before Paul's joy was vain.
that same day, which he so greatly desired, he departed, as before is
specified. Paulus Fagius, which went with Bucer into England, about the end of
Nouembre, died at Cambridge of a Fever Quartane. How the matter was taken up by
arbitrament betwixt the bishop of Strausburge and the Senate, I have showed you
before. Now had the bishop intended to begin the thing in his churches at
Christmasse, and had prescribed the cleargye an order which they should
follow: but for that they were not fully furnished, he differred it till the
first of February. Than, in those three temples, which the Senate by
composition, had granted him, the Priests begin 1550.
again first to sing their Euensong, and the next day mass, which for the
space of.xxi. years, had been omitted: there was a great concourse,
especially of young people. For unto them it was a strange A strange sight and
never hard of.
sight, and before never heard of, to see there so many with shaven crowns,
and in a new kind of apparel; which sange that no man could understand, Tapers
and Lamps, burning at noone days, smoking and perfuming with sensours, to se
the priest and his ministers standing at the aultare, pronouncing al things in
a strange language, using many courtesies, and sondrye gestures, bowynge down
with his hands fast closed, one while castinge abroad his arms, an other
while bringing in the same; sometime turning him self about, now crying out a
loud, and now again muttering something in great secreatnes, sometime loking up
a loft, sometime down to the ground, and cannot stand still in a place, but
remouinge now to the right hand, and now to the left hand of the aultare to
cross and bless with his fingers, to breethe in the chalice, and lift it up
on high, after to set it down again, in certain places to name, one while
the quick, an other while the dead, to break the host, as they call it, and
put it into the chalice, to knock on his breaste with his fist, to sigh, and
to wincke as though he were a sleep, to a wake again, to eat one part of the
bread, and suppe of the reaste with the wine, least any drop should remain, to
wash his hands, to cross and bless with the gilt patent, to put the same to
his foreheade and breast, to kiss one while the aultare, another while an
Image enclosed in timbre or metal: these things, I say, and such other like,
the young people beheld not without great marvel and wonder, nor certainly
without laughter, and could hardly be kept under. At after none, a certain
priest, whom they had procured thither from an other place, makes a Sermon in
the head church, where he had no great audience, yet diverse resorted, as they
are wo^t in a new thing There did a certain young man make a noise, I know not
what: A trouble in the thurch of Strausburg.
whom one of the Sergeaunts rebuked, and made a business with him as though he
would have carried him to prison. By and by the youth came al flocking about
him, and as in such a case it is commonly seen, there arose an uproar and
tumult, while every man inquireth what the matter is, and stir up and down in
the church. Whereupon the preacher, who thought verily there had been a
sedition raised, being sore afraid of his own part, went down suddenly out of
the pulpit, and by his fellows let into the chauncel which was fe^sed with
doors of Iron. For all the priests were there, and amongs them were certain
prebendaries of the same church, borne of noble houses, which sitting near the
pulpit to hear, conveyed the^ selves in also quickly, knowing not what would
come thereof. The whole matter immediately was declared to the consul and
Pretour, who with the reaste of the Senate were hearing Sermones in other
churches. They came in all haste to appeass the Tumulte: but before they came
all was quieted, for besides a few young men, no man once stirred. Wherefore
the Senate, among others, sent to them James Sturmius, who declares to the
principal of the clargy before said, that the Senate is sorye for this
disturbaunce, and shows thoccasion thereof, and affirms that there was no
citezen found in the same, and for as much as it was done without their
knowledge, prays them not to take it displeasauntly, and promises them, that
they will se to it from this time forward, that no such like thing happen. But
they would not thus be satisfied, and say plainly how they will no more from
henceforthe put their lines in such a danger, and the next day they depart in
great displeasure, leaving of their work begone, and reparing to the bishop at
Tabernes, complain of their misfortune. Thus therefore was the matter
discontinued for a few months after. In the mean time they had complained
to the Emperor of the whole matter, as shall be declared hereafter Many men
suppose, how they reioysed inwardly in their minds, they had so good an
occasion to leave. For so long as the Mass was abolished by a decre of the
Senate', they had lived most at liberty, and received their whole revenues
without any pains taking: but now, that they are bounden to daily service,
although the labor be not great, yet was this occasion thought unto them
right acceptable, whereby they might shake of that yoke of bondage: especially
saying their doings were derided and contempned of the common people, and they
them selves poynted at with fingers, and hated of most men. The Senate, after
inquisition made, could perceive no fault in any towns man. About the
beginning of February, the ambassadors of England and France mete, to treat a
peace. For the Englishmen having lost those fortes before said, were driven to
an narrow issue. About this time also The Protector of england
the Protectoure, the kings uncle was delivered out of the tower, whereas the
counsel perceived that the same should please the king well: and for so much as
the Earl of Warwick was the chief occasion of his apprehension, this mean was
found, that their frendshippe should be renewed through affinity. Wherefore the
Earl of Warwickes son marieth the Duke of Somersets daughter. And afterward
the King gave unto the Earl of Warwick the Dukedom of Northumberland: but
this friendship lasted not long, as shall be declared hereafter. In the mean
season at Rome was all full of factions and partakinges: especially the
Farnesians were very earnest that one of their side might be chosen, and at the
first in deed Alexander, that was Nephewe to Paulus, and certatne other
Cardinals his clients joined them selves to the Cardinals imperials: but when
the french Cardinals gave their voices to Cardinal Saluiate a Florentine,
Alexander, fearing least at the next session, Saluiate should be pronounced
Bishop, revolted to the French part, taking first an oath of them, as it is
reported for certainty, that they should not choose Saluiate. By this mean at
the length, Ihon Mary Mountane, whom we said before was high president of
the counsel at Trent and Bononie, the.vii. day of February was created Bishop.
And he was ever accounted to be a most earnest favorer of the French party,
and also of the Fernesians. The cause why Farnesius bare no good will to
Saluiate was reported to be this, for that he feared, least if he should obtain
the dignity, he would cut short both him, his brethren and kinsfolks of much
riches, which they had heaped together by right and wrong, and would avenge the
Injury done to his house by Paulus and the Farnesiaus. And it is said, how
Cardinal Farnesius would not promise the good will of him and his to
Mountane, whom Paul the third made Cardinal till he had assured him by his
fidelity, that he would freely permit Parma to his brother Octauianus. The
bishop after an old custom, changes his name, and is called July the third
of that name. At the same time the French King setforth a proclamation
against the Luthexanes And a penalty also appointed for the judges that are
slack and negligent in executing the same. Before the bishop was elected,
departed out of this life two Cardinals, Uerulan and Rodulphe: therefore there
The French kings Proclamation against Lutheranes.
remained in the conclaue lii. whereof there were.xiiii. frenchmen, ii Germains
iiii. Spaniards, ii. Portugals, and one English man, all the residue Italians,
and of the.xi. Romans. The.xxii. day of February, July was consecrated
bishop, by Cardinal Cibon: two days after, he opens the golden gate as they
call it, whereas, was July yt third.
infinite nombre of people, to obtain remission of their sins, as before is
said. The bishop strikes on the gate with a golden mallet: Thopenyng of the
golden gate.
for so stands the Ceremony, which afterward he is wont to give a way to some
man, in token of honor. For there be some yt thinck them selves happy men if
they may get it: and at this time the cardinal of Auspurge obtained it through
much entreaty, and carried it with him into Germany. Whilst the bishop beats
on the gate with his mallet, work men break it open with crows of Iron.
there the people, which strive, who may first thronge in, gather up full busely
the mortar and rubbishe that falls by the ruin of the same, and keep them as
precious Jewels. Many men iested upon the fact of the Cardinal of Auspurge,
when they heard thereof, saying, A jest of the Cardinal of Auspurge.
that he intended with yt same mallet to knock the Lutheranes in the head. Than
came to Rome to salute the Bishop, and to do their duty to him, the duke of
Urbin, the duke of Farrare, the ambassadors of Uenise, of Sauoy, of the duke of
Florence, Genes, Senes Scotland, France, and after also themperors. The bishop
did not only restore Parma to Octauius Farnesius, but also gave and made him
the high governor, whom they call Confalonier, and restored also Ascanius
Colunnois, whom Paul the third had exiled. The new bishop, of an ancient
custom, gives his Cardinals hat to Ganimede nouryshed of Poope July.
whom he list: and this bishop July, what time he was Legate at Boloigne,
loved a young man, Innocentius out of measure: whom although the reast did
mislike, yea spoke against him, he chose into the nombre of Cardinals, and
received him again into his daily familiarity, giving unto him his surname, and
arms also. It was bruted at Rome, and libels setforth of the same, how
Iuppiter kept Ganymedes, although old were deforme: yea the bishop him self
would not let to tell it to the Cardinals, and as it is said, would recite in
his merry mode, how wanton a lad it was, and how importune, Whilst they were
occupied in the Conclaue, there were letters Dute of the Conclaue came most fill
thye letters.
taken, which Camillus Olius, one about the Cardinal of Ma^tua, was reported to
have written to a certain lover of his, Anniball Contine, the.xxvi. of January,
and verses written in the vulgar tongue, where he speaks of his affection,
and love of him that his absent, he uses such detestable and shameful words,
that they can not without offense be spoken again. Whereupon a rose a jest of
them, that said, some filthy bishop was signified to come out that Conclaue,
which yielded such kind of letters. The.xiii. day of The Emperors letters to
the ^ates of thempyre:
March, the emperor addresseth his leters to the states of the Empire. How
after the conuention at Auspurge, he returned into Flaunders, that he might
bind the people of his dominions to his son, whom he sent for out of Spain
for the same purpose. His intent was, that thing once finished, to return
straightwaies into Germany, but because the wind serves not to sail at al
times and the distaunce of the places were far a sondre, therefore was it long
before his son came out of Spain: and after his arrival, the hole Summer,
and a great part of Harvest was spent about necessaries affairs: and albeit
that winter was than at hand, yet had he fully prefixed to have gone into
Germany, but at the self same time he chanced into the disease of the gout,
and not long after, word was brought him of the death of Bishop Paul: whersore
he changed his purpose, tarying thelection of the new bishop: after how July
the third had both advertised him of his election, and had also promised very
franckly and largely of his good will and zele to the common wealth and
religion: which thing known, he thought mete, not to let slip so great an
occasion and long wished for, of accomplishing the thing desired, especially,
considering how the whole wealth of Germany consists herein: therefore some
way must be devised, that such things as in the last assembly were decreed
and commenced, may be accomplished: again, it must be foreseue, that yt causes
of dissension be taken away, and certain obstinat parsons and rebels straightly
punished: for these causes verelye he intends to hold a counsel of the states
unperiall: wherefore he commands them, that against the.xxv. day of June,
they be ready to attend upon him at Auspurge, and to find no manner of let,
but that they come them selves, unless it be sickness, which thing not
withstanding they shall be bounden to justify by an oath. And that they send
their Ambassadors with large and full commission of all things concerning
the common wealth, to the intent that in consultation there be found no let nor
delay.

The.xxij. Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The Argument of the.xxii. Book.
PEace is concluded betwixt England and France. They of Maidenburge make their
purgation by writing. The Emperors proclamation against the Lutheranes
astonished many Merchants of his Countries. Whilst the assemble was holden at
Auspurge to continue the Counsel at Trent, Granuellan disceaseth. George Duke
of Megelburge, persecuteth them of Maidenbourge, who going by the worse, have
also Duke Moris and other to their enconues. Pope July publishes a Bull of a
very strange sort. Duke Moris being made Chieftaine against them of
Maidenburge, propounds conditions of peace, against whom also, the Clergy
publish letters to charge them. Whereunto they answer fully, and purge them
selves. Osiander inuenteth a new doctrine of man's justification. The decree of
this assemble is to give saufconduit to go to the counsel, Bucer dies in
England. Three Suns and three Mones are seen. The Pope cites Octaulan Farnese
Prince of Parma, against whom also themperoure publishes his letters
Patentes. Upon this the French King makes his excuse to the Pope. The Duke of
Saxon prisoner, healpeth and comfort the Ministers of the Church banished by
the Emperor, an other beginning of a Counsel at Trent, and the order of the
sessions in the same counsel, the mean how to devise and frame Articles of the
faith, the beginning of the war of Parma.

ABout this time thambassadours of England A peace concinded betwixt France and
England.
and France, when they had long debated the matter, at the last conclude a
peace. And that was so much the more easy to bring to pass, for that they
both saw, how there were some, unto whom this contention of theyrs should in
time to come, be profitable and gainful. Wherefore the Englishmen, restore to
the Frenchmen Boloigne, which they had kept now six whole years, not
without the great marvel of many: and the Frenchmen pay them Money: In that
peace were also the Scotts comprised. After, sending ambassadors on both
parties, the two Kings confirm the peace with a new amity. For ye french King
was made Knight of the Garter in England, and the King of England again of
the French order. Which verelye among great Princes, is as it were a
cognisaunce of most assured friendship. Where they of Maidenburge were defaced
with sundry Proclamations by the emperor, the.xxiiii. day of March, they
publishe an other writing, chiefly to the next inhabiters about them.

First they prove, that they can neither by Gods law, nor man's law be
convicted of rebellion: after they declare, how such as put on armure against
them, do make war against Christ him self. Thirdly they confute the crimes
objected, and show that they be sclaunders, surmised by their adversaries, And
albeit, say they, that through their provocation the Emperor has exiled us,
yet may we truly affirm, that we have as yet refused no reasonable condition,
so that we might enjoy still the doctrine professed at Auspurge, and the
liberties that our elders have left us: of the same mind be we now also,
neither refuse we any kind of duty that ought to be done to the Emperor,
or to the Empire, and take god to witness, that we have given none occasion of
any war or trouble, but covet chiefly to observe peace with all men, and by
ye mean of the true religion and doctrine to attain to the life everlasting.
And this doubtless is the cause of all the hatred, that is raised against us.
Now is it devised by the law, that the inferioure magistrate shall not impeche
the right of the superioure.

Moreover, if it so fortune that the Magistrate pass the bounds of his
authority, and command any thing that is wicked, that he should not only be
obeyed, but also, if he attempt any force, be resisted. There is no man, we
think, that can deny, but that all rule and government depends of God
only: against whom if any proclamation come forth, or if any decrees be
made, the matter is clearly out of doubt, that the same ought to be rejected
and refused, but of this sort is the decre made at Auspurge concerning
religion: Therefore can not we obey them, that would make us to receive the
same Mauger our heads, and take from us the light of the Gospel, and setforth
that Romish Idol, that they might draw us into everlasting damnation. And
saying the case stands thus, there can no rebellion of right be objected unto
us: again, every man may easily perceive, how unlawful it is to work any
violence against us, for in yt are not we only assaied, but this thing is
wrought: to thend that the professors of the true doctrine might utterly be
extinguished, that through our side might be wounded Christ him self, and al
godly people, For we are all the members of Christ. Wherefore such as defile
them selves with so wicked a fact, what thing else may they look for, but Gods
vengaunce? Touching the fortes and villages taken, we have spoken in our last
former writing, neither is it neadefull to repeat the same. For so sone as we
shall be assured of peace, we will restore them to the right owners. Where also
our enemies have raised a brute, as though there were used among us an
intermixed and uncertain lechery, it is a most impudent lie. Therefore we beseech
you for the honor of God, yt ye do not defile your selves with innocent blud,
but pray God that he would confound the bloody counsels of the wicked, and if
it fortune to be war yt they would not deny them their aid. After, in the month
of April, the ministers of the church, setforth a writing, wherein they recite
A confession of faith by ye Ministers of the Church there.
the confession of their doctrine, and declare how it is lawful for the inferior
magistrate to defend him self against the superior, compelling him to forsake
the truth: and here they speak unto and beseech themperor, that he would give no
credit to such, as incense him to practice unjust and wicked cruelty, but that
he would first truly and duly examine ye whole matter. Finally, they make
earnest request that they may have no war, and if the thing come so to pass,
they desire aid also of the inhabiters next them. Of the trouble that I said
fortuned in the head church at Strausburge, the bishop made complaint to
themperor: but the Senate, by an ambassador sent, declares that there was no
fault in them: wherefore the emperor adressing his letters to the bishop,
commands him to renew his work omitted, and to proceed therein. The bishop
takes first assurance by oath of the Senate, that there should be no violence
showed, nor any disturbance in their doing. Thus at the length the clargy at
the feast of Pentecost, which was than the.xxiiii. of May, began The clergy of
Strausburge renueth their mysteries.
their matter again. A few days at the first, the consuls, and certain other
Senators were there in the other side of the Cathedral church, least any tumult
should be raised. And the clargy of the said church had enclosed that part of
the chauncel, as they go into the reuestry with grates of iron, yt no man could
come nere. At thend of May, themperor departs from Brussels with his son
Phillip, and goes to thassembly at Auspurge, leading with him the duke of
Saxon prisoner, and leaving the Lantzgraue at Machlin. Not long after A
proclamation against the Lutheranes.
his departing thence, there was setforth a proclamation against ye Lutheranes,
which was written both in French and Flemish ye.xxix. day of April, and that
was after this sort, albeit says themperor, I have always endeavored, that
thauncient and true religion, might within al my dominions be observed: albeit
I have been evermore wholly bent, that therrors, sects and heresies, which
have now these many years bensowen over al christendom might utterly be
abolished, albeit that for the same cause, I have setforth so^dry
proclamations, with most extreme penalties, yet hearing say, not without the
great grief of my mind, that not only men of our own dominion, but also
strangers which dwell within our provinces, and occupy the trade of merchandise,
have spread abroad thinfection of this mischief far and nere: in such sort as
it is doutles requisite to lay to this disease some corrasine or other sharp
medicine, and make diligent inquisitio^ after the offenders, that the same
plage may be plucked up by the rotes, as in the last assemblies prouincial I
admonished the states and governors, yt every man for his part should diligently
apply him self hereunto, and still remain in thold and catholic religion.
Especially considering how it is openly seen of al men, what tumultes and
commotio^s this infection has stirred up, to speak nothing in the mean time
of the loss of salvation, and of souls. Wherefore by thaduise of our most
derely beloved sister, and assent of our nobles, we make this new law, and
straightly charge and command, that no man whatsoever he be, have, bie, or
distribute any books of Luther, Oecola^padius, Zwinglius, Bucer, or Calvin, or
any other books set forth xxx. years past, without the names of the authors, as
in the A register of the deuines of Louaine.
registre of the deuines of Louain is furthermore contained: moreover that no
man keep any Image or picture made in contempt or mockery of our Lady or other
saints, nether that he cast down or break any Image painted or pourtraied in
the honor of any saint: that no man open his house unto privy conuenticles,
wherein both erroures are wont to be sown, men and women rebaptised, and also
conspiracies made against the church and the common wealth: that no man either
privily or apartly dispute of the holy scripture: especially of hard and
doubtful matters, or take upon him thinter pretation of the same, unless he
be a divine aucthorised by some commendable university: they that shall
otherwise do, shall be punished as seditious persons and disturbers of the common
tranquillity, and if they be men, they shall die with the sword, and women shall
be buried in the ground quick, in case they will forsake their error: but if
they will be obstinate, they shall be burnt, and their goods confiscated,
whether punishment so ever they suffer. Again they shall have none authority
to make any will, and whatsoever they shall do herein since the time they first
began to infringe this our law shall be frustrate and take no place. Furthermore
we charge and command that no man receive into his house, or aid with any
thing such as he knows to be suspected of heresy, but that he advertise
immediately thinquisitour or governor of the place, and shall suffer punishment
if he do it not.

Such as not of obstinate malice, but through infirmitye have fallen into
error and heresies, and yet have not transgressed this To talcke of faith is
for bidden.
our law, and have done nothing seditiouslye, but of their own accord have
returned to amendment, and after they have abiured, be received again to
grace, shall after yt have no conference amongs them selves of matters
appertaining to faith and religion: if they have, to suffer, as those that are
returned to their vomit, he that being not convicted, but vehemently suspected
of heresy, shall be condemned, either tabiure or to do open penance, if ye same
man shall be after accused of heresye, he shall suffer as one that is revolted.
Unto such as be spotted with heresy, and stained with like crimes, shall be given
none honor nor dignity, nether shall they bear any office in the common
wealth. Unless a man bring with him a testimonial from the Curate of the
Church, where he dwelt last, let him not be suffered to have any habitation or
dwelling. For such ought to be had for suspected. That the governors of peace,
and all other our Clients, every man in his province, inquire diligently for
such as shall break this law, and that they assist the inquisitoures and
ecclesiastical judges, so that those which be found culpable, may suffer
according to che form prescribed: except they so do, they shall suffer for
it at our pleasure. Let the common Proctoure also know, whether they do their
duty, and if they shall be found negligent, let him command them to come to
judgment, and if it shall appear that they have offended, let them either be
deprived of their office, or otherwise punished, as shall be thought expedient.
Besides this, let all Bishops, Archdeacons, and Abbots with such other like
Prelates, search with all diligence, if any of the Clergy be infect with this
disease, and punish it extremely. They that know any man defiled with this
Pestilence, or in what places the Heretics lurcke and frequent, let them
present them immediately, unless they do so, to suffer the same punishment
that the others should. The promotour, if the accusation be not false, shall
have the Rewards for promotours
one half of his goods. Which goods in deed shall not exceade the sum of
vi.C. crowns. For whatsoever shall be above this so^me, the tenth part thereof
shall be allotted unto him. He that shall detect to thinquisitour privy conticles,
although he were of their Counsel, shall not be punished, so that he think
well of Religion, and from henceforth refrain their company: but he that shall
present them, being not of their followship, shall be rewarded, as before is
said, let the punishments, yt we have appointed, be so executed accordingly
nether shall it lie in any man's power to alter or mitigate the same, which we
perceive is oftentimes done, for the judges that offend herein, shall not
escape unpunished. They that being accused of heresy, and cited to appear have
fled, and have been after outlawed, when they have heard that the companions of
their offenses be dead, are wont to make suit, that they may be suffered to make
their purgation, for so much as they suppose, how the crime can no more be
proved, and by this means it chances, that retourning again, they sow abroad
false doctrine and errors: but that the same be in no wise done, it is for the
common profit. Wherefore we command, yt there be no place given to their
requests, but yt al such, as after they were cited have appeared, but sought to
save the^ selves by fleing, shall be acco^ted for conuictes, and persons
condemned. They that shall make any suit for suspected, fled, banished, or for
Anabaptists, let them be taken for supporters of heretics. And that judges
and governors receive none such into favor, unless it be either by the permissio^
of us, or of ye Queen's sister. Those yt shall do otherwise, shall be deprived of
their A proclamation for printers.
government. That no printers or bokesellers, do print, sell, or utter any thing
concerning the scripture, but by their advise and consent, unto who^ this
charge is committed: and for so much as there is a register of books, which
thuniuersity of Louain has rejected, let ye stationers have ye same hanged up
in their shops in open sight, least after, either the^ selves or the biers,
plead ignorance: again yt they have another register of al their books, he yt
will not obey shall lose an C. crowns. Finally yt no man take any children to
teach, unless it be through ye permission of the magistrate, and the chief
minister of the church authorized, and that he teach or instruct the youth in
nothing, but according to the form prescribed by the deuines of Louaine. When
this decre was proclaimed, many were sore astonished, especially the high duch and
English merchants, which occupy the traffic of merchandise in themperors
towns and countries, especially at Andwarpe a great no^bre. Wherefore they were
of this mind, yt unless the decre were mitigated, they would remove to another
place: yea mani of the^ shutting up their shops purposed to depart, for
thauoyding of ye danger. The Senate of Andwarp also, and the other citezens there,
which saw what a wonderful loss this would be to the^, were in a great
perplexity: and Andwarp astonished at the Emperors proclamation
when thinquisitors came thither, they wtstode the^ withal their endeavor, and
riding to the Lady rege^t, declare unto her, what a loss it should be not to
the^ only, but also to the whole region, if this decre take place. Wherefore the
matter was, in the same city, for ye which the decre was chiefly made, by
reason of so^dry nations and people there, appesed for yt time. This decre
being after translated into the high duch to^g, Matthie Flacie, of who^
me^tio^ is made in ye former book, sets forth, and most sharply ta^teth
Iselebie, and the Adiaphoristes, as he terms the^, which assay to persuade
the people, as though religion were not impugned. But the form of inquisition,
which they call an instruction, contains a most ample authority. For it is
lawful for them to call before the^ not only al private persons, but the
magistrates the^ selves also, and to compel them by an oath to answer to
interrogatories, and to utter what they know. And the questions concerning
religion are in nombre. xxxviii, wherein such ar are presented or suspected be
examined, and amo^gs others, whether they believe the sacrifice of the mass to
be auailable for the dead, so yt they may be delivered hereby from the pains of
purgatory: whether they believe yt S Peter was prince of thapostles, Uicar of
Christ, and high bishop of the church of Rome, and yt those also are to be
accounted for which do lawfully succeed in his chair: whether they believe that
it is lawful to forsake thobedience of the high bishop, being nether heriticke
nor Scismatick: whether they believe that Matrimony privily co^tracted, is
lawful: whether they believe the Lutherans, Buceranes, and such others to be of
the Church. The Cardinals of France remaind at Rome a certain space, after
that July was elected: The death of the cardinal of Lorayne.
and than they return home again. Howbeit by the way, when he was come now into
France before he had seen the King, died Ihon Cardinal of Lorayne, who had
been all his life time a most pleasant gest and companion with king Fraunces.
By this occasion Robert Lenoncourt Cardinal, obtained the Bishopprycke of
Mentz, who was afterward supposed to have helped greatly, that the town of
Metz, a city of thempire, came into the hands of Henry the french king, as
hereafter shall be declared. In the last session at Trent, was decreed amo^gs
other things, that such as had mo Bishopprickes than one, should keep of them
which they list, and forgo the rest, as before in the.xix. book is specified:
Nevertheless, so long as Paul lived, the thing was not put in execution: but
when this man was made bishop, the cardinals of France obeyed it in deed in
aparence, but to no loss of theyrs. For whereas diverse of the^ had ii. or iii
bishoppricks, and many others aspired to yt dignity, by an excha^ge made, they
permitted some other to inioye one, and in stead of one bishoppricke, which
they left, they had of them again many abbotships, or such other like
promoito^s. In the month of July, Adolphe bishop of Colon, making a composition
with the Senate, enters The archbishop of Collon enters the city with pomp.
the city of Colon, with an exceading great pomp and train, having gotten
together all his Clients, kindred and alies, yt they might honor him with their
presence the same day. He was accompanied as they report, with ii.M. horse and
above. And the duke of Cleue verily had brought him a notable ba^d of horsemen,
he had lately a daughter born by his wife Mary, the daughter of king
Ferdinando. Her Godmothers at the fount stone, where both the Emperors sisters,
Elenore the French Queen, and Mary Queen of Hongary, and tharchbishop of Colon
was her Godfather: but not long after there arose a great dissension between the
Duke and the Archbishop, about thecclesiasticall jurisdiction. The.xxvi. day of
July, the Emperor begins the counsel imperial at Auspurge. Wherein he
propounds of followynge the general Counsel, of observing the decre of
religion, lately made at Auspurge, of punishinge rebels, of restoryng the
jurisdiction and goods of the Church. This asse^bly was armed also, albeit yt
the state of things was so^what more quiet. The princes of Mentz and of Treuers
were present, the reast of thelectours sent ambassadors? Moreover there were
present Wuolfga^ge master of Prusse, and the bishop of Wirciburge, Eistet
Costintz, Auspurge, Trent, Cambray and Merseburge: and none of the other princes
besides the duke of Bauier, and at the length also Henry the duke of Bru^swick.
The matter being debated, the most part The protestation of D. Moris against
the counsel.
were content, yt the counsel should be followed: but duke Moris by his
deputies declares yt he can allow the same none otherwise, unless the whole
matter from the beginning may be retracted, and the deuines of the protestants
not only heard, but yt they may also have power to decide matters, yt the
bishop of Rome do submit him self to the counsel, and not occupy the place of a
judge there, and that he release the bishops of their oath, to thinte^t they
may speak their mind freely. After this protestation of his was red openly, his
deputy would have had it recorded, as the manner and custom is, but the same was
denied him, ye whole doing of such matters is in the power of tharch bishop of
Mentz, chauncelour of thempire. Themperor afterward moved the bishop for a
counsel. The seventh day of August, the cardinal of Auspurge, in his Sermonne,
inueighed soore against The knavery of Spanyardes.
the Lutheranes. And a few days after, certain Spanyardes, in mockery and
contempt of the Citezens, which were than hearing ye Gospel preached, played
certain parts in the church, in such sort, yt the matter was like to have
turned to some great tumult. But at the coming of the Consul, the thing was
by a goodly mean appeased and quieted. About thend of the month of August,
Granuellan, The death of Granuellan.
who came lately from Bezonse, a Town in high Burgundy, to Auspurge, leaves
his life, not without themperoures great heaviness, as it is reported, he had
succeeded Marcurine, Castinarie Cardinal, as I showed you in the.vii. book, and
by the space of xx. years had been in chief authority, and was privy in manner
alone to all themperours secreat counsels and working. In whose place and
function succeeded his son Anthony, bishop of Arras, a man of great learning,
who before in thabse^ce of his father, was wo^t to answer the matters of ye
commonwealth, and was very familier with themperor. In the mean season Henry
the duke of Brunswick lays Duke Henry besieges the City of Brunswick.
siege to ye city of Brunswick, to the which he had born great hatred these
many years, for religion, and for other things: and when he had don their
country much harm by firing and spoiling, and yet could not win the city,
through the mediatio^ of certain, themperor co^ma^deth both parts to leave their
war, and plead their cause before him. This was in the month of Septembre. The
Emperors army besieged than Afric, a town of Barbary, some men suppose it
to be Leptis, howbeit Liuie makes also mention of ye city of Affricanes: that
city kept Dracutus a notable Archpirate, who had lately joined hi^ Dracutus an
archpirate.
self with the Turk. Themperor had committed the chief gouernenient to the
Uiceroy of Sicilie. Who after he had beaten the town with his ordenaunce a
certain time, being certified that Dragutus was coming with a new army, saw
he had need to make haste. Wherefore the tenth day of Septembre, he gives the
assault both by sea and land, and within a few hours space, takes it by
force. The Knights of the Rhodes, that were upon the sea, did themperor that
day good service: but the Spaniards which fought by la^d, The taking of the
city of Africa.
and excelled in nombre, when the City was taken, had the most part of the
spoil. The nombre of the prisoners was great, about an.viii. thousand: which
being put into Ships, were led away captive into Sicilie, Sardinie, and to
other places. The situation of the city, is said to be very pleasant, by reason
of grene meadows A goodlye situatio^ of the same.
and hills set with Olives and palm trees, and fair springes of water. Not
far from thence is reported to be a goodlye corn Country, which with a most
ample increse yeldeth again to the plowme^ that it has received. Cosmus the
duke of Florence sent themperor men in this war under the conduit of Iordane
Ursine, and Alastor Balion. For because winter was now at hand, and vitaile
could not be provided, the Uiceroy, leaving there a garrison of Spaniards,
retourneth with his army into Sicilie: Dragutus fled to the Turk, traueling to
Constantinople. This thing was thoccasion of a new war, which the Turk
attempted afterward, not only against ye Emperor, but also against King
Fardinando. When the emperor had commanded Duke Henry, and the Senate of
Brunswick to lay a side their weapons, their armies were discharged on both
parties: but all those forces afterward, George Duke of Megelburge, the son
of Albarte, a young man that had served Duke Henry, allured unto him. The
clergy of Maidenburge, and Prelates of the head church, most of them gentlemen
borne, who were chiefly offended with the city, had waged him with great
rewards and promesses, as it is reported, that through his aid they might
avenge the^ selves, but this do they deny, as shallbe declared hereafter. And
their archbishop Iho^ Alberte was lately departed: wherefore they promised him
ye government of ye hole province, in case he could subdue it, and by wrytings
laid to pledge to him iii. principal castles. Thus he marching first through ye
country of Halberstat, came after into ye province of Maidenburge, and there
practicing slaughter, spoiling and burning, surpriseth the town of Wancelebe,
spoyleth and sets it on fire: and when he had there attempted the castle in
vain, and lost diverse of his me^, he marches forward, and which way so ever he
went, did exceeding much harm. Wherefore ye people of the country and villages,
when they saw their goods and cattle taken and driven away, come to ye Senate
of Maide^burge, craving their aid and succor and declare how they will refuse
no peril nor cost herein. The Senate therefore assigned them a day, wherein
they should be all in a redines: That was the.xxi. day of September. Than
went out of Maydenburg together with the husband men the citezens jointly and
the soldiers of the garrysons, with three bands of horsemen, with field pieces
and other furniture, and rest that night two miles from the city. In the
morning before day light, auauncing their camp, they march streightwaye
toward their ennemie, and when they came into his sight, put them selves in
order of battle. In the forewarde, where was thought most danger, stood the
citezens and soldiers: After them were placed the country people. The Duke of
Megelburge perceiving this order, suddenly tournyng about his ranks, inuadeth
the husbandmen, a kind of people neither well armed, nor exercised in feats
of war, and that upon such a soden, that he gave the charge, before the
others could turn them selves, with their ordenaunce, or be able to rescewe
them. So therefore they casting away their weapons, The overthrow of ye
Maidenburgians.
fled, who might run fastest, and breaking the ranks of their fellows, make
the way open for the ennemy to get the victory. The most part of the^ all,
what at the giving of the charge, and what after in the chase were slain. Of
the citezens and soldiers were not many lost, but diverse taken. The gunnes,
carriage and al warlyke furniture came into the hands of the ennemies. In the
mean season the Emperor was very instant, that both decrees made at Auspurge,
should be observed, and makes a grievous complaynt of the cities of Mayde^burg
and Breme. For they only of all the cities remained constant, albeit the
Bremers were not outlawed. But the Princes make intercession, and require that
they might have the hearing of the matter. And when the Emperor had consented,
they adresse their letters to either city, the.xxii. day of September and The
princes letters to the^ of Maydenburg.
cite them to appear at Auspurge the second day of November, and by saufe
conduicte to come answer in their cause, sendyng their Ambassadors with full
power and authority to conclude. There was a certain woman at Auspurge, a
citezen of the town, who seeing the priest pass by, who carried the host to A
woman in peril for a light word.
a sick man, with light borne before him as the manner is, maruelyng thereat
demanded of him, why he carried that light at noooe days? For so saying she
was apprehended, and in great danger of her life, but through the great
entreaty of women, and finally at the intercession of the Emperors sister
being pardoned of her life, was bannyshed.

For Mary Queen of Hungary Regent of Flaunders, was come thither, boeth for
other matters and also for this cause chiefly, that the proclamation lately set
forth in Flanders and those parties might be mitigated. For unless it were
so, she said it would come to pass, that Andwarpe, which is now the best
frequented mart town in the whole world, should fall in decay and lose her
former beauty. Moreover that there was great danger in all places of an
iusurrection, in case the thing should be put in execution. The Emperor very
hardly acconsented at the last, and altering those things that concerned
merchants strangers, takes away the name of inquisitione abhorred The
proclamation for religion is mitigated.
of all men, the residue he commands to take place and to be observed.
Whylest the letters were conveyed to the Bremers and the^ of Maide^burg, the
Princes and states inquire of the Emperor, upon what conditions he will
accord with them. Wherefore he propounds for the Bremers these, that they
submit them selves unto his power, humbly crave pardon, forsake al leagues, and
make no co^federacy wherein he and his whole family be not comprised. That they
obey the chamber imperial, and be contributaries to the charges thereof for
their portion. That they agree with their Archbishop, if they can not, to stand
to the arbitrament of such Umperes as he shall appoint. That they accord also
with the whole clergy. That they restore the munition taken from Duke Erricke,
and recompense him for the harms done. That none within their jurisdiction
serve in the wars against him. That they pay unto him an hondreth and fifty
thousand crowns, and deliver.xxiiii. pieces of ordenaunce furnished. That they
obey the decree of the former co^uention, and such as shall be now decreed. And
to them of May denburg, he imposes in manner the same laws. This was added
moreover, that they should answer all men to the law, and obey the sentence
given. That from the time of their rebellion, they commence no action against
any man. That they Raze their fortifications and bulwarks. That they receive
into their city him and his Lieftenauntes, at any time, with what power
someuer they bring, without any condition. That they pay two hondreth
thousand crowns. That the publication of their goods be ratified, and the
Possessours thereof not disturbed. The report of the battle of Maydenburge,
was immediately sown abroad far and nere, and within six days was brought
to the Emperor at Auspurg. And where as many men thought, they had now been
almost undone, behold, they publyshe a writing the first day of October,
wherein they recite the whole matter, and say that they have not lost above two
hondreth of their Citezens and soldiers. And they which appeared to need
comfort, do them selves confirm others. For God say they, would by this mean
try our constancy. And of his infinite goodness toward us, we doubt nothing.
And albeit it be his will, that we shall thus wholly perish and be oppressed, yet
can there be no evil therein. For how much better were it, to abide thextreme
peril, than forsaking the profession of the truth, to reuolte to the Romish
Antichrist? For such as either for fear, or for a certain covetousness and
ambition do relent, and submit them selves to the counsel of Tre^t, and do
admit and allow that wicked decree made at Auspurge, there is no doubt, but
that they, both in this life, and in the life everlasting, shall suffer most
grievous tourmentes, except they return to amendeme^t. We know also that God
has appointed our adversaries bounds and limits, which they shall not pass.
Wherefore we desire all men, that they would join their prayers with ours, and
attempt no war against us. For if we be once oppressed, the selfsame
calamity shall redounde unto al Germany without any respect. And seeing the
case stands thus, certainly the very zeal, love, and preservation of our
native country, require this of you, that you should with your aid assiste
us, which for the doctrine of ye Gospel are afflicted. After they of
Maydenburg had this overthrow, incontinently very many prepare them selves
unto war. And among others Duke Maurice, the Electour of Brandenburg, with
his cosyn Marquis Forces bent against Maydenburg.
Albert, and Henry Duke of Brunswicke. Moreover the whole Nobility were also
called upon to bring horsemen. Many supposed these forces to be levied for this
intent, that the Duke of Megelburge might be expulsed out of the country. And
at the first in deed certain would seem to have taken armure for this cause,
that he should not straie to far. But wha^ they were all assembled, the eight
day of October marchyng forewarde, they encamped not far from the city, and
the syxt day after, at night, they run forth with a great clamoure even to
the ditches and gates of the city, to prove what the towns men could or
durst do. But they being repulsed with great shot, lost many of their men.
And as they retired them selves to their Camp in high displeasure, by the
way they set on fire the poor Lazarus house, clean contrary to the law of
arms. The next day they bickered again, when the Towns men had made saley
out. For they were full of courage, and where as diverse others, very many also
of the Nobility repaired thither for the hatred of the Duke of Brunswick
expert men of war and worthy captains. The.xii. day of October was truce
taken and certain Ambassadors came into yt city to treat a peace: But that
was in vain. Whylest these An Ambassade against them of May denburge.
things were in working, yt states of tharchbishoprike of Maydenburg, amongst
whom the clergy is principal, mete at Hale and the.xv. day of October send
Ambassadors to the emperor and Princes of thempire. Wha^ they came to Auspurg
the.x. day after, they accuse most heinously the senate and people of
Maydenburg. And for so much as Duke Maurice had taken unto him ye power of yt
Duke of Megelburg, and they had also the^ selves sent him aid, neither lies
it in their ability: to sustain so great charges long. They require, yt the
Princes would find some mean to quench this common flame, and that so
shortly as may be, how both the soldiers may be paid, and also those naughty
outlawes punished, tofore they recover again their strength and courage after
their late overthrow. For else will the soldiers reuolte to thennemy. Which
thing will be a most present danger, not only to the^ that are next the^, but to
al other states also. For they intend nothing else, but the destruction of yt
high Magistrate, and are wholly addicted to steire up the people to rebellion
throughout the whole Empire. And they demanded aid of viii.M. foteme^, and
a.M. and.CC. horsemen. The same day were red the aunswers of the Bremers, and
senate of Maydenburg, which they made to yt Princes letters, as before is said.
And yt Bremers first declare how greatly they always have desired peace, and
the Emperors friendship, and how often they have sued unto him for peace, not
only by their own Ambassadors, but also by yt king of Denmark and the cities
ye border on ye sea, and show what strayte conditions were offered. And yet to
the end it may appear, how much they esteem themperours authority, they say,
that they will not refuse to send Ambassadors, and promise that if they may
have their Religion and liberty permitted the^, they can be content to do any
thing. And they of Mayde^burg: how in the The answer of the Mayde^burgians.
fourmer assembly of the Empire, they made great suit to the Emperor for
peace, but the conditions imposed were intolerable, and say that since that
time, they have sustained great damage, and where there was no end nor
measure of wro^ges, they repulsed from them violence, yet moderatly. And the
cause of all the hatred to be that they covet to retain the true doctrine, and
to flee Idolatry. As concerning the day prescribed, because they are
commanded to send Ambassadors with full authority, they can find none that
will go in that sort. Moreover, how George Duke of Megelburg has lately moved
war against them, and confesses openly, that he does this by the
commandment of the Emperor and thempyre. And now also the ennemies army
lies before their city. If they may be removed, and their Ambassadors well
assured, and shall and may report the demand unto them, they refuse not that
some be sent. About the beginning of Noue^ber, dies Ulriche The death of
Ulriche Duke of Wirtemb.
Duke of Wirtemberge, the suite hanging still, that he had with king Ferdina^do,
as before is said. His son Christopher succeeded him. After the Emperor had
received the aunswers of the two cities, concerning the Bremers, he thinks
good to tarry for the^, in as much as they say, they will come: But as touching
them of Maydenburge, for so much as the thing is far otherwise than they say,
and because they answer frowardly and in a manner contemptuously, he requires
them to proceed in consulting, what is to be determided against them, and
chiefly that they would way diligently the requests of the states of the
Byshoprike, and herein do that thing which may both be for the commodity and
dignity of thempyre. The Princes and states perceived right well, that there
would never be pacificatio^ made upon these conditions. Wherefore they require
that more gentle things might be propounded. But the Emperor perseuereth A
cruel decree against the Magdeburgians.
in his purpose. So they at the length, albeit against many of their wills
namely of the cities, assente unto him, and promise their aid. But again they
desire the Emperor, first, that he him self would be co^tributory herunto.
Secondly, that in case he can not be at this war him self, he would appoint
a general. That charge they commit to Duke Maurice, if it seem so good unto
him, and say that ye charges of this war must be borne of yt same money, that is
now already levied for the uses and affairs of the commonweal. The Emperor
again replieth what charges he had been at in ye fourmer war, ye he might
restore peace unto Germany, and requires the^ to have consideration thereof.
Touching Duke Maurice, he is well pleased, and says yt he knows no man at
this present time, yt is more fit for yt charge, than he, and that for diverse
causes. And yt the money should be taken out of the common treasury, he does
allow and permit, so yt so much as is taken from thence, be within a certain
time restored. For yt money was not gathered for this use. And he exhorts the^
to follow this thing with their whole endeavor, yt they may be punished
according to their demerites. Which he shows may thus be don, if yt city be
environed with a tre^che and a bulwark made, and the siege continued, til they be
subdued. For unless yt lice^cious and obstinat rebellion be repressed, they se
how great a danger and shame it will be to thempire. Thus therefore Duke Maurice,
which had busied him self herein as I said before, was by common asse^t made
high. Duke Maurice general of this war.
general of the war. And for the charges of the war were appointed.lx.
thousand crowns monthly, and an ho^dreth thousand crowns paid for the
charges past. Concerning the counsel, the Emperor affirms to the Princes,
that it shall be continued again at Trent before Easter: For so does the Bishop
promise him. Yet does he in the mean season urge the decree of Auspurge, and
commands them to declare the causes unto him, why those orders that were
written two years since, of Religion, and reformation of the Clergy be not
observed? The Archebyshops Electours say, how they have omitted nothing, and
are yet wholly about the same. But the cause which lets that they are not
fully accomplished, is the exemptions and privileges of certain. The deputes of
the Electours absent, say they have applied the thing diligently, but the long
continuance of time, has been a hinderaunce. For this Religion can not so
suddenly be plucked out of men's minds, and that they had need to be instructed,
that men might by little and little accustom them selves, who are thoroughly
persuaded, that the same decree dissenteth much from the holy Scriptures, that
nothing can be violently altered without trouble and sedition. And if any man
should co^straine ye prechers to it, there would no man serve in yt church. For
hardely can there any one be found that will abase him self hereunto, for the
state of the syngle life, and condition of the Lords supper. The residue of
Princes and states of the Romyshe Religion, allege these causes, yt The causes
that the decre is not observed.
Schools wherein yougth is not ryghtly instructed. The Ministers of the church
that diswade the people from the same decree. The want of priests: The
negligence of Magistrates. And say moreover, that this thing is an
hinderau^ce, that many of the spirituality live vitiously. Again, that many
inuey and rail upon the decree made with books of reproach unpunished. July
the Bishop of Rome being often treated with by the Emperor, about the eight day
of November, sending forth his bulls, calls Pope July somoneth a counsel.
a counsel, affirming it to be coincident to his office, to call and direct
counsels. That he coueteth also to provide for the tra^quillitie of Germany,
which has always ben most obedient to the church and Bishops of Rome, who in
earth are Christ's Uicars. Wherefore let all men repare to Trente, against the
first day of May, which either by right, custom, or privilege have interest
to be there, and such as Paul the third has called before, what time he
somoned the counsel in the same place: For that day shall the counsel be
there continued. And if it so They repare to Trent be^fore contemned.
fortune that either for age or sickness or affairs of the commo^wealth he can
not himself be present, yet will he by his Legates, be president of the same.
This bulle he sent after to the emperor. Duke Maurice being made chiftayne,
attempteth the thing with great force, and buylding up certain bulwarks, that
the soldiers might winter therein, about the end of November he assayleth the
city. Which city is divided into three parts. Maurice besegeth Maydenburg.
Whereof one, which is called new, he surpriseth by night, scalyng the walls
and gates, and neither drum went nor trompet blewe tofore he had brought in
his soldiers. The citezens reised up with the clamor, so many as were found
in armure are put to the sword, the rest being taken and spoiled, are
expulsed. Wherefore they of the city, to the intent they might take away from
the ennemy this commodity, sendyng forth their soldiers, burn that part,
that was theirs. Again: the other part, which is called Sudeburg, they set
on fire also, receiving the towns me^ into the city. About this time came
Lazarus Schuendie, into the camp to Duke Maurice, that he might in the
Emperors name give his counsel. The same time was Earl Hedeck in Saxony, whom
the Emperor had Hedeck and Mansfeld discomsited by Duke Maurice.
outlawed two years past, as before is mentioned. He and Albert Earl of
Maunsfeld do levy bands of soldiers in the cities by the Sea coaste, to
aid them of Maydenburge. Duke Maurice therefore in the month of December,
goes unto the^ with part of his army, and scatters them, and allureth unto
him four enseignes of the same men, and after also count He deck, as you
shall hear. The.ix. day of December the Emperor in a long proclamation, and
with heinouse words inueieth The Empe. proclamation against the^ of Maydenburge.
against them of Maydenburge, and commands that no man aid them, and
straightly charge the Captains and soldiers, which be within the city,
that within fourtene days after these letters be delivered they depart out of
the city, and give knowledge hereof unto Duke Maurice, or in his absence to
Lazare Schuendie. If they obey, he promyseth pardon, if not, he appoints
extreme punishment. There was in the city Albert Earl of Mansfelde, whom the
Emperor in deed had not banyshed, but had turned him out of al his
possessions, what time he perseuered in the fidelity and friendship of John
Friderick Duke of Saxon. How the Emperor left the Lantgraue at Machline,
taking his journey to Auspurg, it is before declared. Duke Maurice and the
Marquis of Brandenburge, were earnest suitors that he might be delivered, but
answer was made them, how not he only, but also his sons and cou^sellours
so demean them selves that as yet he might not be delivered. His kepers also
said unto him, how he should be carried into Spain. Whereupon he requires aid
of his sons, admonishynge them of the faith and duty they owe unto him, and
The Lantgraues so^ns sue for their father.
commands them to sue Duke Maurice and the Marquis of Brandenburg, that they
yield them selves prisoners according to the form of their obligation, and
fulfill their promise. His sons obey him herein, and sending Ambassadors
most earnestly and often admonish and sue them. But they, one while jointly
together, another while either of the^ severally by him self, some time by
messengers, sometime presently excuse the matter, and declare that it is not
expedient either for them or for their father, that it should so be, and ever
bring new reasons, whereby they trust he may be delivered without any danger.
Therefore they desire them to forbear the^ a while, and to give them respite.
But ye Emperor who before had moved the La^tgraue by Lirane, to deliver those
obligations, as is declared, when he was further sued unto, he sends Lazare
Schuendie to his sons and counselors, commanding them not only from
henceforth neither to co^mence action nor sue Duke Maurice and the Marquis of
Brande^burg, but that also they send unto him all such manner of wrytinges,
and surcease their suit: unless they obey, he threateneth the^ with the
greatest punishment that may be devised: But that was yet in vain. Moreover he
releaseth by his letters the Princes bound, and pronou^ceth them fre from that
bond. Wherefore when the Lantgraue The Lantgraues purpose.
saw no hope, he was fully prefixed to make an escape if he might, and
deuiseth sundry means with his servants, who^ he had sent for out of Hesse,
some of them Gentlemen of good houses. But they being afraid of the danger,
sought delays. At the last he persuades two, Conrade Bredesten, and John
Rommelie, which all the way from Hesse unto Machlin laid post horses, which
he might leap upon and escape. But the matter came to light by a certain man of
his, who had told one Frendely at Machlin, that within a few hours his
master should be at liberty. The same going from one to an other, was reported
to the captain of the guard, in the very same moment His devise of fleing
bewrayde.
and instant that he should have fled in. Than was all that matter dashed, and
two of his servants were slain out of hand, others taken and beheaded, and
he him self carried to a straiter prison. The Emperor, when he knew thereof,
took it most displeasau^tly, and writing his letters to Duke Maurice and the
Marquis of Brandenburg, signifies that this so bold an enterprise,
apperteineth to the injury of him and his dominion, and says he will be sore
avenged of them, that have given him either aid or counsel herein. The copy
of these letters they send to William the Lantgraues son, and amongst other
things they say that in case there be any such part played from henceforth,
they will stand no more bound to them. Yet nevertheless Duke Maurice
severally comforted them, and to deliver their father, promyseth to spend not
only his goods but his life and blood also. And than says there shall be a time
convenient to yield him self, when the state of things shall be such, as the
displeasures of certain are less to be feared.

The.xix. day of December, all the fotemen and horsemen of Maydenburge, that
were not appointed to the watch, issue out of the city at after midnight,
that they might oppress the The issuyng out, and victory of the Mayde^burgians.
stout courage of their ennemies in a vyllage not far of. The enterprise was
very dangerous, for yt they must pass through their ennemies camp: But yet
it chaunsed luckely, for before the ennemy could be armed, they had taken the
Uillage, and set it on fire in diverse places. They had all put over their
harness white shirtes, as the manner is in Camisado. So many of their ennemies
as resisted were slain, which were many noble gentlemen. Diverse fought out of
the houses, but the same being set on fire, they were burnt. Uery many of ye
Nobility were taken, and immediately brought into the city, with two ho^dreth
and lx. horses. On the morrow as soon as the day appeared, they retired home
ward, and by the way met a troop of horsemen, which were led by the Duke of
Megelburge, who at the last The Duke of Megelb. taken prisoner
giving the charge, when the horsemen pressed him before, and the fotemen gave
the onset at his back, was taken and brought into the city, even he, which
had first begone the war.

In these days also came out of Spain to Auspurg Maximilian Marimilian comes
out of Spain.
of Austriche, the Emperors son in law, created king of Boheme in his
absence, called home by his father king Ferdinando, between whom and the
Emperor was than a great contention, about the succession of the Empire, for
the which cause also the Emperor was said to have sent for his sister
Co^tentio^ for the Empire betwirte the Emperor and Ferdinando
Mary, who returned thither in the month of January, that she might be a
mean, where she had departed from thence in September before. For the
Emperor, who knew what commodity it were to annexe Germany to his
inheritance, coueted to establishe his son, which should reign over so
many large and diverse Regions, with this as a sure fortress. But king
Ferdina^do having the same respect thought that another his nor the expectation
and commodity of his children ought to be diminished herein. Moreover
Maximilian who was a Prince of great towardnes, and could speak sundry
languages, especially the high dutche, and in Prince like manners excelled, was
very much favored and beloved of all me^. Those letters whereby the counsel
was denunciatour, as before I have said, the Bishop promulgat at Rome at the
latter end of December. what things offend many
In the which are many things which might offend men's minds, of the which
sort is that he says it is his part to govern counselles, that he calls
him self Christ's vicar, that he will have the action continued, and not
repeted from the beginning, that he chalengeth to him self the place and
authority of the president, that he seems to call thither only me^ of his own
order. These things also the Emperor, when the letters were delivered him, is
said to have noted right well, and to have required of him, that such things
as were somewhat rough, might be altered, fearing, as it was thought, least the
Germans being affrayde of these things, as mariners be of Rocks, would
either refuse the sommoning, or else find some let or delay in this business,
which he with so great labor had brought to pass. I will not affirm this to
be true, and such manner of cou^selles ar wont to be kept secret. But if it be
trwe, it is manifest, that he obtained nothing. For the same form that I
spoke of, the Bishop published, not one word altered. Yea there be some that
suppose he did it of a set purpose, that he might fear away the Germans
from the counsel, that they should not come there, or if they came, he might
have them intrapped by certain snares. Certainly Paul the third, was reported
to have used this policy, as I have said in the ix. book, that after he had
learned by his espialles, what ye Protestauntes could bear and what they
refused, calling than a counsel, he would urge and propounde those things
chiefly, where with he knew their minds to be most offended, as a man may
aso perceive in this bull of Julius, which is framed after that same of Paul
the third.

In these days, Duke Maurice and the Electour of Brandenburge, offer
conditions of peace to them of Maydenburg, and They of Maidenburg are moved to
render.
require them to render them selves and show their fidelity unto them and to
their Archebyshop. Thus if they will do, they shall be permitted to have and
retain the Religion and doctrine exhibited in times past at Auspurge, there
shall be nothing deminished of their privileges, laws and lyberties, the
fortifications also of the city and goods shall remain safe, and no violence
offered unto any man. Moreover they promise to make intercession to the
Emperor that he will abolysh the sentence of publication, verily upon these
conditions. That as other Princes and cities, so they also may humbly desire
pardon, and deliver him.xvi. pieces of ordenaunce, and an hondreth thousand
crowns, to the end they may inioye their goods already confiscated. And that
sum of money they say they will lay out and debource for them, that they
restore unto the Clergy their goods: Concerning the hurt done on either
side, and touching the habitation of the clergy, and ceremonies of the
cathedral church, they them selves will take order. And to the intent the
Emperor may the easlier be persuaded, that a garrison be received into their
city, till the Emperor have confirmed the pacification, and the rest of the
conditions shall be accomplished. And that the soldiers shall do them no injury,
they them selves will forsee. But in case the Emperor refuse these things,
than will they have out their soldier immediately, restoring unto them their
city safe, and in every point such as they found it. But the Senate refused
to make surrender or to receive a power into the city.

In the month of December, the States of the Byshoprike of maydenburg, but
thiefly the Clergy set forth a wrytinge in A writing of the Clergy against
the city.
the vulgar tongue, against the Senate and people of Mayde^burge, and say
how they have aunciently and by right apperteined to the jurisdiction of them
and of the Archbishop, and that is to be proved by the letters of Otto the
first Emperor. And many things say they, have they proudly and
presumptuously done, chiefly against Burcarte and Gunther, Archebyshops, but
being reduced to their duty, they have suffered condign punishment, as by
histories it may be declared. But in ye time that Ernest of the house of Saxon,
and Albert of Brandenburge were Bishops, a composition was made for all
controversies, but they kept not conuenauntes. And so often as the Bishops by
the common assent of the other states decreed any thing for the profit of the
common wealth, they always drew backwarde, and sought the mean, how they
might rule the rest. And what time the Cardinal of Mentz had reciued John
Albert his cosyn to be his coadiutour: They would not only allow the same, but
also took from him the title and honor due unto him, although they were
oftentimes spoken to for ye same. And again when he had succeeded in the
Byshopryke after the death of Cardinal Albert, they would neither take him for
their Bishop nor give him their fidelity, and herein perseuered so long as he
lived, albeit noble men often times entreated therein. And this did they for this
intent, that they might obtain the government, which may easily appear unto
any man, that will consider their doings. And albeit that in books set forth,
to the intent to reyse a commotion, they go about to persuade the people, as
though they had nothing offended, as though they were clearly faultles, as
though they stood in danger for the truth sake only, and for Religion, but
the matter is far otherwise. For their Religion has had no let
nordisturbaunce, although they possessed yt churches of our Jurisdiction. Their
acts against the Clergy.
And for so much as they said how they would answer it in a lawful counsel,
we suffered all things patiently. But they not content therewith, made a
conspiracy, and entering into a league, which thing was not lawful for them
to do, but by our consent and the Archebyshoppes, would have enforced us to
their Religion. Whereof it does well appear that they sought not religion, but
the goods of the church. And yt this was wrought that they might under some
honest pretense cover and cloak their treason and rebellion. Full many
seditious things have they wrought against the Emperor and states of the
Empire, neither can all be recited, but we shall touch those things which
properly apperteine unto us. And four years past, breakyng their faith and
conuenauntes whereby they are bound to us. They gave us the defiaunce, and
entering into our houses took our goods and expulsed us, some also they cast in
prison, whereof some are dead and the rest do remain captive at this present.
Than beat they down our houses even with the ground and brought our towns,
lands, and gouernme^tes into their subjection. And fortifiyng their city
strongly, that they might the more safely rebelle, they imposed to the common
people payment of money monthly, and certain other charges. The churches and
houses of Religion partly they rased and partly defaced, and casting down the
belles out of ye steples, made gunnes of them, and took up the dead bodies not
only of monks and priests, but also of Noble men, and cast them upon their
rampares. Images, aultars, and grauestones, they have cowched and laid in
their walls. In the churches that were standing, they have put down all Gods
service. What orname^tes or precious Iwelles, what wrytinges or monumentes so
ever they found in churches, they spoiled, and beating the priests and other
ministers of the church with their fistes and scourges, drove the^ out of the
holy places, yea from the very aultars. They have in sundry places exacted new
tributes, clean contrary to the custom of the country. Yea they have broken
down in their fury, the sepulcher of our founder great Otto the Emperor. And
these be domestical evils. But not contented herewith they invaded the
byshoprike of Halberstate, and there spoiling the College of Hamersleb, and
plucking the priests yt were saying mass, from the aultars, some they
wounded, and some they stewe, and polluting all things hallowed, trod the
host consecrated under their feet. After disguising them selves in Monks
apparel, when they had done many things in great oultrage and mockery: they
returned home laden with spoils and boties. And a certain wall or rampare of yt
country, that was made with a very great cost, and was right necessary in those
parties, they cast down without any cause, burning and cutting up the bridges
that no man might pass. Moreover they have sought to take away our lives, as
they do also at this present, insomuch ye we can neither remain in our own
houses, nor with our fre^des, without great danger, and whom they suspected to
give us lodgyng, they would break into their houses by night, take their
goods, and carry away diverse of the nobility captive, whom they also put upon
the rack. Yea they have spoiled Noble matrones and virgins, and striped them
out of their apparel, and so evil entreated the^ that they have brought them in
danger of their life, and have not kept their hands also from young babes and
children. Briefly we suppose, that there is not the like example of cruelty
seen amongst the Turks. And if any man would make an estimate as well of those
goods that they have gotten of ours, as also of the harms done us: he shall
find it at yt least to a mount above viii.C. M. crowns. To speak nothing in
the mean season of the contumelious reproaches and raylinges, of ye famous
libels and picturs which they have set forth in contempt and mockery of
the emperor and states imperial, and of the injuries also, which we have
sustained fully now xxvii. years. For they have cast stones at us, and thrown
upon us the filthe of the streets, and as we have gone through the city, have
oftentimes made a clamorous outirie against us, and driven us from place to
place, many times also in the night they have set our houses and gates a fire,
and with stones broken our glase wyndowes. Finally: no kind of outrage has
been of the^ omitted. And four years since, ye xxvi day of July, wha^ at ye
request of yt consuls we assembled in our college, they required of us, first
that we should profess the same religion yt they did. Secondly, yt toward the
furniture of ye war within eight days we should pay.xx. thousand crowns.
After this, entering into the church, and the citezens reparinge thither,
thruste out the Priests by violence, and shut up the church doors, and
demand of the inferior sort of priests a great some of money, and when they
were not able to pay it, were driven out of the city into exile. After the self
same sort also have they handled the rest of the clergy, entering upon all
their lands and goods. In the which thing verily, they have not only
transgressed the laws both of God and man, but also broken conuenauntes and
their faith given. For we are their Megistrates, and they may chiefly thank us
both for their lands and goods. And what time lately George Duke of
Megelburge, had interteined those forces which had defended and also beseged
the city of Bru^swick, in number about three thousand, and without our
knowledge, marched through the country of May denburg and Halberstat. They
through a wonderful presumption issued out of the city, of this intent and
purpose, that after they had first discomfited the ennemy, they might bend the
whole force and brunt of the war against us, yea utterly to distroye us. For
they had two tons full of haltars, and had hired certain hangmen with swords,
that some they might ha^ge, and head other some. Howbeit, through the goodness
of God, it chanced far otherwise. For where they were an eight thousand men,
they were discomfited, and slain above two thousand, and The slaughter of the
citezens.
amongst these were many innocent people, whom they had partly by force, partly
by flattery allured unto the^, and eight ensigns taken, and al their munition
and furniture. And they go about to ascribe the cause of this war unto us,
and say how the Duke of Megelburg moved war through our impulsion: But that
is false. For both oftentimes before, and also after the battle, we sent
Ambassadors for peace, and wish for non other thing at this time, than that
they being reconciled to the emperor, would restore unto us our old
tranquillity and quietness. But for so much as they refuse all peaceable
ways, and deteyne by force and injury our castles, towns and villages, we
are driven to seek some mean, whereby we may recover the same. Now such things
as they infer and allege for their purgation, be all forged and fained, as
it is commonly known. For we have not disturbed or hindered their religion. And
when lately the most noble Princes Duke Maurice and the lectour of Brande^burg
offered them reasonable co^ditio^s, they proudly rejected the^, and making a
salee out in the truce time, assaulted by night a certain au^cie^t gentleman at
home in his own house, which had done the^ no displeasure, and being a sleep
in his bed at their coming, when he had hardly escaped away half naked,
ravening and distroying his goods, they spoiled his wife and children of all
their apparel, and threatening them often with death, left the^ starck naked,
in so much that one of the Nobility coming thither by chance, covered the
woman with his own garment. Certainly what oultrage they did that night, can
not with few words be expressed. They have also made their aduaunt openly,
that we may look for restitution in vain. For they be so highly auaunced with
our lands and goods, that they have accustomed them selves to a finer kind of
life, neither can they be easily brought to render again other men's goods.
And where as the matter is thus, and seeing they adds unto the injuries of the
former years contempt also, and are utterly been upon our destruction, we
could not but recite these worthy acts of theirs, though somewhat briefly.
Wherefore if means be found now to reduce the^ again to their duty, no man
ought to marvel thereat. For who soever they be that love this civil and
common society of men, can not chose but be of stomach against them, much
less ought to succor and aid them. After the same sort had they accused them
a little before sending their Ambassadors to Torge, where than Duke Maurice
held asse^blies concerning the same war. But not many days after, in the
same month, the Senate makes answer by opon wrytinge. How they suppose that
all the states of the Byshoprike do not make this complaint of them, but that
it proceeds altogether The answer of yt citezens
of the clergy, for it greueth them say they, that the Gospel is taught
sincerely amongst us, that their wickedness is disclosed, and their dignity
decayed. This is the chief cause of all hatred. These things have pricked the^
forward, to accuse us falsely to the Emperor, that being by him once
outlawed, we might be so much the more subject to injury. Assuredly we have
offend the Emperor in nothing, and inioying our religion and liberty, there
is nothing but he may have at our hands. We be in deed bound to the
Archbishop of this city: But yet upon certain conditions, that they shall not
disturb us in our liberties, those conditions have we not broken: But our
adversaries counseled the Archebyshop John Albert, that he should demand
certain new things that were not accustomed. And therefore refused we to give
him our fidelity. Yet is there no great cause why they should allege him: For
they were not faithful to him them selves, and it grieved them, what time in
former years they saw the way prepared for him to be Archebyshop. For they
had rather have had him excluded: But unto them are not we subject, nor bound
in any point. So long as the conuenauntes of former time were observed, we
refused no kind of duty. But after that they swarued from the same, we
resisted, and hereof grew sundry displeasures. And verily in these latter
years, when new ways were invented to exact money in this province, we spoke
against it in open asse^blies, and declared how this was not used by bishops of
former time, although it was al in uayn. For diverse of ye states and chiefly
the clergy had a great part of that pray. This is yt frowardnes that they
object against us. They went out of the city but Why yt clergle forsook yt
city.
of their own accorded, and incensed with a certain pride, when they saw the
Duke of Saxon and the La^tgraue subdued. For than they supposed how the time
was come, wherein they might accomplish their mind, obtain government, and
come to that their filthy kind of life, certe^ly we did not expulse the^. And
albeit that the preachers in their sermons, reprove their abominable living,
yet dwelt they safely amongst us many years, and even now lately certain of
them did inhabit the city. And if we had been disposed to have wrought any
violence against them, it was not hard to be done: But we attempted nothing.
And when the state of our things was such, that we were constraimed to fear
the power of our ennemie, we called together the fellows of the cathedral
church. And for so much as the light of the Gospel is revealed, and God also
requires the profession of the same, we required them dilligently, as we had
dove many times before, that they them selves would choice some expert
Divine, which might teach Gods word in the Cathedral church. For the
same were boeth of it self very Godly, and would also help greatly to increase
mutual love and benevolence between them and the citezens. And where as they
refused, we our selves provided the thing. And because the ennemie was at hand
and had already invaded our limits, we required of them, that they would pay
us a certain sum of money, that they should send no letters out of the city,
that they should remain with us, and inioye their own possessions. But they
not long after departed out of the city, and being after required of us, to
send their Ambassadors at a certain day to Salsie, with whom we might treat,
they proudely rejected the talk. Wherefore when they uttered their malice and
spiteful hatred against us, we were also constreyned to requite them with the
like. For in case they had remained with us, all this trouble might have been
auopded. But they burned in malice against us, and many times to our
destruction forged new diuises, so must we of necessity take armure for our
own defense. For unless we had taken their towns and villages, there had been
a place of refuge left for the enne my. And seeing they be the revenues of the
church of Maiden burg, and not theirs which persecute ye church, they may be
rightly employed to the defense of religion against false doctrine and
idolatry: Neither does the thing want examples of fourmer time. The Emperor
has in deed outlawed us, but by no desert of ours, as we have heretofore
oftener than once declared. And this fortune or state is common to us with the
Prophes, Apostles, All Godly folk are afflicted for prosessinge the verity.
and finally with Christ him self, who for the profession of yt truth were
afflicted, as seditiouse, rebels, and most hurt full men of all others. We
have entreated the Emperor concerning our religion and liberties, but hitherto
we labor in vain, and to what end belong all their devises, in our former
wrytinges we have sufficiently declared, verily the thing it self speaks,
that this is meant only, how wicked papistrie may be restored. This controversy
has oftentimes been brought to a communication, and certain conue^tions have been had for the same cause, but in the principal points we never were
satisfied, for that thambassadours said, how their commission stretched not so
far. Assuredly it greueth us and that exceadingly, if any man should sustain
any damage for our cause: But yet such as are godlyme^, we doubt not, but they
will think as we do, and will judge all things to be suffered rather, than
the confession of the truth All things must be suffered for the truths sake
should be forsakn. For seeing Christ has so long before prophesied of the
inco^modities that ensue upon this profession, and has also appointed
everlasting rewards for them, that leave their wives, children and possessions
for his sake, why do we not trust to these certain and large promesses?
Certainly they that relent for fear of their own danger, and fear
displeasures, those procure unto them selves everlasting damnation, unless
they repent. That thing which our adversaries impute unto us, may be rightly
ascribed unto them: For they live a fylthie, shameful, and a beastly life, and
which places as they bear rule, there can the citezens very hardly desende
from them the chastity of their wives and daughters. We took of the commons a
little money, and not with such an extremity, as they feign we did. Unto that
which they speak of the custom, answer might be made, if they had spoken
more plainly. The Rampare whereof they make mention, which yet belongs
nothing to them, we cut a sonder for a commune commodity. For through the
means thereof many times has hurt been done in our country, and when they
had taken their botie, the spoylers were wont to escape that way, and to
retire them selves out of danger. Theycrie out that we have entreated evil
the Gentlemen that are our neighbors. But what so ever we have done in that
behalf, we have been constreyned to do it, when we had a year and more
suffered the injuries of many. That which they say concerning women and
maidens, we utterly deny: such of the Nobility as were taken prisoners: we
released with their servant, without ransom, and the matter was quieted
amongst us by composition. They enlarge exceadinglye, the accoumpte of the
harms done, and name it to be eight hondreth thousand crowns. What if we
should show again into how much mysery they have brought us? Pictures and such
other things have been set forth privily in mo places then one, but all the
blame is laid on us. Where as for certentie we have straightly commanded, by
setting up letters openly, that no man should attempt to do any thing
presumptuously against the Emperor, or any other Prince. And certain also have
therefore been punished. There have been other books also set forth amongst
us, we deny not, wherein both Idolatry is impugned, and many men's consciences
erected. We confess that we had an overthrow, the good will of God being so,
not utterly to distroye us, but to alure us to the amendeme^t of life. Certainly
they died honestly and Godly, for the glory of Gods holy name, and preservation
of the common wealth. And we God wounds and heals.
doubt not, but God when he sees time, will mercifully look upon our
affliction, and also punish our adversaries. Neither chanced this thing by
fortune, as they pretend. For they intised hereunto George Duke of Megelburg,
with large gifts and promesses. And yet in the mean time through a crafty
policy, they called the other states of the byshopryke to Stasfort, as it were
to consulte, by what means they might drive those robbers, as they themselves
than called them, out of their cositrie. For it is to be proved by their own
letters that they hired soldiers, yea they boaste and glory, that they care
not greatly for common hurt and damage. For beit that they sustain some
loss and hinderaunce, yet say they how the land and ground remains in
their possession. What time therefore word was brought us, that the town
Wanslebe was by them suddenly taken, spoiled and brent, a great number also of
villages distroyed, in so much that there came running unto us out of the
country husband men, women, and maidens, with plenty of tears desiring our
aids, we could not assuredly fail the^. And although the thing had no good
success, yet doubt we not, but that we did God thanckfull service. And now
where they say to pike a thank, that our intent was to oppress the nobility
and states of this Byshoprike, it is a starhe lie, and can not be proved. For
we have euerntore honored the Nobility: But if we have indammaged such as
have done violence toward our men, as they have passed by to and fro, who is so
unreasonable a judge that will impute that thing unto us, as a crime blame
worthy? Touching that they report of the swords found after the battle, is
a fained thing: As for the haltars and collars we deny not. For the use of
the^ was right necessary for our wagons and other carriage, as it is manifest.
The conditions of peace, that were offered by Duke Maurice and the Marquis of
Brandenburg, we could not admit for causes most weighty. For in case we had
yielded, and received a power, it is easy to understand, what should have been
the state both of Religion and the common wealth also. God of his infinite
mercy has opened unto us the knowledge of his Gospel: Whom we befeche to
grant unto us this so great a benefit perpetually, but those which promise
us assistaunce herein, how it is credible that they can or also will perform
the same, when they them selves be of wavering minds in Religion, and study to
please men? that our adversaries may recover their goods, and that damage
done on both parties may be egally borne, we refuse not. But that they should
return in the city, and again set up their idolatry, that can we by no
means suffer. They say how they were no impediment to us in religion, but
certainly they wanted no will thereunto. But we have cause to give God thanks yt
sent shrewed cowes short horns. The bodies of dead men were not so entreated
as they report. But where as for our own defense we plucked down certain
churches nere unto the city, so many bodies as were found not wholly consumed,
were co^ueied to an other place, and buried deper. Again it was permitted unto
al men, that such of their kindred as they found there, they might transporte
whether they would. That same of the emperor Otto the first, is most false, and
a shameful lie by them devised. For we The praise of great Otto.
are not ignorant, what honor is due to that chief magistrate and especially
to him of whom they speak, the emperor Otto, who did many worthy acts, and was
a most earnest defendour and protector of yt liberty of Germany. That
service, which they call holy and Godly, and which they complain that we have
disturbed in their churches is nothing less than holy, but concerns the high
reproach of God. They themselves had long before carried out of the city their
vestimentes, chalices and other orname^tes. But their wrytinges and public
monume^tes we keep safely, and have not abolished, as they falsely accuse us.
Moreover their priests were not whipped, but they themselves spoiled the
churches and carried the pray else where. The college or monastery of
Hamerslebie, which nevertheless belongs not to the^, therefore did we assail
at the last, for yt our ennemies had a place of refuge therein and there divided
the boties taken from our fellows and us. Where they add moreover that our men
did many things there insole^tly and outrageously, that same was forged by the
monks. As concerning the injuries, which they say were done unto the^ in the
city, thus stands the matter. About.xxv. years since, wha^ they on the eight
day before Easter, which is called Palm sunday, were in hand with their fond
and trifling ceremonies, they were laughed at by ye common people that thither
resorted, but whose Folyshe ceremonies.
rashness and boldness proceeded further, and such as brake glass wyndowes, they
were suerly punished of us and banished, for other injuries we know none,
neither have they ever brought the^ before us. Wherefore we have done nothing
contrary to our promise, or composition, neither have we given our adversaries
any cause of war. And seeing the matter is thus, we desire all me^, that they
give no credit to their sclaundrous reports, but to lament our chance, which
are co^streined to defend the war yt is attempted against us, to the intent we
might maintain ye pure doctrine of the Gospel, and the liberties received of
our elders, for the which things also godly kings and magistrates of fourmer
times, and the Machabeis men of most stout courage, have refused no peril or
danger. We wish for peace most chiefly above al things: But that is denied
us hitherto. Wherefore being long and sore afflicted with the invasions of our
nere neighbors, we could not repulse from us unjust violence. Whereby we have
also ye better confidence, that such as we have provoked with no injury, will
judge this war to concern the^ nothing, and stand in the awe and fear of
God, the revenger of al unrighteousness. For the self same cause that has
stired up this trouble against us, will shortly after wrap up the^ also in great
distress and perils, so many as covet to retein and maintein the pure
doctrine. The letters 1551.
wherewith the bishop of Rome had called the counsel. The Emperor the fifth day
of January commands to be red in the Senate of states and Princes, exhorting
the^, that they would prepare themselves. The same day king Ferdina^do,
informs the states, how in yt truce time, the Turks wax busy in Hongary, and
build a castle within his dominion, and went about to surprise his castle of
Zolnock, and fortify theirs with a garrison, how also they have made an inrode
into Transsyluania: Whereof verily he has given them none occasion, and does all that he can, that the truce taken may be observed, but in case the Turk shall
refuse, he desired to have aid given him. I told you in the xx. book of
Stephen bishop of Winchester, for what cause he was apprehended in England. And
where he perseuered in his opinion, and would neither allow the statutes
already made, nor such as should be made hereafter concerning religion, during
the kings nonage, he was depriueth of his byshoprike this year in the month
of January, and committed again to ward. Andrew Osia^der, whom I said went
into Prusse, set forth this time a new opinion affirming A new doctrine of
Osiander.
ye man is not justified by faith, but by the righteousness of Christ dwelling
in us, and says that Luther was also of his opinion. But the rest of the
divines his fellows did stoutly impugn it, affirming that he said of Luther
to be false, who not many months before his death, left a most ample and
goodly testimony in the preface of the first Tome of Mela^chthons book, wherein
are treated the common places of holy scripture: Where therefore he inueieth
against Melanchthon, he makes also Luther his adversary, for that they were
both of one opinion. Moreover by a conference made, they proved manifestly that
Luther taught clean contrary to him in this matter: and say yt his doctrine is
pestiferous, which says yt the justification of faith consists not in the
blood and death of Christ, whereby we are redeemed and justified. The matter was
handled with great co^tentio^. He him self verily pretended, as I said, as
though Luther had been of his opinion. But in ye mean time he made his auaunt
amongst his adherentes, as it is written, yt Luther and Mela^chtho^ had made
and co^piled a divinity after Aristotels doctrine, which sauereth more of the
flesh than of ye spirit. Albert the Duke of The Duke of Pruisse addicte to
Osiander.
Prusland desired at yt first yt the matter might have been appeased by
mediators. But persuaded by Osiander, after much debating, he became of his
opinion, and commands his adversaries to depart out of his dominion. Amongst
who^ was Ioachim Merlin, who must needs be packing, although not only ye
citezens, but also women and children besought yt Prince right humbly, that
they might not be deprived of such a pastor. This Osiander taught many years
at Norinberg, and that much to his co^me^dation, and never made business, but
seemed in all things to follow Luthers doctrine so long as he lived. But when
after themperours decree of religion, he forsook Norinberg, and went into the
land of Pruisse, he reised up this same question. Which many me^ supposed yt he
durst never do so long as Luther lived. He chiefly provoke them of Witte^berg
to confute these things if they can, and says how he will defend his opinion,
whosoever impugn the same, and taunteth Melanchthon bitterly. Whose opinion al
learned men for the most part namely in Saxony, reproved, by books set forth,
and rebuked, that in a time most troublesome he disturbed the congregation.
And where he had handled so ungodly Melanchthon, a man of so great modesty and
learning, with yt were al men offended exceadingly. In an other certain book he
Melanchtho^ best learned and modeste
contendeth, that albeit mankind had not ben lost through the sin of Adam,
yet should Christ have been borne nevertheless. The eight day of February is
dissolved the counsel of thempire. Therein made the emperor a decre, and
for so much, says he, as this The decree of Auspurg.
great dissension in religion, can by no means be better appeased, than by a
general, Godly, and fre counsel. Again, for that in yt former assemble the
states have submitted the^ selves unto the counsel, and therein persevere, this
shall be confirmed and ratified. That thing also, which I my self than promised,
I will procure with all travel and diligence, that each thing may be orderly
and rightly done. And sith that this bull of the bishop of Rome, apperteyneth
unto all christian Realms and provinces, I suppose verily, that all kings and
rulers, remembering their duty, will obey, and further so Godly a business to
thuttermost of their power, what soever also shall become me to do therein, as
the advocate of the church, and defendour of counselles, yt same will I
perform. And to al such as will repare to the counsel, whether they have
changed their religion or not, I will grant saufe conduicte, yt they may
there remayn and propou^de such things as they shall think to concern ye
quiet of their conscience, and after shall and may safely return home again
guarded with a common conduct. Moreover I will endeavor, yt the whole matter
shall be treated and determined Godly and christia^ly, al affections set apart,
according to the holy scripture and doctrine of yt fathers, yt as well the
civil as ecclesiastical state may be reformed, all errors and false opinions
clean taken away. I intend moreover to remain within the limits of thempire,
or at the least very near, to the intent to defend the counsel, so that it may
come unto the end wished for, and the fruict thereof may redou^de unto al men,
and may be chiefly for the commodity of Germany. Wherefore I require and exhort
al princes and states, but chiefly the^ of the clergy, and those that have
altered their religion, and cleave to ye confession of Auspurg, that according
to the bishops bull, they prepare the^ selves, and come thither furnished, least
after they complain, yt they were through overmuch haste supplanted, or else
not admitted to the sufficient declaration of their cause. For as I said, I
will assure them by saufe conduict, and bring to pass, that they shall be heard
so much as shall be requisite. But where as the states have alleged sundry
reasons, why the decrees of the former conuention of Auspurg concerning
religion and reformation, be not kept, all this I revoke to mine own
consideration and will know of each man severally what impediment there is.
Therefore let every man for see, yt the matter may come to rehersall. It was
also decreed ye at the first day of April thambassadours of thelectours, and of
syx other Princes, should mete at Norinberg, to consulte, how that Money for yt
war of Mayde^burg.
money which was taken out of the common treasorie for the war of Maydenburg,
should be restored. Whatsoever they shall determine, is commanded to be of like
force, as if the same had been enacted in the full assemble of thempire. And for
so much as this war should concern the wealth of al Germany, it shall be lawful
for every Magistrate to tax yt people for yt same cause. Again, in case any
citezen of thempire or stranger shall aid them of Mayde^burg, tha^ does
the emperor also promise to be at charge. As concerning the jurisdiction and
goods of the church, the emperor says he will forese, yt being sued to, by
the^ whom it concerns, he will minister justice unto the^, that every man shall
recover and inioye his own. They decreed to aid king Ferdinando against the
Turk, although unwillingly, with such aid as was promised him in the former
conuention. Finally because therles of Mansfelde and Hedeck, mustring men the
last winter, had intended to aid the^ of Maidenburg, as before is said, the
Emperor charge and commands, yt in case any soldiers assemble hereafter
in any part of Germany, the Princes and states next the^ shall immediately join
their forces together to subdue the^, and to que^che yt flambe before it be of
force or violence. In this selfsame time Henry the French king, receives into
his faith and tuition, Octauins Farnesius, who was both mortal ennemy Octauian
Farnese cliente to the French king.
to Ferdinando Gonzage, themperours lieftenau^t in Lu^bardy, for ye slaughter
of his father, and also being so nere unto Place^ce, which the emperor held,
fearing least he should not be able to keep Parma by his own force, craved
foreine aid, and received into ye city a garrison of Frenchmen. Which
the emperor took right displeasauntly, and especially the bishop of Rome, as
shall be declared hereafter. In these days gave the emperor sentence against the
Lantgraue for the contie or lorship of Diece. For he was condemned of contempt,
for that he answered not: But he said how it lay not in his power to answer,
for so much as he might not co^ferfrely with his cou^sellours for the awayting
and harkening of the^ ye had him in their custody. For after that it came to
light how be would have made an escape lately, as I showed you before, no man
might have access to him, nor speak with him without a witness. The.xxviii.
day of February, Bucer ended his life at The death of Bucer.
Cambridge, and was buried very honorably and was celebrated with thepitaphes of
learned me^, amongst whom also, were two noble young men of the house of Suffolk,
brethren, whose mother the Duchess, both at al times before, and whilst he
was sick also she wed al favor and benevolence to Bucer, a woman of a most
earnest zeal toward religion. In these days the bishop of Strasburg, makes
a grievous complaint to ye senate of their preachers Complainte of the Bysh. of
Strasb.
by letters written, as though they should styre up yt people, and put the
priests in hazard of their lines. Wherefore he requires yt these things may
be reformed, or else will he do as his counsel shall serve him. The.x. day of
March, king Ferdina^do and his son Maximilian, depart from Auspurg. For unto
this time they stood in terms with the emperor, and the Rege^t of Flanders.
Thambassadours also of Breme depart at the length without peace making. In this
mean time at Maide^burg were diverse co^flictes and skermishes, for ofttimes
would the towns men issue out. And when the river of Elbe ouerflowed, in ye
ships yt they had made they brought in vitayle both up the stream and down.
The same time were diverse wonders seen in Saxony, and amongst other things,
three suns, and as many mones, one while of a pale color, Wonders in Saxonye.
an other while as red as blood. They of Mayde^burg desired aid of the cities
by the sea coaste, by Uolrate and John, sons to the Earl of Manstelde, but it
was in vain. Than do thennemies build bulwarks by the river of Elbe above and
beneth the city, and laying ships on either side well ma^ned, keep the towns
men from sailing. Oftentimes they fought also wha^ they would drive away the
cattle, which the towns men daily turned out into the pasture about the city.
The xi. day of April ye bishop of The Pope accuses Octauian Farnese
Rome in a book set forth, sore accuses Octauius Farnese, and what time, says
he, he received of me Parma and ye high government, he promised by his
fidelity, that he would neither addict his service to none other Prince, nor
receive any foreign power into Parma but through my license. And what time he
appeared to bend toward an alteration, oftentimes I admenisted him of his duty
friendly, by intermessages and by his brother Alexander Cardinal: And because he
answered yt time somewhat strau^gly, sending my letters, I threatened him with
most grievous punishment, if he should do otherwise. Afterward being
advertised, that he kept not conuenauntes, I was (as it well became me) right
sore offended, that he should work me such an injury, whom I had auaunced
with so great honors and benefits. Now therefore, although I might
straightwaies determine, in a matter that is so evident, yet to the intent he may
understand our great humanity, I will and command him, that within xxx days
he appear at Rome; and answer to his accusations, and make us good assurance
from henceforth. For this, if he neglect to do, I will that he be even now
condemned of treason, perjury and other most grievous crimes: and what lands or
goods so ever he has, I command it to be public and common, and require
herein themperors fidelity, that he will aid me in punishing the same; and
command yt no man aid him with any thing. When May day was come, thaction of
the counsel was commenced: but because very few were than The counsel at Trente
is cold.
commen thither, and the war of Parma was at hand, the matter was adiourned
to the first day of Septembre. Thambassadors of Princes which met at
Norinberge, in the month of April, took order, that there should be a new
contribution of Money, for the siege of Maidenburge. And albeit themperoure
commanded the same afterward by proclamation, yet was there an exceading great
difficulty in the thing, and all men were unwilling to pay, for that the siege
was long, and there appeared no end. Wherefore Duke Moris also treated oftwith
the Towns men of peace, and the fist day of May, what time they were come
into the Camp by safe conduit, the matter was long and much debated, he him
self being present, A few months before Duke Maurice had taken to his
service Count Hedecke, whom the Emperor had outlawed, and Earl Hedeck
friend to the^ of Maidenb.
made him governor of Lipsia. Who for the zeal unto Religion, and hatred he
bare to the emperor, wished well to them of Maydenburge, and was a counselloure
of peace, that the same war being finished, Duke Moris might attempt greater
things. For even than entered into their heads the devise of the war; that was
moved afterward against themperor, as shall be declared in his place.
Notwithstanding they could not than agree upon a peace, for that over hard
conditions were propounded, and that of set purpose, as many suppose, whilst
duke Moris differred the time, and sought opportunity for his enterprise, which
than at the length was given, after that the French king had proclaimed war
against the Emperor, as shall be said hereafter. In the mean season a rose a
great rebellion in the Camp before Maidenburge, for want of payment of
certain months wages. Neither came the Prince Octauius to Rome when he was
cited, but aided with the French kings garnisons, took in hand to defend Parma.

Wherefore the Emperor, the.xiii. day of May publishing his letters, for as
much, says he, as of our duty and good will toward yt bishop and church of
Rome, I covet to perform such things as I am den, and to forsee, least by this
occasion greater commotions arise in Italy, and after in other places: again,
whilst I consider upon how just causes the bishop is moved and how he has
omitted nothing, that Octauius might do his duty, I have committed this charge
to Fernando Gonzage, because I cannot my self be present, yt he shall aid the
bishop in my name. Wherefore we will and command al our loving subjects
throughout Lumbardie, yt they be to him obedient in this war none otherwise
tha^ to our self, and yt they endeavor to anoy thenemy as much as is possible
for them to do. So therefore Gonzage begins the war, and first spoiling the
country, be The war of Parma betwixt themperoure and french king.
segeth the city of Parma, and the bishop of Rome Mirandula. For therle of
Mirandula was of the French part, and except he were cooped in, might have
helped greatly the Prince and city of Parma. At the twenty day of May the
Bishop of Rome wrote to the Swisses very louinglye, like as he had taken unto
him the name of July the second, which loved them intierlye well, so had he
also purposed in louinge them to immitate his example and fotesteps. Hitherto
in deed he has been so occupied with sondrye, and that most weighty affairs
of the public weal, that he has had no lesure to declare thaffection of his
mind, yet has he borne them still in perfect memory: and that the same
apeareth chiefly in ii. things first, that for the custody of his body, he
has chosen in the City a guard of the same nation. Secondly, that he has
done also ye same at Boloigne Lagrasse, trusting both to their industry and
fidelity also: and now, in as much as the counsel is called, and latelye the
first day of May begone at Trent, occasion is given him to write unto them: where
therefore their presence should be a great help and furtherance to so godly and
nedeful a work, he exhorts them very much, yt such prelates of the church as
be within their jurisdiction and liberties, be not wanting, but be there at the
next session the first day of Septembre: the rest they shall understand of S.
Hierome, Franch, Knight, his ambassador, whose faith and diligence has of
them now many years ben well tried: again, for because the matter in hand is
greatly to his conte^tation, he will send or it belong one of his principal
bishops, which may treat with them touching the counsel more at large. About
thend of May, the Emperoures son departing from Auspurge, by Italy returns
into Spain, with him went Maximilian his Cousin and Brother in law, to fetch
away his wife, the mother of two Children. In the mean time, the king of
France, to appease the Bishop and Senate The French kings excuse to the Pope.
of Cardinals, declares at Rome by his ambassadoure Mounsour de Thermes, that
where he has received into his tuition Octauian the Prince of Parma, it
deserves no reprehension: For this thing proprely belongs unto kings, to
succor thafflicted: Moreover, that he has sought no private commodity in that
matter, but whatsoever he has done, to have done it for the church of Romes
sake, after thexa^ple of his progenitors, which have been more beneficial to the
same than any others, and many times also defended it by force of arms. For
seeing that Parma is the patrimony of ye church, he was very careful to forsee,
that it should not come into other men's hands, and for the same cause is at
great cost and charge daily: wherefore he desires him and that most earnestly,
that he would take it in that part, and leave the opinion that he has conceived
of him: for the same shall be to the great commodity of the common weal. But if
he refuse this satisfaction, and choose war before peace, he him self sees
how greatly that will be to the damage and danger of all Italy and Europe, and
that also there can be no certain treaty had in Religion, that may continue:
wherefore concerning the most pearillous commotions that shall arise hereof,
that the counsel already called, can not assemble, or if it do, of necessity
must be dispersed, and that in this troublesome time he can send none of the
bishops of his realm unto Trent, of all these things there can be no fault
laid in him, who is willing not only to offer conditions of peace, but also to
take, and this so protests so openly. How be it the bishop trusting to thaid
and promesses of themperor, was nothing The sterse mind of Pope Iulye.
the mileder for this ambassade. The xvii. day of June, duke Moris grants
again safeconduite to them of Maidenburge, that they should send unto him
ambassadors concerning peacs. Who taking their journey, being conducted by
Marquis Alberte, find Duke Moris at Pirne a Town of Meissen. For he was
returned home, and seemed to work slackly. When they were come, in themperors
name he propounds these conditions. That they should yield them selves
without any condition, and humblye desire pardon. They shall make no leage
against themperor, king Ferdinando, Austriche, or Burgundy: they shall observe
all the decrees of thempyre. They shall answer to the law, and recompense the
clergy for damage done, that they cast down their fortifications and Rampires,
and admit into their City a garrison of a M. and CC. soldiers. They shall
receive themperor, King Fardinando, and their deputies at all times, with what
power someuer they bring with them, that they deliver twelve great pieces of
ordenaunce, pay an C: M. Crowns, and confirm all these conditions by an oath.
These things, although they were not able to perform, yet did they not
utterly refuse, and through thintercession, of Count Hedecke, by little and
little some thing was remitted. Themperor before this sending his letters into
Germany, especially to the states of ye protestants religion, had sufficiently
assured the^ by safeconduit, exhorting the^ to be at Trent the first day of
May: but inasmuch as for the war of Parma, the day of the counsel was
differred to the first of Septe^bre, as I said before, he admonishes them
again yt they come in any wise, promising the^ all equity and faithfulness. But
albeit there were very many of the same profession, yet did they not confer
together, which thing has been chiefly necessary, either for yt they dispaired
touching the success of the thing, or else for that they feared themperors
displesure, or for yt they waxed faint hearted, as it were in the very entrance
of the danger. And among ye cities only they of Strausburge sent messagers
to enquire what thing both they yt were nere, and also far of, were purposed to
do herein. And certainly duke Moris gave in commandment to Philip Melanchton,
The confession of Duke Moris by Melanchton.
that he should pen tharticles of doctrine, which should after be exhibited
openly: when that book was finished, the prince commanded all the divines and
ministers of the church to mete at Lipsia the viii. of July, whereas the same
was red and approved by consent of them al. The same order also took
Christopher, duke of Wirtemberge, who caused Brentius to compile a book of the
same argument. And albeit that the sense of either writing was all one, yet
would Duke Moris have his book exhibited by it self, least if many together
should propound the same thing in common, the emperor might conceive a suspicion
of some conspiracy made: Nevertheless se^ding their books to and fro, both
they of Wirtemberge approved the Saxons book, and the Saxons the book of
Wirtemberge, and the divines of Strausburge either of them both, when they had
red the same: and so it was agreed, that when time should serve, there should be
sent to the counsel certain to prefer and defend these things. The Duke of
Wirtemberge, after thexample of his father, made much of Ihon Brentius for his
excellent learning, using his aid in restoring of the godly doctrine, after
also, he restored him to the Ministration The humanity of the Duke of
wirtemberge, to ward Brentius.
of the Church, and made him president of Stutgarde. The.xxv. day of July, the
Marquis Albert, in thabsence of Duke Moris, rejects such things by a
trompetter, as they of Maidenburge had answered to the conditions of peace,
propounded at Pirne by duke Moris. The day before he had taken an overthrow:
for they bickered with greater forces than ever they did before. About the
viii. day of August there had like to have been a great sedition in the city.
For letters were brought to the soldioures, wherein this was contained, how there
were certain of the Senators, which would betray the city to thenemy, and among
them was Henry Alman. Wherefore the soldiors flocking together call for him: when
he came, he says it is to him an injury, and refuses no punishment, if it ca^
be proved, affirminge this to be invented by the enemy, that the thing which
they are not hable to do by power and force of arms, they might bring to pass
by craft and policy: again when the hole Senate were become sureties for him,
the matter was appeased, and a certain nombre of Citezens and Soldiers were
chosen, which should mark what manner of letters from henceforth were sent to
and fro. The eight day after, Duke Moris adressing his letters to ye Duke Moris
letters to the Emperor.
Emperor, declares how he verily can be content with the safe conduit, which
he had given, neither does he greatly find any lack therein: how be it, he
hears say, that a decre was made in the counsel of Constance, that
inquisition should be made against Heretics or suspected of Heresy, if
happily being called to the Counsel, they repaired thither, and that sentence
should be pronounced against them, although the Emperor had granted them
safeconduit, this decre to remain in the common records.

And like as they had decreed, so did they practice in deed, in burninge Ihon
Husse, who came thither by the safeconduite of the Emperor Sigismunde: and
saying it is so, he can send none of his to Trente, unless the Prelates
there will grant also their safeconduit in the whole name of the counsel, as
in times past was done in the counsel of Basil, which was next unto the same:
for the Bohemers being feared with the former example, would not come The burnt
child the fire dreades.
thither at the same time, unless they had first received the public
safeconduit of the whole counsel: his request is therefore, that he either
through his authority or favor would obtain this at their hands: for except
they might be in like case assured, as they were in times past at Basil, it
ought not to be prejudicial to him, or to any other of the same profession, if
they suffered no man of theyrs to travel thither. But concerning the Bohemers,
and Ihon Husse that was brent at Costantz, and of the war that insued thereof,
I have spoken in ye third book. And because a decre was made at Costantz, that
the next counsel after the same should be holden, the fifth year after, an
other after vii. years, and from that time foreward every tenth year, the
fathers assemble again at Basil. And for so much as the Bohemers were not as
yet reconciled, the matter was treated between them by letters and
intermessagers, and in the town of Egre was made a draught of a safeco^duit,
which if yt fathers would admit, the Bohemers said, how they would not refuse
to come. After that those which were sent had declared their ambassade, the
fathers approved the same form, and set to their feales, and sending unto
them withal most friendly letters, exhort them to prepare them selves, that,
what time the safe conduit also of the Emperor Sigismund shall come unto them,
they may take their journey. This was in the fourth session, in the year of
grace.M.CCCC.xxxii. But what manner assurance of the fathers that same was,
shall be showed in the book that follows. Wherefore when Duke Moris was warned
hereof by his counsel, he makes suit to themperor, and urges the prescript of
Basil, as the last, and most convenient for this time. For the protestants
case was in a manner al one with the Bohemers, and for much like causes was the
counsel of Tre^t called, as it was in times past at Basil, that is to wit, that
heresies might be roted out, that peace and tranquillity might be restored to
the common wealth, and that vices being taking away, the church might be
reformed. The xxvi. day of August, in yt morning after a sermon, the doctors
and preachers of the Church of Auspurge, to the nombre of ten, were sent for
to the lodginge of the bishop of Arras, every man by him self: when they were
come thither, some after others, knowing nothing of the matter, they were
commanded to stand apart, and not to speak together: After they were called
into a hall, where sat the bishop of Arras, with Hasie, Seldie, Malue^da, and
certain others, in order one after an other. Interrogatories for the Ministers
of Auspurge.
Seldie had the talk, and as he was commanded, propounds questions. Whether
that in the Lords supper, there is as much contained under one kind, as under
both: Moreover how many Sacraments they believed to be? Finally, why they taught
not after the form prescribed by themperor three years past, whereas they
promised so to do: as well as the Senate, and all other states do? They make
answer every man for him self severally, how Christ did institute the whole
supper, whose prescript is to be followed: that in holy scripture are found
only two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords supper: and that they received
not that form of doctrine, for that it dissenteth from holy scripture. Here
spoke the Bishop of Arras in a great coler, think you than that themperor may
not as The constancy of the prelates.
well in divine matters, as in civil, make laws and prescribe certain orders?
what themperor may do, we now dispute not say they, but, as we have said, that
form we neither received, nor certainly can allow. Than waxed he also more
angry, and being full of furye, taunted them with sore rebukes. When they also
spoke of the Sacraments, Seldie a Ciuilian, as an interpretoure, did rebuke
them, being thus sent from them, they are commanded to tarry with out, and
being led by a keeper, are bestowed every man in his place, that they might not
come together. After were sent for, certain of the chiefest Senators. when
they were commen, they were let in altogether, and commanded that within iii.
days, these preachers should depart out of the city before the son setting:
that hereafter they preach no more within the limits of thempire, nor so far
as the Emperors dominion stretches: that they speak with none of their
friends nor kinsfolks, nether tell any man the cause of their The preachers
exiled.
departure, nor after to write to any man within the city, or signify what is
done with them. These things were they constrained full sore against their
wills, with holding up their fingers, as the ceremony is, to promise by an oath:
after was the Senate commanded to shut up the Church doors, wherein Luthers
Religion was taught, til the Emperor should contremaund them. After the same
sort also, they dealt afterward with the scolemasters, and with the city of
Meminge, and others in Sweueland, which were also sent for to come thither: for
they were both forbidden to teach, and also to return home again. And whereas
one of them alleged that his wife was near the time of deliverance, and
therefore besought them earnestly, that he might only be permitted to se her:
the bishop of Arras turning toward his company, he calls her, says he, his
wife, which is an harlot. Thus therefore they being compelled to depart, caused
great heaviness in the City: but the citezens showed them what pleasure they
could both by gifts, and other liberality. The Duke of Saxon also prisoner,
when he hard thereof, both comforted them by intermessagers, and also help them
with money at their departure. The cause, why the Emperor proceeded on this wise
against them was thought to be, first, for that he was stirred up hereunto of
many: secondlye, for that after inquisition made, he found that the preachers
were a let, that his decre of religion took not place: Finally, for that he had
heard report of the consent and agreement of the divines of Saxon, Sweuela^d,
and Strausburge. And the readiest way was thought to be, if they were exiled,
to the end the fathers at Trent might have the less to do, and the victory
more easily, in case they should hardly have any adversaries to send against
them. They therefore being thus driven out, and banished, fled partly to the
Swisses, and partly to other places, when the brute of this thing was blased
abroad, it made many men a fraid. For that which chanced there, no man
douted, but the same should also be done in other places: but behold, whilst
all men are in the same fear, the french king makes war against themperor,
The French king warreth upon the emperor.
and withal takes certain ships of Flaunders, carries them away into France
and spoyleth them, and in Piedemount and Turrin surpriseth many Towns, and
among other, Cherie, and San damians, by the conduit of Brissake. Touching
the ships intercepted, the imperials in a writing setforth, report that when
the emperor looked for nothing less than war, and commanded his subjects to
sit quiet, the french Captain Poline chanced upon them, and as though he
carried the Queen of Scotland, signified unto them that for honor sake, after
the old accustomed facion, they should veil their bonnets, strike sail, and
hailse her with, shoting of their ordinance: which thing when they had done,
being unarmed, they were fradulently circumuented, and carried away. Many men
had great marvel, that the king durst, in this so great good fortune and
prosperity of the Emperor, renounce his friendship: yea it is said to have
chanced to the Emperor, contrary to his expectation For all be it he warred
against the Duke of Parma, yet would he not seem therefore to be enemy to the
French men with whom he had made peace seven years before. How be it the
king, for that he saw how through the side of Octauius, he him self should
also be wounded, for yt he had already intelligence that ye Turks were sailing
on the Sea. Again, for that he had intelligence by intermessagers, how Duke
Moris was affected, and for so much as the Emperor was thought in that
imbecillitye of body, and disease that returned often, to be of no long life,
he attempted the thing with a stout courage.

And in manner about the same time, the Turkish Fleet, when it had assailed
Malta in vain, surpriseth Tripolis a City in Affricke. The blame hereof the
Emperor laying all together in the French King sends his ambassadors to the
Princes and Cities of Contrary tales of ye King and the Emperor.
Germany, affirming this to be done through his craft and Policy. But the King
so sone as be knew thereof, ercuseth the matter, and says how the cause of the
Turkish war is, for that the Emperor restores not to them the city of
Affricke, according to his promise, for that King Fardinando does hold and
fortify the Castle of Zolnocke standing at the frontiers of Hongary within the
Turkishe dominion, for that he denies to pay him his yearly tribute, and
attempteth new enterprises in Transsyluania. After this he confuteth the
Emperors narration, wherein is declared, how Tripolis was lost through the
treason of Aremount the French ambassador, with a contrary narration, and
confyrmeth the same by the letters of the great Turk. Whilst these things were
a bruing, the day of the consel came, the first of Septe^bre, at the which day
were there present, besides the bishops of Italy and Spain, tharch bishops of
Mentz and Treuers, to the great joy and gladness, as it appeared of al me^, and
not long after came also tharchbishop of Colo^. For themperor had earnestly
moved the^ both presently in ye counsel at Auspurge, and after also by letters
and messagers, yt they should be there, for they excelled al others in dignity,
wealth and power, and the most part of yt bishops in Germany are comprised under
their dominion: wherefore thincking to tarry long, they sold altheyr horses,
reserving only a few, and made theirprouisio^ for houskepi^g a long season,
thither came also yt bishops of straus Uienne, Costintz, Chur, and Numburge:
others being let with affairs, age, or sickness, when they had obtained
license, sent their Proctours. In the Bishop of Romes name, Cardinal Cresce^t
was there president: and had joined in commission with him tharchbishop The
counsel renewed at Trent.
of Sipount and the bishop of Uerona. Themperor had sent thither Fraunces
Toletane, Hugh, Earl Mounforte, and William Pictaue, diverse were there also in
the place of king Ferdinando and Hongary. Making therefore an assembly in the
head church which they call a session, the first day of Septembre, when Mass
was done, and other accustomed ceremonies finished, suddenly came in the French
Kings ambassadoure, the abbot of Bellosan, with letters which were indorsed to
the conuention of Trent, which after The French kings letters to the counsel.
he had delivered to the bishops Legate, and he had red the superscription, a
question arose, why he should call it a conuention, rather than a counsel: and
unless he could show a commission, those letters were neither to be red nor
yet received, and where an exceading great clamor was raised, especially by
the Spanish bishops, and he affirmed that his commission was comprised in the
letters, the bishops Legate arises, and calls a side the fathers into the
reuestry. The matter being decided, that the indorsinge might be taken in good
part, they condescended to hear him. Therefore when they had red his letters
privately, wherein the king did briefly signify his grief, and that he had
injury done him, and required them to credit his Ambassador. They all sit
down again, and than reading the letters openly, make this answer. Where the
king, under the name of a conuention does signify the counsel, it is taken of
them in good part: neither will they therefore conceive any sinistrall
suspicion of so great a king, who has the title of the most Christen: but in
case his mind and will be otherwise, than take they those letters, as not
written to them. After he was commanded to declare his message. Than he
recites a long oration written.

And first, the king rehearses what he treated by his ambassador Paulus
Thermes, with the bishop and Senate of cardinals: and how by all these means
he has nothing prevailed, notwithstanding that he had opened always unto
peace: and says how bishop July, who after thexample of his predecessoures
ought to appease the controversies of Princes, has kindled an exceading great
fire at such time as he ought least to have done it, when doubtless the state
of the Christen common wealth was sore afflicted: and seeing the matter is thus,
and for so much as he deals so sharply and roughly with him, which is
theldest son of the church, he protests, as he says is likewise done at
Rome, first, that for the most troublesome tumultes of war, he may not send
the bishops of his realm unto Trent: again, that he takes not this for a
public or general counsel, but rather for a certain private conuention, which
is not instituted for the profit of the common wealth, but for the vtilitye of
a few: Finally, that nether he, nor any man within his realm can be bounden to
the decrees thereof: but declares also furthermore that he will use such
remedies, if the case so require, as in a like matter his progenitors have
accustomed: he will be ever of a sound and sincere mind toward religion, and
the Church of Rome, neither will he commit any thing worthy of just
reprehension: but in as much as he is burdened with thiniuries and hatred of
certain, without his desert, he can not otherwise do at this present. Therefore
let the^ take this protestation in good part, and Communicate unto him the
doctrine or testimony of this action, to thend he may certify other Princes and
people of Christendom, concerning the whole matter. But whereas he says, he
will use the remedies of his progenitoures, thus it stands, like as in all
other Regions, so also in France, if any Bishoppricke or Abbotship be vacant,
such as are called Chanons or Monks had fre election to choose them: but the
mean benefices, which were not elective, as they term it, the Bishops and
Patrones bestowed: Moreover all manner of suits and controversies touching
benefices or matters of the church were decided within every province. But
bishops of Rome, as Covetousness Reseruatyo^s and graceser pectatiue.
increased, began to subvert those elections, and by reseruatio^s and graces
expectatiue, as they name them, have derived all the gain to Rome, and to them
selves, and called also to Rome, all suits, even the first instaunces, as they
call them. And the beginning of this alteration chanced in France, in the time
of King Jews the ninth: but he resisted stoutly, and in the year of our Lord
M.CC. lxvii. made a law, that thold custom should be retained, nether that any
tribute should for that cause be paid to the bishop of Rome.

This law was verily of force many years, but at the length the violence of
the bishops prevailed against it, and so far as christendom stretches, they
published those foresaid graces and reseruations, and were very chargeable to
all men, until the Synod of Basil took away this kind of pillage, and
restored the aunciente laws of contributions and elections, and prohibited
first fruits to be paid. This decre of the counsel, the King of France,
Charles the seventh by thaduise of his Counsel did ratify, and in the year
M.CCCC. xxxviii. confirmed by Proclamation. But Eugenius the fourth pronounced
this counsel to be frustrate, and of none effect, as I said in the first book,
and the Bishops that succeeded him rejected that decre, and said it was
Scismaticall: and in deed Pius the second, sendinge his Ambassadoure to Jews
the eleventh, son to Charles the seventh, moved him earnestly to abolish that
same confirmation: and the king asks counsel of the Senate of Paris, the
most famous of all France, which in a manner consists wholly of lawyers.
They, repeting many things of great antiquity, declare, what the bishops of
former time, what the Counsels, and finally what his progenitors, Clodowey,
Charles yt great Phillip Deodate, Jews the ninth, Philip le Beau, Jews,
Hutine, Ihon the first, and last what his father and grandfather have herein
determined: and except thauncient laws be observed, it will come to pass, say
they, that al thecclesiastical order shall be brought to confusion, and that
France shall be less populous, when so many shall run to Rome, and shall be so
much impouerished, that churches, and many such other sumptuous buildings in
France shall be neglected and fall to ruin. And as touching the money matter,
unless your fathers confirmation of the decree at Basil may be of The sum of
money that is carried to Rome.
force, there shall be carried yearly out of France unto Rome ten C.M. Crowns.
For to let other things pass, in the time of Pius the second, now bishop,
there have been vacant at the least twentye Bishopprickes, which have paid
every one of them as well for their first fruits, as for other charges, vi.M.
There have fallen abbotships about lx, and every one of them have paid two
thousand, of other benefices have been void above two hondreth, which have
paid v.C. crowns a piece. Moreover, within your realm are an hondreth
thousand parishes and above, out of the which an infinite quantity of gold has
been gathered by that same devise of the bishop of Rome. Walk therefore in your
fathers fotesteps, and swerve not from the decre of Basil. Certainly this was
the counsel of the Senate: but the king being ouercommen with the Bishops,
either authority or policy, would neades abolish the confirmation, and the The
university of Parts apealeth from the Pope.
chief worker of this matter was Cardinal Baluen, in great favor with the
king, whom the bishop of Rome had corrupted: how be it both the kings
procurer, and also the university of Paris, whom it much concerned, resisted
with a stout courage, and appealed from the bishop to the counsel. Afterward
Jews the twelfth had great emnity for the same cause with July the second, and
the matter was brought into the counsel of Laterane, and Fraunces the first,
that succeeded Jews, concluded at the length with Leo the tenth, upon certain
conditions at Bononie, after he had taken Millan: verily that when a
Bishoppricke or Abbotship were vacant, the Covent in deed should not have
thelection thereof, but that the king should within.vi. months nominate some
man to the Bishop of Rome, whom he thought worthy of that office. This same
therefore is the thing amongs others, which King Henry now, by his ambassador
signified unto them of a remeady. For kings are on this wise wo^t to bridle the
bishops, when they are at dissension with them, and so to put in practice the
confirmation of the decre of Basil, espectally at this time, when their
thondrebolt is not so greatly feared as it was in time paste. And for so much
as the Realm of France is both most large and rich also, Rome can not without
great hinderance want the revenues thereof. And that which he signified here
that he would do, the same did he not long after, as you shall hear? The same
remeadye also in times paste used the King of France Tharrogancye of Poope
Boniface against ye king of France.
Phillip le Beaw, against Boniface the eight. For whereas he commanded him to
war against the Sarazens, and refusing his excuse, forbad that he should take no
money of the churches within his own Realm, which the King was driven to do
for the necessitye of his wars, and unless he obeyed the same, did suspend
him out of the Church: he assembleth all his Nobles and states at Paris, and
reciting the wrongs of Boniface, when both all the Bishops, Princes, and
Nobility being demanded had confessed, that they held al their lands and
revenues through his liberality and benefit, he commands, that from
henceforth there be no money conueid to Rome, and causes always and passages to
be watched diligently. But whereas the Senate of Paris made thaccompt, how much
the bishopprickes and abbotships vacant do pay, as before is said, this say
they, is to be understand of former time: for now is the paime^t dubled, and
exceadeth the yearly revenues, in so much, that many beneficed men, by reason
of the great exaction, do leave their bulls in the hands of the Banckers. And
within the realm of France be xii. Archbishopprickes, Aygnes, Uienne, Lions,
Narbony, Tolouse, Burdieux, Auxi, Burges, Tours, Roan, Rains, and Sens: Twelve
archbishopriks in France.
and Bishopprickes about. lxxxxvi, by the vacations whereof, as they term it,
is carried to Rome a wonderful some of gold, and out of tharchbishopprickes
verily about three score thousand crowns, and three hondreth, as thaccompte was
made in the time of Jews the twelfth. What time these letters were red, the
fathers say, how they shall be answered at the next session in case ye king will
acknowledge the counsel to be at Trent. But such things as are now in treaty,
they do not admit, but in as much as they may do lawfully: and therefore can not
grant him any testimonye or instruction of this action. After when the day of
the next session, was appointed the.xi. of Octobre, every man returns home,
which was about ii. a clock at after none. And here seems a mete place to
declare what is the manner and order of the public session, when the same day
came, the fathers as they use to speak, assemble in the house of the bishops
Legate. And still from ye cathedral church unto his lodging stand souldioures on
either side the way, about four hundred, and fifty horsemen, or mo. At ix. of
the clock comes forth the Legate with his Crosier before him: and the
cardinal of Trent goes on his lefthand After follow those that are in
commission with him, and tharchbishops that are Princes electors. Than the
Ambassadors of themperor, and king Ferdinando joined together, afterward the
residue of the bishops every man in order. When the last of them are come to
the church, the Soldiers by and by discharge their pieces: and after repair
to the market place, and there and about the Temple keep ward till the
counsel break up. All they for the most part are taken up in the country,
that they may be pressed and ready at the same day: and the Town it self also
does keep many, when they be come into the church, they hear Mass, that done,
the decrees of the counsel are recited, and the day also assigned for the next
session to come. Than also if any ambassadors have ought to say, they are
hard: But by reason of diverse, sundry, and many busy ceremonies that are used
in all matters, thaction is delated til it be far in the day: which at the
length being finished, the legate retourneth home with the same pomp. In
sittinge, the Bishops Legate has the chief place, next him the Cardinal of
Trent, than the Legates copartners, after tharchbishops electors: on the
lefthand sat thambassadors of themperor and other Princes. On the middle
fourmes sit Archbishops, Bishops, and other prelates, every man in order as he
came. The second day of Septembre, the Theames given to the deuines.
the deuines had Themes given them to discuss and reason upon, whereof every
man may speak his mind, to the intent, at the next sitting they may be
determined. And in pronouncing of sentences of this mean was prescribed, that
they should cleue to the holy scripture, to the traditions of the Apostles, to
the received and approved counsels, and authorities of the holy fathers, that
they use a brevity, that they abstain from superfluous and unprofitable
questions, that they eschew all frowardnes and contention. But as concerning
the order, it was agreed, that those deuines should speak The order of
speaking.
first which the bishop of Rome sent, secondly whom the Emperor sent, and so
forth. Moreover the bishops Legate permits them, that for the searching out
of the truth, and as they say, to confute false opinions, they might read
over all manner of books. And there were deuines a great nombre, Spaniards,
Italians and Germans whom both the bishop of Rome, and the emperor, and also
his sister Mary, had sent, whom also tharchbishops of Collon and Treuers, and
the bishops of Spain and of Italy had brought with them. Unto whom was
referred the knowledge of al matters, nether was it lawful for others, than
for such as were of the same profession, and that had taken the degree of
doctorship, to speak any thing. Yet for the favor of the Archbishops of Colon
and Treuers, was admitted Ihon Gropper a lawyer, and Ihon Delphe a bachelor of
divinity, but no doctor. And for so much as in certain former sittinges of the
year a M.D. xlvi. and the year following, they had made a determination, of
original sin, justification, and frewil, of the vii. Sacraments, of the new
law, as they term it, in general, and also of baptism and confirmation
particularely, they condescended, that al those standing in force of the decre,
they should proceed to the rest, and first in deed to the Sacrament of thanckes
giving. Wherefore certain Theames were delivered to the deuines, with these self
same words, that they should search and try, whether they were heretical, and
mete to be condemned by the holy Senode: which Theames they had collected out
of the books of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, and such others. And the deuines use
the matter after this sort. They assemble all daily in the house of the Bishops
The manner of making ye Articles of faith.
Legate, by the space of many hours, and observing thordre be foresaid every of
them reasons of the said Theames without any interruption, yet so, as they
submit al their sayings to the judgment of the church of Rome. For none of the
protestants were there. This place is open indifferently for all men: and the
Bishops Legate, and the residue of all the fathers are many times there present:
but the deuines only speak, and the words and sentences of every man are
registered by the Scribes. What time all men had done reasoning, which was than
accustomed to be done in a Months space, the bishops resort to the bishop of
Romes Legate, and examine The manner of making ye decrees.
the sentences of the deuines which the Scribes had noted: after, out of every
no^bre and nation were chose^ certain, which perusing over al their opinions,
might thereof make a doctrine: what thing should be determined and believed in
every point: after this they condemn the contrary doctrine and errors, as they
call them, with a grievous sensure, yet not with many words: al these things
are in fine related to the whole assemble. When they be thoroughly agreed they
come unto open sessions, as I said before, and the decrees be red openly: that
done the bishops are demanded, whether they allow the same. They answer all,
that they please them well. And so the deuines declare what is their opinion of
every matter: but the bishops only, and with them a few other mitred men have
authority to determine: that thing which is thus decreed, they command to be
sacred and holy, and call those decrees, Canons. These things in deed are thus
done outwardly, but those that are better acquainted with Romish matters, will
affirm that all those articles of doctrine are written before at Rome, by the
bishops commaunment, and sent to his Legate in time, that the deuines may in
their reasoning follow that prescript and order. For the Bishop finedeth there
diverse of them, and many bishops also, and therefore it is commonly spoken by a
fond proverb, that the holy ghost comes many times from Rome to Tre^t
enclosed in a male. For this cause verily that the bishop sends ofttimes
letters in post, signifying to The holy ghost at the Popes commandment.
his Legates there what he would have done. The fourth day of Septembre, Earl
Hedeck comes to Maidenburge: by him duke Moris did so mitigate the conditions
before propounded, that they thought mete to proceade in the treatye. In the
mean while was truse taken, which was after also prolonged for many days, as
I shall hereafter declare. The French king having his mind alienated The French
kings writing against the Pope.
from the bishop of Rome, publishes a writing, and speakinge many things of
thiniury done unto him, of the cause of the war of Parma, and why he
received Octauius into his tuition, commands under a great penalty, that no
money from henceforth be conveyed to Rome: for considering that the sinews of
war consists in money, what madness were this, with his own money and his
subjects to maintain the force of his aduersarye, and strengthen his power?
how it is the peculiare office of the bishops of Rome to appease: he
controversies of kings: this verily did Paul ye third, who being almost worn
for age came to Nice in Ligurie to make a reconcilement between his father and
themperor: but July follows clean an other wates, and having lately called a
counsel, very necessary in deed for the common weal, has stirred up war
against him, surely of a set purpose, that he might exclude all the french
church, which is one of the principal: so that there can not be holden a lawful
counsel, wherein both therrors of the prelates and ministers of the church
might be reformed, and their faults amended. This proclamation of the king
was openly proclaimed at Paris, the vii. day of Septembre, whereas a few days
before, there was an other most heinous proclamation setforth against the A
cruel proclamation against the Lutheranes.
Lutheranes, which partly confirmed such like decrees of former years, partly
where they seemed not to be diligently enough written, sharpened them, omitting
nothing that concerns great seueritye, and such as will utter any thing are
promised great rewards, which thing in deed the king was thought to have done
for this intent that he might bridell hereby such as in France desired to have
an alteration of Religyon, least by reason of this dissension of his with the
bishop, they should take overmuch liberty:

And again, least they which bear a reverence to the Church of Rome should
conceive any apinion of him, that his mind should be altered concerning
Religion: Finally, that both the bishop him self and the Senate of Cardinals
might see, that they might be received into his friendship when they would. Than
out of themperours court came forth a writing, wherein is recited the original
cause of the war of Parma, and how just an occasion of displeasure the
bishop of Rome has against Octauius, and the Earl of Mirandula, and of what
an unquiet mind the French king is, which seeks all manner of occasions, and
bends his whole force, that he may impeche and defeat the most noble
enterprises of themperor: how beit themperor being nothing moved withal these
things, will so much the more courageously and stoutly proceed. Octauius
pretended, as though he had come of necessity into thobeisance and tuition of
the French king, for thiniuries and laying in wayt of Ferna^do Gonzage. But
that is confuted by this wrytinge: For if there were any cause of fear, the
occasion was given of him self, who has ofttimes laid wait for the life of
Gonzage After it is recited, how Placence came into the hands of themperor: For
Peter Aloise the bishop of Romes bastard son, when he had obtained Pirma and
Placence, governed the common wealth cruelly and like an other The wicked
lusts of the popes son
Nero, and accomplished his wicked lust not only upon women, but on men also:
wherefore he was slain at home, and murdered of his citezens, which could no
longer abide so great crudelitye: after the towns men, for yt they saw a
present danger prepared against them, in case they should come again into the
iurisoiction of the Bishop and church of Rome, had this only refuge to save
them, if they gave them selves to themperor, especially, consideringe also,
how they were once fre citezens of the Empire: so therefore they moved
Gonzage, and desired him that they might be received into themperors tuition:
For otherwise would they provide them aid and succor elsse where: Therefore it is
untrue that he should feign him self to be a fraid: For themperor has imploid
many benefits upon the Farnesians: He has chosen Octauius to his son in law,
and gave to his father Aloise the city of Nouaria for ever, and honored him
with the dignity of a Marquis: but great has been their unthankfulness, both at
other times, and chiefly when through the pretense of friendship they aided him,
in punishing certain rebels of Germany, their whole endeavor was to have taken
from him Genes and Lumbardy: For verily in the same tumult was slain full
wickedly among others, Ioannine Aurie, a man of an excellent virtue, whilst
he both did themperor faithful service, and repulsed pearil from his country.
After came forth an answer to these things in A purgation of the french king.
the French kings name. Wherein is made mention, how themperor, to have the
friendship of the bishop of Rome Paul the third, gave unto his son Peter
Aloise, the title and degree of a Marquis, how he took unto him Octauius the
son of Peter to be his son in law, how he preferred his other son
Alexander to many ecclesiastical promotions: how afterward he made a league
with the bishop, wherein it was provided that the decre of the Senate of
Cardinals, that was made concerning the government of Parma and Placence,
themperor should confirm to the house of the Frenesians: but what time
themperor made war in Germany, and pretended, The cause of dissension be twixt
ye pope and emperor
as though he moved not the same war for Religion, but to punish the rebellion
of certain, this devise was displeasaunt to the bishop, for that he saw how by
this mean, he went about his private affairs, and to procure to him self rule
and government: neither was he disceiued in his judgment: For the war being
almost finished when themperor had no great neade of the Frenesians service,
he declared plainly, how he bare the bishop no great good will: For even than
his lieftenants in Lumbardy fixed their eyes and minds to surprise Placence,
and not long after were procured certain murderers, which slew Peter Aloise
in his chamber, and before the Towns men heard of the murder committed,
souldioures were brought in, which in themperors name did take the Castle. And
if themperor were not privy to this act, it had yet ben reason, that after the
death of bishop Paul, he should have restored the City to the church of Rome:
but he has not only not restored the same, but has also gone about to take
Parma from his son in law, and even than was in hand with the same devise,
when the Bishop yet lived, in so much, that Paulus, being sore vexed in his
mind to think upon such unkindness, departed out of this life: Afterward were
murderers taken at Parma, which spoke it of their own mind, that Fernando
Gonzage had waged them to slay Octauius: when he therefore was brought into this
distress, when he saw, how they, of whom he looked for healpe, and also his
father in law, lay in wait to take from him both lands and life also, he
requires his aid and succor, which he could not deny him, so humbly craving
the same.

The, xxiij, Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charles the fyfte.
The Argument of the xxiij. Book.
The fathers of Trent enter into matters, and grant safeconduit to come to the
Counsel, The French king accords not to the same: pea he disswageth the
Swisses from goinge thither: a composition was made with them of Maidenburge
under certain conditions. The most part of the Cities in Germany send to the
Counsel. The ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberge might not be there hard.
Duke Maurice having for the last time sent ambassadors to the Emperor, for
the deliverance of the Lantzgraue, and obtaining nothing but delays,
secreatly is resolved to make war. The Monk, Bishop of Uarady, by whose
means king Ferdmando had taken Transiluania is slaiue. Themperor in his
letters which he sends to appease the Archbishops, assures him self of Duke
Moris, who to make fair weather sends his Ambassadors to the Counsel, with
whom thothers joined, and make request for a safeconduit for their deuines,
and above all, that those which are of the contrary part be not judges in the
Counsel. But obteining nothing they depart, upon the brute of the preparation
to war that their Prince would make. The fathers of the Counselare at
discord, and after that news came of the taking of Auspurge, they fled al,
Crescencethe Popes Legate, fell into so terrible a fear, that he admits no
consolation at his death.

DUke Moris, for the pacification, assembleth the states of his dominion, and
about thend of Septembre commands them to repair to Wittemberge. Thither
also they of Maidenburge send ambassadors, as it was couenaunted, which the
tenth day after return home, at the conuoy of Marquis Albert. I have showed you
before how Duke Moris by his letters required that the deuines might have
safeconduit from the whole counsel: to the Emperor, therefore commands his
Ambassadoures to prefer the matter to the fathers, and bring it to pass.

Wherefore when the.xi. day of Octobre was commen, there was A decree at Trent of
the Lords supper.
a sitting wherein was first rehearsed the exposition of the doctrine of the
corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament of thanckes giving, of the manner
of the institution thereof, of transubstantiation, as they call it, of the
worshipping and adoration of this Sacrament, of reserving the host, and
cariyng it about to the sick, of the preparation that a man may receive it
worthily. After, al christians are forbidden to believe or teach any otherwise,
than it is here decreed: Than were the Cannons recited. Wherein all those
theames were condemned, which I said before were collected out of Luthers
works and others: Notwithstanding to gratify the Emperor, they leave four of
them undiscussed. Whether it be necessary to salvation, and commanded by
Gods law, that all men should receive the Sacrament under both kinds.
Whether he that receives but one, takes les, than he that receives both:
Whether the Church has erred, in ordeining, that only Priests should receive
under both kinds, and not the residue. Whether the sacrament ought to be
ministered unto children also. Touching these theames, before the Synod
should determine any thing, they said how the Protestants desired to be
heard, and to have safeconduit granted them: where therefore they have longed
greatly hitherto for their coming, and are in hope that they will return to
the ancient concord of the Church, they grant them safelye to come, and
safely to return: And differ the determination of these questions to the five
and twenty day of January, that they may be fore that day repair thither, and
declare what they have to say: the^ will they treat also, touching the
sacrifice of the Mass, because the argument is like. These things did they
read openly in such sort, as if their adversaries had made request to be heard
in these things only, whereas they never thought of any such matter. For
besides Duke Moris, no man once moved the Emperor, and his suit was framed
after an other sort, as before is said, and the matters were much more weighty,
that they would have propounded. But for what intent the thing was thus
pronounced, a man may make a conjecture, but nothing can be affirmed.

How be it, of two things the one must neades be: For either the request of
Duke Moris was coldlye and slenderlye preferred unto them, or else have they
used the matter craftily and negligentlye, which thing is more like to be true,
by the safeconduct that they sent. For where Duke Moris would have had the
self same assurance for his men, that the Bohemers had in time paste: They
wrote the safeconduite with a few words, and very negligently, The safeconduit
of the fathers at Trent.
setting to, neither sign nor seal public.

How it was lawful for all the Germans indifferentlye to repair unto the
Counsel, and of matters to be treated there, either in the full assemble, or
with certain commissioners, to propound, confer and reason, what they shall
think good, either in talk or writing, without contumelious words and
reproaches, and after, when they will, to depart, and return home? for this
consideration ye counsel grau^teth the^ safeconduit, as farforth as to ye same
apertaineth. Moreover, it shall be lawful for them, that as well for their sins
past, as hereafter to be committed, although they be most heinous and sinell of
Heresy, they may at their own pleasure choose judges for them selves. The same
eleventh day of Octobre before mentioned, they made certain laws, under the
title of reformation, which concerned their jurisdiction. After was an other
session decreed the xxv. of Nouembre, wherein should be treated of penance
and extreme unction. Than also the electoure of Brandenburge, Ioachim, sending
his ambassador, Christopher Strasie, a doctor of the civil law, offered his
duty and obeisance. And certainly tha^mbassadour spoke many things at large
of the great good The Marquis of Bra^denburge statereth the counsel.
will of his Prince: They answer again how they have taken much pleasure to hear
his whole Oration, especially that part. where the Prince submits him self
wholly to the counsel, and says that he will observe the decrees of the same:
For their trust is, that the thing which he has now presently spoken, that
same will he perform in deed. After the death of Ihon Albert, which had the
Archbishoppricke of Maidenburge, both wealthy and large, the government was
committed to Fridericke, son to thelectour of Brandenburge, whom the
College had desired for their archbishop: but the matter was impeached, and
could not be brought to pass at Rome: And because thelectour Ioachim, was
before of the Protestants religion, as it was openly known, that same was a
great let. Wherefore to avoid the suspicion, this ambassadoure was sent, who
fawning upon the Prelates, omitted no point of exquisit diligence. There was
peace concluded at Wittenberge: And all beit the siege was not levied
immediatelye, yet were there friendly metinges between them, the xii. day of
Octobre. And ye self same time Duke Moris constrains the Chats, a people in
the country of Duke Moris seaseth upon the dominion of Chats.
Hesse, which were iii. years past by themperours sentence taken from the Lantz
grave being prisoner to be sworn unto him, by the consent of the La^tzgraues
son, by reason of the league of inheritance as he says, which is between the
house of Hesse and Saxon: so that for default of heirs males, the one house
should succeed the other.

And no man doubted but this concerned the injury of themperor. that had given
the sentence, and some new commotion, and all me^ marueled what would be thend
thereof: but in the Emperors court was in a manner no talcke of it, and made as
they knew not thereof. At this time was the Duke of Somerset, uncle to the king
of England, apprehended the second time, and with him the Lord The duke of
Somerset apprehended.
Paget the Lord Gray and certain others.

Than had Ihon the Duke of Northumberlande the chief rule and gouernemente:
The cause of his apprehension was, as it is reported, that the Duke of
Northumberland said, how the other laid wait for his life: For this by a law
newly made was death among them.

About the eight day of Octobre, the Bishop of Rome created Cardinal, George
Martinuse bishop of Wardin, of high authority in Hongary: the common people
named him Monk, because he was of thordre of Paul, the first Hermit. How the
French ambassador was commanded to attend for an answer at the xi. day of
Octobre, so that the king would acknowledge the counsel, I have told you
before: Certes he came not, but yet in the Counsels name was setforth a writing
to the king.

First they reckon up how they looked for most ample things at his hands, and
that for sundry causes, but at the coming of this The counsel writes to yt
french king.
messenger, and after they had red his letters, they conceived an inward sorrow,
for that they are fallen from their expectation: and yet for so much as they are
neither touched with the gilt of conscience, nor have given none any occasion
of displeasure, they have not yet laid aside thold hope they had of him:
wherefore thopinion which he has conceived, as though this counsel were called
for the private profit of a few, can least of all take place in so worthy a
Sinode.

For the causes of calling this Counsel were propounded not only Causes of
calling the counsel.
of this Bishop, but also of Paul the third, verelye, that heresies might be
roted out, the schole of Discipline amended, and peace be restored to the
Church: is not this plain inoughecan there be any more godly or Christianlike
thing be done? For now are heresies spredde, not only throughout Germany, but
in manner in all Countries: which great calamity the counsel is in will to
redress: This is the very cause, and this is also the end of all their doing,
and all things are referred to this point: Let him therefore permit the
Bishops of his realm to further so godly a business: For he neaded not to
fear, least they might not be suffered to speak freely that they thought: For
lately was his ambassadoure both quietly and patiently heard, when he told no
joyful news.

Than seeing a private man was heardwith such a lei tie, why should any man
believe that the same should be denied unto public parsons, and such as are
placed in so high dignity? how be it though he send no man, yet shall the
counsel nevertheless have both his dignitye and authority, for that it was
lawfullye summoned, and now for just causes restored: And where he signified,
that he would use the remedies, that his progenitoures had done before: they
supposed he would never proceed so far, as to revoke those things, which
were taken away and abolished in times past to the great commodity of the
kings of France: and seeing that god has so highly auaunced him, and endued
him with so great benefits, they trust verily, that he will do nothing, whereby
he should seem unthankful, either toward God, or to our mother holy church: let
him only have a respect to his progenitors, to that same title and surname of
most christen king: Finally, to his father king Fraunces, who honored the
former Sinode by sending thither his bishops and ambassadors. Men of most
excellent learning: he ought to walcke in these fotesteps which are both fresh
and domestical, and follow this example, and remit private displeasures for the
common wealths sake. Themperor and the Bishop had exhorted the Swisses, that
they should be at the counsel: but it was in vain: and the Bishop in deed
treated with them by Hierome Francke, as before is said, but the French king
gave charge unto Morlet, that was his ambassador The French disswageth yt
Swisses from the counsel.
there, that he should endeavor to persuade them all, that they send no man
thither. Morlet, fineding some difficultye herein, sends for Uergerius, an
expert man in such affairs, out of Rhoetia, and axeth his counsel. He both
furnished him of arguments, and shortly after setforth a book, of eschuing the
counsel. Morlet being thus instructed, came unto thassemble of Baden, and
there alledgynge his reasons, persuaded not only them, which had long sense
forsaken Papistry, but also all the residue of the Swisses, even as he desired.
Wherefore none of them came to Trent. Out of Rhetia came thither, at the Bishop
of Romes commandment, Thomas Pla^t bishop of Chur: but when the Rhetians
understood, by the advertisement of Uergerius, what the bishop of Rome
intended, and how he would by him recover his authority among them, he was
called home again.

The Spaniardes, which were in the land of Wirtemberge, were sent for about this
time by themperor, and sent into Italy, to serve The land of Wirte^berge
delivered of Spaniardes.
in the war of Parma. By their departure was the whole country delivered from
a most grievous servitude, wherewith it had been oppressed by the space of five
years: only the Castle of Asperge the Emperor reserved to him self,
placing in it a garrison of Almaines. In these days also, Henry Hasie, by the
Emperors commandment, traueling throughout Sweaden, every where changes the
state of the common wealth, and ordeineth new Senators: he discharges also
the preachers and Scholemasters, unless they will obey the decre of Religion, as
was latelye done at Auspurge. It is mentioned before how Duke Moris, and the
Duke of Wirtemberge had commanded Articles of Doctrine to be written, which
after should be exhibited: how also the Senate of Strashurge had joined them
selves unto this their doing.

Wherefore the duke of Wirtemberge, sending two ambassadoures, Ihon Theodoricke
Pleninger, and Ihon Hecline, commanded Thambassadour of Wirtemberge to the
counsel.
them, both to exhibit openly this confession of doctrine, and to say also
that the deuines should come, which shall treat al things more plentifully, and
defend the same, so that they may have safeco^duit according to the decre of
Basil.

They, so sone as they came to Trent, which was almost at the end of Octobre,
go unto the Earl Mounforte, and exhibit unto him the commission of their
ambassade, and show him how in their princes name, they would propound certain
things in the counsel, he in his talk tended to this end, that he thought
good they should repair to the bishops Legate: but they saying that if they
should confer with him any thing, it would apere that they should attribute
unto him the chief right and authority of judgment, wherein they perceived a
prejudice and hinderance of their matter. Wherefore they come not at him, but
writing letters to their prince fary for an answer of his pleasure herein. In
the mean season the deuines do reason after their manner, of the questions
before propounded concerning penance and unction. The third day of Nouembre,
Count Hedeck being sent of Duke Moris, came to Maidenburge, and calling out
the captains of the soldiers into a place The pacificacion of Maydenburge.
without the city, made a full end, and wrytinges of the same matter were drawn
and sealed. And the soldiors in deed were assured by safe conduit, that they
might safely depart. This was the viii. day of the same month, but so sone as
they were discharged, they were priuelye retained, and hired again, by the
duke of Megelburge, which was now by the pacification released: for Duke Moris
purposely would not do it in his own name. And the conditions of peace were
these. That they should humbly crave pardon of themperor: that they should do
nothing against the house of Austrich and Burgundy: that they submit the^
selves to the chamber: that they obey the last decre of Auspurge: That they
answer al me^ to the law: That they cast down the fortification of the city, at
themperoures pleasure: That they admit into their city, themperors garrison at
all times, and set open their gates for him: That they pay L.M. crowns to
themperors cofers: That for the charges of the wars they deliver to themperor
xii. great pieces of ordenaunce: that they set at liberty the duke of
Megelburge and the other prisoners. When the soldiors of the garnison were gone out
of the city, the same day, which were to the nombre of ii. M fotemen, and an
hondreth horsemen, Duke Moris sent in v. enseignes of footmen, and the next
day, the Senate going forth to mete him, he enters the city with his whole army,
and receives them al into thobeisance of themperor, thempire, and of him self,
which had been chief captain of the same war, after, leaving there a
garrison, he leads away the reast. Than causes he the preachers to be sent
for, and by his counselloures, Faccie, Carlebice, and Mortisie he complains
of iniurye done him, by reason of the books and pictures setforth by them, as
though he should have forsaken the doctrine of the gospel, as though he should
have moved war against the city, for the constant professing of the true
doctrine: wherefore he has just cause to be offended, if he would follow his
affections, but all these things he remitteth for the common wealths sake,
and requires that they would from henceforth exhort the people to amend their
lives, and honor the Magistrates: he commands also prayers to be openly made
for the Emperor, for him self and for all other Magistrates: he says
moreover how there is at this present a counsel holden at Trent, wherein he
will exhibit the confession of a godly doctrine, as well in his own name, as
also of other Princes and states, let the^ pray therefore, that God would
prosper and turn to good the whole action of the counsel, and that they rail
not against the same, as they have accustomed to do. They, deliberating upon
the matter, make answer, that in deed they set not forth those pictures, how be
it they judge them worthy no reprehension: and that certain with in his
dominion have by the space of iii. years swarued from the pure doctrine of the
Gospel, it cannot be denied: for there be books and monuments extant: and that
the city was besieged because of the Gospel, it is easy to prove, if a man
consider only the first authors of the war: In admonishinge the people they
have omitted nothing, the same will they also do hereafter: for the counsel,
which is assembled to quench the verity, wherein that Romish Antichriste
obteineth the highest place, they can none otherwise pray, than that God may
confound, break, and dissipate their enterprises and devises: for there is no
good thing to be looked for at their hands. Such conditious of peace were in
deed spread abroad: but certain it is, that they were well assured both for
their liberty and religion. Duke Moris also had rather the City should be open
for him, then for the emperor, as thend declared afterward. After this sort
they of Maidenburge being delivered, besides thexpectation of many, got them
selves great praise and renown among foraine nations, for so much as in
manner they alone throughout al Germany, declared by their example, what thing
constancy may do. Moreover The noble fame and consta^cy of Maiden burge.
thend of their misery, was thentry and beginning of the war against them, by
whose aid and counsel they were afflicted, as here after shall be declared.
Whilst Duke Moris was in the city, he declared sufficiently, what his intent
was, that is to wit, how he would hazard his life to deliver his father inlawe:
Neither did he dissemble the same the next day after, being moved by a certain
man. He had sent Ambassadors to the Emperor before, for ye deliverance of
the Lantgraue. And had also joined with him herein the king of Denmark, and
many Princes of Germany as you shall hear hereafter. And unless he could
bring it to pass, was fully determined to attempt the thing by force, and
Duke Maurice inte^deth to war upon the Emper.
was already at a compact with the French king touching the same, who had sent
to him privily John Fraxinie, Bishop of Baion, a man well acquainted in
Germany, and that understood the tongue. But the Emperor appeared to be nothing
moved with all these things, and was wholly addicte to the war of Parma, and
the treaty of the counsel of Trent. About this time also Maximilian the
Emperors son inlawe coming out of Spain, arrived at Genes with his wife
and children. The French men sailing out of the port of Marseilles, and
bording certain of his ships, took and spoiled the same. The cause whereof was
said to be, for that those horsemen, which king Ferdinando had sent into Italy
to receive and conduicte his son coming out of Spain, had aided Ferdinando
Go^zage in a certain warlike exploicte. But the Frenchemen before that also,
under the pretense of amity entering into the hauon of Barcelona, had taken
away a Galley and six ships of burden, furnished with all things necessary
for the use and nauigatio^ of Maximilian as certainly the imperialls recite in a
certain inuectiue, wherein they complain of the injuries of the Frenchmen and
the peace broken. The Princes had entreated the Emperor in the conuentio^ at
Auspurg, that in case he might not be present, at the least he would not be far
from the place of the counsel. Which thing he granted to do, and had said unto
the^ how he would remain upon the borders of thempire, as I showed you before.
Wherefore departing from Auspurge in the beginning of Noue^b. he came to
Inspruck, which is three days journey from Trent. This he thought to have done,
both for because of the counsel, and also for the war of Parma, that being
so nere al thing should be done with more diligence. Shortly after, about
the.xxi. day of Noue^b. John Sleidane, Ambassador for the city of Strasburg,
John Slefdan, Ambassador for Strasburge in the counsel.
came to Trent, yt he might further ye common cause jointly with Duke Maurices,
and the duke of Wirte^berges Ambassadors. And unto this city had joined
themselves, Esting, Raue^sburg Rutelinge, Bibrach and Lindawe, and gave
commission, that they should treat also in their names. But why, they of
Frankefort, and chiefly of Norinberge, sent not, it may be doubted: Ulmes had
before changed their Religion, after the prescript of the Emperor. From
Auspurg and other places, were all the preachers bannished lately, as I said
before: So that they could not well send any. Howbeit though the same had not
chanced the Senate would have done nothing herein but by the Emperors
consent.

In the month of November the Bishop of Rome, in one day created.xiii.
Cardinals, all Italians. For they be wont The Pope creates. xiii Cardinals.
to provide such, as it were garrysons, to defend them selves. When the.xxv.
day of Noue^ber was come, and the fathers placed in their seats accordingly,
the decrees were recited. That penance is a Sacrament instituted of Christ,
and necessary, for such as after Baptism fall unto sin again. That it is A
decree of penance.
also a several Sacrament from Baptism, and as it were an other table of
salvation, after the shipwrake has chanced. That the same words of Christ,
by the which he gives to his Apostles the holy Ghost, ought to be understand
of the power to forgive sins by this Sacrament. That the sin should be
forgeuen, three things be required, contricion, confession, and satisfaction.
And that contrition is in deed a true and profitable sorrow, which prepares
the man unto grace. And confession, or the manner secretly to recite the sins
to the Priest, to be ordained by Gods law, and necessary to salvation.
That all sins which come to remembrance, and circumstaunces of the same are
to be rehearsed. That confession ought to be every year once at the least, and
that chiefly in the time of Lent. That absolution is not a bare ministry,
whereby the remission of sins is denounced, but an act judicial. That only
priests, though they be never so sinful, have authority to give absolution.
Where as Bishops do reserve unto them selves, certain cases and offenses, for
the which other priests can not assoyle, to be well done. Although the crime
be remitted, yet is not the punishment therefore released, and that
satisfaction consists in work, and not in faith. That by such penance, as
either God sends upon us, or the priest inioyneth, or else of our own fre
will we chose unto our selves, the sins are cleansed, concerning temporal
punyshement. That satisfactions whereby sins are redeemed, be Gods service.
That the priest has power to bind and lowse. And therefore may inioyne
penance to him that confesses his sins. And this much concerning penance.
They decree that extreme unction is a Sacrament instituted of Christ, for that
it gives grace, remitteth sins, and comfort the sick. The use of this
Sacrament to be the same, whereof spoke Saint James the Apostle. Those seniours
also whereof he made mention not to be ancient in years, but priests, and
they only to be the Ministers of this Sacrament. This doctrine they commau^de
to be celebrated and observed. Such as teach or believe other wise, they
deteste and accurse as pestilent and wicked.

The next day after the sessions, were brought the Duke of Wirtemberges
letters to his Ambassadors, Whom he commanded, that they should proceed, and
in the assession, at the xxv. day of November, they should exhibit the
confession of the doctrine written. When therefore those letters were brought so
little time to late, and that it was a long season to the next sitting, and
Earl Mounfort was also absente, they go to the Cardinal of Trent, and say
they have certain things which they should in their Princes name propounde in
the counsel: And how the same should have been done in the last session, but
that the letters came so late that the occasion was paste. Wherefore they
require, that he, which is a Germayne borne, would both for the love of the
country, and for their Princes sake also, whom he knew, further the^ in this
case, and bring to pass, that the fathers being called together, they might
declare their message. He with most ample words, promises great benevolence.
How he will prefer the matter to the bishops Legate: But says how it is
agreed among the fathers, that no man shall propounde any thing openly,
unless it A discipline amongst the fathers.
be first known, what manner a thing that should be. And how the French
Ambassador was cause of the same decree, when lately in the open sittyng there
was raised an unseemly uproar, and a very clamorouse outcrie. Wherefore he
inquireth what should be the effect of their request. Who for the desire they
had to further the matter, show him the letters of their commission. Whereby
understanding that they should exhibit some book of doctrine, he lets the^
so depart at that time, as he put them in hope, that within a few days, the
thing might take effect. The next day he calls for them again, and says
how he has conferred with the legate of the whole matter, and for the better
credit also showed him the letters of commission. But that he is sore offended,
for that they should think to exhibit a writing, and thinks thus, that
those which ought of duty reverently to receive and obey the rule and order
of doctrine, would prescribe their Elders, which thing is both absurd and
vncommely. Other answer could he get none at this present, but yet would he
be in hand with him again.

And bids them also to be of good comfort. Within a few The Ambassadors
of Wirtimb. deluded.
days after, what time Maximilian of Austriche approached nere, the Cardinal
going forth to mete him at Mantua, admonishes the Ambassadors of Wixtemberg,
that, for so much as he must needs depart, they should repare to Toletane, the
Emperors Ambassador: Who both by virtue of his office and authority, may
profit them greatly, and will do it right gladly, even for his sake, which
has commended the matter unto him. They followyng his counsel, spoke unto
him: Who promising them gently many things, so departs. But when they came
again the second time, he began to make an excuse, by reason of the
disputations that the Divines should now have, where at the fathers must be
present. Which finished, he would epsy an occasion. It is to be thought that
he received a much like answer, as the Cardinal had done before: But least
he should take away all hope of being heard hereafter, he alleged this cause,
especially considering both how the Emperor has had procured the counsel,
and that it was permitted by a public decree of the Empire, that every man
might freely propounde of what matters soever he would. In the mean season the
Ambassador of Strasburge goes to the Emperors Ambassador, William Pictaue,
in the absence of the Earl Monforte. And for so much as they were all of like
condition and authority, he shows him the commission of his Ambassade, as
the manner and custom is, and says he is sent thither to ye intent he might
confer and consulte with the residue of the profession of Auspurge, how this
controversy of religion and doctrine might be appeased, and a public quiet
established. He taking a copy of his commission, which he said he would
send to the Emperor, and speaking many things of the doctrine and dignity
of the counsel, like as he was in deed a learned man and an orator, offered
his service and diligence. This was the last of November. And at the same time
the Divines had Theames delivered them, touching the sacrifice of the Mass as
they term it, that they might speak their minds of the same, after the manner
before mentioned.

How Duke Maurice sent his Ambassadors to the Emperor Thambassadours of D.
Mauris and the Marquis of Brande^b. to the Emp.
for the Lantgraue, is declared before. And with the^ were joined the
Ambassadors of the Prince Electour of Brandenburge. Wherefore being admitted to
his speech about the beginning of December, when they had in their Princes
name done their commendations. You know, say they, most redoubted Emperor,
in what distress ar the most Noble Princes electours, Duke Maurice and the
Marquis of Brande^burg, Their Oration.
for ye deteyning of the Lantgraue, where into they chanced beyond all
expectation, whilst by their singular industry, they would procure unto you,
an easy and honorable victory, demynysh the charges of the war, and restore
to the common country peace and quietness. Which thing has been the cause also,
that they have often entreated you, sometime by their Ambassadors, and sometime
in their own persons, that you would have consideration of them, and set him at
lyberty. At the which time verily, they added this moreover, that in case ye
required a further assurance, besides the suertyshipp: wherewith they both, and
Wulfegange county Palatyne, with all the people of Hesse are bounden to you,
they would not refuse. Unto these their requests you made answer to
Christopher Carlebyce, and James Schillinge, whom they sent last unto you,
that to deliver him before it should appear, what the action of the Imperial
assemblee should be, which was than at hand, you might not: Again that you
promised nothing else, but that if he kept conuenau^tes, he should not be
detained in prison perpetual. And where they being occupied with other
affairs, could not them selves come to the assemblee, they moved you again by
their counselors and letters at Auspurg, but you writing again the cause,
why you were offended with him, and might not deliver him, did pronounce them
free from the bond where by they are bound to the Lantgraues sons. Wherefore
they determined to move your highness again: And would have come their selves,
but you know, how they were both let by the war of Mayde^burge, and the
Marquis also by sickness: And therefore would have the thing done by us. And first
in deed, when your pleasure was, that the Lantgraue should submit him self
unto you without condition, they received intelligence by the Bishop of Arras,
what your mind was, this verily, that he should admit and observe the
conditions of you propounded, and delivered unto them. Now, if he should have been persuaded to render him self in this sort, it was assuredly nedeful to
declare unto him, that he should neither be detained prisoner, nor farther
burdened, than was in the pacification prescribed. So therefore ye Prince did
assure him. Which thing also your cou^sellours understood right well. And where
he desired yt certain articles of yt same peacemaking might be further declared
unto him, and also requested yt he might not be stayed in the same matter
above.vi. days, and ye thing signified to ye bishop of Arras in other things
also the Princes in a manner obtained what they would. And albeit that in this
same treaty the case was not understand of all men after one sort, in so
much that he, when he came, was contrary to their promise, committed to ward.
Yet did they never blame you, Caesar, for the same, neither stood they in terms
with you therefore, for that they had had to do only with your counselors, and
not with you, saving than, when the Lantgraue was coming, and had signified
unto them that they should come unto him to Numburg. For tha^ spoke they with
your self, and said how they had persuaded him to admit the conditions
propounded, and that he was coming not far of, and how they, if you would
permit them, would go to mete him: And for so much as he was come thither upon
there fidelity, they besought you that he might not otherwise be burdened,
then was in the pacification comprised. Which thing when your self had
granted then frankely: they went forth, and brought him to Hale. And in the
last treaty, there was no mention made, that he should be detayned prisoner.
Which The Lantgraue kept prisoner against the leage made.
thing they suppose that your own men can also testify, namely the Bishop of
Arras, with whom only they had conference, and Seldus, whom he many times ded
associate unto him. For after the conditions admitted, and his humble
submission: the Princes believed verily, that he should have been released
immediately, and that for many causes they thought so. First, because your
counselours made no mention of impriso^ment, which is the chiefest point of the
same peacemakyng, and diligently marked of ye Lantgraue doubtless above al other
things: Again, for that in the pacification, are many things contained, that
cannot be performed of a captive Prince, but only of him that is at liberty.
After when he had made his submission: you pardoned his offense, and promised
to abolysh the prescription, and to give him letters of reconcilement: moreover
for that ye were content with their suertyship, whereby it was provided, that in
case he observed not co^uenauntes, the people should present him to you
captive: and the suerties by force of arms, should compel him to his duty.
Certeinely, all these things were to no purpose, and al together superfluous,
if there had supposed that he should have suffered punishment with his own body.
But where as they never thought of any such matter, nor yet your own
cou^sellours had made any mention thereof, upon this trust and confidence they
sent for him, and if any thing should chance unto him beside, they promised
and were bound to his sons, to abide the like fortune that he should. This
was their mind and opinion, which was also confirmed, what time after the
submission, the Duke of Alba badde them and the Lantgraue to supper. Which
bedding and hospitality, they, for the manner of Princes, and custume of
Germany, could not so interpret the thing, that he should go to the Duke of
Alba his house as unto prison, and they should accompany him, and bring him
thither. For if they had conceived the least susspection The Lantgraue blod^
to supper, was kept prisoner.
in the world of that matter: who should believe that ever they would have done
it? For seeing they be Princes of the Empire, and that electours, borne of most
noble houses: they would never have employed their service in that sort, as to
in tyse a noble Prince, being their nere friend and kynsman, into such
distress, and themselves as it were, bring him to prison. But they neither
knew any thing thereof, till it was after supper: For then ded the Duke of Alba
first say unto them, how he must remain in the Castle, as in custody. But
howsoever it be, they ded it of a very good mind, as we said at the begenning:
And for so much as they be bounden to him of their fidelity, you may easily
perceive, that in case after so great and long suite, and suerties put in, he
should be longer detayned, how grievous and harmefull the same would be to
them, their children and kynsfolkes: You se also most mighty Emperor,
co^sydering you are come of the Germaynes race, for asmoch as ye Lantgraues
sons poursue their right, and urge them to yield them selves captyue, after
the form of the obligation, what is mete for them to do, to maintain there
honor and estimation, according to the ancient and accustumed manner of the
Nobility of Germany, and how they can have none excuse unto other Princes,
although either ye power to sue them, or deed of obligation, which they have,
should be taken a way. And if peradventure the Lantgraue, which neither by
co^positio^, nor geuyng his faith, but by the same occasion as we have showed
you, is deteyned prisoner, for a certain wearynes, and impacience of long
impriso^ment, has sought some means to obtain liberty, and that perchance
his ministers have attempted any thing against his kepers: the Princes do
beseech you, that the same be not to them prejudicial: But for somoch as by
reason of there obligation, they are in a great perplexity, out of ye which you
only, next after almighty God, may deliver them. For so much as it is not
unknown unto you, how they stroke upon these rocks, for so much as you have
certain inteligence of their good will, fidelity and duty, what time in your
adversity, they employed all their lands and goods, life and blood, for your
commodity, followyng herein the fotesteppes of their auncesters, they most
heartily and earnestly require you, that you would, in releasing your captive,
succor them, and have respect herein not so much to the Lantgraues doings, as
unto the^, which honor you exceadingly. Especially, since that a few of their
families, have for your progenitors, and for the house of Austriche and
Burgundy, spared neither cost nor peril. And in case you fear, least he
being set at liberty, should not keep conuenaunt, your highness knows well
enough, when the matter shall come to that issue, what the nobility and people
of Hesse have promised you by an oath, and what the Princes have done likewise
by suertishyp. But and if you require a further assurance, they have both made
you the offer diverse times heretofore, and now do also, and have given us
authority to treat of the same matter. Moreover concerning the conditions,
for such as might straight ways be accomplished, they suppose there can no
lack be found. And where as the castles were not so suddenly rased, if you
knew well the cause, they doubted not, but for that matter you would hold the
Lantgraues sons excused. Furthermore, if any lack be found, they will do
their whole endeavor, that you may be contented and satisfied. Wherefore, if
they themselves have at any time, or their fathers and grandfathers done any
thing, that has been acceptable either to you, or to the Emperor Maximilian,
and the rest of your progenitors, or if you think that they may do or
perform any thing in time to come that to you may be pleasant and joyful,
they desire you most effectually, that you would suffer them now to receive
some fruicte of the same, and that you would cause that hope and promise to
appear, which first you made them at Hale, after at Numburge, and last also
at Auspurg to the intent verily they may honor you from he^ceforth, with so
much the more industry and courage, and may rejoice, that their sidelitie and
service, which they have done you, has been well employed, and largely
rewarded. For if it should be otherwise, and should now obtain nothing, you
may conjecture, most puissaunt Emperor, what discommodities will in sue, what
time they shall be enforced to answer the matter and to declare their innoce^cie,
but they hope undoubtedly, that you will grant their requests. Which verily
they will accept for an high benefit, and not they only, but also the
Lantgraue with his sons and all his friends, shall evermore endeavor that
they may requite this your benefit. And for because the same thing does so
much concern their estimation, they have also entreated other Princes, to
make intercession with them, whose Ambassadors you se here. And this have they
done for this intent, that the thing which they could not yet obtain of you
by prayers, messe^gers and letters, that same might they bring to pass through
their commendation and favor, and pray you to take it in that part. What
time they had thus spoken, they deliver unto him the letters of Ferdinando king
of Romans, of Albert Duke of Bauier, of the brethren Dukes of Luneburge,
written in the behalf of the Lantgraue. And The names of ye Princes that
entreated for the Lantgraue.
the Princes that sent Ambassadors were these, Friderick the Electour of
Palatine, Woulfgange Prince of Bipounte, John Marquis of Brandenburg, Henry and
John Albert Dukes of Magelburge, Ernestus Marquis of Baden, and Christopher
Duke of Wirtemberge. Their Ambassadors, straight way after the oration before
rehearsed, when they had showed their commission, Duke Maurice say they, and the
Marquis of Brande^burg, Electours, where for the deteining of the Lantgraue they
were in great perplexity, and said they would make suit to The Oration of the
Prices a^bassadours to the Emp.
your highness for him, most merciful Emperor, entreated our Princes, that
they would sue with them, to the intent the treaty might be of more
commendation and importance. Which duty verily they could not in so just a
cause deny the^, for the great frendshyp and alliance that is amongst them.
Considering therefore that the matter is thus, as has been sufficiently heard
of either of their Ambassadors. And because, if he be longer deteyned, the
same should be greatly to the obloquie and defamation of them that have
promised him their fidelity. The Princes which have sent us, do pray and
beseech you to ponder all these things dilligently. For they suppose it to
concern them also, that their dignity, honor and estimation be preserved,
neither can any thing chance unto them more grievous, than if any blotte
should redounde to their noble fame. Which doubtless will come to pass,
unless the captive be delivered. Wherefore they most instauntly require you,
that these intercessions and prayers may take place with you, and that he may
be shortly delivered, especially, since he has both acknowledged his fault,
and humbly also craved pardon, and been now detained captive a long season,
but chiefly, because the great necessity of two Princes Electours so
requires. Who at what time they handled the matter right faithfully, and would
gratify you, fell into this pecke of troubles. And albeit peradventure that in
the treaty some error was committed, and some things not well understand,
yet were it convenient and comely for your clemency, to prefer equity before
extremity, and not to regard so much the captive, as the fatal necessity
of the Electours, and deal frankely with them, after the example of your
progenitors. Who had ever a great respect and care to the dignity of the
Princes imperial. This verily should both redounde to your honor amongst
almen, and also more excite them, to show unto you all fidelity and
benevolence, and make them priest and willing to do all things for your sake.
The king of Denmark also sending his Ambassadors, makes intercession in a
manner to like effect. The Emperor a few days after makes answer. For as
The Empe. answer to the Ambassabours.
much as the matter is weighty, and requires deliberation, and that in the
mean season mention is made unto him of Duke Maurice, that for certain other
weighty causes, he will shortly repare to him, in so much that having written
his letters to him, he looks for him daily, therefore will he, because the
matter may best be treated of when he is present, differ it until than. And as
for the^, they may return home unto their Princes, and show them in his
name, that he will remember their intercession, and so use the matter, that
they may understand, how their commendation was of him not lightly esteemed. Not
long after, William the Lantgraues eldest son came to The Lantgraues son
comes to D. Maurice
Duke Maurice. And because he had put him in hope of the intercession to be
made, and certain months were now past, since ye Ambassadors took their
journey, he inquireth what is done He says, for that the Ambassadors of
Denmark came late, and not till the Emperor went from Auspurg to Insprucke,
the thing was delayde, and again shows him what answer the Emperor made.
And because he desires to speak with him, and differreth the matter till
than. Albeit he is loathe at this present to leave his country, yet for that he
tendreth the case greatly, he says he is determined to go, having first
received letters from him. Than says the other, the answer is uncertain and
doubtful, neither can he see what good is to be looked for. In ye mean while
his fathers estate is miserable, who pineth a way for sorrow, and lothesomnes
of the prison. Whom he may by no means leave destitute, both because of his
duty, and also of his promise. Therefore let him endeavor and bring to pass,
that within a certain and that a short time, there be made a direct answer.
If the same be not done, neither he nor the Marquis of Brandenburge, may take
it displeasauntly, if they be sued, and commanded to answer to their
obligation. As concerning his journey, he would he should take further delibe For
he knows not, whether it be wisdom for him so to do. These things were thus
handeled for a countenance, before certain counselors, whom Duke Maurice
would not make privy to this devise of his. For since he first began to
treat with Count Hedecke, which was at what time he allured to him ^^me part
of his force, as I told you in the fourmer book, he would scarsly let any of
his own counsel know any thing of that matter, in so much that none of them
understood, wherefore Fraxineus ye French Ambassador came, or what he made
there. When he had therefore received this answer from the emperor, by and by he
fixed his mind to make war, and tarried only for the seasonable time of the
year. And touching those foresaid theames they began to dispute the seventh
day of December. And the sixth day after, which was the shortest day of
winter. Maximilian entering into Trent with his wife and children, was received
of the Bishop of Romes Legate, and of the Maximilian enters into Trent.
Bishops of Spain, Italy, and diverse also of Germany, but not yet of the
Electours. He brought with him out of Spain an Olyphaunt of Inde, which the
king of Portugal had given him, a rare spectacle, and a beast not often seen
in Germany. The next day after, it fortuned yt John Gropper, of whom I spoke
before, did dispute, and after that he waxed hot, he inue^ed The railing of
Groppes.
sore against Melanchthon and Bucer, though he were dead, and rayled most
bitterly on the^ both, being a Germain, where both the Spaniardes and Italians,
were a great deal more temperate. Which thing was against the decree of
thempire, and also against the law by them selves made, that verily the matter
should be treated, all affections set aparte, and without railing. Wherefore a
few days after, John Sleidane, by occasion of talk spoke of the same to the
Emperors Ambassador, Pictaue, and complains that they should be permitted
to have such liberty. He said, they did it clean contrary to their wills,
and also the minds of the fathers, and that they have been most earnestly
admonished, that they should abstain. And albeit that perchance they are
provoked to do this by the example of their adversaries, which have now these
many years triumphed in this kind, yet will they take such order, that it
shall no more be so. And that the Emperor would also be loath that any occasion
of offense should be given any man. A Cardinal of Dalmatia slain in his own
house.
About the.xviii. day of December, the Bishop of Wardin in Hongary, lately
made Cardinal, was slain at home in his own house, for suspicion of a
conspiracy with the Turks. The author of this murder was John Baptiste
Castalde, an Italian, whom the Emperor had before sent into Hongary, to
assiste king Ferdinando with his aid and counsel. Sfortia Palauicine, was
also present at the same. After the Bishop of Rome heard of the murder, he
appointed certain to examine the matter, and also does excommunicate the
parsons above named. When the wydowe of John Uayuode saw yt she could hardely
defend Transsyluania, she made a conuenaunt with king Ferdinando, and
permitted him to have the government, and delivering him the arms and
orname^tes of the Realm, returned into the land of Poole. By this mean
therefore Ferdinando possesses in a manner all Transsyluania, by the help of
the bishop of Wardin. But because he appeared afterward to attempt new
devises, and to aspire to the government, he lost his life. I showed you in the
fourmer book of the preachers and ministers of the church, that were expulsed
from Auspurg, wherefore the most part of the church were distitute of priests,
not without the great grudge of the people, who supposed that the senate had
caused the Emperor thus to do. Where therefore it was to be feared least this
heat would sometime break out, at the length, when they had sought long and
much, they found one Caspar Huberine, which professed the form of doctrine
prescribed by the Emperor. There be certain books of his written concerning
Religion, which were always very well commended, even of Luther him self. But
why now he had altered his mind, I can not affirm. Who after he came to
Auspurge, began not to preach by and by, for that he feared the mutiny of
people, but at Christmas after he began, to the wonder of many, which had red
his books before. The soldiers, as well such as beseged Maydenburg, as those
that defended the same, wyntered in Thuringe and there aboutes, and did much
harm, especially to men of the church, and amongst others also to the
Archebyshop of Mentz, whose limits reach unto those places. Tharchebyshops of
Mentz, Treuers, and Collon, being herewith offended, he for the damage
received, and they, for yt they saw also, that the same chance might redounde
unto them, determined to return home, sending both letters and messengers to
the Emperor of the same matter. But the Emperor, who desired greatly to have
the counsel continued, answering the third day of January, your letters, says
he, of the 1552.
xxi. of Dece^ber, are come to my hands. And because I had commanded The
Empe. letters to the Bishops Eleciours.
Fraunces Toletane to treat with you of such matters, as you write unto me
of: again, for as much as ye bishop of Arras had declared unto your Procurer
here certain things of the same sort in my name, I had thought you had been
satisfied: But for so much as I hear say, how for an vnpleasau^t brute,
reised, you intend to return home, I thought good to admonish you by this
writing that you give not credit to althinges that are reported. For although
there has been now for a certain time a brute, as though it were to be feared,
least there should be some commotio^ in Hessia, yet am I credible informed,
that if there be any thing at all, it is but the devise of a few, which the
greater part also discommendeth, wherefore it is the rather to be thought, that
they the^ selves will be mindful not only of their oath and fidelity, whereby
they be bound to me, but also of their duty, which they owe both to me and
to the common wealth, neither trusting to things uncertain, will take so great
danger upon them. Moreover, I have sent intermessagers unto all the Princes,
states, and cities thereaboutes, and have searched diligently, what the matter
should be, and what every man goes about. But I have found all men to be
obsequious and to do their duty. For surely I have given none occasion of
offense to any man. Of Duke Maurice in deed there went a report also not long
since, which peradventure had his original hereof that he had been captain
before of the same bands, which after the rendering of Maydenburg assembled
together and did hurt in certain places: But he writing to me his letters of
late and sending his Ambassadors also, promises al his endeavor. And even at
this present, two of his Ambassadors shall go from hence to morrow to the
counsel at Trent. Furthermore he has signified, that he him self will
repair unto me for certain weighty and necessary affairs, and I know by
certain reports, that he will either this day or to morrow at the furthest,
take his journey hytherwarde out of Maydenburg. Finally, he makes me so large
and ample There is craft in dawbyng.
promise of his loialtie and obeisaunce, that I ought to look for nothing at
his hand, but that is honorable, in case there be any faith in this world yet
remaining.

And seeing he is both in blood and birthe a Germayne, I can not be brought to
believe that he should attempt or imagine so crafty devises, but as concerning
those bands that Wyly begy^ed.
were at Maydenburg, I have heard many complain, and certain states be
careful, least they will remove their camp and work some greater mischief.
But after I understood, that for lack of payment of their wages, they flock
together and work this oultrage, sending Ambassadors and governors, I
commanded they see that in any wise there were money levied to pay them. And
not that only, but writing my letters also to Duke Maurice, became suertie for
the same money that is owyng, so that the soldiers may be discharged. And this
I did, not because I was bound, but for that I love chiefly the peace and
tranquillity of Germany. Now therefore I look in a manner every moment, that
the same be done, and suppose verily, that they shall slip away without the
damage of any man, and all this mutiny and trouble be appeased, but in case
when the payment is made, the army be not discharged: than is it easily
perceived, that there is some other devise in hand. Than shall we also take an
other way, which we have in our head at this present. Now, as touching other
reports that are brought unto me, which are many in deed, but yet doubtful
and full of contrariety, al these I suppose be imagined for the most part of
our ennemies, and according to their old manner and lightness spread abroad, to
disturb the counsel and peace of Germany. But I trust in God that such
privy conspiracies shall at the last come to light, and have an end according
to their demerites. For since the rendering of Maydenburge, all things were
quiet in Germany, and all Princes and states do so lovingly and obediently
demean them selves toward me, that certainly I can not see what cause of any
new mutiny can or ought to be imagined or pretended. I am not ignorant that
men ought to be circumspecte, and especially at this time, and in these sturres
of foreine nations, and that no suspicion of the least danger is to be
neglected. Again I am neither so clean void of care nor diligence, that I
will let pass with a deaf year, such things as are reported, for I have in a
manner in all places espialles, to inquire of every matter. And herein do I
spare neither cost Kings have long arms.
nor travel. How be it to make a full determination of a thing, upon every
light report, you your self of your wisdom consider, how indiscreet a thing
it were. And that you should now leave the counsel, unless some extreme
necessity urged you, it is in no wise to be committed. For considering how
great a furtheraunce consists in your presence, it is to be feared, least
through your departure, the counsel should not only be dispersed, but also
Religion it self should utterly peryshe, wherein verily both the common
salvation of men, and all your private commodity rests. And considering the
case stands thus, I heartily desire you, my Lords of Mentz and of Treuers,
that altering your counsel you do not as yet take your journey. And you my
lord of Collon, which make not so great haste, I exhort ernestly to persevere
still. And generally I require you all, that you who occupy the chiefest
places amongst the states of the Empire, would help one an other with aid
and counsel, declaring among your selves a brotherly love and benevolence.
In the mean time I will keep dilligent watch for the common wealth, and as much
as I am able by polycie and power, will seek to quench in time, the flambe
that shall happily arise, to the intent that (civil evils oppressed, and our
force increased) foreign war may more easily be defended, and that you having
your countries quiet, and tra^quilitie recovered, may altogether apply the
affairs of the christian common wealth. Yet nevertheless I would advise you,
that such of your counselors and officers as you have left at home, do
provide for all things, that nothing chance unlooked for, and that they
confer their counselles with such of their fre^des and neighbors, as are to
be trusted. Wherein if I may also profit you any thing, I will do it gladly: So
that if any tumulte be, which I can not think there will, you may be so much
the more ready what so ever chances. And seeing there is no great distaunce
betwixt us, you shall do me a pleasure, in case you shall write unto me of
such things, as from hence forth you shall have intelligence of. And I shall
do the same, and whatsoever I shall think to concern you and the common
wealth, I will let you understand, and as I have oftentimes promised you, so
will I in deed perform all defense and tuitio^. A few days before Earl
Montfort was returned to Trent. Unto him therefore go the Ambassadors of
Wirtemberg, and declare how they have brought nothing to pass hitherto by the
Cardinal, and Toletane. And for so much as he and his fellows Ambassadors do
present there the Emperors person, they require yt their Princes demaundes
might be heard. But where as than they received no very good answer, they
being almost in despair of the thing, were pourposed to go home. As the
Prince had lately commanded them, in case they were long delayed. The
Ambassador also of Strasburge declared his commission to the Earl Monfort, as
he had done before to Pictaue, and he also took a copy of the commission. And
now the Divines disputations ceased, and the fathers assembled daily, that
searching the opinions of all them, they might make decrees, as I showed you
before. And of the contrie of Germany, were chosen for the same three bishops,
Collo^, Uienne, and Nu^burg. This was Julius Pssugius. And whilst they were
occupied with those affairs, and prepared al things for ye next sitting,
the.vii. day of January come thither the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice, of whom
the Emperor had written a little before, Wuolfie Coler, and Leonard Badehorne a
Ciuilian, by their coming, the Bishops of whom I spoke were well chered up,
and chiefly the Emperors Ambassadors, for that they thought there was now no
more doubt in Duke Maurice, which followed peaceable ways. The third day
after they came, they declare their message Tha^bassad. of Du. Maurice come to
the counsel.
to the Emperors Ambassadors. First, they recite, how the Divines that
should come were not sufficiently assured by the counsel, and for that cause
their Prince did send no man. He is in deed right well affected toward the
common wealth, and desires much that some way of concord might be found. And
therefore was fully resolved to send of his own, such as are good men, and
lovers of concord, and doubts not but that diverse others will likewise do
the same. But that the same may be done, these be his requests.

First that those that shall come, may have saufeconduicte according to the
form of the decree of Basil, as the Bohemers were assured in times past.
That they surcease from all action in the mean time till they come. That when
they shall come, all fourmer acts may be retracted, and the day appointed for
the session, be adiourned. That there may be had a counsel, wherein all nations
and people may assemble. That the Bishop of Rome take not upon him the
authority of president, but submit him self to the counsel, and release
all Bishops of their oath, that all men's voices in the counsel may be free,
and their judgments not entangled. Which things also, when they shall
think good, they will declare more at large in the assemble of the fathers,
and make request that some thing may be done in it so shortly as may be. For
the Divines have already taken their journey, and are come at the least forty
miles on the way, and tarry now till they be called. This was the tenth day
of January. They said how they were both right glad of their coming, and
that also they would prefer all these things unto the fathers. They
signified also the whole matter to the Emperor, who to gratify Duke Maurice,
did advise and counsel the fathers, that they should D. Maurice feared of the
Emperor.
answer myldly and friendly to his requests. Moreover the Duke of
Wirtemburge, where he had heard no certentie before after he knew that Duke
Maurice had sent thither, commanded his Ambassadors to tarry till the next
sessions, and to exhibit their wrytinge in the same. He sent them also an
other wrytinge, howbeit very brief, of the same tenure in a manner, as was the
request of Duke Maurice, and wylled them to put up that also with the
confession of doctrine. The Ambassador of Strasburge was commanded to attend
till either Duke Maurice men came, or that it were certainly known, they would
not come. When they were come therefore, he communicates with them the cause of
his Ambassade, and shows them how things stood, and understands by them
again, what their commission was. The same do the Ambassadors of Wirtemberg,
and the case was comen to them al. Which they notwithstanding for that it was
long or they came, followed and urged chiefly, and therefore they entreated
diligently the three Archbyshops Electours, and the Cardinal of Trent, a
great-frende to Duke Maurice, and the Emperors Ambassadors, that for the
common wealth sake, they would both be wylling them selves, and also persuade
the rest of the fathers herein. For none of the Ambassadors would go to the
legate Crescentius, or any of his fellows legates, least they should appear to
attribute to them any thing. But because they were sent to follow the
Emperors mind, and satisfy the decre of the Empire, therefore they used his
Ambassadors, which was their high and chief magistrate, for their
intercessours. And at this present time came news, ye within a few days Duke
Maurice would come to the Emperor. Which made al men to be of better hope, and
a great deal more willing. In this month was beheaded at London ye Duke of
Somerset, uncle as I said before, to the king of England, and with him certain
of his friends, as Michel Stanope, sir The Duke of Somerset beheaded.
Rafe Fane, and sir Miles Partrich knights. And some reported that the same
was done by the procurement of the Duke of Northumberland. They that were of
the wittier sort, began even than to fear the good king, whom after his
kinsfolks were dispatched out of the way, they saw was more open to danger
and treason. For after the Duke of Somerset was dead, the Duke of
Northumberland put to the king new chamberlaines, and among them his own
sons and kinsmen. When the day of the next session was now at hand, the
Emperors Orators, sending for thambassadours of Duke Maurice, declare what
they have done with the fathers in their cause. How they have obtained a
saufeconduict such as they wyshed for. How also thaction may be discontinued
and differred, until they come and may be present at the same: For that al
nations and people be not there assembled, that lies not in the fathers to
perform. The counsel was lawfully so^moned. And although al me^ come not, yet
stands it nevertheless in his full strength and dignity, that such decrees
as are made should be revoked, let them consider them selves, how indecent a
thing it were: For it belongs to the reproach and infamy of so great an
assembly. Let Divines come only: They shall both be in all matters heard, and
also entreated most gently. And if any thing offend the^, or be done without
reason, if they see them selves ouermuche aggrauated, they have free liberty
to depart when they will. They desire them earnestly that they would give some
thing to the time, and not to covet to have all things granted the^ in this
one moment. When they shall come to the action, than may diverse things by
occasion be obtained, which appear now very hard. The fathers, they say,
be very desirous of a reformation, and will not fail to do their duty, and
long sore for the Divines coming, unto whom they will show all good will and
fidelity, and have things to propou^de of great importance, and desire that
they may begin, to the intent that by this occasion, they may come forth
also. That which they require moreover touching the submission of the Bishop
of Rome, they desire them some thing to qualify. The fathers do see and
perceive, that there is some what in that high dignity, that may be
reprehended, and ought in deed to be redressed. But yet must they proceed after
some fine devise. The Emperors mind and will is, that all things should be
ritely and lawfully done. But they find by daily experience, how fair, and
dissemblingly they must treat with the Bishops legates. For verily they must
use a singular dexterity, and deal with them by policy. Wherefore let them
now content them selves with such things as are granted, which are surely
not without their great travel obtained, and find the means, that the
Divines may make haste. And than will they neither in public nor private
cause omit any part of their duty. And when they were come hitherto, they
deliver unto them the saufeconduicte: Which they bid them read, and after to
send it them again. This was the.xxii. day of January.

And thus sending them away, in the self same momente, D. Maurice Ambassad.
sent away.
call for the Ambassadors of the Duke of Wirtemberge. And first make an excuse
touching the fourmer time, by the most weighty affairs of the fathers. But
now if they have anythyng to do, they be ready to further the same. They said,
how they have had a long time now things to propounde, and to be heard with
speed. As Soon as they were dimissed, they send for the Ambassador of
Strasburge, and speak to the same effect. He declared briefly, wherefore he
was sent, by reason of Coletane, unto whom he had not spoken before. For this
present he said he had nothing else to say, and how he looked daily for letters
from home. For immediately after that Duke Maurice Ambassadors were come, he
was commanded to write home what their commission was, and to attend what the
Senate would have done further more. Howebeit he required the^ in the mean
time, that in those matters, which the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice had
preferred unto them, they would so use them selves, that they might come
forthwith, to open treaty. They said again, how they had certain things to
do with the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice and of the Duke of Wirtemberge. When
any thing shall be done, they will let him understand, that he may signify the
same to his citezens. They verily do greatly wyshe for a concord. And the
Emperor also applies his whole endeavor and study to the same. They desire
very much also, that thaction might begin, and doubt not but God will
assiste that most honest enterprise. When this was done, the Ambassadors of
Saxon, Wirtemberg and Strasburge, having conference together, do way that
form of saufe conduicte which they had received. And for so much as they
had written out before every chapter of the decree of Basil, ye all men might
see, especially such things as concerned any weighty matters, it was not
hard for them by and by to discern in what places this dissented from that.
When they had The saufeco^duict altered
therefore perused it over, straight way they perceived, that the chiefest
places, were partly altered and partly omitted. For in the saufeconduicte that
in times past was given to the Bohemers, are these things amongst others.
That they should have also authority to decide matters. That in all matters of
controversy, the holy scripture, the order of the primative church, and such
counselles and interpretours as were agreeable to the scripture, should be instead of the judge. That they might use their own service at home. That
nothing should be done in contempt or reproach of their doctrine. Whereof, the
first, the third and last were clean omitted. And the second and chiefest
thing in deed was sore altered. Which things considered, they them selves
devise a new form, following the fotesteppes of the decree of Basil. But in
the mean time Toletane, sent his servant once or twyse for ye paper, fearing,
as it appeared, overmuch diligence: But they nevertheless proceed, and at the
last wha^ the thing was finished, Duke Maurice Ambassadors come again unto
Toletane, and comparing the one with the other, show him, what lack they find
therein. Than began he to stomach the matter, and was right sore offended. For
why should they not be content with ye, which they with great labor and
diligence had obtained? For such as should come, were assured sufficiently.
For the chiefest point is whereby it is provided that they may safely come and
safely go. All other things serve nothing to that purpose, but only concern
the manner of treaty in the counsel: Which thing might a great deal better be
determined what time the Divines be present, than now. They make answer, how
they may not pass the bo^des of their commission, which is, that they may not
receive a saufeconduicte contrary to that of Basil. Two days after, the
fathers assemble all in the house of the bishops legate, and with them
themperours Ambassadors. Who call before them there thambassadours of the Duke
of Wirte^berge, which the day before they had said they would do. When they
were brought in, they are commanded to declare their message. Who after they
had showed their commission, and made a brief preface, bring forth the
confession of doctrine written, and deliver it to the scribe of the counsel, as
the manner is. And said also that Divines should come from their Prince, which
should treat of all things more abundantly, howbeit upon these conditions.
First, yt by consent of both parties, convenient judges should be chosen, which
should hear the divines reason, and judge uprightly of matters yt be in
controversy. For in as much as the Prince perceives, yt the doctrine of his
divines, does for ye most part disagre with ye doctrine of ye bishop of Rome
and of other bishops, which ar many ways bound to him, he thinks it very
unreasonable and against al right, that they, which sustain ye parsone either
of plaintiff or defenda^t, should challenge to the^ selves thauthoritie of
judgment. Secondly, that it was decreed in thassembles of thempire at Auspurg,
that the counsel should be continued, and althinges Godly and rightly done. And
this was evermore so taken of their Prince, that such things as were decreed
in the counsel in fourmer years, ought not to have the force of a law, but
that all things should be repeted from the beginning. For what right or reason
were it, when two men go to the law, that the thing which is decreed, when
the one has just cause to be absent, should be taken for ferme and stable?
Moreover, seeing many dcerees were made not only in the fourmer, but also in
this same counsel, contrary to the holy Scriptures, and also many old errors
established, their Prince requires that the same be of none authority, but ye
al things may come to a dew examination. Those same articles comprised in
writi^g they exhibited together with the confession of doctrine. Wha^ this was
done, answer made them, that the fathers, wha^ they saw time, should show them
their opinion, and thus were they dimissed. The Same day in the evening they
sent like wise for thambassadours of Duke Maurice. They, when they came, recite
with a long oration ye demaundes of their Prince, in like sort as they did of
late to ye The frank speech of D. Maurice Ambassad. to the Fathers.
Emperors Ambassadors: saving that the end was more pithie. Where this was
said moreover, that ye same service and order that is used in the popish
churches, was not the true religion, but a countrefeated thing, and as it were
a shadow of religion. When they had made an end of thoration, they were
answered with the selfsame words, as before were the Ambassadors of
Wirtemberg. Amongst other things this grieved the^ most, yt their religion was
described by so vile and conte^ptuouse a name. Which was afterward well known.
Thambassadours had intended to have uttered their message openly in the
public assize: But to avoid this, which they knew certainly they would do,
they were heard privately. For either must they needs do this or else leave al to
ye common treaty. They had brought with the^ a confession of doctrine written
by Philip Melanchthon, as I showed you before, but where as they had no
commandment of this thing, I know not for what cause, they did not present
the same. The next day, which was ye.xxv. of January, was thopensassions, and
the bishops legate was brought to the church with ye pomp before rehearsed.
Than was the number of soldiers much augme^ted, and also a greater resort of
people out of so^dry places, for that they supposed that the treaty of the same
day should be very notable. When the mass and all other ceremonies were fully
finished, it was recited in the pulpit, how for the protesta^tes cause the
whole matter should be differred till the.xix. day of March, before the
which day, they will be here in good time, to propound their matters. And this
to be friendly granted the^, for that the counsel trusts, that they will come
not obu^inatly to impugn the catholic faith, but for a zeal to know the
truth, and that they will in fine admit and obeie the decrees of ye church
and schole of correction. How they have more over a larger saufeconduicte, so
that no lack can be found. Furthermore that in the next sitting, the treaty
shall be of the Sacrament of Matrimony. The third day after, when nothing came
forth at al, the Ambassadors of Duke Maurice and their fellows demanded of
Fraunces Toletane, with whom they chanced to dine that day, a copy of the same
saufeco^duict, which was spoken of openly: Who made them a gentle answer, but
wha^ other three days were past, thambassadour of Strasburg at ye request of
the residue goes unto Pictaue. He co^plaineth that this is the sixth day,
wherein they can hear nothing. And that before was a longer delay, for that the
saufeconduicte was not sufficient, and now is the time tracted again. And
certainly the divines will not come, before such time as the magistrates be
contented with their saufeconduicte. He said how there was no fault in him,
and marueiled why Toletane thus differred them, who had the chiefest place
amongst them. He would go talk with him, and doubted not but the matter
should be dispatched ye same day. That thing which he should learn by him, he
would she we him. And thus went to him. This was the last day saving one of
January. Within a few hours after, al thambassadours were commanded to come
to the house of Toletane, who delivered to every of them a copy of the
saufeco^duicte, signed underneath by the scribes of the counsel. There was also
ye Earl Monfort. Pictaue begins the talk, and first in deed he excuses
the delay made, and than speaking much of their own zeal, and the great good
will of the Emperor, he admonished them, that the divines might come with all
possible diligence, which they trusted doubtless they would, having once
received their saufeconduict. Than go they apart and read it. And the The
Ambassadors of ye Protest. deluded.
places which they had amended before the sessions, they find nothing
altered. Wherefore they come to them again, and complain thereof, and she we
what lack they find in every point. Thambassadours of Saxon desire also to
know, what answer the fathers have made to their requests. The Same do they of
Wirtemberge. Again speaks Pictaue, and touching the saufe conduicte,
answers. Where they desire, that their men might have authority to decide,
that same do they ouertimely. When the divines be here present, and in ye work
it self, many things may fortune upon occasions to be granted, which are
now refused. Where they would that holy scripture only should be judge of
every controversy, there is no man against that. But when there arriseth
strife about thinterpretation of scriptur, unto whom should credit be given
sooner than the counsel? Scripture is a dome thing and without life, as also
other politic laws How much the papists esteem the Scripture.
be: But the mouth of the judge must be applied thereunto, that it may be well
perceived. Which mout verily is the voice of the council, and this manner has
been always observed since the Apostles time, whansoeuer there arose any
doubtful matters. Where they would use their own service at home, it is not
indede openly granted the^, neither yet it is prohibited. Least any thing
should be contemptuously done against their Religion and doctrine, they need
not to fear for it should be straightly prohibited. For both the Emperor would
have it so, and the fathers also hate all such inte^perauncie. And seeing
thassemblie is made for peace and unity, immodeste and opprobrius words shall
not be unpunished. Unto there requests they make in a manner the like answer,
as they did lately before the sitting. How all the treaty was disterred for
their cause until an other time: But that the decrees made should again be
repeted, they pray them not to disgrace so many notable men. They will promise
and become suerties, yt when the divines shall come they shall be heard in
althinges. Where they would have the Bishop of Rome brought in subjection, and
the other released, for as much as the same belongs properly to himself, ye
fathers can determine nothing before the matter be declared to him. Concerning
the requests of thambassadours of Wirtemberge, for so much as they be of the
same sort, the judgment of the fathers is like also. Wherefore they entreat
them, that they would not for so small matters, suffer the occasion so long
wyshed for of accomplishyng a most holy thing, to be let and dispointed,
whereof doubtless all the nations of Europe shall receive fruit, but that they
would endeavor and persuade their magistrates, that the divines might come
with speed. They can not at this time work a greater benefit for the common
wealth. When the Ambassadors had again replied, and urged this thing chiefly,
that it is against all reason, that such as sustain a part of the suite,
should judge in a matter of controversy, at the length they depart thus, that
they receive the copy of the saufeco^duite upon no other condition, but to
send the same to their magistrates, which they would do immediately with all
expedition, neither will they fail to further the matter, so much as in them
lies, another do they despair also of their coming. Thambassadours of Duke
Maurice send their copy out of hand, and so did thambassadour of Strasburge,
they of Wirtemberge carry their copy with them, going home the first day of
February, by the Princes permission, who not long after sent others, as
hereafter you shall hear. A little before this time came the Divines from Duke
Maurice to Norinberge, and amongst them Malanchthon, The divines come to
Norinberge.
being commanded to remain there till the Ambassadors sent them
saufeconduict from Trente: But a few days after they were come thither, they
are forbidden to go any further, but to attend til they know what the Prince
shall make with the Emperor, unto whom it was said he should go. When the
decrees are confirmed in the counsel house, there were theames wont to be
delivered to the divines for the next disputation, as I showed you before: But
since the last sitting this was clean omitted, whereof were reported causes mo
tha^ one. Yet was it said commonly, to be done for the Protestants sake. For
in the beginning of February, when the one of Duke Maurice Ambassadors and the
Ambassador of Strasburge, went forth of pleasure to see the hither part of
Italy and Uenise, the other, which had seen Italy before, treated with the
Emperors Ambassadors for so much as he supposed the divines would come right
shortly, which in his opinion were now at Auspurg, that ye whole entreaty
might be differred until than, and that the fathers would patiently bear so
small a delay. Tharchebishop of Treuers had with him a black Freer, Ambrose
Pelarge, who on a certain holy day, which was than the vii. of February,
expounding yt place of the Gospel, which is of the cockel mixed with yt wheat,
said among other things The bitterness of freer Pelarge againg yt
protestauntes.
that thyl cockel must be destroyed, after any sort or manner, so yt the same
might be done without the loss of the wheat, appliyng all his sermon to
heretics, which were signified by this word, cockell. And it was reported to
thambassadour of Duke Maurice, how he had rayled bitterly against heretics,
and had said this also, that there was no faith nor promise to be kept with
them, if any were happily made.

He therefore, after he had made more dilligent inquisitio^, goes to the
Cardinal of Trent, who was there with authority, and to the Emperors
Ambassadors, and complains of that he had heard. The Freer being called for,
confessed in deed that he spoke of heretics generally, and that they should be
distroyed with fire, sword, hanging or any other mean, in case the same may
be done without any great hynderau^ce or public commotion. But concerning
that promise is not to be kept within them, he had spoken never a word, and
if he had so done, he should have incurred the penalty of losyng his life, for
breakyng the decre of the counsel. After this they call for the Ambassador,
and reciting the Freers purgation, bid him look for nothing of the Fathers, but
fidelity and vpryght dealing. If any thing also be blabbed out lightly, which
never thelesse is straytely prohibited, that they ought not to be moved
therewith. Whether the Freer were belied or no, I know not certainly. For some
of his auditors being demanded, Duke Maurice letters to his ambassadors.
said not the same thing.

In these days were brought thither yt letters of Duke Maurice, dated the last
of January. In the which he signified to his ambassadors, that such things as
they had not obtained of the fathers hitherto, they should urge: he was all
together in preparing him self to go shortly to the Emperor: Than will he
amongs other things treat with him also of these matters presently: and that
also with his divines should come.

Moreover the ambassadors and divines of certain Princes and Cities: among
the which he named the Duke of Pomeranes cosins, the copy of the which letters,
the one of thambassadors, for that his fellow was not yet returned from his
journey, sends to the Cardinal of Trent at Brixna, which was lately gone
thither. For he, because he was both most serviceable to the Emperor, and also
loved Duke Moris by reason of much familiarity, dearly well, and chiefly
wished that the counsel might proceed, took very heauely this dissension
growing, whereof there was much talk. And that was the cause that thambassador
sent these letters, wherewith he knew he should be comforted.

And he verily after he had received those letters, where before he doubted,
now at the length he began to take more comfort, and to hope well, and wrote
again to thambassador, that so sone as Duke Moris shall come to Insprucke, he
will go thither immediately to him, or a great way further. For by reason of the
amity and friendship that was between them, he thought he could persuade him to
peaceable ways. And these letters were subscribed with Duke Moris own hand,
and to them was also annexed letters of their commission, to exhibit, if need
required, for the same was before neglected. Not long after, tharchbishop of
Treuers, to refresh him self, departs from Trent homeward the xvi. day of
February. For that they said, how themperor had given him leave, that so sone
as he might recover his health, he should come thither again: yet left he the
Friar Pelarge there, that he might be present at al actions: Tharchbishops of
Mentz and Collon brought him goinge a mile or two on his way. And he turned on
the lefthande, and took not his iourny by Insprucke, where themperor lay.

Shortly after, many began to mutter how the counsel should be proroged, and
that Duke Moris, making league with the french A brute of war against themperor.
king: prepared to war upon themperor.

This rumor was not great at the first, but it increased daily, and secreatly
was one sent from Trent to themperor: to understand his pleasure. After also
came one thither from themperor: but all things were kept very close.

The second day of March, which was than Ashewedensday, the Bishop of Romes
Legate, settinge up papers on the church Pardons.
walls, which they call indulgences or pardones, grants remission of
sins to al men in general, but specially to Bishops, Ambassadoures, and
deuines, which either have or will confess their sins by a time prescribed,
will go to certain Churches in Trent on days appointed. And there saying five
Pater nosters, and five Aue Mary's, and other prayers, will pray to God for the
concord of Princes, for the consent and unity of the church, and for the lucky
success of the counsel: and how this so great a benefit is given by the high
bishop July the third, who is careful for the health of souls, yt men may as
well enjoy the same at Trent, as at Rome. Wherefore many ran daily to the
churches both Bishops and others, especially Spaniardes, observing the
difference of days. For they attributed to this religion one while les time,
an other while more. In this great taciturnitye, as before is said, the
ambassadoure of Strasburge inquired of themperors ambassador Pictaue, of the
state of things, who said, how the brute that went, that the counsel should
be proroged, was untrue, and that themperor would have them in any wise to
proceade, and continue their action: where also there has nothing been done of
late, that is for their cause, which have put the fathers in hope of the
coming of the divines. This was in the beginning of March, when Duke Moris
had about thend of February called back the deuines from Norinberge, who
after the brute was raised that he should come to themperor, when he had passed
a certain way of his iourny, retourneth home, and begins to take munsters,
as in the next book shall be recited. When these things were known, and sundry
messagers came daily one after another, and that the matter was now out of
doubt, the Archbishops of Mentz and Colon, unto whom came lately great plenty
of vitaile out of the nether parts of Germany, prepared the^ selves to
horsbacke with great expedition, and the eleventh day of March they depart in
the dawning of the day, whereas over night the bishops of Romes Legate,
accompanied with the residue of the Bishops of Italy and Spain, came unto them
to bid them farewell. The same day came thither new ambassadors from the duke
New ambassadors from Wirte^berge
of Wirtemberge, Werner Munchinge, and Hierome Gerarde, a ciuilian. They go the
next day to themperors ambassadoures, and showing their commission in writing,
desire to have an answer of their Princes demands, exhibited to the fathers
the.xxiiii. of January: And say moreover how the deuines will be there within
these few dais, to declare more at large the confession of doctrine, yt was
lately put up the whole assembly Whereat they meruailed greatly, I know not for
what cause, except it were that one of the^ had made all things ready to take
his iourny, and was purposed to go home, which than of necessity must tarry there
full sore against his will. It was answered them, how they must devise and have
conference of the matter with the fathers, and look what they shall hear of
them they will let them understand.

In the mean tune duke Moris ambassadors were in great distres and carefulnes.
For they were supposed both to have handled the matter craftily, and to have
been privy to their princes doings and to have played all together the
dissemblers: where they again affirmed, that neither they knew any thing that
was don at home, nor yet received any letters from thence, and knew not which
way to return home out of danger. And for so much as they saw, that the
longer they tarried, the more danger it were for them, the xiii. day of March
they depart as privily as they could, as soon as the day apeared, and speding
them hastly to Brirna, axe thaduise of the Cardinal of Trent, what is best to
be done. At the last the one of thambassadors, which before he came to Trent, had
made long abode at Iuspruck, and in his princes name had with ye rest made
intercession to themperor for the La^tzgraue, having first received except I be
disceiued, a safe conduit came to Insprucke, and made his purgation to
themperors counsel, and proves that he was not made privy to this war, in such
sort as they did credit him. From thence he goes straight home: and the other
taking his iourny through Carnia, returns into Saxony. When tharchbishops of
Mentz and Collon approached nere unto Inspruck, they were honorably received of
such as themperor sent to mete them. Among whom was the bishop of Arras.
After they both talking long and much with the Emperor alone, speed the^ on
their iourny, for the matter required have. The vi. day after that,
thambassadors of Duke Moris were The divines of Wyrtemberge.
departed from Trent, came thither iiii. divines from the Duke of Lirtemberge,
whereof Brentius was one, and ii. of Strasburge. Wherefore thambassadors
immediately repair to Earl Monfort, and name the divines unto him that be
cummen, and pray him so to devise with his fellows, that the fathers may
answer to their demaundes, and that the action may begin.

The next day, which was the.xix. of March, and appointed for the open
sessions, as before is said, the fathers assemble in the house of the Bishops
Legate. There was thambassador of the King of Portugal, which was lately come
thither: who after he had showed his commission, was after a solemn manner,
received and admitted of the fathers: This done the common session was
adiourned to the first of May, and other thing was there none done. And at these
things were wrought priuatelye. The duke of Wirtemberge had The confession of
the duke of Wirtemberge.
caused in yt mean time ye confession of doctrine, which his ambassadors had
exhibited, to be setforth in print, whereof first thambassa and after also the
divines had brought with them certain Copies, whereof though many had the sight:
yet a great deal more wanted. For the Bishops Legate reserved to him self
that writing that was openly exhibited the xxiiii. day of January, and would
hardly suffer any to read it. Which thing was than first known, in so much
that now, when it was commen forth in Printe, diverse Bishops both of Italy and
Spain, and divines sought for it diligently, although perauenture not all for
one intent. But the Legate Crescentius, taking the same displeasauntly, blamed
sore a certain learned Physician of Trent, for that he had sown abroad such
kind of books. And also thearle Mo^fort dissembling not the matter one whit,
spoke in such sort, as though they had transgressed the conditions of their
safeconduit, and said that such as were openly assured from danger, ought
also to eschew all occasion of offense. Two days after that private treaty in
the Legates house, Pictaue shows the ambassador of Strasburge, in the night,
when they reasoned together certain hours before of the treatye to be
commenced, that in case they would have any thing propounded to the fathers by
him and his fellows, they would not fail them herein, and also appoynteth them
an hour. Wherefore the next day, which was the xxii. of March, thambassadors of
the Duke of Wirtemberge, and of Strasburge resort to the house of Toletane,
when Pictaue had begone the talk, thambassadors of Wirtemberge said how they
desire the same now, that they did at their first coming, namelye that they
might have an answer to the demands, long since exhibited which thing done,
they may the better proceed unto the rest: and where after many words to and fro
it appeared evidently, that if they did stick at this, the whole treaty should
be let thereby: The ambassadors, as they were commanded, make this recital.
All be it they ca^ not obtain such things as before they required, yet, to
the intent it may appear and be known, how greatly desirous their Prince is
both of peace and concord, again that the treatye of the matter should be no
longer delaied. Moreover to obey the Emperor, and fulfill the decre of
thempire, they are content to admit the divines to the disputation, and to
present them in their princes name. Howbe it upon this condition, that they
grant no part of their right hereby, and that all such things may remain
safe and whole unto them and theyrs, as are agreeable to the laws and customs
and to the decrees of thassemble at Auspurge. When they had pronounced this
form of Protestation, they deliver it unto them by writing, and after depart
out of the place. When they were called in again, the others commend their
doing, and say how they perceive rightwell, that they be wholly bent to a
concord. And seeing it is so, the next consultation they say is, concerning the
manner of the treaty, and desire to know, what their opinion is, touching the
same. Thambassadors go a side, and after they had consulted of the matter,
declare unto them, how they have found two wais. That is to wit, that either the
deuines may be hard, touching all the decrees of doctrine made in this counsel,
or else that the confession of doctrine presented to the fathers, and now also
setforth in Print, may be laid forth among them, and every Chapter thereof be
decided in order: for their divines are commen for this intent, yt they may
more at large erpound and declare the doctrine comprised in that book, and
answer such as will impugn the same: This seems unto them the readiest way,
and know no way better. Than also thambassador of Strasburge said, how the
magistrates of his city had red the same writing of the doctrine of
Wirtemberge, and did approve and profess the same, and had sent divines
thither, which should join them selves to his confession, and with the
divines of Wirtemberge should defend the same: This was he commanded to show
them, and confirm in the name of his city and fellows, whereunto it was
answered.

That where they were so forward, and wrought so plainlye and sincerely, where
also the state of Strasburge and other cities there unto annexed have joined
them selves to the same doctrine, they are right glad and give them hearty
thanks, and withal expedition will signify the same to themperor, doubtinge
not but he will be very desirous to hear it: but as touching the treaty of the
deuines, and the manner of disputing by them devised, they will shortly
advertise them, what is thopinion of the fathers therein.

A few dais after, where they kept silence, and the bishop of Numburge departed
thence, and the residue also of Germane Bishops, which were but ii. that
remaind, were said to prepare them selves to take their journey. Thambassadors
went to Monfort, to hear, if the fathers had answered any thing: he had
nothing else to say: but but this only, how the fathers as yet had made none
answer And when mention was made of the Bishops departing, he said how the
Bishop of Numburge went no further but to themperoure: for there should come
certain commissioners thither out of Saxony to treat a peace with Duke Moris:
and for so much as he is of yt same country, and that one of the principal,
being hereunto requested, he could not say them nay: for the residue he said,
he knew nothing. For in so much as the Emperor desired so greatly that the
counsel might proceed, they them selves also applied hereunto all their words
and deeds, least men should despair in the thing. The next day, which was the
xxvii. day of march, thambassador of Strasburge goes to themperoures orator.
Pictaue, and told him how the state of his business was such that he must
return home: And therefore desired to know what he should report at home of
the deuines matter. By this occasion they entered again into talk of the
manner of the treaty that should be. And he affirmed verily, that to proceed
after thordre by them lately prescribed, it might not be conveniently: For now
they were in hand with the Mass, which thing should be next discussed: which
matter seemed unto him mete first to be discided, and after to come unto all ye
rest: How be it this, he says, he speaks of him self privately, not that
his fellows have so willed him. The Other infers again: how like as their
deuines have accustomed to debate things from the very beginning in order. Of
the creation. Of the fall of man. Of original sin, as they term it. Of
justification. Of faith. Of works, and finally of the Sacraments: so ought
they now also to be permitted to use the same order: Moreover the same day
wherein they delivered them the safeconduite at the end of January, their
promise was, that the deuines should be hard in all matters: where in they ought
to persevere, and not to subvert and altar the nature of things: for unless
the former things be well determined, all disceptation of the last, that
depend of the first is to no purpose. And after they could not agree of this
thing between them selves, he answers touching his journey, that this may
not be granted him: for themperor has commanded them, that they suffer no
man to depart. After much talcke, where he alleges that he has no more to
do, and whatsoever also remains, should be done by the divines, which had
commission in writing for the same: he bids him go to thearle Monfort, and
show him the letters of commission. After very gently he bids him farewell,
and wishes him well to return. When thearle Montfort had seen the commission,
he said in deed that he would his business so required, yt he might longer
remain: but for so much as the time must be served, he will not be against it:
and so lets him friendly depart. The next day when he was ready to depart,
themperors ambassadors send for Thambassador of Strasburge deteyned.
him, Pictaue begins to speak. Where yesterday they were agreed that he might
depart, now they have more diligently considered the thing, and conferred their
heads together, they can not give him leave to depart: for now is the matter
brought to yt pass, that the fruit of the time spent is to be looked for, and
thaction to be commenced: so that if the bishops Legate were not sickly, some
thing might be determined this self same day: therefore must he still remain:
for if he should now depart at this instaunt, the fathers would be offended,
which know that he has been certain Months here present. Themperours
commandment also is such, as no man at all may depart: and if his magistrate
have so commanded him, he ought to exhibit the letters of the same, to
the intent they might excuse it to themperor. Than said he, how it was not the
commandment of the Senate, but that his own matters so required: and
alleging certain causes, unless it were for ye same, he said he would not
stir one foot: for that both thauthority of the Senate, which would have him
to remain there longer, and also their honors that request him hereunto, and
the cause it self moreover, which he loves, of reason ought to obtain this of
him: Howbeit since that the deuines be commen, he may now much better be
absent, especially seeing this thing remains only, that they be admitted to
thaction: Here be also thambassadors of Wirtemberge to assist the deuines, and
the cause is common to both, as lately it was declared: and if it so be that
the matter be earnestly and constantlye handled, it is possible, that the
Senate will substitute an other in his place, who^ he has all ready advertised
of his departure hence. There replieth he again, willing him at the least to
abide so long, till thaction be commenced, which should be out of hand: and if
perchance the Legate Crescentius recover not his health, they will yet so follow
the cause that his fellows in commission shall execute the thing. When he could
neither by excusing, nor entreating prevail any thing, he flees to the last
remeady, which until that time he had purposelye reserved, and said how both
he and all others that were protestants might lawfully by their safeconduit
depart thence at any time. Than at the last says Toletane, that is so in deed,
neither can they let or be against it, but that he may depart: howbeit they
could not but declare what themperor has commanded, and what also they them
selves would have done. Thus therefore he departing, commends unto them the
cause and deuines also. Than were the fathers at dissension among them
selves, and not bent al one way. For the Spaniards, Neapolitans, and Sicilia^s,
and whosoever were of themperors part, but chiefly the Spaniardes, and
themperors ambassadors, were importune that thaction might be continued: but the
bishop of Romes clients, for that they supposed that the Spaniards went about a
reformation of the court of Rome, sought to find some let and delay: and for so
much as the chiefest Bishops of Germany by reason of civil tumults, were
departed all ready. They looked also for the same occasion, and so much the
rather, for that by daily letters and Messagers, it was reported how Duke Moris
and his confederats were already in armure. The French king also by the
Cardinal Tournon treated diligently with the Bishop of Rome for peace: which
if it took effect, for as much as yt French king had war that time with
themperor. No man doubted but that for his sake also the counsel should be
dissolved. Wherefore themperors ambassadors which knew and feared all these
things labored this chiefly, that the thing which they most coueted, they
might bring to pass by thambassadors of the Protestants. This was little
perceived than, but afterward certainly known. About The blasphe my of a gray
Friar.
thend of March, a certain graye Friar expounded the Epistle of Paul to the
Romans, before a great audience, and oftentimes by octasion he railed
bitterlly against Luther and his fellows, and waded so far that he said such as
had no knowledge of Christ, and yet lived honestly, have obtained salvation:
and that this also is the very meaning of Saint Paul, in the second chapter
of the foresaid Epistle. When certain deuines of the Protestants had heard him
speak this openly, after deliberatio^ taken, by common assent they write The
requests of the protestants deuines.
to themperors ambassadors, the last day of March, declaring for what intent
they were sent, verily to expound and defend the confession of the doctrine
exhibited: they complain that there is none action commenced, and that the
decrees of the counsel already made, have in manner nothing else, but a bitter
reproach and detestinge of that doctrine which they do profess: and that also
this other day a gray Friar spoke not only many absurd things openly, and
contrary to the consent of the Church and exposition of thold doctors, but also
poured out great abundance of railing words against their doctrine and
churches: and all be it that many will say that he does these things against
the will of ye fathers, yet se they with what an assent he teaches and is hard:
if this be thonly cause, why they were sent for hither, that they might be
verily a spectakle and laughing stock to others, and should be compelled to
hear daily thiniuries and reproaches of their doctrine, there was doubtless no need
to have taken this journey in hand, and all these things might have been
declared by writing: wherefore they earnestly require them according to their
office and authority, they would bring to pass, that both the fathers would at
the last declare what lack they find in the confession exhibited, and that they
may again also be openly hard in all matters. Those letters thambassadors
receive very ge^tly, and say they are glad also, that they have an occasion
ministered to urge the matter, to the intent that if the Legate Crescentius do
refuse, they may treat with his fellows, and with the fathers. Than also the
same Friar left reading, excusing the matter by sickness. The first day of
April Duke Moris and his league friends, laid siege to the Duke Moris takes
Auspurge by composition.
city of Auspurge, and took it the third day after by composition, as in the
book that follows shall be declared. The v. day of April, the Ambassadors of
the Duke of Wirtemberge, being sent for to the house of Toletane, came, and
brought with them as they were commanded two divines, Brentius, and Ihon
Marpache of Strasburge. Pictaue begins to declare, first of their own good
will, and zeal, after of the Legates sickness, and how, unless he were
present, neither his fellows, nor yet the fathers would do any thing and that
the fault has not been in them, that they do not proceed; and shows that
they will also hereafter omit no manner of diligence, and hereof makes
protestation. Thothers, when they had consulted, say, that they know rightwell
their good will and diligence, howbeit they had looked for an other and a more
certain answer to their demaundes, which they might have signified to their
Magistrates: but now since the matter is thus, they must take counsel the best
they can for them selves. Than said he again, that the matter is not brought
to that point, neither ought it so to be taken, as though there were no hope of
any further action remaining: to advertise their Magistrates, and signify unto
them in what case all thing stand, it is well done of them, and according to
their duty: nether doubt they, but they, when they shall hear thereof, will both
marvel at this long delay and surceasing, and will take it also in evil part:
Howbeit he requires them to take patiently the tediousness of a few days: In
the mean time they will travel, that they may have a direct answer. Unto
this, say they, they will gladly for their sakes acconsent. The next day with
great expedition came messagers and letters that Auspurge was taken, and how
the Princes marched straightway toward thalpes, to stop all the wais and
passages. Wherefore they were commanded to take armure in the county of
Tiroll, and bands of soldiors, hired, and commanded all to repair to
Insprucke. Now were all the bishops of Germanye The fathers fle from Trent
departed thence: there remained only the deputies of the bishops of Spier and
Manster. When these news were brought, immediately the bishops of Italy flee,
carrying all their baggage down the river of Athesis. Wherefore thambassadors of
Wirtemberge being herewith moved, what time of their own accord the council
now slipped away, come to themperors orators, and show the^ for what cause
they purpose to go home with the divines also. Who in deed at the first were
sore against it, and say how they may not assente thereunto, except themperors
pleasure be known: but when that might not prevail, they require to have the
causes of their departing delivered to them by writing, and signed with their
own hands, to the intent they may make an excuse to themperor, and to the
fathers. Pictaue demanded this also, if happily after their departure the
fathers shall proceade in thaction, what than shall the divines say? whereunto
thambassadors conferring with the divines upon the matter, say they will make
them answer, and the viii. day of April early in the morning, they deliver
unto them a wrytinge. In the same they recite, what time the confession of
their doctrine was The answer of the protestants ambassadors.
exhibited: wherefore the divines came. How they have in vain solicited
hitherto, that they might receive an answer to their Princes demaundes: How
unto that day there appeared no hope of any action that should be: Now also there
is war raised, so, that not only yt bishops of Germany, but also of Italy do
depart, and that all states are now so entangled with troubles, that they can
look for nothing at this present: Moreover the bishops of Germany being
absente, perauenture it were not expediente that any progress should be
made: And if any time hereafter chance, wherein this business may be treated well
and ordrely, they suppose, how their Prince will not be wanting: The divines
moreover think thus, that there be many decrees made both in this, and also in
the former counsel, which might be well reproved, in case they be lawfully hard:
And if the fathers do now proceed herein, it is to be thought, that their
doings will be like the reast. Nevertheless, in case either the decrees already
made, may be amended, or such may hereafter be decreed, as are consonant to the
holy scripture, there is no doubt, but the same will be received with most
obedient hearts: This thing unto them doutles will be most sorrowful, as in
certain places of the confession exhibited has been declared: which writing
verily, they judge to be good and godly, and also when time shall serve, will
declare it more at large: They pray them therefore, to take in good part, their
departure: and say in deed how they might by virtue of the safeconduite depart
thence what time they list, and are not bounden to make any man privy to it:
but for so much as they have many times proved their gentleness, they would not
omit this kind of duty. Thus therefore taking their leave, they depart about
none time, and a few hours after they met with the Cardinal of Trent, which
rode in great post hastr from Brixna to Trent: And when he heard that they
were of Wirtemberge, inquiring for Brentius, he spoke unto him, and gave them
all most gentle words. Two days after met them king Ferdinandoes daughters,
which went by Insprucke to Brunecke, a town in the Alps, bordering on the
limits of the Uenetians. Of the fathers I showed you before, how they drue not
all by one line. The Spanish bishops in deed seemed of all others most Diverse
minds in the counsel of Trent.
diligente: diverse also of the Germans pretended, as though the thing
required much reformation: but the mind of them yt thought best of al others,
was this, that the schole of correction and manners of the church should be
reformed, that al superfluous excess, ambition, and dishonest examples of
living should be taken away, that every man be resident in his own church, and
that each man should have one benefice, and no man be permitted to have mo.
Furthermore they purposed also to include within certain limits the power
Refourmation of the papists.
of the bishop of Rome, and not to attribute unto his court so great authority
over all realms. These and such other like things they comprise by this word
of reformation, and those things they acknowledge to belong proprely unto
them: but touching religion and doctrine, they will be acknowne of none error,
yea they decreed that The Church can not err.
counsels could not err, and thought verily that their adversaries would in
fine revolt and obey the counsel, as it apeareth manifestly by an Epistle
written to the French king, and by the form of the the safeconduit. And this
thing also increased their hope and opinion, for that they judged few
professors of that doctrine, least being so many of them dead and banished, as
before is spoken of Sweuia. This was also common there among them, that
whatsoever concerned religion should within a few months be determined. For
of the chief articles there remained two only, the Lords supper and Matrimony:
All other articles of doctrine were all ready discussed. The fathers that were
at Basil did attribute the whole judgment to holy scripture, and to other
wrytinges agreeable to ye The counsel of Basil purer the^ Tre^t
same: but these men would be judges them selves in expoundinge the scripture,
neither would they admit that place of the decree of Basil, by thambassadors
restored, but chaunginge the words of the decre, determined also to follow the
traditions of thapostles in every doubtful matter. And whansoeuer they were
destitute of scripture, they bosted that it was so left by thapostles, and
delivered them as it were from hand to hand, as in the disputations of the
deuines was often times noted. Which caused also the ambassadors, when they
received the safeconduit of themperors oratoures at thend of January, to
protest, that by the traditions of thapostles they understood those wrytinges,
which were annexed to the new Testament, or story of the four Evangelists. I
showed you before, how the first of May was appointed the day of session. But
The last session of yt counsel.
now the fathers that remained, being in despair of the thing, assemble
together, and for the discord of kings and princes, proroge the counsel for
the space of two years or longer, in case the dissension be not appeased. This
was the xxix. day of April, and now was the bishop of Rome agreed with the
French king. A few days after themperors ambassadors depart thence also. But
the Legate of The french King has peace with ye Pope.
Rome Cresce^tius, detained by sickness, abode still: who being feared by a
vision in the night, as it is said, fell sick, and began to despair also of his
life, notwithstanding that both his friends, and also the Physicians did
comfort him. Neither was he disceiued in his judgment: For the disease
increasing, he died at Uerona. And this was thend of the counsel, which being
right stoutly renewed thought The end of the Counsel at Trent.
verily to restore the Romish doctrine, and shortly to establishe the same.
Besides the Legates of Rome and the Cardinal of Trent, there were present lxii.
bishops, whereof viii. were Germans, five and twenty Spaniardes, two of
Sardinia, four of Sicilie, one of Ho^gary, the bishop of Agria, all the reast
were of Italy: and divines there were xlii. and of them xix. Spaniards, of
Germany and Flaunders The death of the popes Legate.
xii. By what occasion the Legate Crescentius fell sick. I had purposed not to
have spoken: for that there was some suspicion, it might be devised of malice:
but in as much as his friends and those of his own family, which went to
comfort him when he lay sick, do thus report it, I thought mete to add to
the same. The xxv. day of March he had been very much occupied in writing
letters to the bishop of Rome, and continued this travel til night. At the
which time arising, that he might refresh him self, behold, he saw a great
black dog going, with glistring eyes, and ears hanging down almost to the
ground, and went straightway to him, and after slipped under the table. He being
astonished and amassed, when at the length he was cummen again to him self, he
calls upon his servant, that were in the utter chamber, commanding them to
bring in a light, and to beat out this dog: but when he could no where be
found, neither there, nor yet in the next chamber, he took a great thought, and
fell sick, as I showed you before. When he lay on his death bed also, he is
reported to have cried out many times to his servants, that they should
drive out the dog that came upon his bed.

The, xxiiij, Book of Sleidanes Commentaries, concerning the state of
Religion, and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire of Charies the
fyfte.
The Argument of the xxiiij. Book.
DUke Moris publishes his letters to all the states of thempire, not to hinder
his enterprises: the same does Marquis Albert. The French king also publishes
his, and nammge him self Protector of Germany, takes Metz in Lorayne, and
marches up to Strasborough, and from thence retireth to Hagenaw. Whither came
unto him sundry ambassadors, beseching him to stay his army. The king retireth
his army out of Germany. Duke Moris and his company having won the straites
of thalpes, puts themperor to flighte, who a little before had enlarged the
Duke of Saxon. After they publishe their letters at Auspurge, whereb yt they
restore the ministers of the Church that preached the Gospel. Whilst Duke
Moris went to Passaw for the treaty of peace, Marquis Albert practices great
cruelty against them of Nurinberge, and constrains them to make their peace,
unto meaner Princes of the peace, sondrys things were declared as well by
letters as by ambassadoures: and they be pleased with certain conditions. They
of Seine do revolt from themperor, who comes to Strasborough; goinge to
besiege Metz.

HOw in the last assemble of thempire, the government of the war of
Maidenburge, was by common assente of the Emperor and other states committed
to Duke Moris, I have before declared, during the which war, continuinge the
space of one year: he, having the army at his commandment, began to seek
means how to deliver the Lantzgraue his father in law, saying he had so
long time sued to themperor for the same matter in vain. Wherefore compelling
the Chattes by an oath, to be true to him, and making peace with them of
Maidenburge, and sendinge his ambassadoures to Insprucke, as in the former book
is mentioned, he enters into league with the French king, and assurance
made on either side by pledges given, they thought good by wrytinges setforthe
to declare the cause, of the war, to thentent they might win thereby the good
wills of many. Moreover the Marquis Albert of Brandenburge, going privily into
France to the king withdrewe him self wholly to the same business.

In the mean season the soldiers, as well those that defended Maidenburge, as
they that beseged the same, wintered at Mullusie, and the places there aboutes,
and did much hurt to the Northusians and them of Herfurd. And when themperor
demanded the cause thereof of Duke Moris which had of the whole war been
general, he was answered that this tumult was for want of payment of their
wages. For this he pr^^^^ded the cause, where in deed they served him, and
secreatly were bounden to him by an oath. And that he might the better persuade
the self same time, he sent ambassadoures through Insprucke to Trent, which
might obtain a safeconduit for the divines that should come, and propound
certain other things in the counsel: Afterward he commanded the divines to
follow, which goinge as far as Norinberge, tarried there loking for letters
from the foresaid ambassadors, as before is mentioned: he sent also other
ambassadors to the Emperor. Christopher Carlebice, and Ulrich Mortise, which
should tarry for his coming in the borders of Bauier, whose advise and counsel
he might use in the treaty. Furthermore he commanded a lodging to be prepared
for him at Inspruck, and he him self took his journey, and when he had gone two
or three days iourny on his way, sending from thence to Insprucke most gentle
letters, and alleging a certain cause for an excuse, returns home again, and
thus tracting the time, when he had driven it of from day to day. In the
beginning of the spring time, having called back his men in due season, he
began to take musters of his soldiors, which in the winter time he had gathered
very secreatly, and addressing his letters unto all ye states of thempire,
says: There is nothing in this world to him so dear as concord: but he
wishes chiefly for an agreement in religion according to the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles: whereof our adversaries have many times put us in hope,
both privately and also by public decrees: but nothing is performed, and they
do not only constre a miss those promises and decrees, but also do abrogate
the same and take them clean away: This also have they spoken unto certain,
that unless they follow their procedings, let them not trust greatly or lean
to former promises: For at what time those promises were made, the state of time
was other wise: but now they must obey, or else, such as refuse must be
punished: and not contented with these words, they have stirred up also foreign
kings against him and other princes of his state and profession, and have
invented sundry causes to bring them in hatred, whilst they blame us for
religion or certain other things, whereas the thing it self declares, that they
care for no religion, but have always had an eye, how through thoccasion of
dissension in Religion they might aspire to the government.

For now is their craft seen of all men, which they used, that they might
wholly rote out and abolishe the true Religion, in former years setforth and
expounded at Auspurge: For this is the matter wherefore they have in all places
exiled the preachers and ministers of the Church, out of the limits of
thempire, and tarry neither for the decree of a lawful Counsel, nor yet of
the Bishops of Romes neither, and begin the thing by and by with execution.
Wherefore, although he with force of arms should repulse (...) him and his,
this servitude of mind and conscience, there ought no man to blame him: How
be it for so much as this thing apperteineth to Gods glory, who alone can both
auaunce and defend his word, he commits the whole matter unto him, and
pr^yeth God, to grant him constancy in the true knowledge of him until his
lives end. An other thing whereof he intends to speak, is concerning the
Lantzgraue, his father in law. For certainly v. years The second cause of war
since, was he and Ioachim the Elector of Brandenburge put in hope in
themperors name, that if the Lantzgraue might be persuaded to come to
submission, and humbly to crave pardone of the Emperor, that themperor should
than require no more of him besides that which was contained in the
pacification than conceived, but would friendly let him depart: wheruppon they
sent for him by their letters, giving their faith unto his sons, that if any
thing chanced to their father otherwise than well, they would abide the same
fortune.

So therefore came he upon this faith unto Hale, and asked the Emperor
pardon. And afterward supped with the Duke of Alba, til it was far in the
night, very pleasantly, and what time The Lantzgraue deteyned prisoner against
sidelity.
he would have returned to his lodging, beyond al men's expectation, he was
detained, and carried to prison, wherein he has now remained in a manner five
whole years, not without exceeding great misery: and although both his sons,
his nobilitye and subjects have confirmed the pacification: Albeit that he him
self, the Marquis of Brandenburge and Wuolfgange, the Paulsgraue, became
sureties for him, that unless he performed couenaunts, they would deliver him
into his custody, albeit that according to the form of couenaunts, the money he
was condemned in, is paid, his artilerye, and munition delivered, his Castles
and fortes rased, Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke and his son set at
liberty, the letters of confederacye exhibited, in so much, that nothing
more can be required, yet could neither the suite of him and the Marquis of
Brandenburge, nor the lamentable tears of his wife, which pined to death for
sorrow, nor the Prayers of the people or intercession of other princes prevail
any thing unto this day: For he has ofttimes spoken to themperor, and
because diverse men have had a sinistrall opinion of him, he has entreated him
most earnestly, to have some respect to his honor and estimation, and that he
would grant him this for the benefits which his elders had done unto his
Progenitors, and for his deserts also toward him and king Fardinando, and
that he would set him at liberty: but all these things could move him
nothing, yea he constrained the captife to answer to matters in the law out
of prison, and to plead his cause, lying in fatters, which can be done by no
law, especially in matters so weighty: to speak nothing in the mean time,
how suspiciously, and how rashly he handled the matter, after a strange
example, such as never was hard of in Germany, that verily under this pretense
of the law, he might by little and little tourn both him and his children out
of all their lands and possessions, and bring them in such distres, that they
should be no more hable to maintain their state and dignity: which thing
that it come not to pass, touches him very much, by reason of the alliance
and hope of succession that he has with the house of Hesse.

This thing in deed might be thought a wonder, were it not that these crafts
and policies are manifest in the sight of al men, which doubtless tend unto
this end, that the same Monarchye, that has been now so many years in
framinge, may at the length be established.

The third, and chief point is that, which concerns all men, The thirds
cause.
and our common native country of Germany, whose state doubtless is most
miserable: For contrary to the laws and couenauntes, forain soldiers are
brought within the limits of thempire, which have now many years ben here
settled, and every where both in town and Country consumes other men's goods,
and exercise al kind of filthy lust: Moreover, many times there be new wais
invented to get money, and the ancient liberty diverse ways infringed, neither
is any state, no not the Princes electours, in this case spared: and
thambassadors of foren kings, which be sorry for these things and love the
wealth of Germany, are prohibited to come at any public assembles, clean
against the manner of thempire: Finally, The bondage of Germany.
this is altogether wroughte, that all men may be brought into a shameful
and straight bondage: for the which thing doubtless our posterity and offspring
may have most tuste cause to detest the cowardice and slouthfulnes of this
time, wherein that most precious jewel and goodly ornament, that is, the
liberty of our country should be lost: seeing therefore that the case stands
thus, at the last is he awaked, and William the Lantzgraue, the son of
Phillip, who^e the just sorrow for his fathers miserye has raised, and making
a league with the french king, whom thenemy seeks also to deprive of that he
has, are determined for the deliverance of the La^tzgraue and the duke of
Saxon, to maintain their honor, and recover the liberty of all men, to attempt
the matter by force of arms: therefore does he exhort, that no man disturb
this his enterprise, but that al men do further and profess the same, and put
in good assurance: For if it be otherwise, and if any man by one mean or
other and the adversary, he will take him for his ennemy. John Albert, Duke of
Megelburge subscribed also to the same letters, chiefly for the preservation of
religion, for so much as duke Moris had said how he warred for the same cause
also. And the Marquis Albert of Bra^denburge Marquis Alberts letters against
the Emperor.
publishes a writing in manner of the same effect, and complains that the
liberty of Germany is oppressed ene^ of them, which of duty ought to maintain
and auaunce the same: he says there is holden now a counsel, wherein be a few
assembled for to subvert the truth: and that also there be many assemblies of
the Empire. Whereof the end is this, that by certain corrupted with bribes and
fair promises, money may be gotten by some subtle fetch to The heavy
burdens of Germany.
the utter undoing of Germany, and the same to be wrought chiefly by the
clergy, which in the consistory of the Empire surmounte in nombre, and now is
the matter brought to yt pass, that the effect of al counsels depends almost
of one man's pleasure, which is neither gentleman nor German borne, nor
annexed to the Empire, to the great reproach assuredlye and hinderance of all
Germans: And if this ought to be the state of the weal public, it were much
better to call none assembles at all, but that money should be frelye and
franckly given, whansoeuer it is commanded and required: for so should there be
no loss of time, and besides great charges should be spared. By such like
craft also is the seal of thempire commen into strangers hands, which
foreiners at their pleasure abuse to the damage of Germany: yet is there no man
at all that dare bewail these things, unless he will enter into high
displeasure: Nether yet are the Germans matters and suits dispatched, but are
most long delaid in so much that many men complain much of the same: For the
state of the things is such that the Germans had need to learn other
la^guages, in case they should be there to do them selves any good: of the
same sort is this, where against tholde custom of Germany it is prohibited,
that no man may serve any foreine Prince in his wars, that the protestants
being reconciled over and above most grievous penalties, were constramed to admit
other more unworthy conditions, and for that a great some of money arose of the
Protestants clients for serving them in their wars. The same burden also was
laid upon other states and Princes, that had nothing offended, and as though
that war had been made for the common wealth, they were commanded to pay
money, to recompense the charges of the wars, for this intent verelye, yt there
should no sinews nor force at all be left in all Germany: Of like sort is it,
that civil controversies of most weighty matters, are committed, not to the
public judgment of thempire, but unto a few commissioners, that it may be in
their power, either to establish or displace great princes: Again that it is
prohibited that no Prince may set his own Image in his coin, that new
Senators are made in every town of the Empire, that this bondage is imposed in
manner upon all Germans, that they be constrained to suffer foreign
soldiers in their country, which both do very much harm, and bring many
men to beggary, and also practice al kind of arrogance and lechery that has
not ben hard of: For his own land was not spared, although he promised him
better, for the fidelitye and service done to themperor: Howbeit at what time
he was detained by reason of the war of Maidenburge, and about matters of the
common wealth was absent, soldiors were brought into his country.
Notwithstanding that his officers desired much to the contrary: and thus
certainly both he and other princes, which in the former war against the
protestants, for his preservation and dignity, put in great hazard their lives
and goods, have received a goodly recompense in that book which Jews Auila
setforth The story of Jews Auila, of the protestants war
of matters done in the same war, a naughty and a lying fellow, whilst he
speaks of all Germany so coldly, so disdainfullye and straungely, as though
it were some barbarous or vile nation, whose original were skarcely known:
And the unworthiness of the thing is so much the more, for that the same book
is printed and setforth by a certain especial privilege of themperor: Now
verily be many things excused, by letters sent throughout Germany, but it is
the self same song, that has been songen now many years, and all things tend
hitherto, that they say, how according to the state of times the decrees must
be altered, and that men must obey the present counsels, or else suffer
punishment: And whereas certain Princes have taken armure to repulse this
ignominye and servitude, he has also promised them all aid and fidelity, yea
and his life also: And this he protests openly, and desires, that no man
aid their adversaries, but that all men would further this endeavor of him
and his fellows, and defend the commen cause: For although very many
perchance will follow the contrary part, yet let no man promise him self
better things, if the adversary may vanquishe: for than shall the state and
condition of all Germans be common: but in case any manne bear armure
against him and his fellows, him will he persecute with sword and fire. There
goes a brute, he says, of him and his fellows, as though they would bring
into Germany foreign nations, and even the Turk him self, but this is a false
and an absurd sclaunder: For what a madness were it to procure so great a
danger to them selves and their country? It is vain also, that diverse report
of him, as though he should attempt this war to enriche him self: he has
served now many years the Emperor, and king Ferdinando, and hereby has
sought no gain, but rather praise and honor. Not without the great loss of
his substance: he has had also large offers made, and not to be contemned,
but all those refused, he has fixed his mind on this war, wherein the
liberty, and former dignity may be restored to the common country. In the which
war, if it fortune, that the same overmuch authority of the Clergy, and
prohibited by holy Scripture, be infringed and weakened, no man ought to blame
him therefore: For certainly the chief bishops of the Empire have been the
occasion of al these evils: yet is it not his intent, that those Colleges which
were founded chiefly for the nobility should be distroyed, but that the vices
being taken away, and those things amended, that can not be borne with, they
may remain in their vocation and be auaunced also: whereunto he will be a
furtherer to them, so that they will be content, and not suffer them selves to
be persuaded otherwise by his enemies. The king The french kingsletters
of France also, in his letters setforth, says, he has this respect
chiefly, that Religion being established, he may profit the public weal, and
chiefly his friends. And therefore immediately after the death of his father, he
had restored Scotland to their former dignity, renewed the league with Swisses,
recovered Boloigne, and brought again the old inhabiters and Citezens
dispersed hither and thither, into their lands and possessions, he has made
peace also with the king of England, and entered with him into perfect amity:
and whilst he was occupied with these matters, the Emperor by secreat
devises has Imagined many things for his destruction, and oftener than once
has given occasion of war, how beit both for the common wealths sake, and
priuatelye also to relieve his people, he would attempt nothing, but winckinge
at the injuries, he gave his mind whollye to the establishment of his realm:
but this his quietness, afterward, by his adversaries was ascribed to a
certain timerousnesse and cowardlinesse: but in the mean season were brought
unto him grievous complaints of the Princes and states of Germany, which said
that occasion was sought partly for Religion, partlye for the Turkishe war,
and to punish rebellion, to bring them in to bondage, and that by craftye
counsels, dissension, and faction are mainetained, and Germanye impouerished,
so, that it can no longer be doubted, but that he goes about to make a
monarchy for him self and the house of Austrich: of the which thing verelye he
conceived an inward sorrow, both for the common original of either nation,
and also for the old amity and friendship, which ever continued ferme and
inuiolated, so long as it might by themperoures craft and policye: For if that
state should have an alteration, and Germanye lose her liberty, he perceives
well, what damage and danger the same will be for him and all his realm: For
Germany is not only the fortress and strength of France, but also of the
whole christian common wealth: Germanye ye fortress of Christendoe.
And therefore has he desired often with earnest prayer, and wishing, that either
nation with their forces joined together, might so stay them selves, that they
should nead to be afraid of no man: and where no hope of this thing appeared,
and yet many craved his healpe, he could not see by what means he might
succoure the Empire, so rent and torn a sondre: but in this consultation so
waighey, God, which is a righteous judge, has showed a goodly way. For
Octauian Frenese, Duke of Placence and Parma, whom the emperor and the Bishop
of Rome, July, laid in wait for, required aid of him, and declaringe al
their injuries, has persuaded him, to take upon him, the defense of him and
the countye of Mirandula. After this came also those complaints of the Princes
and states of Germany, which required they might enter into league with him,
for that they said, how by that means only, the common wealth might be
restored: but how just and weighty causes they be, for the which the Princes
attempt war, he will not recite, for that the same may be understand by
their own wrytinges: Notwithstanding let every man way with him self, whether
this insatiable covetousness of our adversaries does not give a most just
occasion of grief, which destroyinge the wealth of the Empire, swepe all
into their own coffers and treasury. The Burgonians do now invade them of
Treuers, Gelderland, and Wirtemberge, Cou^tryes oppressed by the Emperor.
and make invasion into their countries, and destroys the La^tzgraues
dominion diverse ways: of like sort is it, that themperor excludes his
ambassadors from thassemblies of the Empire, that he prohibiteth, that no man
may serve in foreine wars, that he puts to death noble capitains, and
worthy serviceable men, and among others, Uogelsperge, whose execution he him
self beheld at Auspurge, to the intent he might satisfye his bloudye mind: Is
if not a most evil an example, that he should provoke and hyre men with
great rewards to slay such as serve him in the wars? Assuredlye it can not
with few words be expressed, what crafts our ennemies use: For into the
same judgment of the Chamber and consistorye of the Empire are admitted and
placed such, as by their means they may bring to pass and obtain what they
list: For doubtless the blame of all these evils is to be imputed to this kind
of men. Especially to the judges of the Chamber: For the which causes verily
he could not deny ye Germains, requiring his aid: Therefore has he made league
with them, and not only yt, but also is determined to employ upon this war
all his force and his royal parson. Neither yet does he look for any private
profit or gain thereby, but minedeth this thing only, that Germany being
restored, and Ihon Fridericke the Duke of Saxon and the Lantz grave delivered,
whom he has detained prisoners in long and unworthy captivity, he may win
praise and renown immortal, as did in times past Flamminius, for delivering
Greece from bondage: neither is there cause, that any man should fear any
force or violence: For in as much as he attempteth this war for liberty he
will wholly endeavor that no man be hurt undeservedly: let them trust
therefore to this promise, which he confirms unto them faithfully, and give
no creadit to adversaries, which say his purpose is to afflicte and plage the
Clergy: For he not only intends no such matter, but also receives al them
into his defense and tuition, so that they do not annoy him nor yet his league
friends. For after liberty recovered, he is put in good hope by many men's
letters, that the concord of the church, shall and may also be restored, and
that by lawful means, when all ambition and private lucre is far removed.
And what so ever he may help hereunto, he will do it gladly: These are the
things, whereof he thought good to admonish them, to thend they may understand,
what his will and purpose is: wherefore he requires them, that in so just
war, which of necessity is attempted for the wealth of Germany, no man would
impeche or hinder him or his confederates: for otherwise, if any man be so
clean void of all love and duty, that he owes to his country, that he
intend to make resistaunce, him will he destroy with sword and fire: and albeit
he shall do so unwillingly, yet, if any such shall be, the same as a naughty and a
corrupt membre, must be cut of from the reast of the body, least it do hurt by
his infection, and in such sort be restrained that it do no more harm: The
rest they may know of his ambassador Ihon Fraxine, Bishop of Bayon, whom he
has sent unto them with further of his pleasure unto whom he prays them to
give creadit. This wrytinge being set forth in print, in the vulgar tongue,
had over the head, a bonnet between two daggers, and written by, that the same
was the badge Tharmes of liberty.
of liberty. And underneath that was the title of the king, who named him
self the revenger of the liberty of Germany, and of the Princes captive. This
badge or cognoisaunce many say was found in old coins, and used by them, that
slew Julius Caesar. Where he says, how themperor had assigned a reward for
them, that could slay certain of his captains, thus stands the case.
Themperor by proclamation lately setforthe, had again with words most
weighty outlawed the Rinegraue, Recrode, Riseberge and Scherteline, which in
deed served all the French king, as I have said before, and appointed four
thousand crowns in reward for him that could bring forth any of them, either
quick or dead. For they furthered the cause very much, and when this league
was made, going into Germany, prested souldioures, and brought them into
France. And Scherteline in deed when he had sued many years in vain, and
could by the intercession of no man be reconciled to themperor or King
Fernando, being in a manner constrained fled to the French king.

These letters of the king, and the Princes, dispearsed abroad in Germany,
raised in some hope, but in many, fear and carefulnes. Duke Moris, which
wrought all thing by dissimulation the first of March, holds an assemble of
the states of his dominion, and among other things he propounds, because
he is sued of the Lantzgraues sons, to present him self, he may no longer
seek delays, or disceine their expectation. Therefore will he go unto them, to
keep his faith and promise: let them therefore in the mean time obey his
brother August, whom he has made his deputye in his absence, and let them
gather a force to defend the country, that nothing chance unto them
unprovided. Thelector of Brandenburge was present at this treaty, for that he
was sommoned to appear: but when the Lantzgraues sons did permit him, that
he should at the next process, appear, and discharge his bond, he retourneth
home. Duke Moris having put in order his things at home, and Duke Moris goes
to the field.
appointed certain counselloures to assiste his brother Auguste, he goes with
a few small company to those forces, which I said before he had in the country
of Turing, and marching forth abides for the Lantzgraues son.

Before he departed from home the Burggraue of Meyssen, as they call him Henry,
of the noble house of the Plauians Chauncelor of Boheme, in the name of king
Ferdinando, treated with him diligently for a reconcileme^t. The La^tzgraues
son, leading forth his army, when he came to Erlebache the eightene day of
March, where also was the French ambassador, Fraxine, they both request them
of Franckfurt by letters among other things, that they receive no garrison
of the Emperors into their city. And all beit that they answered neither
plainlye nor purposelye, yet, for so much as they must go forward, there was
none other thing done.

The sixth day after, he joins with Duke Moris: And when they were commen
with their whole army three days after to Schwinfurt, Duke Moris declares
unto him, how king Fardinando would make intercession, and signified the same
plainlye both by letters and ambassadoures, as though he had authoritys of the
Emperor to treat, yea touching the delivery of his father.

He therefore making privy to it the French ambassador, refuses not, that the
conditions and requests of king Fardinando, should be heard, which thing
determined, they march with great expedition, by Roteburge, Dingelspelle, and
Norling to Donauerde: At Roteburge, Marquis Albert joins him self to them
with his power both of horse men and footmen. Which way so euerthey went,
they brought the Citezens into their subjection, and displacing those, which
the Emperor before had chosen, do ordain new Magistrates: And exact of them
also money and munition. And because Auspurge was kept with no great garrison.

And again because in the self same days, a certain piece of the wall and
Rampeare was fallen down, they marched with exceading great iourneis, and the
last day of March, reasted not so much as in the night season, and came
thither the first day of April at midday, and making roades there, declared
them selves to be ennemies: In the City were four enseignes of fotemen, sent
by them peroure: but where the Towns men the fourth day after rendered the
city, they were permitted to depart.

Than they that sommoned the Cities of high Germany, and among them also
Norinberge, and command them to be before them at Auspurge, at thend of
April, and also urge them of Wuolmes, which were but nine miles from
Auspurge, that they should aid them with all things, and come into their
society.

About this time, the Prince of Salerne, by occasion of falling out with the
Uiceroy of Naples, reuolteth from the Emperor, The Prince of Salerne
reuolteth from themperor.
and goes into France:

Whilst these things are done in Germany, the French king, marching forth,
with an huge army, surpriseth Tullie, and Uerdome towns of thempire, at the
borders of France, after he inuadeth Lorayne, and sends the young Prince into
France, about nine years of age, though the Lady Dowager his mother entreated
never The french subdueth Loraine.
so much to the contrary, and promises him his daughter in marriage: Whilst
the king him self was occupied with these affairs, his lieftenaunt the
Constable, Annas Memoraunce, who led the Uantward, surpriseth Metz, a famous
city of thempire, the tenthe day of April, when both the garrison within was
small, and the French men made fair promises, and said how the king made
this war to maintain their liberty. For what time the French king went out
of his own pale, which was about the eighte day of March, sendinge unto them
letters, and messagers, he desired only that they would prepare him vitaile, yt
he might pass through their country with his army, promisinge all
benenolence. And he used for his minister the Cardinal Lenoncurt, bishop of
the City, The Cardinal betrayed the City of Metz.
who setforth his good will and zeal to the Senate.

The conestable also wrote unto them most frendlye: but when he came near
unto the city with his force, he desired to be let in, and obtained: the next
day he was master of the gates, and of all the fortifications. Thither came also
afterward the king him self at the xviii. day of April, and there
remaining four days, after he had taken thothe of the Senate and people, he
appointed Mounsir Go^norie to be their gouernoure, and commanded their armure
to be delivered, and carried into one place, and the City to be fortified,
likewise does he in the Towns before named, and in Loraine, and sending his
messagers before to Strasburge, to Haganawe, and other places near, and to the
bishop of Strasburge, required to be aided with Wheat and Uitaile. When
Auspurge was taken, as I said, and thold Senate restored, which themperoure had
displaced, and the liberty of geuinge of voices, restored also to the people,
the Princes contederated marched toward Woulmes, that refused their league
When they came thither the xii. day of April, they ride about this City: And
when they were shot at with the great pieces, they damaunde to be satisfied
for the injuries done them with the sum of three hondreth thousand Crowns,
which denied, they becommed their enemies. But duke Moris goinge from thence,
went to Lintz, a town of Austriche, that he might understand by king
Farnando the conditions of peace. For he, as I said, by the Emperoures consent,
was a mean to entreat a peace. Afterward the Emperor exhorted by his
letters the chiefest Princes of Germanye, that they would assaye to quench
this fire, and devise some means of peace, the which he would not be
against. And where as diverse required his aid, for that they were able to do
nothing against so great a power, comforting their minds, he answers, that
he hops well that the treaty of peace commenced shall have a lucky success,
if not: than will he neither fail them, nor the common weal. When Woulmes had
been beseged six days, the Princes, the.xix. day of April, removed to
Stocach, a town of Hegouia. There they received money in the French kings name
for three months (as is conuenaunted) and Gamey Marchiane, the French pledge
was delivered: For the other, Nantoliet died by the way. The Princes The
pledges of France and Germanye.
pledges, which they gave to the French king, were Christopher Duke of
Megelburg, and Philip the Lantgraues son. The last of April the Princes
return to Thonaw, certain miles beneth Woulmes. In the mean season Marquis
Albert burns the towns and villages belonging to Woulmes, and extorteth
money, and takes their castle of Helfesteyne, situated on a high hill, and
places therein a garrison, and the town of Gissing nere unto it, which is
three miles from Woulmes, with certain villages by the same, he condemns to
pay.xviii. thousand crowns. Wha^ Duke Maurice was come to Lintz, he
propounds of delivering the Lantgraue his father in law, of Conditions of
peace, offered by Duke Moris.
appeasing the dissension of Religion and doctrine, of well ordering the common
wealth, of peace to be made with the French king, their fellow, and
confederate, of the outlawes to be received again into favor.

Those were the Ryngrane, and others before named, and also Earl Hedecke which
in fourmer years gave him self into the tuition of Duke Maurice, as before is
said. Howheit the Emperor had appointed no reward against his life, least he
should offend Duke Maurice, as it is to be thought. Unto these demaundes,
Ferdinando, with whom were Maximilian his son, and his son in law Albert,
Duke of Bauier, and also the Emperors Ambassadors, makes answer. How the
Emperor is content that the Lantgraue be set at liberty, yet so that the
war may cease immediately. Touching Religion and the common wealth, he is
well pleased, that the matter be determined in the next conuention of German.
But the Emperor is very loathe that the French king should be herein
comprised. Nevertheless Duke Maurice may know of him, in what sort he will be
accorded. The outlawes may also be taken to mercy, in case they will obey the
condition offered by the Emperor. Moreover, Ferdina^do requested, that when
peace were once concluded, Duke Maurice would help him in Hongary, and that
the soldiers should not slip away to the French king. Whereunto when Duke
Maurice had answered, and said that that he could determine nothing without
the consent of his fellows, they departed so, as at the.xxvi. day of May, they
should mete again at Passawe, which is a town between Lintz and Regenspurge,
where the Ryuers of Thonawe, and Oene mete. Thither should come also the
Princes that were intercessours, and their deputies. On Maydaye the Lantgraues
son, and John Albert Duke of Megelburg, lead the army of Gundelfinge, and
there lie eight whole days together lokyng for Duke Maurice return out of
Austrich. When he was come, the next day was the army munstred at Lawginge, a
town of Otto Henry the Pausgraues. For they The country of Oto Henry recovered
had also recovered his province, possessed by the Emperor, and had expulsed
the Bishop of Auspurge out of his country. And verily Otto the Paulsgraue,
joined him self unto their league. From thence they go toward the Alps. And
it chanced at the same time that king Ferdinando had obtained of them a truce,
which beginning the.xxvi. day of May, should end the eight day of June. In
the mean time The Emperor levied a power at the foot of the Alps, which
assembled at the Town of Rwe. In this hurly burly the Bishop of Auspurge
Cardinal, which before was not very rich and had now sustained great loss,
as I said, went to Rome, that he might obtain of the Bishop new promotions
and benefices, wherewith he might fill up those sinkes again. After this the
judges of the chamber imperial fly away from Spiers. For by The judges of the
chamber sly.
the French king and the Princes in their forsaide wrytinges, signified
plainly a displeasure, and ascribed to the^ in a manner the blame of all their
trouble. The French king came with his army by ye borders of Loraine to
Saberne, the third day of May, four miles from Strasburg, a town belonging to
the bishop. He had before requested them of Strasburg to aid his army with
things necessary. For the which cause Ambassadors were sent unto him to
Sarburg, seven miles from Strasburg which should offer him a certain quantity
of wheat and wine, those were Peter Sturmie, Fridericke Gotesseme, and John
Sleidane. But the Conestable accounted that as nothing, which they offered.
And albeit the Ambassadors departed from him in such sort, as that they
would aduertyse the Senate, and after make report unto him, yet sent he the
next day two Gentlemen for a spedy answer, speaking much of the kings
great good will and zeal toward Germany, and also for what intent, the king
had moved his war, verily that he might restore the liberty of Germany
oppressed. An other request was, that for so much as the soldiers had need of
many things, they might bie the same in their city, and that artificers might
be suffered to bring forth their wares and sell them within the camp. Whereunto
the Senate made this answer; that in such matters of weighty importance,
there is nothing wont to be determined, but by the consent of the whole state.
When the matter shall be debated, they will send again Ambassadors to declare,
what their mind is. When they were thus sent away, the next day ye same
Ambassadors were sent again into the camp, which was than at Saberne. When
they were heard speak, and offered some what more, tha^ before, and had also
declared causes, why the soldiers might not be permitted to come within the
city, the Conestable began to speak displeasauntly, and making a comparison,
how The Conestable chideth with them of Strash.
partial judges they were, both of the kings benefits, and also of the
Emperors injuries, gave very sharp language. The conclusion of his talk was,
that the next day they should hear the king him self speak, which would
affirm all that he had now said. On the morrow were the Ambassadors sent
for before the king, with whom was the Cardinal of Loraine, the Duke of
Uandome, and the Conestable. And there report unto him, what talk they have
had with the Conestable at two several times, and offer as many rasers of
Otes, as they did before of wheat, and after also some what more wine,
beseching the king, that both for the old amity, that ye kings of France
have had with the state of Strasburge, and also of his own humanity, he would
take in good part their offer. For they have great force of soldiers within
their city, and a great number of people also be fled thither out of the
country, so that the city can not spare that corn, that they have for their
provision. The king, after he had first conferred with his counsel, began him
self to declare, for what cause he came into Germany, to the self same
effect, that the Conestable had the day before. Saying that vitayle was most
necessary, and not to be denied any man, that would pay for the same, unless he
were an ennemy. If ye Soldiers want that, they will find a way, how to come by
the same. But what inconvenience would come thereof, every man may easily
perceive. That thing which was offered, the king in deed refused not, but he
would have had it delivered in bread. Tha^bassadours again in corn: Where upon
when they could not agree, they departed with out the matter concluded. When
the Ambassadors were returned, the Senate made a decree. For as much as no
part of that wheat, which is in the city, can be spared, that there should
be as much bread made, as might be in the places theraboutes. For the
Ambassadors had alleged both to the Conestable, and the king also, that the
state of the city and condition of time was such, that from thence was
nothing to be looked for. But in case any thing might be gathered in the
country, belonging to the same, they should have it right gladly. And this did
ye Senate decre, least any extremity should be wrought upon the plowmen and
people of the country. And so, that which could suddenly be gotten in towns
and villages with out the city, was carried to the Camp, but that same was
very little. When the country of Loraine, and city of Metz were taken, they of
Strasburge immediately took up to the number of five thousand soldiers, to
defend their city, again they pulled down very many as well public as
private buildinges about the city, and cut down trees, and orcherdes and what
so ever did let the prospecte, or that might be a succor to the ennemie, and
where most need was began to fortify their city. This same was a great
displeasure to the Frenchmen, and in the later communication the Conestable did
not dissemble the same to the Ambassadors. For it is thought, how they were
in a certain hope, that like as by a certain face of friendship, they entered Metz,
so also they should not have been shut out of Strasburg. But when they knew,
that the city was exceading strong, and saw moreover all things provided so
diligently for the defense of the same, changing their purpose, as it is to be
thought, they turned an other way, and remouinge their camp the seventh day
of May, marched toward Haganawe and Wisseburg. Hither came unto ye king,
Ambassadors from the Paulsgraue Electour, from the Archebyshoppes of The
request of the Princes to the king.
Mentz and of Treuers, commissioners, and from the Dukes of Cleave and
Wirtemberge, which for the common wealths sake, were lately assembled at
Wourmes. Whose request was this, that the king would absteyne from spoiling
the country and spare the poor people. And for so much as he protests to
make war for the liberty of Germany, that he would stay with his army.
For if he should go further, the same would be to the great loss and damage of
the Empire. And they require him to give his mind to the ways of peace,
whereof they both have already made mention to the Emperor, and will do
also hereafter, and trust that all shall be well. Where he writes of entering
into league with him, they desire him to consider herein their honor and
estimation. For by reason of their oath and faith they owe to the Empire, they
are not able to perform it. But yet will they do their endeavor, that a
general peace may be established. Furthermore they require him most
instauntly, that he would spare the dominions of Strasburg, which is a fre
city of the Empire, and that by his mediation Marquis Albert would entreat
more gently the Bishop of Wirciburge.

At the selfsame time, which was the.xi. day of May, letters were brought to ye
king from Duke Maurice, wherein was written D. Maurice letters to the king.
what was done at Lintz. Duke Maurice required moreover, yt the king, whom he
would have also comprised in the treaty of peace, would declare, upon what
conditions he would accord with the Emperor. When these letters were
received, the king, unto whom this thing was thought to have chanced unlooked
for, two days after, remoueth his camp, and leaving Germany, marches again
toward Loraine. But before his departure, he answers the Ambassadors of
the Princes before named. How he has already obtained the same The kings
answer to ye Princes.
thing, for the which he came with his army into Germany. For the captive
Princes shall be delivered. And this was the cause of his war: He therefore
has won honor enough. And if there chance any time hereafter, wherein
Germany may require his aid, he will spare neither pains, cost, nor peril.
And now leading back his army, he intends to return home, chiefly, for
that his ennemies have invaded France. As concerning the complaints of the
poor people, he is heartily sorry. Howbeit there can not be so good order taken
in any Army, but that licentiouse soldiers will always do some harm.
Notwithstanding he takes most dilligent head, that both as little harm be
done as is possible, and also that offenses be most straytely punyshed.
Touching that which they write of the Emperor and of peace, he looks
certainly for at their hands. Through his pains, force and diligence, Germany
is released from those miseries, wherewith it lay oppressed. Now must they
well forsee, that they do not dishonestly lose their liberty, by him
restored. For their request touching them of Strasburge, he can not say them
nay, not withstanding, that what time he was there with his army, ye soldiers
of that city used great presumption and arrogancy toward his men. When the
king was entered into Germany, the Emperors power of the low countries, by the
conduict of Martin van Rossem spoyleth Cha^panye.
Marten Rosseme, invaded Champaignie in France, burning and destroying all
before them, and took the town of Asteney, standing by the River of Mase,
belonging to the Duke of Loraine, but lately surprysed by ye Frencheme^. This
was thought to be one cause, why the king returned with his army, another,
for that he misliked Duke Maurice doings, and again, for that his hope failed
him at Strasburge. When he had removed from Wisseburge, Ambassadors came to
the king, sent The suite of the Swisses to the King.
from all the Swisses. King Ferdina^do has a Region joining to the Heluetians,
called Sontgouia. And they of Enseme are the chiefest of all that country, who
being afraid of their parts, had entreated the Swisses, that for the
authority and favor that they had with the king, they would make
intercession for them. Wherefore at their request and charges taking their
journey, they commended to the king also the cities nere unto the same, Colmar,
Seletstat, and Strasburg, saying how this country was linked unto them in
great amity, both for the nerenes thereof, and also chiefly for that they serve
them in a manner of all their wheat, so much as to them is needful, so that no
displeasure can be done to them, which they shall not feel also. Unto whom
the king makes answer the.xx. day of May besides Bipont. How he does
forgive them of Ensem so that they will release such of his soldious, as they
have prisoners. As touching the rest, for whom they spoke, he never meant them
evil. And albeit that the soldiers of Strasburg received his men somewhat
roughly before the gates, and put them back that came thither to bie things,
yet will he not forsake their amity therefore, even for their sakes that
entreat and be means for them. Now that he possesses Lorayne, he shall be
their nere neighbor, and will do nothing against the manner of neighbourhead.
And looks again for the same good will and duty of them also. There were
before at Saberne, Ambassadors sent to the king by ye Senate of Basil about
the same matter, unto whom also was made a gentle answer. I showed before of
Duke Maurice, how he departed from Lintz. King Ferdinando also when the
conuention was done, went immediately to the Emperor at Inspruck, to infourme
him of all the matter. And Duke Maurice retourning to the camp, marches with
his fellows toward Thalpes as before is said. And when he came almost there,
by the persuasion of the French Ambassador, he determined to set upon the
soldiers, which the Emperor had levied in those parts. And where as ye.
xvii day of May he was not far from Fiessa, which is a town situated at the
entering up to the Alps, by the river of Leyche, he sends forth espialles, to
understand of the ennemie. They all in a manner bring word, how they keep the
straytes and narrow passages of the mountains, and have so fortified
themselves, that they can be hurt by no means. Wherefore the Princes send
forth certain horsemen, chosen out of the whole number, which riding almost to
their ennemies camp, intercept diverse, and bring them away to the Princes. By
whom they understand many things, and the next day marching forewarde
Skirmyshes of ye Princes with ye in Eperialles.
with their fotemen, and having with them but two ho^dreth horsemen only, they
go to Fiessa. And what time they were not far of Rewe, they come unto the
straytes which were kept by the Emperors soldiers to the number of eight
hondreth, and with two field pieces. Upon whom giving the charge when they were
once entered into ye straytes, overthrow their ennemies, who slipping away by
flight, made them that inca^ped at Rwe, to fear and tremble. The Princes
pursuing with speed, give charge upon the^ also, and finally put them to
flight. Whereof a thousand were taken, and slain, and drowned, in the River of
Leych: And lost also one enseigne. The next morning they go to the Castle of
Erenberge, whereof we have often made mention. And when as fortune would, they
had taken the fortress, standing underneath the castle, and had won the
strait ways and passages, and had moreover surprised diverse pieces of great
ordenau^ce furnished, they clyme up the stepe and pitchell hill unto the
castle, and albeit they were laid at with many Erenberge take again
weapons, yet took they it by surrender. There were in the castle.xiii.
enseignes of fotemen: Whereof.ix. were taken, and. iiii escaped, of the which
three were of Germans, and one of Italians. And they that were taken, were
about three thousand, where they lost but few of their own men. After that,
was Rebellion, in D. Moris ca^p
Duke Maurice in great danger. For when he would have marched forewarde, the
soldiers that were under Riseberge, would not, unless they might have an
extraordinary pay for the wynning of the castle. But Duke Maurice said that
was no reason, and commanded with all, to apprehe^de a seditious fellow that
was more clamorouse than the rest. There all the rest make toward him not
only with their pykes, but also Duke Morisuye slain.
with their handgunnes, in so much, that with most spedy flighte, he could
hardely save his life. The.xxi. day of May two legions were sent by the Alps
to Inspruck, which was from thence two days journey. All the horsemen were
left with one legion of fotemen about Fiessa and Rwe, to defend and keep the
passage. The next day Duke Maurice and his fellows Princes followyng after,
join with the army of fotemen, at Zirley, which is not two great miles from
Insprucke. But when the Emperor heard that Ereberge was won, he departed
suddenly in the night away from Insprucke, with his brother The Empe. sleeth
away by night.
Ferdina^do, who was lately come thither to persuade a peace, as I said before,
and through the Alps, as they go to Trente, tourning on the left hand he came
to Uillace a town in Carnia, by the River of Drove, when he had a little
before set at liberty John Friderick, Duke of Saxon, which had been five years
prisoner, least his ennemies should ascribe this unto their The Duke of Saxon
set at liberty.
glory, which thing in deed the prisoner also him self would not. Wha^ he
was at liberty, he followed the Emperor nevertheless, whyther soever he
went. In the self same time, queen Marie, the Emperors sister held an
assemblee at Achen in low ducheland, to make a league with the princes about
her. And the Duke of Cleave in deed, excuses the matter by Ambassadors. But
Adolphe, Archbishop of Collon coming thither enters into league with the
house of Burgsidy. Likewise does the Bishop of Luke, George of Austriche. When
Duke Maurice came to Insprucke, what thing soever was found The Empe. staff
spoiled
there of the Emperors, and of the Spaiardes, and the Cardinals of Auspurge,
it was spoiled. But to king Ferdinandos and the citezens goods, there was no
harm done. And for so much as there remained but three days only, unto the
truce, which for the treaty of peace, was taken, as before is mentioned, Duke
Maurice went from thence to Passawe. And the other Princes, Marching the same
way they came ye.xxviii. day of May return to Fiessa, and afterward by
menssengers as well, in their own, as in the name also of Duke Maurice, they
publyshe letters at Auspurge, of this effect. In what sort say they, ye
ennemies of truth, have always done their endeavor, that all Godly Preachers
oppressed, the Romish idolle might be restored, and that the yought being
brought up in those errors and false opinions might by little and little
increase in the same, that thing is so manifest, that it needs no further
demo^stration. For even at the same time, when they did not stick to proteste
that they sought not Religion, they wrought with all their force that the pure
doctrine might be clean roted out. For they did not only cast the Godly
preachers in prison, but Cruelty against godly preachers.
in this city also compelled them by an oath, and with great ungentleness, that
they should depart out of the limits of the Empire. And albeit that same oath
was very wicked, and therefore is grounded upon no law nor reason, yet, least
any sclaunder might arise, we have called home again those self same
preachers and scholemaisters, which our adversaries had exiled, thinking it
our duty so to do. Wherefore all such as after this sort were bannished, as
before is said, we do clearly release from that bond of oath, whereunto through
force and violence, contrary to the laws they were bound, and restore them
unto liberty, in joining them, that not only in this city, but also in other
places, according to their vocation, they teach Gods word syncerely,
according to the confession here in times past exhibited, and rightly and godly
bring up yougth in learning, trusting unto our defense and tuition. We
command also that no man moleste them with words or injuries, as though they
should do contrary to their faith given. For inasmuche as not through their
deserte, but only for the profession of the truth, they have lived many
months in exile, we doubt not but all good men will lamente their chance,
and account them worthy of all good will and favor.

And for as much as those which in their absence have preached in this city,
be men suspected and unconstant, insomuch, that they may not conveniently be
with these, that we have called again, by reason of their contrariety in
teachinge, we require the Senate, to put them to silence, and so to demean
them selves, that this decree of ours may stand in full stre^gthe and
authority. When the Princes had thus proclaimed the seventh day of June, the
fifth day after, they restore the ministers The princes restore ye ministers of
ye church.
of the church to their places, and give them again authority to preach, to
the great rejoicing and contentation of the people. Before Duke Maurice
returned from Lintz, Marquis Albert going a part with his army, does much
harm with spoiling and burning to Wuolfgang, master of the Almaigne order, as
they call him, and when he had exacted money of him, inuadeth the country of
Norinberge, and the fifth day of May takes by composition, Lightnaw, a castle
of theirs, standing five miles from the city, with the town joining to the
same. His army was of two thousand horsemen, and.xix. enseignes of fotemen.
The next day sending his letters to them of Norinberge, The Marq. Albertes
army.
albeit the French king says he, and the Princes co^federated, have declared
by wrytinge sufficiently, and at large what they thought of the common wealth,
and how they were bent to recover the liberty of Germany, and Religion also,
upon hope and confidence that all good men with wylling minds, would not only
embrace this their enterprise, but would also with all their force and endeavor
further the same, which many have done in deed: yet have you neither declared
what your mind and purpose is, nor as I hear, have sent no Ambassadors to
the assemblee appointed at Auspurge, but prepare all things for defense,
plantyng your ordenaunce here and there on your walls and Bulwarks, and
hiring force of soldiers, make auaunt, that you will persevere to the
vttermoste extremity, as I am credible informed, and it makes me to believe it
the more, for that hitherto you have sent no Ambassadors to me for peace.
Which some notwithstanding have done, both Princes and Cities further of.
Where therefore the same writing, of the king and Princes confederated, does
manifestly declare, that such, as either shall resist this enterprise of
theirs, or not further the same, shall be taken as ennemies. And again, for so
much as I am adjoined to the same war, to the end to bring all those, in
whose limits I come, to do their duty, and to leave behind my back no
fortified place, out of the which any force or saleinge out is to be feared,
therefore have I taken from you, which as yet have not satisfied my
expectation, the castle of Lightnaw, which was a great annoyaunce to my
camp, preserving the soldiers of the garrison, whom nevertheless I might
have otherwise used. But because the chief thing yet remains, I require you
both in the French kings name and my fellows, that you will make a direct
answer, what you are purposed to do for the defense of the liberty of
Germany, and for the stablishyng of Religion, and let me understand it
tomorrowe, that I may know, what thing is to be looked for of you, and in what
sort I ought to accept you. Howbeit, what time Duke Maurice and his fellows
were at Schwinfurte, which was the.xxvi. day of March, as before is said,
they demanded of them of Norinberge, faith, society, munition, vitayle, and a
great sum of money. But after much debating, all other conditions omitted,
what time they had paid them an hondreth thousand crowns, they promised them
peace as well for them selves as their fellows, by letters devised in most
ample wise.

Now therefore what time Marquis Albert assailed them, they make complainte to
them. And because Duke Maurice was not yet returned from Lintz, the Lantgraues
Son writing to them again the third day of May, from Gundelfynge, byddeth
them be of good comfort, And the fifth day after when Duke Maurice was
returned, they write both, and promise to keep conuenauntes, saying that this
act of the Marquis is clean besides their expectation, neither do they like
it, but will do all their endeavor, that they may recover their own, and will
also call back immediately such aid as they have lent him. When they of
Norinberge had received the letters of Marquis Albert, they wrote again the
same day, signifiyng what thing Duke Maurice and the princes had promised them
by composition, and say how that was the cause, that they sent no Ambassadors
to him. Wherefore they earnestly pray and beseech him that he will restore fully
the castle taken, and gratify his fellows herein. Three days after he wrote
again: For so much as he does not know, how they have compounded with them,
and yet it concerns the French king very much, unto whom he is no less
addicted than to the others, he requires to have saufeconduicte for a credible
man of his, whom he will send into their city, to se the instrument of their
accord. They follow his mind, and let him se it. But he nevertheless,
although Duke Maurice and his fellows were means and diligently entreated him
to the contrary, the.xi. day of May, writes to them again. And in the
French kings name especially does charge them, that within a few hours
they would answer him plainly, whether they will be obedient. And where he
received not, such answer as he would, the town and castle of Lightnawe he
spoyleth, burns, overthrows and makes even with the ground. And when he
had exacted money of the towns men, he caused them to swear to be true
subjects to him and to his cousin George Friderick, also Marquis of
Brandenburg, and besegeth the city. Wherefore the the Lantgraues son calls
again by and by two guidons of horsemen which he let him have against
Woulfgange, the master of the order, and commands to come unto him,
wherewith he was sore offended. He attempted therefore cruel war, and when he
had burned and spoiled an hondreth villages in their dominion, and about
Albertes cruelty to them of Normberg.
three score and ten manners and fermes of the citezens, and the churches also,
he sets on fire moreover an exceading great wood that they had, which
served not them only, but also other inhabiters thereby of timber and firewood,
and burned thereof above three thousand acres. And he had before this proclaimed
open war to all others, there aboutes that would not obey, both of the
nobility and others, but chiefly to ye Bishop of Bamberge, and of Wirtemburg,
whom also in this case he drove to most unreasonable conditions. And verily
the bishop of Bamberge, to save himself and his province from present Bamberge
redemeth peace dearelye.
danger, bought peace of him for wonderful losses. For he was feign to give
him.xx. towns and signories within his jurisdiction, and made him wrytinges of
the same, the.xix. day of May, and also permits him to have all his wards
and clientes. And the Bishop of Dirtemburge paid him two hondreth and twenty
thousand crowns, and also takes upon him and promyseth to pay his debtes,
which amounted to the sum of three hondreth and fifty thousand crowns. The
cities of Sweuia having compassion of this unworthy and lamentable fortune of
the Norinbergians, which were lately assembled at Auspurge (as before is said)
to the number of.xxvi. by Ambassadors chosen out of the whole number, make
intercession, especially they of Auspurge. And when they were come by
saufeco^duicte to Norinberge, alleging many reasons, they exhort them to
peace, and tell them of the taking of the strayte passages in the Alps, and of
the castle of Erenberge, and declare that the state both of Hongarie and
Italy is such, that there can be no aid nor succor looked for of any man.
After they exhibit the conditions propounded by Marquis Albert. They give them
thanks for their good will and pains taken, and declare both how the Marquis
has no cause to war against them, and also what was treated with Duke Maurice
and his fellows. And because the conditions be such, as partly they are not
able to perform them, and partly can by no means be excused to the Emperor
and king Ferdinando, they say, they will abide the extremity, and commit the
matter unto God. For they know them selves so clear, that they can be
contented to be judged herein not only by the Emperor, but by all other
Princes also, yea by the next friends and kinsfolks of the Marquis him self.
When the intercessours had reported these things again to the Marquis, and
had duly placed their words with terms apt and convenient, and he not only
relented nothing, but also threatened most cruel things. The fourth day of
June, they advertise them by their letters, that his mind is set all on
cruelty, and how they could not bring him to any more reasonable conditions.
And now the Marquis shoteth of his ordenaunce into the city, with much more
violence, than before, and one night makes the battery, more over to put the^
in the more terror, he burns one of the suburbs. And about the same time
came into the Camp to him George Thanberge, and William Schacthe, sent as
Ambassadors from Duke Maurice, and the Lantgraues son, to make peace. They,
taking to them the Ambassadors of the cities, which being in despair of the
matter, were else minded to depart, after a long and laborious treaty, at the
length persuade both parts, and conclude a peace. For the Marquis has his
army lately augmented, by Job Dalbeck and Christopher Olde^burge, Norinberge
has peace with ye Mar.
Earls, and Duke Maurice writing his letters to the senate, signified that he
was most grievously offended with this the Marquis doing, yet now could not
remedy it. The conditions of peace were these. They should pay two hondreth
thousand crowns, and deliver him six great pieces of artyllarie, with all
things furnished. They should bear their favor to the Princes confederated,
as they of Auspurg do. That he him self should again restore such things as
he had taken from them. Wherefore about the.xx. day of June, was levied the
siege of the most famous and mighty city in manner of all Germany, and best
furnished of all things, but especially most strongly fortified. The Marquis
full of lusty courage by reason of this lucky success, the.xx. day of June,
writes letters to them of Albert to the^ of Wolmes.
Woulmes out of his camp. Wherein was contained, how the Norinbergians, to
their exceading great hinderaunce, by him vanquished, had received conditions
of peace, and would do what so he and his fellows shall command them. Now
therefore is he determined to besege them also, but far otherwise, and much
more straightly, than he did of late. And if fortune favor his purpose, he
will spare no mankind, that is past seven years old, except they return in
time, and immediately sending Ambassadors, do fully satisfy him and his league
friends, and also make their purgation of their rebellion lately committed. And
what they will do herein, he commands them to send plain word, by the
brynger of these letters. Unto the which letters they answer briefly, that
whylest they be saufe, and so long as they have life, they will do no such
thing as he demands.

The French king passing out of Germany, with his army divided in three parts,
came at the last to Walderfing, which is a little town of the duchy of
Lorayne by ye River of Sare. There uniting his army, the.xxv. day of May,
marching forth and passing over the river of Mosel, what time he came into ye
The French king destroys The Emperor country.
land of Lutcemburg, he distroied all before him with spoiling and burning,
provoked by the example of Rosseme, as they the^ selves report, and recouereth
the town of Asteney, void of soldiers to defend it. For Marten Rosseme was
returned home. Again pitching his tents, he takes a little town by
surrender called Danuillers, after that also Iueye, one of ye chiefest fortes
there. In the same town was Count Mansfield Ernestus, governor of the whole
country, with the flower of the youth there with him. Al they were taken
prisoners. Afterward was the town spoiled of the outrageous soldiers against
the kings will, as they report. Now let us return to Duke Maurice. He, for
to treat a peace, as I said, was gone to Passa we. There he repeting the
treaty that was at Lintz, the Thassemble at Passawe.
first of June, propou^deth and declares al things more at large. There were
themperours Ambassadors, king Ferdinando, Albert Duke of Bauier, the Bishops
of Salisburge and Eistet, and of all the chief Princes of Germany, the
Ambassadors also of Cleave and of Wirtemberge, and many others besides. He
complains that the state of thempire which chiefly ought to be The co^plain
te of Princes Elect.
free, is governed by strangers, that thauthoritie of the Princes Electours is
deminished, and that many things be done with out their advise and knowledge.
That certain things also are plucked away, and alienated from thempire. How
means are devised, that thautoritie of electing the emperor may be taken from
the^, in common assemblies the Electours voices are in a manner neglected, that
the private conuentions of the Electours, are for a certain fear omitted, and
their liberties infringed, whylest the chamber imperial receives those, that
appeal from the^, contrary to the ancient custom. That the controversies of
the states Imperial are purposly maynteined, and be never accorded, before
either party have sustained loss and damage. How in the Emperors court a
man can hardly be heard speak, neither is his matter exactly known, chiefly
for that they understand not the tongue, and that there is much loss not
only of costs, but of time also: In open assemblies matters are handled
nothing friendly, and if any man propounde ought for the common wealth, it is
taken in evil part. That Germany is sore impoueryshed and beggered with those
often and daily conuentions, and at home oftentimes are many things neglected,
and neither yet is the public state any whyt amended, yea it is made worse
and more intricate. By strayghte proclamations it is prohibited, that no man
serve in foreyne wars. That such as be reconciled, are bound, that they
shall not war against the Emperors country, and so are plucked from the
Empire. In the Protestau^tes war such as served their Lords, according to
their duty, were punished by the purse, such as in the same war remained in
the^perours frendshyp, were commanded to pay also, and that their lands and
goods should be put to sale, unless they paid immediately, and their
Ambassadors, because they did not by and by assent, were commanded under
pain of death, that they should not depart from the court. That foreine
soldiers have been oftentimes brought into Germany, and the last war being
finished, were distributed hither and thither into Provinces, which have done
many things dissolutely and vitiously, and have gloried of the conquest of
Germany, and have said, how it should be annexed (...) the Emperors
patrimony, and that in the head cities should be builded castelles and fortes.
How much ordenaunce and warlike munition, was, as it were in a mockery,
carried out of Germany into foreine nations. How diverse men, for a certain
ambition, have caused the arms of ye Princes of Germany to be set upon ye
gunnes which they made for themselves, as though they had taken them from the^.
How there be set forth books, and that with the Emperors privilege, which
sound to the great reproach and infamy of Germany, as though it were
conquered and brought in bondage. That in common assemblees, under the name of
the Emperors provinces, certain men were placed among the Princes and states,
and this to be wrought through secret devises, that the number being augmented,
they may prevail by the number of voices. How four years past was ordained
the judgment of the chamber imperial, and laws made by a very few, which were
after published, to the great hynderaunce of many, especially of them, that be
of the Protestauntes Religion. For all those are utterly excluded from that
benche. Wherefore the thing it self requires, that those laws be better
skanned in the next conuention. These and such other like things he
propounds, and for as much as they chiefly concern the Emperor, he
requires that they be redressed out of hand, and that the Empire be restored
to the fourmer dignity, and that others be not permitted to delude and
contempne the same.

The intercessours conferring together, judged nothing amiss in these
requests. Howebeit to the intent, that both the Emperors dignity should be
maintained, and might so much more easily be persuaded, they think, that many
things, which concern the reformation of the state public, may be right
well differred till a general conuention of the Empire. There was present the
French Ambassador, Fraxineus: Who The oration of the French Ambas.
the third day of June made an oration before the Princes. How between the
Frencheme^ and the Germans, in old time, and before the name of Francons was
known, there was so Tha^^nitie of Fre^chme^ and Germans.
great lykenes of life and manners, that ye Germains be the same people, which
the Romans in times past called the brethren of the Frenchemen. But after
that the Francons had planted them selves in France, both nations were so
united, that there was one Empire, one Prince, and the same laws for both.
Afterward, when an alteration chanced, and that thempyre was deuolued to the
Germains: The Dukes of Saxon and other Emperors, for that they had their
original of the kings of France, had continual amity with the Frenchmen, in
so much that Philip king of France, caused ye ancient league, which could
scant be read for the old antiquity thereof, to be written out in golden
letters, and laid up in an holyer place. And verily not without just cause. For
during that league of amity, the common wealth of either nation was in deed
most flourishing. And certainly the force of Germany was tha^ so great, that it
prescribed laws, not only to the Hongarians, Bohemers, Polonia^s, and Deanes,
but also to the Italians. And ye kings of France, for the maintenance of
religion, have warred many times against thennemies of Christendom. The
Saracenes and Turks, both in Asia. Affricke and Europe, and have had most
noble victories. But after chanced a time more unfortunate, when certain
Emperors as newly entered, and not very Germans, nor worthy of ye dignity,
have forsaken that amity with ye kings of France, and have induced great
calamity to the common wealth. But this sore plage, through Gods benefit, was
healed by the noble house of the Dukes of Lutcemburg, out of the which have
issued certain Emperors, men of great virtue, and linked most assuredly to the
kings of France. For the father of the emperor Charles the fourth, died in
battle for the king of France. The like good will bear also the Princes of
Austriche, amongst others Albert the first, who neither for promise, nor
threatening of the high Bishops, could be brought to war against France.
These things he recites for this intent, that they may see, how evil certain
councillors and ministers of the most puissaunt Emperor Charles the fyfte,
provide for the common wealth, whylest they work not this thing only, that
they pluck a sonder the one from the other, these two most excellent nations:
but also through their craft and subtlety have brought this to pass long
since, that the most noble Prince, king Fraunces, was judged an ennemie, his
cause not hard. This do they to their own private gain, but to the exceading
great hinderasice of the co^mmon wealth. For how hard it were for them, during
the amity of the two nations to infringe the liberty of Germany, and to
build up that their kingdom, it does hereof sufficiently appear, for The
liberty of Germany restored by ye power of France.
that they being now affrayde of the force of France, be not so importune as
they were, nor do not so much urge that Spanyshe yoke and bondage. These be
verily they which by entreaty and tributes, obteyning peace of the Turk,
under the color of Religion, and obedience, have brought in dissentions and
factions into Germany, who aided with the power of Germaynes, have warred
against Germany, which have exacted money of all men, and made the State of
the Empire miserable, by placing here and there garrisons of Spanyardes by
vnarmyng the armaries, and openyng the way to confiscation. For the matter is
brought to that pass, that both the seal of the Empire, and the judgment of
the chamber, and also the right and liberty of assemblies depend only upon
the pleasure of the Bishop of Arras. For what example is this or what equity
is it, that such as to get their living serve in foreine wars should be
therefore executed, outlawed, and with great rewards set forth? be in danger
of murtheryng, to omit in the mean season so many murders, lecherous acts,
spoylynges and robbinges of towns, and especially the handlyng of Religion,
which has not been after one manner, but diverse according to the time.
Certainly what so ever has been done these many years now, tends all to
this end: that, contrary to the laws of the Empire, king Ferdinando being
herunto either compelled, or else by fair promesses allured, the Princes also
by a certain fear and terror subdued, the Prince of Spain might be made
Emperor. And should not noble courages The way opened for ye Prince of Spain
to be Emper.
wyshe for death rather, than to behold ye light of ye Sun in such distress
and miseries? Assuredly there can no man be imagined so very a coward or so
barbarouse, who^ these things would not move. Wherefore no man ought to marvel,
that in the end there should arrise some Princes, and amongst them Duke
Maurice thelectour of Saxony, which thought it their parts even with ye hazard
of their lives to recover ye liberty of their native country. And they, being
of the^ selves not able, nor of power sufficient to sustein such a charge
alone, have desired ye aid of the king of France. And he doubtless setting a
part ye displeasure of former years, has not only made the^ partakers of al
his fortunes, but has also employed him self wholly to the same business,
making a league with them, wherein amongst other things it is provided, that
they may not co^pounde with the ennemie, but by the kings consent. Howbeit,
Duke Maurice, although he be tied with that same bond, yet, for ye weal of
his country, and to follow the mind of king Ferdinando requiring him
hereunto, has lately demanded of the most christian king, how he could be
content to have peace. Which thing chanced unto him in deed some what contrary
to his expectation, for that, considering his benefit is so great, he supposed
that in matters touching him, he should not have sent to him a far of, but to
have devised with him presently. Neuerthe less because he sets much more by
public, tha^ by his own private profits, he would deny nothing to a Prince
of his confederacy. Wherefore if the wounds of the common wealth may be
healed, as they ought, and from henceforth assurance made, yt they break not
out again, if the captine Princes may be released, upon such conditions as be
in the league expressed. Moreover, in case the old leagues of France with the
Empire, and this new confederacy also made of late with the Princes, may so be
confirmed, yt they may take place for ever, if these thines, I say, may be
brought to pass, he is so well affected toward the common wealth, that not
only he will assent gladly to the treaty of peace, but also will give God
hearty thanks, that his advise and help hereunto has not wanted. As touching
his private matters, for so much as the Emperor deteineth many things by
force, and has made war upon no just cause, the king thinks it reason,
that he ye has first done wrong, should first seek also to make satisfaction.
He verily, althoug he neither distruste his force nor yet his cause, will so
demean him self, yt it may be well perceived both how desirous of peace he
is, and how willing also to gratify Duke Maurice and them all. Hereunto the
Princes answer. How that recital of antiquity repeted of fourmer memory,
concerning the coniu^ctio^ of France The princes answer his oration.
and Germany was to them right joyful, and no less pleasant to hear, that
the king prefers the common wealth above his private commodities, and is not
against, but that the Princes confederate may conclude a peace with the
Emperor. For that it should so be, it is for the profit, not only of one
nation, but also of all Europe, which afflicted with civil discord, ten death
to destruction. And such conditions of peace, as the king requires, they
doubt not but that they may be obtained. For the Emperor both before this
time, and also in this trouble thinks well of the common wealth, and will not
have the liberty of Germany deminished. There is good hope moreover that he
will shortly deliver the captive Princes. But that both the old leagues should
be renewed and the new confirmed, the king of his wisdom understands, that
in this same conuention so great a matter can not be finished. Nevertheless they
wyshe unfeignedly, that the same amity, which has been always between both
nations may remain ferme and unviolable. That such private suites as he has
with the Emperor, might be appeased, they both covet chiefly, and also will
refuse no pains and travel therein. And where as the king affirms that the
Emperor deteineth diverse things that are his and signifies plainly, that he
has things to lay claim to, they think it not against reason that he show,
what thing that is. For they are minded to prefer the controversy to the
Emperor, and be as means therein. And they desire very much, that the king
would accept these things in good part. Now as concerning the alliance
between the Germaynes and French men, I have spoken in the eight book. And
that which the French Ambassador speaks here of the house of Lutcemburge,
The house of Luce^burg
thus it stands. The Earl of Lutcemburge Henry, had a son named Henry,
which was after made Emperor, the seventh of that name, he had a son Called
John, which by marriage was made king of Boheme. Who aided Philip Ualose the
French king, against the king of England Edward the third, going him self
with him to the field, and the battle The battle of Cressie.
being foughten, where the Englishmen had the victory, he was slain, and
among others, left a son called Charles, which afterward was made
Emperor, the fourth of that name, father to Wenceslaus and Sigismunde, which
were after both Emperors, and this Sigismunde also king of Hongary and Boheme,
the procurer of the counsel of Constance. Albert of Austriche of whom he
speaks, the son of Raffe the Emperor, when he was Emperor he observed
perfect amity Albert of Austriche.
with Philip le beau king of France, notwithstanding that the Bishop of Rome
Boniface the eight, did wonderfully incense him unto war. Duke Maurice
besides the deliverance of his father in law, urged two things chiefly. One,
that of such matters, as annoyed the liberty of Germany, and the which he
him self had recited by name, king Ferdinando Maximilia^ his son, and the
intercessours themselves, should now forthwith examine, and according to the
laws and custom of Germany, determine the same. Another was that peace might
be granted to Religion, and that no man should he molested therefore till such
time as the whole controversy were fully reconciled. This way did not
thintercessours disco^mend: but the emperor by his Ambassadors declares, what
lack he finds therein, and thought it reason, that those which had been
faithful to him, and therefore had chanced into extreme misery, should be
first recompe^sed their loss. After much debating, what time diverse points
were mittigated, they agreed at ye length, that the third day of July, the
Emperor should answer directly, and that the war should cease in the mean
time. Wherefore thintercessours writing their letters the.xvi. day of June
exhort the emperor unto peace. When yt castle of Ereberg was taken, and
afterward Inspruck spoiled, I showed you, how the Princes, retorning through
thalpes about the end of May came back again to Fiessa. And marching from
thence, the.xix. day of June, pitched their tents at Eistet, which is ye
Bishops town, bordring upon Bauier, and there the whole army longed sore for
Duke Maurice coming, not without great thought and carfulnes. Who coming
thither at the length, shows them in what case the matter stood: and the
last day of June, he retourneth from thence to Passaw by post horses, that he
might be there at the day appointed, and his fellow Princes removing their
camp, the next morning, the fourth day after came to Roteburg, which is a
town nere unto Francony by the river of Duber. But Marquis Albert
nevertheless pursued his enterprise, and having driven the city of Norinberge
to make Marquis Albert warreth for himself.
their peace, he compelled also the nobility and states in these parties, to
be at commandment. For albeit he maintained the common cause at the first, as
in the writing set forth he professed to do, yet was he not of the same league,
and wha^ the siege of Ulmes was levied, he went about his private affairs,
whether it were for that he would win to him self alone, what soever the
chance of war had given him, or that he myslyked Duke Maurice his doing, or
else moved by the French king, was bent otherwise. Notwithstanding those that
he took the faith of he commanded to perform the same fidelity also to his
fellows. Afterward inuading the province of the Arch^bishop of Mentz, by the
River Meyne, does exceading much harm with burning and spoiling, and
demands of him a wonderful sum of money. And where diverse made
intercession, neither yet could they agree upon the sum. The Archebyshop,
first synkynge his great Artylarie in the Rhyne, the first day of July fled
away, to save him self.

The self same time also, Marquis Albert, which left nothing unattempted,
wylleth the Archebyshop of Treuers to deliver unto him the chiefest castle of
his dominion, which is situated, where the Rivers of Rhine and Mosell mete,
upon an high hill, naturally strong, and very commodious. And he said, how he
required this of him in the French kings name. He, after he had conferred
with his counsel, sent him word yt he could not accomplish his request
herein. For as much as the Princes intercessours in the latter part of their
answer that they made to the French Ambassador (as before is mentioned)
said how they thought it reason, that the king should declare what he required
of the Emperor. The Ambassador, by the king advertised, when he was with the
army besides Eistet, the.xix. day of June, writes to them again, how the
king has attempted this war, for none other cause doubles, The French kings
answer to thin tercessours.
but to profit the whole common wealth, and chiefly to restore the liberty of
Germany sore opressed, what time certain Princes had long and much requested
him to the same. And assuredly sought no private gain to him self therein,
and that may the thing it self bear witness. For he had taken nothing at al in
Germany, where it had not been hard for him to have done. He permitted the
Princes also to war freely as they list. And albeit that in the mean time
that he himself lay still with his army by the River of Rhine, his ennemies
had invaded France, yet did he not once remove till he was advertised by Duke
Maurice, that such things might be obtained by peaceable means, for the
which this war was attempted. Which thing known, he was not a little glad,
when he saw the thing proceed, after their hearts desire. For his advise and
counsel was, first that the Princes should not neglect, so goodly an occasion
as this was, neither disceiue them seluws, or by others be abused, as they were
before. Moreover, for so much as he had showed so notable a token of his good
will and fidelity, that the amity of both nations might assuredly be
established, to the intent that he himself may afterward have better leisure to
se unto other commodities of the common wealth: And because Duke Maurice has
demanded of him, in what sort he would be accorded, this is his opinion, that
he says how ye Emperor moved war against him without any just cause. And
the kings of France be not wont to desire peace of their ennemy, especially
of such one, as neither in power nor other thing they be inferiors to. Now to
propounde any thing (unless there were certain hope to obtain yt same) he
sees no cause why. And as touching them selves he supposes, that they will
require nothing of him, but that may stand with his honor and dignity. And
he so loves them again, and so estemeth them, that in case he may se them
treat the common peace of the whole world, he would for their sakes give over
a great part of his right. And is contented also, that they shall both hear
and determine his requests, so that the Emperor refuse not to do likewise,
and wysheth greatly that for the same cause, there might some conuention be had
as soon as might be. And if it may so be, than shall all men understand, both
how much he loves the common wealth, and also how far from the truth are
those things, which are bruted of him by his adversaries, concerning the
Turkishe league. But if these things can take no place, and that all
consultations be referred only to his discretion, neither can obtain that
league of amity with the Germans which by good deserte he looked for, the
blame ought not to be imputed to him, if there chance further trouble to
arise. These letters were red before the Princes the first day of July. When
Duke Maurice was come to Passawe at the day, on the morrow was brought the
Emperors answer to king Ferdinando. Than he when the Princes were set said,
how the Emperor in deed had written his mind, but did not assente to many
things. And for so much as it is so, it is not needful to declare
expressly, what thing he has answered to the rest. Nevertheless to the intent
it may appear, how greatly he himself desires peace, and how well he wysheth
unto Germany, he will go with great expedition to the Emperor, doubting not
but that he shall persuade him. Wherefore he desires ernestly, that Duke
Maurice would be content to expect so long as he may go and come, which
shall not pass eight days at the most. Which thing when he refused
immediately, the king was very importune: But that was in vain, and Duke
Maurice calling unto him the Princes and Ambassadors says, how they them
selves know right well, which have been present and privy to all doings for
the space of a D. Maurice weary of delays.
month, that he has left nothing undone, that he might either by study or
travel, work to conclude a peace. And doubted not but yt they would assuredly
witness with him the same. Where fore he requires them, yt they would still
bear him their good will, and help to further the common cause of Germany,
for he may grant no further respite, for this long treaty is had in
suspicion of his fellows already. Whereunto, when they had made a gentle
answer, commending his good will, they desire king Ferdinando, that he in
themperours name would make a plain determination. For they suppose that what
soever he did, the Emperor would confirm and ratify. Unto this Ferdinando
answered, that his brother had given him no such authority. For than would he
not take so much pains to travel to and fro: For he might in no wise pass
the bo^des by him prescribed. I showed you before how the Princes that were
intercessours, by their letters written the.xvi. day of June, exhorted
the emperor to peace. Unto the which letters the last of June thempe The Empe.
letters to the intercessours
rour answers from Uillace. How from the time he first received the crown
imperial, he has ever desired peace, yea and now wishes for nothing else.
Wherefore there is no cause that they should commend the same so greatly to him,
but unto them, which be thauthours of these co^motions. And that they would so
do, he requires the^ by the faith, they owe unto him. As touching his own
private affairs, he will for their sakes grant very much. And concerning the
whole pacification, he has written his mind to his brother king Ferdinando,
of whom they shall hear al things. Unto the which letters they write Their
answer to the Emperor.
again the fifth day of July, what time king Ferdinando returned to the
Emperor. How they at his request and desire came first unto this treaty, and
so much the rather, for that he promised to do any thing for the common
wealths sake. And how they have through their exceading great labor,
carefulnes, and diligence, found out the way of peace. Wherefore they beseech
him eftsoon, and that most intierly that he would have some respect to the
common country. Many, and the chiefest states of thempire, keeping their faith
unto him, have already sustained great calamity, and now the condition of
things is such, and the occasion of deliberation to be had, so brief, that
the other Princes and states, especially such as are nere the fire, although
they would never so feign perform unto him al faith and loialtie, yet can
they not so do, no they are constreined to consult by what means they may
spedely esche we the present calamity and distructio^. And in case he refuse
peace, inte^ding to make war, there will doubtless most greuouse and
perilous alterations arrise thereof in Germany, which afterward will redounde
to his provinces also. Wherefore there were nothing better, than that he would
content him self with the conditions of peace, which they with so great
travel have procured, especially, since ye chiefest points were first
approved at Lintz, the form and fotesteppes of the which treaty they have
followed herein. Again for as much as all such things, which properly
concern his dignity are pourposly referred to the co^uention of thempire, to
the end they may there more gently and quietly be treated. The same day,
wherein this was done, Duke Maurice departs thence, and when he was come to
his fellows D. Maurice retourneth to his fellows.
the.xi. day of July, which that time encamped at Mergetheme, he shows them,
what is done, and says how king Ferdinando is ryden in post to the Emperor,
and supposes that very shortly he will send of his counselors, which shall
bring a full and determinate answer. And in this doubtful state of things,
least they should sit still and do nothing, and because there was at Franckefurt
a garrison of the Emperors of.xvii. enseignes of fotemen, and a thousand
horsemen, at the leading of Conrade Hansteyne, so that they of Hessebye were in
no small daunder, they condescended to go thither. Wherefore when they had done
much harm to Woulfgange, Master of Prusse, by burning and spoiling his
country, where they were at the same time, marching forward through the land
of the Archebyshop of Mentz, the.xvii. day of July they come to Fra^cfurt. But
the Princes and intercessours and Ambassadors, sent immediately after Duke
Maurice and his fellows into their camp Ambassadors, which might mollify
their minds and persuade the^ to peace. During the which siege, George Duke
of Megelburge, adjoined unto Duke Maurice, even he which first of all men moved
war against them of Maydenburge, was slain with a great piece. What time
they began first to George Du. of Megelbu. slain.
besiege Franckfurt, the Princes confederated desire a great quantity of
batteryng pieces of the Paulsgraue Electour, who says them nay ones or twyse:
But when he might none otherwise chose, and they threatened to come with their
whole army, he gave them eight of the best he had, with all their furniture.
King Ferdinando retourning to Passawe at the day, which was the.xiii. day of
July, declares to the intercessours what the Emperors mind was in every
thing.

Uerely that the matters concerning the Empire, which I said before Duke
Maurice had propounded, should not be Conditions of peace offered by the
Emperor.
heard of certain commissioners severally, but of all men in general in the
whole assemblee of the Empire. Again that the cause of Religion should quietly
remain unto the next conuention of the Empire. In the which conuention, that
which shall seem good to be done therein from henceforth by the common advise of
the states, the same to be confirmed and ratified. The Emperor also ye.xi. day
of July answers thintercessours to their last letters, yt like as they have
by their letters so has his brother king Ferdina^do treated with him diligently
to accept And he in deed would gladly have pleased both parts, but he is for
diverse causes let, which he declares to his brother: for it lies not in
him to co^firm and approve al things indifferently: and where by thoccasion of
this co^motion, diverse, without al desert are fallen into much calamity, yt is
he as sorry as one man living: yet has not the same chanced through confidence
in him, which put no man in that hope, whereunto he should trust: For although he
sent unto certain chief princes, yt they should remedy this evil growing, at the
beginning of yt tumult, promising the^ al his endeavor, yet was not this his
minde^ therefore, yt whatsoever should be propounded, he would allow ye same: for
such things as co^cern the hole Empire, he thinks reso^ they should be referd
to the publik asse^blies: at the which time verily if any man shall bring forth
any just complaint of him, he will not fail to do his duty, which verily he has
not omitted hitherto: For since as yet there has no such request ben brought
unto him, which nevertheless ought to have been done, before war had been
attempted, he could not conjecture, what thing should be required of him, much
les give instructions to his ambassadors sent to Passaw, what they should answer
to every point, which in deed for thoffice and dignity of his person, he
inte^deth to do him self presently: where therefore he aloweth not al things yt
many perauenture go about to persuade him to, there is no cause why any man
should reprehend this in him: but those yt be intercessors ought rather to
persuade and exhort the^ to reasonable and moderat condicio^s: especially since
they se, how he does hardly at the least, and not before he is of necessity
co^straind, attempt war, which he intends not to follow now nether, if he may
choose, and in case they ca^ devise some reasonable and convenient way of peace:
And seeing the case stands thus, his trust is, yt they will declare all
fidelity to him rather, being their chief magistrate, than that they should give
ear to such, as contrary to their duty, have made league with their ennemies,
and raised up co^motions: he perceives, and is not ignorant what evils
approach near, when both armies are brought forth to ioyn in battle, and is
exceadingly moved with the losses of the common weal, and chiefly, of
thinnocent people, and therefore minedeth peace, as he has done always, and
will refuse no condition reasonable: and it is not to be ascribed unto him, that
in the mean season, whilst he consulted of the conditions sent unto him at ii.
several times, certain states susteind great losses: For there was a truse all the
time of the intercession: and whereas, during the same time, the Marquis Albert
afflicted diverse, ye could not he do withal: For even from the beginning was
he ever against the treatye of peace? Moreover in answering the same, he never
made any delay: And if they had perseuered in the same way, which by the^ was
first propounded, and afterward altered, answer might have been much sooner and
more plainlye made, yea if they had not shronke from the treaty of Lintz,
whereof they the^ selves make mention, al things might have been concluded long
since: where therefore they se how he is minded toward ye commo^welth, he
earnestly requires them, that together with his brother Ferna^do, unto who^ he
has opened him self wholly, they would bring them to reasonable conditions, and
therein have respect to the wealth and dignity of thempire: for certainly he will
use the same lenity and peaceable wais from henceforth that he has done
hitherto, for yt he abhors very much al civil war: but in case peace can not
upon these co^dicions be established, he looks for all fidelity of them,
which are bounden to him. He answered than also by king Fardinando to the
letters of the French ambassador, red unto the Princes, as before is said. How
he had peace with the French king, which he observed diligently: And although
he did many things arrogantly and proudly, yet has he dissembled the same for
a common quietness: but he, albeit he promised by his ambassador very largely,
and pretended no such thing, made war against him both by Sea and land, before
he had proclaimed the same: How be it he has offered this condition all
ready, that if Duke Moris, electoure, should in his name bring any reasonable
conditions of peace, and to former acts agreeable, he would not refuse them: but
there is no certain or determinate thing propounded, and this his drift, that
where he has laid the blame of breaking the peace in him, he says how the way
of concord must be set open by him also.

Moreover he seeks to purge him self of the turkish confederacy, as though he
had wrong done him: but all this is wholly forged: for if ye case shall so
require, there may be brought to light and showed the commentaries of Aremont,
the french ambassador, written at Constantinople Thambassadors comme^taries
intercepted.
for a memorial, and sent to the king by one Cost a ce^turion, there are forth
coming also, and to be seen the letters of the Turks lieuetenant in Hongary,
sent at this time to the Princes confederated and others but intercepted,
whereby it appears evidently, yt he was the causer of the hurt, that the
Turkishe nauye did the last year, and motioned also that the like might have been done this same year, and that he is right sorry, that there is no more harm
don. To be brief, that is his intent and purpose, and the Emperors of Turks
also, utterly to undo him and his brother Ferdinando, to the intent they may
afterward bring the whole common wealth, but chiefly Germany into extreme
danger and distres: but how well these things do agree with his fair promesses,
and what care he takes for the wealth of Germany, any man may easilye
perceive: For the thing it self declares what his mind is: For that the
chiefest states of thempire were this year sore vexed and afflicted, and utterly
distroid, that many others were in most pearil and danger, yt through the help
of the Germains, that linketh the^ selves with him, certain places of thempire
were brought into his tirannical power, and are now by him also fortified, the
whole blame is to be ascribed unto him: seeing therefore that the case stands
thus, he cannot see what credit may be given to his ambassadors letters utterly
forged, and fained: and in deed after his opinion it had been much better to
have rejected the same, than to have received any such kind of answer: and if
they consider al thing diligently, he douteth not but they shall perceive, what
he by his ambassador intends and goes about: and for so much as that same
writing makes not for this present treaty, he thinks it nothing nedeful to
answer any more to the same. About the xiiii. of July, king Ferdinando, sent
Henrye of the noble house of the Plauians, Burgraue of Meissen, and chancellor
of Boheme, unto the camp before Frankfurt. Who coming to duke Moris the
xxiiii. of July, after the matters were a while debated, at the Duke Moris
admits peace.
last parswadeth him to peace. Wherefore the last day of July, contrary to many
men's expectation, they concluded of the whole matter, as hereafter ye shall
hear, among other reasons which he had to persuade, this was one also. Let
him consider with him self, unless he receive the conditions, what danger he
stands in, both of the Emperor, which has now a puissant army, and also by
the Duke of Saxon Ihon Fridericke, whom themperor having enlarged will
incontinently send home: Let the Lantzgraues son also consider into what
pearill he shall bring both his father being prisonner, and also his whole
province. The gunnes of the Paulsgraue elector, which he was constrained to
lend them, as before is said, when the peace was made, were received into the
town, least they should come into the hands of Marquis Albert. In the monthe
of July the French king having taken certain towns of the Duchy of Lucemburge,
as before is said, brought his army into Artois, The French king discharges
his army.
but without any notable exploict done, to the end he might relieve his army
from travel and infection, discharges his power, and him self returns home,
having fortified such places, as he had taken with garrisons and
fortifications. Over all the which things he made governor the Duke of Guise, a
Prince of great authority through out France. And he commanded the Duches of
Loraine widow to depart the country, which was near to themperor by his
sister. She, the xii. of July came to Strasburge, and there remained certain dais
with her husbands sister, which was also commanded by yt french king to
depart. To Strasburge came also, driven from his country, ye forenamed
Wuolfgange, master of thorder of Knighthode in Germany, which in the consistory
of thempire has the next place to tharchbishops.

Marquis Albert who joined him self by the way to his fellows Marquis Albert y
scourge of priests.
going to Franckfort, leaving them at the siege, goes to the Rhine, and
subdueth Wuormes, and Spiers, exacting of them both money and also munition.
Which way someuer he went, the priests either were fled away before, or else
changed their apparel, and dissembled their profession and order. And what
time the army came near unto Frankonie, the bishops there abouts, and the other
prelates of the same order, sought to save them selves by flight: and
tharchbishop of Mentz, who for fear of the Marquis was gone long before, the
xxv. day of July came fleing to Strasburge, and lodgyng there one night, passed
over the Rhine. The bishop of Spiers a very aged man, fled to Saberne, where he
died not long after. The Bishop of Wuormes, through the mediatio^ of the
Paulsgraue, returned home, after he had paid xii. thousand Crowns. When he had
taken these cities before said.

Marquis Albert the xxviii. of July, sending his letters to the Senate of
Strausburge, requires that he and his fellows may His requests to Strasbo.
have access into their city at al times, and there to place a garrison when
neade shall be, and they to show them fidelity, as well in his own, as also in
the French kings name: For all this war, says he, is moved to revenge al
Germany: nether shall it be honest or profitable for them to resist this
enterprise: For to the intent they may bring this to pass, therefore has he
and his fellows joined together The answer of Strausbo.
again now al their power. To which the Senate two dais after writes again.
These many years now they have wished for no thing more than that the true
Religion of Christ, and also thancie^t siberty might flourish throughout al
Germany, and to this end have they bent not only all their doings and
counsels, but also have alwais imploid hitherto their money and goods, and are
now of ye same mind also, nether will they at any time fail either the wealth or
dignity of the common country, for so much as they are able at all times to
perform: They know moreover that this is their bounden duty, for the same oath
and fidelity, by the which they are bounden to yt Emperor: And seeing it is so,
there needs no further declaration of their will: The king of France also,
what time he was in Alsatia, had demanded no such thing of them: Again, that
writing, whereof he makes mention, setforthe by the Princes confederated, was
not sent nor showed unto them: Wherefore they desire him to accept this
satisfaction, and work no violence to them nor to their country. In this self
same instant Marquis Albert being advertised, that duke Moris intended to make
peace, leuing at Spiers a garrison returns with his army to Franckfurt, and
renueth the siege, which Duke Moris having made peace, had forsaken, pitching
his tents on the other side of the town, on this side the river of Meyne upon
the higher ground somewhat, from whence he might very commodiously beat the town
with his ordinance. And this pacification he took most displeasantly, and
spoke evil words of duke Moris, and would not be comprised therein. The
conditions of peace be these. That the Princes confederated shall leave their
armure before the xii. day of August, and so discharge their army, that they
may serve king Farnando, if he so will, and neither annoye themperoure nor
Germany At the same day also the Lantzgraue, being set at liberty, Conditions
of peace.
shall be delivered at his castle of Rinfelse, which he has upon the Rhine,
putting in first surety, to observe couenaunts given by the Emperor at Hale in
Saxony: They also which at the same time became sureties for him, Duke Moris
thelector of Brandenburge and Wuolfgange Duke of Sainebricke, renewing their
obligation enter again into bonds: The suit that the Lantzgraue has with the
Earl of Nassow for the Lordship of Chats, shall be examined by the Princes
Electors, and of such also as both the plaintiff, and also the defendaunt
shall assign to the same matter: of the which afterward themperor shall choose
out six, which shall determine the case, yet so, that the matter be discussed
within two years space. Within six months, the Emperor shall hold an
assemble of the Empire, to consult chiefly, how and by what meaue the
dissension of Religion may best be appeased: In the mean time all men shall
observe peace, and no man shall be molested for religion: and what so ever
shall be decreed, concerning the manner of appeasing Religion, by the common
assent of the states, and by the authority of the Emperor, that is to wit, that
the controversy may be quieted by godly and rightful ways, the same to be
firm and stable: Unto the judicial place or Chamber of the Empire shall be
admitted also those, which are of the Protestants Religion: All other
things, which proprely concern the dignity and liberty of Germany, ought to
be entreated of in the conuention of thempire: Otto Henry the Paulsgraue is
also permitted freely to enjoy his land and dominion: during this war so
many as by giving their faith to the Princes confederated, have bounden them
selves unto them, shall be free from all bonds, and their own men, as before:
they that have sustained any damage in this warly tumulte, shall commence none
action therefore, against those that have done it: yet shall it be the part of
themperor and states, in the next assemble to devise some mean, whereby they
may receive some recompense for the losses they have received.

As concerning the French king, for so much as matters of thempire concern him
nothing, it shall be lawful for him to declare unto duke Moris, such private
actions as he has against themperor yt they may after be related to
themperor: The outlawes are received to mercy, so as they attempt nothing
hereafter against themperor, and the other states, so that they also, which serve
in the French kings wars, return again into Germanye within three
months, clean forsaking him and his service: he that shall break this peace,
shall be judged an enemy. Unto all these things, the princes that were there
present, of the chiefest dignity, and the deputies of others subscribed. For
this pacificatio^ was divided at Passaw, which was signed also by themperor.
When this peace was concluded, Fraxineus, the French kings ambassador
retourneth home. And certainly the king took this composition grievously: but
hearing, that the Lantzgraue should be in great danger, except this compact
were made, he assented, and sent again the pledges safe into Germany. The
third day of August, Duke Moris, and ye Lantzgraues son, departinge from
Frankfurt, go two several ways: This man into Hesse, and the other leads his
army to Donauerde, and sends them down the river of Thonawe into Hongary,
against the Turk inuading, but that legion which was under the leding of
Riseberge, passing over the river of Moene, went to Marquis Albert, not
without the great care of the Princes, which feared, least themperor would
take an occasion hereby, not to dimisse the Lantzgraue. Marquis Albert liyng
before Frankfurt, where he might have been comprised in the peace, and would
Marquis Albert refuses the peace.
not. The ix. day of August he departs thence, and tra^sporting his army over
the rhine, ineampeth besides Mentz, and brought the citezens into his
subjection. About thend of July, themperor returning from Uillace to Insprucke,
and the eight day after departing thence, and marchinge through Bauier, with
Almaignes, Bohemers, Italians, and Spaniardes, which at the beginning of July
arrived at Genes, at the conduit of the Duke of Alba, the xx. day of August
came to Auspurge. Tharchbishop of Mentz, wha^ he had wandered certain days in
Swenia, so sone as he understood of the Emperors coming, he takes his journey
thither. At this present time they of Senes, through the procurement and aid of
the french king, cast out a garrison of Spaniards, and pull down a castle,
that was begone there to be builded by themperors commandment and recover their
former liberty. In the mean season Marquis Albert imposes a great some of
money to thecclesiasticall persons, especially of Mentz and Spiers: when the
same could not be levied, by reason that many were fled, he spoyleth the
churches of either city, and began to take the lead of the cathedral church at
Spier, but at the request of the Senate he surceased: And at Mentz he burns
the bishops castle, standinge by the Rhine, his own lodging, and five
churches. Moreover all the ships, yea those, that were laden with wine and
wheat: And calling away those soldiers of his, that he had there placed in
garrison, marches toward the borders of Treuers. The xiii. day of August,
Herman, archbishop of Collon, a pure aged man, ended his life in his native
country, The death of Herman Archbishop of Colon. His wish.
and had such end, as he desired. For he had many times wished that either he
might setforth the doctrine of the gospel, and put in good order the churches of
his province, or live a private life: and being sometime by his friends
admonished, how much envy he should procure unto him self by this alteration
of religion, he was wont to make them answer, how there could chance nothing
unto him, unlooked for, and that his mind was established against all that
might fortune, he came of the noble house of the Earls of Weden. The
Lantzgraue being set at liberty, as couenaunte was, and taking his journey
homeward, when he was commen to Utrecht, a Town standing by the mase, by the
commandment of Queen Mary regent of Flaunders which was there present, he
was attached again, and committed to the custodye of the same Spaniardes,
which had kept him these v. years. And the cause hereof was for that Riseberge,
who had served the Lantzgraues son, went with all his force unto Marquis
Albert, as before is said. Wherein the Queen said, how the peace was broken, and
therefore might not she let him depart, before she knew themperors pleasure
therein. Duke Moris, as I said, coming to the water of Thonawe, the xxii. day
of August sends his army before, the footmen, down the river, and the
horsemen by land: he him self for his private affairs rides home in post,
mineding shortly to return to them again. When Marquis Albert came to the
frontiers of Treuers, George Holy, a captain of themperors, had brought ten
enseigns of fotemen, to defend the city: but kept out by the Towns men,
which refused to have any garrison, he brings again his men to Lucemburge.
And the Marquis the xxvii. of August sommoneth the town to be rendered unto
him: The next day being received, he Marquis Albert enters Treuers.
bestows his soldiors in the city, and places there aboutes. The bishop in
the mean season was in the castle, which I said was situated where the Rhine
and Moselle mete: neither was there any prelate of the same order there.
Themperor remaininge certain days at Auspurge, displaceth the Senate, which
the princes had lately ordained, and abrogateth all the tribes, and restores
the same state of the common weal, and the Senate by him established, and of
the ministers of the church he remoueth three, and the reaste he permits to
teach and minister according to the fourm and order of the confession of
Auspurge, which thing declared in the pulpit, made many me^right glad. This
was the xxv. day of yt mo^th of August. Whereas in the year before, they were
in a manner the same day exiled, as I have in the xxii. book declared. After
that, departing thence the first day of Septembre, and leaving behind him a
garrison of vi. enseignes of fotemen, two days after he came to Wuolmes: but
his army went an other way, till they came to the borders of Wirtemberge
which was done for their sakes of Wuolmes, least their country, which had
showed to themperor so great fidelity, should sustain a new damage: The same
day that themperor departed from Auspurge, he sent away Ihon Fridericke the
The duke of Saxon goth home to his own house.
Duke of Saxon, with most gentle words, and promised very largely of his
benevolence toward him, who on the next day took his journey homeward. The
La^tzgraue also being released the fourth of Septembre, retourneth home the
sixth day after. The same time came forth the fourth Tome of Luthers worckes. To
the which Melanchthon making a preface, reioyseth much at the Dukes return,
and highly commends his constancy, which he used in the time of his most
adversity. In the mean time that Marquis Albert was at Treuers, all the
churches were shut up, who remaining there viii days, when he had burned
certain Abbaies, and a castle of the bishops not far from the town, he leaves
in the city a garrison of xii. enseignes. Afterward marching toward Sircke,
which is a town of the Duchy of Loraine, in the midway betwixt Metz and
Treuers the xiii. day of Septe^bre, he passes there with his army over the
river of Moselle, and inuadeth the land of Lucemburge, and from thence
retourneth again into Loraine, and every where does very much harm, attending
to se what manner of condition the french king would offer him. How he had sore
afflicted the bishops in Franctonie, it is before recited: but when themperor
approached near, being sued to of the Bishops, he does discharge those
compactes, and charge them, that they stand not to them, but seek to recover
their own, the same does he permit also to them of Norinberge, and after
exhorts them, that for the defense of their country, they would make a
league: the same thing writes he to them of Sweuia to the inhabiters of the
Rhine and others, as well princes as cities. Wherefore these foresaid Bishops
with the state of Norinberge do fortify them selves afterward by a league, and
what time Marquis Albert, at the Emperors coming, went into Loraine, the
bishop of Bamberge, about the end of August, and in Septembre, recovered the
towns of Forcheme and diverse others. Themperor passing out of the land of
Wirtemberge, held the way toward Spiers: but when he came to Bret, Themperor
goes with his army toward Lorain
which is a town of the Prince Palatines, altering his purpose, he turned on
the lefthand, and marched toward Strasburge. At his coming, vi miles from the
city came unto him ambassadors, James Sturmie, Friderick Gottesseme, and Jews
Grempre, to entreat Ambassadors of Strasburge to the Emperor.
him that he would spare their country, and lead his army another way, neither
that he him self would enter into the city with any great power, or alter any
thing in their common wealth. Who, after he had right gently received them,
says, how he knows rightwell, how worthily and valiauntly that city has
lately showed it self, and what a benefit they have done to him and the whole
Empire: which thing he will bear in perpetual memory, and in very deed will
declare, as occasion serves, how much he is bounden to them for the same.
Afterward he excuses diligently his sudden coming, by reason of the ships
bre^t by Marquis Albert, for the news that came how the Frenchmen invade
Alsatia, and also for the time of yt year which requires expedition, that they
may come to thenemy so sone as is possible: wherefore he will lead his army a
long by the City, wherinto he him self will enter with his own family only,
and taking a dinner, will not tarry there one night. When therefore the.xv. day of
September, he was cummen into a certain village, a mile without the City, his
whole army destowed here and there in the country abouts, he remaind there v.
dais: In the which time all his Themperor enters into Strasburge.
carriage was conveyed down the Rhine, wherein was no small difficulty, and
as soon as it was day, commau^ding his army to march forth, he him self, with no
great company, about none came into the City, which he had never seen before,
and was both lovingly and honorably received of the Senate. It was his chance
to pass by the headchurch: when he came thither, he alighted, and being led in
by the priests, making there small abode, went straight to dinner. The Senate
than presents him with a gift, after the custom of the city, praying him to
accept it in good part, he answers, that it is to him right acceptable, and
that which he had spoken certain dais past concerning his good will toward
them, for their stout governing of their state in a most doubtful and
pearillous time, he repeteth again, and for that the towns men have hurt done
them without the city, by the soldiors in their Orchardes and heritages, he
says he is right sorry: but for so much as it is impossible to save al upright,
among so great a multitude, he prays them to take it patiently, chiefly for
that this war is made for thempire. Afterward, toward the Evening, entering
into the way of Hagenaw, he turned into the next village, and there reasted al
night. What time he was at Strasburge, going to Metz, he commanded
thambassadors of forain Princes, which followed his court, to go to Spier and
there remain. That time was sir Richard Morisine, knight Sir Richard Morisine
ambassador of England Marquis Antonius Ambassador of Uenise. The spoil of the
soldiors.
ambassador of Edward the vi. King of England, who amongs me^ learned has a
worthy name: and for the state of Uenise, Marcke Anthony Amulie, who also was
him self very well learned, and a great fauorer of learning. In those few dais
that themperor staid at the city, no man would believe what hurt the soldiers
did in ye country, and it was an heavy sight to se the pore husband me^, their
wives and children come running into the city, spoiled of all that ever they
had. The matter was complained upon to the Duke of Alua, by the Senate: And
all be it he said he was very sorry for it, and would se, that the like should
not be done from henceforthe, yet did it preuail nothing, and which way so ever
they went, after their manner they spoiled all things. The Duke of Alua was
lieftenant general of the whole army, and all manner of complaints were
brought unto him, neither might any man be suffered to speak with themperor,
which was thought to have any such thing to sai. In the mean season the
Frenchmen, by the conduit of the duke of Guise, fortify chiefly Metz and
Nancey, and also convey thither all the wheat and forage of the country. There
served themperor, Tho^ the Marquis of Brandenburge, Alphonse Duke of Holst,
brother to the king of Denmark, Philiberte son to the duke of Sauoy. The
outlawes, refusinge the condition of peace, remained still in France. The
Duchess of Lorayne, expulsed out of the country, The death of Caspar Hedio
and Andrew Osiander.
spoke with themperor her uncle at Strasburge, and after went in to Brabant.
The xvii. day of the monthe of October died Caspar Hedio, the chief minister
of the church of Strasburge. The same day also died Andrew Osiander, at
Coningsperge, which is a town in Pruse by the sea coast. Themperor remoueth
from Hagenaw to Landaw, and there making abode xvi. dais of very fair weather,
not without the great wonder of many, at the length he takes the way to Metz,
and the xxii. day of Octobre besieges the City. Uery many citezens and
Senators, by the permission of the French Themperor besegeth Metz.
men went their ways some into Loraine, and some to Strasburge. Than was the
Marquis Albert in the borders of Lorayne, at the Town of Pontamosse, with l.
ensesgnes of fotemen, and no small power of horsemen, but where the French king
and he could not agree upon wages, as well for the time past, as also for the
time to come, through the mediation of certain, he was reconciled to themperor
Marquis Albert reconciled to themperor.
who both pardoned him for all his offense, and prohibiteth that no action
should be comme^ced against him, for his enterprises in this war, and
ratifieth the compacts made with the bishops of Bamberge and Wirciburge, and
releaseth him of the warfare into Hongary, and for his sake pardons the Earl
of Oetinge, the father and the son, of whose misfortune before is mentioned:
likewise Albert the Earl of Mansfeld and his sons. This thing known Duke
d'Anmalle, brother to the duke of Guise, who was sent into Lorayne with a great
power of horsemen, by the king, least yt Marquis of whom they stood in doubt of,
should work any mischief, was purposed to set upon him. For now had the
French men secreatly plucked from him one legion of footmen, at the conduit of
Riseberge: for he was revolted to the French king: Afterward, they attempted
the reast of his army also, and their purpose was, that, for want of money,
being made naked and destitute of his men, they might put him to flighte with
shame. Duke d'Anmalle had of his counsel Ihon Fraxine, Bishop of Baion: And
when he exhorted him to do likewise, he gave the charge with his whole force.
The fotemen for want of a pay refused to fight: wherefore his whole trust was
in his horsemen, whom the Marquis speaking friendly to, and exhorting them to be
valeaunte, set upon them, and fortune Albert overthrows the French men
favored his bold enterprise: For breaking through their maigne battle, he
overthrows them, and puts them to flighte, all be it they were far mo in
nombre, slayinge many, even of the nobilitye: Fraxine the bishop escaped away
by flight: duke d'Anmalle, receiving three wounds, is taken. This was the
fourth day of Nouembre, Duke de Anmalle taken prisoner.
when Marquis Albert had obtained this victory, he came to Metz with duke
d'Anmalle prisoner, and pitcheth his tents by the river of Moselle, and what
time he healed his prisoner of his wou^des, he sent him into Germany, to be
kept, his lieuetena^t was now as also in the protestants war, George of the
noble house of Lichteberges. After he adnertiseth the bishop of Bamberge of the
compactes confirmed by themperor, and admonishes him that he keep his
promise, and restore unto him his towns: he commands his captains also,
that unless he so do, they recover them by force of arms. In this self same
time, themperors army of the low countries, inuadeth France, and takes
Hesdine, the strongest castle in those parties, which after a certain time
the French king recouereth again, and sending his letters into Germany,
taunteth the Emperor bitterly, and exhorts them to keep amitye with him, as
mindful of a benefit received, and of their liberty by him restored. About this
time the judges of the chamber imperial, of whose fleinge I have spoken
before, return to Spiers. The Emperor who had yet remained at Dedehoue,
which is a town by the River of Moselle four miles beneath Metz, the twenty
day of Nouembre came into the camp. Than chiefly was the city maruelouslye
beaten with shot, the violence whereof was so great, that the noise and
Thondering thereof The great battery of Metz.
was hard, not only to Strasburge, but also iiii Dutche miles beyond the Rhine.
And Strasburge is from Metz xviii. great dutch miles. Duke Moris, whom I said
went with his army into Hongary for the king Fardinando, about this time
retourneth home. That time Uolrate, the son of Albert, Earl of Mansfeld made
The duke of Brunswicke driven out of his country.
war against Henry the Duke of Brunswicke, and had in a manner driven him out
of his whole Country, Duke Henry therefore comes to the Emperor at Metz,
complaining of his misfortune, and desires aid, but that was out of time.
Count Mansfelde had served under the Marquis Albert, whilst he was yet of the
french party. Whilst themperor besieges Metz, Wuolfgange, master of the
Almaigne order, takes the Town of Eluange. There is a very rich promotion
ecclesiastical, which he had sued for many months. The fellows or prebends
of that College have authority to choose the Provost, as they commonly call him.

When therefore they had chosen one of a noble house, he, which was sorry that it
passed by him, upon the soden surpriseth the place. This known, the Duke of
Wirtemberge, whom the fellows of that College had besought to defend their
right, leuieth his men immediately, and setting forth in the cold winter
season, recouereth that easily, and besides wins an other Town or two from
him, till he were recompensed for the charges he was at with his soldiors. The
French men that were besieged make many sales out, especially into Mar. Alberts
Camp, and amongs others, Lichteberge his lieftenaunt was sore wounded. The
winter was very sharp with frost and snow: And although themperor had an
exceadinge great army, yet did he abstain from the assault, and attempted the
thing by mines: but that was in vain, when both the time of ye year was a let
thereunto, and thenemy also knew it by espial. There defended the City most
chosen captain, commen of noble houses: but ye chief The duke of Guise
defended Metz.
governor was the duke of Guise. What time the lieuetenauntes of the Marquis
Albert, hired soldiers by his commandment, the bishop of Bamberge
complaininge thereof to thimperiall chamber, the xxix. day of Decembre obtains
letters, whereby the Albertines were commanded to lay away their armor. They of
Wuolmes recovering their castle of Helsesteine, by expulsinge the garrison,
which Marquis Albert had there left, rased it down to the hard ground.
Themperor enforced by thextremity of the cold winter, about thend of Decembre,
being in despair of the thing, levied the siege, and removing from thence to
Dedehouie, and so returning into Flanders, commands certain legions to remain
in the country of Treuers, among the which was also Marquis Albert. By cold
and sickness, themperor lest the third part of his army.

The French men the xxii. day of January go a procession about all the Churches
in Metz, giving God thanks for their good fortune. 1553.
The next day are searched out al Lutherian books in the citezens houses, and
by the hangman are burnt openly: After this, the Duke of Guisse, leaving there
his deputy, returns into France In this same month the captain of Marquis
Albert wone many things again from the Bishop of Bamberge: and after the siege
of Metz was levied, when Marquis Albert had wintred a while in Treuers, til
themperor, had paid him his wages in the month of February returning into
Germany the Bishop of Bamberge, the.xvii. day of the same month, obteyneth
new letters of the chamber, whereof in one was commanded again, the same as,
was before: in the other are enjoined the nobilite of Franckeconie, they of
Norinberge, the Paulsgraue electour, and John Friderick Duke of Saxon, as his
next neighbors to help him. About the end of the month of February, the
French king which was puffed up with pride, that Metz was so defended, sets
forth a writing in printe The french kings writing against themperor.
unto all the states of the Empire, very stinginge and hateful to the
Emperor. For he goes about to bring him in hatred and contempt also: How
he verily is now no more to be feared, whose power is all ready in fringed,
and the craft of many years detected, which is also so sick and diseased,
that they can hardlye keep life in him: he doubtless will be alwais of one mind
toward the^, that is to wit, friendly and liberal. And all be it that diverse
of the^, which have received of him great benefits have not showed the^
selves very thanckefull, yet will not he therefore renounce the Friendship of
the reast. After that Marquis Albert was advertised of the commandment of the
chamber Imperial, he writes many letters to the Bishop of Arras, to the Duke
of Alua, and to the Emperor him self, signifyinge what the Bishops go
about, and how they break couenauntes, and for so much as he has ratified
those compactes that were made him, he requires that there may be a penaltye
appointed, unless they obey the same. Afterward sendinge a messager to the
chamber at Spier, declares how the Bishops have not only broken couenauntes,
but themperors commandment also: wherefore he requires them, that they
would suffer none action to be commenced against him, and that they would
abolishe the letters, which his adversaries had obtained. Whereunto they make
answer, how it is their parts and duty to minister the law unto all men:
which they could not deny the bishops also requiring the same.

But he again after a long confutation, requires the same that he did before.
For else in case he sustain any loss, he shall have good cause to require
amends and recompense at their hands.

Themperor the xiii. of March writes an answer to the letters The Emperors
letters of answer to Marquis Albert.
of Marquis Albert. How he ratified that compacte he can not deny: How he paid
him also and his men their wages most liberallye, to his own great
hinderaunce, where he gave to the residue nothing: And he would have been
right glad, if the Bishops would have stirred no more in the matter, and
for the same cause he sent an ambassadoure to them, to persuade them: but since
they have refused, and have appealed both to him, and also to the Princes
electors, and to the Chamber imperial, he sees well inoughe how this can not
be denied them: Especially, consideringe how diverse states have conceived a
suspicion of him, and spread diverse brutes: For in case he should now
accomplish his request, and command them to keep couenauntes, it would be
said that he did wrong, and it should increase suspicion: For his office is,
to minister justice indifferently unto all men, and prohibit wrong and
violence: Therefore the only way is this, that the matter may be friendly taken
up, and he doubts not, but he him self, if he ponder the matter diligently,
will take this same way: and to the intent the matter may the more easily and
purposelye be brought to pass, he will appoint his own kinsmen, the Dukes of
Bauier and of Wirtemberge, that they shall be means in the matter.

The bishops verily in diverse and sundry letters have complained to him
grievously: Nevertheless he trusts that they will not refuse the treaty: for
the controversy that is between the Duke of Brunswicke and his nobility, he
has committed the hearing of ye matter to Ihon Marquis of Bra^denburge: And
has appointed also the dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, to end the matter
between therles of Deting, the father and the sons. In manner about this
time, both tharmy of count Mansfeld shrank away, and thambassadors of Ihon
Friderick and duke Moris met together, to accord the^ two: For he in his
letters and coin, that he stamped, used still the name of elector and ii.
swords a cross, which is tharmes of Tharmes of Electorshyp
Electorship, and by themperors permissio^ fortified again his castle of Goth,
which thing duke Moris took grievously, and co^plaineth thereof to his states:
the opinion of al the^ was to devise means of peace: wherefore, as I said,
ambassadors were sent, but yet in vain. In this The Cardinal Lenoncourtes
ambition.
time also Robert the bishop of Metz, Cardinal Leno^curt, most addict to the
french king came to Metz, and chalengeth to him self, the hole jurisdiction,
and says it belongs to him, which is a prince of themand ordeineth a new
Senate, and places in that nombre diverse of the Clergy, and fortifieth Marsey
a little Town standinge at the Frontiers of Germany, with fortificatio^s and
garrison of french men. His letters were before intercepted, wherein he desired
of the king, that he would permit him to have the jurisdiction, which the
Bishops, his predecessors have had: For his intent is, to ordain a new
Senate, and to receive none into the same: but that shall be wholly addicted to
him: or else will it come to pass, that such as be of the Emperors part shall
remain there, and the others shall depart thence, which doubtless would be
to his great hinderaunce: For unless all suspected persons be clean
removed, let him not look to keep the City in quiet possession. And he desires
to declare his heart and good wlil toward him: For even for the same cause
chiefly, came he into these parties, and received this bishoppricke, that he
might do him some notable service.

Than was Marquis Albert at Hedelberge with the Paulsgraue elector, and had
sent those foresaid letters to the judges of the chamber. That time came also
to Hedelberge, by themperors commandment, the Dukes of Bauier and
Wirtemberge, for a pacification: thither came also the Duke of Cleave. The
matter being long debated, when the Bishops had offered him a wonderful
sum of money, especially Bamberge, that he might have his Towns in quiet, and
the intercessors also approved this condition: The Marquis which would have his
couenauntes observed, which themperor had also confirmed, whereas in the same
time, his captains levied horsemen for him in Saxony, and was now assured of
certain other men's aid, he departs and nothing done, the intercessors being
sore offended, and bends him self to war, and publishing a wrying the xxvii.
of March, repeteth the whole matter in order, complaining most greuouslye of
his adversaries for breaking their promise, and confuteth that reason, whereby
the Bishops allege, that they may alienate nothing of the church goods,
and shows how he is driven of necessitye to defend his right by force of
arms. The bishop of Wirciburge was there him self, Bamberge had sent deputies.

The grudge and controversy was between the Duke of Wirtemberge, and the
master of the Almaigne order, through the mediation of princes was here
appeased, where this man to recover his towns again, paid xxx. thousand
Crowns. At the second day of April, which than was Easter day, Duke Moris
came also unto the Princes at Hedelberge, using great expedition. Three dais
after, he returns home again in post. These princes that were
intercessoures, make a league, that they may defend them selves from injury,
and therein be comprised also the Archbishops of Mentz and Treuers. When Marquis
Albert refusing the conditions, went from Hedelberge to gather his army, the
Bishops of Bamberge and Wirciburge procure other letters from the chamber, in
the which both the Archbishop of Mentz, the Paulsgraue Duke Moris, the
Master of Pruisse, the Duke of Saxon, the Duke of Wirtemberge, the Lantzgraue,
the Norinbergians, and all their neighbors, are commanded to assist them:
This was the second day of May.

Duke Moris, who suspected Marquis Albert, and supposed that he was also
pricked at by the same, for his own assurance, makes a league with the Duke
of Brunswicke, and promises aid to the Bishops and Norinbergians. In the
mean season Marquis The spoylinges and burninges of Marquis Albert.
Albert, having levied his power, marches forewarde, and in the Countries of
the Bishops and state of Norinberge, he destroys all with burninge and
spoylinge, and takes the City of Bamberge, the head Town of all that
Country, and threatens war to the Nobilitye of Frankonie, unless they will
obey, and surpriseth Schuinfurt, a Town imperial, and fortifieth it with a
garrison. The Norinbergians, because they hold certain towns and Castles by
the benefit of the Realm of Boheme, had entreated king Farnando that they
might leuy certain horsemen in his dominions to defend those places: The king
was content, and permitted them to gather five hondreth: but the Marquis, as
they were coming intercepteth them, and takes also certain of the foresaid
Towns and Castles. Again on the other side, Henrye Duke of Brunswicke, which
had drawn unto him a great part of Count Mansfeldes army, by Phillip his
son moves war against his neighbors, inuadinge the borders and
Countries of the Bishops of Munster and Minden, and of his Cousin also Duke
Erike of Brunswicke, and of the state of Breme, and extorteth of them a
marvelous great some of Monye. About this tune the controversy that the Duke
of Cleave had with the Archbishop of Collon, for a certain jurisdiction, by
the mediation of the Paulsgraue and the Bishop of Treuers, which met at
Bacheracke, was thoroughly appeased.

A little while after, at the beginning of the monthe of June, the Paulsgraue,
tharchbishop of Mentz, thambassadors of the dukes of Bauier and Wirtemberge, by
themperors commandment mete at Franckfurt, about the war of Franckonie.
The Emperor had ambassadors there Count Conigsten, therle of Solmen, and
Henry Hasie: king Ferdinando had theralso diverse. And where the bishops brged
the Emperors abrogation, and the Marquis his co^firmatio^, thelectors admonish
his ambassadors, to signify this unto him, to the intent he may advertise them,
whether he will have to take place. Themperor the xvii. day of June makes
answer. Whereas in the last year past he had hard of the composition of Marquis
Albert and the bishops, at the suit and request of certain, he abolished the
same, commanding the bishops not to keep it, for that it was a matter of an
evil president, to compel any man to such subjection, for doing of his duty
to him and to thempire: But afterward, when Marquis Albert would none
otherwise accord with him, except those former compositions were ratified,
(he) to eschew a further in conuenience, which was than like to ensue upon all
Germany, served the time present. And, for so much as he had an army ready,
and Count Mansfeld also, in his name was gatheringe a new power in Saxony,
and he him self being troubled with the french wars, could not suppress him,
neither was there in all Germany, that was hable one day to abide his force, he
made peace with him, in hope verily that he should quiet him afterward:
Especially, if the Princes that be his kinsmen should travel in the thing: and
certe^ly, if God had sent him good success before Metz, he had devised
means, whereby he should have been satisfied: For he did him much good service
in the same war, in so much that he was desirous to gratify him: but after
that the siege took no place, he assaid how to make a concord by them at
Hedelberge: and where the Marquis refused the conditions there propounded, and
again has moved war, it was to him very displeasaunte, and therefore did he
assign this other conuention at Franckfurt: And now it is reported unto him,
that he attempteth war, not only against the Bishops, but against certain
others also: which thing both greueth him exceadinglye, and is done also
contrary to the compactes: For he, what time he was received into favor,
promised faithful service hereafter both to him and to thempire: And yet if
he would now at the least obey, he could be content to forget all things
past: but where he him self also is had in suspicion of diverse, it is
wrongfullye done: wherefore let them endeavor with all their force to make a
pacification, and require no further declaration of him in this matter: The
same shall be to him most acceptable, and in matters concerning the Empire,
he will do nothing from henceforth, but by their advise and Counsel. At the
length they departed from Fra^ckfurte, without the matter ended. About the
same time also, by themperors commandment, the Duke of Bauier and of
Wirtemberge with others assemble at Lawginge, that they might pacifye The
father and the sons contend for inheritance.
the Earls of Detinge, the father and his Sons. For ever since the
Protestants war, unto the siege of Metz, Jews the father and his eldest
son of the same name, have wandered up and down at most uncertainty, for that
they warred against themperor: but all his lands and possessions, by
themperors permission had his sons Fridericke and Wuolfgange, which were of
a contrary Religion. When they came to the treaty, the father, accuses them
of most ingratitude: and all be it the Princes labored the matter diligently,
yet could there be nothing determined.

The, xxv, Book of Sledaines Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire, of Charles the fyfte.
The Argument of the xxv. Book.
THe war beginning in Piedmount, Duke Moris and the Marquis Albert being at
desiaunce, loyne in battle. wherein Duke Moris was slain, but the Marquis lost
the field. Augustus his brother succedeth Duke Moris. John Fridericke makes
reclaim to his lands. At this time are nine martirs executed at Lions. The
good king Edward of England being dead, his sister Mary is proclaimed Queen,
and the Popish bishops restored to their dignity. Marquis Albert having lost
the field against Henry Duke of Brunswicke, surpriseth the town of Holse:
After he is banished. A disputation in England about the Sacrament of
thaultare. The Lady Jane, which was proclaimed Queen is beheaded, and great
execution is done in England. The blessed death of the Duke of Saxon and his
wife. Alberte again exiled, works great crueltye. Marye Queen of England
married to king Phillip. Cardinal Poole gives full absolution to England. An
assemble at Auspurge. Many excellent parsonages are condemned in England,
being wholly reconquested to the Pope.

TO the intent some remeady might be found for these troubles and tumults in
Germany, the Emperor in the month of May calls an assembly of thempire, the
xiii. day of August: And when he had besieged the City of Terwen, in the
dominion of France, from the end of April. The xx. day of June he takes
Terwen rased.
it by an assault, spoyleth, burns, and raseth it down to the ground. The
Constable son was taken in the same. The king of England sendinge an
honorable ambassade, by the space of certain months entreated a peace. The
same did the bishop of Rome, but that was in vain.

In the month of May, Ihon, Duke of Northumberla^d, which after the death of
the Lord Protector, the Kings Uncle, had ye chief The Lady Jane of Suffolk
married to Buylford Dudley.
government (as before is said) marieth one of his Sons to the Lady Jane of
Suffolk, daughter to the Lady Fraunces, which was Nece to King Henrye the
eighte, by his Sister the French Queen. That time was King Edward greuouslye
sick. Than was it war also in Piedmont, and in the hither parts of Italy.
King Edward sore sick. War in Italye.
For the Emperor purposed to recover Senes, sendinge thither a power from
Naples under the conduit of the Uiceroy, Peter Toletane: but whereas he died,
and the Turkish Navy, to the which the Prince of Salerne, going out of
France, had joined him self, was sailing on the Seas of Greece and Italy, the
soldiors returned home, to repulse the near and domestical danger.

Marquis Albert kepinge war in Franconie, Duke Moris and his fellows send
their army thither. The Marquis therefore leaving a garrison at Schuinfurt and
other places, when he had every where exacted Monye, hasted with great
expedition into Saxony, leading away with him many pledges out of the
dominions of Norinberge and Bamberge captives. When he was common to Arustet,
there were the ambassadors of Ihon Fridericke, Duke of Saxon, to entreat him
that he would not hurt his country: he promised right gently, and kept it.
After, marching into the limits of Erfurde, he spoyleth there many villages.
Duke Moris amassed at his soden coming, which had sent his army into
Franckonie, as I said, commands all his Nobility, after also the other states
to put on armure, and hyreth as many as he could, The Mar. makes war in
Saxonye.
but the Marquis passing through his country, with out doing any hurt,
when he came to Halberstat, he takes the gates, and imposes to the Cleargye
there a great sum of Monye, after that, he burns and destroys the
Country of Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke, being aided by Duke Ericke, and the
Nobilitye of Brunswicke.

The Duke of Brunswickes army, which I said before, was gone into
Franckonie, by the conduit of Phillip his Son, when they had attempted
Schuinfurte in vain, and saw there was pearill at home, return into Saxony:
likewise do the Souldioures of Duke Moris, whereof the Earl Hedecke had the
leading, and ioyn with Duke Moris about Northuse. And for so much as ye Marquis
turned down into the province of Minden, Duke Moris thinckinge that he would
have gone through Hesse, and again made invasion into Franconie, from
Northuse marches to Embecke, that he might preuente him. Than in the end
ioyninge all his forces together, he incampeth in the country of Hildesseme,
at Osterode, and the first day of July, not only he, but also the Chau^celour
of Boheme, Henrye Plauie, in king Fardinandoes name King Ferna^do proclameth
war against Albert.
Proclaim war against him, and sending abroad their letters. (Themperor)
say they, in these former years, has by common assent and consent of the
princes and states, established peace through out the Empire, and gave
commandment, that what action some ever any man had, he should try it at the
law, and work no force nor violence: And certainly the state of Germany,
which has been now certain years now sore afflicted with Civil wars
does much require peace and quietness.

Wherefore, what time there arose war lately within the limits of the Empire,
king Ferdinando, with the healpe of others, endeavored and took pains, that
the war was appeased. And here in at the length had the Princes consentes,
that were chief Captains of the war, and finally, through the Emperoures
permission concluded peace. Wherein it was provided amongs other things, (not
only) that nothing be done to the contrary, but that such also as be in danger
should be aided and assisted, but that same peace did not Marquis Albert refuse
only, but also did write openly to certain renowned princes, that the same
te^ded to the great reproach and dommage of Germany, and was more worthy to be
called a treason, than a peace making. By which words you declare
sufficiently, what mind you bear to your native country. Again, wha^ you had
with spoiling and burning distroied the country that lies by the Rhine,
whereas you had no good success in France, and themperor had an army prepared,
through intercession you were reconciled to him, upon respect only, that he
would confirm your composition with the Bishops of Bamberge and Wirciburge.
But you straightwaies abusinge this confirmation of themperor, who permitted
you to show no violence, have by your ministers many times put in fear,
either prelate, with most terrible threatninges, saying how you would enforce
them, by tharmies of the Earls of Mansfeld and Oldenburge, to observe their
couenauntes, as it is by your own men's letters to be proved. And that also you
might bring this to pass, the soldiors, which you discharged after ye siege
of Metz was levied, you commanded to return to you again, at the beginning
of April. And all be it that they put their matter to the arbitrament of
themperor, king Ferdinando, and the Princes, or cls referred the controversy to
the judges of the chamber, and laws of thempire, and namely at Hedelberge
offered such conditions, that not only the princes intercessors, but also
themperor by his letters approved the same: yet you refusinge all these offers,
have invaded their provinces, and surprising certain places, have not spared to
spoil gentle women, and so practicing spoilinge and exactions of money, have
fired many Castles, Towns, Uillages, The spoylinges of Al.
and other buildinges, burning cruelly not only them, but the men in them in
some places, as well of theyrs, as of the state of Norinberge, which both by the
public law of the Empire, and a league also lately made did assist them.
After this have you taken out of sondrye places, Towns men and Citezens, of
great years: and for age unwieldy, as pledges for the money imposed, where it
is not to be had, and have carried them about with you into the lower parts of
Saxony, cruelly and tirannically which way soever you went. Moreover, against
all right, you have proclaimed war agauist the Nobility of Franckonie, and
taken Sthuinfurt a town imperial, and fortified it with a garrison, by the
which things doubtless you have raised up a wonderful trouble and terror
in all places. Furthermore, you have not spared the king Fardinando: And all be
it you are bounden to him by wardship, and league of inheritance, yet through
a certain desperate rashness, you have not only made Rhoades into the borders
of Boheme, but also have sore afflicted the possessions of his kingdom,
granted out in times paste by composition to them of Norinberge, and diverse
honest men also of the same jurisdiction, you have partlye slain, and partly
brought into extreme poverty and misery, and the same guidons of horsemen,
which the king licenced the Norinbergians, to leuy for the defense of their
Country, and not to wrong any man you have set upon, and taken, and spoiling
them of horse and armure, you have compelled them to return home again.
Furthermore, you keep certain Traitoures, and such as the King has outlawed
for rebellion, and speak words, as it is reported, full of threatninges
against the King and the Bohemers. Yet has the king given you none occasion
so to do, but has ever auanced your commodities, by what means he could: And
all be it you entered his Country one year past, full like an ennemy, yet are
you not ignorant, how friendly than he wrote unto you, that both you should
amend this fault: and also beware from henceforth.

Now, for my part, says Duke Moris, all be it that in all my life The
complaint of D. Moris upon Marquis Al.
I never gave you any occasion of displeasure, but have rather bestowed upon
you many benefits, yet, the last year, when after the peace concluded,
departing from Franckfurt, for the common welthes sake, and king Ferdinandos, I
led my army into hongary against the Turk, you remember by what means you
sought to allure my men from me, and what opprobrious words you gave me, both
to your soldioures and others, what time, speaking of the pacification of
passawe, you called it the betraying of Germanye. meaning it by me, and my
friend Henrye Plauie. Moreover I am not ignorant, what thing was attempted the
last winter, when I was in Hongary, to the destruction of me and my country,
by the army of the Earl Mansfeld, which was than in the duchy of Bru^swicke.
And when you were reconciled to themperor, what manner of words, and not only
how stinginge and bitinge, but also how threatening and contumelious ye spoke
against me and my province at the siege of Metz, they know, which were-than in
Camp with you. And when you returned home, after the siege was levied, being
demanded of me by letters, of the same matter, and of your mind toward me,
you answered proudlye, yt whatsoever you have spoken of me or of others, you
both remember it, and will not deny the same: And to the other you made such
answer, as I can gether no certaintainty thereof. After, writing to me of the
same matter from Hedelberge, you alleged certain things of great parsonages
for this intent as I suppose, that you might cause me to suspect and distrust
them: but whereas I gave no great regard to such matters, I advised and
counseled you, both by letters and intermessagers, that you should observe
the peace, and also desired to know, what I my self should look for at your
hand. But you, writing letters to thelector of Brandenburge: All be it you
spoke of me somewhat temperatly, yet, where you come to the pacification of
Passaw, you signified plainly enough, how you were affected toward me, and
not long after declared it also in deed. For in certain of your last letters,
you required me, that I would call back my army, which was in the tents of
the confederates in Franckonie, for this intent verily, that unless I so did,
you might have an occasion to war against me. Again, shortly after you led
your army through my country and my brothers Augustus, where you had given us no
knowledge there of before, clean contrary to thaunciente custom of Germany.
You make your boast, that you did no hurt as you went, but my men report to me
far otherwise. And all be it, that it were so, yet do I not so much ascribe
this to your will, as to necessity. For it is known how fast you marched, and
how weary the Soldiers were: And you knew rightwel, that in case you had
attempted any force or showed violence, it had not ben hard for me to have
resisted you and your army, being so faint and weried with traueling, and to
have called home those that were in Franckonie: but doubtless your purpose
was, to have set on me at your return, and that have your Soldiers not let to
say. Moreover, passing through the country of Thuring, you spoiled certain
villages of the city of Erfurd, which is under our tuition. Which you deny not
in your own letters written to me from Brunswicke. Your soldiors also have
slain diverse in my brothers Country, and near unto Bichlinge, they took two
gentlemen, and when they had appealed unto me, bette them with whippes and cast
them in prison.

Yet for all this could not I be brought, to attempt war: but required the
same by letters, that I did before, and exhorting you to peace, whereof there
was than a treaty at Franckfurt, inquyred what mind you were of toward me
and my fellows. But how bitterly and angerly you answered, it appears by your
own letters. For neither would you utter your mind, and yet accused the
treaty of Franckfurt as suspected. Whereof I could gether none otherwise, but
that you were determined to continue the war of Frankonie, yea and as
occasion served, to spare neither me nor my fellows. Which you also denounced
to them of Erfurde, and immediately after declared also to others.

For besides many others displeasures, that you did the Bishoppricke of
Halberstat, which themperor, as you know, has committed to my protection,
you imposed a great some of Monye, and spoiled their colleges in the country
nevertheless. The same did you also in the Archbishoppricke of Maidenburge,
which is likewise comprised under my tuition, and have exacted Monye of the
Northusians and Mullusians. And Henrye the Duke of Brunswicke, with whom I
have made a league, right honest in deed, Duke Mor. league with the Duke of
Bru^swicke.
and not repugnant to the treatye of Passawe, you have persecuted with sword
and fire, so sone as I had advertised you by letters, of the league, and the
reast of my fellows. These things doubtless, be not correspondent to certain
of your former letters.

Now therefore, although that king Ferdinando (I) and our fellows do greatly
desire peace: especially of Germany, and ever sense the pacification of
Passaw, to endeavor that al things may be quiet: Especially in these parties:
which thing also very many of the nobility of Brunswicke, which serve now in
your camp can testify: yet, for so much as you have removed the war into these
parties, and declare manifestly, when you invade our fellows, what your intent
is. Moreover, for so much as there is a brute, yt you are hyring of greater
forces, though it be in an others ma^s name, which you are not hable to find,
except you permit them to rob and spoil, and work what mischief they list,
in so much that not only Frankonie, but other provinces also, stand in great
danger of you, which your self can not dissemble, whilst you say, you will
bring to pass, that no man else shall be in better case than you are: For
these causes I say, and for so much as you leave no place unto Concord, king
Fernando (I) and our fellows, seeing we are next the danger, are constrained to
put on armure, to repulse from us violence and injury, to the end we may
deliver our native country, and recover the Public quietness. For this do
the laws of the Empire, not only permit, but inioyne us also, and the high
court of the chamber imperial commands us, to aid and assist our neighbors
of Fra^ konye. And although at this time that you leuye men in, you pretend to
do it in themperors name, yet know we assuredly, that the same is forged and
famed. For he has declared what his mind is, not only to you, but to us and
other also, and shortly you shall know more, what he thincketh. But, since this
our enterprise is attempted for the common wealths sake, and therefore neaded
no declaration of our mind, yet to the intent, you shall not be ignorant, we both
do protest, that we will do hereafter, as the thing it self shall require,
that this your dissolute, and more than Tirannicall cruelty, may be suppressed.
And this verelye in our own name, and our fellows, we do you to understand,
and hear testify, that the blame of all the calamity, that shall chance in
this war, is wholly to be imputed unto you, which will come to no reasonable
condition: nether doubt we this also, but the everliving God will assiste
rather those, that seek the safeguard of their country, than him, that goes
about destruction, and warreth on his native country. What time these letters
were delivered, in the camp of Marquis Albert, the Ambassadoures of the
electoure of Brandenburge, were sent to persuade a peace.

When he had red the letters, he co^sulteth of the matter with his captains,
and demands of them, whether they will take his part: Who affirming, he
calls for the young ge^tleman that brought the letters, and tourning his talk
to him. Thy Prince, says he, has thrice broken his faith before this, and
has done wickedly, and this is the fourth fact of the same sort: let him come
hardly, I will prove what he can do: This tell him in my name. The Mar. annswere
to duke Moris.


With these words he gives him certain crowns in reward, and sends him a
way. There the ambassadoures that were intercessors, shall we do nothing than
say theyrnothing, says he, you may return home. When therefore he perceived
the weight of the war, he sends Duke Ericke of Brunswick to the Emperor the
third day of July, and signifies unto him, how through the policy Marquis
Albert sends to the Emperor
of certain, there were many adversaries raised against him, which endeavor, that
the couenaunts be not only not kept, but also that he might be expulsed out of
al his lands and possessions, by reason of a new conspiracy, and that is he
able to prove: that certain Princes electors, and the chiefest of all Germanye,
have conspired to choose a new Emperor. And the cause why the Bishops be so
sore against him, is long of the judges of the Chamber. He prays him therefore
that he would not be offended, if he shall attempt ought against them. His
adversaries also, to bring him in hatred, and to allure mo unto them, have
raised this brute of him, as though he has conspyred with him to oppress the
liberty of Germany. This doubtless have certain Princes objected unto him, and
letters are cast abroad in Germany, as sent from the Bishop of Arras, how he
verily for this intent, hyreth an army, that he might accomplish his will.
For the Duke of Alba shall bring his son, the Prince of Spain into Germany
to the next conuention of the Empire, that he may be denounced the successor
of the Empire. With this is king Ferdinando so fully persuaded, that entryng
into league with his ennemies, he has proclaimed war against him. He has
verily excused this unto many right dilligently: but the suspicion increases
daily. Therefore is he subject unto great perilles and dangers, in a manner for
this cause only, that he will not forsake his frendshyp. Wherefore he humbly
besecheth him, that he will both ratify those compositions of the Bishops,
and also defend him and his. This if he will do, he will bring unto him
(when the matter shall be agreed upon).ix. thousand horsemen, and an hondreth
enseignes of footmen.

In the mean time the Norinbergians, and the Bishops; in the absence of
Marquis Albert, invade his dominion, he, The bishops in his absence invade his
counitie.
publishyng letters, blamed sore them of Norinberge, as those that had broken
their faith and conuenauntes, and entering into league with the faulse
Bishops, embraced again the Popish doctrine. Whereunto they afterward,
setting forth a book make answer, and recite the whole matter in order, ever
since the year before, how cruel war he has kept, how they made compacte
with him, how after by the Emperors permission and consent, they made a
league with the Bishops about them, how he has refused most reasonable
conditions, offered by the same Bishops, and again moved war against
them: and how, at what time, both for the league made, and also for the
commandment of the Chamber, they aided their fellows, he invaded again
their Country lately. Amongst others of his wicked Acts, they recite this as
a rare example of such cruelty as has not been heard of, that, having taken
two towns of their dominion, Altorfe and Lanse, he shut in not the towns The
great cruelty of Mar. Albert
men only, but also the people he could find in the country, and eattell, and
after set them on fire in sundry places, but chiefly about the gates,
pourposing doubtless to burn them all up. In the which fire they say children
and women with child, and many sick persons, which were not able to break
down the walls and escape, were there miserably brent. Touching that he
says of altering their Religion, they declare to be false for the league is
made only, to repulse violence from them and theirs. And that he cares for no
Religion, it is well known to many, and they also have many things to say in
this behalf: But for the noble family he comes of, and for certain Princes,
his kinsmen, they will temper them selves.

The fifth day of July Sigismunde king of Pole, marieth the Lady Katherine,
daughter of king Ferdinando, which had been wife to the Duke of Mantua, where
as ten years since, he had married his sister, as is mentioned in the.xv. book.

Edward the syxte, king of England, a Prince of undoubted and excellent hope,
the syxt day of July, as it was known The death of good king Edward.
abroad, departed out of this life, of a consumyng disease, being of.xvi.
years of age, to the exceadynge great grief of all good and Godly men. For
after his death ensued a marvelous alteration of things in England, as shall be
declared hereafter. It was bruted abroad, that he was poisoned. Certainly,
there was not in Europe a king of so great expectation these many years. From
his very chyldhode he was excellently well brought up and instructed in virtue
and learning, and had The virtues of Edward the sixth.
not only the Latin tongue, but the Greek and French also, and loved the
doctrine of the Gospel exceadyngly, and gave unto all learned men
enterteinement and succor, to Germans, Italians, Frenchemen, Scotts,
Spanyardes, and Polonians.

What time both armies were not far a sonder in Saxony, A battle fought
betwixt Duke Maurice and Mar. Albert.
and the Marquis was come over the water of Weser, the nynth day of July at
after none, they joined in battle with all their forces. After a long fight,
Duke Maurice which excelled in horsemen, had the victory, but he him self
being stricken with a dagge through his bowels, died within two days after. The
Marquis came to Hanobrie in safitie. There were slain about four thousand,
in a manner al horsemen. There were taken exceadyng many. Henry the Duke of
Brunswycke, lost in that conflicte two sons, Charles and Philippe. The next
day came five hondreth horsemen out of Boheme, sent by king Ferdinando to
Duke Maurice. The Lantgraue had also sent to Duke Maurice seven hondreth
horsemen. At the same time therefore, there were together in one camp the
Lantgraue and the Duke of Brunswick, with the Bishops, by a marvelous change
and contrariety in things, where Duke Ericke of Brunswicke, that had married
Duke Maurice sister, aided Marquis Alberte. Many men thought that time, that
like as king Ferdinando gave aid against Marquis Albert, so did the Emperor
encourage and strengthen the Marquis against Duke Maurice. Howebeit the
Emperors letters (which hereafter I shall recite) importe no such kind of
things.

The French king was said than to have treated of new devises with Duke
Maurice, and was right sorry for his death. Duke Maurice being carried into his
Tente, the same night writes letters to the Bishop of Wirtemburge, his fellow
in that war, wherein he declares the whole matter, and says how the
victory is his, but that he is sore wounded: And supposes that Albert is
fliyng. He admonysheth him therefore, that he command the ways to be laid
for him in certain places, that he may be intercepted, and not suffered to
pass. What so ever his own state or end shall be, he is of a good conscience.
For he took in hand this war, that he might suppress that disturber, and
recover the quietness of Germany. He was buried at Fridberge a Town of Meissen,
the fourtenth day after the battle by Henry his father, and his young son
Albert. He was.xxxii. years old and upward: His presence was thought to be a
great cause of the victory, or else it was supposed that the Marquis should have
won the field. For D. Maurice wan yt field and lost his life.
many of his horsemen were fled. There were taken of the ennemies and brought
unto him out of the battle.liiii. enseignes, and.xiiii. guidons. For the
which Duke Maurice in deed spent his own life, but yet he ouerthrewe the
force and power of the Marquis. For after that battle he was never able to
gather any main power. When the corpse went through Lipsia, Ioachim Camerarie,
made the oration funeral, and speaking much in his commendation, he rekened
up the wonders The wonders before his death.
that went before his death. Drops of blood styckynge upon the leaves of
trees, the most importune barkynge of Dogs, and werieng one an other. The
neyinge of Horses heard, and the clatterynge and clankynge of Harness, and
certain other things full of terror. Again, his own Tente overthrown with a
whirlewynde, and the residue standing still and not touched, and certain words
of his own, as forespeaking and prognosticating his death to come. And
certainly as touching those red drops, they were commonly seen in diverse
places, and even at Strasburge about the beginning of June, what time they
fell upon bows, grass, tyled houses and stones. That time did there fly a
wonderful number of butterflies, and some there were, that said, how these
bloody drops came of them. Again others judged that it did pourte^de and
signify some thing. Between Duke Maurice and Marqes Albert, being both of one
age, there had been Great friendship betwixt D. Maurice and Marqu. Albert.
always very great friendship, so that there could be no derer friends. For
they both had served the Emperor in three wars together, in the French, the
Protestauntes, and the war of Maydenburge, after, this fourth and last war
they attempted against the Emperor. But displeasures arysing, as before is
said, their amity had at length this doulefull and sorouful end. What time
Duke Maurice died, his brother Augustus was in Denmark, with his wife, with
the king his father in law. Wherefore the Nobility and States do retain
part of the army, for to defend his country, about.xii. enseignes of
fotemen, and five guidons of horsemen: The residue are discharged, and for the
most part returned home with the funeral. But the.xviii. day of July,
Marquis Albert writes letters to the nobility and people of Duke Maurice.
Where as of late The Marq. letters to yt states of D. Maurice.
he went through their country into Saxon, he passed without harm doing, for
that he had no hostility in his mind. But Duke Maurice has not only hurt men
of his dominion, but also to the intent to gratify certain wicked and perjured
bishops, had renounced yt ancient league, that is between his family and ye
house of Saxon, in a manner for no cause, and after a strange example had made
war against him. Which thing being so in deed, and for so much as they the^
selves have furthered his enterprise, clean against the Emperors
commandment, therefore must he see for him self, how he may recompense
himself for the damage received, and therefore renounceth their league and
amity. The Emperors army, after Turwen was overthrown, marching from thence
into Artois, in the month of July took the Castle of Hesdine by assaute.
There was slain Oratius Farnese, the French kings son in law. There were
many of the Nobility taken, among whom was the The death of Orace Farnese.
high Mareshall of France, Marchian, that dwells in the foreste of Arden.

The news of the battle in Saxony was brought to the Empu^y within a very
few days. Who after the.xxii. day of July, answers Duke Ericke of
Brunswicke, whom Marquis Albert had sent, as before is said. How he is not a
little sorry, that the displeasure is grown so far, for he had much rather
that all this controversy had been appeased, and unless it be so, he fears
least it will come evil to pass, not only to the Empire, but also to Marquis
Albert, especially, since that so many of the chiefest States do set in foot
herein, and have made a league. Therefore his advise and request is, that with all speed they lay down their weapons, and devise some means of concord. If
the Marquis be so content, he will devise, that the contrary part shall
surcesse also, and distrusteth not, but that he shall persuade them. And he
earnestly desires, that he refuse not so to do: For otherwise, the case
standing as it does now, he can not use his service, least he should increase
the suspicion that is raised already. Which doubtless unto him, that has
nothing derer, than the peace and tranquillity of the Empire, should be very
grievous and displeasaunt.

About the beginning of the month of Auguste, Augustus Augustus brother and
hesre to Du. Maurice.
Duke Maurice brother, coming home out of Denmark, a few days after,
consultyng with his Counsel, takes an oath of all the people, and amongst
others, of the Wyttembergians to be true to him and to his heirs males, and if
none remain, to return to the fidelity of John Fridericke and his children,
in case he obey the Emperor, and observe the compactes of fourmer years, if
not, that than they be obedient to the Lantgraue. This done, he is saluted
Prince Electour, and calls an assemblee of his States, to appear before him,
the xx. day of Auguste. The.xvii. day of that month, was a marvelous great
earthquake in the town of Mesen. When all were assembled at Lipsia, at the
day, very many. Duke Auguste brings in question: first, whether he should
join him self to the new league of king Ferdinando, the Princes and
Byshopes, and to prosecute his brothers war against Marquis Albert.
Secondarely, if he should forsake the league, how he ought to avenge his
brothers death. Finally, by what means he may compounde with John Fridericke.
For he, in his absence, sendyng letters to the nobles, required that the
dignity of Electourshyp, and his possessions that were taken away might be
wholly restored to him. The effect of the consultatio^ and counsel was, that he
should observe peace with both, and that the Electour of Brandenburg should
treat a pacificatio^. And hereof an order was made, although king Ferdinando
by Henry Plauie, Chauncelour of Boheme, had treated earnestly with Duke Auguste
concerning the league. In this conuention, the Duke of Saxon sending again an
other Ambassade, John Frederick demau^deth his lands and dignities.
demands his own, and that with sharp words, the same did the States of
his dominion, but that was in vain. And Auguste said, how he was not bound
so to do, and that he would stick to those compactes and conuenauntes which
the Emperor had made when he was taken, but yet would he not refuse all
treaty. During that same assembly, Henry Duke of Brunswicke desired aid of
Duke Auguste against Marquis Albert, which hired new bands of soldiers.
After the death of Duke Maurice, the Duke of Saxon sent the one of his sons,
John William, into Brabant to the Emperor, that he might be restored. And in a
manner about the same time, the nobility and states of his dominion, sent
thither Ambessadours also in the absence of Duke Auguste, that the Emperor,
would accept their Prince as by them commended. The Duke of Saxon had sent
Ambassadors also, to king Ferdinando, and to the king of Denmark, about the
same matter. In the mean season the Bishop of Wirtemburg besegeth Schninfurt,
which was kept with a garrison of Marquis Albert, as before is said. And the
Bishop of Bamberge, and the Norinbergians, when they had a while beseged
Collebach, leading away the power, join the^ selves to Count Plauie, which
laid battery to the town Hosie, belonging to the Marquis.

In these months were.ix. burnt at Lions, when diverse of them had been in
prison a year and more. Articles were propounded Nine burnt at Lions.
to them al, of the presence of Christ's body in the Lords supper, of
Purgatory, of the Mass, of private or auricular Confession, of Ceremonies, of
praiyng to the virgin Mary, and other that be dead, of the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome, of Free will, of Justification of works, of the authority of
the church and of Bishops, of Monastical vows, of choice of meats, of
unction and confirmation, and of Images. And they answered to every point
constantly, and after one sort, severally, alleging the testimonies of
Scripture. Whylest they were in prison, with their letters they comforted not
only one an other, but also their friends and other churches, and wrote every
thing as it was done. What time Lewys Marsake, one of the prisoners being a man
of war, alleging many things Lewys Marsake.
out of the holy Scriptures, the inquisitours that were present demanded of
him, whether it were his part to read the books of Scripture, and asked him how
he knew these things to be the Gospel? The kings liftenaunt also said there
were only but two Evangelists, Matthew and John: For the other two The
blasphe my or yt lieftenaunt.
and Paul also, had as it were sowed together certain fragmentes, and patches.
And if it were not that the Doctors of the church did attribute to Paul that
authority, he would set no more by his Epistles, than by Esopes fables. And
when Marsake inferred again, that there were Godly testimonies of the vocation
and office of S. Paul, especially in the.i. chap. of the Epistle to the
Galathians. That makes nothing for the matter says he, for he bears witness
of him self. Unto those that suffer with him, the hangeman put an haltar about
their necks, as the manner is. But Marsake, whom the judges commanded to be
led without a band about his neck, said unto the^, is their cause better
than mine? Why will you not give me such a chain also? Why will you not dubbe
me knight of this noble and excellent order? alluding to ye accustomed manner of
kings, who at what time they will honor and auaunce their friends, they make
them knights of their own order, and give them a chain of Gold, as a token
of honor. Five of them studied at Losanna, Frenchemen in deed borne, but
found at the Five stude^ts of Losanna.
charges and liberality of the Lords of Bernes. When therefore they had heard
that they were taken, and understood their danger, they made diligent suit to
ye king, desiring him, they might be given to them: But it was in vain, where
the king alleged that he might not do it by the laws. The Cardinal of
Tournon, was thought to have been the occasion hereof.

I spoke a little before of the death of the most noble Prince, Edward the
sixte, king of England. He was in a consumptio^, and in the month of January
he fell sick. And where as his sickness increased, being careful for his
Realm and Religion, he conferreth with his counsel of the matter, and
inquireth of them, unto whom chiefly he should commit the government. For
albeit that king Henry his father wha^ he died, had appointed next in
succession unto him. Mary and Elizabeth, as before is said, yet for so much as
he him self was of lawefull years, he accoumpted it to lie in his power to
make his heir, especially, seeing that most men doubted of the lawful birth of
his sister, and Mary was also of the Bishop of Romes Religion, which if she
should have the government, he saw how there was great danger, least both
this present Religion should be subverted, and the Realm also be governed by a
stranger. Wherefore after deliberatio^ had, it was agreed to chose the lady
Jane of Suffolk, daughter to the Lady Frau^ces, nece to king Henry the eight.
When the rest of the Counsel, and the Mayor The lady Jane.
of London, and the Lords of the Realm had this allowed. The Archebyshop of
Cantorbury, primate of England, was sent for to the court, that he might
subscribe, which he refuses to do, unless he may first hear the king
speak. Wherefore being admitted to his speech, when he had reasoned the matter
with him familiarly as he lay, he asse^ted, being of him earnestly required
hereunto. When the king was departed, which was the syxt day of July, as
before is said, the fourth day after, the Lady Jane is proclaimed Queen, and a
proclamation openly set forth how king Edward by the consent of his Nobles,
for most weighty causes, had disherited the Lady Mary, and the Lady Elizabeth
his systers, and left the succession of the Realm to the Lady Jane. The
Nobility and commons took this most displeasauntly, not so much for the love
of the Lady Mary, as for the hatred of the Duke of Northumberlande, where no
man in a manner doubted, but that he was the author of this counsel, to the
intent, that by this mean, he might as it were convey the kingdom into his
own house. Whylest these things were a workyng, the Lady Mary flees into
Norfolk, and from thence to the castle of Framingham in Suffolk, and writing
abroad for aid, takes upon her as Queen. That known, the Duke of
Northumberlande assembleth a power, and setting forth of London, marches
toward her, by the consent of the rest, to apprehende her. But in the mean
season the counselors that remained in the city, perceiving the hearts of
the people, and that the forces of Norfolk and Suffolk, resorted to Queen
Mary, changing their minds and purpose, proclaimed Queen Mary, and keep the
lady The Lady Mary proclaimed Queen
Jane in prison. After these news came into the Camp, al me^ for the most
part, because they served against their wylles, and hated the Duke, do
reuolte. And when letters and commission came from Frammingham, they take the
Duke at Cambridge, and the.xxv. day of July bring him again into the city.
It is incredible, with what rebukes and railinges ye people received him,
whylest some call him traitor, some parracide, and others the murderer of the
most innocent king. For in as much as he was thought to have brought his
sons wife to the Roial crown, there arose a suspicion, that he had imagined
these things long before, and laid in wait for the kings life. After were
apprehended his sons and his brother, and certain other Nobles, and the kings
scholemaister, Sir John Cheke, knight, a man of great virtue and learning. Yet
was he discharged afterward, but put in a manner from all his lsuing. After
came Queen Mary to London, and entering into the hold, which they call the
Tower, delivers out of prison the Duke of Norfolk, who had been almost
seven years in captivity, and Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and Tunstall
Bishop of Duresme, and certain other Bishops of the popyshe Religion, which had
been put from their Byshoprikes, and restores them to their fourmer places.
And certainly yt bishop of Winchester, although in books set forth, he had
defended the doing of king Henry, what time he divorced him self from the Lady
Katherine the mother of Queen Mary, as in the.ix. book is mentioned, yet now
he obtained the place of the chauncelour, which is there Winchester made
Chau^celour.
the highest degree of dignity. For where the lady Katherine alleged the
Bishop of Romes license, July the second, who had confirmed that matrimony, and
the king again said it was naught, and therefore sent the Bishop of
Winchester, before he was Bishop, to Rome, that Clement might pronounce the same
frustrate. Who coming thither in the month of February in the.xxix. year,
was an importune suter. The Bishop of Rome, who as the proverb is, held the
woulfe by both ears, where as both he coueted to gratify the king, and also
feared themperours displeasure, answers that he will write to the emperor,
that the true license under seal might be showed. He assenteth in deed, but he
requires to have two months only appointed for the same matter: When that
time shall be run out, Gardener requires ye the license might be compted
unlawful. But that thought the Bishop of Rome both strange and also
unreasonable, and seeks with gentle words to satisfy the king. But the
Ambassador told him plainly, that unless he might obtain the kings request,
it would be to the great hinderaunce of the Sea of Rome. Again the Emperor,
and king Ferdinando, the.xxvii. day of April, by Ambassadors declare their
grief, and expostulate with bishop Clement, that he favored the king
onermuche, and would have the matter judged in England, and also appointed
their procurers with large and ample commission, which should treat and
follow the cause, in their names, at Rome. Wherefore the Bishop commanding at
the last Campegius to return home, reuoketh the suite to him self, so much
the rather, for that he understood by the Cardinal of York of the kings new
love, as I said in The Duke of Northumberland condemned.
the.ix. book.

The.xxii. day of August, the Duke of Northumberland, condemned of treason,
was beheaded, and when he was brought to the Scaffolde, made an oration, and
among other things, he exhorts the people, to persevere in the same
religion, which they had received of their forefathers, as it were from hand to
hand: For he judges this to be the only cause of all the calamity, that has
come into England, of long time now, His inco^stancie at his death.
but chiefly since the death of King Henry, that they are separated from the
rest of the body of christianity. Of many years now, he had been of a
contrary opinion (as he pretended at the least) and had utterly forsaken the
Popish doctrine. And the cause why he now spoke thus (as they say) was for
that he was put in hope to be pardoned. And albeit that the rest of his talk
being finished, he said he spoke as he thought, yet be there some that affirm
he was sorry for so saying, what time he loking round about him, perceived no
succor, and saw that he was begiled. And other that suffered at the same
time, one sir Thomas Palmer, knight, professed the doctrine of the Gospel
Thomas Palmer.
with most constancy. And the Duke was condemned (as I said) of rebellion and
treason. And albeit there were great suspicio^s, ye he had given the king
poison, yet was he nothing at al examined for that matter: Nor in the sentence
pronounced against him any mention made thereof. Of Peter Martyr the Florentine,
we have spoken before, which going into England six years past, by the kings
sending for, was reader of the divinity lecture at Oxforde. Whom many made
much of for his excellent learning and virtue, but he wanted not also evil
willers. Wherefore when the king was dead, he was commanded not to styre one
foot thence without the pleasure of the Queen first known, nor carry away any
thing that he had, under a great penalty, in case he should do otherwise. He
was content to obey, but when he saw he was long delayed, he writes to the
counselours of the Realm concerning his state, and if he had ought offended,
he requires that his accuser might be brought forth, and the matter examined:
Whereupon through their permission, he came to London. There he fyndeth the
Archebyshop of Cantorbury his Patron and friend, of whom the Popysh preachers
The constancy of the archebyshop of Cantorbury
had raised a brute, as though he should be unconstant and wavering, as though
by his commandment the Mass were restored at Cantorbury, and as though he
had promised the self same thing to the Queen. And bragged with all of a
disputation that should be. After he knew of this, immediately he set forth a
writynge to pourge him self, and says, how a terten priest, unknowing to him,
had said Mass at Cantorbury. he denies the other thing also, yea, he
protests, if the Queen will give him leave, to prove, that the acts of king
Edward concerning the Lords supper and other articles of doctrine, be
consonaunt to the holy Scriptures, and that the Romyshe Mass is clean
repugnant from the institution of Christ, for the declaration whereof, he
desires no great number, but even a very few, and among them, Peter Martyr,
to aid and assiste him. And for so much as the contrary part, adourned their
Religion by the commendatio^ of antiquity, saying that it has continued above
a thousand and five hondreth years, he affirms that they be not able to
prove the same, but he will prove, that the doctrine, which in king Edwardes
days, was set forth, and is as yet observed in England, is the very native and
ancient Religion instituted and left us of Christ and his Apostles. When he
had publyshed this writing at London about the fifth day of September, Peter
Martyr the same time came thither from Oxforde (as I said) and aduertysed by
him of the whole matter, commends his doing, and shows him ye he will
refuse neither pains nor peril herein. But behold, whylest they are in this
expectation, the Archebyshop of Cantorbury was committed to prison, and also
the Archbishop of The bishops carried to prison.
York, and Rydley Bishop of London, H. Bishop of Worcester and certain other
Bishops, for the profession of the Gospel, and for sermons made against Queen
Mary, by the counselles commandment, before she atcheued the crown. Moreover
Hughe Latimer is than also apprehended, whom king Edward delivered out of the
tower, laid in there by his father for doctrine. In the mean time Peter
Martyr, albeit he perceived his danger, yet for that he had nothing offended
against the laws of the Realm, trusting to his innocence, thought not good
to depart, before he had obtained leave. Wherefore when he had brought that to
pass, and received his passeporte signed with the Queen's hand, he came to And
werpe, from thence to Collon, and after to Strasburge, from whence he went
first into England, and a little before him Bernardine Ochine, both in health.
It was once written and signified into Germany, that the Emperor should have
given counsel to his auntes daughter Queen Mary, that she should govern with
mercy, and not alter Religion, nor marie without the Realm. For what danger
were in that, in case she should change the Religion, he knew best of all
men. Whether this were so in deed I can not affirm: The end it self
declares it to be far otherwise. For even for the doctrine of the Gospel,
strangers being commanded to depart, and the native country men there cast
in prison, the Romyshe Religion was wholye restored, as shall be declared The
popish Religion restored in England.
hereafter. The first day of October after Queen Mary was crowned. And not
long after began the Parliament at London. But the conuention of the Empire,
which the Emperor called against the.xiii. day of Auguste, as I showed in the
beginning of this book, was proroged to the first of October, and than to the
month of January. After that same battle, wherein Duke Maurice was slain,
Henry the Duke of Brunswick, and the Marquis Albert, every of them for them
self, make them selves strong, and gather their power about them. The Wars
revived betwixt the D. of Brunsw. and Marquis Albert.
Bishops and States of Norinberge fed Duke Henry with money. But all men for
the most part marueled at Marquis Albert, from whence he had all that store.
Wherefore it was spoken commonly, that Queen Mary the Emperors sistes supported
him with money: But the Emperors folks deny that utterly, and marvel, that
there are any so fond so to think. But what time the money was brought to the
Duke of Brunswicke somewhat to late, he was in very great danger. For when the
Marquis had intelligence thereof, he practiced with the soldiers to forsake
him, who abode this delay most impatiently: But very luckely, in the self
same momente, when that heat and mutine began to rise the.x. day of September,
was brought a remedy, and all the tempeste appeased, and Duke Henry for his
better assurance, fell at a composition with Duke Ericke his cousin, which was
his ennemy before. The king of Denmark had long since sent his Ambassador
into Saxon, to further the matters of Duke Augustus his son in law. They at
the length through the help of the Electour of Brandenburges Ambassadors,
reconcile him to Marquis Albert. The conditions were these, that Duke Augustus
should neither Albert reconciled to Augustus.
prosecute his brothers war, nor aid the ennemies of Marquis Albert. The
same shall the Marquis do, and if he shall chance to lead his army nere
unto the limits of Duke Augustus, he shall go forth without harm doing. That
Duke Auguste shall beware, that what time he discharges his army, they go not
to the Marquis ennemies. Finally that the league of inheritance, which is
between the house of Saxon and of Brandenburge, be renewed so shortly as may
be. The next day which was the.xii. of September, Marquis Albert leads his
army out of Brunswicke. And where as he chanced upon his ennemies, not far
without the city, he gives the charge. But vanquished with the number,
especially, where he had none and the Duke of Brunswick had.xx. enseignes of
footmen, he was discomfited and put to flight, albeit he left to the ennemy a
bluddy victory: After the battle he retourneth to Brunswick. In the mean
season they were in great distress, whom Count Plauie and his companions had
besieged at Hoffie. For where the town was both very sore battered with shot,
and the Marquis was vanquished in battle, and no rescowe came, being driven
through penury and want of all things, they render up the town. And Count
Plauie swears the towns men to be true to him and his children, and leaves
there in garrison one enseigne of fotemen, and the great ordenaunce.

We have spoken before of the Turkishe flete: Unto whom The Turkishe Naute
takes the Island of Corsica.
joined them selves certain French captains, setting forth of Marseilles, and
in manner in these days take the Island of Corsica, belonging to the state of
Genes, a few towns excepted. How the Emperor took the castle of Hesdine by
force, is before said. And ye same he raseth, as he had done Terwen before: The
French king in the mean season leuieth his army about Amiens, and attends,
till the Swysses, which he had sent for were come. When Hesdine was now
overthrown, the Emperor at the end of Auguste was in mind to attempt
Dorlans, but when the Constable heard thereof by espiall, he leads forth a
great number of horsemen, and some part of footmen, so spedely, that he set
upon them or ever they were aware, and puts them to flight, slaying and
taking many of them. And what time the Swisses were come about the beginning
of September, a ten thousand footmen, the king went up the water of Some, on
the bank whereof stands Amias, and comes to Corbie. From thence sending out
certain guidons of horsemen, he runs about the Town of Bappam, as though he
would besiege it. But the seventh day of September sendyng an Herault of Arms
to Cambraye, he requires to be certified, what hearts the Towns men bear
toward him, that is a very large town, belongyng to the Bishop, and
aunciently to the Empire, and in the same war which the The French king
attemteth Ca^bray
Emperor made with the French king, it was a neuter town indifferent to both,
but at this time it was more of the Emperous part. The king therefore sends
them word, that he will do nothing against co^uenauntes, so that they will do
the same, and let their city be set open for him, who is protector of
the^pire, and be ready to serve him in all things, as well as they be to
the emperor. But when yt governor of yt town had signified ye matter to the
Emperor he made answer, that for so much as the Frenchmen had with spoiling
and burning distroyed all the country, yt he should take them for his ennemies.
But before this message came again from the Emperor, the king making roades
out, began to assaie the city certain days. But where nothing prevailed, about
the mids of September, he rayseth his camp, and pitcheth his tents two
miles from the Emperors camp, which was than at Ualencene, a town of
Henault, nere unto the river of Scalde. Tha^ he approaches nerer. and certainly
the thing was like to have come to a batell, but yt end was this, that the
king, for that he had approached so nere yt Emperors fortifications, after he
had lost very many of his men, returned with his army the.xviii. day of
September. At his departing he distroyed all far and nere with fire. The matter
was after written privately unto friends, and the Frencheme^ in deed say, how
the Emperor would not fight, but this the imperials deny. The king retourning
home, discharges the Swisses. In this same month are discharged the garrison
of six enseignes of fotemen, which had by the Emperors commandment been
all that year at Auspurge, as I said in the fourmer book. About this time also
met at Hailbrune, ye Paul's grave, the Archebyshop of Mentz, the Duke of Bauier,
and the Duke of Wirtemberge. From the Archebyshop of Treuers, and the Duke of
Cleave came Ambassadors. There was present in the name of king Ferdinando, the
Bishop of Passawe. This Pestilence and firing at Paris.
summer the rage of yt plague made a great slaughter at Paris, and in the mean
time diverse were burnt there also for Lutheranisme. The king had a darling,
whose husband in time past had been governor of Normandy. The same woman being
a wydowe had two sons in law at the same time prisoners: Duke de Anmalle,
and the Mareschall Marchian as before I said. And for the ransom of Duke de
Anmalle, Marquis Albert demands a hondreth thousand crowns, but that was
above his ability. Wherefore the brute went, that she, which might do with the
king what she list, to yt end she might make the money, without her own
hinderaunce, had obtained that the king should give her their lands and
goods, that were condemned for heresy. For the custom of France is, that
the king takes not only the life of such as be condemned, but their goods
also. What time therefore this pray was obtained many they say, were brought
in danger. I will not certainly affirm this, but it comes to pass many
times in France and in other places, that the blood of innocent persons is
not only a pleasure, but also a gaigne to many. The blood of innoce^tes
gaynfull to many.


Marquis Albert, after his overthrow in battle, retourneth to Brunswicke, as
a little before I have said, but where he understood by espiall, that the Duke
would besege the city, making no long aboade, he gathered up what horsemen he
could, and commands them to abide his coming in Turingia, and sending to
his kinsfolks and allies for aid. When he was helped of them, he hastes into
Turinge, and the fifth day of October, using great expedition, beyond al men's
expectation, came to Weymer, where he was right gently received of John
Fridericke, and there remaining two nights, that he might refreshe his
soldiers after their travail, that lay scattered a broad in the country,
he marches toward Franckony. That time the Earl Plauie and his fellows
beseged a town of his named Birnt. But hearing of his coming, they levied
their siege, and got them to Bamberge. But he being accompanied with no great
band of horsemen, goes forth the.xi. day of October to epsy what is done at
Hosie, the town lately lost. The soldiers of the garrison chanced than to be
some what un warely without the gates, for their pleasure, being altogether
careless. Wherefore, fynding this occasion, and exhorting his men to be
valiant, ryding upon the spur, sets upon them quickly, and putting them
to flight, follows after, and entering in at the gates with them: when the
towns men rejoicing at his sight and presence, came running to him, he slew
the most part of them. He found there great pieces of Artillery, and certain
others, which they call field pieces, but without any carriage or furniture.
For the enemies had carried away all that were furnished to make the battery
at Birnte. Leaving there an enseigne of foteme^, he goes to Blasseburg, his
chief castle. After he came away from Brunswick Duke Henry beseged the city,
and battered it sore with shot. Brunswick beseged.
But the Bishops, and they of Norinberge, which supported all that army,
sendyng him word, that he should repair to them. Duke Henry demands of the
citezens about four thousand crowns. When they refused this, and the
Soldiers unless they were paid their wages, would bear none enseignes,
they being afraid of their own danger, promise to give him so much. Than at
the length leuieng the siege, when he had appointed his Soldiers a day, when
they should be paid, he takes his journey through Turinge.

That known, the Duke of Saxon, John Friderick, for that he was not as yet
made at one with him, goes him self and his three sons to Gothe, leaving his
wife at Weymer, for that she was not very well in health. Duke Henry being now
furnished The Duke of Brunswletters to the D. of Saxon
to take his journey, sending unto him letters, albeit says he, I have had
just cause, and good occasion also, in these certain years past, to revenge the
injuries of fourmer time done unto me, yet, for so much as you were in the
Emperors custody, I have attempted nothing against either your subjects or
children, but have permitted the thing to law and judgment. But you not
contented with fourmer injuries, have helped now of late also with your aid
and counsel, Albert of Brandenburg, the disturber of Germany, and my vttermoste
ennemy, which I know for certentie, although you wrought it secretly.
Wherefore, in case my army now shall do any hurt to your country, there is no
cause to complain thereof: For yt beginning is of your self. Duke Henry was
determined to have played the utter ennemy, with Albert and Uolrate Earls of
Mansfeld, for the last years war. Howbeit through thintercessio^ of Duke
August, who^ they sought upon, the matter was appeased. John Fridericke,
receiving the Duke of Brunswickes letters, began to treat with him by
ambassadors, and to mitigate his mind, so that he should come to Weymer with
two guidons of horsemen, and five enseignes of fotemen, and the residue of his
army, be placed in ye country therabout. Hither came to him from the Prince,
Minquice his chau^celour, and declaring his co^missio^, persuaded him thoroughly
The Du. of Brunswick is reconciled to the Duke of Saxon.
to quietness. And where before he required a great so^me of money, the same now
does he partly remit, and remaining there two days without doing any hurt,
departs friendly. At the.xviii. day of October, began a disputation at London,
by the Queen's commandment, of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the
altar, as they term it. The matter was reasoned six days, A disputation in
England
not without opprobrious words, where one of the Romsh dictrine, Doctor
Westo^, that was proloqutour, demeaned himself disorderly what was decreed of
the same, and what was thend of that parliament, I will declare here after.
About the end of October, Michael Serueto, a Spaniarde, was executed at Geneua.
He had many years since set forth diverse books, amongst Serueto a Spanyarde
burnt at Geneua.
other things of the trinity, utterly repugnaunt to yt common consent of the
church. And when at the length he came this year to Geneua, ye Senate being
certified of him, commands him to be aprehended, and after appoints
Calvin who before had written against him, and other ministers of yt church,
to have conference with him. Wherefore there was a great and a bitter
disputation amongst them, where as he would many times tell Calvin he lied,
very immodestly. But the Senate, least any thing should be done in so weighty
a matter rashely, asks counsel touching the same opinions of the Doctors of
Bernes, Zurick, Basil, and Schafusians. They all make answer, that the same
things redounde to Gods high contumely. And where he would not only not
forsake his opinion, but also with opprobrious words and cursed speakinges
defend the same, he was condemned to die. When he came to yt place of
execution, and William Farell did exhort him, he would not call upon Christ,
the eternal son of God. And where he she wed no token of repentance, yet
did he not defend his cause unto the people. Many men ascribed the blame of his
death to Calvin: But he, setting forth a book, recites his opinion, and all
the matter as it was, and declares that heretics may be punished with death.
The last saving one of October, James Sturmie a man most just and witty,
and the very beaultie of the Nobility of Germany, both for his excellent
gifts of mind, and notable lerning, departs out of this life at Strasburg,
wha^ he had layne sick of a quartaine, by the space of two months. He was
past three score and three years old. In these days Reynold Poole, an
Englisheman borne, a Cardinal, coming from Rome, goes through Germany to the
Emperor. And Reynold Poole Cardinal.
when he was come to the frontiers of the Paulsgraues country, receiving news
from the Emperor, who sent unto him Mendoza, he retourneth to Dilling, which
is a town of the Bishops of Auspurge by the water of Thonawe, and there
attends, till he shall hear more from the Emperor. The Duke of Brunswicke,
departing from Weymer, the seventh day of November came to his fellows Camp,
which was than at Lichtefelse a Town belongyng to Bamberge. In the which
Town were placed the Soldiers of Marquis Albert, a.ix. enseignes of fotemen,
the self same that had been a little before at Birnthe. And the Count Plauie
and his Fellows had beseged it. And what time the great pieces of Artillery
came from Norinberge, wherewith the Town might be battered, they making
surrendrie, the tenth of November yield them selves in their ennemies hands.
Who taking certain of the Captains, let go the rest without armure, or
enseignes. That done, they go to Colembach, a Town of Marquis Albertes, and
batter it very sore. And the townsmen perceiving that they were not able to
defend it from the ennemie carry out all their goods and household stuff into
the castle of Blasse burge, and after, setting the houses on fire, fly thither
them selves also. Thus in fine the ennemy enters the town, and kylling
diverse that were found there, quenches the fire, and spoyleth the rest that
was left. Afterward when Count Plauie had taken by surrendrie the castle
of Lichteberge and the towns of Biruth and Hofie, and rased the walls, he
besegeth the castle of Blasseburge, the chiefest forte that the Marquis had,
and kept with a great garrison. This time, the French men, going privily out
of Piedmount, upon the soden, take Uercelles, Uercelles surprised.
a town of Turin, which the Spanyardes kept. But where they thought them
selves hardly able to defend the same being so nere Millan, and Gonzago, the
Emperors lieftenaunt approached also with a power, they spoiled the town, and
returned home in due season, laden with boties. Not long after it was
signified and written both from Uenise and other places, of Solomon Emperor of
Turks, who had hanged his eldest son, Mustapha, for suspicion of treason.
They report, that The Turck hanged his son Mustapha.
the murder was committed, through the procurement of his second wife, which
coueted to have her son auaunced, and to succeed his father. I have, spoken
before of the Archebyshop of Cantorbury: He, and Queen Jane, with three sons
of the Duke of Northumberlande, being brought to the bar, in the The
Archbishop of Cantorbury and others condemned.
month of November, were condemned to suffer for treason: but according to the
custom of the Realm, they were carried again to prison, and through the
intercession of certain, were reserved. Sebastian Scherteline, of whom often
mention is made, for whose death the Emperor had appointed a great reward, as
in the last book is declared, was at this time reconciled to the Emperor and
king Ferdinando, and recovered all his goods. At the suite of the bishops
and their consortes, the judges of the chamber imperial, with a solemn
ceremony, the first of December do outlawe Marquis Albert of Brandenburg, as
a disturber of the public quiet, and of the Empire, dispatching Marquis
Albert outlawed.
abroad their letters hither and thither, and the same set up openly, and
permitted his life and goods to be spoiled of al me^. Duke Henry of
Brunswicke, leaving Count Plauie at ye siege of Blasseburg, the sixth day of
December goes with his power to Schuinfurte, which town in deed being
situated on the bank of the River of Moene, the Marquis kept with a strong
garrison. The Duke had an aid of Soldiers that came from Norinberge and
Forcheme. But Marquis Albert suspectinge the matter first, what vitaile so
ever was in places thereaboutes, he brought it into the Town, after he burnte
all the buildinges about it, to the intent he might take away the occasion of
besieging from the ennemie that time of the year. Wherefore Duke Henry, without
any exploicte done, having lost also many of his men, what time the Marquis
saleed out, and fought, retourneth home with no great company, passing through
the country of John Fridericke, without harm doing. When Marquis Albert
understood that he was outlawed by the chamber, he sueth to the Emperor, that
he would reuerse the judgment: But he says how he may not let the execution
of the law. So than he refuses the judgment as corrupted with bribes and
rewards, and makes a protestation, in a writing set forth of the same. But
the judges do commau^d the next provinces of the Empire to se the thing
executed.

This time was holden in England a parliament of all the The Godly laws of
good Edward repealed.
States of the Realm. And for so much as in king Edwardes time, there were
acts made, of the Lords supper, of ceremonies, of the ministration of the
Sacraments, of the marriage of priests, of the election of Bishops, of
ordeining the ministers of the church, of the form of praying, and of such
other like things. In this parliament it was enacted, that those statutes
should take no place, but that all men should follow the same Religion, which
was observed at the death of king Henry. Moreover, that no man should moleste
or disquiet such priests and ministrs of the church, as shall be ordained
hereafter. Furthermore the diuorcement of Queen Katherine, the Queen's mother is
pronounced to have been onlawfull. Finally there was debated among the Nobles
concerning the Queen's Queen Mary: affiau^ced to the Emperors son
marriage, and a greed that she should be espoused to the Emperors son, king
Philippe. Of whom there went a report before, that he should marie his Cousin,
daughter to Emanuell king of Portugale, and to his aunte Elenore. When this was
agreed upon, the Emperor sends for Cardinal Poole. The cause why the
Emperor would have him to stay in Germany was this (as many supposed) least
he being of the blood royal, and well beloved in his country, should have
been some let to the marriage. Instead of those Bishops, which I said before
were thrust in prison, were created others at this time. For the full
confirmation of the Matrimony, the Emperor sent a most honorable Ambassade
into England, which might affiaunce Queen Mary to king Philippe being absent.
The 1554.
chief Ambassador was Count de Egmonde. They arriuinge at London about the
beginning of January, after they had treated of the matter a few days, bring
it to pass. The commons of the Realm took this matter most grievously, and
diverse also of the Nobility, and laiyng their heads together, Commotion in
Kent.
do rebelle. The chief author and ring leader hereof was sir Thomas Wiat.
Who reysing a rebellion in Kente, made grievous and bitter orations, against the
Queen and her counsel, how through the marriage of a stranger, they will
procure to the Realm of England a perpetual and most miserable bondage, and
seek also that the true Religion being extinguished, they may again establishe
papistrie. And Kente is a county by the sea coaste, next unto France, by
reason of the city of Cantorbury right famous. The brute of this commotion
was brought to London the.xxv. day of January, and not long after was heard
also of Henry the Duke of Suffolk, who raised up men in Lecester shyre.
Wherefore the Queen assembleth what power she could, over whom she makes
general, Thomas the Duke of Norfolk, lately delivered out of prison. Who
about the end of the same month meting with his enemies at Rochester bridge,
being forsaken of his soldiers, was feign The Duke of Norfolk forsaken of his
men.
to save himself by flight, and with much pain came to London. Wherefore
amongst these tumultes, the Emperors Ambassadors to mitigate the rebellion
and for their own danger together, the first day of February take shipping and
depart. And the same day came the Queen into the city of London, and making
in her oration a grievous complaint against Wiat, declares what his intent is,
and what love she bears unto them, The queen's oration to yt commons in yield
hall.
and says how she has determined nothing of her marriage, without the
consent of her counsel. For she has lived a good part of her time a maiden,
and doteth not so of marriage, but that she would remain in the same kind of
life still, in case her Nobles and commons judged mete that it should so be.
For that the Realm should be in danger because of her marriage, and that all
should be full of slaughter, it should be to her most grievous. Wherefore let
them persevere in doing their duty, and assiste her in revenging the treason
of wicked persons. For this is their duty to do, which have commanded her,
as the lawefull heir of her father, by common assente to be Queen. When she
had on this wise pacified them, she appointed certain to defend the city, and
assigns the Earl of Penbroke to have the charge abroad. Now was Wiat
proclaimed before by an Heraulte of Arms, Rebel and Traitor to the Realm,
and to bring him in greater hatred there were read his requests sent unto the
Queen, whereof the first (as they say) was, that he would have the Queen in
his custody, and that it should be lawful for him to determine concerning her
marriage, and either to retain or displace her counselors at his pleasure.
The third day after was proclaimed a pardon to all the common people, so that
they would forsake the captains and authors of rebellion, and to him that
would bring Wiat prisoner, was appointed a great reward. The Duke of Suffolk
was also accounted in the number of traitors. And whereas the same day the
conspiratours came nere unto the city, the Queen cutteth in two London bridge
over the River of Temse, least any should go out to them. The next day they
come into Southwarke, supposing that the citeze^s would have joined with them:
But they were holden in with a garrison. In the mean season the Duke of
Suffolk is taken in an other part of the Realm, by the Earl of Huntington,
whom the The Duke of Suffolk.
Queen sent after him with horsemen. When the confederates had spent two days
at the city, and traueled on that side in vain, taking an other way they
pass over the Temse at King stone ten miles above London, and so march
toward the city. There at the last was Wiat and his fellows intercepted, of
that power, which the Queen had sent out with the Earl Wiat taken and
committed to Prison.
of Penbroke, and committed to prison. The next day, which was the seventh
day of the same month, proclamation was made, under pain of death, that who
so ever had received any of these rebels into his house, should bring them
forth and present them immediately. A few days after the Duke of Suffolk is
brought prisoner to London. And the.xii. day of February, the Duke of
Northumberlandes son, Guilford Dudley, and the lady Jane his wife, the Duke
of Suffolkes daughter The Lady Jane and her husband beheaded.
(which after king Edward I said was admitted Queen) were both beheaded, for
that, contrary to the lawful succession they had aspired to the crown. And
the Lady Ianes mishappe in a manner all men lamented, that so virtuous a Lady,
so well brought up, and so learned, should chance into so great a calamity,
for none other cause verily, tha^ that she had not refused the kingdom
offered. She made an oration to the people, very Godly and modeste, and calling
to God for mercy, through Jesus Christ, took a clothe of one of her
gentilwomen, and covered her own face and bound it about her eyes, and than
offered to the hangeman her neck to be stricken of. The self same day was
Corteney, Earl of Devonshire, whom the Queen a few months before had
delivered from long captivity, again taken upon suspicion of a conspiracy
made. After this in London and Westminster, where the Queen than was, many were
carried to execution, and that of the Nobility not a few. Some of them also
escaping, and amongst them a worthy Knight sir Peter Carrew, fled into
France. The Duke of Suffolk also The Duke of Suffolk beheaded.
the.xxi. day of February was beheaded, when he had been condemned four days
before. Whylest these things are done in England, Sibille of Cleave, the wife
of John Fridericke, Duke of Saxon, the foresaed.xxi. day of February departs
Sibille Duches of Saxo^ departs.
at Weymer, and the.xi. day after her the Prince him self, when he had layen
a while sick. They died both in the true knowledge of God: And suerly he,
when his wives tomb was a making in the church, had commanded a certain place
to be reserved for him by the side thereof, for that he should shortly follow
after. Neither was he disceaued in his opinion. For the third day of March,
about ten of the clock before noone, when he had heard a Sermon liyng in his
bed, calling upon Gods mercy, and commending his spirit unto God, he flitted
The Godly end of John Friderick.
out of this miserable life into the heavenly country.

And now was the composition made between him and Duke Augustus. For where the
king of Denmark, sendynge Ambassadors, as I said before, made great
intercession, after much and diverse, and almost an half years disceptation,
now at this time was the matter appeased, upon these conditions. John
Fridericke departs from the Electourshyp, from Meissen, and from the Towns
of mettell mines. Duke Augustus disceasing without Heirs males, all these
things return to the Duke of Saxon and his heirs males. In the mean time
the Duke of Saxon may use the name and the arms of Electourship, as well in
sealing of letters as in coyninge of money. Duke Augustus also grants to him
and to his sons certain towns and gouernementes, and for the debtes that were
behind of certain fourmer years which Duke Maurice had not paid to his
sons, he pays down to the sum of an hondreth thousand crowns. He
redemeth also the Castle An end made betwixt him and Augustus.
and town of Conigsperge, standing in Franconie, and laid to morgage to the
Bishop of Wirtemburge for.xl. thousand crowns, and restores it to the Duke
of Saxon and his sons. Finally the league of inheritance of the house of
Saxon, in these fourmer years infringed, is renewed, and established again.
The same composition John Fridericke, lying on his death bed, not long before he
ended his life, confirmed with his writing and seal, and commanded that his
sons should do likewise. Wherefore with a noble courage vanquishyng all
euilles and miseries, wherinto he chanced, he died not in prison, nor in the
custody of foreine soldiers, wheru^to he was appointed, but through the
notable benefit of God set at liberty, and retourning home to his wife, his
children, and his own religion, ended his life most peaceably, leaving to his
sons and subjects peace and quietness. His wife also the Duchess, having her
own wyshe; left this earthly mansion. The Godliness of his wife.
For often times she had said, that she could be content to dye with all her
heart, so that she might first se her husband safe and at liberty. And the
same many times did she pray to the living God for, with many tears and
sighinges. The same day that she ended her life, had Duke August a son borne
named Alexander. In these same days the rest of the strangers that were in
England, yea and many of the same nation, forsakyng their country for the
alteration of Religion, and the Queen's proclamatio^s, conueye them selves into
Germany, whereof some tarry at Wesell, some at Franckefurte, and many also at
Strasburg. John Alascus, a Polonian, a noble man borne, brother to Hierome, a
man of excellent learning, went thence before winter John Alasco
with diverse others into De^marke: But where as he was there not very friendly
received, by reason of his contrary opinion, touching the Lords supper, and
for the same cause was denied to dwell in the lower parts of Saxony, he came at
the length to Emden, a town in east Friseland, and there remained. The fourth
day of March, the Queen of England set forth ecclesiastical laws, wherein she
commands bishops and their officers that they receive no man. that is
suspected of heresy, into holy Ecclesiastical laws in England.
orders, that they rote by clean all heresies, that they abolyshe al naughty
and pestiferous books, that they prescribe an order to Scholemaisters, and
preachers, that they take away from married priests their wives and benefices,
and inioyne them punishment condign for their misdoing, yet so, that such as
by the consent of their wives, will proteste to make a diuorseme^t they do
handle more gently, and such as amend to be also restored. Moreover that all
prayers at common supplications be said in the latin tongue, after the old
custom, that all holy days be observed, and the Ceremonies of fourmer time be
restored that big children before christened be confirmed of the Bishops, and
that they be taught in Schools how to help a priest to say Mass and serve
him at the altar. What time the king of England, Henry the eight banished the
Bishop of Rome, as I said in the.ix. book, he made this law amongst others,
that no man should be admitted to any office or ecclesiastical dignity, except
he would first proteste by a solemn oath, both him and his successors also to
be supreme head of the English church, over the which the Bishop of Rome
has no authority, neither to be any other thing than Bishop of the city of
Rome, with whom they will have nothing to do. Which oath the Queen when she
published these things, did now release also, and charge the Bishops,
that from henceforth it be required of no man, secretly after a sort restoryng
the supremacy of the bishop of Rome. Where she speaks of common prayer, thus
it is. By the king her fathers commandment procession was said in the
vulgar tongue: Wherein God was prayed to among other things, that he would
deliver them from the sedition, conspiracy and Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome.
This form therefore set forth in print, ye Queen now commands to be
abolished. Not long after the Lady Elizabeth the Queen's sister, a Lady very
well learned, was committed The Lady Elizabeth committed to yt Tower.
to the Tower, for that she was thought privy to the fourmer conspiracy. At
the end of March, the ennemies of Marquis Albert return to the siege of
Schninfurt. In the month of April came into Germany, out of England, men of
great learning, sir Richard Morisine, Knight, of whose Ambassade I have spoken
in the fourmer book, sir Anthony Coke, and sir John Cheke, Knights, both the
kings scholemaisters and they went after into Italy. Thither came also John
Pomet, Bishop of Winchester, which by reason of this alteration of Religion
was displaced, as likewise were diverse others.

About this time, where as the forces of the Duke of Florence, and the Bishop
of Rome besieged Senes: Peter Strosse, who in the French kings name defended
the city, understanding The siege of Senes.
certain things by espiall, set upon them suddenly, and slew of them a great
number. They notwithstanding, restoring their strength continued the siege.
Wherefore the French king hyreth about three thousand Swisses to aid those that
were besieged. The Duke of Florence had fiaunced his daughter to Ascanio the
Bishop of Romes nephewe, and means were devised, to auaunce him by this
marriage.

In these days; the governor of Millan Ferdinando Gonzago, being sent for,
came to the Emperor in Brabant: Thither came also Babtista Castaldus, whom
the Emperor, as I said, in fourmer years sent Ambassador into Hongarie.
About the mids of April, Sir Thomas Wiat was executed at London: Before he
suffered, excusinge the Lady Elizabeth The death of Wiat.
and the Earl of Deuonshyre diligently, he affirmed that they were not privy
to this conspiracy.

Than also the Archbishop of Cantorburye, the Bishop of London and Hugh Latimer
were carried first to Windsore, and after to Oxford, and after they had disputed
with the divines of that university, and also of Cambridge, perseueringe in
their opinion, they are committed to prisone. At the same time again the Queen
held a Parliament. Wherein she propounded two things chieflye, concerning her
own marriage, and restoring the supremacy to the bishop A Parlame^t in England.
of Rome: whereof she obtained the first upon certain conditions, but this
other, the Nobility being chiefly against it she could not persuade. Cardinal
Poole, after he had been a certain time with themperor, went to the French
king, and was a counselor of peace to them both: but he prevailed nothing. At
thend of April, Marquis Albert receiving lx. thousand crowns, sends away
Duke D'anmalle his prisoner, where a little before he had lost Holansperge, an
other fortress of his dominion. Not long after, themperor sending his letters
from Bruissels, where he was in the winter before outlawed by the chamber, he
outlaweth him again, and complaininge that he should work so much mischief
unpunished, commands with words most weighty, that all Princes and states,
but chiefly those that are next him, do put the Proclamation of outlawrye in
execution. They had met twice before this at Roteburge to treat a peace: but
whereas nothing was concluded, themperoure decreed this against him, and for
the same the states assembled after, at Wuormes, al such as belong to the
province of the Rhine. Of the common assemble of thempire yt should be holden at
Auspurge, I have spoken oftener then once: and because themperor, being impeched
both with sickness and also with wars, could not be there, king Fernando at his
request, takes this charge upon him, and the Princes being of him desired to
come, excused them selves by reason of the troublesome state of Germany.
Themperor had all ready sent thither Thassemble of Auspurge
certain of his counsel, and had also chosen out the Cardinal of Auspurge for
the same purpose: but what time for the cause above named, no man came, the
matter was differred til a time more convenient. Marquis Albert had written
certain things spitefully and bitterly against the Norinbergians, as though in
the former war they had privily aided the French king and his fellows, and had
paid money, as though they should have had a great suspision of themperor, both
they and also the bishops their fellows, had spoken contumelious words, that
they should favor the french king more then themperor, yt they them selves had
attempted this war against him, yt they do what they are able, yt the bishops
should not keep covenants as though they should seek to destroy all the nobility,
as though they should have broken their promise expressed and signed in
writing, as though they should have made a wicked and a cruel war against the
people of his dominion, as though they had corrupted the judgment of the
Chamber with bribes. He called them also traitors to their country, dispersing
abroad libels thereof, through out Germany. This known, the Norinbergians,
when after the taking of Holansperge, they had found certain things of the
like A wrytinge of the city of Norinberge against Marquis Albert.
sort, the.xviii. day of May make answer at large, and addressinge their
writing unto all the states, both confute al things in order, and verify the
most things of him, and recite, upon what condition they gave Monye to Duke
Moris and his fellows, and declare who is the author of the war. For even at
the same time say they that the Princes intercessoures met at Hedelberge, he by
his vau^tcurrers levied as much power as he possible might in Saxonye, and
that is to be proved as well by others as also by those letters, which one of
his curriers, William Grumpache wrote unto him the xxix. of March.

Than if king Ferdinando, duke Moris, and the dukes of Bru^swicke, had not
imploid all their force, yea their lives and blud for their country, he would
doubtless have made an horrible destruction and waste through out all
Germany. He had driven the Bishops of Franckonie to conditions most
unreasonable: but that composition the Emperor made after frustrate, and gave
them leave to recover again their own. Wherefore the Bishop of Bamberge wan
again certain of his Towns and governments, long before that he was
received again into the Emperors favor, and even than, at what time by reason
of his high treason, not only his lands and possessions, but his life also
might have been taken from him lawfully. Afterward by the Emperors
commandment we made this league for the defense of our provinces. Than was
^e reconciled to the Emperor, and obtained of him the confirmation^ the
compactes made, but yet upon condition that he should be true to him and to
the Empire: but he, all be it the Emperor permitted him no violence, in the
time of the siege of Metz wrote home to his captains, that they should fear
the bishops, and unless they would restore that they had taken to work force
and violence.

So they, in the monthe of January followinge, making an invasion recovered
many things by force of arms. Wherefore the Bishop of Bamberge, admonished
his fellows to aid him according to their league: we nevertheless, least we
should do any thing rashly by sondrye letters and intermessagers, exhorted
Marquis Albert to peace: but he answeringe contemptuouslye and opprobriously,
said amongs other things, that the mo ennemies he had, the more honor and
praise should he win.

This was in the beginning of March, and not long after began yt treatye at
Hedelberge. And when he there refused most ample and large conditions, his
kinffolkes and allies, intercessors, exhorting him unto peace, he went home and
levied an army, we being solicited and moved again by the Bishops, did than
at the last profess our selves his enemies. This was the last year, the first
of April. And whereas he him self has moved a most cruel war, after a very
strange example, and such as has not been heard of in Germany, he goes about
to charge us with that crime. But assuredly it is untrue, neither was there ever
any such like thing complained of unto us. But his soldiers have omitted no
kind of cruelty, and chauncing on a time to find plowmen in the field, hanged
them up both the fathers and the sons, in a manner before our faces: and
have not only enforced women a live, but have also dug them up when they
have been dead. The last year in ye month of May, a certain gentelman of
Franconie, Nicholas Eglofsten, was enforced to yield up his castle of Conrute:
but he did not only The cruel acts of Marquis Albert.
burn it, but also fineding there about a fortye country men, and with them the
minister of the church, commanded them to be hanged up all in an Orchard
adjoining to the Castle, and carried away with him his wife and his mother
Prisoners. He went about in deed to excuse this matter by letters to the
Nobility of Franconie, but nothing to the purpose. How he also entreated his
prisonners, both our men and the pledges of Bamberge which he haled with him
into Saxony can declare, and all other such as he has detained in prisone.
For both he demanded of them an unreasonable sum of money, and most
grievously tormented them upon the rack, and also sterued them for honger and
cold, so that many died, and the residue having their limbs stark dead, by
reason of the cold, were feign to have them cut of and taken away. And whereas
certain of them, had nothing, either to pay their ransom or to live by, he
forbad they should have any meat given them. And if the souldioures of the
ward, being vanquished with their lamentations and pitiful cry, had not
sometime cast them a piece of bread, that was so dry and molded with long
kepinge, that no Cattle nor brute beasts, unless it were for extreme honger,
would have touched, they had died all for want of meat.

And all be it yt some of them made a piece of money by their friends, yet hardly
could they therefore get a little straw and water. Wherefore certain were
staruen for honger and thirst, not only in the terrible darkness, but also
in the stench of the prison, in the mids of thordure, Uermen, and venomous
beasts. And when they had thus perished, ye coarses were not than drawn out,
nor removed from thence but left with them that were alive there, and
increased the Prison with stench. But how gently we have entreated his
Prisonners, both captains and certain centurions, and even such as deserved
worst of us, and have rendered them selves without condition, that may be known
by their own testimony. And how unwilling he is to have peace, that may well
appear by the two last treaties of Roteburge, (as you know) most noble
Princes, which either were there your selves, or sent thither your
ambassadoures.

For although we sustained by him wonderful loss and calamity, and all be it
he was already outlawed, yet in the former conuention we made this offer That
if he would leave his war, and demean him self well from henceforth, and
would try the matter by the law, we would also lay a part our weapons, and
put the matter to tharbitrement of the Princes that were intercessours, or to
the judgment of themperor and states of the Empire: the same offer made the
Bishops, by the advice and consent of the ambassadors of King Ferdinando:
The counselloures also of the Princes intercessoures, for the love of peace
added this moreover, that if the states of Franconie, that be in confederacy,
would promise to restore him his province, as it was than, they should cease
war on both sides, and keep peace from henceforth, and that the Publication,
in that behalf should be frustrate, and the whole controversy committed to a
friendly and lawful treaty.

But he in a contempt and mockery called the intercessors his enemies
procurers, and said he would not suffer him self to be brought into such
distress, neither did he covet to have this outlawry as yet reuearsed, and
would also put in hazard the reaste of that he had, and spoke many such other
like things, both rashly, opprobriously and with threatninges, to the highest,
mean, and lowest degrees, as it is to be proved by those letters, that are in
Printe at Holansperge. After, at the next assemble, although we offered more
largely, yet was he nothing the rather inclined to peace, yea, he went about
crafts and policies, neither commendable, nor princelike. For at the request
of the intercessors, committinge the whole matter to the Emperor and certain
Princes, he promised not to attempt longer war, and that same compromise,
themperor sending letters from Bruissels the fourth of April, did ratifye, and
willed the states of Frankonie, that they should leave war also, and commit
the cause to his care and fidelity.

And this did Marquis Albert for this intent full craftily, as it appears by
such things as followed, yt both he might stay themperor that he should not
co^mau^d certain provinces of thempire to put the outlawry in execution, and
that he him self also might have space to leuy an army, which he was gatheringe
that time in all places, to have oppressed us upon a soden: but through Gods
benefit the matter was detected, by his own letters at the same time
intercepted, which he sent hither and thither to his chief Captains and
Ce^turions, wherein was this: that he has admitted the treaty of Roteburge, for
this purpose only, that in the mean season, he may prepare him self, and set
upon his enemies: and now if thintercessors shall happily require them to forsake
their enseignes, let them not obey, but keep together, and in no wise scatter
abroad: and for an excuse let them allege this cause, that they have many
months wages owing them, and therefore may not depart before they be paid, but
say, how they will remain in those parties without any hurt doing, til they
have received their money. Hitherto appertain also those letters of his, wherein
he commands his chieftaines, with out delay to set upon al men, whosoever
they be, when this treason therefore was brought to light, and whereas our men
demanded of of his ambassadors, sent to Roteburge, whether he would stand to
the compromise, and could have no certain answer: by the advice of king
Ferdinandoes ambassadors, we were constraind to commit the matter unto God first
and to themperor and thempire, as our letters sent to themperor the same time
declare. And seeing the matter is thus, and for so much, as every man may easily
perceive, by such things as we have truly rehearsed, that we are hitherto
driven by so many railinges, reproaches and displeasures, to repulse his fury
and violence, that we have obeyed the commandment of the high and chief
Magistrate, therefore we beseech all men, that love virtue and honesty, and
hate violence and iniurye, to consider diligently, that unless the sentence
given should be put in execution, and this his boldness be repressed, how
great danger hangs over not us only, but them also.

Wherefore let no man aid or assist him, or give him any succoring place or
refuge, but as it becomes noble Princes, and such as love their country, we
wish they would not only not impeche thexecution of the commandment, but that
they them selves also would se the thing executed to the vttermooste of their
power, and work so herein, that all others may be made afraid by his example.

And that also they give no creadite to his famous libels and slanders set
forth against us, and if he shall again attempt any thing against us that
they further him not with their aid or Counsel, we require them most
earnestlye. Marquis Albert receiving money of duke D'anmalle, as before is said,
hastes into Saxony, and there hiringe soldiors in the monthe of May, goes to
Schuinfurt privily, and the tenth day of June, with viii. hundredth horsemen,
and vii. enseigns of fotemen, in the dawning of the Marquis Al. goes to
Suinfort.
day, he enters the town, on that side that was not besieged. And for because
they were in great penury of al things, the third day after when he had spoiled
the Town, in the night he leads out all the soldiors, as well horsemen as
fotemen to the nombre of xviii. enseignes with the artillery, leaving no ward
at al to keep the gates and takes his iourny to Kitzing, a town standing
beneath on the river of Moene. When it was now light day, and thenemies
perceived the gates unfurnished, at the sound of the Tro^pet, they prepare them
selves every man to follow and pursue after him: but diverse, and that chiefly
the soldiors of the Duke of Brunswick, were commanded of him to enter the
town, who spoil and destroy all that was left. Wherefore the chief captains
and governors of the field, least through the delay and taryinge of the
reaste, Marquis Albert should have time to escape, set the town on fire in
diverse and sundry places: so they being driven to depart, repair unto tharmy.
And albeit the Marquis was gone certain hours before them, yet for that he was
so let and hindered with thordenaunce, yt he could make no speade, he was
staide of the forewarde, and with them he bickereth: but the reast of tharmy
approaching, when he saw him self to weak for so great a multitude, exhortinge
his men to make the best shift they can, every man for him self (he)
accompanied with His flight.
a few horsemen, goes spedely out of sight, and by swimming over ye river to
Kitzing, escapes, losing all his munition and carriage.

The viii. day after was the Castle of Blasseburgh, his chiefest Fortress
rendered up, and came into the hands of king Ferdinando, when the Chauncelour
of Boheme, Count Plauie, which beseged the same continually was dead a little
before. Thus therefore Marquis Albert was expulsed and driven out of all his
dominion. Whilst these things were done in Franconie, Henry Duke of
Brunswicke, in the lower parts of Darony, compels diverse, as well Princes as
Cities, and many of the Nobility to pay money, and be under his subjection, as
the Duke of Megelburge, the dukes of Luneburge, the Princes Anhaldes, and
Earls of Mansfelde: An other part also of his and the bishops power, having
discomfited the Marquis, and taken Schuinfurt, punished right sore Roteburge, a
Town imperial, and Count Henneberge among others, and were thus bent, that
except they might recover the charges of the war, which they said appartained
to all men, they pretended to work much violence: but through mediation the
matter was appeased, and the war ceased.

In manner about this time, Charles duke of Sauoy, deprived of a great part of
his dominion, as I told you in the tenth book, departs out of this life,
leauinge his son Philibert his heir, The death of Charles D. of Sauoy.
who had served themperor in his wars now many years. King Fernando setting
forth of late a Proclamation, had commanded his subjects, that nothing should
be altered in the Sacrament of thanckes giving, and that after thold custom,
such as received the Lords supper, should be contented with the one kind as they
term it: but the Nobles, Gentlemen, and Cities, whereas they had diverse times
before sued to him herein, now again they require him most humblye by their
letters, and alledginge many teasons, that they might he permitted to receive
the whole Supper of the Lord, according to the commandment and institution
of Christ, and custom of the primative Church. Unto these letters of theyrs,
the xxiii. of June, the king ausweringe from Uienne, I had full little The
letters of king Fardinando to his subjects of the Lords Supper.
thought (says he) that you would have called in question that proclamation of
mine, and have found cauillations therein. For I me^t only that my subjects
should persevere in thauncient and true Religion, and obedience of the
Catholic church, without the which, no man can obtain salvation, and that
they should receive this sacrament, the chiefest of all others, after the law
and custom of the church, and neither through the corrupt opinions of certain,
or for curiosity and pride also, should swerve from that duty, which they both
owe to the church and also to the Magistrate. This is verily the mind and
effect of the same proclamation: nether is it any new thing that I commanded,
but an old ordinance, which has been brought as it were by hand unto my
progenitors, Emperors, kings, and Dukes of Austrich, and to me also, when I
began to govern the common wealth, was deduced, and unto this time, by me
diligently, as becomes a Christen Prince, observed, and at sondrye times to
my people also enjoined that they should remain in the same. Wherefore I
supposed that you would not have attempted any thing against this my
proclamacion, which in all other things do contend, that there should be no
alteracio^, and that your laws and liberties might remain unto you whole. For
certainly that you do, is a new devise, and lately of you conceived by a
certain opinion, and now also reasoned at large, as though it were lawful for
you to judge of my commandments, which am your chief and supreme
magistrate, or as though the same ought of right to be permitted you, which
certain years now diverse of you, of your own accord, contrary to the laws of
the church and my will, have taken upon you privately to usurp. But because
the question is hard and full of difficulty, as you also affirm, I will
doubtless think more thereupon, and when time is, make such answer, that it may
be well perceived, that I do not tender a little the salvation of my people:
but in the mean time I look for all obedience of you, and trust that you will do
nothing against my proclamation. Unto this the states The states make aswer to
yt Kings letters.
afterward answer again by writing: And the same (say they) that we have often
times spoken before of our savior Christ's commandment, most puissant king,
we now repete again. For he did institute his supper with plain and manifest
words, that after the same sort, that he him self prescribes, it might be
received of al men: nether is it lawful for any man mortal to alter his
institution.

It may be proved also that this was the manner of thauncient Church, and the
same that is used now a days, to have crept in by little and little. For even
the counsel of Constance grants that ye same was so instituted of Christ.
Where therefore this concerns our salvation, certainly neither curiosity nor
pride has moved us here unto. Whereby we trust the rather, that you will refer
your consultation to the commandment of Christ and his Apostles, and consent
of the primative Church, and will not that our conscience should be burdened,
which thing that it might please you to do, we beseech you for the honor of God,
and the glory of his name, and for our own salvation. We do acknowledge you,
and that most gladlye to be our high Magistrate given us of God, and there is
nothing in this world, but that you both may and ought to look for at our
hands, if it lie in us to do. But in this one matter we desire you to be
favorable to us. In the bishop of Wirciburges dominion there is an Abbay of
Monks, called Newstat. The Abbot thereof, Ihon Frise, Thabbot of Newstat
accused of Herisye.
after he came in suspicion of Lutheranisme, the fifth day of May he is cited,
to come the vi. day to Wirciburge, and to answer unto certain interrogatories.
And the questions were these. Whether it be lawful to swear: whether any man
be bounden by his oath, whether it be lawful to make a vow of Chastity, poverty
and obedience, Interrogatories ministered to him.
whether such manner of vows do bind, whether becomes better the ministers
of the church, marriage or singleness, whether there be one true and Apostolical
church, whether the same, as the spouse of Christ, be continually governed by
the holy ghost, whether she can always discern true and holsom things, whether
the same by reason of her head, Christ's vicar, be called rightly ye church of
Rome, whether all the books of both Testaments, that be in the Cannon, be
lawful and true, whether the holy scripture ought to be expounded, after the
mind of the holy fathers, the doctors of the Church and counsels, and not after
thopinion of Luther and others of the like sort, whether that besides the
Scriptures, there is need also of other traditions as be those of the Apostles
and such other like, whether the same faith, aucthority and obedience ought to
be given to the same traditions, as to the holy scripture, whether we ought to
obey ye civil magistrate in politic matters, and in holy things,
thecclesiasticall ordinary, whether there be vii. sacraments of the Church.
whether children ought to be Christened, whether they ought to Christen in
the Latin tongue, with Salt, Oil, Water, Charactes and exorcismes, whether
that by baptism be clean put away Original sin, in such sort, that
concupiscence, which remains loses the name of the same sin, whether the
bread be changed and consecrated into the body, and the wine into the blud of
Christ by the virtue of the words which the Priest pronounces, and whether it
do so remain, although it be not by and by received, whether the Sacrament
being after this sort consecrated is to be worshipped, when either it is borne
about for the honor of Christ, or carried unto sickfolkes, or also be reserved
in the pix, whether Christ is to be worshipped under the form of bread and
wine, whether Christ be wholly underneath either kind, whether the confession
of sins do prepare a man to the worthy receiving of the Sacrament, whether
Mass be a true and continual sacrifice, whether yt the Cannon of the mass is
to be retained, whether the Sacrament of confirming is to be used, whether there
be iii. parts of penance, contrition, confession, and satisfaction, whether
the priest may forgive his sins, which has not before confessed the same,
whether Priests only have authority of the keys, whether the souls of good
men do love us, whether they pray to God for us, whether we ought to pray unto
Saints, whether sainets Holy days ought to be observed, whether the relikes
of Saints ought to be worshipped, whether the souls of the godly not yet
repurged, be relieved with Masses, Prayers, Fastinges and Almose deeds, whether
there be a place of Purgatory, whether the time of Lent and other times of
fasting appointed by the Church ought to be observed, whether on days by the
Church forboden, we ought to abstain from eating of flesh, whether the people
ought to be stirred up unto religion by Ceremonies, what Ceremonies be godly,
and which not, Unto these does he make answer, the xxvii day of May at
large: And although he confirmed his sayings with the Testimonies not only of
scripture, but of the doctors also, yet was he condemned the xxv. of June, and
deprived of all his function. About thend of June, the french king marching
with an army out of Cha^paigne, The frenche^ King muadeth themperours
countries. Mariburge taken.
takes the way to the river of Mase, and inuading the Emperors country joining
to Tournay, surpriseth among many other things. The Towns of Bouine and
Dinaunt, spoyleth them, and raseth the castles there, and taking Mariburg,
fortifieth it with munition and garrison. Themperor going out of Bruissels with
his army comes to Namures, which is a town by the river of Sabie v. miles
beneath Dinant. The French king appeared to have desired the battle: but when
the time was tracted, he tourneth into Henault, and takes Biuse a town and
castle of Queen Mary's the Lady Regent of Flaunders, where she had a house of
pleasure, all the which he spoileth and burns, and destroys all the
country, far and near with spoiling and burning. After he comes to the
siege of Rentie, a town in the borders of Artois: but at the Emperors coming,
whose army was now wholly assembled, the siege was levied, after light
conflictes had, and skirmishing on either side. This was in the month of
August, whereas in a manner the same time, the kings army in Italy, at the
conduite of Peter Strosse, set upon by themperors power, whereof was governor
the Marquis of Marignan, received a great overthrow. Uery many of the Swisses
were slain, which as I said before were sent thither by the king.

In the mean time the Emperors son Phillip, the xix. day of King Phillip
arriueth in England.
July, arriueth in England with a Navy out of Spain, and the fourth day after
in the evening, comes to Winchester, where the Queen tarried for him, and
going to the Cathedral Church, with all the Nobility before him, was received
of the bishop of Winchester and certain others. Emonges other Princes there
was with him the Duke of Alua. The next day he goes to the Queen, and talking
with her long and much, very familiarely, the second day, which was kept
holy to S. James the Patron of Spain, the marriage was solempnised: And there
was themperors ambassadoure, who affirmed openly, how themperor had given to
his son for his marriage, the kingdom of Naples. Afterward departing from
thence, at the last he entered into London the head city with great pomp and
solempnitie. In the month of August certain states of thempire mete again at
Wourmes, for that themperor called upon thexecution against Marquis Albert. Who
being expulsed out of his country, went first into Loraine, and after into
France, where the king denied him not intertainmente. And because it was to be
feared least he should attempt something, least he should make a road into
Alsatia or the parties near unto it: they that are of the province of Rhine,
about thend of Septembre, sent certain guido^s of horsemen into the borders of
Loraine to keep the passages. But they at the last without any exploict done,
return home, not without the damage of them where they lay. In the month of
Octobre they assemble again at Frankfurt, both for this, and for other causes.
Unto the which conuention were brought the letters of Marquis Albert, wherein he
complains of his enemies last war, and speaking much of yt bishop of Arras,
he taunteth spitefully among others, the bishops of Treues and Strasburge and
also the Lantz The french kings letters.
grave, and calls those bloody horsemen, that lay in wait for his life.
There were letters also red in the name of the French king, written in the
Dutch tongue the first day of Octobre. And speaking of thold amity of France
and Germany, our eunemies, are wholly addict, says he, to infringe the same:
And certain years past, they wrought the matter so far, that my father was
declared an enemy: but I nevertheless, when about two years since the state of
thempire was miserable and clean out of order, forgetting the offenses past,
declared plainly, what good will I bare you, following here in the fotesteps of
my progenitors, which sought ever to auaunce your honor and dignity. For it
can not be proved that ever they offered you wrong: but our adversaries have
many ways, gone about to pluck from you all your liberties and goods also,
what time they have devised sundry policies not only to exact money, but have
also kindled factions between noble houses; as you know rightwell: And albeit
the case stands thus, yet through their procurement, I hear say, how
certain states, which are in deed my neighbors, of whom verily I looked for no
such thing, have moved war against me, where they have proclaimed the same
before.

Which doubtless is to me great marvel; and so much the more in deed, for that
there is no quarrel betwixt us. For in that, which is commonly spoken of
Marquis Albert, as though I should aid him against you, I receive wrong. For
inasmuch as I show him favor. I do it both for the same old friendship, which
I said has been always between us and also for that this has been ever the
custom and entertainment of the kings of France, that Princes in adversity,
especially Germans, should have with them a safe refuge and succoring place
It were much more pleasant to me surely, to se him in honor at home, and all
things safe and well, than to se him thus discomfited, expulsed and destitute
of all succor: I would have wished also, that he had not chanced into this
calamity, or at the least wise might now be reconciled upon reasonable
conditions. And for so much as through the fault of mine adversary he is
brought into this distress, which he has pronounced the same thing
frustrate, and after has ratified it? why should I be had in suspicion, for
having compassion of his misfortune? but that I should give him aid against
thempire, it never came in my thought: neither will I do it here after, and
that you may be assured of, so that you again do nothing against the laws of
amity. And whereas youu ought to look for nothing else of me but that is
peaceable and frendlye, I require of you again, that you be not circumuented
through their crafts, which neither love me nor you, so that either you should
make war your selves with me, or aid them with men and monye. For this is
their endeavor, that they may make their private affairs common. But rather
observe amity, and take the condition that is offered you. And what you intend
herein, I require you to advertise me plainly by the bearer hereof: Moreover,
that according to thauncient custom and pacification of Passaw, my
ambassadors, which shall come to the next assemble of thempire may have
safeconduit.

Unto this was made answer, how the horsemen that were sent to the frontiers of
Loraine, concerned none injury toward him, but was done for this intent, that
in case Marquis Albert should make any sudden invasion, his enterprise might
be disapoynted: touching his Ambassadoures and the safeconduit, for so much as
they have no commission hereof, they will advertise their princes, and distrust
not but they will do herein, that shall be reasonable. About thend of Octobre,
themperor gives over to his son Phillip Thempeor gives to his son Phyllip
the dukedom of Millan.
the Dukedom of Millan, sendinge messagers to inuest him herein with
accustomed Ceremonies. The French king leuiynge his siege from Rentie, as
before is said, and not long after discharging the Swisses, he placed the reast
of his soldiors in garrisons. And themperor not far from Hesdine, which in the
year before he took and overthrew (as is said) espying a place convenient,
began a new fortification of a Town, and to the intent he might bring it to
pass, he maintains an army, which in the monthe of Nouembre, destroys all
Picardy with spoiling and burning as far as Amias. Wherefore the whole force
and violence of the war lighted upon the pore and miserable people on either
side. Afterward themperor discharging the reast of his army, interteined
still a legion or two for him self. The same time the French king sent a new
power into Italy, and among others certain Almaignes, to relieve them of
Senes, whom the Emperors force and the dukes of Florence besieged hotely.

At the.xii. day of Nouembre was holden a Parliament in England. For the which
Cardinal Poole coming out of Brabant, whereas certain ambassadors were commen
out of England, to co^duit Cardinal Poole arriueth in England.
him, and among them the Lord Paget, the xxiii. of Nouembre he came to
London, being right honorably received, in all places, whersoeuer he came, and
was immediately restored to his blud and house of inheritance with common assent
and consent, from the which king Henry the eight had displaced him. The v. day
after he came into the Parliament house, and in the presence of king Phillip
and the Queen, wha^ he had showed the cause of his ambassade, he exhorts them
to return to the communion of the church, and restore to the most holy father
the bishop of Rome his due authority, who will grant unto the^ all clemency and
gentleness: he admonishes the^ also, to give God thanks, which has given them
such a king and a Queen: Finally, where they have restored him to his house and
inheritance, he takes it for a very great benefit, and says he is so much the
more bounden, to restore them again to the heavenly court and country, which he
wishes most of al other things. When he had spoken to this effect, he goth a
part. There the bishop of Winchester being Chancellor, repeting his oration, and
with many words exhorting the^ to unity and concord, says they are bounden to
give God great thanks, who of his unspeakable mercy has raised them up a
prophet of their own sede, which is, that most honorable Cardinal, which is
wholly inclined unto their salvation. The next day, when the Nobility and
commons had approved thoration and requests of cardinal Poole, there was drawn
a form of a petition, wherein they beseech the King and the Queen, that they
would make intercession to him. The some of that supplication was this. How it
repented them sore of the scisme, for that they have denied their obedience to
the Apostolical seat, and that they have consented to the decrees made against
the same: but from henceforth they will be at the commandment of him and the
Queen, and will do all that ever they can, that all such laws and statutes may
be abrogated the same Parliament: Wherefore they most humbly beseech their
highness, that they would be means, and bring to pass, that being absolved
from the sins and censures, whith they have committed against the laws of
the Church, they may be received again England returns to her vomit.
as penitent children into the bosom of Christ's church, that from henceforth
they may serve God in the obedience of the sea and Bishops of Rome, to the
glory of his name, and increase of their own salvation. An other day, when
the King and the Queen and Cardinal Poole were present: the Chaunceloure
stands up and pronounces openly, what the states had determined concerning
the request of the Bishop of Romes Legate: Afterward does he exhibit the
supplication aforesaid comprised in wrytinge and subscribed, to the King and
the Queen, beseching them to receive it. They when they had opened it, deliver
it again to the Chaunceloure to read.

Than he demands of all the company, whether they be content herewith?
which when they had affirmed, the King and the Queen arrise, and deliver it
to the Cardinal. When he had red it, he exhibiteth unto them the letters of his
commission. And than were the same red, that all men might perceive, that he
had authority given him by the Bishop of Rome to assoile them. After he makes
an oration, and declares how acceptable a thing unto God is repentance, and
how much thaungels in heaven rejoice for a penitent sinner, and alleging for
the purpose many examples, gives God thanckes, which has put in them a mind
desirous of amendment This done, he arriseth: likewise do the King and the
Queen, and knele down upon their knees. There he than calling upon the high
power and mercy of God, besecheth him to look mercifully upon the people, and
pardone their offenses: And affirming him self to be sent therefore from the
high Bishop, Christ's vicar, to give them absolution, lifting up and
stretching forth The Cardinal gives yt Lords absolution.
his hand, as their manner is, blesses the whole multitude, and assoileth
them. After this, they go to the chapel: Here was geuinge thanckes unto God,
playing of the Organes, sounding of tro^pets, and all tokens showed of mirth
and gladness, as at such times is accustomed. They that knew Cardinal Poole
before, by his talk and manner of living, marueled much at this his doing, and
looked for other manner of stuff at his hand. The xviii. day of Decembre
themperor addressing his letters from Bruissels, unto all the states of
thempire. Upon how weighty and vrge^t causes (says he) Marquis The Emperors
letters against Marquis Albert.
Albert the last year was outlawed by the judges of ye chamber, and condemned
of treason, you have had certain knowledge by the letters, which than was set up
openly, and those also which came from us afterward. And for so much as he
perseuereth obstinatelye in his troublesome and seditious purposes, and
undoubtedly goes about more mischief, to the intent he may vex and plage again
our native country of Germany: Again, forasmuch as he has his recourse into
sundry places there, which he takes for starting holes, and refuge as I am
credily informed, I thought it necessary for the common countries sake, to
renew ye former decrees. Especially since I believe there is none of you, but
both he loves his country, and would provide for ye safeguard of him self, his
lands and subjects, and also would have thenterprises of him, and his adherents
impeched and let. Wherefore I charge and commau^d under the same penalties
before expressed, yt no man aid him or his fellows with any thing, nether with
help nor counsel, relief, money, vitails, nor artillery: And also yt nether he
nor his fellows be permitted to make any power or leuy soldiors in any of
their dominions, and if he attempt any such thing, yt every man let him by
always possible, and keep in their people and subjects, that they run not
out to him, and such as be offe^ders, and will not obey this commandment to
punish extremely. These letters were set up in all places in Print. At
the.xxix. of Decembre, king Ferdinando, for because of the counsel, whereof I
have spoken before, yt it should be holden at Auspurge, came thither: and
fineding no man there, two days after, sendinge Thimperial counsel of
Auspurge.
both letters and messagers, he exhorts the princes, yt for so much as they
should treat of most waightye affairs of the Empire, they would repare thither
with speed: he him self although to his great loss and hindraunce, leaving his
own country, is commen thither: yt he might consult with them of the common
weal, and devise such means as be profitable and necessary for thafflicted
state of Germany: wherefore let them come the^ selves, and not do the thing by
their deputies: for so the waightines of the cause requires: and themperor his
brother has given him full authority to treat, neither will he tarry them any
longer, than he neades must. About the mids of January breaks up the
Parliament at London. Among many other things, the restoring of Cardinal
Poole, was enacted. Thactes also of kings of former time concerning the
punishing of 1555.
heretics, and authority of bishops, were renewed: but chieflye the supremacy
of the bishop of Rome was wholye restored, and all the laws and statutes that
had been made against the sea of Rome by the space of xx. years, were
condemned and abolished. Uery many supposed, that at the same Parliament king
Phillip should have been crowned: but herein was nothing done. In the beginning
of February, five were condemned at London to suffer, because they would not
return to the Romish Religion, men of excellent learning, Ihon Hoper, Bishop
of Gloucester, Ihon Bradford, Laure^ce Five co^de^nd at London for the Gospel.
Saunders, Rolland Tailler, Doctoure of the civil law, and Ihon Rogers: And he
was burned at London, where he had taught, but the reast were carried every man
home, to Gloucester, Manchester, Couentry, and Hadley, and ended their lives
with the like punishment, all right constantly.

A little after, also the Bishop of Saint David was condemned, and sent home
to suffer. It was written than out of England, that ambassadoures would go to
Rome in the name of the whole Realm, which should both give the bishop thanks
for his great cleme^cy, which he has showed toward them, and promise him
also from henceforth al obedience and fidelitye. The v. day of February, king
Ferdinando, though very few Princes were there, begins the treaty at
Auspurge. How they them selves know, for how waightye and neadefull causes
the Emperor had appointed this conuention, first at Wuolmes, after in this
City, to begin at the mids of November: And he in deed at the request and
advise of his brother wished yt the matter might have been co^menced at the same
time: How be it in puttinge his things in order at home, that in his absence
all things might be well governed, and the near enemy be resisted, in case
he made any enterprise, he was impeched and let.

Notwithstanding at the xxix. of November he came hither at the last, to
consulte for the common wealth Which thing also the Emperor desires
chiefly, that is to wit, that what so ever concerns Gods glory, and the
tranquillitye of the Empire, the same might by the common consent of them all
be here determined: For how much has been alwais themperors diligence,
study, pain; and care, for the zeal he has to the common country, that both
the public quiet, and offenses being taken away, Religion might be
established, that is so well tried and known: both by all others, and also by
the decrees that were made in the two last assembles, that it needs no
further declaration. What so ever also he promised at the same time to do, he
performed in deed: but how pernicious co^motions as well civil as foreine
have beyond al expectation chanced sense, by the which all those so wholesome
decrees were not only let and disturbed, but also taken away, to the great
damage of the common weal, that is so manifest to all men, that it needs no
further rehersall: but herein was not the Emperor to be blamed, who gave none
occasion of offense unto any man, and has alwais dealt vprightlye and
constantlye, and whatsoever the sclaunder of his adversaries be, has chiefly
had respect to the common profit: neither doubts he but they also believe ye
same, and hold him clearged in this behalf. Where therefore to remeadye these
evils, themperor has called this counsel, he was certainly purposed to have been present him self at the whole treatye, but detained by sickness and other
affairs, he could not: yet nevertheless he would not, that the thing should
be longer delaied, to the intent verily that both this evil increasing might be
restrained, and he might do his duetye to his country, which he loves above
all other things.

Wherefore he has made him his Uicegerent, and given him full authority, that
together with them he may devise means both honorable and also profitable
for the common weal, and for the same purpose has sent certain men, and
joined them with him in commission to treat of the same: and the chief and
principal matter shall be concerning Religion: For this so long a dissension has been the head and welspringe of all these tumultes and miseries: and that these
many years now, so many thousands have lost not oulye their lives, but also
their souls and eternal salvation, is altogether long of this: and that same is
so manifestly known, that it neadeth no further declaration: For doubtless it is
a lamentable and an heavy sight, that those which are al of one baptime, name,
Empire, and language, should be thus torn a so^dre, in the profession of ye same
faith, which so many hundredth years they have received of their elders, as it
were delivered from hand to hand: but the case is much more grievous, for that
there arises daily not one sect or two, but diverse, whilst every man will
maintain his own opinion. Which thing doubtless is both to the reproach of
God, and breaks the bond of charity, and disturbeth men's minds, in such
sort that the vulgar people knows not what in the world to believe, but the
greatest mischief of all is, that in these so great erroures, very many by
little and little grow up in, and that there be found diverse, as well of the
chiefest Nobility, as of others, which setting cock on houpe; believe nothing
at all, neither regard they what, reason, what, honesty, or what thing
conscience does prescribe: and this is done both to the great hinderaunce and
danger of innocent youth: And certainly it were chiefly to be lamented, if
Germanye, which has had so many years the chief praise of Religion and
virtue, should now be so abased, and so far degenerate, that it might not be
compared with the heathen people of old time, neither ought to be preferred at
this day before the Turks also and, Barbarians, nor in this point to be
thought one whit better: and because there has been no redress made hitherto
of this great enormity, although many conuentions have been had therefore, for
that few men cared for it, for because those, whom it best became to remeadye
it, partlye wincked thereat, partly serving the time, had a respect more to
their private commoditye, for this cause the ever living God has of long
time now plaged all Germany, and certain states privately with diverse
calamities, in so much, that the same region, which in times past, for nombre
of people, excelled in strength and valeauntnesse, and was hable easily to
repulse all foraine violence, the same being rent and torn with dissentions,
wars, and commotions, as well civil as foreines. is now in great danger,
and tends to utter destruction, except God do wonderfullye preserve it:
Therefore is it neadfull that every magistrate endeavor for his part, herein to
do his duty, and have an especial regard to the cause of Religion, wherein
both Gods honor, and the honestye of life also is contained.

Moreover, there has benmo ways than one devised to appease religion: but that
an universal, free, and godly counsel might be had, seemed always from the
beginning, not only to the Emperor, but also unto them all to be the best way.
For because that in as much as it is a matter of our faith, it apperteineth not
to one only people, but also unto al other nations of christendom, which must
doubtless be called to the same, yt what vices soever be in any place they may
be reformed and taken away. Therefore did the Emperor both for his own duty,
and at their request also, labor this way to the uttermost of his power, and
at the length brought it to pass, that such a counsel was oftener than once
called, and sometimes also commenced: but what impediment there was at every
time, and why no fruit of the same returned to the common wealth, that does he
leave to his place, doubting not, but many of them, which were either at the
Counsels them selves, or had their deputies there, know the matter well
enough: And now, if they be so content, that the same order of the counsel
may be repared to, and take place: which thing verily is above all others to
be wished for of almighty God, he will not only assent thereunto most willingly,
but also apply the thing with all study, faith and diligence: And than in deed
is this thing only to be consulted of, how those causes that were before a let
and impediment might be avoided and taken away: but if for the tumultes of
war, and tempest of the common wealth, they shall think mete it be
differred until an other time more quiet, he is content, that other godly and
tolerable ways be debated, that in the mean season the people and all states
may live peaceably, and be kept under an honest discipline, to the glory of
God always, and with a safe conscience: In former years in deed there was
ofttimes mention made of a counsel provincial, as though the same were most
fit and conueniente for our purpose, but for so much as both the name,
manner, and form thereof in ouretime has not in his opinion been much known
and accustomed, he can determine nothing thereof at this present. The third way
and means has been diverse times assaied by talcke and conference of learned
men: And all be it the same has commen to small profit, yet is this well
perceived, that many and that the chiefest points might here by have been
reconciled, in case the matter had been handled with a godly zeal, and no
respect had to private commoditye of either side, which thing nevertheless
he would that no man should think spoken to his iniurye: of this way
therefore we must take further deliberation also: And all be it that themperors
devise and purpose touching the same matter, who all together mente good
faith, was otherwise taken in former years, and had small thank of either
party, yet does he again, if they shall think good so, not mislike the
same: if the parties also will treat sincerely, if all affections laid a part,
and obstinacy set a side, they will have before their eyes Gods glory only
and the common salvation of all men, he will show herein all faith and
diligence: he can perceive none other way at this present, that is convenient:
but in case they have any other thing that is more mete for this purpose, it
shall be lawful to declare the same. An other part of this consultation is
concerning peace, and when certain years past there were laws made hereof,
themperor and he had supposed, that they had well provided for the common
quiet: but thend now declares, that it was not sufficiently foresene, for that
they might not condemn nor outlawe the rebels, and seditious parsons, unless
they were first cited to appear, and after all due order of judgment
convicted, where they in the mean season, having time and space, did afflicte
diverse without any desert: it was also provided in former acts, that if any
man suffered injury or were by force invaded, his next neighbors should assist
him: but it is not unknown to them, what impedimentes have chanced: Therefore
must they consult and way with him diligently, how these two points of the law
may be amended, that both unquiet and troublesome persons may be made a
feared, and such as are faithful to thempire may know assuredly that they shall
not want aid against force and violence: which thing may now be done so much
more commodiously for that the foundation hereof is laid of late at Woormes and
at Frankfurt: Wherefore they shall do well, if they follow the consultation there
begone, and bring it to an end: He exorteth them moreover to consult of
establishing the judgment imperial, of public contribution of Coin: and of
other politic things, and hitherto to apply all their devises, by what
means these domestical evils, dissentions, tumultes, seditions and force may
be taken away and clean roted out: and herein to consider chiefly the state
of thempire, and to se in how great danger Germany stands not only by
reason of the cruel Turk, but for other ennemies also, which nothing less,
than the Turk, seek ye destruction of thempire: let them ponder therefore, what
commodities they receive of these discordes and domestical evils, which they
undoubtedly have craftelye raised and supported, that in this dissension of the
states, they might accomplish their gready lust, and by a soden invasion might
bring al men into their subjection and bondage: for other nations, which have
been so vanquished by them and suppla^ted, ought to be a warninge for them, to
take heed to the^ selves, and to take such counsel, whereby, both the present
tempest and ruin of the country may be blown over, and the Empire consiste
and persevere in full strength and authority, and all foraine violence, as in
times paste, so now also may be manfullye and valeauntly repulsed: And what
so ever the Emperor and he are able to do here in both with their aid and
counsel, they will do it right gladlye, and that in such sort, as all men
may understand, what intier love they bear to the common Country: And let
them persuade them selves of this to be most assured What time this Oration of
king Fardinando was published throughoute Germanye, it was written at the self
time out of sundry places, that he had exiled out of Boheme, about two hundredth
ministers of the church: It was The ministers exiled out of Boheme.
signified also by letters, how cardinal Morone should com from Rome to the
counsel of thempire, which would assay to do the like in Germany, that
Cardinal Poole had already brought to pass in England: For it is thought
assuredly, that for the recoueringe of England, the bishop of Rome and all his
clients conceived a wonderful hope in their minds. For in as much as the thing
had so lucky success, therefore thought they now, or else never, yt God was on
their side, and that they maintained a most just cause, neither that their
church could be convict of any error, thus they now chiefly believed. or at the
least so pretended: And when they send ambassadors into Germany, they do it
for this intent, not to acknowledge any faut of theyrs, but that they may help
and succor, as they say, men's infirmity. About the end of February, Ihon
Albert, Duke of Megelburge, who I said was in league with Duke Moris, and who^
Henry the duke of Brunswicke afflicted sore the year before, what time he kept
war in Saxony, marieth the daughter of Albert duke Pruisse. When I had
proceeded thus far, I was advertised out of England, that of those five, of
whom I spoke a little before, Bradford, although he were condemned, was
reserved in prison, and that the minds of many, through the constancy of the
reaste that suffered, were wonderfully astonished and amassed.

The, xxvi, Book of Sledaines Commentaries, concerning the state of Religion,
and the common Weal, during the reign of the Empire, of Charles the fyfte.
The Argument of the xxvj. Book
ENgland brought again in subjection to the Bishop of Rome, a wrytinge is
se^te for the with Indulgences. The Duke of Saxon by his ambassadoures makes
his purgation to Ferdinando, and excuses him self that he can not be at
thassemble. The ministers of the Church expulsed out of Boheme are comforted
by the wrytinges of godly learned men. Towns taken by the French men. The
Princes of Germany mete, and enter also into league. Pope July being dead:
immedidiatly after that Mercellus was chosen in his stead he dies. And Paul
the fourth of that name founder of the sects of the Jesuits, succedeth,
whilst they of Seen do yield them to the Emperor. Cardinal Poole
solliciteth themperor and the French king unto peace in vain. The Queen of
England being therein a mean, and persecuting cruelly the true Christians. At
which time a rose tumultes at Geneua and Lucerues. The Senate of Paris
indeuoureth to mitigate and call in the Proclamation setforth by the French
king against the true Christians. Things done at Rome by the Bishop, and by
the Normens against the Spaniardos. Uulpian taken by the French men, dissension
among the Ministers of the Church concerning the Lords supper. Whilst the
compact was made for the Lordship of Chattes, themperor going into Spain,
commits the government to his son. Things dove in thassemble of thempire
concerning Religion: And extraordinary writing of the Papists in the same,
thanswer also of Ferdinando and of the Protestants to them both: and what
decrec insued upon the same. The Parliament and state of England. They of
Austriche by their ambassadoures requiringe that they might be permitted to
have the true Religion, are denied it by the diverse answers of Fardinando, and
sue in baine. In manner at the same time the Bauarians solicit their Duke
about the like matter in vain. At the length was truce taken betwixt the
Emperor and the French king. The Duke of Prusse imbrasing the confession of
Auspurge, therror of Dsiander is quenched. About this time appeared a blasinge
star. The matter of Marquis Albert is heard. Tharchbishop of Cantorbury
openly and constantly professyng the true Religion, is burnt. The Pope seeks
priuelye to infringe and disseuer the confession of Auspurge. The Cardinal of
Auspurge accused of treason purges him self: declaring plainly of what nature
and faction he is of. A suspicion of a conspiracye in England brodeth trouble,
and increases crueltye against the faithful: that xiij. were burnte together
at a stake. Fardinando alleges the reuoltinge of Transtiuania and diverse
Towns from him: And also the Turk now ready to invade as causes and lettes,
why he can not come to thassemble, which hitherto he had so often differred.
Themperor now at length takes shipping into Spain, leaving his soon governor
of the low countries. Sleidan departs out of this life.

HOw England submitted it self again to the Bishop of Rome, it has been
showed in the Joy at Rome for England reduced to yt Romish Church.
former book. When these news with a wonderful expedition were brought to
Rome, great joy a rose in the City, and Te Deum was song in every Church.
After on Christmasse even. The Bishop sends forth this writing. Since I
lately heard (says he) that England, which of many years now, was separated
and plucked from the body of the Church, is through the unmeasurable mercy of
God brought again to the Communion of the same Church, and to the obedience
of the sea of Rome, by the singular diligence, fidelitye, travel and
industrye of king Phillip and Mary his wife, and Cardinal Poole, I took
great pleasure in my mind: And also, as reason was, gave thanks unto God as
heartily as I could, and omitted nothing, but that the fruit and profit of this
my gladness might redound to the whole City. But, like as that father, of whom
the Gospel mentions, having recovered his son lost, not only reioyseth
exceadingly, and is privately glad in his mind, but also inuiteth others to
feasting and making good cheer together with him: Even so I verily, to
the intent, that all the world may understand, how great is my joy and gladness,
will that common thanckes and prayers be made. Therefore, by the power yt
Indulge^ces granted by the Pope for the conversion of England.
I have, I permit every man in general, that he may choose him a priest, whom
he list, unto whom he may confess his sins rightly: And give to the same
priest authority, yt he may forgive al manner of sins, be they never so
grievous, even those which are reserved to my power alone, and are wont to be
excepted by name: that he may remit not only the trespass, but the pain also
for sins due: that he may impose such satisfaction as behooves, and may
release all vows, except chastity and Religion: so yet, that they be
recompensed by an other work: yea trusting upon Gods mercy, and the
intercession of saints, Peter and Paul, I grant full remission of all
sins, which is wont only to be given but every fifty year, to all those,
that with an humble heart do convert to God, and wholly confessing their sins,
when they shall understand this indulgence to be setforth by us, will twice or
thrice a weke fast and give Almose and use other godly exercises, and after
receive the Sacrament, with thanckes giving and prayers unto God, that he with
ye light of his countenance, would illumine those that walk in darkness, that
he would give peace, and move the hearts of kings to concord. And this so
great a benefit I grant to them also, which are hindered either by reason of
age or sickness, so that they can not perform the things before said. And to
the intent that these our wrytinges may be every where known, I charge and
command all Patriarchs, Archbishops, and such other like, that so sone as
they shall have received a copy of the same by and by they cause it to be
published every man through out his Province, and since the gift is fre, that
they set it forth without any gain.

In the last book I showed you how Blassenburge the head castle of Marquis
Albert, wherein the hope of the whole country co^sisted, by surrendry was taken:
And at this time, least being recovered it might give an occasion of further
displeasure, his adversaries do subvert and raze it to the ground, not without
the great displeasure of the house of Brandenburge, and the Marquis kindred.
Ferdinando king of Romans, both before he came from home, and than also, when
he was commen to Auspurge to the assemble, by messagers and letters exhorted
the Princes to make haste, and come thither in parson, as in the last book has been said.

And chiefly he had solicited the Prince elector of Saxony, to come to
Auspurge: who had both excused him self before, that he could not come, namely
for the state of Saxony not very quiet, and now sending ambassadors thither,
excuses the matter again, and by occasion falling into the mention of the
Turk, shows in what pearill Germany stands, which in times past being
mighty and feared of others, is now almost destitute and void of strength,
having received so many displeasures and plagues. And that this evil is so
much the worse, that there is among the states so great an alienation of
minds, and distrust among them selves: And how the Emperor him self, to
remeadye this disease, had omitted no kind of diligence: but yet yt al labor
hitherto has been taken in vain: For the minds of men to be so bitterly
exasperated, and alwais so set open to displeasure, that uneath any hope of
reconcilement is to be had: how a few years past, his brother Moris had
ordained that certain Ceremonies, and things indifferent should be kept still
in Churches of his dominion, but that the same commandment was of so little
force, that it was also taunted with the libels, and bitter raylings of many.
In so much that it was not in his power to confirm it, unless he would bring him
self in danger.

And therefore are many afraid for attempted any thingin this behalf: Now on
the other side, they that be on the contrary part, and impugn the doctrine
professed at Auspurge, how little they think to establish any godly and
lawful reformation, it is known well enough by the doings of former time, when
the matter was attempted either by talk and conference, or else by counsels.

Consideringe therefore that after so much labor taken, and counsels holden,
the way of concord can not be found, God peranenture so willinge and
reuenginge our sins, he besecheth him earnestlye, that the same Book, that
contains the some of the Christen doctrine, and was in times past exhibited at
Auspurge he would not take for an evil or wicked book.

But know it for a certenty to be a pure and a godly wrytinge, which can show
unto us the son of God authoure of salvation, which in Doctrine does
plainly agree with thauncient church, and with those four chief Counsels:
which teaches and fetteth forth true Christen worckes, and exhorts the
people to show obedience to the Magistrate.

Wherefore in case a sure peace in that assemble may be established, there is
no doubt but that the Emperor and he may have great aid in Germanye
against the Turk, where as elsse they that are of the Protestauntes Religion,
and many of them in deed borne and brought up therein, will persevere
constantlye in the same Religion.

For unless such a peace may be had, that may comprise both Religion and also
the Church goods, and if the matter, as many times it has been, should be
differred to an other assemble, and delaied from day to day, and the people
be left in this doutfull state of things, to be uncertain how patiently
all men would take it.

For though he and other Princes should be quiet and do their duty, and show
all obedience, yet that it may be, that men of the meaner and baser sort may
raise some tumulte, and may pretend this vncertaintye of state, and fear of
pearill for Religion: Especially in those places, which give oportunitye to
attempt such things: Since therefore the case of the Empire is such, he
earnestlye requires him to provide for the common tranquillity, for so much
as he has full authority of the Emperor to determine. But of late years
this condition was propounded of his brother Moris at Passawe, that in case the
controversy of Religion might not be reconciled, that yet nevertheless an
assured peace might be had, til the thing might be throughli appeased: and
although the Emperor would not than admit the same condition, for that he said
it apperteined to all thestates of the Empire, yet in as much as at the same
time he reproved it not, and with express words added to the Composition,
that he would see that in the Counsel the matter should be handeled
indifferentlye, neither that there should be any craft used in the voices
concerning Religion, he trusts for the same cause, that he will move in this
behalf not only those which were that time at Passawe, but other states also
so sone as the counsel be ginneth, and persuade them to peace. When
thambassadours had spoken to this effect the fourth day of February, the next
day after king Ferdinando propounds to the states in such sort as I showed
you in ye last book. The ministers of ye church driven out of the land of
Boheme, the learned men that were in Meissen and in Wittemberge, and amongst
others Mela^chthon, Melancthon comfort ye ministers of Boheme.
comfort them with an epistle, and show the craft of the contrary part, who
affirmed that they kept a necessary order in the church, and that those which
either had not received orders at the Bishops hand, or had wynes, could not
minister the Sacraments. For this cause of expulsion they feigned, that they
should not seem to have a desire to oppress ye true doctrine: but these men
show how it is a stark tyranny, that married priests should be put from the
holy ministry. For Satan was the author of prohiting matrimony, as it is
evident by ye scriptures: And that we ought not to seek to be ordained of the
bishops, yt are the open ennemies of the Gospel, and defend idols, but of
that fellowship, which has pure doctrine, and therefore has the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. For it were to absurd and dau^gerouse, if Shepeheardes
should be ordained of wolves. The church to have had always right to chouse
mete ministers, and that so was the decree of the counsel of Nice. And they
that were so chosen and tried, to have been confirmed of them, that governed
Godly congregations: The same manner to be now also observed, and therefore
that it is a sclaunder, to say that they disturb or break order. Since
therefore the matter is so, and that for the true professing of the Gospel they
be expulsed, they ought to take this calamity so much more moderatly: For God
will not fail them in his time: And that they be ready with their next
churches to show them all love and hospitality.

Where the French men at the Ides of Dece^ber of the year before, had by the
conduit of Brissake, taken Eporedia a town The town of Cassalle taken by the
Frenchmen
in the Alps by the water of Durie. This year, the third day of March they
intercept the town of Casale nere unto ye Poo, wherein was a garrison of
Spaniardes and Almaynes, upon the sudden, and with in a few days after the
Castle also: Afterward bring many other things into their subjection. And
amongst others they raze and make even with the ground, Ualence and Saluadore.

The sixth day of March August Duke of Saxony, Ioachim Marquis of Brande^burg,
Princes Electours: The sons also An assemble of the Princes of Saxony at
Numburge.
of Duke John Fridericke, the Lantgraue and certain other Princes of the same
country, assemble at Numburg upon the River of Sale, and there renew the
league of inheritance, which is betwixt the houses of Saxon, Brande^burg and
Hessia, as I showed in the.xxiiii. book, and also determine, that they would
stick constantly to ye confession of Auspurg: And least there should any
suspicion arise of any new or secret counsel, the fifth day after that they
came thither, they signify the cause of their assemble to ye Emperor in
writing. In the former year, what time a compact was made between Augustus and
John Fridericke Duke of Saxony, this was also agreed upon y^ the old and
familiar leage The letters of the Princes of Saxony to themp.
should be renewed: To wit that league which was made an hondreth years
since and more, and after established by a law: And therefore yt they have now
met for the same cause, and as that league was profitable to their elders and
all the people, so likewise they trusted, yt it should com the^ luckely to
pass: since they sought for nothing else but peace and tra^quillitie, and did
it to ye displeasure of no man: Moreover, yt after the manner of their
au^cesters, they have excepted his highness and his brother king of Romans: and
as they intend privately to keep mutual amity amongst the^ selves, so will
they also openly do that their duty requires, and which may become obedient
Princes of thempire: And yt in Religion they will not proceed any further than
is limited in the confession of Auspurg, but for as much as in the same are
contained the chief articles of ye Christian doctrine, and no wicked sedicious
opinion can be found therein, they will through Gods grace persevere in the same
doctrine: neither will they fail also the common wealth of Germany, so far forth
as they are able with their travel, counsel and treasures. And for as much as
at this time being not most quiet, for the avoiding of a further disco^moditie
they abide at home, they have sent Ambassadors to thasse^blee of thempire, who
have in commandment to refer al their counsels and doings unto peace, so yt
neither for religion nor any civil cause any force or violence should be
feared. For ye peace once established it shall be an occasion yt other
controversies may be ye better appeased: That the state doubtless of ye common
wealth now is such, yt it is great need to join together all their forces and
minds that a wyder entry be not set open to ye Turks to invade us: How they
know well enough how greatly he desires that so sone as may be, a sufficient
army might be prepared, to repres thennemies violence. Wherefore now in case
such a peace might be established, there is no doubt but the states of thempire
would gladly employ their substance upon the same war, which verily hitherto by
reason of sundry tumultes and civil discordeshath been omitted. That they will
be always ready, and have commanded their ambassadors to offer these things
in their name, at the counsel, the same day they write to king Ferdina^do, in a
manner to ye same effect, as before I said, ye Duke August did by his
Ambassadors. For both they urge y^ same co^pact of Passawe, and show how
desirous they are of peace. They commend the doctrine confessed at Ausperge,
and exhort him to confirm the peace, and also pray him, that he would give no
credit to such, as happily seek to disturb the quiet of Germany. At the Ides of
March the The Archbishop of Me^tz dies.
Archbishop of Mentz departed out of this life, whom we said to have been at
the counsel of Trent, and after was put to flight by Marquis Albert: Whom
Daniel Bre^del succedeth. The. viii day after yt bishop of Mentz, which was
ye.xxiii. day of March, The death of Pope July the third.
dies Pope July the third. Who for because he had so easily beyond al
expectation recovered England, was thought to have conceived also a wonderful
hope of Germany: And had therefore sent thither Cardinal Morone, who the next day
after that he was dead, came to the counsel of thempire at Auspurg: But with
in eight days after hearing news thereof, ye last day of March he departs
thence again, and with Truckesse Cardinal of Auspurg, spedeth him to the
Election at Rome. The Cardinals that were at Rome, not tarieng for the rest made
have, and the.ix. day of April proclaim Pope, Marcellus, the second of that
name. The Marcellus ye second chose^
same that was sent Ambassador with Cardinal Farnese to ye Emperor, of Paul
the third, as I showed you in the.xiii. book The Cardinal of Auspurg a few
days before, that he went to Rome, by his letters sent to the Senate of
Princes and Ambassadors, shows that he desires in deed peace by all means:
but in any wise to consent, that the dignity of the Sea Apostolic or the
old religion should be defaced, he will never permit.

In the mean time they of Seen, who now by the space of eight months (to
wit) even from the time that Peter Strosse They of Seen render them selves to
Themp.
received the overthrow, as is showed in the last book, were besieged with ye
power of the emperor and of Cosmus Duke of Florence, driven for want of all
things, where no aid appeared, ye xxi. day of April yield themselves to
the emperor, and are ruled by a garrison of soldiers, lieftenaunt of
themperours army was the Marquis of Marignane, twyse famous by the policy of
war. Three years since what time by thayde of the French king, the Spanyardes
being discomfited, they Rased the Castle, they of Seen, sending Ambassadors,
gave the king as hearty thanks as they could devise, and from that time
forewarde commended to his tuition them selves and all that they had.

Marcellus the second, newly created Pope, the, xxii. day of Marcellus ye
second dies
his creation, in the night yt goes before the first of May, changed his life
for death. Alitle before wercome to the city forduties sake and to salute him,
Hercules Duke of Farrare and Guy Ubalde Duke of Urbine. For they had prevented
others, who nevertheless should have come. The Cardinals assembled in the
Conclaue, the.xxiii. day of May, proclaim Cardinal Theatine Pope. The Same was
John Peter of Naples, Deane of the College, a gentleman borne of the noble
house of Carastes, a man of ancient years and notably learned. Changing his
name, he called him self Paul the fourth. Paul the third had chosen him into
the number of Cardinals. And he is the self same that began Paul the fourth.
a certain new sect of those which are called Jesuits, and have nestled not
in Italy only but also in certain places of Germany. Not long after he created
his nephew his brothers son The sect of Jesuits.
Cardinal, the same was a man of war, and that a chief captain serving for
the most part the French King.

I showed before in the last book how Poole thenglish Cardinal went to
the emperor, and French king, to solicit and move the^ The travel of
Cardinal Poole to make peace between them perour and French king.
to peace, and handled the cause both by words and writings, and amongst
other things which he used to persuade them. Whilst you says he, keep civil
war, the Turk does very much to enlarge his dominion. And having won by Sea
and land two strong holds, Belgrade and the Rhodes has made him a way open to
Offen, and has the possession of Tonowa: And if God had not stired up the king
of Persia to be his adversary, it is to be thought that he might have already
subdued to him self all the provinces of Christendom. By this selfsame occasion
have evil Christians also increased in sundry places, with so much a
deprauation and corruption of al discipline as well ecclesiastical as civil that
now your power is not great enough to suppress the^. For this declare
welenough so many rebellions which are stired up every where, and the duties of
religion neglected, and heresies and scismes which in the mean time spring up
and are increased. After in an other place, ye ought to consider (says he)
that you ar the Princes of the Christen Beligion. And albeit that God has
permitted Satan, thauthour of all evil, which is altogether in this yt he
might sift the church, and wynnowe it like wheat, to styre up war amongst
you, which are two of ye chiefest and most noble members of ye church, yet
has he not suffered his wickedness further than to profane and civil matters.
For in Religion he has kept you sound, of one and the same opinion, and
annexed to the body of the church: For else could there hardly be made again
any concord betwixt you. And where as so many other Princes have revolted from
the church, and that thennemy of mankind has attempted so many things, yet
has God most benignely looked upon you, and has made his enter prises
frustrate. Whereby, as by a most certain token of his goodness and clemency
toward you, he shows that he will at the length use your ministry, and will
join you both together with his vicar in earth, to the intent verily that such
hurtful dissentions may be taken a way, and that as well in the state civil as
sacred peace may be restored to al me^. Many such like things brought Poole,
threatening them also with the wrath and ve^geaunce of God, unless they leave,
and releaue the misery of ye afflicted people. And although he prevailed than
nothing, yet whilst the matter went forward in England, he holds on: And
the matter at length was brought to this point, that both the Emperor and the
French king refused not to send Ambassadors to the treaty of peace.

But the Queen of England, who was a mean in this matter, appoints a fit
and mete place in the mids of the A place of y^ treaty of peace, chosen by
the Queen of England.
plain betwyxt Caleis, Arde and Grauelyn, Towns of the English, French and
Flemishe dominion, set as it were a treangle, and intrenchynge the same round
about with Ditches, builded there four Pauilions, Summer houses in deed, but
yet fine and fit for the purpose. In this place therefore, the.xxiii. day of
May this year the Ambassadors mete, from the Emperor, amongst others came
the Bishop of Arras: From the French king the Cardinal of Loraine and the
Conestable. Out of England came as peacemakers Cardinal Poole, the Bishop of
Wynchester Chauncelour, the Earl of Arondell, and the Lord Paget. This brute
blowe^ abroad far and nere, styred up diverse expectations and judgments of
men, amongst the chiefly unto whom the controversies were not unknown. For
there came in question the Dukedom of Millan, Burgundy, Sauoye, Piedmont,
Corsica, Nauerne, Loraine, the land of Luke, the cities of Tully, Uirodone and
Metz. The matter being long and much debated, where amongst other things at
the last the English intercessours said how certain of these controversies
ought to be referred to the hearing of the general counsel, they departed and
nothing finished. King Ferdinando and the states of the Empire sendinge their
letters to the Emperor ye fourth Ides of June, had prayed him that in the
treaty of peace he would have consideration of those things which the king
of France had taken from the Empire. Where therefore nothing was done, the
Emperor The Empe. letters to the states of the Empire.
writing again to the states the.xv. day after, your duty, says he, is to me
right acceptable, that you are so moved with the calamities of those things
which both mine and also the public ennemy of the Empire has afflicted.
Doubtless I was very careful that such things might be restored to their
fourmer estate: And before your epistle was delivered me, I had enjoined mine
Ambassadors and chief counselors, sent to treat of peace, that amongst
other things they should handle this same most diligently, another should they
herein relent any thing. And although all ways and means of concord being
set open of us, I had thought, that he, because of a common quiet would not
have dealte obstinatly, yet are they at this time broken of without any good
done: Nevertheless for the better stay of Christendom, I refuse not peace,
upon such reasonable conditions as hitherto have been propounded. And when
occasion shall serve, I will wholly endeavor that those things may be restored
to the Empire, and may be in a better state hereafter. The Emperor had a
little before sent the Duke of Alba into Lumbardie, that he might there make
war, where as Ferdinando The Duke of Alba sent to Millan.
Gonzaga had discharged him self of that office, and retourning home out of
Flaunders lived a private life. Of many months before there had been a
report, and that in deed most certain, but chifly at this time, that ye Queen of
England was with child, and nere her time: But the expectation was vain. Then
also they began to burn again in England, and the same Bradforde whom in
the end of the.xxv. book I said Bradforde burnt in England.
was a few months before condemned, and carried again to prison, was than at
last burnt amongst others.

At the end of the month of May, John Fridericke the eldest son of Duke
John Fridericke, took to wife Agnes the John Friderick thelect. son marieth.
Lantgraues daughter, which had been wife to Duke Maurice. Thither came many
Princes, which upon this occasion also consulted again of their own matters
at Numburge. In manner at this same time the Lady Jane the Emperors mother
departed out of this life: King Ferdinando kept her funeral at Auspurge. The
Empe. mother dies


A certain tumult in the night was raised than at Geneua, by certain of the
Senators, who thought to bring the government A tumult raised at Geneua.
of the city to them, and to their faction. And chiefly they hated Calvin:
And those, which for persecution were come thither out of France, they sought
to expulse: And where there was running up and down in the night season, in
sundry places, as a token or watch word, they cried that the Frencheme^ were
up in harness, and the city was betrayed: But where they kept them selves in
their houses, the matter at length was appeased, and after were certain
executed: Many saved the^ selves by flight. The cause why they would have
expulsed the French men that were strangers, amongst others was this, that
many of them were of late chosen in to the number of the citezens whereby they
saw their own force weakened, the number of the other part being increased.

The Turks navy, as in certain former years, so now also sailed on the
Tuscane sea, threatening Hetruria. Wherefore or ever they went any further, or
joined with the French navy, the Marquis of Maarignane lieftenaunt of the
Emperors army, invaded the port of Hercules, kept by the Frenchemen, and by
force of his soldiers wynneth the castle, putting the Port Hereules taken
by Imperials. Plu^bine besieged of Turks.
garrison to ye sword. This was at the Ides of June. The Turks afterward
besiege the Town of Plumbine: And when after an overthrow the matter would
not succeed, they attempt Ilua, an Island of the Dukes of Florence, but in
vain also. Than were certain politic laws set forth at Metz, in the which
city the French king had a garrison and a governor, and also a judge to
execute justice. There was written amongst other things, if any brother or
sister or uncle or tutour, or gardien be bawed to any maid or woman, that he
should have a ring of Iron put about his neck, and where he shall openly use
such practice, being subject to the injuries and rebukes of all men, let him
be beaten with rods, and bannished. But if the father or mother shall do the
like, they shall lose their head. Many men marueled that these things were so
set forth, for that such unaccustomed vices, and not every where used, seemed
not so much to be forboden, as showed. But how corrupt manners be in our time,
hereof it may be easily gathered.

Of that same controversy, which has now many years Controversy for the
dominion of ye Chattes.
vene betwixt the Lantgraue and William Earl of Nassow, for the Lorship of
Chattes, we have spoken heretofore oftener tha^ once. Wherefore to the intent at
the last an end might be made least that any further inconvenience might
arrise thereof, certain Princes entreat the matter, and as indifferent arbitrers
appointe a day at Worms the first of July. These were the Paulsgraue Prince
Electour, Christopher Duke of Wirte^berg, William Duke of Cleave, the La^tgraue
sent thither William his eldest son. The conditions there propounded, and a
certain time debated, at the last are permitted to a further deliberatio^ and a
certain time appointed for the same matter. In ye mean season the Frenchemen,
to the intent they might have victualles in a readiness, pluck down many
villages in the country of Mountfarrate, least if the ennemie should possess
them, Casale should be brought in distress. There is in those parts a town
Uulpiane, of great force and estimation: The same was Uulpian vitayled.
kept by Spaniardes. And where at the new coming of the Duke of Alba, a great
power was gathered, the town was vitayled. At the same time also the
Frenchemen vitayled Maryburge, taken the year before in Flaunders, and kept
from the Emperor. The French king being moved by his counsel, set Maryburg
vnailed.
forth a proclamation, whereby he commanded all his officers, that such as the
ecclesiastical judges, and Inquisitours of the faith should condemn, they
should for the greatness of the fault, The French kings proclamation against
the condemned of yt inquisitours
without any delay, or respect had of appealyng, put them to death. The
Cardinal of Lorayne delivered this proclamation to the Senate of Paris, that
after the old custom being of the^ allowed and set forth, it might be
registered in the common records, but they somewhat astonished at the newnes of
ye thing, for that the help of appealing was taken away, require a time for to
take deliberatio^, and after sending to the king their Ambassadors, she we
what is their opinion, as shall be declared in his place.

There is a town in Rhaetia, next Italy, called Lucarne, which belongs to
the common city of the Heluetians. The citezens of the same town required of
the Swisses that they The Lucernates require of yt Swisses the doctrine of the
Gospel.
would permit them to have the doctrine of the Gospel. But they, for as
much as they were in Religion diverse, varied in sentence, where some thought
mete to grant them their request, and others that it ought not to be
permitted. And there was like some civil tumulte to arise thereof: But in the
end their voices prevailed, whereby it was decreed, that they should remain in
the Religion of their elders, and that it should be lawful for the^ that would
not, to go dwell else where. So there were found very many, which leaving their
houses, went to Zurick, which city in deed received them and dealt liberally
with them. About this time the English Ambassadors which were sent to the Pope
in the name of the whole Realm, as I showed about the end of the last book,
return from Rome homewarde. The Pope allowed well enough al other things,
that they had returned to repentance, and craved pardon: But that the church
goods should not be restored, he said it was in no wise to be suffered.
Amongst the Ambassadors was the Bishop of Ely.

The king of Denmark had a navy at that time, which sailing The Navy of the
king of De^marke
toward the North, made men to talk diversely. For some said it was done by
the Emperors counsel, who minded to put the kings son or his brother in to
the possession of Scotland: Others said it was prepared for the use of the
French king, others for this cause only, that if the Emperor or king Philip
his son (whose power was waxed great by reason of England) should straye any
further: they might be restrained. And therefore were the cities of the Sea
coaste thought also to have borne the charges of the same navy. After long and
great expectation all this rumor vanished away, and all this preparation was
found to be made against Pirates.

Than was ye state of Rome troublesome. For yt Pope having Sanstorian and
Camillus Cardinals led into prison.
conceived a suspicion of certain nobles, provided him garrisons, and placing
soldiers here and there in the City, committed Ssortia Cardinal of
Sanflorian; and Camillus of the house of Columnois, to prison. And for as much
as they were of the Emperors part, many men thought he went about a greater
matter: And that suspicion was increased, what time he required of the Duke of
Florence the Emperors client, a wondrous great sum of money, which both
Clement the seventh lent Alexander Medices, and lately July the third lent him,
at the siege of Seen. The captive Cardinals at the length putting in suerties
are enlarged.

The Spanishe flete that time came toward Flaunders, laden with all kind of
Marchaundise: And when it came upon The Spanishe flete intercepted by the
French.
the coasts of Normandy, the Frenchemen, which knew it long before, set
upon them with a great force. And the fight and conflicte was terrible, the
ships being sunk and burnte on either part, and very many lost, whereof
some with weapon, others with fire, many swallowed up of the billows did
perish. The French men carried away certain ships that they King Philip came
out of England to his father at Brusselles.
took into Deep hauon, from whence they came. This was in the monthe of August,
whereas about the end of the same month, king Philip sailing out of England
into Flaunders, came to the Emperor his father at Brusselles, accompanied with
the Nobles of England. Truckesins Cardinal of Auspurge, An university
erected at Dillinge.
had a few years past, founded an University at Dillinge, a town situated
upon the River of Danubius, by the will and permission of Pope July the third,
who had granted for the same a public bull, with exceading great fredoms and
privileges, as a writing set forth in print declares. Hither therefore among
other came he whom the emperor of many years had used for his ghostly father
or confessor as they term him. Peter Asot, a Spaniarde, a black freer. He
this year began with a contrary writing to impugn the book containing A book
of Peter Asot against the confession of the Duke of wirtemberge.
the so^me of the christen doctrine, the which book Christopher Duke of
Wirtemberge sent by his Ambassadors to the fathers of the counsel of Trent,
as before is said, which also he was not afraid to dedicate to the same
Duke. But John Brentius about this time answers it at large, and confuteth
his sophistical reasons. Which book of Brentius Uergerius afterward
translated into Italian, to the end that men of his own nation might
understand, both what thing came in to controversy, and whether part handled
the scriptures more purely and sincerely.

About the Ides of September, George Count of Mountpelicarte, George Earl of
Mount pelicarte marieth yt Lantgraues daughter.
uncle to the Duke of Wirtemberge married the Lady Barbara the Lantgraues
daughter. After the arrival of the Duke of Alba in Lumbardie, the king of
France also sends thither new aid, and many warlike captains, which joined
them selves to Monsour Brissake as companions of his perils and fortune. There
is a town whereof we have spoken before, called Uulpian, which fortified with a
garrison of Spaniards was a great annoyaunce to French matters, seeing that
from thence roades were made as far as Taurin and further. To the intent
therefore that this only let might be taken away, and that they might have
victualle, the Frenchemen toward the end of August besiege it with all their
force, and batter it with Uulpian taken and rased by the Frenchmen
much harm done and received. At the length the.xxii. day of September they
take it by surrendry, and raze the walls both of the town and Castle, and
make it in shape of a Uillage. And a few days after, they take also the Town
and Castle Mountcalue is taken by yt Frenchmen
of Mountcalue betwixt Aste and Casale. The dissension that has been now
these.xxx. years betwixt learned men about the Lords supper, and of the
presence of Christ's body, began at this time to be renewed, and books were set
forth by the ministers of the churches of Breme and Hamborough, namely against
The controversy about the Lords supper is renewed by yt bremers.
Calvin and John Alascus. Calvin afterward answers sharply, and defends
the cause. The Same does Bullinger and John Alascus also. For setting forth a
book to the King of Poole, he complayneth and bewayleth that there is no
examination had or made by talk or conference of the sentences, but that the
opinion is only condemned by prejudice, verily after the manner of the Papists,
which also proceed not by arguments and scripture, but only by will and
violence. About the end of September, Augustus Duke of Saxony, had August
prince Electour, had a son borne.
a son borne, called Magnus, his Godfathers at the fo^tstone were amongst
others Henry Duke of Brunswicke, and John Fridericke the Lantgraues son in
law.

I have spoken before of the Archebyshop of Cantorbury, and of Ridley Bishop of
London, and Hughe Latimer, how they being carried to Oxforde, and reasoning
with the divines there were of them condemned, being therefore kept in prison
unto this time, now at the last in the month of October, Ridley and old
father Latimer were burnt. The Archebyshop was also Ridley and Latimer burnt in
England.
brought forth with them, and at the place of execution did openly call upon
God for mercy with them, but he was lead again to prison. In this same month
the Cardinals of Lorayne and Tournon went to Rome. Then also the Senate of
Paris, which they call the Parliament, aunswering the king, Thanswere of the
Parliament of Paris to yt kings proclamation of Lutherians.
to that which the Cardinal of Loraine requested them to, as before is
mentioned. By that proclamation of yours (say they) which came forth four
years since, most mighty king, you reserved to your self and to your judges
the examination and punishment of Luthers heresy: Neither in it was any thing
exceptep, unless it were what time it required any declaration of heresy, or
that sentence were to be pronounced of such as had taken orders: But this
proclamation of yours that is now set forth, does plainly establish the
contrary. For it submits the people of your Realm to the ecclesiastical
judgment, and to the Inquisitours, and by this mean it diminished your
dignity, whereby you excelle all men, and gives to your subjects a just cause
of grief, when they being of you clearly destitute, ar made subject to foreine
power. But herein a great deal more inconvenience shall be, when all their
goods, life, health and dignity shall be at their pleasure, the help of
appealing being taken away. For verily appellation is the refuge and sanctuary
of innocence: And you are the protector and defendour, both of the
appellation and also of innocents, yea besides you no Note how bishops seek
authority of kings to condemn innocents.
man has any right over the people. But and if the law and judgment be now
committed to the Inquisitours and Bishops officers, appellation taken away,
this were to set open a wyndowe and to make a way that even innocents might
be condemned, and lose both body and goods. For they being indewed with so
great power, to wit, the kings full authority will forget their duty, and
will keep no measure, what time they shall see every degree to them subject,
and not only common persons, but also Noble men and Princes to stand in their
hand. Howbeit yet this mean way may you take, that your judges should hear
the cause and give sentence. And if there be any obscure opinion, that the same
be determined by the clergy. Let the^ also that be with in orders be judged of
their own men. Concerning appellations, let a writing be obtained of the Pope,
whereby this may be permitted to your judges. And when the matter shall come to
this issue, that judgment must be made of such as have appealed, let there be
present certain of your chosen counselors of the ecclesiastical order, or if
such want, other tried and fit men. In the inquisition let this be observed,
that the Popes Inquisitour do substitute and place under him in provinces, men
of upright fame and good men, and that the Bishop do bear the whole charges,
and not the defendaunt, yet so, that the matter being determined, the costs be
required of whom it behooves. These things tend to this end verily, that
such manner of controversies may be restreyned within certain bounds and
limits. Notwithstanding, for as much as it appears by the punishment of
Heretics, al though it be necessary, that this has hitherto been thereby
brought to pass, that their fact should be detested rather, than that they
should be amended: Moreover, for because it is much better, to remedy the
disease in time, than to give it space whilst it may increase and after to lay
to a medicine, it shall be law full for you (most merciful king) herein to
follow the manner and steps of the old and primative church: For the same
was not established either by fire or sword, but the diligence of the Bishops
did ever resist Heretics, whylest they both preached to them oftentimes Gods
word, and shone before them in example of good life. Since it was therefore in
times past by this mean first confirmed, it may now by the same also be
retained and kept, so that you would only execute that, which lies rather in
your power to do. This verily, that Bishops and Pastors of sheep, should
them selves govern their churches presently. Let also the inferior ministers
do the same. Again that from henceforth such be made Bishops as are able them
selves to teach the people, and not to substitute deputies in their stead.
This is the rote, that must be tilled: upon this foundation must we build, for
so may we hope well that heresies will by little and little vanishe away: But in
case this way be neglected, it is to be feared, least they will increase more
and more, what proclamatio^s so ever be finally made, or what remedies so ever
be used. This was the.xvi. day of October, when they signified these things
to the king by Ambassadors and letters. Then also the Princes that were
vmperes, for the controversy of the government of Chattes, mete again as was
appointed: The meting of Princes about yt ^a^tgrauet matter.
First at Bacherach, afterward for the sickness of the Paulsgraue, at Worms.
The matter in deed was ended, and a certain sum of money agreed upon, which
the Lantgraue should pay to the Earl, and abide still in possession: But
where the Earl (unless the money were paid at a certain time) would have this
compact to be vain, and his action to remain to him whole. And the Lantgraue
which had sent his son thither, as before, rejected this condition, they
departed the matter not finished.

In this same month the Emperor calls before him at The Emre. Charles
gives the government to his Sonns Philip.
Brusselles the rulers of all states, and speaking of his sickness, shows them
amongst other things that he would go into Spain, and gives over his
government, his right and all his power to Philip his son, and exhorts
them to their duty. These news were spread abroad over al Europe far and
nere, and a navy was prepared, and the day appointed for his journey at the
Ides of November: But by little and little this brute waxed cold, and because
winter was at hand, they said his navigations was differred to the next summer.

Now must we come to the counsel of the Empire, of what matters they should
treat, king Ferdinando the fifte day of February had propounded, as is said
in the end of the last book: But where many came very slowly, they began not
before the nonas of March. Than at the last the Ambassadors of the Princes
Electours do consulte, of what matter they should first treat: And although
there were many against it, yet do all consent at the last to treat first
of Religion.

The same also was thought mete in the Senate of the other Princes and Cities.
After much debatynge they agreed to give peace to Religion: But this thing
came chiefly in controversy, Whether peace should be given to Religion or no?
that the Protestauntes would have it lawefull for all men indifferently to
follow their doctrine. But their adversaries with much contention did resist
them, and said that the same was not to be permitted either to the cities that
had received the decree of Auspurge made seven year before concerning
Religion, or yet to the whole state of the clergy.

And if any Bishop or Abbot would change his Religion, they would have him
removed, and an other to be substitute in his place. Therefore the contention
was sharp, and the Protestauntes alleged this cause for their purpose, that
the promesses of God as well of the old as of the new Testament, which
contain our salvation, do apperteine generally unto all men. And therefore not
to be lawful for them to include the same within any certain limits, or bring
them to any restreinte, least that they should shut both them selves and
others out of the kingdom of heaven. That there is neither Turk nor Jew of
any zeal at all, that would not be glad to bring all men to his own
Religion. How much more than ought we to do the same, whom God has so
earnestly and straightly charged? Wherefore they are able to prove, that all men
in this case ought to have liberty granted them, both by the holy
Scriptures, and also by the decrees of the fathers and counselles, how those
which take upon them the title of old and Catholic Religion, not without
the great dishonor of God, handle Religion and abuse the church goods.
Nevertheless to establishe a peace, they do permit that they may keep still
their laws, Rites and ceremonies, and inioye all their goods, lands, and
possessions, customs, rightes, and privileges, till such time as the
dissension in Religion be accorded. Wherefore they can not allow that they
should prescribe that condition to the Bishops: For so should it come to
pass, that they them selves should be bound to impugn the approuers and
fellows of their own Religion. And to their great dishonor they should
condemn their own cause.

For this were (say they) to grant, our Religion and doctrine not to be
worthy of the Church goods, and that the same goods have been hitherto
applied amiss to our Churches and Ministeries. We should also confess their
wicked doctrine and ministry to be grounded upon Gods word, and that the
Church goods are consecrated to this fylthie life of theyrs, Laws and
Ceremonies.

But how great an assence would this thing engender, if we should
maynteyne the cause and lyuynges of them, which do perform no profitable
nor necessary duty to the Church? And should betraye them who for the same
Religion ought of us to be most set by? The adversaries among other
things said this, if the Clergy should be permitted to alter their Religion,
it would come to pass, that Byshoprikes, and such other like colleges should
be made profane, and by little and little being plucked away from the church
should come into the hands of Princes, and be made their inheritance. But
they affirm that this was never their intent: But to have had a respect to
this only, that being called again to their old foundation, they might be
employed to the true uses, and that the same goods might be annexed to the
same churches for ever. And to take away all doubts, they promise to put in
good assurance, that in what Byshoprikes or Colleges soever Religion shall be
altered, no part of their goods to be alienated, and that after the death or
resignation of the bishop, free election and administration should be permitted
to the College. But where after much reasoning they could not agree, they
exhibit on both parts to king Ferdinando their reasons comprised in wrytinge,
and request him that he would find some way. This was after the Ides of June.
For they proceeded very slowly. The cause whereof many thought to be, that the
conclusion of peace between the Emperor and the French king was looked for:
For that the same was thought to make not a little for either part.

But the Papists made as it were an extraordinary writing, A wrytinge of the
Papists to requests of yt Protestauntes.
vehement and biting, to the intent they might the more set forth their matter.
And first say they, the protestauntes have propounded five conditions. First
that the catholics should allow that doctrine, which many years past, and
in this our time also, by and by so sone as it spra^g up, of the ordinary
magistrate has been always condemned. Secondly that the sacrileges which they
by the space of these.xxx. whole years have committed, should be ratified and
allowed, and that neither by law, nor by other godly and lawful means the
church may recover yt same goods. But they would also have peace to be made
with them, where notwithstanding it is forboden to have any company with them.
Moreover that they might place in ye colleges and churches of archbishops and
of other prelates wicked ministers, to set forth dotestable and condemned
doctrine, to abolish the true service and ceremonies of ye church, and to bring
in new and wicked in their place, and that they may norish those false
preachers of ye church goods, directly against tholde laws and custom of
the church. Further more that it should be lawefull for all persons as well
ecclesiastical as civil which as yet follow the catholic religion, to
revolt from their true religion, and to come and follow their lore. Finally
when any of the Princes or Bishops do revolt to their side, that it shall not
concern the same person only, but must apperteine to the people also that are
subject to his government, and to the goods, and the whole ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Now although these things do strive with the laws of God and
man, albeit they be contrary to the oath both of the emperor and of the king and
of all the Prelates, in so much that the catholics may not conveniently
receive them, unless they would break both their fayeth and promise, yet for
as much as they stick obstinatly to their purpose, and threaten force also,
the catholics at the length are contented, so far forth as they ought to do
by the pacification of Passawe, and have declared the same sufficiently in the
Senate of the Empire, showing how they can not grant that liberty of
changing religion indifferently to all men. For so should it come to pass
that the Empire should be brought to desolation, and that high top of
dignity taken away from Germany: For it is the duty of Archebyshops and other
Prelates, that not only The office of Archebysh.
they do not permit any Religion condemned, but also that they should
admonish and put in fear Bishops and such others yea the unlearned that
are ready to reuolte, and such as continue in their error, to present to the
Catholic and Romish church. For this manner has ever since the time of the
Apostels been observed, as it is to be proved by sundry testimonies of
counselles, but chiefly by that of Calcedonie. Neither ought any man to think,
that such as do reuolte, should be left to their own conscience. For in
things that concern our faith, every man ought not to be permitted to have
his conscience free. But when any departs from the common consent of the
church, he ought to be punished and restreyned. And in case he obeie not, he
must be excommunicated, after the example of those counselles, which are
accounted the chief, which condemned Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius Eutyches.
And in deed the counsel of Calcedonie deposed Dioscorides the maynteyner of
Eutyches from his Byshoprike. For where it is said that every man ought to
have his judgment and conscience free: And that neither Christ nor his
Apostles did ever compelle any to believe, yea when many went away from
Christ, there was none holden against his will, this same verily is grounded
upon no foundation: And is confuted by Saint Augustine at large in the two
hondreth and fourth Epistle. For if it should be free for Bishops, forsaking
the catholic Religion, to reuolte to an other, they will not relinquishe
their Byshoprike, for they will say that they can no^t do it with a saufe
conscience, but they will desire aid of the Protestau^tes, that they will
assiste them in mainteining their state, and keeping of the people in their
Religion. If this be done, there is no doubt, but these will take in hand to
defend them, and will say they do it of duty, to the end that they may have
the government, and also the possession of the goods. But where these men say
they are bound to admit fellows of their Religion and to exclude no man out
of the kingdom of heaven: It does not excuse them, for there is one only faith
which all that are christians ought to profess and observe. This faith in
times past both Emperors and kings, and all Princes and Rulers of the Empire,
and the people also confirmed by an oath. Uerely this catholic faith is the
self same, which we of Germany from the beginning unto this time have
followed, those excepted that have revolted from the same. Wherefore there is
nothing to be made new, but all things ought to be referred to this faith,
and the mind is to be subdued, that it may obey the catholic church. He
that does otherwise, and takes to him self any private Religion, he unless
he obey admonishementes ought of his Bishop to be excommunicated, and to be
removed from all function: His goods also ought by the civil Magistrate to be
published, neither is he to be suffered within the limits of the Empire. For
that same liberty or licenciousnes of Religion the fathers have always
rejected as a certain confusion of the faith, and made this law, that what
things so ever were once determined of counsels in matters of faith, should no
more be reasoned, nor called in doubt, so that it is lawful for none to ordeine
or propounde any thing to the contrary. For histories teach us, what time
Ualentinian the emperor, admitted all kind of sects, what trouble arose of the
same. Again if this should be received, yt whosoever dissenteth from ye
catholic faith, should be excused by his conscience. Than should the
Anabaptists and Zwinglians, a Schuuenchfeldians, and such other like also be
excused, and in this peace comprised. They say how the promesses of God,
whereby he promises us everlasting life, apperteine to all men in general,
neither ought they of the^ to be restreined. As though those promesses
apperteined to the^ only which be of their profession. But the thing is far
otherwise: For what time they shall swerve from the communion of the church,
they are excluded from the kingdom of heaven, even by their own judgment: And
where there is no salvation out of the church, how should the kingdom of
heaven belong to them, which reiecte the Sacraments of the church, and
contemn the ordeining of priests, unto whom Christ has given power to
bind and lose? And if there be no priests consecrated among them, how
obtain they remission of their sins? And except their sins be forgeuen,
how shall they be made partakers of the heavenly kingdom? Therefore those
promises apperteine not to them only: But rather they are to be thought to be
of that number, whom Christ says he knows not. They brag that they are
able to prove, how the Catholics by sundry abuse both religion and the
church goods. But let us see what thing is herein to be blamed. After the
holy Scripture and the laws of the fathers and counselles the church goods
ought to be distributed to Bishops and ministers of the church, to be employed
upon the poor, upon reparations, and if the thing require so upon the
raunsomyng of them that are kept prisoners of the Turks and Barbarians. Uerely
this custom has continued a thousand and three hondreth years since, that the
same goods should be employed to Godly ministers and uses: Of the which
sort be, to say Mass, to show Gods word, to repare and build churches, to
find pore men, also Monks, Freers and Nuns. But what do they? putting out
certain Bishops they make new, as they were profane and civil officers, unto
whom they give as small a portion as they can possible: They join to them
other ministers, which bring ye sely people into error, whilst both they
contemn the sound doctrine, and minister to the people the Sacrament, whole,
and the bread in deed not consecrated, to wit a creature in place of the
creator, and under the color of true worshipping, commit Idolatry. They
say that from henceforth they will imploye the church goods about none
other matters, but to the use of schools, nor will convert no part thereof to
them selves (well let it be so) but by this use the catholic religion should
be polluted, and utterly oppressed. And this use shall be a great deal worse
than if the same goods were bestowed about profane matters. For these causes
therefore, it is not lawefull for the Catholics, to allow this condition, as
it is written.

This writing (as I said) was extraordinary and privately made. The
Protestau^tes being advertised hereof, write against The answer of the
Protestauntes to yt writing of the Papists
it, and first show what is the true doctrine, the same verily, which is
contained in the wrytinges of the Prophets and Apostles. Secondly, they
declare how much the doctrine of the Papists differs from the same, which
have so many ways polluted the Lords supper, which have brought in so
filthy errors of purgatory, of praying to the dead, which take away and
deny the remission of sins, whilst they say we must always doubt of the
grace of God, which so much dishonor matrimony, instituted of God, which
with detestable and horrible crimes are defiled in this their senglenes of
life, eue^ with the same vices that Saint Paul rehearses. Of these things it
may clearly appear who have forsaken the true Religion. And seeing it is so,
such ecclesiastical persons, as either have now already or else hereafter
shall embrace the pure doctrine can not be of them neglected. As touching the
church goods, all things be maruelously defiled also. Truth it is that a
benefice is given for duty, but it is to be considered diligently of what
sort is the office of a priest or bishop. And that a consideration of schools
must also be had. For even from the time of ye Prophets this manner has ever
remained. And now the prelates of churches seek chiefly, that such things as
are due to ministrs of the church, to teachers, scholars and schools to
almouse houses and hospitalles, they imploye to their own uses, that they may
live in all voluptuousnes. The same do they with Abbeies and Colleges. Does
not the Bishop represent a great Prince, who taking first the possession of his
byshoprike, enters the city with two thousand horsemen? And these things in
deed they do, where there is none of them all that can do his duty: What
mind or conscience is there? Can these obiecte sacrilege and extortion to
others? Their doctrine is in deed condemned of Freers: But through their
wickedness, yt persuade them not to read their wrytings. And that the Pope and
that the rabble do condemn and despise it, to be no marvel: For after the
same manner was Christ and his doctrine entreated of Anna, Caiphas, and all the
sort of Phariseis and Bishops. They make often mention of counselles and of
the church: But it lies not in the power of the counselles and church to
propounde or command any new doctrine, besides the same which is left us by
the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles. That they speak of the consecrating
of ministers to be fond and worthy to be laughed at: For that folishe and
histrionicall anointing makes nothing for ye purpose. Finally their writing
to be full of railing and opprobrious words, but this they commit to God,
and would only, answer the thing in few words. A wryitng of king Ferdinando
to the Princes.


When this was the state of things, king Ferdina^do, whom both parts had
requested, that he would show some way, as before is said, about the
beginning of Auguste sends Ambassadors to the Electours and certain other
Princes, with this message, how to obey the Emperor his brother and to
further the common wealth, he came to Auspurge the third Kale^des of January,
not without the loss and hinderaunce of his own affairs. Again when he was
come thither, how he was driven to tarry long, because few or none were come,
before he could propounde any thing. For the matter was differred till the
nonas of February. Than first he declared the causes of sommoning the said
assemblee: But in consultations to have had wonderful delays, and not before
the tenth Kalendes of July was there any answer made him, and that but of one
only point of the deliberation, that is to wit of the peace in Religion, and
that self same answer, not of one mind, but diverse and contrary. He verily
fearyng this long before, had admonished them diligently, that they would
have been present at the counsel them selves: If they followed his advise
herein, the matter in his opinion might have been brought to an end wyshed
for: Upon the other part, which concerns the public peace, they do now
consulte, but because it is to be thought, that it can not be dispatched in a
short time. Again, for because the state of his countries required his
presence, for as much as the Turks seemed to attempt new matters, and
threaten sore, notwithstanding that he treats with them for peace. Moreover
for as much as nothing can be done or determined to any purpose unless they
be present them selves, therefore he thinks good, that the counsel be
differred till an other time, and that now a decree be made after this manner.
For as much as through the absence of the Princes nothing can be determined,
they are agreed that all treaty be differed till the next assemblee, the
beginning whereof to be made at Regensburge about the Kalendes of March, of
the year followyng. There the Princes them selves to be present, that they
may together with the Emperor, or with him determine and ordeine those things
whereof they have now consulted, and hereafter shall do. In the mean season
the pacification of Passawe to remain in full strength. And for as much as it
conteyneth this, first, that in the counsel of the Empire should be treated,
whether that by a general or by a provincial counsel of Germany, or else by
the conferrence of learned men the cause of Religion ought to be appeased.
Secondly that the thing be done by the common counsel of al states, not
without the ordinary power of the emperor Therefore he, which loves peace and
concord, has determined at the next assemblee to exhibitie a certain book
compiled for the reconciling of such matters as are in controversy: but in it
to be none intrapping, and to be made only for this end, that the discord
should grow no further, and that the offenses might be mitigated. Moreover, to
the intent that they them selves may the better determine, whether by the mean
declared in the book, the dissension may be taken up, or whether that an other
way must be sought for. Therefore he requires them to take this proroging in
good part, and that to the next counsel they would come them selves, after his
example who for the common welthe sake has been now so long time out of his
provinces. And that he has chosen the place at Regenspurge, for because for
the imine^t danger of the Turk, he may not depart far out of his own
country. Let them advertise him therefore what they will do herein, to the end
he may be certain, that the matter shall not be forslowed, that with vain
expectation the better part of the time do not pass away, as it has
heretofore oftener than ones. These requests heard, the most part of the
Princes thought it not good, that he should depart before the peace confirmed.
For all Germany to be in great expectation of this matter. And since they agree
now better in voices, than ever they did before this time, they beseech him
that he would make an end before his departure: To the intent verily that in
the next assemblee they might with so much more expedicion, take order and
determine of Turkishe matters, which yet remained. As touching the book which
he would exhibit, many of them said how the like would come of that, as
chanced to the other book which seven years paste was written also of
Religion and set forth. For yet it is fresh in memory with what railing words
it was taunted: For where it was set forth, and priuileged by the Emperor to
have made a co^corde, there arose occasions thereof of many offenses and
dissentions.

When Ferdinando had heard these of his Ambassadors about the eight Kalendes
of September, the day before the kalendes of the same month, he declares
what his opinion is of the wrytinges of both parts to him exhibited, and
amongst other matters that chief poinct that concerns bishops, that in case
they change their Religion, they should forgo their office The bishops which
change their religion should lose their promotions.
and goods also, by his will, and with many words moves the Protestauntes
that they would assente to the same. For this condition (says he) takes from
you nothing, but does this only, that when a bishop forsakes his order, and
departs from the old Religion, his benefices and promotio^s may
nevertheless remain in the same state, wherein they were instituted, which
thing is both agreeable to the civil law, and also to the laws of the
Empire, and to the pacification of Passawe: Which says by plain words,
that those which follow the old Religion, as well of the state
ecclesiastical as civil, not to be molested in their Religion, Ceremonies,
goods, possessions, rightes, privileges: but that they should inioye all these
things quietly without the interruption of any man. I can not se therefore how
this condition can be denied them, which apperteineth to the end that we
spoke of (that is) that they may inioye their things quietly. Which in deed
can not be, if they should release this condition: For so should it come to
pass, that such as happily forsake and relinquishe the holy order and
ancient Religion, would keep still nevertheless their office, goods, and
possessions, neither should it be lawefull for their colleges in the mean time
to try the law with them in this case. And this inconvenience will come also,
that between the Bishop and them there will be no great good will. For where it
is reason, that according to the laws of the foundation mete persons should
govern and rule holy offices, and if they do against those laws, or
relinquishe their state, that tha^ their Collegers should remove them, and
forsee, that the same reuolting hurt but him alone. Certainly their demand
ought not to be refused. Wherefore I exhort you again and again, that you
contend no further herein. For among other things you ought to consider,
how they do not prescribe unto you, what mean and way is to be kept in
governing of such offices, Colleges, and benefices, as to your selves you have
usurped, nor yet what is to be done with the ministers of churches of your
dominions, which break the laws set forth by you, and neglecte their duty.
For like as it should be grievously and evil taken of you, in case they would
have such ministers as forsake and impugn your Religion, of you to be
retained: So should it be much more greuouse unto the^, if both the
government, and possession of lands and goods should be left unto them,
which should both forsake and impugn their Religion. For what other thing
might hereof be looked for, but debate, strife and contention? The foundation
therefore of the thing that is now in hand, to wit peace it self, by this
mean should be utterly taken away. The eight day after, they answer. How
it is not their intent, to prescribe the clergy herein, much less that the
holy gouernmentes should be brought to desolation, or that their nature altered
they should be made civil or profane. For we'ar not ignorant (say they) that
some part of the Empire consists in these matters and possessions, which we
covet not to deminishe or decay, but by all means to mainteyne them. It would
have pleased us right well, that this question had never been moved, but to
have stand in the decrees of fourmer years, made at Norinberge, Regenspurg
and Spiers, which include in the peace all the parteners of the confession of
Auspurge: And at the first in deed the Ambassadors of the three Archebyshops
Electours, did wittely consider this also. But after when this doubt began to
be moved of others, they went unto their side. They that first moved this
question had peradventure some cause so to do, but what has insued thereof,
now appears. For if this let had not chanced by the way, al ye matter (in
our opinion) had now ben brought to a good end. But why we should not admit
that condition, there were Godly and weighty causes. For every man does easily
perceive, how much it should be to the contempt and hinderaunce of our
Religion, if we should permit, that such as embrace the same, should be
displaced and deprived of all their honor and dignity, and accounted in the
number of heretics. What the first foundations of Colleges were, and what
vices have crept in since, we will here pass over in silence: But we suppose
that many of the same statutes be not against our Religion. Again, to assente
that none of the ecclesiastical state should be of that Religion, which as
the true and Christen Religion we profess, were doubtless no small offense. For
by the same fact we should condemn it as wicked and unworthy the state of
pristes, which ought chiefly to set forth Religion. And seeing it is thus most
mighty king, we beseech you to way these things in your mind, and for the
authority that you have of the Emperor, you would suffer that part to be
omitted. But he makes answer that nothing more can be granted them: And
says moreover that those things are now permitted them, which of so many
years could never be obtained. Therefore let them have consideration hereof,
for else shall they be feign to depart without any thing finished: Which if it
so come to pass, and any inconvenience arise thereof, there is no cause why the
blame should be laid either in ye Emperor or in him, who so quietly and
patiently has handled the matter, and hitherto has remained: Which now he
can defer no longer. Therefore he gives them ten days, that in the mean time
they may write these things home to their Princes, and make him a direct
answer. When the day came, these men, for that they had omitted no diligence,
that al others were provided for concerning religion, and for that they might
not prescribe any measure herein to ye king or Emperor, do assent, especially
since the king also released certain things, as hereafter shall be showed.

Therefore the seventh Kalendes of October the decree made was red openly, as
the manner is, to this effect. For the doctrine a decrewher by religion is freely
permit to all men.
of Protestauntes, faith and Religion, the Emperor, king Ferdinando, and the
residue of Princes and states shall hurt no man of the whole Empire in any
wise, neither shall they compel any man to forsake his Religion, ceremonies
and laws, which in their dominion the Protestauntes have already ordained, or
hereafter shall ordeyne, by commandments or any other mean, nor yet
contemn the same: But permit them this Religion free, and also their goods,
faculties, customs, possession and rightes, so that peaceably they may enjoy
them. That the controversy also of Religion be appeased by none other but by
godly, friendly, and quiet means. In like case shall they that be of the
confession of Auspurg demean them selves toward the Emperor, king
Ferdinando and the rest of Princes and states addicte to the old Religion, as
well sacred as civil, toward the whole state ecclesiastical, and colleges of
the same, whether so ever they shall finally remove to dwell, so that their
ministry be well ordered, as beneath shall be said. To all these shall they
permit their Religion, laws, and ceremonies, possessions, customs and all
other rightes freely, neither by any mean hinder, but that they may quietly
inioye them, and what so ever displeasure or strife shall arise, be determined
on either side after the custom and laws of the Empire. That such as be of
neither Religion, be not comprysed in this peace. If any Archebyshop, Bishop,
Prelate or other ecclesiastical person shall reuolte from the old Religion,
he shall immediately An ecclesiastical person that changes his Religion shall be
deprived.
depart from his Byshoprike, office, benefice, and also from all the prosites,
that he receives thereof: And it shall be lawful and free for the College or
those to whom the same thing shall by right or custom apperteyne to chose or
substitute an other in his place, which is of the old Religion; to the intent
that the ryghtes of the foundation, election, presentation, confirmation, and
such other like may remain to them whole with the quiet possession of the
goods: Yet so, that nothing hereby be taken away from the foresaid
reconcilement of Religion, that shall be. And because diverse states of the
Empire, and their progenitors, have taken to them certain ecclesiastical
gouernementes, abbeies and such other like goods of the church and have
disposed the same to the ministers of the church, upon schools, For churchs
goods al controversies ar taken away.
and other good uses, they shall not be troubled for the same nor sewed in the
law therefore, but such goods, to wit, those which do not belong to the states
of thempire, or to others that be subject to thempire, and the possession
whereof the clergy had not at the time of the pacification of Passawe, nor
after also, shall remain as they be, and are comprised in this peace: Neither
shall it be lawful for the judges of the chamber imperial to grant out any
process, or decree any thing against them for vsurpinge the same goods. That
the ecclesiastical jurisdiction be not exercised, nor take place, against the
Protestau^tes Religion, faith, The ecclesiastical laws shall not be exercised
against ye protestauntes.
rightes, laws, and ecclesiastical ministry: But remain in suspense, and
stayed, and moleste them in nothing, till the controversy be thoroughly ended
and taken away: But in all other matters, that concern not Religion,
ceremonies, laws, and ministry, let it be of force, and be exercised after
the old custom and law: Again that the goods, customs, rightes, remain
whole to all the state ecclesiastical, yet so, that they in whose jurisdiction
such goods be, lose no part of their politic law which they had before this
contention in religion. Moreover, yt of these selfsame goods, the necessary
ministeries, of the church, parishes, schools, almouses, hospitalles for the
poor and sick people, as they were founded in times past, ye so they be now
also established and maintained, without any respect had, of what religion they
be, to whose use the almouse or sustenau^ce is employed. And if there fortune
any strife or contention to arise by reason of this sustenau^ce, or yt measure
thereof, yt by the consent of ye parts arbitrers be chosen, who viewing ye
thing, within ye space of half a year shall determine and make an estimate,
how much ought to be decided and bestowed upon such uses and ministeries. In
the mean season, til the matter be decided, that, yt thet whose part it is to
give such aid, be not molested in their possession, but look what they were
wont to give and bestow in times past, let the^ give now also, till the matter
be determined.

In October and November was a Parliament holden in England: many supposed
that they would have there treated A parliament in England
of the coronation of king Philip, but nothing was propou^ided. The Queen
motioned for the restoring of abbey lands, for as much as the Pope urged the
same. But many Noble men and gentlemen do possess the^: Wherefore nothing
could be brought to pass. The Queen her self in deed, which with all she
could do, restored to the clergy the first fruictes and te^thes of benefices
during the time of this Parliament certain biting libelles were Libelles strowed
about in London.
sown abroad in London, wherein were some things to whet the people against
the Spaniardes, and some other yt might have withdrawn the Queen's mind from
king Philip. When inquisition was made nothing could be tried out. Before the
end of the parliament the Bishop of Winchester Chauncelour died of The bishop
of Winchester dies.
the dropsy: In whose place was substituted Doctor Heth Archbishop of York,
which had been in times past with the Archebyshop of Cantorbury in Germany, and
thought rightly of the pure doctrine. About ye nones of Noue^ber the wife of
John The wife of John Friderick dies.
Friderick, the Lantgraues daughter died, of whose marriage is spoken before.
Frau^ces Uenerie Duke of Uenise, for that he had not handled him self well in
the vytayling of the city, and set Frances Uenery displaced.
more by his private profit tha^ by the public, was displaced.

What time the emperor had given over all his government in the countries.
Philip his, son sends his Ambassadors to the chief Princes and cities of
Germany, and signified to the^ yt same Ambassad. to the Princes of Germany.
and offers the^ his good will and amity. At the same time also ye
Ambassadors of king Ferdina^do solicited the Princes of Germany, that for as
much as a most present danger hanged ever by the Turk, who required al
Transyluania to be given him, a country of nature most strong, fertile, and
full of horsemen, they would at the day appointed be present them selves in the
counsel of the Empire, and to consulte for the common wealth. He held also a
An assemble in Austriche
counsel of his subjects for the same cause, in yt which assemblee they of
Austriche required that religion might be permitted the^ fre? But the king
differred them to the counsel of thempire that should be next at Regenspurg,
and also took order that they should be before him at Uienne at the Ides of
January the next year. The Marquis Marignane diyng at Millan, the Cardinal of
Trent is sent into Lumbardy by the Emperor or king Philip his son, to have
the government there: And the Duke of Alba is made viceroy of Naples. On
Christmas day the Pope, after his manner, creates new Cardinals, and
amongst others John Gropper, Counselor to the Archebyshop of Collon, of
whom often mention is made in the fourmer books. Than also John Gropper Cardin.
Reinold Poole, when of a Cardinal deacon he was made a priest (as they call
it) began to singe Mass. For this is not law full for Deacons by the Popes
law.

In the beginning of the month of January throughout Saxony, Meissen and
Boheme were horrible tempests, thondering, and lightening, and thonderboltes,
which did much harm every where, but especially in churches. In the same
month, at Uirodure, which is a town in Swicerlande two mile from Zuricke, in
the night about suppertyme, fire bursting out of one of the towers of the
church cracked so, that all men came running to quench it: When they came
thither, there was no flame, twyse this happened one time after an other, to
wit the fourth day of the same month, and the.xiiii. day. Certain men of
the towns of Heluetia, being moved by the Pope, go afterward to Rome, not
without the great suspicion of many. King Philippe beginning his new
government which he had received of his father, with great pomp and
solemnity, the.xviii. day of January enters into Andwerpe the chief town of
that country. In the mean time there is great King Philip enters into
Andwerpe.
persecution and burning in England.

About the Ides of January tha^bassadours of the provinces of Austriche,
assemble at Uienne, as was appointed. There the king with an oration grave and
long, declares in how great danger they stood all of the Turk now iminent,
and therefore does admonish them, that so sone as may be, they would help him
with men and money, that his great and outragiouse cruelty might be repressed.
Then they that are of yt lower parts of Austriche, say how they were
commanded of theirs, that they should treat Thambassadours of Austrtche
require of king Ferdinando that the true Religion may be permitted them.
first of Religion. Therefore they recite what they have done in the selfsame
cause, by ye space now of.xiiii. years, how often they have entreated and put up
supplicatio^s, and what manner of proclamations he has set forth contrary to
their expectation: Again, for as much as hitherto (say they) al cou^selles
against ye Turk are taken in vain, and not only as yet he could not be
repressed, but also his violence has so far proceeded, that having taken in
Hongary and Slauonie many towns, Castles and Fortes, he hangs now over yt
necks of us, it is doubtless to be thought that this is the manifest vengeance
of God, which plageth us for sin, and afflicts us for that we amend not
our life, and so in deed afflicts us, that unless his word be received, and
the amendment of life follow, the loss not only of life and goods, but also
of eternal salvation is like to ensue. For although the whole world took
armure against that ennemie, yet, so long as it shall remain in that state of
life, there is no hope of victory, but rather of destruction, and slaughter, as
it is evident to have chanced some time to most florishynge kingdoms. We
treated of the same matter also in the last assemblee, and prayed you that we
might not be compelled to do any thing against our conscience: But you referred
the matter to the counsel of Regenspurg. How be it you may consider (most
mighty king) how greuouse it is to them, which thyrste for the health of
their souls, to be differred to a time vncerte^. For in the mean time the
mind is in angwishe, and in this angwyshe and perplexity many thousands of
me^ end their life. Doubtless the word of God, which through our Savior
Jesus Christ is opened to us, should be the only rule, which the church ought
to follow: And in case any thing contrary to gods word have crept in,
although it be grounded of great antiquity, it must be rejected: For God will be
honored and worshipped, as he him self prescribes and commands, not as men
wene and feign. But with how horrible and grievous plages he reuengeth the
neglecting of his commandment, and the observation of men's traditions, both
the Empires of fourmer time do show, and also the fresh and domestical
calamities of people next us declare. Therefore after most dilligent search,
there appears to us none other remedy than that those manifest errors and
deprauations, brought long since into the church, being cast away, the pure
doctrine may be received and freely preached, to gether with such
administration of the Sacraments as Christ him self did institute, for to
depart and turn away from the word of God so manifest and so plain, we may
not, as we have often showed you at other times. For first we must seek for the
kingdom of God. Which being done, God assisteth us with his spirit, and
governs our counselles and doings. To the end therefore that he would
deliver us from al these dangers, that he would be the counselor of the war
and enseigne bearer, that he may assiste us in battle and discomfite thennemies
force, in most humble and earnest wise we beseech your highness, even for the
death of Christ, for our salvation, and for the last judgment that we shall
abide, for as much as this thing apperteineth to the perpetual felicity of
you and your children, and al your Realm, that we, which are spotted with no
sect, may by your leave and permission remain in the pure and sincere
Religion until a free general counsel, and that we may inioye the same
benefit of peace, which in the last assemblee of the Empire you have made
with the fellows of the confession of Auspurge. For seeing we be all Baptized
in Christ, we beseech you, that our State and condition be not worse than
theirs, another that you would deny us the thing, which you have granted to
diverse other of your Provinces, but that you would call in those
Proclamations of yours, set forth concerning Religion, and would deliver us
from this carefulnes, wherewith we are bound. Moreover, we beseech you, that
you would set forth by proclamation, that the ministers of the church, that
teach after the wrytinges of the Prophets and Apostels, and after the same
manner, as before is said, do minister the Sacraments, be not molested, nor
yet such schomaisters: Neither that they be imprisoned nor banished, before
they shall plead their cause before a lawful judge. If you thus do, as we
trust you will in this extreme danger, there is no doubt, but God will reward
the same most abundantly, and also the states of the Empire will send you
more aid than they have done hitherto. And we likewise will not be behind
with our duty, but with most willing minds, will bestow and give what so
ever shall apperteine to the common defense and preservation of our country,
and will thoroughly satisfy your demau^des, so much as shall lie in our power
and ability to do.

At the selfsame time the Ambassadors of the emperor and Truce taken between
the Emperor and the king of France.
the French king had met: And where the controversy could not be finished by
a peace, the fifth day of the month of February, they take truce for five
years by Sea and land, as well in Flaunders and those parts as also for
Italy and all other places. Every one keeps the possession of those things
which he has gotten in the time of the war: The Emperor excepteth the exiles
of Naples and Scicilie. He compriseth the Pope in the first place, as does also
the French king, and afterward every man his friends and allies, as the manner
is. The same truce not long after the king caused to be proclaimed both
throughout France and at Metz also, but the Emperor somewhat later in his
countries. A brute went that the Pope took it in snuff that this truce was
made, and went about afterward to persuade the French king to break the
same. Others thought contrariwise, that it was made chiefly through his advise,
yt he might make war against the Lutherians. Touching prisoners nothing
could be concluded in this truce, amongst whom the chiefest were the Duke of
Arescot, a Bourgunnion, and Monmorau^ce the Conestables eldest son, taken
three years before at Terwin.

When they of Austriche (as I said before) had on this wise The answer of king
Ferdinando to yt Ambassa. of the house of Austriche
the day before the Kalendes of February put up their supplication to king
Ferdinando in writing, the king the eight day after answers, and speaking
first of his good will toward the common wealth, and of the common calamity
and misery of times, and of Gods wrath, whilst I consider (says he) and way
mine own state and place diligently, whilst I think how I have ever from my
yought hitherto followed the precepts of the christen and catholic church,
after the manner of my progenitors, of whom I have received this Religion He
means the Emper. Sigismonde that burnte John Husse.
and discipline as it were delivered by hand, I do surely find, yt I may not
assent to you in that which you require. Not that I would not gladly gratify
my people, but for that I see it is not lawful, that I should be prejudicial
to the Christ church, and should alter the laws of the same, and the wholesome
decrees, at my pleasure, where I must rather hear it as Christ commands.
How beit for as much as I know by long experience, what occasion of great evils
this bitter contention about Religion brings, I have doubtless with my brother
yt Emperor been now these many years wholly occupied, that they might come to
a composition. And therefore has the matter been attempted in many counsels of
the Empire, and certain conferences of learned men, and through our mediation
has been begone once or twyse the counsel of Trent: But where as the treaty
came to no good effect, that can not doubtless be imputed to us, neither is it
unknown, by what diuises and crafts the matter was than hindered, Now where
you require that the pure doctrine, and the benefit of the peace newly made
for Religion may be granted you: Like as heretofore I have kept back no man
from the true Religion, so will I not also do it hereafter. Again you are as
well comprised in the same peace, as are the people of other Princes. For this
is the meaning of the same decree, that the people shall follow the Religion
of their Prince. And it is permitted to temporal Princes to chose whether
Religion they will, for that the people ought to be content with the choice of
the Prince, but yet so for all that, that such as shall not like that Religion
which the Prince has chosen, may have fre liberty to sell that they have and
go dwell in an other place, without any hinderaunce or blemishe to their
estimation, which seeing it is so, your duty is to persevere in the old and
catholic Religion, which I profess. That the Gospel should not be purely
taught after the exposition of the Apostels Martyrs and fathers which the
church has received, I was never against. The Lords supper although it were
instituted whole, yet was it in the old church also distributed under one
kind, as it may be declared at large. Therefore it was not altered first in ye
time of the counsel of Constau^ce, but that custom had lasted many ages
before: Wherefore you may easily think, how it is not lawful for me, by my
private authority to change or abolish that law received and approved by
general counselles, especially at this time, when both now lately peace is
given to Religion, and in the next assemblee we must treat further for a
reconcilement: In the which treaty doubtless, I will seek to the vttermoste of
my power, that dissension may be utterly taken away: But if that can not be
done, tha^ will I take such away as may profit both your wealth and your souls
health also. And to ye intent you may understand my good will and clemency
toward you, I will in deed stay and restreine that part of my proclamation
that concerns the Lords supper, but yet under this condition, that all
sects forsaken, you do alter nothing of the laws and ceremonies of the
church, but tarry for the decree of the assemble of the Empire next coming.
The ministers of the church and scholem aisters, so that they follow this
order, also shall not be molested, as also before this time, I suffered no man
against right to be iniuried. Seeing therefore I bear you this good will my
trust is that you will desire nothing furthermore, and for as much as the
public necessity urges, it shall become you to consult for the common
wealth, and to give that behooves. Whereunto they make answer the.xii. day of
February: And The Ambassadors answer to Ferdinando.
where in the cause of all other most weighty, which contains perpetual
felicity, and especially apperteineth to the salvation of him and his
children, they can obtain nothing, they she we how they are most heartily
sorry. And where as (say they) most mighty king, you say, that this wonted
distributing of the Lords supper, was in oulde time received in the church,
that same may be abundantly confuted by holy scripture, and also their error
detected, that have persuaded your highness herein. But where you say the
meaning of the late decree made at Auspurg to be, that the people should apply
them selves to the Religion of their Prince. Uerely for as much as a few
years paste, and long before this decree, we have with common consent
exhibited to your highness supplications concerning Religion, it were lawful
for us also, in case we would dwell in the same answer, to sell our goods, and
flitte with our wives and children to some other place: But what disco^moditie
were herein, again, how heuie and sorrowful news this would be to the people,
who sees not? When verily they shall hear, that they, which after the custom
of their elders, have been ever more ready to spend their blood and life for
the preservation and dignity of the house of Austriche: must now forsake
their most sweet native country, so many years inhabited and enriched by
their fore fathers? Therefore we admit not, nor ratify the same answer, in
this behalf, but as we have done often heretofore, for the honor of God we
beseech you, that you would permit us to have that incomparable treasure of
Gods word, and suffer us to have no let in this matter. For if the condition
of the cause were such, that the whole blame should be to you ascribed,
doubtless we could be content, like as in other things, so in this case also,
to obey you willingly. But since that every man must render an account of his
own deeds, since there is no difference of persons with God, and for because
the end of this life is every moment at hand, neither is there any thing more
uncertain than life, we can not but with earnest suite and labor require this
thing of you. Wherefore, we beseech you that we may have sufficient warrauntise
herein.

Hereunto the king the fourth day after, I suppose (says The answer of king
Ferdinando.
he) there was no just cause, wherefore you should not be satisfied with the
fourmer answer. I permit that as the Apostels have set it forth, as the martirs
and fathers approved of the church have taught and expounded the scripture, it
be now taught also, I pray you, what more require you herein? For since God
has promised to his church the holy ghost, salvation is not to be sought else
where. You say you are defiled with no sect, of the which sort be many now
adays, as anabaptists, Sacramentaries, Zwinglians, Schnemfeldians and such
other like. This in deed is very well: But if the doctrine be set at liberty,
and be not included within certain limits, as before is said, how long
suppose you that it will continue pure? When every man for him self will brag
of Gods word, and say it is subject to no creature, but to God alone, nor
will admit the judgment of no man, as we see it happen in many places, where
all is full of trouble, whylest every man does stiffly maintain his own
opinion, the authority of the church utterly contemned. And for as much as in
your fourmer writing you recite the last decree of the Empire somewhat
otherwise than apperteineth, therefore have I declared how it is to be taken,
not that I would have you to go dwell else where. Again to take from you all
carefulnes, I have suppressed ye part of the proclamation touching the Lords
supper, promysing hereafter all diligence, that a reconcilement may be had. For
what causes I can not reuolte from the laws and ceremonies of the church, I
have showed. For both Christ says that the church must be heard, and also the
thing it self teaches the fourmer age, which renewyng nothing, abode in the
Religion of their forefathers, to have been much more quiet and fortunate in
all things, than this is now, where all things are tourmoyled with sects
and dissentions, and many men ravished and toste hither and thither with every
wind of doctrine. Whereby I would the rather have thought that you would not
have answered in this sort. And now, albeit that this answer of yours may
be thoroughly confuted, yet, for as much as we must treat of contributions and
subsidies, and thereof shortly determine, unless you be determined to suffer
extreme misery, I will not be over long, trusting also that you will do, both
as the matter it self, and also as the consideration of your duty requires.
They again solicit the same thing, and say how they can not leave it: And
in case they can obtain nothing, they say it will be the cause, that the
same consultation of giving him aid, will surely be hindered and let. For
that they have no commission to promise any thing herein, unless they have
first good assurance for Religion and Ministers of the church, and for
Scholemaisters, that they may be authorized to teach freely.

In the month of February, Henry Duke of Brunswick, takes to wife the sister
of Sigismunde king of Poole. About Duke Henry of Bru^swick marieth a wife. The
bishop of Treuers dies. Frederick Count Palatine dies.
this time dies John Isemburg, Bishop of Treuers, and has John Ley his
successor. The.xxvi. day also of the same month departs at Alzeme
Frederick the Pausgraue, Prince Electour, a man of great years: Whom Otto
Henrick his brothers son succedeth, who had long since received the doctrine
of the Gospel, and was in danger therefore to have lost al his possessions.
Taking an oath of his people, he commands by and by, that no man within his
dominion should say Mass, or use any other ceremonies.

Of the trouble that Osiander styred up in Prusse, who had brought in a new
doctrine of justification, is spoken in the xxii book. But where as the most
part of learned men reprehended that opinion, Albert Duke of Prusse by open
writing professes The Duke of Pruse professes the confession of Auspurge.
that he will follow the doctrine of the confession of Auspurg: He commands
therefore the ministers of the church, that they teach according to the same,
and promyseth to save them harmeles, in case they obey. And to the end the
matter might be thoroughly appeased, John Albert Duke of Megelburge, son in
law to the Duke of Pruse, a Prince excellently learned, going thither, and
having learned men about him, brought John Funccius, who was chief of the sect
of Osiander, to that poinct, that both he acknowledged his error, and affirmed
that he would confess it openly, and would hereafter teach after the
confession of Auspurg. Where as others would do the same, they were agreed with
the other divines, and the state of the church was appeased.

The fourth day of March began to shine a blasing star, and is seen by the
space of twelve days. In this month the A Camete seen.
Ambassadors of Princes and cities mete at Rege^spurge, and treat the cause
of Marquis Albert of Brandenburge. For his adversaries in the counsel of the
last year had again required the aid of Princes against him, but through the
mediatio^ of his friends, and that the matter should be heard by intercessours.
Where he therefore in the month of February of this year came out of France
into Germany, his matter was heard the causes of thempire differred till the
month of April.

The Archbishop of Cantorbury already condemned, and after Tharchebyshop of
Cantorbu. burnt for Religion
the death of Ryddley and Latimer returned to prison, as before is said,
ye.xxi. of this month is burnt at Oxforde. Certain days before, being put in
some hope of life, through the persuasion of certain, he had revoked diverse
articles of doctrine, neither showed he constancy. And when he saw he must
die, he made an oration to the people, and speaking many things of the
amendment of life and of manners, to the end he might have his audience
atte^tiue, at the length shows how grievously he had offended God by denying
of the truth, and reciting the chief articles of doctrine, declares briefly,
what he thought, and confirms Papistrie to be the kingdom of Antichriste. He
had no so ner said so, but he was had thence, not without most bitter and
railyng words to the place of execution. And when he came thither, stretching
forth his right hand, this hand (says he) has wickedly offended, in
subscribing to ye wicked opinions, which the ennemies of the truth had
propounded to me: Wherefore it shall first suffer punishment. Thus being tied to
ye stake, so sone as the fire began to burn, he stretched forth his hand into
if, as far as he could reach, that it might first feel the torment. And so
was burnt the primate of England, a man of greatest learning and authority.
From the time that the Popish mark was taken from him, they call it
degrading, which is wont to be done with many ceremonies, they put upon him a
most vile garment, and so brought him forth among the people, to be laughed
at: But many having compassion of his unworthy chance, could not keep the^
from sheding of tears, although they doubted nothing, but that he should
flitte out of this miserable life in to the heavenly country, and life
everlasting. His promotions got Cardinal Poole, made Archebyshop, when he had
Massed before. The Bauarians solicit their Prince forreligio^.


And like as they of Austriche, so also the Bauaria^s solicited Albert their
Duke concerning religion, in manner at ye same time. The Duke seeing that king
Ferdinando his father in law had permitted some thing to his subjects, he
also, when he exacted money. granted some thing for a time, that they might
receive the Lords supper whole, and on days prohibited, when necessity
requires, to eat flesh. Howbeit he prosesseth with many words that he will
not depart from the Religion of his auncesters, nor alter any thing in
ceremonies and such other things for the same not to be lawful for him to
do, without the consent of his supreme Magistrate both spiritual and
temporal: And where he permits these two, to be for a time only, till some
thing be established by public authority, or a reconcilement made. For he
will that his proclamations of fourmer time concerning Religion be exactely and
stryghtly kept, these two things only excepted: He will procure also, as much
as in him lies, that the Metropolitan and Bishops shall confirm this
grant, and that they shall not for this cause seek to moleste any man. This
proclamation was written the day before the Kalendes of April. The
Metropolitan of whom he speaks, is the Archebyshop of Salisburg. At this
time certain noble men of Transiluania do reuolte from king Ferdinand.
Ferdinando also prorogeth the counsel of the Empire to a time uncertain, and
leuieth an army, which he sends down the river of Danubius into Ho^gary.
There is a town of Alsatia called Obereyne, three leages from Strasburg. A
certain citezen of that town, being a labourer about vines, for penury and
want, when his wife was absent, the tenth day of April sleeth his A father
kills his three children.
three children, a daughter of seven years, a son of four years old, and a
sucking babe in the cradell, not fully half a year old. That time there was
a brute, and report went of the secret conspiracy of the Pope and his
adherentes against the Protestauntes. It increased this opinion, for that there
was no doubt, but that the Pope took most displeasauntly, the decre The Pope
took displeasauntly that peace was given to religion.
of the last year made at Auspurge, whereby peace and liberty was granted to
Religion: It is thought also that he solicited the Emperor to make it
frustrate: For he saw how many revolted daily from his kingdom, and
understand what they of Austriche and what the Bauarians went about. Moreover,
the Archebyshops of Mentz, Treuers and Collon by occasion of the bathes met
that time together: Which was thought to be done not without cause.

King Ferdinando breaking up his assemblees in Austriche, goes into Boheme,
and calling the countries there about to King Ferd, goes in to Boheme.
Prage, against this iminent danger, demands money and has it granted:
Than sending letters to them which had been now certain months at Regenspurg,
he excuses his absence, and because he must return to Uienna, he appoints
the assemblee of the Empire the first of June. After the departure of king
Ferdinando, the Lantgraue came in to Meissen, and was a certain time with
Auguste Duke of Saxony. The tenth The Duke of Arescot brake out of prison.
day of May, the Duke of Arescot, being prisoner in castle Uincent, not far
from Paris, escaped and came home safe.

The Cardinal of Auspurge who had tarried a whole year at Rome, when he being
lately returned from thence had heard how sinistrally and many evil men spoke
and thought of him, as though he should practice with the Pope privy and
perniciouse counselles for Germany, he pourgeth him by an open writing, set
forth in the vulgar tongue, about the end of May. And where as the last year
(says he) after the death of Julius the third, I went to Rome, as my duty was
to do, and was present The Cardinal of Auspurg pourgeth himself by writing.
at the Election of him that now rules: I had pourposed doubtless to have
returned home into Germany with expedition, but I was detained of the Pope,
who went about than a reformation of the church: And chosing certain excellent
men of all nations for the same purpose, chose me also, although unmeet for so
weighty a matter, because I was a Germane, to be of that number. But where the
charge of my Byshoprike required my presence, askyng leave of the Bishop, the
day before the Ides of April, I returned home. Nevertheless, although I have
so used my self both always before, and after also that I came to this kind
of life that I now am in, which I would should be spoken without boasting, that
no shameful matter can be truly objected to me, although I have been often the
cou^sellour and author of peace, not without my great loss and hinderaunce,
although the wealth and dignity of my country has been to me always dear,
yet so sone as I came again in to Germany, I heard of great me^ and worthy
credit that were my friends, how in mine absence certain wrytynges were cast
abroad, which sounded to my dishonor, as though I should not only at Rome
with ye Pope, but also every where through out Italy, with secret diuises
practice this, that Germany, and namely the league fellows of the confession
of Auspurg, should again be vexed with a most grievous war. And in the same
wrytinges they alleged this to be the cause of this enterprise sinisire
suspicious spread of the Card. of Auspurg.
and fecret working, that the Pope did greatly mislike the decre made the last
year at Auspurg concerning religion, in so much that he persuaded the Emperor
that he would abolishe the same, that he had dispensed with him for his faith
and promise herein, that he had promised him all the aid and power that he
could make to subdue Germany, so that the emperor again would not fail him in
recovering the ecclesiastical jurisdiction in Germany, that therefore he had
made truce betwixt the Emperor and the French king, that both their Armies
might be converted to this use. They added moreover that this was written in
the same libelle, that no foreyne Soldiers should be levied, but only of
Germaynes, that the thing might the better be hid. Moreover that the king of
England would hire eight thousand horsemen, and be governor of the whole
war, and that mounsters should be take in sundry places: Briefly, that the
whole matter should be handled so circumspectly, that all these powers should
set forward together at one time, and should invade the Protestauntes upon
the soden, than when many shall be from home at the counsel at Regenspurge,
Furthermore, that both the Pope and the king of England, sending Ambassadors
to certain Princes in Germany, do promise them largely, and that the Pope in
deed prepares a great army of horsemen and fotemen, to send for aid.
Furthermore, that I should sclaunder Otto Henrick the Paulsgraue, Christopher
Duke of Wirtemberge, and Albert Marquis of Brandenburge, as Heretics, and
seditiouse and worthy to be driven out of their country. And should hyghly
commend the Lantgraue in the Senate of Cardinals, for that he had forsaken
his Religion, and that Titell man one of the Ministers of his church had
revoked his doctrine at Rome both by word and writing.

Now for as much as this sclaunder touches not only the The pourgation of yt
Cardinal of Auspurg against the suspicious of certain
Pope and the Emperor, but hurts also my name and estimation. And because it
is the part of an honest man to defend both his own and also the honor and
innocence of his Magistrate, I must needs answer to the same. And to begin
with all, it was surely very grievous and paynefull for me to hear that any
were yet remaining and to be found, which contrary to the ancient virtue of
Germany, faith and constancy, do give their minds to such sclaundering,
and here to apply them selves, that through most wicked libelles and lewd
talk, they might styre up the Princes of the Empire against their high
Magistrate, and set the Princes together by the ears in a wicked war.

How cruel, troublesome, and full of peril was the sclaunder divised.xxviii.
years past, I suppose full many do remember: A sclaunder devised against
certi Princes.
When king Ferdinando, the Bishops of Mentz, Salisburg, Bamberge and
Wirseburge, the Prince Electour of Brandenburge, Lewys and William brethren
Dukes of Bauier, and George Duke of Saxony, were said to have conspired against
John Duke and Electour of Saxony, and the Lantgraue, where the matter was
brought to that poinct, that al things tended to a most cruel civil war.
Doubtless Princes ought to set before their eyes, and to remember the same time.
For both the wyckednes of that deviser was detected, where as every Prince for
his part denied the thing by open writing, and the sclaunderer afterward,
lost his head, as he deserved. Which I trust shall now come to pass also,
that even God being revenger, the authors of so wicked a devise may be
disclosed: For my part I pray God to send them a better mind, and to
confound their counselles, that they redounde not to the destruction of the
Country. For saying that this is a like sclaunder, as that furmer was, it may
be easily perceived, that the authors have forged it of the self same mind,
that the other did: or after the imitation of him to have attempted this, to
the intent, verily that they might now bring to pass, that thing which he
than could not finishe.

But for as much as the intent of this Sclaunderer is, that he might persuade
that the Pope and the Emperor, would by force of arms, break that decree
made for peace in Religion, and that the king of England and the Bishops of
Germany would also aid them herein: I proteste that it is wyckedly forged and
invented, for this intent verily, that men's minds being exasperated, and
displeasures increased, all places might swymme full of ciuyle blood.

And although I do not doubt but that the Emperor and other Princes, to the
injury of whom this seditiouse and famous libelle apperteineth, will them
selves defend their cause, yet for duty sake, I can not omit but that I must
also pourge the high Magistrate. Unfaynedly all the time that I remained at
Rome, in my presence or to my knowledge, there was not one word spoken at Rome
of that same peace of Religion. It is falsely therefore ascribed to the Pope, as
though he should apply all his Counsel to force and violence, as though he
went about to persuade hereunto the Emperor and other kings: It is falsely
(I say) imputed to him, neither can it be proved. And seeing that is so, it is
like wise false that is written of the Emperor. For since there was no
conference nor treaty between them for this matter, how could they The Pope
had no conference with yt Emperor against religion or the liberty of Germany.
determine upon war, or make a compacte between them, for the recoueryng of
the ecclesiastical jurisdiction, or subduinge of Germany?

This defamer says, that truce was made betwyxt the Emperor and French king,
to the intent that the soldiers being of either discharged, might be led to
this war. What the cause of the truce was, the copy of the same declares.
Again, those soldiers were not retained of any Prince, but so many, as king
Ferdinando commanded to be taken up, and sent the^ into Hongary against the
Turk, those also excepted, whom they of Auspurge and of Norinberge, and the
Bishops of Bamberge and Wirtemberge hired, least happily they should be
oppressed upon the soden. This part therefore of their deuyse falls touching
the Pope, the Emperor, and of the other Bishops.

Now as concerning my self, I have verily hitherto followed the old true
and catholic Religion, and as it becomes The Cardinal of Anspurg addicts
to the old Religion.
a Germayne borne, I tread in the footesteppes of my elders, and persevere in
the same communion of the church, that I was brought up in, as also in the
last counsel imperial I declared both by my letters and counselors. In this
mind I purpose through Gods grace to persevere: Neither am I minded to do any
thing, that may strive with honesty or consideration of my duty: And yet
nevertheless I covet to be at peace with all men. But where it is said, that
I have had secret conference with the Pope, with the Emperor, with the king of
England, and with other States of the Empire, and and with certain private men,
about the framyng of this war. Again, that same of the Paulsgraue, the Duke of
Wirtemberge, and the Marquis of Brandenburge, to be most false, neither that
it can be proved of any man: Yea they that bring up such tales of me, whether
it be done by word or wrytinge, I say they be sclaunderers, and ennemies of
the common country. And touching Count Palatine thus stands the matter. The
manner and dignity of my vocation requires, that I should maynteyne the right
of my Byshoprike, and keep the people committed to my charge in the old and
Catholic Religion. And being aduertysed that Otto Henry Prince Electour went
about, to make certain Towns of my Byshopryke, of his Religion, and had placed
Preachers in them, I took this doubtless in evil part, and had cause, why I
should defend me by the laws. Therefore my counselors in my absence,
howbeit, yet by my commandment, brought the matter in to the chamber
imperial, where the matter depends as yet so: Otherwise not so much as in
word I never hurt his name nor estimation, much less have I attempted any
thing against his country: But if I could do any thing, that might turn to
the commodity of him self, his country or people, I would omit nothing,
and I suppose that the people of his country can bear witness of this thing,
for they know what I have done for them in times paste in their great
adversity. Moreover I have evermore loved the house of Palatine, being ready
to gratify them by what soever means I might: And the same will is never a
whit changed. In semblable wise am I affected toward Christopher Duke of
Wirtemberge, a good man, wise, skylfull, a lover of peacei And have ever since
the time we were first acquaynted, The good will of the Cardinal of Anspurg
toward the duke of Wirtemberg.
borne him great good will, and have studied also to perform the same in
deed. But that either he or the Paulsgraue should be driven out of their
country, the same not only came never into my mind, but also in case I had
known any such matter as might have tended to the loss of their estimation
or goods, I would both have been right heartily sorry for the same, and would
have let it also to the vttermoste of my power that no such thing should
have chanced. And hitherto in deed I have so demeaned my self always, that I
suppose they have found nothing, so shall I also use my self from henceforth,
that I shall give them a more occasion so to think, upon this hope verily,
that for as much as I have given no cause to be offended, they will bear me
the like good will. And how much I lamented the chance of Marquis Albert, he
is not ignorant him self, for what have not I assayed, what have I not
proved, that this discord might be taken away, and quietness be restored to
the Empire? Doubtless my travel in that thing has been so much, and my
industry so great, that although I regarded herein the common wealth, yet came
I in suspicion with many, that I tendered his commodities ouermuche, and sought
to hinder others. But how vpryghtly I handled the matter, my letters written
to him can show. Seeing therefore I am of this mind toward the^, neither is
there any duty wantyng in me, I trust, that for the virtue that is in them and
true Nobility they will sooner give credit not so much to my saying as doing,
which manifestly appears and shows it self, than to these sediciouse
persons, which as certain bellouse seek to reyse up flame. With what intier
love also and good will being absent Embraced al Germans for the remembrance
of the most sweet country The love of yt Cardinal of Auspurge toward yt
Germans.
that can both the Ambassadors of many Princes, and many also of the Nobility
declare, which were than at Rome, when I was of Mentz, Treuers, Collon,
Saxons, of Brandenburg, Maydenburge, Bauarians, of Brunswicke, Passawe,
Osenburg, Minden, and of Basil. For all these at once repared to me as a
certain haven, and were faithfully helped of me in their affairs, and certain
also through my labor and commendation have ascheued offices and great
promotions. Now that same of the Lantgraue, and of one Titelman what a fond
divise is it. For neither had I ever any talk with the Lantgraue, and his
sons of that matter, neither can I remember that I spoke one word of it
either at Rome or in Italy: Much less can I tell what the Ministers of his
dominion do teach or revoke: This in deed am I able to say, that to my
knowledge, there was no such recantation made at Rome. Therefore I doubt not
but the Lantgraue, when the matter shall so require, will easily confute this
same, and the other also of my commendation. Considering therefore that the
artificers of so perniciouse libelles have shamefully forged all things, to
the end that the same fire which many years since they had laid together,
might now at the length burn and break out all at ones, it is needful that
Princes and Magistrates take dilligent head of them, and when at the last they
shall be detected, that they set such an example, as may make all others
afraid. Finally, in case there be any that have conceived any evil opinion of
me by reason of these sclaunders, I earnestly pray them to lay it away, and
think assuredly, that since I am both a Germayne borne, and come of a noble
house, I will do nothing unworthy the virtue and Nobility of my auncesters.

When he had published this wrytinge the fifte Kalendes of June (as before is
said) he wrote also privately to diverse Princes to the same effect, and after
went again into Italy, what time Bona, the mother of Sigismunde king of Poole,
returned home, going to Naples.

In the mean season commotio^s were in England, and many Commotio^s in England
for suspicion of a conspiracy.
Gentle men for suspicion of conspiracy (as it was said) were cast in prison:
Whereof, some were executed, other some fled into France, and among them Sir
Androwe Dudley, brother to the Duke of Northumberland. There were two also
taken out of my Lady Elizabeth her house. At the Ides of May Sir Peter Sir
Peter Carrowe and Sir John Cheke taken prisoners.
Carrowe, who for an insurrectio^ had fled certain months before, reconciled
to king Philip, and Sir John Cheke which was king Edwardes scholemaister,
retourning out of Germany into Brabant, to fetch his wife, as they were going
from Brusselles to Andwarpe, by the commandment of king Philip being
apprehendetd are carried to London. About the end of June not far from London
there were.xiii. burnt together at Xiii. burnt at Stretford at the bewe. The
Marq. of Baben receives the Gospel.
one stake for Religion. In the mean time Charles Marquis of Baden receives
the doctrine of the Gospel, and of his neighbors borrows ministers to
refourme and order his churches. Before this also had the Senate of Spire taken
a preacher or two of the Gospel. Maximilian the eldest son of king
Ferdinando with his wife the Emperors daughter departing from Uienne, the.
xvii, day of July came to Brusselles, where he had been long and much desirous
to take that journey. Peter Martyr, a Florentine of whom we have spoken
before, what time the dissension about the Lords supper was kindled again,
and he in certain books was touched by name, went from Strasburg to Zurick, that
he might handle that matter freely both in teaching and writing. That time
Conrade Pellicane died at Zurick: Peter Martyr goes to Zurick.
And therefore the Senate being requested by the ministers of the church,
writing their letters to the Senate of Strasburg, pray earnestly that he might
be sent them. So he departs at the third Ides of July not without the sighing
and grief of many, which loved him for his incomparable learning, his most
exact judgment, his great gentleness and modesty and his other virtues.

At the same time the Archebyshop of Pise Cardinal, borne in Sicilie, passing
by Basil, went to the emperor at Brusselles Cardinals sent from yt Pope to the
Emper. and the French king.
being sent from the Pope, where a little before Cardinal Caraffa the Popes
cousin, was come to the king of France. A report had been, and that written
that there was most heinous displeasure betwixt the Pope and the emperor, and
that ye matter tended utterly to war. For among other things the Pope had
taken from the house of Columnois al their possessions in Italy: Which thing
in deed seemed to apperteine to the injury of ye Emperor. Again it was said how
he would not inueste king Philip his son, in the possession of Sicilie and
Naples, propounding over hard conditions, for those kingdoms pay tribute to
the Bishop of Rome, and depend upon his benefit.

At the Ides of July, Albert Duke of Bauier, in the name of king Ferdinando
begins the counsel at Regensburg, declares Counsel begone at Regenspurg.
that he is occupied with holding assemblees in Austriche and Boheme, so that
he could not come hither him self at the time appointed, and shows why he
can not be present yet neither. For by means of Peter Petrouice ye kings
cliente, who had desired aid of the Turk, all the country of Transyluania,
when no necessity urged them, and when they had no just cause, revolted from
the king to the son of John Uayuode: After that Fraunces Beuecke and George
his son, making a rebellion in Hongary have by the help and the aid of the
Walachia^s taken certain towns and castles. Again that the Turk has lately
sent a governor to Offen. And that an other also what time they treated of the
truce, beseged the town and castle of Buda in Latin.
Zegeste the.xi. day of June, and began to batter it sore. Moreover to be
signified by the letters and messages of many, that the governor of Bosnia
leuieth an exceading great army to invade Slauonia: And also that the president
of Grene, gathers no small power at the city of Sophie, intending to march
forward, and that the Emperor of Turks him self will in harvest next, come
in to Hongary and winter there, or if he defer it to the next spring, that he
will come than with a strong army, to win Uienne by sege. For these causes
therefore ye king can not at this time leave his countries, but is wholly busied
and occupied in making preparation to resist. And for as much as it is not for
the profit of the common wealth to differ the counsel any longer, therefore has
he appointed him to begin the treaty and to proceed, till he may come him
self. And in deed three years since the king sent a noble Ambassade to the
Turk for peace or truce, and they are yet detained at Constantinople. And
albeit that truce was taken between the^, till thambassadours were returned
home, yet the Turks in the mean season, having broken their faith, have taken
many towns and castles, upon the frontiers. And seeing now also Zegest of them
is beseged, it appears not, what peace in very deed is to be looked for at
their hands, that can be firm and tolerable: Which thing seeing it is so,
and for as much as great danger hangs over not only the remnaunt of Hongary
and Austriche, but also over all Germany to be first need, to consulte
imediatly of sending aid, and of co^tribution money, which should be kept in
certain places, and for this war, when need is, to be defrayed by the public
treasurers. And that other kings and Princes also are solicited by the king
for aid, neither will he him self spare any cost or peril either of him
self or his sons also, but since his countries being sore inpouerished with
the wars of so many years, are not able to resist so great an ennemy, it is
requisite to contribute thereunto, and that spedely. Moreover, for as much as
in the last assemblee it was decreed also, that in this assemblee ways should
be sought to appease Religion, the king ernestly exhorts that they would
search diligently, whether a reconcilement might be made, and which way.
They must also treat of money, and of establyshyng peace in the Empire. And
the consultation of the Turkishe war not to be set behind, but to be chiefly
of them considered, to the end the present and iminent calamity may be
repulsed.

About the.xv. day of September, the Emperor having a The Empe. goes in to
Spain with both his sisters.
fair wind, and his navy in a readiness, takes shipping to sail into
spain, and takes with him both his sisters Queen Mary and Elenor companions
of his journey. But before he departed, he set king Philip his son in
possession of all the low countries. And to his brother king Ferdinando he
committed the common wealth of Germany, sending letters to the Electours of the
Empire, whereby he requires them that they would acknowledge the same for
Emperor of Romans, and obey him accordingly. The last day of October, John
Sleidane author of this work, a man for John Sleydane dies.
the singular gifts of the mind, and excellent learning all praise worthy,
departs out of this life at Strasburg, and is there honorably buried.

FINIS.
An Apology of John Sleidane.
FOr as much as I hear that diverse men speak nothing friendly of my History,
and have small thank requited me for my exceading great pains, I am
constreined to set forth this writing for defense. Now for what causes I was
moved to write this story, how I proceeded in yt same, how I wrote for the
displeasure or favor of no man, and couched things in order, I declared in
the preface of the work: And added moreover, that I was very desirous of the
truth and therein so affected, that if I knew any thing to be written
untruly, I would scrape it out, and admonish the Reader of mine own accord,
to give no credit to it. Doubtless I would have thought that all men here with
would have been satisfied, especially, since the very reading should prove it
true that I said: But in as much as it is reported to me far otherwise, which
to me was very loathsome and grievous, I am driven of necessity to add some
things to my preface. And first in deed ever since the beginning of the world
it has been accustomed, that matters as well ecclesiastical as civil should
be committed to writing: Which thing in deed books do testify, and the same
custom has always flourished chiefly among noble and free nations,
especially Greeks and Romans. The chief precept and ornament of this kind of
writing is, that it be right and true, and therefore Tully calls an history
the witness of times, and light of verity, the life of memory, and maistres of
life. By the which words verily, he does both commend it exceadingly, and
also shows, of what sort it ought to be, and now, for as much as in this
our time has chanced so great an alteration of Religion, as since the time of
the Apostles the like has not been, and no small stir of civil policy has
insued also upon the same as is commonly wont to do, I verily, although not the
metest man of al, at request of certain good men, took upon me this kind of
wrytinge, to the setting forth of Gods glory, and with great fidelity and
diligence have brought it to this our time. And that I have herein given
nothing to affections, and have used my self so moderatly in this argument, as
peradventure none other before me has done, that same I truste^l indifferent
judges will confess. For although I do gladly prufesse this doctrine of the
Gospel through the benefit of God restored, and rejoice exceadingly to be of
that number and fellowship, yet do I absteyne from al bitterness of words, and
declare simply the whole matter as it was done. God also I take to witness, that
mine intent has not ben, falsely to hurt any man: For what a shameless
impudency were it, of those things whereof the memory yet is fresh, to set
forth any thing contrary to a truth? Again they that know me thoroughly, have
perceived, I trust no such vanity in me: Notwithstanding in case I have erred
in any point, I will both acknowledge it willingly, being admonished, and also
as I said in the preface, I will proteste it openly, that the Reader be not
abused. And as concerning my pains I suppose verily, that in searching out of
the truth, no man's diligence could have been no more than mine has been, and
like as many are able this to testify, so I doubt not but the thing also it
self shall declare. And in describing matters of Religion, I might not omit
polytique causes. For as I said before, they came in manner always together,
and especially in our time they could not be separated. And that they come
together, this is a sure reason and grounded upon the scripture. To wit that
so sone as among any people Religion is changed, by and by arrise offenses,
dissentions, debates, vprores, factions and wars. For even for this cause
Christ says that the son is plucked from his father, and the daughter from
her mother: Also that his doctrine brings not peace, but the sword, and
says it shall styre up fire also among the nere of blood. And this has
been ever the state of things since the world was made, neither can it be
denied, and the thing it self speaks. For so sone as in our time gods
benefit given to man, and the Gospel began to be preached, against the Popes
pardons and traditions of men, by and by the world began to reise tumultes,
and chiefly they of the clergy. Upon this very occasion the matter was brought
into the common assemblee of the Empire. And where certain Princes and cities
received also this doctrine, the fire went further abroad, and the matter was
handled by diverse means, till at the last it ended in war. And in all this
same description a man may see, what care and diligence the Emperor took, that
the dissentio^ might be taken up: It is to be seen also, what the Protestan^tes
and states have answered, and what manner of conditions they have oftentimes
offered. But when the matter fell out into war, the handling of it was
variable and diverse. And the Emperor in deed that I may bring of many
examples, one sending his letters to diverse Princes and cities, after also
setting forth a public writing, declared the cause of his enterprise. This
wrytinge, wherein the foundation of themperours cause consists, with the
answer of the contrary part, might not be omitted. For than I pray you what
manner of story were it to be thought, which raccompteth but the doings of the
one part only? And yet how I have demeaned my self herein, how I have
moderated and tempered my style, it may be seen by conferring the dutche with
the Latin, whereunto I refer my self also. The war being now driven of till
winter, the Emperor had the upper hand, where the ennemies were gone every
man home. These victories and triumphs of his also, first in high Germany,
and after in Saxony, I recite faithfully all, and this order is kept every
where: For neither I take away, nor attribute to any man more, than the thing
it self requires and permits, which thing few men have performed, as it
is evident. For many in the narrations put also their judgment as well
touching the persons, as the things. And to speak nothing of old writers,
it is known, how Platine has described the Popes lives. And a little before
our days, a worthy knight, Sir Philip Commines, set forth a notable history
of his time, and among other things he shows how after ye death of
Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was slain in battle a little from Naunce, Lewys
the.xii. king of France, took away from the daughter and heir of Duke
Charles, either Burgundy and also the country of Artois. And albeit that
Commynes was bound to France by his oath, although he were one of the kings
counsel, yet he says that this was not weldone of him. About the.xxiiii.
years past, the Senate of Uenise appointed Peter Bembus to describe the wars
which they had made with the Emperor Maximilian, with Lewys the French king,
and with Pope July the second, and with others. Which he did comprising the
matter in.xii. books: And amongst other matters he reports, how Lewys
the.xii. king of France denounced war to the Uenetians: He says how the
Herault of arms, after that he came before the Duke and the whole Senate,
spoke these words. To thee, Lawredane Duke of Uenise, and to all other
citezens of the same, Lewys king of France commanded me to denounce war, as
to me^ unfaithful, possessing towns of the Bishops of Rome and of other
kings gotten by force and by wrong, and sekyng to catch and bring al things
of al men disceiptfully under your government: He him self comes to you
armed to recover the same. These words, would some man say for as much as
they be heinouse against the Uenetians. Bembus should have omitted. But he
would not so, but wrote them out of the common records into his book, and
added to the answer made to the Herault, no less biting: And the works was
printed at Uenise with the privilege of the Senate. Paulus Iouius, besides
other wrytinges, wherein he compriseth the forces of certain noble me^, has not
long since set forth also two Tomes of things done in his time: But how
frankely he writes, those that have red them can testify. Not withstanding
that in certain places he does the Germans wrong: And yet the same work came
forth authorized by sundry privileges. Who so will, may seek the ninth leaf of
the second Tome, also in the life of Leo the.x. leaf.xciii. and.xciiii. And
in the life of Alphonse Duke of Farrare, leaf.xlii. All the books of good
authors be full of examples. And Comines is for this cause chiefly commended,
that he wrote so indifferently: But he keeps this manner, as I said also
before, that not only he discribeth the things, but also adds his judgment,
and pronounces what every man has done be it right or wrong. And albeit that
I do not so, yet is it used of many. But that whatsoever is done on either part
should be recited, that same is not only reasonable, but being frequented in
all times is needful also. For otherwise can not the History be compiled.
Where so ever be factions, where war and sedition is, there doubtless are al
things full of complaints accusations, and defensions with other contrary
wrytings. Now he that recites all these things, in such order as they were
done, does injury to neither part, but follows ye law of the story. For in
those brawlinges and complaints every thing is not by and by true that one
obiecteth to an other. When there is grudge, hatred, and malice among them,
it is known and tried, how the matter is used on either side. If the evil
words, that Popes and Bishops and such other like, have powered out against
the Protestauntes.xxxvi. years past, were true, what thing could be imagined
more wicked than they? Paul the third, being Pope, sent his nephewe by his
son Cardinal Farnese, Ambassador to the Emperor to Brussels the year of
our Lord.M.ccccc.xl. He there gave counsel against the Protestauntes, which
not long after was set forth in printe, and is of me recited in the.xiii. book
of my History. After many contumeliouse words, among other he says, that
the protestauntes do resist Christ no less, but rather more tha^ the Turks
do: For these sleye the bodies only, but they lead

The souls also into everlasting pardition. I pray you what more heynouse or
horrible thing can be spoken,

And in case these things should not have been recited, then might the
Protestauntes have head just cause of complaint against me: but the matter is
far otherwise: For neither be things true, because he said so. And if I
should have omitted this, I might justly have commen into suspicion, as though
I handled not the matter uprightly, and would gratify more the one part. And
that it is thus, as I have plainly declared, I doubt not, but reasonable men
will judge, that I have done nothing contrary to the law of an history, and so
much the rather for that the most things are taken out of common records,
which had been setforth in Print before.

Therefore they do nothing friendly, no they do me plain wrong, which thus do
sclaunder my work, and so much the more wrong, if they understand thorder of
compiling an history, but if they know it not, I would they should learn, of
such things as we have now declared, and of others that write stories.

But when I speak of Historiographers, I mean not those of our time, which
study only, to extol, and highly commend what part they list, and ouerwhelme
the other with contumelious and railynge words. They that are of such sort, be
not worthy to be so called.

Ihon Cocles.vi. years past, setforthe Commentaries, in a manner of the same
argument that mine are: but all things are heaped up with such horrible,
forged, and abominable sclaunders and lies as have not been hard.

Cardinal Poole in the book lately setforthe, calls the Doctrine renewed in
Germany Turkishe seed. Of such like words are al their books full. But what
like thing is found in all my work? I have verily written the wonderful
benefit of God, given eo this our time, orderly and as truly, as I could
possible, and for the same purpose, I gathered.xvi. years since, what soever
belonged herunto, neither have I written rashlye, but with a sure judgment
proceaded.

And what labor and pains this work has cost me, next the living God, I
know. For his glory have I chiefly regarded, and leaving the practice of the
law, I have applied in a manner all my study hereunto: and verily I must
confess, that through Gods motion I have been after a sort drawn unto this
labor And now where diverse requite me so unworthy thanckes for my so great
travel and pains.

I will commit to him, whose cause chiefly I took it in hand: for I know
undoubtedly yt I have offered up unto him a most acceptable sacrifice with the
same verily good conscience I comfort and sustain my self, especially seeing
that my labor is commended of learned men, which both give me thanckes, and
confess also that they have received much fruit thereby. Wherefore I desire all
lovers of the veritye, that they would give no credit to the sclander of a few
certain me^: but would gentelly accept my labors, faith, and diligence, nether
conceive any sinistre opinion of me. Furthermore I protest that I do
acknowledge the Emperor and king of Romans, for the high Magistrate, whom
God has ordained, and to whom in all things, that be not against God, we ought
to obey, as Christ and thapostles teach.

FINIS.
A Table containing all the Principal matters in this Book.
A
A Counsel promised. 92 An Apology delivered, but not received. eodem A beastly
cruelty. 104 A blasing star. 109 A consecrating of Cardinals. 113 Andrew
Gritie duke of Uenise. 117 A book of Romish Merchants. 118 A strange
change. eodem Alteration in England for Reli. 125 A Prophet inspired. 129 A
new king of Anabaptists. 131 A book of the mysteries of the scrip. 133 A
blind ass. 134 A counsel called. 147 An oration against the french king. eo.
A reformation of Collon. 141 A sword hallowed. 142 A writing of Auspurge. 143
Athanasius, Arius, and Liberius. 148 A propre saying of Ciprian. 153 A priests
son, not enjoy his Fathers benefice. 155 Avarice and concupiscence, let cou^.
156 Annas Momorancy made Constable of France. 157 A gentleman of Tolowse
burnt. 158 Andrew de Aury saluteth the king. 159 A college erected at
strasborough. 160 A league of the Papists against the protestauntes. 173
Ambassadors sent to Henry brother to George duke of Saron. 176 A Friars wede
makes the deuell a. 177 An assembly at Smalcald. 169 A writing exhibited by
the deuines. eo. A confutation of the.vi. articles. 171 An oration of a young
Cardinal. 172 A privy hatred of the french king. eod. An exceading hot summer.
174 A disputation betwixt Eckius and Melanchthon. 176 A great assemble at
Regenspurge. eo. A mean to get money by pardons. 177 A most costly stole or
Paile. eodem A woollen halter to stra^gle the pope. 178 A book presented to the
collotors. 179 A great tempest destroid his ships. 184 An assemble at Spires.
186 A soden fear in the french court. 88 An army against the Turk. eodem Any
pleasant life is not to be. eodem A consolation of the prisoners. eodem A
counsel called at Trent. 198 An assembly at Norinberge. 163 Ambassadors to the
duke of Saxon, and the Lantzgraue. 194 A rebellion at Rochelle. 197 A
supplication of the protestaunts. 194 A book called Antididagma. 201 An
assemble at Spire. 202 A league of themperor, and the king of England against
the french king. 203 A book of Calvin against Sorbo. 204 A book of the relikes
of saints. eodem A false report of themperors death. eo. A great assemble of
Spiere. 206 A strange tale of the duke of Bru^. 209 An image buried in ye
stead of Eve. 209 A decre for religion. 212 A peace concluded betwixt
themperor and France. 314 An ambassade said to the king. 216 A Commention of
deuines at Mil. 217 An assembly at Worms. 218 A lamentable departing. 219 A
soldsoure gives the Merundo. 220 A cruel fact of Miners. eodem A terrible
example of cruelty. eodem A captain defends the women. eode^ A sharp answer
of the king. eodem A friar obseruant stirs the emperor to war. 221 A
skirmish betwixt the Duke. 225 A conflict betwixt the Duke. eodem A league of
them of Strasborow, Zuricke and Bernes. 85 A confutation of the Protestants.
88 A confession of the Zwinglians. 88 A story of the king of France. 101 A
controversy of the bishop of Bantberge with the Marquis of Brandenburge. 103
A bishops office. 111 An assemble at Regenspurge. 73 An assembly at Spires. 79
A treatise of peace betwixt France and England. 227 A brute of war against
the Protestauntes. 228 Ambassadors to themperor for tharchbishop of Collon. 230
A decre of the Sinode, read. 231 Alphonse Diaze comes into Germany. 234.
Alphonse returns to Nuburge to kill his brother. eodem A communicatio^ of the
Lantzgraue, and others. 237 A division among thelectors. 241 A statute of
Trent. 243 A decre of original sin. eodem An answer of them of Strasborough
to themperor. eodem An heap of evils, of ciuel war. 244 A league betwixt the
Pope and themperor. 246 A preatence of mouinge war. 247 Albert of Brunswicke
hurt. 265 Alteration in Sauoy. 266 A warlike policy of themperor. 267 An other
policy of themperor. eodem Aucthoritye can not bear equallitye. 271 A decre
of the counsel at Trent of justification. 276 A Dolphe substituted to Hermon
archbishop of Collon. 277 Alteration of Religion. 278 Alteration in the Court
of France. 282 A pergidu of the son. 285 An assembly of the Empire at vrmes.
286 An assemble at Auspurge. 291 An holy box sent down from heaven you may be
sure. eodem A conspiraty against the Popes son. 294 A reformation of Religion
in England. 297 Albert received into the tuition of the king of Pole. 3021 A
disordained order of knights. 303 A composition of peace. 305 A counsel called
at Trent twice 309 An evil compiled book often corrected. 314 Ambrosa Blaurer
the chiefest minister of the church. 324 At Strausburge the Consul of
th(...)ri^, eodem Augustus married a wife. 327 A commotion at Burdeaur. eodem A
wonderful conversion of Uergelius. 328 A meting of deuines in Saxony. 330 A
Diaphora. 333 An open disputation at Oxford. 335 A communication at Lipsia. 336
A rebellion in England. eodem A book in Italian against the Poope. 339 An
assembly of Cardinals for to choose a new Pope. 340 A strange sight never hard
of. 342 A trouble in the Church of Strasburg. eodem A jest of the Cardinal of
Auspurge. 343 A peace concluded between France and England. 344 A confession
of faith, made by the ministers of Auspurge. 345 A Regester of the deuines of
Louaine. 346 A proclamation for printers. 347 Andwarpe astomed at the Emperors
Proclamation. 347 A woman in pearil for a light word. 348 An ambassade against
them of Maidenburge. 350 A cruel decre against the Maidenburgians. 351 A
writing of the cleargye against the city of Maidenburge. 354 All godly folk
afflicted for the verity. 357 A new doctrine of Osiander. 359 A cruel
Proclamation against the Lutherans. 368 A purgation of the french king. eodem A
decre of Trent of the Lords supper. 369 A decre of penance. 273 A Cardinal
of Dalmatia slain in his own house. 378 A brute of war against themperor.
385 Albertes crueltye to them of Noremberge. 402 (...) Assembly at Auspurge.
386 A point of the law. 72 A Monk forsakes his religion. 76 Alteration in
Denmark. 45 Archbishop of Mentz answer. 22 Aristotle. 20 Albert Arch bishop of
Mentz. 3 Authors of scismes. 47 An assembly called at Auspurge. 65 A bloody
preacher blows a trom. 56 A most cruel manner of burning. 54 Albert to them
of Wolmes. 403 Albert of Austrich, of whom. 466 Ambassadors of Strasburge to
themperor. 413 Albert overthrows the french me^. 414 A battle fought betwixt
duke Maurice and Marquis Albert. 421 Augustus brother and heir to Duke
Maurice. 423 Albert reconciled to Augustus. 426 A disputation in England. 428
An end betwixt John Frederick and Augustus. 431 A parliament in England. 433
A writing of the city of Norinberge against Marquis Albert. eodem A place of
treaty, of peace chose^, by the Queen of England. 451 A tumult raised at Geneua
eodem A university erected at Dilling. 453 A book of Peter Asot against the
confession of the duke of Wittem. eodem August Prince elector had a son. 454 A
writing of the Papists to requests of the protestaunt. 456 A writing of the
king Fardinando to the Princes. 458 A decre whereby Religion is freely permitted
to all men. 460 An ecclesyastical parson that changes his Religion shall be
deprived. eodem A parliament in England. 461 An assemble in Austrich. eodem A
Comet seen. 465 A father kills his iii. children. 466 A slander devised
against certain. 467 Aucthority of the deuines of Paris. 32 Agreement betwixt
Luther and Zwinglius. 83 A Concord. 107
B
BIshops of Rome bound as other is to Gods commandment. 3 Book burners. 27
Bloudye preacher blows a trompet. 56 Books presented to themperor. 85 Bondage
no let to christian liberty. 63 Bucer laboreth for concord. 96 Busy
merchants. 118 Brauling Friars. 119 Barbarossa almost taken. 121 By what
means men be disceiued. 134 By what means the deuel is van. eode^ Baptism
condemned. 135 Bishops stir up princes. 150 Barbarossa takes castle Newstat
178 Bucer preaches at Bonina. 201 Barbarossa returns. 213 Bolloigne rendered.
214 Bruly burnt at Tourney, 216 Bucer declares how tharticle of justification
wa^s accorded in. 229 Bucer is sent for to Auspurge. 310 Bucer is in danger.
313 Bren. wife and his children banyshed. 316 Bucer and Fragus come into Eng.
331 Bau^berge redemeth peace dearly. 402 Brunswicke besieged. 428 Bradford
burned in England. 451 Bish. of Merspurge answer to Lu. 22 Best thiuges
pleases fewest men. 34 Beginning of first fruits and tenthes. 42 Bible is to
be preferred before al. 43 Bishop of Constaunce makes a book in defense of
Images. 48 Book of restitution. 131 By. Munster demanded his charges. 136 Bold
answer of the king. 137 Barnes aid to Geneua. eodem Bold and profitable
Counsel of the Lantzgraue. 359 Bhoemers served against the Duke of Saxon
unwillingly. 169 Bohemers refuse war in Saxony. 277 Bishop of Strausburge,
syngeth his first Mass. 331 Bondage of the Germanians. 392 Bishop of
Winchester dies. 461 Bauarians follows the Prince for Religion. 465
C
CHarge of the Bishop of Maidenburge. 1. Ciuilians use of Citing. 2 Cardinal
Caietane writes to ye duke of Saxon. 8 Charles is declared Emperor 14
Conditions propounded by Luther. 18 Confession of sins. eodem Counsel of
Lateran and Pisa. eo. Capnio a divine. 19 Catarinus writes against Luther. 27
Commotions in Spain. 34 Cornelis Scepper a good writer. 42 Cardinal Campeius
writes to the duke of Saxony. 45 Campeius Oration to the Princes at
Norenberge. eodem Campeius raileth against Matrimony. 49 Christianity takes
not away bondage 61 Carolostadius writes against Lu. 65 Carolostadius makes
his purgatio^. 65 Counsel at Spires. 69 Contention about the Mass. 79 Certain
Princes resist the decree of Spires. 81 Civil war amongst the Swicers. 82
Cardinal Campeius Oration. 88 Certain chosen to accord Relygyon. 90
Conditions of peace. 104 Conditions of peace between themperor and the
Protestauntes. 105 Conditions of creating a king of Romans. eodem Cristine
king of Denmark is taken. 108 Christ was called Seditious. 112 Conditions of
peace. 116 Conditions betwixt Fardinando and Duke Ulrich. eodem Crafty
merchants. 118 Covetous merchants. 119 Cruelty unseemly in Churchmen. 122
Condition of peace. 128 Civil war in the city. 129 Cnipperdoling was the chief
of that faction. 129 Cnipper doling prophecieth. 130 Crooked necked cattle. 134
Comotion in Lincoln shire. 141 Captain Ask executed for Treason. eodem
Cardinal Pole the Popes ambassador to the French king. 142 Cardinals Poles book
against e King Henry the eight. eodem Cold reasons for the Popes supremacy 143
Carninall Poole was unthankful. eodem. Cardinal Pole incenseth the
Emperor against the king of England. eodem Cardinals Poles Hipocrisy and
falsehode. eodem Cristierne king of Denmark, receives the Gospel. 158
Complaints of Pillage. 178 Contention betwixt the electoure of Saxon and Duke
Moris. 188 Conterme in displeasure with the pope and cardinals. 194 Cardinals
sent to make peace 197 County William taken Prisoner. 213 Cabrier yielded. 220
Cardinal Farnesius, his coming to Worms. 221 Count William delivered. 226
Claudius Cenarcleus a young ge^tlema^ of Sauoy. 235 Condityons imposed to the
Duke of Wirtemberge. 275 Conditions offered to the Lantzgraue. 281 Caspar
Phlugus captain of the Bohemers army eodem Conditions whereby the duke redeemed
his life. 285 Civil war betwixt England and Scotland. 310 Countries united by
marriage. 311 Civil war in Africa. 330 Contention for thempire between the
Emperor and Fardinando. 353 Complaint of the bishop of Strausboroughe. 360
Contrary tales of the king and themperor. 364 Causes of calling the counsel.
371 Countries oppressed by the Emperor. 394 Conditions of peace offered by Duke
Moris. 397 Cruelty against godly preachers. 40 Conditions of peace offered by
themperor. 48 Conditions of peace. 411 Commotion in Kent. 430 Cardinal Pole
arriueth in England. 438 Controversy for the dominion of Chatz. 452 Cinistre
suspicion spread of the Cardinal of Auspurge. 456 Commotions in England for
suspicion of a spiratie. 469 Cardinals sent from the pope to themperor and
Freuch king. eodem Counsel begone at Regenspurg. 470 Cause why Luther was not
punished. 41. Complaints of them of Zurick. 51 Cause of them hatred. eodem
Constancy of them of Zurick. 52 Confession of the Protestauntes. 88 Conspiraty
of the Papists against the Protestauntes. 93 Complaint of the Pope to the
king of Pole. 97 Common wealth has neade of many remeadies. 102 Contention
between Erasmus and Luther. 114 Clement the seventh dies. 117 Counsel of
Constaunce. 149 Counsel of Myllen broken of. 152 Craft of Popes. eodem
Cardinal Montaine stricken with a fury. 300 Cruel acts of Marquis Albert. 434
D
DUke Frederick his wisdom. 2 Disputation at Lipsia. 18 Dissension betwixt
Leo and his Cardinals. 38 Decrees of Pius and Julius. 23 Dyssentyon at Basil
for Relygyon. 80 Danger of the Turk. 85 Duke Ulrich expulsed out of his
country. 113 Disputation with the king of Anabaptists. 136 Duke George of
Saxon dies. 176 Doctor barnes burnte in Smithfielde. 174 Dure the chiefest
Town in those parts is taken. 196 Depensius driven to recant. 20 Duke of
Moris makes laws for the ministers of the church. 202 Duke Moris foundeth
three Schools. eodem. Duke Moris is beneficial to the university of Lipsia.
eodem Dissension in Scotland. 205 Duke Moris served themperor at Landerssy. 206
Duke Moris entreats a peace. 405 Duke Henry and his Son yield them selves.
eodem Diaze goes to Maluenda. Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue prepares to
war. Duke Frederick chosen Emperor. Donauerde taken. Donauerde rendered. 265
Duke Maurice consulteth against the Potestauntes. 266 Duke Maurice letters to
the Electour. 269 Duke Maurice blamed of all men. 270 Duke Maurice Excuses.
eodem Duke Maurice nothing covetous. eod. Duke Maurice follows Doeg. 275 Duke
Ericke discomfited. 287 Duke Maurice and the elector of Bra^denburge entreat
for the Lantgraue eodem Duke Maurice letters to the Lantgraue. eodem Duke
Maurice entreats liberallye to the deuines of Wittemberge. 291 Duke of
Placence depryued Hierom. 294 Daughter of Navarre married to the duke of
Uandome. 321 Duke Henry besieges the city of Bru^swicke. 348 Dracutus an
archpirate 348 Duke Maurice general of the war. 351 Duke Maurice besieges
Maidenburg. 352 Duke Maurice letters to the Emperor. 363 Duke Morice seaseth
upon the dominion of Chatz. 370 Duke Morice entendeth to war upon themperor.
373 Discipline amongst the fathers. 374 Duke Maurice feared of themperours. 380
Duke Maurice ambassadoure sent away. 381 Duke Maurice letters to his
ambassadors. 384 Duke Maurice takes Auspurge by composition. 388 Diverse minds
in the counsel of Trent. 389 Duke Moris goes to the field. 395 Duke Moris
letters to the king. 399 Duke Moris nie slain. 40 Duke Moris weary of delays.
47 Duke Moris reburneth his fellows. 48 Duke Moris admits peace. 410 Duke
de Anmalle taken Prysonner. 44 Duke Morleague with the Duke of Brunswicke. 420
Duke Maurice wan the field, and lost his life. 422 Duke Henry of Brunswicke
marries a wife. 465 Duke Frederickes answer. 26 Deuines of Paris condempn
Luthers books. 32 Duke of Saxon, and the Lantzgraue prepare them to war. 78
Duke of Saxon Marshall of the Empire. 90 Duke of Saxon letters to the Princes.
98 Duke of Saxon and the Lantzgraue write to the French king. 166 Death of the
french king. 282 Daughter of Scotland affiansed to the king of England. 308
Death of Sigismund king of pole. 305 Duke of Swaybrige molested for Religion.
332 Death of Pope Paul the third. 336 Disputation at Baden. 71 Decre for
religion. 70 Decre of the duke of Loraine. 50 Disputation at Zuricke. 44 Decre
of the Swices. 45 Daniel expounded, how? 89 Deluge at Rome, and in Seland. 94
Dombe sprite walking. 114 Dukes Confession of the duke of Wittemberge. 386
E
ECkius book against Luther. 2 Erasmus judgment of Luther. 16 Eneas Siluius.
23 Erkius to Luther. 28 Erasmus book of fre wll. 50 Eckius the Popes champion.
52 England has title to France. 74 Erasmus book against Gospellers. 83
Erasmus writes to Campeius. 90 English Bibles Printed at Paris. 160 Ebleb a
noble Gentleman dies for sorrow. 29 Execution done in the french kings sight.
335 Earl Hedecke friend to them of Maydenburge. 361 Erenberge taken away. 40
Ecclesiastical laws in England. 432 England is turned to her vomit. 439
Emperor sends for Luther. 28 Emperor writes to Luther. eodem Emperors
letters to the Princes of Germany. 65 End of the Papists dectrine. 67
Emperor marries a wife. 71 Exhortation of the Lantzgrane. 57 Excuse of some
to the Protestauntes. 94. Emperor of necessity grants peace to Germany. 108
Emperor goes into Italy. 109 Erroures of the Anabaptist. 133 Erroures of the
Mu^sterians in faith. 135 English ambassadors winter at Wittenberge, 139
Emperor inuadeth the french province. 140 Erasmus death. eodem Emperor,
French king, and the pope mete at Nice. 59 Emperors and French kings ambassador
to the Uenerians. 168 Emperors private writing for the protestauntes. 183
Emperors letters to them of Collon. 203 Emperors answer to the pope. 195
Emperors letters to the states of Boheme. 283 Emperors son comes into
Flaunders, and he is received at Millan. 330
F
France and Germany were united. 12 Frederick the Paulsgraue sent into Spain.
14 Flatterers must be eschued. 18 France is offered to the spoils. 19 Fear
for the host. 47 Fear in Muncers camp. 57 Faith ought not to waver. 65 Faber
driven out of Paris. 66 Fardinando forsaking king Jews. 77 Fardinandoes title
to Hongary. eo. Fraunces Sfortia reforced to the dukedom of Millan. 83 Florence
rendered. 90 Florence loses her liberty. eodem. Fardinando proclaimed King of
Romans. 98 Frances Sfortia marries the Emperors Niece. 117 Folish pity
marreth the city. 122 Frederick forsakes the bishoppricke. 128 From the horse
to the ass. 130 Franckfurt received into the league. 139 False doctrine is not
to be born with. 151 Fardinando his army destroyed 154 Fardinandoes request.
173 Fires in Saxony. 174 Fardinando besieged Buda. 184 Fardina^do defeateth the
request of his nobles. 186 Frances Lander committed to Prison, his weakness and
recantation. 200 Few Spaniardes love the Gospel. 233 Friars be disturbers of
peace. 236 Friars are vile in life and learning. 237 Fear in themperors
camp. 259 Force ought not to be used in Religyon. 260 France denied to aid
Protestauntes. 264 Fardinando Sebastian deputye, proclaims war to Saxony. 269
Fardinando to the Bohemera. 283 Fardinando ambassador to the Bohemers. 284
Fardina^do goth wc his army to Proge. 291 Freight with others carried to
prisone. 325 Frances Spiera dispaired. 327 Fraunces Spiera his recantation, his
death in despair with comfort. 328 Forces bent against Maidenburge. 350 Folish
ceremonies. 358 Five of them students of Lossaunce, french men borne. 424 Five
condemned at London for the Gospel. 440 For Church goods all coutrouersyes
are taken away. 461 France venery displeased. eodem Frederick Count
Palatines death. 465 French king taken prisoner. 43 Faith of Abraham obtained
great benefits of God. 56 French league against themperor. 71 French kings
letters to the Princes of Germany. 73 French kings inventions against the
Emperor. 79 French kings oration. 120 French kings letters. eodem French
warreth against the Duke of Sauoy. 38 French king kissed the Popes right
foot. 159 French king gives counsel to ye Duke of Wittemberge. 166 French
kings answer to themperors letters. 199 French king compared to the Turk. 207
French king hated of all men for the Turks societe. 211 Frowardness of the
Duke of Brunswicke. 225 French king is received into Paris. 235 French
discharges his army. 410 French kings Proclamation against condemned of
thinquisition. 452
G
Greece and Bohemes happiness. 3. Gerson of Paris. 8 Gesmer captain of the
boures. 54 Gods power appears in fewest men. 56 Gods wrath is slow, but yet
sore. 58 George Duke of Saxon hates the gospel. 67 Godliness is not to be
sought for in the Court. 68 Great ghostly fathers. 89 God bridleth the power of
Satan. 134 Great execution done at Gaunt. 171 Granuellans oration at Worms.
174 George of Austryche apprehended at Lions. 184 God offreth his word before
he Plageth. 185 Gropper commended Bucer. 187 Gwelphians. eodem Gibellines
which were names of the Imperial. eodem Geneua. 192 Grasshopper in Germany and
Italy. 193 Gropper forsakes the gospel. 202 Great Princes sue for the Popes
favor. 305 Griniam the French ambassador. 309 Granuellan his answer to the
Lantzgraue. 409 General counsel promised. 72 Great slaughter. 105 Great
alteration in England. 113 Great assemble at Regenspurge. 176 Gonzage govern
of Millane. 501 God is not the author of wrong. 263 Gropper had the spoil of
Frede. 277 Godly preachers fly. 315 Ganimede nourished by the pope. 348 God
wounds and heals. 357 Germany the fortress of Christendom 394 George duke
of Megelburge slain. 408 Great friendship betwixt duke Maurice and Marquis
Albert. 422 George Earl of Mount Pelicart, marieth the Lantzgraue daughter.
453 Gospel is slaundred with rebellyon. 63 Godly constancye of the Duke of
Saxons children. 322
H
Hebrew books of three sorts. 20 How the scripture must be handled. 22
Honors change manners. 23 Henrye King of England writes against Luther. 34
How the yoke of Papists is to be shaken of. 48 Henry Zutphan put to death. 50
How the magistrate should deal with the Papists. 58 How wicked dominion is to
be shaken of. 58 Hunting, hauking, and fishinge prohited. 60 How ministers
should be ordained. 62 Hipocrisy of bishops. 75 How scripture should be
expounded. 82 Hugh Capet Earl of Paris. 101 How a free counsel is to be
understand. 111 Hirman Stapred. 128 Heldus the Emperoures ambassador. 143
Heldus Oration at Smalcald. eodem Harlots honored at Rome. 157 Hatred betwixt
counselors 170 His arm discomfited. 184 How the Turks atcheued the Empire.
187 His death. 194 His weakness before the king. 202 Holy men have had leagues
with men of contrary Religion. 211 Hermon leueth his Bishopprick. 277 How
miserable is it for the Queen for to marry with a stranger. 311 He that does
against his conscience procures him self hell fire. 316 Hallowing of churches.
333 Hallowing of Belles. 334 Hallowing of altares. 334 Hedeck and Mansfield
discomfyted by Duke Morice. 352 How much the papists esteem Scripture. 383
Heldius answer. 147
I
IHon Tecel a Dominican Friar, set up conclusyons at Frankfurt. 1. Indulgences
to be used after the Canon law. 2. James Hogestrate wrote against Luther. 3.
Ihon Wickliffe an English man. 32 Ihon Husse a Boheme. eodem Ihon Husse
appealeth from the pope. eo. Ihon Husse, and Ierom of Prage burned. eodem.
Iniquity proceeds from the priests. 40 It is not lawful for us to kill any man
43 Images burnt at Zurick. 48 Ihon Frederick of Saxon, marries Sthel of
Cleave. 74 Ihon Uaivodes letters to the states of thempyre. 76 Ihon Uayuodes
ambassadors taken. 77 Images put down. 80 Images burnt on Ashwedensday. eod.
Inas king of Britain. 114 Idle Nuns merchant women. 120 Ihon Leidan an
Anabaptiste. 128 Ihon Matthew the high Prophet. 130 Jesting punished. eodem Ihon
Leidan inuadeth the kingdom. eo. Ihon Leidans pomp. 131 Ihon Husse at
Constance. 199 Ihon Calvin and Peter Bruly superintendantz of the College of
Stras borough. 168 Ihon Isleby, chief of the Antimo. 172 Inuectiues unmeet for
princes. 174 Joy in France at themperors loss. 185 Ihon Miners president of
the Counsel at Agnes. 219 Iustus Jonas asked whether we shall know each other
in the life to come. 232 Ihon Diaze a Spaniard. 233 Ihon Isseby a Revolt. 310
It is danger to use forain aides. 311 Ihon Marquis of Bra^de^burge refuses
thinterim. 315 Isseby rewarded of themperor. 320 Inquisitions of Uergetius. 320
July the third consecrated bishop. 343 Interrogatories for the Ministers of
Auspurge. 383 Ihon Sleidan ambassador for Strausburg to thempire. 373 Ihon
Frederick demands lands and dignities 423 Ihon a Laisco a Polonian. 432
Interrogatories Ministered to the Abbot of Newstat. 436 Joy at Rome for England
reduced to the Romish church. 443 Indulgences granted by the Pope for the
conuersyon of England. eodem Ihon Frederick the electours Son marieth. 451
Ihon Gropper made Cardinal. 461 Ihon Sleidane dies. 470 Judges of the chamber
trouble the protestauntes. 123 Ihon Laydon parradocsises. 131 Judges of the
chamber. 144 Ignorannce of the people is gain full to the priests. 150 Judges
of the chamber shall keep their place. 212 Ignorance of the people for lack of
teachinges. 237 Interim permits Priests to keep their wines still. 313
K
Kings of Naples pay Tribute to Rome. 11. King Henry the eighte calls his
marriage in question. 113 Kingdoms destroid for Idolatry. 185 Kings of France
most addict to the Pope. 200 King Henry banished the Pope, but not Popery. 278
King Ferdinando moves the Bohemers to war. 279 King of Fraunces fautour of
^ear. 282 King Fardinandoes letters to the Bohemers. 286 King Fardinando
requires mouye of the states. 314 King Phillip invested in Flaun. 337 Kings
have long arms. 279 King Edward sore sick. 408 King Fardinando proclaims
war against Albert. 408 King Phillip arriueth in Eng. 437 King Phillippe
came to his father to Brurels. 453 King Phillip enters into And. 462 King
Fardmando goes into Boheme 466 King of Denmark slieth. 41 King of England
writes to the princes of Sarony. 44 Kings sons are pledges. 69 King of
Hongary slain. 71 King Henry hated against the Pope. 114 Kings supper and
murder. 132 King of England, patron of the Protestauntes league. 139 King
Edward the.vi. borne. 154 King of England refuses the Counsel. eodem King of
England hated of the Pope. eodem. King of England married the.vi. wife. 187
Kings purgation. 191 King of Denmark warreth upon the imperials. 266 King of
England warns the Protestaunts of the danger. 227 King of Denmark aided not
the Protestauntes. 275 King is apparelled like a deacon. 292
L
LUthers letters to the Bishop of Mentz. 1. Luthers questions at Wittenberge.
1 Luthers exception. eodem Luthers letters to Pope Leo. 2 Luthers answer to
Siluester Prierias. eodem. Luthers second answer to Siluester Prierias. 3
Luthers forsaking of Rome. eodem. Luther cited to Rome. 4. Luther is called to
Auspurge^. 5. Luthers conference with Cardinal Caietane. eodem Luther
appealeth. 6 Luther appealeth from the Pope to the Counsel. 9 Luthers letters
to the Pope. 17 Luthers book to the duke of Saxon. 18 Luthers book condemned at
Louain 19. Laurence valla. eodem Luthers letters to themperor. 21 Luthers
letters to the archbishop of Mentz. eodem Luthers letters to the bishop of
Merseburge. 22 Luther cursed of the pope. 23 Luther impugneth the Popes
censure. 24 Luthers book of the captivity of Babylon. eodem Luthers books are
burnt. 26 Luther burns the Canon law. 27 Luther comes to Worms. eodem
Luther pledeth his cause before themperor and the hole Empire. 1. Luthers
answer to the princes. 39 Luther sent away from Worms. 31 Luther is outlawed
by themperor. 33 Luther wrote sundry books in his exile. eodem. Luther is
conveyed out of danger. eo. Luther returns to Wittenberge. 35 Luther
foreseeth the tempest coming eodem Luther writes to the Bohemer^. 36 Luther
writes against the bishops. eo Luther a Friar. 38 Luther compared with
Mahomet. 40 Luther expounds the Popes laying. eodem. Luther interprets the
decrees of the Princes. 43 Luther wrote to the Senate of Prage. eodem. Luther
wrote of eschuing the doc. 44 Luther compared to Mahomet. 50 Luther disswageth
al men from sedi. 58 Luther did more with the word, then could have been done
by forc. eodem Luthers answer to the boures. 60 Luthers office. 63 Luther
blows the tro^pet against. 64 Luther to vehement. 65 Luther married a Nonne.
eodem Luther and Zwinglius mete at. 66 Luthers letters of submission to the. 67
Luthers letters to George duke of. eo. Leonard Caesar apprehended for the. 74
Laws of disputation. 75 Lantrech besieges Naples. eodem Luther and Zwinglius
dispute at. 83 Luther wrote a book to the bishops. 96 Luther comfort
Melancthon. eodem Luthers opinion of men's traditions. eo. Letter of the duke
and Lantzgraue. 103 Luthers counsel. 112 Luthers purgation. eodem Luther
comfort thexiles. eodem Luthers opinion touching the spri. 116 Luthers
writing of Munster. 134 Legions of soldiors in France. 137 Luthers constancy.
138 Like lips, like lettes. 151 Longolnis oration against the Lu. 167 Lascus
committed to prison. 175 Luthers book against the Duke of. 176 Luther is cursed
of the Pope. 175 Langeus letters to Alphonse. 184 Luthers oration for the
field. 189 Laws against deflowrers of vir. 202 Laundersey besieged. 205
Luthers book of the Lords supper. 215 Luthers answer to them of Louain. 218
Luthers book against the Pope. 222 Luthers Themes of iii. govern. eodem Luthers
picture against the pope. eode^ Luther a Prophet. eodem Luther chosen arbitror.
231 Luther wareth sick. 232 Luthers last prayer. eodem Luthers birth. eodem
Luther sent to Rome. eodem Luther eloquent in the dutch. eodem Lightning caused
destruction. 255 Liberty is exiled out of the counsel. 256 Letters for the
Lantzgraue to. 295 Letters of Strasborough to them. 326 Luther brought in
contempt, the Popish Ceremonies. 334 Jews Marsile one of the prisoners 423
Libels strowed about in London. 461 Lady Clinor comes into France. 86
Lantzgraue departs from Ausp 89 Lantzgraue goes to the french king. 113
Lantzgraue boroweth Monye of the French king. eodem Lady Mary proclaimed
bastard. 114 Lantzgraue takes his leave of themperoure. 240
M
MAximilians letter to Poope Leo, concerning Luther. 3 Maximilians death. 10
Many sects in the popish kingdom. 36 Manner of choosing themperor. 10 Matrimony
lawful for all men. 47 Muncer a great Anabaptist. 55 Muncer will have a token of
God. eode^ Muncer makes gunnes. eodem Muncer teaches that all things should
be common. eodem Muncer raileth on the princes. 56 Muncer disceyueth the people
by the rainbow. eodem Muncer is taken, his cruel answer, and he is reproved of
the Lantzgraue. 57 Muncer repents at the hour of death eodem Mishaps of the
french king. 82 Matters received in religion. 89 Monestical vows. 124 Munster
a city of Westphalia. 137 Maidens do prophecy. 130 Marriage counted whoredom.
135 Many filthy acts of Monks. 156 Means to restore the ecclesiastical. 181
Melancthon and pristor come to. 201 Miners president of Aygwes. 219 Miners
leuieth a power against Ualdois. 219 Maluenda treats of justification. 229
Marquin excuses Diaze. 234 Marriages in broil of war. 254 Maurice loves his
towns. 276 Marquis Albert sent to aid. 277 Mendoza ambassade from the French
King to Strasburge. 279 Marquis Albert taken prisoner. 280 Mihel Sidonie a
great Masmo^ger. 294 Muskel borowe field. 296 Muleasses king of Tones. 313
Maximilian marieth his cosen. 315 Musculus departs to Bernes. 316 Maximilian
warred against the Swissers. 322 Married Priests plucked from their wives. 329
Melantho^ defe^deth the Adiaphorist. 333 Monseur Ueruine beheaded. 336
Maximilian comes out of Spain. 353 Melanthon best learned. 359 Money gathered
for the war of Maiden burge. 760 Maximilian enters into Trent. 378 Marquis
Albertes letters against the^peroure. 393 Marten van Rossem spoileth Champanie.
399 Marquis Albert warreth for him self. 406 Marquis Albert the scourge of
Pristes. 410 Marquis Albertes request to Straseburge. 410 Marquis Albert
refuses peace. 101 Marquis Albert enters Treuers. 412 Marquis Antonius
Ambassadoure of Uenisse. 413 Marquis Alberte reconciled to Themperoure. 413
Marquis Albert sends to the Emperor. 420 Marquis Albert outlawed. 429
Marquis Albert goes to Sewinforte and flies. 436 Maryburge taken. 473
Melanthon conforteth the mynisters of Boheme. 449 Marcellus the Second chose^
Pope. 450 Marcellus the Second dies. 450 Maurenburge vitaled. 452 Mount Calue
is taken by the Frenchmen. 453 Mass abolished at Zuricke. 54 Madness of the
Munsterians 57 Magestrates is as necessary as the Son to the world. vi
Marquis letters to the state of Duke Maurice. 42 Ministers exiled out of
Boheme. 442
N
NEw pardons. 9 No man may be kept from the gospel. 6^ News of the Turks
Coming. 200 News of the Turks approach. 1^ Nauius has the place of Heldus.
174 Nuburge rendered to the Emperor. 264 Notes of the Interim by the Bishop
of Rome. 314 No man ought to be compelled to his faith. 319 New ambassadors
from Wittenberg 375 Norinberge has peace with the Marquis. 402 Nine bournte at
Lions. 423 Note how Bisshoppes seek authority of kings to condemn. 454
Nombers of great gonnes taken front protestauntes. 29 Notes of the Interim by
the bishops of Rome. 313
O
O Eham condemned in Paris. 19 Of the original of the Turks. 190 Of
ecclesiastical benefits. 281 Out of the conclaue came most fylthys Letters.
343 Ortauious Farnesius clie^t to the french king. 360 Oration of tharchbishop
of Treuers. 12 Opinion of the Cities touching the king of Romans. 102 Oath
of the Electors. 406 Oration of the Popes ambassador to the Duke of Saxon. 109
Oration of Themperours Ambassador. 109 Oration of the french ambassadors. 123
Offspring of france and germany. 123 Original of the Annabaptistes. 127
Oration of the Popes Legates. 231 Oration of Themperours Ambassadors. 240
Occatio^ of taking the^perours loss. 267 Oration of the king of Poles
ambassador. 301 Original of this order of knight. 303 Oration of the Princes
ambassadors to the emperor and the^perours answer. 377 Oration of the French
ambassador. 404
P
PRinces of necessity must reform Rome. 3 Popes under the Council. 7 Pope
John is deposid. 8 Pope Prius wish. 18 Picus Myrandula. 19 Pope Leo his bull.
23 Priests married wives. 44 Popes subject to the emperor. 25 Pope Clement
sends Campeius to duke Frederike. 45 Phifer compagnion to muncer. 55 Phyfers
entreprise. 56 Preachers ought to be circumspect. 59 Prayers for the dead ar
superfluous. 75 Paccius beheadid. 78 Prayers mixed with threateninges 92 Poor
Luther makes many men. 95 Persecution against the Lutherians. 115 Paul was
craftier then Clement. 117 Persecution in France. 118 Pope John a woman. 119
Proud Marchantes. 115 Popes condemned for heresy. 121 Paphu^tius persuades
ye priests. 124 Peter wirte^ began to preach again. 129 Perome besieged. 141
Popes have emperors insubiectio^. 149 Pope paul evil reported. 154
Presidentes of the Council. 158 Preaching forbidden. 173 Persuasions to war
against the Turk. 187 Perpiguian besieged. 192 Peace is disceptfull. 196
Psalms translated by Marot. 201 Philip created king of Spain. 202 Pillugius
bishop of Numburg among the presidentes. 230 Preaching frees. 231 Peace
betwixt France and England. 246 Peter strosse disceaued ye protest. 265
Penstellens in Emperors camp. 267 Persecution in France. 270 Paulus Fagius a
man learned and (...)loquent. 273 Part of the counsel of Trent flit to
Bonomie. 283 Peter Alois ye popes son slain. 294 Peter martyr goes into
England. 297 Prusse belongs to Pole. 303 Prusse belongs to the emperor. 305
Paul given to astrology and coniuration. 340 Paul's joy in bayne 342
Proclamatio^s against lutheranes. 345 Pope July somoneth a counsel. 351
Pardons granted by the Popes legate. 385 Pestilence and fiering at Paris. 427
Paul the fourth made Pope. 450 Port hercules taken by thimperialles 452
Plinabine besieged of Turks. 452 Peter martyr goes to Zurick. 469 Papists in
Swicerland made league with king Ferdnando. 80 Protestants assemble at
Norunberg. 86 Protestants accused of Sedition. 93 Practice of Prelates. 117
Practice of the French men. 144 Popes ambassador despised. 147 Popes errors
and authority. 148 Paul the thirdes craft. 149 Preachers of the gospel
brought godly works to light. 150 Popes accused of Idolatry. 151 Pope would
bie Millian. 201 Princes letters to the Pope. 208 Popes letters to the emperor.
215 Pope most desirous of war. 221 Pope cite the Archbishop of Collon. 223
Popes letters to the Swisses. 247 Protestauntes Ambassadors to the Swissers.
247 Protestauntes accused of treason. 253 Protestau^tes letters to John marquis
of Brandenburg. 251 Protestauntes answer to the table of out lawery. 260
Purgations of the Cardinal of Auspurge against suspicions. 467 Pope had no
consideration with the emperor against religion or the liberty of Germany. 468
Q
Queen Anne loves ye gospel. 113 Questions moved to a dombe spirit. 115
Queen Marie affiaunced to the emperors son. 430 Questions of zuinglius. 39
Queen of Hungary made regent of flaunders. 101 Queen of Anabaptists behedid.
133 Queen Katherine dies. 137 Queen Anne dies lamentably. 140 Queen of
Scotts dies. 153 Queen Mary's oration to the commons in yield Hall. 430
R
ROme the seat of Antichrist. 3 Reweline a divine. 19 Reweline dies. 37
Relics of the holy ghost. 45 Rome is the treasure house of the hole world. 72
Rome is Sacked. 74 Religion reformed. 76 Religiou reformid at Geneua. 76
Rochester and more beheadid. 121 Rochester made cardinal in ye tower. 121
Rotman a Preacher at Munster. 127 Rotman became an Anabaptist. 128 Rotman
desperate. 136 Reasons why the protest. refuse the counsel. 149 Rebellion in
Gelderlande. 154 Rebellion of Gaunt. 168 Rebellion at Genes against the house
of Aurice. 276 Robert of a Brince wrote against the interim. 322 Rewards for
promoters. 346 Reseruations and graces expectatiue. 365 Reformation of the
papiste. 390 Rebellion in duke Moris camp. 40 Renold Poole Cardinal. 429
Ridley and Latimer burnt in england. 454 Rage of Antichrist. 125 Requests of
the princes to ye king. 398
S
SIlens of the bishop of Mentz. 1 Siluester prierias his dialogue. 2 Siluester
prierias themes. 2 Scripture and the old writers only are to be allowed. 2
Siluester prierias his second answer to Luther. 2 Shifts of the Popes. 19
Suit betwixt the bushoppe and Swissers vanquished. 11 Senate of Strasburg. 48
Supper of our Lord under both kinds. 18 Sundry plages in Germany. 83
Scripture is the touch stone of all doctrine. 91 Spirits in the popish
kingdom. 115 Selling of benetices. 119 St. Geneu(...)a the gods of Paris.
120 Sedition in Munster. 131 Symony reigns in the Church. 157 Symony must be
taken away. 181 Sir Henry Kneuet. 185 Strife about the Bisshoprick of
Numburge. 186 Sebastian Scertiline a man of war. 228 Spedius a blabbe. 240
Sherteline retyreth. 252 Silver mines common to the Dukes of Saxon. 266
Scertiline departs from the prot. 267 Sedition at Naples for the Spanish in
quisition. 291 So I will and do command. 303 Sin against the holy ghost. 315
Strasborough rue the Interim. 326 Strasburgh writes letter to the emperor. 331
Skirmishes of ye princes with the imperial. 400 Sir Richard Morisme
Ambassador of England. 403 Serueto a Spanyarde burnt at Geneua. 428 Sibylle
Duchess of Saxon depar. 431 Sanslorian and Carmillus lead to prison. 453 Sir
Peter Carrow sir John Chick taken prisoners. 469 Swisses made a legue with the
french King. 32 Solemn buriyng in France. 114 Sfortia Duke of Millane
dies. 121 Supper of the Lord under both kinds. 124 Spoiling and burninges of
Marquis Albert. 416
T
THomas of Aquine Albertus magnus Scolar. 3 Thomas of Aquine a Saint. eod.
Thomas of Aquine gives authority to the Pope. eodem Thomas of Aquine died.
eodem Treaty of war against ye turk. eod. The popes letters to ye Duke of
saxo^. 4 The popes letters to Gabriell Uene. 5 The university of Wittenberge
writes for Luther to the Pope. 5 The well spring of pardons. 7 The Dukes
letters to the Card. 8 The university of Witte^berg writes for luther to the
duke of Saxon. 9 The pope sends a golden Rose to the Duke of Saxon. 10
The Emperor Rafe. 13 The Duke of Saxon refuses the^p. 14 The birth of
the emperor. 14 The court of Rome is incurable. 17 The part of a true friend.
18 The story of Rewcline. 20 The Sacraments. 24 The manner of the Coronation.
24 The Emperor calls a counsel imper. 25 The law of pope Clement. 25 The
court of Rome an France. 26 The Duke of Saxon incensed against Luther. 26 The
Bull of Cursing. 28 The Constancy of Luther. 28 The pope and the counsel may
err. 30 Treuers and other princes threten lut. 30 The offense of faith and
manners. 31 The Counsel of Constance. 32 Three Popes deposid. 32 Thyrtene
towns of Swissers in the league 33 The liberty of the Swisses. eodem The Mass
to be abolished. eodem The Emperor has war with france. 34 The death of pope
Leo the tenth. eod. The Turk takes Belgrade. eodem The Lady Mary assured to
themper. 35 The Sects of Bohemers. 36 The Pope writes to the Princes of
Germany. 37 The Watre of Treuers. 38 The Popes letters to Strasburg. eod. The
stock of Adrian. eodem The disputation of Zurick. 39 The request of Adrian to
dispatch Luther. 39 The sin of Rome spread over all the world. 40 The mean
to let Counselles. 40 The answer of the Princes. 41 The manner of a free
Counsel. 41 Two Friars burnt at Brussels. 43 The Ceremonies of disgreding.
eod. The death and works of Hutten. 44 The answer of Duke George. eodem The
eating of flesh. eodem The Princes answer to Ca^peius. 46 The decree of worms
repeted. eodem The Pope is well monyed. eodem The Swisses are assendid with
them of Zurick. eodem The Marchaundise of the Clergy. 47 The answer of them
of Zurick. 47 The decree of Norinberge. 48 Thomas Moouer a Graye friar. 48 The
lamentation of Luther. 49 The Golden Rose sent to the king of England. 50
The Emperor blames the princes. eod. The Emperor defendour of the Romish
Church. eodem The duke of Burbo^ne besieges Marselles. eodem The beginning of
ye Rusticall war. eod. The papists fight for their belly. 51 To serve foreyne
Princes is vile. eod. The craft of Papists. eodem The poverty and bondage of
the Swissers. 52 The Riches and liberty of the same. 52 The Comotion of ye
vulgar people. 53 Their Demaundes. 53 The Duke of Wittenberg attempted War.
eodem The slaughter of the Boores. eodem The great cruelty of the Boores. eod.
The war of ye Boores in Loraine. 54 The slaughter of the Boores. 54 The
cruelty of tharchbishop of treu. 54 The death of Frederick duke of. 56 The
Princes make a power. 56 The slaughter of the Muncerians. 57 The unreasonable
laughter of mu^c. 57 The dewty of a good Magistrate. 58 Thautors of rebellion
are without excuse. 58 The best way to overthrow the popes authority. 58 The
practice of the Deuell. 59 The popish kingdom not long. eod. The demaundes of
the preachers. eod. The Boores use godly titles. 60 The state of a Magistrate
wherein. 61 The Christian Law. eodem The Christian profession is hard. eod. The
nature of verity. 62 The craft of the devil to oppress. eod. The answer to
ye Boores dema. eod. Tithes must be paid. eodem The false title of the Boores.
63 The rayser of tumultes. 63 The part of a wise man. 64 The duty of a
Magistrate. eodem The end of tyranny. eodem Their can be nothing worse then.
65 The popes letters to them of Paris. 66 The kings letters for Faber. eodem
The story of Pruse. eodem The chief point of luthers doctrine. 67 Thomas
woolsey cardinal a butchers Son. 68 The peace taken at Madrice. 68
Themperours letters. 69 The Turk inuadeth Hongary. 69 The beginning of the
prot. league. 70 The popes benefits to the emperor. 71 Themperours answer. 71
The kingdom of Naples. 72 The pope and themp^ar two great. 72 The Pope is a
waryour. 72 The Emperor confuteth the French. 73 The princes letters to
the emperor. 73 The beginning of ye Anabaptists. 74 The French army inuadeth
Italy. 74 The power of Bernes. 75 The duke of Burbon condemned at. 75 The
prebendes of Constance dep. 76 The victory of the Gospel. eodem The English
and French ambassad. eod. The French king offreth themp. eode^ Themperours
answer to ye French. 78 The Papists forbidden to Preach. 79 The ambassadors
of thimperiall chamber to Strasborow. 79 The Bishops letters. 79 The mass
put down at strasborow. 80 They of Basil take armure. 80 The Mass put down.
80 The assembly of Spires. 80 The ambassadors of Strasborow. 81 The decree of
Spires. 81 The decree of worms. 82 Thoriginall of protestants. 82 The peace
of Cambray. 82 The Turk besieges Uienna. 83 The sweating Sickness. 83 Two
Clerks burnt at Collon. 83 The protest. ambassadors to the^p. 84 Themp.
answer to ye protestants. 84 Thambassadours appeal. 85 The honesty of a
Bishop. 85 The Chamber writes to Smalcald. 86 The^perors Coronation at
Bonony 86 The divines of the protestants. 86 The princes yt would not have
mass. 87 The Duke of Saxons office. eodem The turks victory in Ho^gary. eodem
The turks cruelty. eodem Tha^bassadour of Austrich his comp. 88 Things
refused in religion. 89 That the Mass is a sacrifice. 89 The war of florens.
90 The pope in league with the^p. eodem The Turks power. eodem The
protestants were labored. eode^ The Bohemers borne withal. 91 The^p. oration
to the protestants. 91 The Protesta^tes answer to themp. 91 The Emperor to the
Protestants. 93 The protestants spite no man. 93 The drone bees desire to be
restored. 93 The answer to ye co^futation of zwin. 94 The decree of Auspurge.
95 The Church oppressed with tira^ny. 96 The papists are accused of aerag. 96
The Lantzgraue made a league with Strasborow Zurick and Basil. 96 The league
of ye protest. at smalcald. 97 The pope is a Sayler. 97 The prot. letters
against Ferdina^do. 67 The causes of creating king of romans 98 The protestants
letters to the king of England and France. 99 The protestants appellation. 99
The bishops of Denmark resist. 100 The laws permit the inferrour magistrate
in some causes to resist the. 100 Tharchbishop of Treuers departs. 101 The
answer of the French king to the protestants. 101 The amytie of France and
Germany. 101 The au^swer of the king of England. 102 The duke of Saxons doubt
of the. 102 The Palsgraue and tharchbishop of. 102 The Appellation of the
Marquis. 103 Therles of Nassow and Nauenar come to ye Duke of Saxon to
entreat. 103 The intercessors and protestants. 103 They of Zurick
discomfited. 104 The death of Swinglius. 104 The death of Decolampadius. 105
The assembly of Regenspurge. 105 The dukes of Bauier misliked the. 106 The
annswer of the duke to ye int. 107 The craft of the Papists. 107 The number
of Protestants. 108 The assembly at Regenspurg. eodem The Turk inuadeth
Austrich. eodem The death of the duke of Saxon. eodem The slaughter of the
turks. 109 The pope serves the time. eodem The Popes policy. eodem The duke
of Saxons answer eodem The protestants answer to ye pope. 110 The counsel are
swarued from their. 110 Themperours part is to defend rel. 111 The Pope is
plaintiff defendant and. 111 The Popes snares. eodem The Pope slieth to the
Counsel. eodem The craft of duke George to find of. 112 The inconstancy of
pope Clement. 113 The university of paris Sentens. 113 The death of Cardinal
Wolsey. 114 The tragedy of the graye friars. 114 The game players carried to
paris. 115 The condemnation of false Friars. 115 The victory of the Lantgraue.
116 The liberality of the French king. 117 The Lantgraues letters to the^p.
eode^ Themperours answer. eodem The punishment of the Godly. 118 The cruelty
of John Morine. 118 The price of a Mass is sometime. 118 The Pope the old
Merchant. 119 Thieuish Merchants. 119 The manner of execution in France. 120
The Lutherians are abhorred. 120 The Lantgraue is reconciled to Fer. 121
The^perours voyage into Barbaria. 121 The duke of Saxon answer to ver. 121 The
protest. answer to Uergerius. 122 The Popes craft is espied. 122 The Emperor may
order Cou^selles. 122 Themperous letters to ye Judges. 123 The answer of ye
protest. to ye french. 123 The duty of Princes. 124 The kings opinion of
matters in. eod. The common places of Melanthon. eod. The mass mainteneth
purgatory. eod. The kings of France and Nauar ex. 125 The prot. would make no
league. 125 The oration of Bishop Fox ambassador for the king of England. 125
The state of ye church troubelsome. 125 The protest. league is renewed. 126 The
Earl of Nassowe has mitted. 126 The Gospel received at Auspurge. 126 The
papists confess their ignorance. 128 The papiste for sake their City. eodem
They of Mu^ster oppress ye papiste. eod. They Anab. banished the City. eod.
The constauncie of Fabricius. 129 The prophecy inspired with fury. 130 The
diuition of Germany into prouente. eodem The falsed of John Berdan. eodem The
evil Judges. eodem The madness of Knipperdolan. 131 The Appose of munster. 132
The preachers of munster. eodem The preachers raked. eodem The preachers
obstinacy. eodem The king takes head to him self. eod. The diuition of the
world. 133 The present age compared to Esaie. 133 The craft of an ignorant
devil. 134 The assemble at worms. 135 The city war requered to render. 135
Two escaping betrayed the City. 135 The king is taken. 136 The king and his
fellows tarried ab. 136 The cruel death of the King. 137 The popes counsel to
invade Sauoy. 137 The house of Uicecountes in Lo^b. 137 The French kings title
to Millain. 138 Themperours oration against ye French King. 138 The duke of
Florence married the Emperors basterd. 138 The kings letters to the protest.
139 The king of England requered a conference of learned men. 139 The
protestant sent to themprour. 140 Themperours letters to the prot. 140 The
death of Frances Dolphin. 141 The Pope will refourme the court. 141 The king of
Scotts married the French Kings daughter. 141 The duke of slorener slain by
his. 142 The Swicers sewe to the king for. 142 The protest. ambassador to
the^pe. 143 The dukes of Saksones answer. 144 The place of the Counsel. 148
The protest. decree mariyng of mi. 149 The authority of Judgment in y^. 150
The craft of the Pope. 151 The of spring of Cayne. 152 The protest. letter
unto the French. 152 Terwine besieged in vain. 153 The pope intendid to make
Eras. 154 The pope has a duble office. 155 The Couls makes not the Mo^cke.
157 The cardinal of Cappira can abide. 158 The Coloquie of Erasmus. eodem The
duke of Pruse is outlawed. eod. The metyng of the emperor and the. 159 The
bishop of lige made his grave. 159 Thomas Becket archbishop of ca^t. 160 The
Marks of Brandenburg of ye. 161 The lady Elizabeth sister to the lantzgraue is
referred into the league. 162 The sect of the Antinomions. 162 The city of
Mynden outlawed. 163 The duke of Bru^swick desirous of. 163 The Lantgraue
intercepteth the. 163 The death of John duke of clean. 164 The duke of Saxson
would not give to Ferdinando the title of the king. 165 The Cannons comenly
called of y^. 167 The six Articles. eodem The lady Anne of Cleave. eodem
The Emperor passes through france. 168 The emperor enters into Paris. 168
Themperors and French kings amb. 168 The secret of the senate uttered to. 169
The treators executed. eodem Themp. arriueth in Flaunders. eodem The prot.
write to ye French king. eod. The Lord Cromwell. eodem The answer of the prot.
to Cro^wel. 170 Themp. letters to the protestants. 171 The protest. answer to
the emperor. 171 The protest. comparid to Turks. 172 The duke of Cleave joined
with. eod. The pope warreth upon ye perusians. eo. The lord Cromwell beheadid.
eodem The king marieth Katherine Haw. eo. The duke of Brunswick accused. eod.
The assembly of Hagenaw. 173 The decree of Hagenaw. 173 The death of John
vaynode king of. 173 Three prote. burnt and three papists. 174 The death of
Budey. 174 The evil that comes of disce^sion. 174 The Turk receives the
infant of. 175 The papists seek delays. 175 The admiral of France condemned.
176 The Emperor gods Clyent. 177 The blasphemy Friere Tecell. 177 The manner
of making this Palle. 178 These fires were set on by the duke. eo. The treaty
of Regenspurge. eodem The chosen by themp. eodem The rashness of Eckius. eodem
The contents of the book. 179 The protestauntes letters to the French king for
such as were persecuted. 179 The Duke of Cleave goes privily. 179 The duke of
Cleave marieth the. 179 The Admiral restored. 179 The Constable put out of the
Court. 179 The colloquie of learned me^ at Reg. 180 The worse part over comes
by ye. 180 The Popes legate. 181 The diligence of the prot. in teach. 181 The
divines of the prot. answers. 181 The princes electours answer. 181 The answer
of the popish princes. 182 The bishops are enjoined to ref. eod. The
presumptuousnes of Eckius. eod. The protestants confute his let. 183
Themperours complaint of ye duke. 183 The princes make intercession for. 183
The oration of the French ambass. 183 The French ambassadors intercep. 183 The
emperors journey into Barb. 184 The plague in Germany by the. 185 The nobility
of Austrich put up a. 185 The plages that God sent to Aust. 185 The Turk is
the scourge of God. 185 The chief article of doctrine is in. 186 The nobles
reiterate their suit. eodem The oration of the French ambass. 187 The policy
of the Romans in est. 187 The concord of England. 187 The opinion of the
popes Ambassa. 188 The Pope suspecteth Germany. 188 The pope compared with ye
Turk. 189 Two mighty tyrannes. eodem The turk shall not be of such force. eo.
The last act of the Turk. eodem The prayer of Luther. 161 The Marks of
piscare accuses the. 191 The French king proclaymeth war. 192 The Duke of
Languile and Martin van Rossen invade Brabant. 192 The manner to search out the
Luth. 192 The articles of the Sorbonistes. 193 Two Friars preach ye gospel at
Metz. 193 The duke of Saxon and lantgraue move war against the Duke of
Brunswike who flies. 193 The Chau^celor of France put in. 194 The Palsgraue
the Gospel. 195 The enterprice of fregose and Rinco^. 195 The French king is
accused of ambission. 196 The presidentes of the counsel at Tret. 196 The
Scotts taken at Solymosse. eod. The king of scotts dies. eod. The Duke of
Saxon and Lantzgraue refuse the judgment of ye chamber. 197 The duke of Cleave
recouereth Dure. 197 The kings oration to them of Rochell. eodem The Clemency
of king France. eod. The assembly of Nurremberge. eode^ The treatye of
Norunberge. 198 The Turks increase by the loss of Christians. 198 The decree
of Norunberge. 199 The duke of cleave refuses truce. eod. The death of ye
bishop of Auspurge. eo. The duke of Sauoye friend to thep. 200 The death and
praise of William Bellay. 200 The praise of Clement Marot. 201 The Archbishop
of Collon calls a co^uocation. eodem The Bishops book of reformation. eod.
The protestau^tes ambassador to the^peror. 203 Themperors viage against the
duke of Cleave. eodem They of Hyldesseme are accused to the Emperor. eodem The
Popes to ye clergy of Collon. eod. The French king fortifieth landersey. 204
The Turks navy arriueth in the. eo. The Castle of Nice besieged. eodem Two
cities full of Relicques. eodem The duke of Cleave craves pardon. 205 The duke
conditions to him imp. eod. The daughter of Nauarris sent to. 205 The preachers
of ye gospel thrust. eod. The siege is leued at Nice. eodem The young Queen of
Scotts affiaunced to king Edward. eodem The duke of Cleave renounceth y^. 206
The departure of the French men. 206 Three Eclipses of the moon. eod. The
causes of the Turks prospe. 207 The protesta^tes oration to the emp. eo. The
duke of Brunswick accuses. eod. The French ambassador to ye ass. eod. The
French herau^t evil received. 208 The ambassadors return by night. eo. The
Popes answer. eodem The mean to heal the common. eode^ The Princes letters to
the swisses. 209 The protestants accuses duke of. eod. The tenure of his
letters. eodem The duke of Brunswicke contemns his own religion. eodem The
French victory at Carignaue. 210 The duke of sanoye accuses the. eod. The
swisses answer the Princes. eod. The English Navy inuadeth scot. eod. The
oration of the French ambas. 211 The duke of Saxon is set through. 211 The
states of thempire decree a(...). 212 Themperours gen^elnes to ye lantz. 212
The Duchye of Brunsewicke com. 212 Thamperours Iorny into france. 212 The king
besieged Bollognie. 213 The death of the Prince Orange. 213 The fear and
slight of the Parisians. 213 The conditions of the peace. 214 The town of Pery
was burnt. 214 Three most mighty enemies of France that is the emperor, the
Germaynes and the king of England. 214 The enemies of the Romish church. 215
The pope cannot abide no super. eod. The Emperor is ye popes eldest son. eo.
The creation of Cardinals. eodem The Clergy of Collon to the arch. 216 The
clergy appeal ^o the pope and. 216 The articles of Lonaine. 217 The
protestauntes make answer. 218 The counsel trent unlawful. eodem The devise
of the popish princes. eode^ Their be in the French province a people called
valdois. 219 The Cardinal of fournon. 219 The Meridol^ns fly into ye woods.
219 The Swisses entreat for the valdois. 220 The confession of the valdois
doctrine. 221 The death of Lewis duke of bauier. eo. The^perours ambassador to
the king of Poole. eodem The kings answer to the emperor. eod. The wild Beast.
222 The ignorance of Grimian. eodem The death of Fraunces Duke of Loraine.
eodem The birth of Charles son to king Philip. 223 The Duke of Brunsewicke
gets money of the French king. 223 Themperours takes truce with the Turk.
eodem The clergy and university of Collon against their Archbishop. eodem
The Emperor cites the Archbish. eod. The decree of Auspurg. 224 The war of
France and England. eod. The protestants send Ambassadors into France and
England. eod. The death of the duke of Orelau^ce. eo. The army of ye duke of
brunswick. eo. The lantz. goes against him. eodem The vanity of the Duke of
Brunswicke. 225 The death of ye Cardinal of Mentz. 226 The Lantzgraues letters
to the^p. eod. The Emperor to the Lantzgraues. eod. The Palsegraue ordeneth
ministers in his Churches. 227 The protestants accused of conspi. 228 The
la^tzgraues letters to Nauius. 229 The colloquie of the learned men at
Regenspurg. 229 The colloquie dissolved. 230 The popes Legates in the counsel
of Trent. eodem The beginning of the Counsel. 231 The warning of Esoras and
Nehem. 231 The second session of the Synod. 231 The quiet departure of
Luther. 232 The invincible constaunce of Luth. 232 The victory and conquest of
the word. 233 The traytorous mind of Alpho^se. 234 The murderer kills Daze.
235 The^perours letter for a paracide. eod. The Emperor visits the Lantzgraues
daughter. eodem The Lantzgraue comes to themp. eo. The Lantzgraue spoke unto
the^p. 236 The book of reformation at Collon. 236 The archbushoppe of Collon is
accounted unlearned. 237 The divines are stubburne and ob. 238 The Emperor ought
to counsel the pope to his duty. 239 The end of the Scripture. eodem The
best things please fewest. eod. The mind of the Paulsgraue. eodem The
Lantzgraue is arbittor betwixt the duke of Saxon and duke moris. eod.
The Emperor tha^keth lantzgraue. eod. The third sessio^ in the Sinode at. 240
The popes letters to the Bushoppe of Sedune and Chur and certain Abb. eod. The
Archbushoppe of Collon excomunicated by the pope. eodem The Emperor comes to
Reuspurg. 241 The murder of Diaze unpunished. 241 The brute of war against
ye prot. eo. The falshode of Marquis Albert and John Brandenburge. eodem The
Lantzgraue is circumspect. eod. Themperours letters to the Cities of the
protestauntes. 242 Themperours Craft. eodem The oration of the French Amb.
243 The French kings request. 243 The pope tiraunt. 244 The clergy abused ye
church goods. eo. The good will of the protestau^ts. eod. The Emperor had
secret talk with duke Moris. 245 Themperours ambassador to ye. eod. The
cities of wirte^berg put on ar. eod. The oration of Balthazar to ye sold. eod.
The protestauntes letters to the Uenetians. 246 The Church goods in Spain to
be imployde. 246 The cardinal Scotland slain. 246 The tears of the
Crocodile. 247 The pope attempteth the matter. 247 The Paulsgraue axeth the
cause of. 247 The Paulsgraue seeks to reco^sile the protestaunte to
themperours. 248 The duke of Saxo^ letters to the^p. eod. The Emperor perjured.
eodem The authors of this war. eodem Themperours letters to the
Archebusshoppe of Cellon. 248 Themperours policy. 249 The Cardinal of Auspurg
the fire bra^d of this war. 249 The Judges of the Chamber be Papists. 250
The league betwixt the three houses, Saxon Brandenburg and Hesse. 250 The Intent
of the Papists. 251 The Popes bull against the Protestauntes. 251 The
diligence of the Protestants in leuyng their army. 251 The Lantzgraue sent
his son to Strausburge. 251 The first enterprise to the Protestauntes. 251
The Castle of Erenburge. 251 Themperoures power. 252 The Duke of Saxon and
Lantzgraue are out lawed by Themperoure. 252 The popes letters to the Swysses.
257 The pope brings the emperor into hatred. 254 The number of the fathers at
trent. 254 The king of Swetia receives the. 254 The^perours letters to
dukemoris. 254 The protestauntes letters to the Duke of Bauer. 255 The Swysses
au^swer to the Prote. 255 The death of Diazius unpunished. 256 The Protestants
proclaim war against The Emperor. 256 The craftines of the emperor. 256 The
Articles of the university of Louayne. 257 The Emperor would not receive the
protestants. 257 The table of prescription. 257 The popes army comes to
the^pe. 257 The Captains of the said army. 257 The captains of the^perours
army. 257 The princes of ye protestau^tes ca^pe. 257 The la^tzgraue rides
forth to epsy. 258 The Spaniardes invade the protestants Captain. 258 The
Earl of Bure leads an Army to Themperoure. 259 The cause of the protestants
miseri. 259 The Swisses answer to the^pe. eode^ The Emperor to the Swisses is a
gospeller. eodem The protestants one against an other. eo The protestants se^d
to ye bohemers. 260 The pope hireth me^ to poiso^ other. eo. The emperors
craft toward ye pro. 261 The emperorsdecrees made for fear. eo The
dissimulation of the emperor. eo The Duke of Brunswick a bitter enemy to the
Protestants. 262 The French ambassador dissuadeth the Emperor for his war.
eodem The Emperor will conquer Germany. eo The rabble of the papists. 263
The Emperor pretended this war long before. eodem The decres of worms was the
trompet of this war. 264 The custom of thempire in asse^bles. eo The
protestauntes remove there. eo. The protestauntes write to the Swifsers
gospellers. 265 Their answer to the protest. eodem Themperours and the
protestauntes Camps nere together. eodem The Duke of Alba tau^teth ye lantz.
266 The unreasonable request of Duke. eo The Emperor wins the river of. 267
The lantzgraue answers the states of duke Moris. 268 The cruelty wrought by
the per. eode^ The protestauntes benefits to Duke Moris. eodem The
protestau^tes letters to ye cities. eo The horse men of hongary are commonly
called Hussares. 269 The duke of Saxons request to his. eod. The electours
country invade. 27 The Bohemers slip a way. eodem Tharchebishop of Collon
appealeth from the Pope. 271 The unlucky success of the protestau^tes war.
eodem The peril of protestauntes. 272 The duke of Saxon exacteth many
papists. eodem The Emperors letters to the duke of Wirtemberg. eodem The
dukes letters of submission to the emperor. 273 The Paulsgraue asks pardon of
the emperor. eodem They of Frankforth render therle of Bure. eodem The Electours
letrers to the states of Duke maurice. 274 The Calamissi of Saxoni. 274 The
king of Denmark aided not. 275 The cities of protestants send am. 276
Themperor will hear no mention. eod. The duke of Saxon besieges Lip. eod. The
death of Henry the eight. 277 The Duke of Somerset. 278 They of Auspurge make
their. eodem Thelector of Brandenburge in. eodem Thomas Cranmar primate of.
eodem Thelector of Saxons letters to. eodem The death of Nauius. 279 Themperor
leuieth a new armyeodem The league of Bohemers. eodem The winning of Roclice.
eodem The duke of Wirsemberge cra. 208 The seventh session at Trent. eodem They
of Strasburge compound. 281 The duke of Saxon sends an. 282 The Bohemers
letters to the. eodem The notable library of king Fran. eo. The kings
knowledge. eodem The death of two kings was hap. eo. The overthrow of
themperors. eodem Two executed at Frankfurt. eodem The Lantzgraues purgation.
eodem Themperors Iourny against the. 284 Themperors celerity in ouerta. eodem
Themperor fights a battle with. eo. The duke taken sighting. eodem The
condemned to lose his head. 285 The burial or king Fraunces. 286 The
Lantzgraues son in law. 287 The schole which was fallen in. eodem The
treatise of Urmes. 288 The Lantzgraue comes to. eodem The Lantzgraue kneleth
to. eodem Themperors answer. eodem The Lantzgraue is driven into. eodem The
Lantzgraue captive. 289 The nombre of great gunnes taken. 29 The Bohemers
subdued by fre. eodem The Cardinals of France sent. eodem The Coronation of the
French. 291 The twelues Peers of France. eodem Themperor exacteth in Germany.
292 They of Maidenburge outlawed. eod. Themperor moves the Swisses. eod. The
churches new hallowed. eodem This was an armed assembly. 293 The Pope a
Negromancier. eodem The hatred of the Citezens to 294 The monstrous lusts of
hin. eodem The counsel of Trent. eodem The Protestants intised or sea. 299
Themperor answer to the states. 290 The conditions whereby the Lantz. eo.
Thanswer of duke Maurice. eodem Themperor requires the wry. eodem Thoration of
the Cardinal of. eodem Thoration of the bishop of Renes. 297 The French king
contendeth. eodem The Popes letters to his Legate. eod. The Pope to Mendoza
thempe. 298 The popes letters to the bishops. eod. The pope is ignorant of al
things. eod. The pope is a watchman. eodem The constancy of the Romish. eodem
Themperors ambassador sent to. eode^ The Popes Legate to themperors. eo.
Themperors ambassador to the. eodem The malapertnes of the legate. 299 The
letters of protestation. eodem Themperors carefulnes for the. 300 Thauthors of
removing the coun. 300 The beginning of thordre of. 301 The victory of king
Cosriure. eodem The war of Emperors and kings of Pole against this order of
Knights. 302 Thoration of the Marquis. 303 The duke of Muscouia. eodem The
prince of Lituanis, made. eodem The people rebel. 304 The conditions of peace
betwixt the king of Pole and the knights. eodem The commotion in Boheme for
ye doctrine of Ihon Husse. 305 The Popes answer to Mendoza. eodem The war
finished by the Popes ar. eode^ Themperors praise, set ye pope afire. eo. The
fathers must be provided for. 307 The Pope may be weak and neg. eodem The
authors of thinterim. 308 The connsel of England write. eodem The governor of
Scotland. eodem The Britains expulsed by the. 309 The pictes by the Scotts,
eodem Two ways to finish war. eodem The ceremony whereby duke Mau. 310 The
Marquis of Brandenburge. 312 The contents of thinterim. eodem Two sacrifices
of Christ after these. eo. Thelectors vary in opinion. 313. The craft of the
archbishop of Mentz in approving of thinterim. 314 The Constancy of the duke
of. 315 The labor and pearil of Bren. eodem The playnes and godliness of
Brentius. 315 The fearfulness of the Duke of wittemberge. eodem The constacie
of the duke of Saxo. eod. The Dukes godly mind. 316 The cruelty showed is Duke
of Saxon prisoner. eodem The ^^stmate mind of winchester. 317 The
Ecclesiastical reformation of the Emperor. eodem The Tre^blable misteris of
the Mass. 317 The Excomunication. eodem The means made that Strausburge
should receive therein. eodem Their Answer. eodem The Emperor will not
discharge his Soldiers. 319 The promise of a lawful Counsel repented. 320
The decree of the Uenetians. eodem The wisdom of the Uenetians in matters of
religion. eodem The story of Jews Auila of the Germains war. 322 The Duke of
Saxon beloved of all men. eodem They of Counstau^ce writ to the emperor.
eodem The Emperor makes new Senators. 323 The^perours abrogates faternities.
323 The Spaniardes go to Coustau^ce. eod. The Constaunce assaulted. eodem
The Emperor delited in the French tongue. eodem The letter of Strausburge to the
emperor. 324 The Constancy of the ministers. 325 The Duke of Saxon and the
La^tgraue led away prisoners. 325 The reformation of the Chamb. 326 They of
Constaunce give them selves to the house of Austrich. 326 The slaughter yt was
at Burdour. 327 The abominable filthiness of an archbushoppe. 329 The inheritor
of Scotland led into France. 330 They of Madenburge are made a pray for their
godliness. 331 Trouble in England. eodem The Admiral of england beheaded. 331
Thomas Crammer a furtherer of learning and Codlines. 331 The duke of Swaybrig
plain troth. 332 The Interim confuted by them of Bubeck and others. 333 The
force of Hohwater. eodem The popes legates to the emperor. 334 The Pope granted
license to eat flesh. 335 The Archbishop of Metz to the counselors of the
Lantgraue. eodem The Godly au^swer of ye preachers. eod. The king commands
to go on presession. eodem The French king steals fortes. 337 The Senate of
Strausburge do compound with their Bishop. eodem The peril of fear of them of
Maydenburge. eodem The Purgation of them of Maydenburge. eodem The cause why
them of Maydenburge cannot get their pardon. eodem The sayng of goodness the.
338 They betray the troth that hold it in Silence. eodem The mo^struous
lechery of the pope. 339 The Popes ravening. eodem The Pope sister a whore made
her brother a Cardinal. eodem The mayseres of ceremonis. 340 The custody of
the conclaue. eodem The orders of the Cardinal. eodem The manner to choose the
pope. 341 The factions of the Cardinal. eodem The cause why pole was not pope.
eod. The year of Iubiley. eodem The protector of England. 343 The French
kings proclamation against Lutheranes. eodem The opening of the Golden gate.
eod. Themperiours letters to the states of thempyre. 344 The cleargye of
Strausburge renueth their ministers. 345 The talcke of faith is forbidden. 346
The death of the cardinal of Loraine. 347 The Archbushop of Collon enters the
City with Pomp. 347 The Protestation of the Duke Moris against the Counsel.
348 The knavery of Spanierdes. eodem The death of Granuellan. eodem The taking
of the Ciue of Africa. eod. The overthrow of the Maiden Burgians. 349 The
princes letters to them of Maiden burge. 349 The Proclamation for religion
mutigated. 349 The answer of ye Maydenburgians. 350 The death of viriche Duke
of Wirie^b. 351 The causes that the decree is not observed. eodem They repare
to trent before condemned. 352 Themperours Proclamation against them of
Maydenburge. eodem The Lantgraues Sons sue for their father. eodem The
Lantzgraues purpose of sliyng bewrayed. eodem The issuyng out and victory of
the Maydenburgians. 353 The duke of Megelb. taken prisoner. 353 They of
Maydenburge are moved to render. eodem The Acts against the Clergy. 354 The
slaughter of the Citizens. 355 The answer of the Citizens. 356 The praise of
great Otto. 358 The duke of Pruisse addicte to Ou^. 359 The decree of Auspurge.
359 The death of Bucer. 360 The pope accuses Octauian far. 360 The counsel at
Trent is sold. 361 The war of Parma betwixt the emperor and the French king.
eodem The French Kings excuse to the Pope. eodem The fierce mind of the
Pope. 362 The confession of duke Moris by Melanthon. eodem. The humanity of the
Duke of Wittemberge toward Brentius. eodem The burnt child the fire dreades.
363 The Constancy of the Prelates. 363 The Preachers exiled. 364 The French
king warieth upon the emperor. 364 The Counsel renewed at Trent. 365 The French
kings letters to the. 365 The Some of Money that is carried to Rome. 366 The
university of paris appeleth from the Pope. eodem The arrogantie of Pope
Boniface against the king of France. eodem Twelve archbishoprikes in france.
eod. Theames given to the diumes. 367 The order of speaking. eodem The manner of
making the Articles of the faith. eodem The manner of making the decrees. eod.
The holy ghost at the popes commandment. 368 The French kings writing
against the Pope. eodem The wiked lusts of the Pope. eodem The cause of
dissentio^ betwixt the pope and the emperor. 369 The safe counded of the fathers
at. 370 The Marquis of Brandenburge mocketh the Counsel. eodem The duke of
somerset apprehended. eod. The Counsel writes to the French king. 371 The
French king disswadeth ye Swisses from the Counsel. eodem The land of
Wittenburge delivered of Spanyerdes. eodem The ambassador of Wittenburge to
the Counsel. 372 The pacification of Maydenburge. eod. The noble same and
constancy of Maydenburge. eodem The Pope created xiii. Cardinals. 373 The
amba. of witte^berg delivered. 374 The amb. of Duke Mauri(...)he Marquis of
Brandenb. to themper. 374 Their oration. 375 The Lantzgraue kept prisoner
against the league. 375 The Lantzgraue bidde^ to Supper and kept prisoner. 376
The names of the Princes that entreat for the Lantzgraue. 377 The Lantzgraues
Son comes to Duke Morice. 377 The railing of Cropper. 378 Themperours
letters to the Bushoppe electors. 378 Their is craft in daubing. 379 The
ambassador of duke Maurice come to the Counsel. 380 The Duke of Somerset
beheaded. 381 The saufeconduct altered. 382 The fraukespeache of Duke Maurice
Ambassador to the fathers. 383 Thambassador of the prot. deluded. ide^ The
divines come to Norinberge. 384 The bitterness of Friar Pelarge against the
Protestants. eodem The divines of Wittenburge. 386 Tha^bassodours of Strasburg
det. 387 The blasphemio of a gray Friar. 388 The requests of the Protestauntes
divines. eodem. The Fathers fly from Trent. 389 The answer of the
Protestants Ambassador. eodem The church cannot err. 390 The Counsel of
Basell purer then Trent. eodem The last session of the Counsel. eodem The
French King has peace with the Pope. eodem The End of the counsel of Trent.
eode^ The death of the Popes Legate eodem The second cause of war. 392 The
Lantzgraue detained prisoner against fidelity. eodem The third cause. eodem
The heavy burdens of Germany. 393 The story of Jews Auila, of the
Protestauntes war. eodem The French kings letters. 394 The arms of
liberty. 395 The prince of Salerne reuolteth from the Emperor. 396 The
French king subdneth Lorain eod The cardinal betrayed the cites. eode^. The
pledges of France and German. 397 The country of Oto Henry recovered. ^de^ The
Judges of the chamb. fly. eodem The Conestable chideth with them of
Strasburge. 398 The kings answer to the princes. 399 The suit of the Suises to
the king eode^ The Emperor flies away by night. 400 The duke of Saxon set at
liberty. eode^ The Emperors stuff spoiled. eodem The Princes restore the
ministers of the church. eodem The Marquis Albertus army. 401 The French
king destroieth the Emperors country. 403 The assemble at passaue. eodem The
complaint of the princes elector. 403 The affinity of Frenchmen and. 404 The
liberty of Germany restored by the power of France. 405 The way opened for
the Prince of Spain to be Emperor. eodem The princes answer his oracio^.
eode^ The house of Lucenburg. 406 The battle of Cressie. eodem The French
kings answer to the intercessours. 407 Themp. letters to thintercessours.
408 Their answer to the emperor. eode^ The Ambassadors commentaries
intercepted. 409 The answer of Strausburge 410 The death of Bernard
Archbishop of Colon. 412 The duke of Saxon goes home to his own house. eodem
The Emperor goes with his army toward Loraine. 413 The^perorentreth into
Strasburg eod. The spoil of the soldiers. eodem The death of Caspar Hedio
and Andrewe Osiander. eodem The Emperor besieges Metz. eodem The battery of
Metz. 414 The Duke of Brunswik driven out of his country. eodem The duke of
Guise defended Metz. eod. The French kings writing against the Emperor. 415
The Emperors letters of answer to Marquis Albert. eodem The arms of
Electourship. eodem The Cardinal Lenoncourtes ambicion. eodem The father and
the sons contend for inheritance. 417 Terwen raced. eodem The Lady Jane of
Suffolk, married Guilford Dudley. 418 The Marquis makes war i Sar. eode^. The
spoilyng of Albert. 419 The complainte of Duke Moris, upon Marquis Albert.
eodem The marquis answer to duke Mo. 420 The Bishop in his absence invade his
country. 421 The great cruelty of marquis Al. eode The death of good king
Edward. eode^ The virtues of Edward the sixth eodem The wonders before Duke
Maurice death. 422 The death of Orace Fernese. eodem The blasphemy of the
lieutenan^t. 424 The ladle Jane. eodem The lady Mary proclaimed queen eode^ The
Duke of Northumberlande condemned. 425 Thomas Palmer knighte professes ye
doctrine of the Gospel. eodem The constancy of the Archebishopp of
Cantorburse. eodem The bishops carried to prison 426 The Popish religion
restored in England. eodem The Turkishe naute takes the Island of Corsica. 427
The French king atte^pteth Came. code^ The blood of Innocents gainful to
many. 428 The Duke of Brunswickes letters to the Duke of Saxon. eodem The Duke
of Brunswicke is reconciled to the duke of Saxon. eodem The Turk hanged his
son Mustapha. 429 The Archbishop of Cantorburie and others condemned. eodem
The Godly laws of good king Edward repealed. 430 The duke of Norffolke
forsaken of his men. eodem The duke of Suffolk. 431 The Lady Jane and her
husband beheaded. eodem The duke of Suffolk beheaded eodem The godly end of
Iho^ Frederick. code^ The godliness of his wife 432 The Lady Elizabeth committed
to the Tower. eodem The slege of Senes. eodem The death of Wiat eodem
Thassemble of Auspurge. 433 The death of Char. duke of Sanot 436 The letters of
king Ferdinando to his subjects, of the lords Supper. eode^ The states make
answer to the kings letters. eodem The Abbot of Newstat accused of Hereste.
eodem The French king inuadeth the Emperors countries. 437 The French kings
letters. 438 The Emperor gives to his soonne, the dukedom of Millane. eodem
The Cardinal gives the Lords absolution. 439 The Emperors letters against
Marquis Albert. eodem Themperiall counsel of Auspurg. 440 The ministers exiled
out of Boheme. 442 The Town of Cassell taken by the Frenchmen. 449 The letters
of the princes of Saxon to the Emperor. eodem The archbishop of Metz dies.
450 The death of Pope July the third. eode^ The^ of Senes render them selves
to the emperor. eodem The sect of Jesuits. eodem The travail of Cardinal
Poole, to make peace between the Emperor and French king. eodem The Emperors
letters to the States of the Empire. 451 The duke of Alba sent to Millane eode^
The Emperors mother dies. eodem The French kings Proclamacion again
condemned of thinquisitors. 452 The Lucernates require of the Swisses, the
doctrine of the Gospel. eode^ The Naute of the King of Denmark 453 The
Spanish Flete intercepted by the French king. eodem The controversy about the
lords supper is renewed by the Bremers. eode^ The answer of the Parliamente
of Paris, by the kings Proclamacion of Lutherians. 454 The meting of princes
about the La^tzgraues matter. 455 The Emperor Charles gives the government to
his son Philip. eode^ The office of the Archbishops. 456 The answer of the
Protestants, to the writing of the Papists. 457 The bishops which change
their religion, should l^se their promocio^. 459 Thecclestastical laws shall
not be exercised against the Protestants. 461 The wife of Iho^ Frederick
dies. eode^ The ambassadors of Austrich require of Ferdinando, that true
Religion male be permitted unto them. 462 Truce taken between the Emperor and
the king of France. 463 The answer of Ferdinando to the Ambassadors of the
house of Austrich. eodem The Emperors Sigismonde burned Husse. eodem The
Ambassadors answer to Ferdinando. 464 The answer of Ferdinando, eodem The
bishop of Treuers dies. 465 The Duke of Pruse professes the confession of
Auspurge. eodem The Archbishop of Cantorburie burned for Religion. eodem The
Pope was displeased, that peace was granted to Religion. 466 The Duke of
Arestat. brake out of prison. eodem The Cardinalle of Auspurge purges himself
by writing. eodem The Cardinal of Auspurge addicte to the old religion. 468
The good will of the Cardinal of Auspurg toward the Duke of Wittenberge. eodem
The love of the Cardinal of Auspurg toward the Germans. 469 Twelve burnt at
Stratford bow. eode^ The marquis of Barden receives the Gospel. eodem
The Emperor goes into Spain with both his sisters. 470
VV.
WHy the Bisshoppe of Rome is extolde. 3 Which are properly called
Sacraments. 24 Who is aucthour of single life. 35 What needs gold in the
church. 47 What is true confession. eodem What thing Rebellion is. 58 We are
all blind in our own cause. 61 Who be the aucthours of dissencion. 81
Uergecius the Popes ambassador. 86 Upon what conditions the duke of Saxon will
come to the assembly. 103 Wars in Swiserlande. 104 Whereof sprang the
dissencion in Religion. 110 Wil^e Merchants. 120 Uergecius message to the
Duke of Saxon. 121 Uergecius spoke with Luther. 122 Who wrote against the
Anabaptists. 131 Uergecius sent to the Emperor. 138 Who ought to be at the
Counsel. 150 Why Innocents be in peril. 151 Whereof comes contempt of the
clergy. 155 Who ought to be made bishop. eodem Unlawful to give benefices by
legacis eodem Why Cardinals were first made. 156 Uergecius his oracion. 176
Why the Protestants desire a Counsel. 177 What moved Luther to write against
Papists. eodem Willyam Farell. 192 War betwixt England and Scotland. 196
William County forsakes the French king. 206 Whether we shall know each other
in the life to come. 232 What Counsel the Protestauntes desired. 237 What
profit has the Emperor out of Germany. 239 Ulmes reconciled to the emperor
273 Unreasonable tormente, is a perilous matter. 283 Wittenberg rendered. 286
Wittenberge a Town of Electorship 287 Uogelsburge apprehended. 312 Uogelsburge
co^stancy at his death 312 Works of superogacion. 313 Whilst the Mass is set
up in Germany, it is put down in England 317 Uiolence is not to be used in
Religion but reason and truth. 318 Who were outlawed by the Emperor. 320 Who
impugned the Interim. 322 Uergecius vanquished with the truth. 328 Uergecius
repaireth to Mantua, and is put out of the Counsel. 329 Uergecius Preaches
the Gospel in Rhetia. eodem What things offend many. 353 Why the Clergy
forsake the city. 356 Wonders in Saxony. 360 Wily begiled. 379 War in
Italy. 48 Winchester made Chaunceler. 425 Wars renewed betwixt the Duke of
Brunswick and marquis Albert. 426 Uercelles surprised. 429 Wiat taken and
committed to pri. 431 Uulpian victualed. 452 Uulpian taken and raced by the
French king. 453 Whether peace should be given to the religion or no. 455
Unconstancie of Clement. 53 Uictorie of themperialles. eodem Winnyng of Munster
136 Wars of Geneua against the Duke of Sauoy. 137 Uenecians league with the
Emperor. 138 Uenecians Ambassador to the Turk. 169
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Ihon Day, for Nicholas England. M.D. LX.

The. 26. day of September.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


