Philochasander AND ELANIRA The fair Lady of Britain.

Wherein is discovered the miserable passions of Love in exile, his
unspeakable Joy received again into favor, with the deserved guerdon of
perfect love and Constancy.

Hurtful to none, but pleasant and delightful for all Estates to
contemplate.

By Henry Petowe.

Dulcia non meruit qui non gustauit amara.

Printed by Thomas Purfoot.

1599.

To the virtuous and courteous young Gentleman, and his very friend Master
John Cowper, H. P. wishes increase of virtue and heavenly Happiness.
Seem you content, be discontent who list,
My chiefest study is to please my friend,
Your liking scares the biting Satirist,
What fool dyslikes where virtue does commend.
Virtues firm stay is resident in thee,
And I from virtue seek Appologie.
Vouchsafe then thou admired to descend,
Down from the imperious rich sky threatening throne,
Of all subdewing virtue, (honors friend)
And grace the Roof of my poor mansion.
Herein's contained the house of my goood will,
Like it and take it, so be Landlord still.
If the foundation shrinking chance to fail,
And strongest posts the builder do beguile,
Suppose it then the Cottage of a Snaile:
That tottering falls: so that her ruin smile.
Decay in such poor creatures breeds delight,
For their ambition sauors not of might.
Yours to his power humbly devoted. Henry Petowe.

Ad Inuidiam.
SHame seeking Zoylists, is it not offense,
That Momus is the God of your devotion?
To whom you consecrate all diligence,
In carping and contemning every motion.
Shame ye not thus to seek the shame of others?
Why seek you shame? shame swiftly does pursue you:
Yet envy so your bashful senses smothers,
That you shame not so much as they that view you.
Look back, look back and let this Poem pass,
That passes not blind biting Enuies terror:
But learn to know abstaynance in this glass,
And carpe not that which wants naught but error.
Vain are all actions of humanity:
Then blame not fiction, it is but vanity.
N. R. Gent.

In laud'em Authoris.
THe Laurels green wreath, Pallas does propose,
To the Tryumphant Temples of all those,
Which by Appollo's inspiration,
Merit fair Daphnes transformation.
Then does this Author, by all Poets Laws,
Deserve that Fame with general applause.
Henry Snelling Gentleman.

To the quick-sighted Readers.
AS he that lately ransomed from the snare,
Dreads still venture on the selfsame gin,
So erst by folly led, not armed with care,
Seek I to shun the pit I late was in,
The sink of misconceite, and errors Cell,
Wherein my wandering Muse downehead-long fell.
(Raised by your favors) she has prunde her wings,
And now her second flight she gins to make,
Oh do not hurt her, though she rudely springs,
For want of skill, but rather pleasure take.
To see an vnflidg'd foul make shift to fly,
Whose vngrowne plumes all means for aid deny.
Once she did ill, since when she lived obscure,
In black robes mu'd within an ebon hearse,
No longer now she will her self, Immure,
But cancel her rude Epitaphe's harsh verse.
Blessed may her second resurrection be,
And in your favors live eternally.
Yours as opportunity will permit. H. P.

To the fairest Elanira.
Fair glory of Virtue, whose bright Angels form.
(Framed of immortal powers all divine,)
Banish the black Clouds of a threatening storms
Darting such splendant rays from Bewties eyes.
Eyes casting light, like to the Lamps of heaven,
Whose eyes all eyes of sight has quite bereauen.
Blind I, whose I, can never be but blind,
Unless the sunshine of your sacred beauty,
Enforce the curtains of mine eyes, (assigned
By love) to ope' and do their wonted duty.
Then shine bright Sun upon my liquid soil,
Drenched with my tears in hazard of much spoil.
How can that soil (fair Sun) but ruinate,
Whereon the Sun will never cast his light?
Such is your Bewties force, when I contemplate,
That one kind smile can brighten my dark night.
My hearts sad woes, which force my soul to languish,
Such is my woes inexorable anguish.
If then one harmeles smile from beauties fair
Lend comfort to a thousand new bred woes.
Smile sacred Saint to banish fell despair:
Despair that all sweet pleasure overthrows.
My weal or woe at Beawties mercieis,
Frowns bred my sorrows, smiles my endless bliss.
Philochasander.

The pleasant History of Philochasander and Elanira.
Seven times twice told the bright Hyperian,
Has circled the fiery Zodiac,
Seven times twice seven, since darting love began
Within those twice seven dais my poor souls wrack,
Of an old hurt, yet feel the wou^d but green,
Wounded by Love, yet love has never seen.
In Cyprus springes, where Beauty fair once dwelt,
A well so hot that who so tastes the same,
Were he of stone, as thawed Ice should melt:
And find his breast kindled with burning flame.
Whose fervent heat my cold lymmes so oppressed,
That fell despair does lend me little rest.
An other well that springes so hot is found,
Whose chilling venom of repugnant kind,
Drenches the burning heat of Cupids wound,
And with the spot of change infects the mind.
Whereof my dear has tasted, to my pain,
My service thus is grown into disdain.
II.
FRom Tuskane came my Ladies worthy race,
Fair Florence was sometimes her ancient seat,
The western I Will whose pleasant shore does face,
Wild Cambers cliffes did give her lively heat.
Fostred she was with Milk of Irish breast,
And now in famous Britain she does rest.
Fortune bad Chance, the Author of my rewe,
Why did you suffer hoarie aged time,
To present such a Diamond to my view,
At whose first sight, my Sunshine did decline:
Wars foreign gallants wherefore did you slumber,
And carelessly let slip so rare a wonder.
Why did you sleep, and did not gaze upon her?
Why did so rare a prise escape your hands?
Why did not waking Centonels cease on her?
Whose sacred looks all earth on earth commands.
Her fair of kind, her virtues from above,
Happy is he that can obtain her love.
III.
THe Sun has twice brought forth his tender green,
Twice clad the Earth in lively lustiness,
Once have the winds the trees displayed clean:
And once again begins their cruelnesse.
Since I have hid the harm within my breast,
My Ladies coy disdain that hinders rest.
The winters hurt recouers with the warm,
The parched green restored is with shade,
What warmth alas may serve for to disarme,
The frozen heart that mine inflame has made.
What cold again is able to restore,
My fresh green years that wither more and more.
Strange kinds of death in life I try,
At hand to melt far of in flame to burn,
And like as time list to my cure apply,
So does each place whole heaps of woes return.
Love seems to have my cure still in scorn,
Who living die: and dying live to morn.
IIII.
MOst happy all but I; the sauadge wild,
The senseless beasts in field that pasture takes,
Nature will not permit them be beguild.
Of their true-harted love affecting makes.
The poorest senceles creature on earth lyuing'
Enioyes what he loves most, and never grieuing.
The Heart he feeds by the gentle Hynde,
The Bucke does feed hard by the pretty Dove,
The Turtle Dove we never see unkind,
To him that to her does affection show.
I proffer kindness, yet it is not accepted,
I love, yet love of love is quite rejected.
The harmeles Ewe she has by her the Ram,
The younger Cow has to her make the Bull,
The Calfe with many a pretty nibling Lam:
Upon the downs do feed their hunger full.
But my Love loved prizeth so hie her fair,
That for her want I cannot but despair.
V.
FVll fair and white she is, and White by na me,
Whose white does strive the Lillies white to stain,
Who may contemn the blast of black defame,
Who in dark night can bring day bright again.
Day is not day, unless her shine give light,
And when she frowns, day turns to gloomy night.
The ruddie Rose impresseth with clear hew,
In lips and cheeks right orient to behold,
Her sparkling eyes dart forth to worldly view:
Such glimering splendant rays, more bright the^ gold.
Her looks the still behoulders eyes amazes,
Dimming their sights, that on her Beauty gazes.
Oh how my heart did burn at her first sight,
Oh how my ravished soul did leap for joy,
Day still did smile, it was never ebon night,
No grief, no woe, increased my anoy.
Until I gave the onset to the fort,
Then fell disdain set period to my sport.
VI.
Fair Penthesilea th'Amazonian Queen,
Whose man-like force foiled Achilles son,
And hung his shield of Graecians to be seen,
Within Troy walls has not such honor won.
By that her admirable Princely deed,
As my love has, on whom all eyes do feed.
Helen among Princes is accounted rare,
Phillis the Shepherds Do commend for feature,
The Gods sweet Venus to be only fair,
Yet she whom I love is a fayrer creature.
Of all the beauties since the world begun,
Make one fair star, yet mine will be the Son.
From utmost confines of the far wide world,
Came warlike Knights like bees to hiue in number
To gaze on her, decked with Appollo's courld,
And dangling goulden locks, the worlds fair wonder.
Whose too bright lamps shining in Phoebus view,
VVithdrawes his rays into a darker hew.
VII.
EAch morn when fresh Aurora began to peep,
And Phoebus rising from the Eastern clyme,
Showed forth his radiant beams true course to keep,
Whom Zephire bids Boniour with calmie wind.
Forth goes my Mistress for to take the air,
Deemed by the world sweet Bewties fairest fair.
No sooner did my love display her beauty,
From forth the glorious portall of her being,
But many states did hold it bounden duty,
To offer service such a Goddess seeing.
Then do they strive in duty to excel,
Whose duty graced her beauty wondrous well.
At her first gaze, like when Appollo's beams,
In the full glory of their Bewties shine,
Do with the splendant rays that from heaven streams,
Illuminate the day: from her divine.
Such lightning came, as all the earth thereby,
Was graced as much as with the heavens brightie.
VIII.
When she was mounted on her Palfrayes back,
White as the whitest snow winters beauty,
Her horse again this Princess must vnbacke,
Yt were a wonder to behold the duty.
Those loue-sicke Knights that still attended on her,
How diligent they were to wait upon her.
Then in a Chariot tryumphantly she rydes,
Attired all in Robes of perfect green,
That dangling down hung loose about her sides,
Like Lady Flora, Summers blessed Queen.
Two other Palfrayes swift as Venus dove,
Draws this admired Goddess Lady love.
No sooner had her beauty graced the fields,
But busy air vp-heaues her yiedling robe:
Her nether garments likewise willing yields,
The covering Canopie of pleasures globe.
A globe wherein a man did never see,
Such pleasant fertile countries as there be.
IX.
THe time when this sweet fair her progress took,
Was when fresh spring that bud and blome forth bring,
With green had clad the hills, and every brook
With Crystal glyding streams did sweetly spring,
The Nightingall with feathers new did sing,
Summer was come for every spray did spring.
The Bucke in bracke his Winter coat did cast,
The Turtle to her make has told her tale,
The Adder all her slough away did wast:
The Heart had hunge his old head on the pale.
And thus I saw among these pleasant things,
Each care decaies and yet my sorrow springs.
Still side by side her Chariot did I run,
And like a Page attended with the rest,
But when I saw the honor she had done,
To other Knights, and mine to be the least:
Oh how my heart within fraighted with ire,
A spark scarce kindled, turned to flaming fire.
X.
Revenge I sought upon those harmeles Knights,
And needs I would give scope to raging ire,
Our clamorous weapons fearful Love affrights:
To know my name the Lady does desire.
Those foreign gentiles knew not what to say,
Some said I was Leander, some said nay.
But if that Beauty beauties worth may praise,
And praise himself, whom blackest hew does scorn,
My Beauty boue the rest my self might raise:
But that I leave for after-worlds unborn.
Then issued forth a voice, some neighbor wight,
Philochasander do we call this Knight.
A warrior whom all Britain does admire,
A man at arms that dreades no martial rage,
Disgraced he would not be: for fell desire
Did egg him on: some others to assuage.
His new bred fury sought; but all in vain,
In presence of his Lady four Knights were slain.
XI.
THose stark dead Corpse of those 4 worthy peers,
That breathles lay upon the thirsty ground,
Was such a terror to her tender years,
That tymerous fear did cast her in a sound.
But when her senses were restored again,
This was her guerdon for my taken pain.
From Bewties Court I must on Pilgrimage,
And never more behold her Majesty,
But bannishment with such a goulden age,
As were my youthful days; could not agree,
But though her doom exild me from her sight,
Aloof I followed like a wandering Knight.
Four dead I banished yet a hundredth more,
Of gallant gentles did attend on her:
Well might five absent be, amongst fiue-score,
Where such a worthy troop did wait upon her,
Exild I was, and Lovers she had score,
Yet in despite of hate, she had one more.
XII.
Poor I which had two eyes, yet not one eye,
That durst attempt to lend my soul relief,
Relief to me in midst of misery,
Least that the one eye caused the others grief.
Two eyes I had yet none to do me good,
So much in fear of Beauty, poor I stood.
Nere her I might not come, the more my woe,
The farther out of sight, the more her joy,
Thus woe became my friend, and weal my foe,
My absence her content, my sight anoy.
Thus pilgrym like I ranged full of pain:
Hoping for rest, though captive to disdain.
But they that hope for fruit on barren land,
May lack what they desire, and so did I,
I looked for favor at a Princes hand,
Yet scarce durst view her sacred Majesty:
For I was banished, banished from her sight,
That once gave day unto my souls dark night.
XIII.
SOme men will think as due they ought to have,
For their true service, guerdon and reward,
But I entreat, and love for love I crave:
Yet others though unworthy are prefard.
I beat the bush, and others catch the bird,
Reason exclaimes and swears my hap is hard.
They eat the honny, I must hold the hiue:
I sow the seed, and they must reap the corn,
I wast, they win; I draw, and they must drive,
Theirs is the thank, and mine the bitter scorn.
I seek, they speed: in vain my wind is spent,
I gape, they get, I pray and yet am shent.
I fast, they feed: they drink, and I still thurst,
They laugh, I weep: they joy, I ever mourn:
They gain, I loose, I only have the worst:
They are whole, I am sick: they cold, I burn.
I would, they may: I crave, they have at will,
That helps them, but hate my heart does kill.
XIIII.
Adieu desert, alas how art thou spent?
Ah droping tears, how woefully you wast,
Poor heart how many scalding sighs are lent
To prick them forth, that make no speedy have:
Ah payned soul, thou gap'st for mickell grace,
Of her in whom sweet pity has no place.
Unhappy I, the fixed stonye rock,
From place to place as soon I may remove,
As by my heavy sorrow to provoke
A frozen heart from hate to perfect love.
What should I say, alas such is my lot,
To fawn on women's fair, that make men dote?
For where I seek to find a resting port,
I do but weigh against the wavering wind,
And where my troubled soul would feign resort,
There is no place for my abode assigned.
My destiny I fear decrees so,
That my true heart should cause my mickle woe.
XV.
UUHen glorious Phoebus had the Serpent slain,
The wanton God desired Cupids bow,
Which sudden strife did turn him to such pain,
That in the end he felt the depth of woe.
The shaft once shot, he never could remove:
His woe began in seeking Daphnes love.
This Cupid has a shaft of perfect kind,
Wherewith true-louing makes he gently wounds.
Whose goulden head has power enough to bind,
All loyal hearts; such force therein abounds.
An other shafte he has, that is wrought in spite
Whose Nature is to quench all sweet delight
The own in Phoebus took a resting place
In Daphnes Breast the cruel shaft did slumber,
Phoebus sought love, Daphne would not embrace
His vowed love could never bring her under.
Such is my case? to her I seek to most
I love, she hates, thus is my labor lost.
XVI.
AS often as I behold my love in Majesty,
Her sparkling sovereign beauty that me bound,
The mores my comfort, though exild I be,
But yet alas the fresher is my wound.
My soul like Tantalus in sorrow wastes,
Who sees the goulden fruit, yet never tastes,
On like a careless Lady still she glides,
Woe worth those Palfrayes that befriend her so,
Woe worth the burnisht Chariot where she rides,
Alas alas they nill regard my woe.
Swift Spookes, strong Axeltree, burst all in sunder,
That I may feed upon my souls rare wonder.
Ye gentle Coursers that so much obey,
Let not the goulden raines your proud heads tame,
Graze on some fertile soil, that she may stay:
And meditate upon an exiles name.
Look what I wished: good chance to cure my wou^d,
Subverted her rich pomp down to the ground.
XVII.
THere sits my love like Jove in heavens throne,
That mountain like still stands, so stands she,
Whose majesty those knights do gaze upon,
Expecting from her beauty some rich fee.
But this rare accident that Fortune wrought,
Twixt timorous fears and dread, my mistress brought.
As in a trance she all amazed sat,
Fair Elanira, so my fair I name,
Who did disdain black Venus for her mate,
Mate would she none but babbling tell tale fame.
To blaze her Bewties excellence about,
Casting proud libells foreign lands throughout.
No sooner were her Palfrayes put to graze,
And she revived that erst seemed dead:
But all the pretty birds on her to gaze.
Marching along, by Nightingalls were lead.
With sugared notes they proffer humble duty,
Carrolling sweet music to her beauty.
XVIII.
THose pretty birds did frame such melody,
That Elanira fell into a slumber,
Her ravished servants drencht with harmony,
Sad drowsy Morpheus were inthralled under.
Which when the birds perceau'd as they were ioying,
They hop and leap about, and fall to toying.
They thought poor silly fools, but thought amiss,
That she was Flora in her chiefest pride,
Therefore her currall lips, they chirping kiss,
Anon her dangling amber hair they'spied.
Thereon some play, and leap from hair to hair,
While others suck the breath of Bewties fair.
Then came unruly Air Zephirus blasts,
To gaze upon this all admired Lady.
The wanton winds her nimble robes vpcasts,
About her corpse: they were as quick as may be.
To cover Bewties treasure, they nothing leave,
Their yiedling garments bout her they vpheaue.
XIX.
THen did the wanton birds fly all about,
Her pleasure pallaice viewing all her store,
Rownd rownd, they flutter in, and then fly out,
All that she had they law, what could they more.
What mortal eye but I had such a sight,
Could deem the field no bed, the day no night.
No eye but I, unless the heavens bright eye,
And other senceles eyes that nothing wit,
Beheld this blessed object: whereat I
Amazed stood, bereaved of sense and wit.
Yet when I called to mind what I had lost,
I drew nigh that which I desired most.
And when the sudden mist that dazzled had,
Mine eyes at their first sight and sudden view,
Had cast his stemmy garment: oh so glad
Was I, that what I saw, for truth I knew.
Imagine gentle Lovers how it grieved me,
I saw, yet could not have, that should relieve me.
XX.
UUHile thus I musing stood, swift feathered Time,
Came flying by, and told me it was midday,
Those slumbring Knights and Lady all divine,
Slept on; the pretty birds took flight away.
Then nigh my Lady, nigh as nigh may be,
I did approach unto her Majesty.
I did again what Zephir did undo,
I spread the covering silken Canopie,
I placed her goulden tresses in a roe,
I had a care of her sweet Chastity.
By this time drowsy slumber left her eyes,
(The curtains drawn) my Lady began to rise.
She saw it was day, but when she saw me by,
She began exclaim, but all her Knights were fast,
Then dreading naught I did approach more nie,
No dread at all, nor fear did me aghast.
Then such a tale I sounded in her ear,
That are I ^east, she bad me come more nere.
XXI.
NO sooner had she said, but I was by,
Down I must set, with honor she did grace me,
My tale half told, she cast a wanton eye,
With luorie circling arms she did embrace me.
Thrice welcome to thy friend thy Quondam foe,
(This said) she asked if I did love or no?
Ravished with joy I made her this reply,
Worlds wonder, Heavens beauty, Loves comfort,
Was Hero loved, if loved, then so love I,
I true Earbas not false Aenaeas consort,
Then welcome love, if love in thee have place,
Receive this touch, as guerdon from my grace.
What that I touched her lips, she likewise mine,
And what I gave to her, she gave to me,
Twice did I touch her beauty all divine,
Nay then (quoth she) one more, I Will have my fee.
A thousand more to give was my desire,
Such store of fuel love cast on true-loues fire.
XXII.
BY this the dreaming Knights began to wake,
The drowsy Iaylor bid them have away,
Forth of his slumbring Cell quick speed they make,
And having left their cabbins find it day.
(Their former sense restored) on me they gazed.
To see me present they were much amazed.
Lordings why gaze and frown you thus, quoth she,
Why disconted? not a word they say,
They cease to frown, since 'twill no better be,
She bids them bring her Courser* they obey.
She being mounted, made her home return,
Erst cold with fear, now freight with joy I burn.
Her shiuered Chariot was anewe repaired,
Against her next days progress as she bad:
What earth on earth to her might be compared,
Who of the choice of earth by Gods was made?
Fair Elanira fairest fair alive,
To match whose fair all other faires did strive.
XXIII.
HEro the fair so called for her beauty,
And yet not fair in Elanira's view,
The Gods themselves did proffer love and duty,
Vowing to change her earth-borne mortal hew.
And frame her all (divine, but yet alas,
She said them nay, she would be as she was.
Hellen was fair, but not so fair as she,
Dido was fair and yet she wanted fair:
The (...) of Jove were fair, for so thought he,
But none of these with her might nere compaire,
Hero, Hellen, Dido, all pale with White,
And when she shone, their glory turned to night,
On this days newborn light, I Page-like tended,
Casting my little lights on that bright Sun,
Oh so mine eyesight suddenly amended,
Receiving comfort from that blessed one.
I could but wink, such was her beauties force,
She lends smiles on me, moved with remorce.
XXIIII.
UUIth pretty pleasant chat we spent the time,
Until the setting of this glorious Sun,
At the fair portall of her rest divine,
The Senses five sweet harmony begun.
To welcome home fair beauty with their sweet,
While other Virgins stoop to grace her feere.
There might I see, and seeing might behold,
Her Princely edifice: whose entering gate
Did seem to all in-goers beaten gold,
Such was the honor that did grace her state.
Entering therein all sorrow was bereauen,
For I supposd her pallaice blessed heaven.
The rich embowings of that mansion,
Were framed of the purest Iuorie,
The pillors gold which they did rest upon,
For the sweet pleasure of her Majesty.
The walls were covered all with silver over,
So rare a pallaice never seen before.
XXV.
Upon the silver sealing of the same,
Were carved fiery beasts of sundry sorts,
That seemed to withstand all such as came,
And to that Princely mansion durst resort.
All things therein so curiously were placed,
As never mortal wight was better graced.
The pauement was of rich and precious stone,
Carved in such sort, as three times blessed he,
Might so be honored as to tread thereon,
To have access unto her Majesty.
Each part thereof did glister where we come,
As if it were the beauty of the Sun.
The Sun said I, alas how often yet mist her,
(Like to a crafty Fox mong'st water fowls,)
Crept through het window and had thought to kissed her,
No no, hie soaring Eagles scorn low stowles.
There is no sun to glad the world but this,
Whom tender plants young youth do long to kiss.
XXVI.
HEr gentle palm my warlike hand did grace,
And to a further room conducted me,
Clasping my yiedling corpse with sweet embrace,
Until she showed me all her treasury.
If words had bred content, then deeds would savor,
Had Mars of scornful Venus won such favor.
Viewing her storehouse I began to wonder,
Within this burnisht caskonet (quoth she)
Are pearls high prized: this other placed under,
Contains such Iems as man did never see.
This Iuorie box with Ruby stones is graced.
Within this other, Diamonds richly placed.
With that she takes me as she did before,
Philochasander worthy Knight she said,
Lo here a chest containing three times more,
Ask what thou will, thou shall not be denayd.
All this is mine nay thine, and so much more*
If thou will help my woes, take all my store.
XXVII.
ALas my love said I what bitter woe,
Presumed to house within thy sacred breast?
The heavens will sure be venged on thy so,
And nere permit that hellish soul to rest.
Phoebus will frown and never lend him light,
But suffer him to pine in obscure night.
Jove will send down swift Mercury from heaven,
And make a transformation of his hew:
The senses five will him of sense bereauen,
And bind him captive to the pyning crew:
That wanting ears and eyes, to hear and see,
May pining live, and die in misery.
Jove's Ganimed that sweet and dainty boy,
Whose flowing Nectar cup impleat with sweet,
Shall like false Mynos with that traitor play,
And change Ambrosia to poison meet.
Forcing him drink a full carouse to death,
Who soon shall pledge him with his loss of breath.
XXVIII.
IF heaven refuse to do this blessed deed,
I will in person down to night black hell,
And crave of fair Proserpina his meed:
That still he may be plagued with furies fell.
She is a woman therefore will be won,
If she consent, soon shall revenge be done.
I Will bring with me from Hell to torture him,
The hateful monster hag Tysiphone,
Upon whose ugly loathsome carrion skin:
Feed hissing Snakes the Impes of cruelty.
That they may dangling hang upon his hair.
That (frighted with the hissing) may despair.
If she deny to aid my Loves distress,
I Will to the Sea, and there I will complain,
To lovely Thetes she is not pitiless,
That if the founder of thy woes remain,
Upon her silver waves, rough seas shall rise,
And on his shipwrackt soul shall tyrannize.
XXIX.
I Will Likewise to the Mother Earth deplore,
And all my hearts deep wounds to her make known,
That if the Traitor raunge upon the shore,
Her cruelty upon him shall be shown.
Heaven, Earth, Sea, Hell, I Will woo the^ with the Sun,
To make him taste of woe, that woe begun.
Say Elanira, speak my love divine,
Sweet soul (said I) why stand'st thou thus amazed,
Heart, Life, and Soul, and all I have is thine,
Like one affrighted still on me she gazed.
Until, as forth of trance she was removed,
Thus she began and told me that she loved.
Kind Knight, Lord all admired, my dearest friend,
Bewties Champion, the Prince of Chivalry,
Thy forward mind, and valor I commend,
Ne make I doubt of thy true loyalty.
Then in a word the founder of my woe,
Is a proud Britain Dame Silla my foe.
XXX.
THis Dame (quoth she) a neighbring Castle by
Does keep, whose fair indeed I must confess,
Is too too fair graced with a wanton eye,
Whose beauty then my fair is nothing less,
Were she but dead, then should I never moan,
For with her death my heavy woes were done.
Pleases my love? nay pree thee stay (quoth she)
I know thou't say, thou will perform the deed,
But be advised, be slow in cruelty,
I wish her dead, yet would not have her bleed,
May not this act some other way be done,
And force no blood: said I, let me alone.
But all this while the other loue-sicke Lords,
Were banqueting to pass the weary time,
Love to my love, and me no cates affords,
Save precious Nectar from pure love divine.
With that she wild me to a window come,
To show me where this murder must be done.
XXXI.
TAking my humble leave as lovers use,
I bad farewell, the like she did return.
I wished her dread no ill, ne to refuse,
To oil those out-worne Lamps that could not burn.
For want of her sweet comfort blessed sun,
Until the scene of this first act were done.
She to the Knights, I to this Dame did go,
With good intent, and not as Homicides,
With thirsty hands for blood, ne like a foe,
That for a pray himself in ambush hides.
Though love enforced me grant what she desired,
My heart denied to act what she required.
When to the Portall of this stately Tower,
I did approach, (amazed at the sight)
I stood admiring, deaming it some bower,
Or Summer mansion house of sweet delight.
Or else the residence of some demi-god,
Or some rich Court where love made his abode.
XXXII.
A Valiant man at arms, a warlike knight,
Clad in rich Armor of pure beaten gould,
Stands to encounter with each wandering wight,
Of courage fierce, to Combat wondrous bold,
(Dismounted of my Steed) I began salute him;
And as a foreign Knight, thus began to greet him.
Courteous Lord, if thou be courteous,
To such as proffer naught but courtesy,
Grant me access unto the virtuous,
And all admired Queen of Chastity.
Thy Lady and Mistres so she seems to be,
Whose beauty thou maintain'st by Chiualtie.
If by entreaty I may be so happy,
As to obtain the grant of my desire,
Freely to have access unto the Lady,
Whose grace and virtues all the world admires.
What, do thou frown before my tale be ended?
Then do thy worst, Iscorne to be befriended.
XXXIII.
SParks let to burn, break into fiery flames,
Flames not put out, consume what ere they tuch,
Tuch where it will, the fire nothing frames,
But burns and spoils all, were it twice as much.
My sword the fire, the spoil his heart blood is,
Which I enforced the cold base earth to kiss.
Down down he fell, my force enforced him down,
Down to the low laid bowels of the dust,
Dust to the dust I threw, with dust did frown.
And frowning spoke his last, die die I must:
Must is for a Queen, therefore meet for me,
For whose sweet sake I framed this Tragedy.
Leaving the liueles body on the ground,
Clad with the goulden breast plate of my foe,
Secure I entered in whereas I found,
Fair Silla dancing with a hundredth more.
Well quallified Virgins all in white,
Whose glorious splendour made the rome more light.
XXXIIII.
Dark grew the place at my first gazing on them,
Dark as the gloomy day or sable night,
No sooner was I in, and looked upon them,
But Silla fled amazed at the sight:
The day grows dark when as it wants the Sun,
(The Princes fled) the Ladies sport was done.
I seeing this fair Lady fly me fro,
As fearful Dooes from hunters fierce pursuit
Who ouer-toyled can no further go,
But in some brake lie close as dead and mute.
So did I chase this pretty Do so fur,
That (being faint) fell down and could not stur.
Bout whom her Virgins framed a pretty fort,
Linking their Iuorie fingers one in one,
As did Diana's Nymphs in self same sort,
Lamenting her mishap with mickle moan.
Silla amazing star'd me in the face,
Admiring much how I came to that place.
XXXV.
THe yiedling chained fort I brake in sunder,
And clasping Silla in my gentle arms,
I took her up as forth a drowsy slumber,
Vowing to shield her from ensuing harms.
Fear not (said I) sweet Lady fear no harms,
Thy guard my sword shall be, thy bed my arms.
Hereat dead Silla began revive again,
Recovering former sense these words she said,
Heavens warrior, Hell conqueror, Earthes captain,
A thousand welcomes to a silly maid.
More then a man thou art, less cannot be;
Thy valiant looks fore-showes great Chivalry.
Were thou not hardy, thou had nere come here*
But tell me gentle Knight, how scap'st thou death?
The Lord that kept me from thy sight sweet dear,
By dint of sword I sword his vital breath.
Dead lie his corpse in place where he was slain,
Nere on my life will he revive again.
XXXVI.
IF then (quoth she) my guerdon thou do deem of,
Supply that place of honor, and my love:
Which small preferment if my Lord esteem of,
My firm vowed favor never shall remove.
Serve me but daily, I am thine for ever,
What day forbids, at night we will do together.
I list not ask, ne do I care to know,
The cause that moved thee to adventure life,
Unless for favor: tell me is it so,
If so? I yield, to banish further strife.
Why do I thus with words beguile the time,
And make not use of him, that is wholly mine?
Come, come my love, my hand would feign be doing,
Meet me half way* and then we be united,
The fort is won, thou need'st no other woing,
Give me thy heart it shall be well requited.
Heart, hand and all what ere I have is thine,
Yield thou as much, and be thou likewise mine.
XXXVII.
UUHy stand thou amazed worthy Knight,
Can thou not love, or do thou scorn to love?
Thou see my pallaice fraighted with delight,
Whose endless pleasures never shall remove.
Oh can thou see a Lady weep, that loves thee,
And cannot pity to some pity move thee?
Be but my love, and from Elysium,
I Will charm sweet Orphey for our more delight,
Who can enforce the beasts to dance that is dum,
And likewise hold the fleeting birds from flight,
Who stays swift rivers with his melody,
And cause the trees pursue his harmony.
Nay more I will to Paphos take my way,
Where sacred beauty has her residence,
And charm her senses that sweet music play,
And force them wait upon thy excellence,
What can thou wish, that shall not be effected?
But yet I see my love is quite rejected.
XXXVIII.
I that gave hearing to her wanton words,
When all her idle chat was well concluded:
My sad reply no comfort sweet affords,
It Is folly, with kind words to be delded;
I naught do sing but death and misery,
Fair Elanira wills, and you must die.
Oh short lived joy (quoth she) and (...) be,
That I am thus betrayed of my foe:
O welcome death, strike, strike, I pardon thee,
And since I needs must die, let it be so.
I never wronged her sacred deity,
That she should seek my woeful tragedy.
My weeping eyes fraighted with liquid tears*
To hear my silver swan sing so by rote,
Oh how her lamentation duld mine ears,
How my poor heart in pities sea did flote.
To hear her young, (poor Virgins) wail and weep,
How their discording plaints, no mean could keep.
XXXIX.
SIlla that prostrate lay at mercies feet,
I did vpheaue, and took her by the hand,
Whom, (after her sad passions) thus did greet,
Be ruled by me, (quoth she) at your command.
Though contrary to kind; yet do but this,
And on mine honor it will prove thy bliss.
To life, or death, do what you will (quoth she)
I condescend and long to hear my doom,
Then thus said I, you must transformed be,
And from a Lady, a worthy Knight become.
If this be all to further your desire,
I will forthwith provide me such attire.
Clad like two worthy Knights, we both together,
March to the pallaice of my Lady love:
Next day with early Tytan we came thither,
Approaching nigh, descending from above.
A lofty Tower, my love cast down such beams,
As not from Phoebus throne more bright rays streams.
XL.
I gazing on my love, the Sun that shone,
Casting sweet comfort on the low laid ground,
From of the top of loves sweet mansion,
Received from love a three times deeper wound.
Which love perceauing to recure the same,
Descended from above and down she came.
First we embrace, and then to kissing fall,
From kisses to imbracements turn agaie,
Then began I tell a fained tragic tale,
How Silla and her Virgins all were slain.
She ravished seemed to hear that tale of woe,
(Sylla by standing) and the tale not so.
Not Silla then but Florus I did name her,
Whom I presented to fair Elanire,
How pale the Lady looked but could I blame her,
Being a Princess in a Knights attire.
Short tale to make, so much her friend I proved,
That in the Court she was entirely loved.
XLI.
THree souls in one, in one close senceles Chamber,
Silla, my self and fairest Elanire,
Whose glittering hair shone like the chased amber,
Of force to force immortal eyes admire.
Within that closet close which we were in,
A false discourse of murder I begin.
Fair glory of honor beauteous Elanire,
Since for your love I did adventure life,
Vowing by holy oath nere to retire:
Until death ceased the instrument of strife,
Thy love sweet love's retourn'd with victory,
Then grant me guerdon for her tragedy.
Thy honors prize, (quoth she) shall be my soul,
My endless love, my store and all that is mine,
No Knight within my Court shall thee control,
No mortal Prince shall check thee all divine,
Divine thou art because thou art my love,
Self of my self, descended from above.
XLII.
AS many weary steps, as love has gone,
So many kind imbracements will I give thee:
Thy sword shrill echoes, ten kisses sweet for one,
For one blow single, gentle love believe me:
Promise is debt and debt shall be repayde,
Receive thy dew to kiss be not affrayde.
Art thou ashamed, belike this knight in place,
(Speaking by Silla) hinders thy intent,
Tush man for love it is lawful to embrace:
To kiss and wanton where true love is meant.
If kisses and imbracements will not serve thee,
We le find more dainty cates, I will not slain thee.
As she did descant on these wanton theames,
Terrors alarums sounded in our ears,
Whereat we 'mazed, as a soul that dreams,
Frighted in sleep with thousand sundry fears.
And as I thought a like reply to frame,
An hundred Knights into the chamber came.
XLIII.
THe rumor which good truth did verify,
Was, that a multitude of Quondam Lovers,
Came for reueuge for Silla's tragedy:
Whose warlike troops the grasse-greene medowe couers.
Short tale to make Silla against Silla fought,
Philochasanders policy so wrought.
A greater warrior Britain never bred,
Before the battles joined, unto the field,
Fair Elarina's troops by him were led,
The skirmish done, his enemies began yield.
Some fled, some fearful dyed, some others slain,
Which honor unto Silla did pertain.
Silla supposed Florus, to whom the Knight,
Philochasander Prince of Chivalry,
Did willing yield the honor of the fight,
And made her famous in the Victory.
(All things concluded, they two worn lovers,)
Philochasander Silla then discouers.
XLIIII.
GReat admiration bred this accident,
The virtuous love of Silla to her foe,
That sought her death, yet ever permanent,
To honor her, that sought her overthrow.
When Elanira on good Silla gazed,
Oh how the blushing Lady was amazed.
How many Dames affords this wilful age?
How many Silla's is there to be found?
How many women can revenge assuage
And bury mortal anger under ground?
As Silla did, for which as erst before,
Fair Elanira did her joys restore.
Philochasander, where is such another,
That can endure the sorrow he has borne?
What man is he, to aid his dearest brother,
Will were loves weary yoke, as he has worn?
Do good to all, though you be tyrannized,
That boue the Sphere, your souls be cannoniz'd.
Omne simile non est Idem.

