THE COPY OF TWO LETTERS SENT FROM SPAIN: CONTAINING The Kings Censure for the
rooting out of Vices, Abuses, and all sorts of Briberies and corruptions in his
Kingdoms.

F K
PAX OPVLENTIAM. SAPENTIA PACEM. printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by F.K. for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Fleetstreete, at the golden Bucke, near Serieants Inn. 1621.

The Copy of the first Letter.
COnsidering the great Obligation that lies upon me, in that God has put upon
my shoulders the administration and government of so many Kingdoms and
Dominions, with the name and style of Catholic King; whereunto appertains an
ardent zeal and desire of the public good: And that the things which augment
these Obligations, are the examples of Christian piety, which did shine so
gloriously in the King, my Lord and Father (who is now in glory:) as likewise
that notable care and diligence in government, together with the severe
discipline of the King my Father, and my Grandfather: I am resolved to settle a
kind of censure for the rooting out of vices, abuses, and all sorts of bribery
and corruption in these my Kingdoms. And to this end, I ordain and command
you, our President, that you firm and order a Junta, or Committee, of these
persons following: of whose virtue and zeal I have a particular trust and
confidence.

1. Maestro Fray Antonio de Soto Mayor, my Confessor. 2. Don Francisco de
Contreras, of my Council. 3. Don Pedro Porto Carrero, Conde of Medelin, of all
other the ancientest, Mayor-domo, or Chamberlain of my Lord the King. 4. Don
Francisco de Riuera, Marquess of Malpica, a Gentleman of the Chamber of my
Father and Grandfather. 5. Don Diego de Corral, of my Council. 6. Don
Francisco de Seiada, of my Council. 7. Father Hieronymo de Florentia, my
Preacher, or Chaplain, and Confessor of the most Illustrious Infanta's my
brethren. 8. Friar Juan de Peralta, Prior of Saint Lorenzo, and Lord Elect of
Tuy. 9. Doctor Aluaro de Villegas, Governor of the Arch-bishopricke of Toledo.
10. And for Secretary, Pedro de Contreras.
And this Iunta or meeting, is to be made in your presence, when your great
employments shall not hinder you; and your Sessions shall be every Sunday, for
so holy a day ought not to be a hinderance to so holy a work and Christian
action. And if you shall think it fit, you may appoint some other day in the
week: And the first Session shall be the first Thursday after Easter: And you
shall give entrance to this work with a Benediction or thanksgiving to God,
desiring him (by the intercession of his blessed Mother) to indue me with his
grace, and to give supply to my tender years, that I may hit the mark aright,
and govern my self according to his holy Law, and to the general benefit,
and public good of all my Kingdoms and Dominions. And that this beginning,
being given to so divine a Service, may the better proceed in ordering the
business of State, of War, of my Treasury, which requires such a deal of
care and vigilance.

As for any instructions to be given to this Junta, or Session of yours, it
seems to me that it cannot be committed to any better then the Committee it
self: And therefore your first Session shall be to this effect:

To frame your Instructions in the best manner you can devise, and to send the
same unto me, that I may peruse them, and that I may send you them back again.

Signed with my hand for your second Session. Yo el Rey.

The Copy of the second Letter.
SInce I wrote by the last Post, another History may be made of the changes
and alterations of this Court: From the late Kings Confessor they have taken
all his Offices, and quitted him of his rent, which was a good revenue,
amounting to more then 30000. Ducats: Being, besides, commanded to leave the
Court, and to retire himself to a Monastery of his own Order, some 20.
leagues distant from the Court. As soon as he was gone out of Madrid, they
seized upon all that he had; And iourneying upon the way, there were certain
Officers set of purpose to register what he carried with him, and to strip him
of all save his apparel and what was needful for his journey. The selfsame
day they banished the Duke of Vzeda, and laid hands on his Secretary, and
likewise quitted all his servants and officers from the Palace, which had been
placed there by the Duke of Lerma.

Moreover, his Majesty published a Decree or Schedule, giving commission to
Don Fernando Carillo, and other Judges, for examining of all those Mercedes or
Favors, which the deceased King had conferred on the Duke of Lerma, his sons
and servants, to see if there were just cause, and reason sufficient for the
bestowing the said favors, and in case that they should not find it to be so,
then to proceed according to Justice.

Touching the business of the Duke of Ossuna, there is no good blood in it, it
is all very foul; for they have laid to his charge the vildest and most
enormous things that ever were heard of, and they have clapped him up in prison,
with a very strong guard upon him, and his business (as all the rest of the
like nature) is to be weighed in the balance of Justice: for the King has a
purpose to repair the reputation of this Monarchy, which was ready to run to
ruin, for want of executing Justice (which is the prop of estates.) Calderon
had been once more put to the torment, if he had not freely confessed all,
which they were willing to work out of him; He himself wrote his own
confession, containing seven sheets of paper. It is thought, ere it be long,
that they will make a riddance of all those that were the Dukes followers, and
more particularly, of those that were his household servants (eodem pane and
aqua viuentes) that had eaten of his bread, and drank of his drink: to so bad
a pass is the promotion of the Duke of Lerma now come, that it is great pity
to see how deiectedly they walk up and down, like men that are trodden under
foot, never to rise again. His Majesty has nominated a Committee, for the
reforming of all the disorders and evil customs of the Court, and once a
week they meet for the ordering of what is requisite in this kind: and that
business is so far advanced, that they are come to a repartition, or
dividing of all the streets in Madrid, between the Alcaldes, who go from
house to house, to know what people lodge therein, and what their business is.

Father Florentia is of this Junta or Committee, and carries a great hand, not
only in this, but in all things else, and the King is well pleased with his
counsel and advice: It is now well known that he is Confessor to the two
Infanta's, Charles and Ferdinand.

The people are generally well contented with the new King, and the spirit and
mettle which he shows, and he leans very much to holy and exemplary
persons, in the conferring of Offices, remoouing those from them which are
otherwise inclined: He has quitted the abuse of the Palace, and of the whole
Court, of rising at twelve at noone, and dining at three; rising himself at
six, and giving audience very early; dining at twelve, and supping at eight.
It is a thing to be wondered at, to see how conversant he is in business, as
likewise to consider the wise and discreet answers that come from him.

On Tuesday last the Kings Funerals were solemnized in the Monastery of S.
Jeronymo, whither he had withdrawn himself since the decease of his Father.
Padre Florentia (as his manner is) made a most excellent Sermon: The Tomb was
wonderful sumptuous, and cost many Ducats, and there were 3000. lights and
torches: At the Mass, there assisted above twenty Bishops, and many other
Grandes were in that solemnity, very worthy and seeming, and too long the
recounting.

THere came now news hither to Madrid, of a very disasterous accident which
happened at Granado, upon Saint James his day last; for they, having deferred
the proclaiming of the new King until then, the more to solemnize it upon
their Patrons Feast day, there was such a number of people gathered together,
that in their Marketplace, a new house, being ouercharged with people (that
came to see the sight) fell down, and killed to the number of 300. persons,
being all, or for the most part, women; and maimed and lamed near as many
more. This we received from an English Gentleman that lives there, that was a
spectator of this lamentable chance.

FINIS.

