ENGLANDS CAESAR.

His Majesty's most Royal Coronation.

Together with the manner of the solemn shows prepared for the honor of his
entry into the City of London.

Eliza. her Coronation in Heaven. And Londons sorrow for her visitation.

By Henry Petowe.

LONDON, Printed by John Windet, for Matthew Law, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Fox in Paul's Church-yarde. 1603.

TO THE CVRTEOVS and wise young Gentlemen united in Love, Master N. H. Master
To. W. Master I. H. Master L. K. Master H. A. and Master Tho. S. Henry Petowe
wishes increase of virtue and prosperous success in all their affairs.
I Have adventured (courteous, virtuous, and wise) with the strong wrastlers of
Olympia, though not to win, yet to work for the Garland, I mean the Laurel
wreath of your gentle favors. The judgment of my labors relyeth on your
several censures, whereof if your opinions relish but one small taste of
content, I presume upon a general liking of others; such is the sufficiency I
conceive of your discrete judgments. Therefore touch and taste, taste and
digest but with such contentment that you may applaud the fruitful operation.
How it will prove I know not, but I hope pleasant in disgesture: For howeuer
the fruits of my toil now relish after the long gathering, I dare protest the
tree from whence they were plucked, came of a Royal stock; make therefore your
several choyces of the best, and if you find some more green then others,
impute it to their want of growth in that they are but young, and not come to
their true perfection, or rather blame my rashness, that make sale of them for
mellow fruit, when indeed they are not ripe. But in hope they will all prove
delicious according to your expectations, I present them in all love to your
kind acceptances, promising as much in affection as any other can perform in
perfection. Therefore look and like of such as you find, and I promise you
(under your favorable encouragements) to employ all my best designs and
studies to your several good likings.

Yours in all that he may, H. P.

Ad Lectorem.
GO princely writ apparelled in love,
The poison of all sorrows to remove:
Enrich thy self and me by thy self riches,
And strive to mount beyond our Poets pitches.
And thou kind Reader, reading this my writ,
Applaud the invention of an infant wit.
Though young it be, it has as good a heart,
To merit well, as those of high desert.
Then blame it not although for Fame it strive,
For after death Fame still remains alive.
Thine in all love, H. P.

The Induction.
Now turn I wandering all my hope again,
And loose them from the prison of despair,
Ceasing my tears that did bedew the plain,
And clearing sighs which did eclipse the air.
My mourning weeds are off, and sigh I may not,
Joy stops my tears, and (Ioying) weep I cannot.
Nor tongue, nor pen, nor wit can truly sing,
His wondrous worth and matchless dignity,
I mean the glory of the English King,
Which wraps my Muse in all felicity.
Oh, were my pen so rich in Poetry,
As to pourtray his royal Majesty.
But since she is not as I would she were,
And since I cannot as I wish I could.
No marvel though her weakness do forbear,
To sing that Royal song which all pens should.
Yet what she can she will for love compile,
Not seeking glory for a stately style.
Go joyful truce-men in your virgin weeds,
Under a Royal Patron I have past you,
Soake up the tears of every heart that bleeds,
And on the wings of Fame hence quickly have you.
And from the silver main of Calmy Thames,
Sound forth the worth of our Heroicke James.
Into the ears of drooping London thunder,
The King of peace and plenty sallies by:
Bid her rejoice in him our English wonder,
Who mournes to see her in extremity.
He mournes for her even at his Coronation,
It Will greiue her soul to taste his Royal passion.
Yet London thou art happy by his tears,
That weeps for thee, whom all the world else fears.
HIS MAJESTY'S MOST Royal Coronation.
WIthin the Table of AEternitie,
In leaves outwaring Brass shall Fame write down,
With Quilles of Steel the lasting memory,
Of Englands Caesar, and great Caesar's Crown.
Give place ye silent shadows of black night,
And let the brightest Lamp of Heaven shine,
Vanish thou Time of Dreams, for to delight,
This Ieme must be suruei'd with Angels eyne.
Angels as bright as is the brow of Heaven,
When nere a Clowd hangs lowering in the Sky,
When foggy mists are from the Sphere bereuen,
And Angels beauty Mates with Heavens eye.
Such Sunne-bright Angels with a smiling face,
Must Englands Caesar's Coronation grace.
Mount high my Soul the Harbinger of light,
Plays Iocand Music to the welcome day,
Aurora blushes and the sable night,
Unto the ruddy morning gives fair way.
From forth th'esterne clyme behold the Sun,
Shines on the Turrets of great Caesar's Tower,
And summons him to ware what he has won,
By true succession what brow dares to lowre,
Or contradict the will of mighty Jove,
He Will have it so for Englands future bliss,
Our King is his anointed derest love,
And what we have we farm it but as his.
Then like true leigmen let our voices sing,
Glory to God that he may bless our King.
This is the day, yea this the happy day,
Makes Heaven smile, and Tellus weep for joy,
Even from her dry parch't womb a liquid sea,
Of Crystal water issuing over the bay.
Of the o'r ioyed earth, of my iocand Soul,
Can thou forbear excess, surfeit and die,
My thoughts of joy are far beyond control.
My Spirit in a blisfull ecstasy.
See see the azure firmament is clear,
Through which we may discern as in a glass,
Fair troops of Angels that do guild the Spheres.
Gaze settled eyes the like sight never was.
Rejoice fair England for thy Sovereign pray,
Angels themselves grace this triumphant day.
But stay my Pen, my Muse does gin to slumber,
And slumbring dreams a dream of sacred bliss,
Oh happy vision wake and tell this wonder,
Awake my Soul, my Pen write what it is.
Me thought fair Tryton with his silver Trump,
(As if he progra'st to the Parliament,
Of all the Gods) sounds not a solemn dumpe,
But with a flourish, wraps heaven in content.
Next him the winged Mercury does pace,
Clad in rich robes by Vesta's virgins wrought,
Who on his shoulder bears a Golden mace,
Enchast with glorious Pearl (oh heavenly thought)
What then succeedes, this object after seen?
Delia triumphant which was late our Queen.
On whose right hand attended Ganymed,
Darling to Heaven and the pride of Jove,
By the other hand was she by Cupid led,
Venus fair issue and the God of Love.
Thus paced triumphant Delia to her throne,
The chaste Dyana bearing up her train,
Then followed the Senses one by one,
Touching their silver strings with sweetest streyne.
Next them drad Jove with Juno in his hand,
Apollo next with Pallas arm in arm.
Then Berecynthia with a silver wand,
Mars, Neptune, Vulcan, all the Elizian swarm,
Of Nectar sucking Gods and Goddesses,
Measuring the silver pau'ment of the Skies.
Oh happy sight! But what ensued then,
Delia's Instalment in the throne of Bliss,
Stay busy thoughts. Oh stay my forward Pen.
At which rare triumph the infernal Souls of Dis,
Made stay of torment and did feel no pain,
Tantalus that time did taste the pleasant fruit,
Which never till that hour he could attain.
The busy murmur of the Dam'de was mute.
Ixions wheel that (ceaselesse) euertournd,
Stayed then in spite of Fate (Oh time of wonder)
The Sulphur flames of hell, which ever burnd.
Were then extinc't what then could Hell keep under.
Under subjection Pluto had no Soul,
So much the powers of Heaven did hell control.
Pore Sysiphus whose toil was endless pain,
When he perceau'd his tumbling stone lie still,
And when those triumphs ceast, to role again*
From top to bottom of that tedious hill.
Then Lamentation drencht in tears of woo,
Yell's forth a horrid cry, why changes Time,
Why do the powers of Heaven deride us so.
Why mount our joys? and at the highest decline.
Oh welcome mynet of most sweet delight,
Why left it us so soon, come once again,
Shake hands with us once more in hels dispight.
That we may taste of joy in midst of pain.
No no (unhappy Souls) it cannot be,
Ye now are ever swayed by Destiny.
Delia's in Heaven, there let Eliza stay,
Crowned with the wreath of everlasting bliss.
Descend my Muse tread thou an other way,
See that thy daring quill stray not amiss,
Let thy sweet tunes harp on diuinest song,
Base not at all, but on a treble String,
Warble a high streynd Himne with silver tongue,
To lawd the Coronation of a King.
A King whose virtues make the Muses labor,
Striving which most and best may sing his praise,
Begging no pencion but the worlds kind favor,
For singing James in their celestial lays.
James Englands King defendor of the faith,
Long may he be so, so his England prai'th.
Gaze London gaze, that surfet'st with a longing,
To see thy Sovereigns Coronation day:
Thy people iocond in a dangerous thronging,
Lift up their voices; on their hart-strings play,
Crying Hail C^sar with a shrill toung'd streyne:
Caesar the princely Author of their peace,
Whose very name pierced through the liver vein
Of hot Rebellion, weak'ned her increase,
Of long wished streams of blood: the name of King
Made forward Insurrection start and die.
Oh wholesome North from forth whose womb did spring,
The blessed Sun of our felicity.
Sh ne Sun on us, but when our souls mount hie,
Let thy bright beams guild our posterity.
He comes he comes, see London where he comes,
That claspeth peace and plenty in his arms!
Embrace him kindly, Times glass how quick it runes:
Be thou as quick, and with some heavenly Charms,
Mixed with the milk of prayer, Juice of zeal,
Lie groueling in the dust in the midway:
And let not pass the solace of thy weal,
Before he hear thy harmeles Orphans pray.
Pray London pray, with hands heau'd to the skies,
And let each able Infant, smyling sing,
Hymns from their hearts, for such to heaven flies,
In honor of King JAMES our lawful King.
Hold fast his fore-locke, and make stay of Time,
Till he does hear our hearts how true they chime.
Heaven stand at gaze, ye blessed Angels see,
Look through the Windows of the firmament,
Upon the Phoenix of all Sovereignty:
Bid heavens ELIZA from that continent,
Where she sits crowned in bliss: bid her look down
On princely JAMES her dear succeeding brother:
To see him go tryumphant to his Crown,
Beloved of those that whilome called her mother:
Bid her but look if that her princely will,
Be not performed even to our utmost duty:
In all obedience: our true hearts fulfill
Her dread command: late Earths now Heavens beauty!
She willed us love him, and in love persevere,
And we do vow to love King JAMES for ever.
So long as life in him or breath in us,
So long we vow in sight of God and Heaven:
Oh might our prayers be propitious,
That our dread King may never hence be'reauen!
Then should Belphoebe know her subjects love:
What care they have in trayning up their young:
That to her great Successor they may prove,
Loyal in duty that from virtue sprung.
When she shall see from her celestial Sphere;
And he on earth perceive his subjects zeal,
How in their hearts they do affect him dear,
And he in peace maintain the common weal:
Both Heaven and Earth will then rejoice and sing,
A happy people and a blessed King.
O'pe wide ye Oryent gates of Caesar's tower;
Caesar him self with a most royal train
Must grace your golden leaves, this is the hour,
Fly open then for Caesar's entertayne.
Usher his way, my Muse say that he comes,
At whose vprise Phoebus does stand at gaze,
Thinking the Heavens had ordeyn'd two Suns;
One for the earth, which made Heavens Sun amaze.
Such is the glory of his reflecting gleames,
Composed of sacred metal: made by Jove
That night turns day when as he darts his beams,
Frowns into smyles such is his princely love.
Then London smyle, let no brow dare to frown,
When Royal James rides to his regal Crown.
Thus should the flynty pauements of the street,
Be clad in green (the apparel of the spring)
As if their Joy were young, and therefore sweet:
And being sweet, a present for a King.
The houses Mantled all in Tapestry,
The high Piramides of the churches thunder,
Eyes never saw such glorious royeltie,
The pride of London and the English wonder.
The Synowes of the Cittye Troynouant,
Clad in their richest robes in comely sort,
Whose fair demeanor draws like Adaman,
Spectators hearts, bearing so rich a port.
Thus should they sit rayld in on either side
Of every street twixt whom our King should ride.
Suppose this done, what glory has been seen,
Within the compass of the earth like this:
At Coronation of a King or Queen,
No Marvel he is elected King of bliss.
Room greedy multitude, let the air of heaven
Breath everlasting life into his soul,
To make him all immortal: Jove make even
The years of JAMES with Nestors, and control
The vile pretenses and Inventions
Of Traiterous thoughts: if any slave there be
Repining at his state, and by Inventions
Of privy Treason, seek our misery.
Thou most of might if any such there be,
Confound him in his thought of Treachery.
He shines like Phoebus in the welkins breast,
So may he shine for ever on this I Will,
Darting his crimson rays from his bright crest,
And from his gladsome face a gracious smile:
And see that Sun whose bewtie's of such power,
As daz^eth all spectators eyes (oh wonder!)
The eye of day looks pale at this blessed hour,
As if his glory had brought Phoebus under.
Oh blessed Sun, keep thy dyurnall course,
May never be extinct thy radiant light:
But as thy glory glisters on the sourse
Of silver Thamesis (Water-nymphes delight)
So London in her bosom hopes to see,
Tryumphant JAMES in all his royalty.
Oh thou that only can, forbear thy rod
Of fell correction, we will sin no more:
Oh thou eternal Essence, only God;
Now London feels thy scourge, she does deplore
Her mass of sin; oh she does weep at heart:
Thy visitation does in force her weep,
She wants her Sovereign which procures her smart.
His sight would lull her in her joys a sleep:
But thou say no, for by thy mighty hand,
What she and hers intended to perform
In JAMES his honor, thou do countermaund;
And make her know, that she is but a Worm.
A Worm that has her being from thy power,
And must not dare but stoop when Jove does lower.
And now thou frown'st, oh she does quake for fear:
Her hands are daily heaued to the skies,
With impetrations, that thou would forbear.
See how trill tears distill from her moist eyes?
How can a Mother choose, but ever weep,
When as her children loath their native bed?
Her young ones in her bosom will not sleep,
But to a forrayue fosterer are fled.
Yet like a Mother she does daily pray,
Thou would not note such disobedience:
But to be merciful to them that stray,
And in their loss to give her patience.
She weeps for loss of them which now are gone,
Thinking thereby to shun correction.
But who knows not thy power is every where?
In City, Country, both on Land and Sea?
Then do we think thou can not touch us there?
Yes yes, it is too apparent every day.
But stay great glory of aeternitie,
We do confess thy might almighty force,
Be merciful to us in misery,
And for thy dear anointed, take remorce.
Smooth thy deep furrowed front, shriu'led with ire:
Open thine ears unto our sad complaints:
Let us at last rejoice in our desire,
And help weak London that now helples faints.
For while thou frown'st, alas she fears to die:
And but to thee she knows not where to fly.
Thou made the sore; but who can give the cure?
Thou gave the blow, but who can salve the wound?
Thou prick'st the heart, but who can help procure?
Thou made the bruise, but who can make it sound?
Thou all in all can salve, make sound, and cure
The sore, the blow, the wound, yea more then this,
Thy ministering is present help, it is sure:
And he that prays to thee, prays not amiss.
Deigne then dread Lord from thy high throne of grace,
Where Angels praise thee with diuinest song,
To look on London with a smyling face,
And break thy rod which she has felt too long.
Then will her friends draw near, and she shall see,
Her long wished Sovereign, in his royalty.
For him she weeps, for JAMES his want she mornes:
Want of his presence, that should guild her streets
For want of him, in passion she burns,
And from her residence all comfort fleetes.
Thousands of treasure has her bounty wasted
In honor of her King to welcome him:
But woe is she, that honor is not tasted,
For royal JAMES on silver Thames does swim.
The Water has that glory, for he glides
Upon the peatly main unto his Crown:
And looks with pity on London as he rydes,
Saying, alas thou should have this renown.
So well he knew that woeful London loved him.
That her distress unto compassion moved him.
And from his royal love thus does he greet her,
Before the glancy Isacles of Winter
By heat of Sun be molten, he will meet her
In all her pomp, till when of joy he will stint her.
Mean time he wills her teach her young to pray
That Heavens almighty may surcease his hand:
For when he hears of such an happy day,
He leglad the Chamber of the Fairy Land.
Then shall her shows, and princely ornaments;
Her famous Pageants (Londons solemn pride)
Be at the full, and surfeit with contents;
Such joy shall mantle her on every side:
Where JAMES shall ride* Conduits shall flow with wine
In honor of his state and happy time.
This is the day that should have famed our City,
But that the hand of God lies heavy on it:
All you that know it, cry alas it is pity,
And pray Iehoua may look down upon it:
Whose joys like shadows took their sudden flight;
Whose weal is fleeting like deluding sleep:
That in an hour mix sorrow with delight,
Her paths to joy, is tedious, long and steep.
Give period all-almightie to her plaint:
Unhappy London, witty in selfe-grieuing;
Let her now joy, let grief no longer taynt
Her tender heart that makes her woe her living.
Let her now smyle, and as she smyleth sing:
Glory to God, and God preserve the King.
FINIS.

