PETRARCHS SEVEN PENITENTIAL PSALMS, PARAPHRASTICALLY TRANSLATED: With other
Philosophical POEMS, and a HYMN to Christ upon the Cross.

Written by GEORGE CHAPMAN.

Arri. Epict. Progressus sum in medium, and pacem
Omnibus hominibus proclamo.
At mihi quod viuo detraxerit inuida turba,
Post obitum duplici foenore reddet honos.
LONDON, Imprinted for MATTHEW SELMAN, dwelling in Fleete-streete near
Chancerie lane. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHILY HONORED, grave, and ingenuous Fauorer of all virtue, Sir
Edw. Phillips Knight, Master of the Rolls, etc.
SIR, though the name of a Poem bears too light and vain a Character in his
forhead, either to answer my most affectionate desire to do you honor, or
deserve your acceptance; yet since the subject and matter is grave and sacred
enough, (how rudely soever I have endeavored to give it grace and elocution,) I
presumed to prefer to your emptiest leisure of reading, this poor
Dedication. In the substance and soul of whose humane and divine object, the
most wise and religious that ever writ to these purposes, I have (for so much
as this little contains) imitated, and celebrated. Good life, and the true
feeling of our humane birth and Being, being the end of it all: and (as I doubt
not your judicial and noble apprehension will confess) the chief end of
whatsoever else, in all authority and principality. Notwithstanding (either
for the slenderness of the volume, or harshnesse of the matter) I have not
dared to submit it (as the rest of my weak labors) to my most gracious and
sacred Patron, the Prince; reserving my thrice humble duty to his Highness,
for some much greater labors, to which it has pleased him to command me. And
thus most truly thankful for all your right free and honorable favors, I
humbly and ever rest

The most unfeigned and constant obseruer of you and yours, Geo. Chapman.

PETRARCHS SEVEN PENITENTIAL PSALMS.
PSALM I. Heu mihi Misero.
1.
O Me wretch, I have enraged
My Redeemer; and engaged
My life, on deaths slow foot presuming:
I have broke his blessed laws,
Turning with accursed cause,
Saving love to wrath consuming.
2.
Truths strait way, my will forsook,
And to wretched bywaies took,
Broad, rough, steep, and full of danger.
Every way, I labor found,
Anguish, and delighte unsound,
To my iourneyes end a stranger.
3.
Rocks past fowls wings, took my fligh^^,
All my days spent; all my nights;
Toils and streights though still repelling.
One or other beast I met,
Shunning that for which I swet;
Wild beasts dens were yet my dwelling.
4.
Pleasure, that all pain subornes
Making beds of ease, on thorns,
Made me found with ruin sleeping.
Rest, in Torments arms I sought,
All good talked, but all ill thought,
Laughed, at what deserved my weeping.
5.
What is now then left to do?
What course can I turn me to?
Danger, such v^icap't toils pitching.
All my youths fair gloss is gone,
Like a shipwreck each way blown^,
Yet his pleasures still bewitching.
6.
I delay my Haven to make;
Nor yet safeties true way take;
On her left hand ever erring:
I a little see my course,
Which in me, the war makes worse,
The Use of that small sight deferring.
7.
Often I have attempted flight,
The Old yoke casting, but his weight
Thou Nature to my bones impliest.
O that once my neck were easde,
Straight it were; were thy power pleased,
O, of all things high, thou highest.
8.
O could I my sin so hate,
I might love thee yet, though late;
But my hope of that is sterued;
Since mine own hands make my chains:
Just, most just, I grant my pains;
Labor wrings me most deserved.
9.
Mad wretch, how dear have I bought
Fetters with mine own hands wrought?
Freely in deaths ambush falling.
I made; and the foe disposde
Nets that never will be losde.
More I strive, the more enthralling:
10.
I looked by, and went secure
In paths slipperie, and impure;
In my self, my sin still flattering.
I thought youths flower still would thrive,
Followed as his storm did drive,
With it, all his hemlockes watering:
11.
Said; what think I of th'extreames
Ere the Mean has spent his beams?
Each Age has his proper ob^ect.
God sees this, and laughs to see.
Pardon soon is go^ My knee
When I will repent, is subject.
12.
Custom then his slave does claim,
Lays on hands, that touch and maime;
Never cour'd, repented never:
Flight is then, as vain, as late;
Faith too weak, to cast out Fate,
Refuge past my reach is ever.
13.
I shall perish then in sin,
If thy aid Lord, makes not in,
Mending what does thus deprave me;
Mind thy word then, Lord, and le^d
Thy work thy hand, crown my end.
From the jaws of Satan save me.
All glory to the Father be,
And to the Son as great as he:
With the coequall sacred Spirit;
Who all beginnings were before,
Are, and shall be evermore.
Glory, all glory to their merit.
PSALM II. Inuocabo quem offendi.
1.
I Will inuoke whom I inflamed;
Nor will approach, his fiery throne in fear;
I will recall, nor be ashamed
Whom I cast off, and pierce again his ear.
Hope, quite even lost, I will restore,
And dare again to look on heaven;
The more I fall, inuoke the more;
Prayre once will speed, where ^are is ever given.
2.
In heaven my dear Redeemer dwells,
His ear yet let down to our lowest sounds;
His hand can reach the deepest hels;
His hand holds balmes for all our oldest wounds.
I, in my self, do often die;
But in him, I as often revive;
My health shines ever in his eye;
That heales in hell, and keeps even death alive.
3.
Fear all, that would put fear on me;
My sin most great is, but much more his grace:
Though ill for worse still alterd be:
And I in me, my eagrest foe embrace:
Yet Truth in this has ever stood,
The blackest spots my sins let fall,
One drop of his most precious blood;
Can cleanse and turn, to purest luorie all.
4.
Strike, Lord, and break the rocks that grow
In these red seas of thy offense in me:
And cleansing fountains thence shall flow,
Though of the hardest Adamant they be.
As clear as silver, seas shall rore,
Descending to that noisome sink,
Where every hour hels horride Bore
Lies plunged, and drowned, and does his vomits drink.
5.
Race, Lord, my sins inueterate skarres,
And take thy new-built Mansion up in me:
Though power fails, see my wills sharp wars,
And let me please even while I anger thee.
Let the remembrance of my sin,
With sighs all night ascend thine ear:
And when the morning light breaks in,
Let health be seen, and all my skies be clear.
6.
Thus though I temper joys with cares.
Yet keep thy mercies constant, as my crimes:
I Will cherish, with my faith, my prayres,
And look still sighing up for better times.
My self I evermore will fear,
But thee, my rest, my hope, still keep:
Thy darkest clouds, thy lightnings clear,
Thy thunders rock me, that break others sleep.
7.
My purgatory O Lord make
My bridal chamber, wedded to thy will:
And let my couch still witness take,
In tears still steep't, that I adore thee still.
My body I Will make pay thee pains,
Hell jaws shall never need to open.
Though all loves fail, thine ever raign^^,
Thou art my refuge, last, and only hope.
All glory to the Father, etc.
PSALM III. Miserere Domine.
1.
STay now, O Lord, my bleeding woes,
The vein grows low and dry*
O now enough, and too much flows,
My sin is swollen too hie.
2.
What rests for the abhorred event?
Time wastes, but not my woe:
Woes me, poor man, my life is spent
In asking what to do.
3.
Pale Death stands fixed before mine eyes,
My grave gaspes, and my knell
Rings out in my cold ears the cries
and gnashed teerh of hell.
4.
How long shall this day mock my hope,
With what the next will be?
When shall I once begin to open,
My locked up way to thee?
5.
Ease Lord, my still-increasing smart,
Salve not, but cure my wounds:
Direct the counsels of my heart,
And give my labors bounds.
6.
As in me, thou have skill infusd,
So will, and action breath:
Lest chidden for thy gifts abusd,
I weep and pine to death.
7.
See, bound beneath the foe I lie,
Rapt to his blasted shore:
O claim thy right, nor let me die,
Let him insult no more.
8.
Tell all the ransom I must give,
Out of my hourly pains:
See how from all the world I live,
To give grief all the raines.
9.
What is behind, in this life ask,
And in these members sums:
Before the never ending task,
And bed^id beggerie comes.
10.
Show me thy way, ere thy chief light
Down to the Ocean dives:
O now it is evening, and the night,
Is chiefly friend to thieves.
11.
Compel me, if thy Call shall fail,
To make thy straight way, mine:
In any skorn'd state let me wayle,
So my poor soul be thine.
All glory to the Father be,
And to the Son as great as he,
With the coequall sacred Spirit:
Who all beginning^ were before,
Are, and shall be evermore.
Glory, all glory to their merit.
PSALM IIII. Recordari libet.
1.
ONce let me serve, Lord, my desire,
Thy gifts to me recounting, and their prise,
That shame may set my cheeks on fire,
And just confusion tear in tears mine eyes.
Since quite forgetting what I am,
Adorned so Godlike with thy grace,
I yet neglect to praise thy name,
And make thy image in me, poor and base.
2.
Thou have created, even for me,
The stars, all heaven, and all the turns of time;
For of what use are these to thee,
Though every one distinguished by his clime?
Thou Sun and Moon, thou Nights and Days,
Thou Light and Darkness have disposd:
Wrapped earth in waters nimble ways,
Her vales, hills, plains, with founts, floods, seas enclosd
3.
Her rich womb thou have fruitful made,
With choice of seeds, that all ways varied are:
And every way, our eyes invade
With forms and graces, in being common, rare.
In sweet green herbs thou cloth'st her fields,
Distinguishest her hills with flowers.
Her woods thou make her meadows shields,
Adorned with branches, leaves, and odorous bowres.
4.
The weary thou have rest prepared,
The hot refreshest with cool shades of trees,
Which streams melodious enterlar'd,
For sweet retreats, that none but thy eye sees:
The thirsty, thou give silver springs;
The hungry, berries of all kinds;
Herbs wholesome, and a world of things,
To nurse our bodies, and inform our mind^.
5.
Now let me cast mine eye, and see
With what choice creatures, strangely formed and fair,
All seas, and lands, are filled by thee:
And all the round spread tracts of yielding air.
Whose names or numbers who can reach?
With all earths power, yet in thy span:
All which, thy boundless bounties preach,
All laid, O glory! at the foot of man.
6.
Whose body, past all creatures shines,
Such wondrous orders of his parts thou make,
Whose countenance, state, and love combines:
In him unmoved, when all the world thou shak'st.
Whose soul thou give power, even of thee,
Ordaining it to leave the earth,
All heaven, in her discourse to see,
And note how great a womb, went to her birth.
7.
Vnnumberd arts thou add'st in him,
To make his life more queint and more exact:
His eye, eternesse cannot dim.
Whose state he mounts to, with a mind infract:
Thou show him all the milke-white way,
Op'st all thy Tabernacles do^es.
Learn'st how to praise thee how to pray,
To shun, and choose, what likes and what abhorres.
8.
To keep him in which hallowed path,
As his companions, and perpetual guides,
Prayre thou ordainst, thy word and faith,
And love, that all his soul offenses hides.
And to each step his foot^ shall take,
Thy covenants stand like walls of brass,
Which, from thy watch tower, good to make,
Thou add'st thine eye for his securer pass.
9.
All this dear (Lord) I apprehend,
Thy Spirit even partially inspiring me:
Which to consort me to my end,
With endless thanks, I Will strew my way to thee.
Confessing falling, thou have staid:
Confirmed me fainting, prostrate raisd,
With comforts rapt me, quite dismayed,
And dead, have quickn'd me, to see thee praisd.
All glory to the Father b^,
And to the Son, etc.
PSALM V. Noctes mea in moerore transeunt.
1.
YEt, Lord, unquiet sin is stirring,
My long nights, longer grow, like evening shades:
In which woe lost, is all ways erring:
And varied terror every step inuades.
Ways made in tears, shut as they open,
My lodestarre I can no way see:
Lame is my faith, blind love and hope,
And, Lord, it is passing ill with me.
2.
My sleep, like glass, in dreams is broken,
No quiet yielding, but affright and care,
Signs that my poor life is forspoken:
Lord, cou^be the ill, and good in place prepare.
No more delay my spent desire,
It Is now full time, for thee to hear:
Thy love has set my soul on fire,
My heart quite broke twixt hope and fear.
3.
No outward light, my life has graced,
My mind has ever been my only Sun:
And that so far has envy chaced,
That all in clouds her hated head is run.
And while she hides, immortal cares
Consume the soul, that sense inspires:
Since outward she sets eyes and ears,
And other joys spend her desires.
4.
She musters both without and in me,
Troubles, and tumults: she is my household thief,
Opes all my doors to lust, and envy,
And all my persecutors lends relief.
Bind her, Lord, and my true soul free,
Prefer the gift thy hand has given:
Thy image in her, crown in me,
And make us here free, as in heaven.
All glory to the Father be,
And to the Son, etc.
PSALM VI. Circumuallarunt me inimici.
1.
MY foes have girt me in with arms,
And earthquakes tossed up all my joints,
No flesh can answer their alarmes,
Each spear they manage has so many points.
2.
Death, armed in all his horrors, leads:
Whom more I charge, the less he yields:
Affections, with an hundred heads,
Conspire with them, and turn on me their shields
3.
Nor look I yet, Lord, to the East,
Nor hope for help, where I am willed:
Nor, as I ought, have armed my breast;
But rust in sloth, and naked come to field.
4.
And therefore has the host of stars
Now left me, that before I led:
Armed Angels took my pay in wa^res,
From whose height fallen, all leave me here for dead.
5.
In falling, I discerned how slight,
My footing was on those blessed towers.
I looked to earth, and her base height,
And so lost heaven, and all his aidfull powers.
6.
Now, broke on earth, my body lies,
Where thieves insult on my sad fall:
Spoil me of many a dainty prise,
That far I fetched, to enrich my soul withal.
7.
Nor cease they, but deforme me too,
With wounds that make me all engor'd:
And in the desert, leave me so,
Half dead, all naked, and of all abhorred.
8.
My head, and bosom, they transfixt,
But in my torn affections raged:
Wounds there, with blood, and matter mixed,
Corrupt and leave my very soul engaged.
9.
There, Lord, my life does most misgiue,
There quickly thy white hand bestow:
Thou live, and in thee I may live.
Thy fount of life does ever ouerflow.
10.
All this from heaven, thy eyes explore,
Yet silent sitst, and sufferst all:
Since all I well deserve, and more;
And must confess me, wilful in my fall:
11.
And hence it is, that thou letst me bleed,
Make all men shun, and skorne my life:
That all my works such envy breed,
And my disgrace gives food to all men's strife.
12.
But this, since Goodness often does cause,
And it is Goods grace to hear his ill:
Since it is a chief point in his laws,
No thought, without our power, to make our will.
13.
Still let the green seas of their gall,
Against this rock with rage be borne:
And from their height, still let me fall:
Them, stand and laugh, and me lie still and scorn.
14.
But, Lord, my fall from thee, o raise,
And give my fainting life thy breath:
Sound keep me ever in thy ways,
Thou mighty art, and setst down laws to death.
15.
Drive thou from this my ruins rape,
These thieves, that make thy Phane their den:
And let my innocence escape
The cunning malice of ungodly men.
All glory to the Father be,
And to the Son as great as he:
With the coequall sacred Spirit:
Who all beginnings were before,
Are, and shall be evermore.
Glory, all glory to their merit.
PSALM VII. Cogitabam stare.
1.
WHile I was fallen, I thought to rise,
And stand, presuming on my thies:
But thighs, and knees, were too much broken.
My hair stood up to see such bane
Depresse presumption so profane:
I tremble but to hear it spoken.
2.
Yet in my strength, my hope was such,
Since I conceived, thou vow'dst as much:
I feigned dreams, and reioyc't to feign them:
But weighing awake, thy vows profound,
Their depth, my lead came short to sound:
And now, aye me, my tears contain them.
3.
For calmes, I into storms did stere,
And looked through clouds, to see things clear,
Thy ways showed crook't, like spears in water;
When mine went trauerse, and no Snake
Could wind with that course, I did take:
No Courtier could so grossly flatter.
4.
But which way I soever bend,
Thou meet'st me ever in the end:
Thy finger strikes my joints with terrors;
Yet no more strikes, then points the way:
Which, weighing weeping, straight I stay,
And with my tears cleanse feet and errors.
5.
But of my self, when I believe
To make my steps, thy ways atchieue,
I turn head, and am treading mazes*
I feel sins ambush; and am ^ext
To be in error so perplexed,
Nor yet can find rests holy places.
6.
I loath my self, and all my deeds,
Like Rubarbe taste, or Colche in weed^:
I fly them, with their throws upon me.
In each new purpose, customs old,
So check it, that the stone I rold
Never so often, again falls on me.
7.
No step in man's trust should be trod,
Unless in man's, as his in God:
Of which trust, make good life the founder:
Without which, trust no form, nor art;
Faiths loadstarre is a guiltless heart;
Good life is truths most learned expounder.
8.
With which, Lord, ever rule my skill;
In which, as I join power with will,
So let me trust, my truth in learning,
To such minds, thou all truth setst open
The rest are rapt with storms past hopes
The less, for more deep arts discerning.
9.
Bless, Lord, who thus their arts employ,
Their sure truth, celebrate with joy,
And tear the maskes from others faces;
That make thy Name, a cloak for sin;
Learning but terms to iangle in,
And so disgrace thy best of Graces.
10.
Whereof since I have only this,
That learnes me what thy true will is,
Which thou, in comforts still concludest;
My poor Muse still shall sit, and sing,
In that sweet shadow of thy wing,
Which thou to all earths state obtrudest.
11.
As often as I my frail foot move,
From this pure fortress of thy love:
So often let my glad foes deride me.
I know my weakness yet, and fear,
By trial, to build comforts there,
It does so like a ruin hide me.
12.
My worth is all, but shade, I find,
And like a fume, before the wind;
I gasp with sloth, thy ways applying:
Lie tumbling in corrupted blood;
Love only, but can do no good:
Help, Lord, lest I amend not dying.
All glory to the Father be,
And to the Son as great as he,
With the coequall sacred Spirit:
Who all beginnings were before:
Are, and shall be evermore.
Glory, all glory to their merit.
The end of Petrarchs seven Penitential Psalms.
THE I. PSALM more strictly translated.
1.
O Me accursed, since I have set on me
(Incenst so sternely) my so meek Redeemer;
And have been proud in prides supreme degree;
Of his so serious law, a slight esteemer.
2.
I left the narrow right way with my will,
In bywaies broad, and far about transferred:
And every way found toil, and every ill,
Yet still in tracts more rough, and steep I erred.
3.
Where one or other of the brutish heard
My feet encounterd, yet more brute affected:
Even to the dens of savage beasts I erred,
And there my manlesse mansion house erected.
4.
I haunted pleasure still, where sorrow mournd,
My couch of ease, in sharpest brambles making:
I hoped for rest, where restless torment burnd,
In ruins bosom, sleeps securely taking.
5.
Now then, aye me, what rests to be done,
Where shall I turn me, where such dangers tremble?
My youths fair flowers, are altogether gone,
And now a wretched shipwreck I resemble.
6.
That (all the merchandise, and venture lost,)
Swims naked forth, with seas and tempests tossed.
7.
Far from my haven, I roue, touch at no streme
That any course to my salvation tenders:
But ways sinister, ravish me with them:
I see a little; which more grievous renders
8.
My inward conflict; since my charges pass
Upon my self; and my sad soul endanger:
Anger with sin strives; but so huge a mass
Of cruel miseries oppress mine anger,
9.
That it confounds me, nor leaves place for breath.
Often I attempt to fly, and meditation
Contends to shake off my old yoke of death,
But to my bones cleaues the vncur'd vexation.
10.
O that at length, my neck his yoke could clear,
Which would be strait, would thou o highest will it:
O that so angry with my sin I were,
That I could love thee, though thus late fulfill it.
11.
But much I fear it, since my freedom is
So with mine own hands out of heart, and sterued:
And I must yield, my torment just in this,
Sorrow, and labor, wring me most deserved.
12.
Mad wretch, what have I to my self procured?
Mine own hands forged, the chains I have endured.
13.
In deaths black ambush, with my will I fell,
And wheresoever vulgar broad ways train me:
Nets are disposde for me, by him of hell.
When more retired, more narrow paths contain me.
14.
There meet my feet with fitted snares as sure,
I (wretch look downward, and of one side ever,
And every slipperie way I walk secure,
My sins forget their traitrous flatteries never.
15.
I thought the grace of youth could never err,
And followed where his boundles force would drive me,
Said to my self; Why should th'extremes deter,
Before youths season, of the mean deprive me?
16.
Each age is bounded in his proper ends;
God, I know, sees this, but he laughs and sees it:
Pardon, at any time, on prayre attends;
Repentance still weeps when thy wish decrees it.
17.
Then vilest custom challenges his slave,
And lays on hand, that all defense denies me;
And then no place reserved for flight I have:
Subdued I am, and far my refuge flies me.
17.
Die'in my sin I shall, unless my aid
Stoopes from aloft, of which deserts deprive me.
Yet have thou mercy, Lord, help one dismaide,
Thy word retain, and from hell mo^^h retriue me.
All glory to the Father be,
And to the Son as great as he*
With the coequall sacred Spirit;
Who all beginnings were before,
Are, and shall be evermore.
Glory, all glory to their merit.
A HYMN TO OUR Savior on the Cross.
Hail great Redeemer, man, and God, all hail,
Whose fervent agony, tore the temples veil,
Let sacrifices out, dark Prophesies
And miracles: and let in, for all these,
Simplicity of piety, and good life, answerable to such doctrine in men; now
as rare as miracles in other times: and require as much divinity of
supportation.
A simple piety, a naked heart,
And humble spirit, that no less impart,
And prove thy Godhead to us, being as rare,
And in all sacred power, as circulare.
Water and blood mixed, were not swet from thee
With deadlier hardness: more divinity
Of supportation, then through flesh and blood,
Good doctrine is diffusde, and life as good.
O open to me then, (like thy spread arms
That East and West reach) all those misticke charms
That hold us in thy life and discipline:
Thy merits in thy love so thrice divine;
It made thee, being our God, assume our man;
And like our Champion Olympian,
Come to the field against Satan, and our sin:
Wrestle with torments, and the garland win
From death and hell; which cannot crown our brows
As our Saviors brows bled with his crown of thorns.
But blood must follow: thorns mix with thy bows
Of conquering ^aw^ell, fast naild to thy Cross,
Are all the glories we can here engrosse.
Prove then to those, that in vain glories place
Their happiness here: thy hold not by thy grace,
To those whose powers, proudly oppose thy laws,
Oppressing Virtue, giving Vice applause:
They never manage just authority,
But thee in thy dear members crucify.
Thou could have come in glory past them all,
With power to force thy pleasure, and empale
Thy Church with brass, and Adamant, that no swine,
Nor thieves, nor hypocrites, nor fiends Such as are Divines in profession; and
in fact, devils, or Wolves in sheep clothing
divine
Could have broke in, or rooted, or put on
Vestments of Piety, when their hearts had none:
Or rapt to ruin with pretext, to save:
Would Pomp and outward glory, rather outface truth then countenance it.
pomp, and radiance, rather not out brave
Thy naked truth, then cloth, or countnance it
With grace, and such sincerenesse as is fit:
But since true piety wears her pearls within,
And outward paintings only pranke up sin:
Since bodies strengthened, souls go to the wall;
Since God we cannot serve and Beliall.
Therefore thou putst on, earths most abject plight,
Hid'st thee in humblesse, vnderwentst despite,
Mockery, detraction, shame, blows, vilest death.
These, thou, thy Christ taught all his militant soldiers to fight under the
ensigns of Shame and Death.
soldiers taughtst to fight beneath:
Made a commanding President of these,
Perfect, perpetual: bearing all the keys
To holiness, and heaven. To these, such laws
Thou in thy blood writst: that were no more cause
We need no other excitation to our faith in God, and good life, but the
Scriptures, and use of their means prescribed.
T'enflame our loves, and fervent faiths in thee,
Then in them, truths divine simplicity,
Twere full enough; for therein we may well
See thy white finger furrowing blackest hell,
In turning up the errors that our sense
And sensual powers, incur by negligence
Of our eternal truth-exploring soul.
All Churches powers, thy writ word does control;
And, mixed it with the fabulous Alchoran,
A man might boult it out, as flower from branne;
Easily discerning it, a heavenly birth,
Brake it but now out, and but crept on earth.
Yet (as if God lackt man's election,
And shadows were creators of the Sun)
Men must authorize it: antiquities
Must be explored, to spirit, and give it thies,
And (...). In these controversies men make the By the Maine: the Maine the By.
controversies, thick as flies at Spring,
Must be maintained about th'ingenuous meaning;
When no style can express it self so clear,
Nor holds so even, and firm a character.
Those mysteries that are not to be reached,
Still to be strived with, make them more impeacht:
Simile.
And as the Mill fares with an ill picked grist,
When any stone, the stones is got betwist,
Rumbling together, fill the grain with grit;
Offends the ear, sets teeth an edge with it:
Blunts the pict quarrie so, twill grind no more,
Spoils bread, and scants the Millars custom'd store.
So in the Church, when controversy falls,
It marres her music, shakes her batterd walls,
Grates tender consciences, and weakens faith;
The bread of life taints, and makes work for Death;
Darkens truths light, with her perplexed Abysmes,
And dustlike grinds men into sects and schisms.
And what is the cause? the words deficiencie?
In volume, matter, perspicutitie?
Ambition, lust, and damned avarice,
Pervert, and each the sacred word applies
To his profane ends; all to profit given,
Men seek heaven, with using the enemies to it; Money and Avarice.
And pu^snets lay to catch the joys of heaven.
Since truth, and real worth, men seldom sease,
Impostors most, and sleightest learnings please:
And, where the true Church, like the nest should be
Of chaste, and provident Alciones nest described in part, out of Plut. to which
the Church is compared.
Alcione:
(To which is only one straight orifice,
Which is so strictly fitted to her sise,
If the bird be less, the sea will get in; by which means though she may get
in, she could not preserve it.
That no bird bigger then her self, or less,
Can pierce and keep it, or discern th'accesse:
Nor which the sea it self, on which it is made,
Can ever ouerflow, or once invade.
Altars of the Church for her holiest place^ understood.
Now ways so many to her Altars are,
So easy, so profane, and populare:
That torrents charged with weeds, and sin-drownd beasts,
Break in, lode, crack them: sensual joys and feasts
Corrupt their pure fumes: and the slendrest flash
Of lust, or profit, makes a standing plash
Of sin about them, which men will not pass.
Look (Lord) upon them, build them walls of brass,
To keep profane feet off: do not thou
In wounds and anguish ever ouerflow,
And suffer such in ease, and sensuality,
Dare to reject thy rules of humble life:
The minds true peace, and turn their zeales to strife,
For objects earthly, and corporeal.
A trick of humblesse now they practice all,
Confess their no deserts, habilities none:
Profess all frailties, and amend not one:
As if a privilege they meant to claim
In sinning by acknowledging the maime
Sin gave in Adam: Nor the surplussage
Of thy redemption, seem to put in gage
For his transgression: that thy virtuous pains
(Dear Lord) have eat out all their former stains;
That thy most mighty innocence had power
To cleanse their guilts: that the unvalued dowre
Thou made the Church thy spouse, in piety,
And (to endure pains impious) constancy,
Will and alacratie (if they inuoke)
To bear the sweet lode, and the easy yoke
Of thy injunctions, in diffusing these
(In thy perfection) through her faculties:
In every fiuer, suffering to her use,
And perfecting the form thou did infuse
Vbi abundauit delictum, superabunda^it gratia. Romans 5. ver. 20.
In man's creation: made him clear as then
Of all the frailties, since defiling men.
A simile, to life expressing man's estate, before our Sa^iours descension.
And as a runner at th'Olympian games,
With all the luggage he can lay on, frames
His whole powers to y^ race, bags, pockets, greaues
Stuffed full of sand he wears, which when he leaves,
And does his other weighty weeds uncover,
With which half smotherd, he is wrapped all over:
Then seems he light, and fresh as morning air;
Guirds him with silks, swaddles with roulers fair
His lightsome body: and away he scoures
So swift, and light, he scarce treads down the flowrs:
So to our game proposde, of endless joy
(Before thy dear death) when we did employ,
Our tainted powers; we felt them clogd and chained
With sin and bondage, which did rust, and reigned
In our most mortal bodi^^: but when thou
Strip'dst us of these bands, and from foot to brow
Guirt, ^old, and trimd us up in thy deserts:
Free were our feet, and hand^; and spritely hearts
Leapt in our bosoms; and (ascribing still
All to thy merits: both our power and will
To every thought of goodness, wrought by thee;
Our Saviors blood, now and ever, as fresh, and virtuous as in the hour it
was shed for us.
That divine scarlet, in which thou did die
Our cleansd consistens; lasting still in power
T'enable acts in us, as the next hour
To thy most saving, glorious sufferance)
We may make all our manly powers advance
Up to thy Image; and these forms of earth,
Beauties and mockeries, match in beastly birth:
We may despise, with still aspiring spirits
To thy high graces, in thy still fresh merits:
Not ^ouching at this base and spongie mould,
For ^^y springs of lust, or mines of gold.
For else (mild Savior, pardon me to speak)
How did thy foot, the Serpents forhead break?
How has the Nectar of thy virtuous blood,
The sink of Adams forfeit oue^flow'd?
How does it set us free, if we still stand
Our Savior suffered nothing for himself, his own betternesse, or comfort:
but for us and ours.
(For all thy sufferings) bound both foot and hand
Vassals to Satan? Did thou only die,
Thine own divine deserts to glorify,
And show thou could do this? O were not those
Given to our use in power? If we shall lose
By damned relapse, grace to enact that power:
And basely give up our redemptions tower,
Before we try our strengths, built all on thine,
It is false humility to lay necessarily (all our Saviors grace understood)
the victory of our bodies, on our souls.
And with a humblesse, false, and Asinine,
Flattering our senses, lay upon our souls
The burdens of their conquests, and like Moules
Grouell in earth still, being advanced to heaven:
(Cowes that we arre) in herds how are we driven
To Satan's shambles? Wherein stand we for
Thy heavenly image, Hels great Conqueror?
Did thou not offer, to restore our fall
Thy sacrifice, full, once, and one for all?
If we be still down, how then can we rise
Again with thee, and seek crowns in the skies?
But we excuse this; saying, We are but men,
And must err, must fall: what thou did sustain
To free our beastly frailties, never can
With all thy grace, by any power in man
Make good thy Rise to us: O blasphemy
In hypocritical humility!
Man i^ a living soul. Genesis 2.
As we are men, we death and hell control,
Since thou createdst man a living soul:
We do not like men when we sin, (for as we are true and worthy men, we are
Gods images:) but like brutish creatures, slauishly and wilfully conquered with
the powers of flesh.
As every hour we sin, we do like beasts:
Needless, and wilful, murdering in our breasts
Thy saved image, out of which, one calls
Our humane souls, mortal celestials:
When casting off a good life's godlike grace,
We fall from God; and then make good our place
When we return to him: and ^o are said
To live: when life like his true form we lead,
And die (as much as an immortal creature:)
(...). Hier. in Carm. Pythag. Non quod existere de^inat, sed quod vitae
praestantia exciderit.
Not that we utterly can cease to be,
But that we fall from life's best quality.
But we are tossed out of our humane Throne
By pied and Protean opinion;
We vouch thee only, for pretext and fashion,
And are not inward with thy death and passion.
We slauishly renounce the royalty
With which thou crownst us in thy victory:
Spend all our manhood in the fiends defense,
And drown thy right, in beastly negligence.
God never is deceived so, to respect,
His shade in Angels beauties, to neglect
His own most clear and rapting loveliness:
Nor Angels dote so on the species
And grace given to our soul (which is their shade)
That therefore they will let their own forms fade.
And yet our soul (which most deserves our woe,
And that from which our whole mishap does flow)
So softn'd is, and rapt (as with a storm)
With flatteries of our base corporeal form,
(Which is her shadow) that she quite forsakes
Her proper noblesse, and for nothing takes
The beauties that for her love, thou putst on;
In torments rarefied far past the Sun.
Hence came the cruel fate that Orpheus
Sings of Narcissus: who being amorous
Of his shade in the water (which denotes)
Beauty in bodies, that like water flotes)
Despisd himself, his soul, and so let fade,
His substance for a neuer-purchast shade.
Since souls of their use, ignorant are still,
With this vile bodies use, men never fill.
And, as the Suns light, in streams never so fair
Is but a shadow, to his light in air,
His splendour that in air we so admire,
Simile.
Is but a shadow to his beams in fire:
In fire his brightnes^e, but a shadow is
To radiance fired, in that pure breast of his:
So as the subject on which thy grace shines,
Is thick, or clear; to earth or heaven inclines;
So that truths light shows; so thy passion takes;
With which, who inward is, and thy breast makes
Bulwark to his breast, against all the darts
The foe st^l shoots more, more his late blow smarts,
And sea-like raues most, where it is most withstood.
He tastes the strength and virtue of thy blood:
He knows that when flesh is most soothed, and graced,
Admired and magnified, adored, and placed
In height of all the bloods Idolatry,
And fed with all the spirits of Luxury,
One thought of joy, in any soul that knows
Her own true strength, and thereon does repose;
Bringing her bodies organs to attend
Chiefly her powers, to her eternal end;
Makes all things outward; and the sweetest sin,
That rauisheth the beastly flesh within;
All but a fiend, prankt in an Angels plume:
A shade, a fraud, before the wind a fume.
The minds joy far above the bodies, to those few, whom God has inspird with
the souls true use.
Hayle then divine Redeemer, still all ^aile,
All glory, gratitude, and all avail,
Be given thy all deserving agony;
Whose vinegar thou Nectar make in me,
Whose goodness freely all my ill turns good:
Since you being crushed, and straind through flesh and blood:
Each nerve and artire needs must taste of thee.
What odor burned in airs that ^oisome be,
Leaves not his sent there? O then how much more
Must thou, whose sweetness swet eternal odor,
Stick where it breathed: and for who^ thy sweet breath,
Thou freely gave up, to reuine his death?
Let those that shrink then as their conscience lodes,
That fight in Satan's right, and faint in Gods,
Still count them slaves to Satan. I am none:
Thy fight has freed me, thine you make mine own.
Inuocatio.
O then (my sweetest and my only life)
Confirm this comfort, purchased with thy grief,
And my despisde soul of the world, love thou:
No thought to any other joy I vow.
Order these last steps of my abject state,
Strait on the mark a man should level at:
And grant that while I strive to form in me,
Thy sacred image, no adversity
May make me draw one limme, or line amiss:
Let no vile fashion wrest my faculties
From what becomes that Image. Quiet so
My bodies powers, that neither weal nor woe,
May stir one thought up, against thy freest will.
Grant, that in me, my minds waves may be still:
The world for no extreme may use her voice;
Nor Fortune treading reeds, make any noise.
Amen.
Complain not whatsoever Need inuades,
But hea^iest fortunes bear as lightest shades.
(...)
Poems.
VIRGILS EPIGRAM of a good man.
The Sunn^ usurp for Apollo; whose Oracle being ask for such a man, ^ound
only Socrates.
A Good and wise man (such as hardly one
Of millions, could be found out by the Sun)
Is Judge himself, of what stuf^e he is wrought,
And does explore his whole man to a thought.
What ere great men do; what their saucy bawdes;
What vulgar censure barks at, or applauds:
His carriage still is cheerful and secure;
He, in himself, worldlike, full, round, and sure.
Externae nequid labis per laeuia sidat. This verse Ascensius ioynes with the
next before; which is nothing so; the sense being utterly repugnant, as any
impar^^all and judicial conferrer (I suppose) will confirm.
Lest, through his polisht parts, the slendrest stain
Of things without, in him should sit, and reign;
To whatsoever length, the fiery Sun,
Burning in Cancer, does the day light run;
How fair soever Night shall stretch her shades,
When Phoebus gloomie Capricorn inuades;
He studies still; and with the equal beam,
Cogitat, and iusto trutinae se examine pensat* This verse is likewise mis^yned
in the order of Ascenscius, which makes the period to those before.
His balance turns; himself weighs to th'extreme.
Lest any crannie gasp, or angle swell
Through his strict form: and that he may compel
His equal parts to meet in such asphere,
That with a I here needlessly take a little license: for the word is Amussis,
the mind of the Author being as well expressed in A compass. Sit solidum
quodcunqu^ subest, nec inania subtus. Subest and subtus Ascens^con founds in
his sense; which the presnesse and matter of this Poem allows not: it being in
a Translator sooner and better seen then a Commentor. He would turn digitis
pellentibus, to digitis palantibus. To which place, the true order is hard to
^it. And that truth in my conversion (how opposite soever any may stand) with
any conference, I make no doubt I shall persuade.
compass tried, it shall not err:
What I here needlessly take a little license: for the word is Amussis, the mind
of the Author being as well expressed in A compass. Sit solidum quodcunqu^
subest, nec inania subtus. Subest and subtus Ascens^con founds in his sense;
which the presnesse and matter of this Poem allows not: it being in a
Translator sooner and better seen then a Commentor. He would turn digitis
pellentibus, to digitis palantibus. To which place, the true order is hard to
^it. And that truth in my conversion (how opposite soever any may stand) with
any conference, I make no doubt I shall persuade.
ever subject is, is solid still:
Wound him, and with your violent I here needlessly take a little license: for
the word is Amussis, the mind of the Author being as well expressed in A
compass. Sit solidum quodcunqu^ subest, nec inania subtus. Subest and subtus
Ascens^con founds in his sense; which the presnesse and matter of this Poem
allows not: it being in a Translator sooner and better seen then a Commentor.
He would turn digitis pellentibus, to digitis palantibus. To which place, the
true order is hard to ^it. And that truth in my conversion (how opposite soever
any may stand) with any conference, I make no doubt I shall persuade.
fingers feel
All parts within him, you shall never find
An empty corner, or an abject mind.
He never lets his watchful lights descend,
To those sweet sleeps that all just men attend,
Till all the acts the long day does beget,
With thought on thought laid, he does often repeat:
Examines what has past him, as forgot:
What deed or word was used in time, what not.
Why this deed of Decorum felt defect?
Of reason, that? What left I by neglect?
Why set I this opinion down for true,
That had been better changed? Why did I Miseratus egente^, cur alique^ fracta
persensi mente dolorem. Ascens very iudicially makes this good man in this
di^tie, opposite to a good Christian, since Christ (the president of all good
men) enioynes us, vt supra omnia misericordes simus. But his meaning here is,
that a good and wise man should not so piti^ the want of any, that he should
want manly patience himself to sustain it. And his reason Ser^ius alleges
for him is this, saying, In quem cadit vna mentis perturbatio, posse in eum
omnes cadere: sicut potest omni virtute pollere cui virtus vna contigerit.
rue
Need in one poor so, that I felt my mind
(To breach of her free powers) with grief declined?
Why willed I what was better not to will?
Why (wicked that I was) preferred I still
Profit to honesty? Why any one
Gave I a foul word? or but looked upon,
With countenance churlish? Why should nature draw
More my affects, then manly reasons law?
Through all this thoughts, words works, thus making way,
And all reuoluing, from the Even till Day:
Angry, with what amiss, abusde the light,
Palm and reward he gives to what was right.
A great Man.
A great and politic man, such as is, or may be opposed, to good or wise.
A Great and politic man (which I oppose
To good and wise) is never as he shows.
Never explores himself to find his faults:
But cloaking them, before his conscience halts.
Flatters himself, and others flatteries buys,
Seems made of truth, and is a forge of lies.
Breeds bawdes and sycophants, and traitors makes
To betray traitors; plays, and keeps the stakes,
Is judge and iuror, goes on life and death:
And damns before the fault has any breath.
Weighs faith in falsehoods balance; justice does
To cloak oppression; taile-like downward groes:
Earth his whole end is: heaven he mockes, and hell:
The privation of a good life, and therein the joys of heaven, is hell in this
world.
And thinks that is not, that in him does dwell.
Good, with Gods right hand given, his left takes t'euil:
When holy most he seems, he most is evil.
Ill upon ill he lays: th'embroderie
Wrought on his state, is like a leprosy,
The whiter, still the fouler. What his like,
What ill in all the body politic
Thriues in, and most is cursed: his most bliss fires:
And of two ils, still to the worst aspires.
When his thrift feeds, justice and mercy fear him:
And ( As Wolves and Tigers horribly gnarre, in their feeding: so these
zealous, and giuen-ouer great ones to their own lusts and ambitions: in
aspiriring to them, and their ends, fare, to all that come nere them in
comp^tencie; or that resist their de^o^ring.
Wolf-like fed) he gnars at all men nere him.
Never is cheerful, but when flattery trailes
On This alludeth to hounds upon the traile of a squa^ Hare, and making a
cheerful cry about her, is applied to the forced cheer or flattery this
great man ^hewe^h, when he hunts for his profit.
squatting profit; or when Policy vailes
Some vile corruption: that looks red with anguish
Like wauing reeds, his windshook co^forts languish.
Paies never debt, but what he should not ow;
Is sure and swift to hurt, yet thinks him slow.
His bounty is most rare, but when it comes,
It Is most superfluous, and with strook-vp drums.
Lest any true good pierce him, with such good
As ill breeds in him, Mortar* made with blood
Heaps stone-wals in his heart, to keep it out.
His sensual faith, his souls truth keeps in doubt,
And like a rude, Plebeij status and nota est nunquam a seipso vel damn^m
expectare, vel vtilitatem, sed a rebus externis.
vnlearn'd Plebeian,
Without him seeks his whole insulting man.
How a good great man should employ his greatness.
Nor can endure, as a most dear prospect,
To look into his own life, and reflect
Reason upon it, like a Sun still shining,
To give it comfort, ripening, and refining:
But his black soul, being so deformd with sin,
He still abhorres; with all things hid within:
And forth he wanders, with the outward fashion,
Feeding, and fatting up his reprobation.
Disorderly he sets forth every deed,
Good never doing, but where is no need.
If any The most unchristian disposition of a great and ill man, i^ following
any that withstand his ill.
ill he does, (and hunts through blood,
For shame, ruth, right, religion) be withstood,
The marked withstander, his race, kin, least friend,
That never did, in least degree offend,
He prosecutes, with hi^'d intelligence
To fate, defying God and conscience,
And to the utmost mite, he rauisheth
All they can yield him, rackt past life and death.
In all his acts, he this does verify,
The greater man, the less humanity.
While This has reference (as most of the rest has) (...) the good man
before, being this man's opposite.
Phoebus runs his course through all the signs,
He never studies; but he undermines,
Blows up, and ruins, with pretext to save:
Plots treason, and lies hid in th'actors grave.
Vast crannies gasp in him, as wide as hell,
And angles, gibbet-like, about him swell:
Yet seems he smooth and polisht, but no more
Solid within, then is a Medlars core.
The kings frown fels him, like a gun-strooke foul:
When down he lies, and casts the calfe his soul.
He never sleeps but being tired with lust:
Examines what past, not enough unjust*
Not bringing wealth enough, not state, not grace:
Not showing misery bedrid in his face:
Not skorning virtue, not depra^ing her,
Whose ruth so flies him, that her Bane's his cheer.
In short, exploring all that pass his guards,
Each good he plagues, and every ill rewards.
A slight man.
A Slight, and mixed man (set as twere the mean
Twixt both the first) from both their heaps does gleane:
Is neither good, wise, great, nor polititick.
Yet tastes of all these with a natural trick.
Nature and Art, sometimes meet in his parts:
Sometimes divided are: the austere arts,
Splint him together, set him in a brake
Of form and reading. Nor is let partake
With judgment, wit, or Intending in his writing, etc.
sweetness: but as time,
Terms, language, and degrees, have let him clime,
To learned opinion; so he there does stand,
Stark as a statue; stirs nor foot nor hand*
Nor any truth knows: knowledge is a mean
To make him ignorant, and rapts him clean,
In storms from truth. For what Hippocrates
Says of foul Quo magis alantur, co magis ea laedi.
bodies (what most nourishes,
That most annoies them) is more true of minds:
For there, their first inherent prauitie blinds
Their powers preiudicate: and all things true
Proposd to them, corrupts, and does eschew:
Some, as too full of toil; of prejudice some:
Some fruitless, or past power to overcome:
With which, it so augments, that he will seem
With To be therefore instructed in the truth of knowledge, or a^spire to any
egregious virtue; not stiff and (...) Art serves* but he must be help^
besides, benigniore nascendi hor^. According to this of Inusual. -- plus etenim
fati valet hora benigni, Quam fi te Veneris commendet epistola Marti.
judgment, what he should hold, to contemn
And is incurable. And this is he
Whose learning forms not life's integrity.
This the mere Artist; the mixed naturalist,
With fool quick memory, makes his hand a fist,
And catches Flies, and Nifles: and retains
With hearty study, and vnthrif^ie pains,
What your composd man shuns. With these his pen
And prompt tongue tickles th'^ares of vulgar men:
Sometimes takes matter too, and vtters it
With an admired and heavenly strain of wit:
Yet with all this, has humors more then can
Be thrust into a fool, or to a woman.
As nature made him, reason came by chance,
Held her torch to him, cast him in a trance;
And makes him utter things that (being awake
In life and manners) he does quite forsake.
He will be grave, and yet is light as air;
He will be proud, yet poor even to despair.
Never sat Truth in a tribunal fit,
But in a modest, staid, and humble wit.
I rather wish to be a natural bred,
Then these great wits with madness leauened.
He Is bold, and frontlesse, passionate, and mad,
Drunken, adulterous, good at all things bad.
Yet for one good, he quotes the best in pride,
And is enstil'd a man well qualifide*
These delicate shadows of things virtuous the^
Cast on these vicious, pleasing, patcht up men,
Are but the devils cousenages to blind
Men's sensual eyes, and choke the envied mind.
And where the truly The truly learned imitateth God, the sophi^te^^ emul^^eth
man. His imperfections are hid in the mists imposture breathes: the others
perfections are unseene by the brightness truth casts about his temples, that
dazzle ignorant and corrupt beholders, or ^pprehenders.
learnd is evermore
Gods simple Image, and true imitator:
These sophisters are emulators still
(Cousening, ambitious) of men true in skill.
Their imperfections yet are hid in slight,
Of the felt darkness, breathed out by deceit,
The truly learned, is likewise hid, and fails
To pierce eyes vulgar* but with other vailes.
And they are the divine beams, truth casts round
About his beauties, that do quite confound
Sensual beholders. Scuse these rare seen then,
And take more heed of common slighted men.
A good woman.
A Woman good, and fair (which no dame can
Esteem much easier found then a good man)
Sets not her self to show, nor found would be:
Rather her virtues fly abroad then she.
Dreams not on fashions, loves no gossips feasts,
Affects no news, no tales, no guests, no ieasts:
Her work, and reading writs of worthiest men:
Her husbands pleasure, well taught childeren:
Her households fit provision to see spent,
As fits her husbands will, and his consent:
Spends pleasingly her time, delighting still,
To her just duty, to adapt her will.
Virtue she loves, rewards and honors it,
And hates all scoffing, bold and idle wit:
Pious and wise she is, and treads upon
This foolish and this false opinion,
That learning fits not women* since it may
Her natural cunning help, and make more way
To light, and close affects: for so it can
Courbe and compose them too, as in a man:
And, being noble, is the noblest mean,
To spend her time: thoughts idle and unclean,
Preventing and suppressing* to which end
She entertaines it: and does more commend
Time spent in that, then houswiferies low kinds,
As short of that, as bodies are of minds.
If it may hurt, is power of good less great,
Since food may lust excire, shall she not eat?
She is not Moone-like, that the Sun, her spouse
Being furthest off, is clear and glorious:
And being near, grows pallid and obscure:
But in her husbands presence, is most pure,
In all chaste ornaments, bright still with him,
And in his absence, all retired and dim:
With him still kind and pleasing, still the same;
Yet with her weeds, not putting off her shame:
But when for bed-rites her attire is gone,
In place thereof her modest shame goes on.
Not with her husband lies, but he with her:
And in their loue-ioyes does so much prefer
Modest example, that she will not kiss
Her husband, when her daughter present is.
When a just husbands right he would enjoy,
She neither flies him, nor with moods is ^oy.
One, of the light dame savors* the other shows
Pride, nor from loves ingenuous humor flows.
And as Geometrae dicunt, lineas and superficies, non seipsis moue^i, sed motus
corporum comitari.
Geometricians approve,
That lines, nor superfie^es, do move
Themselves, but by their bodies motions go:
So your good woman never strives to grow
Strong in her own affections and delights,
But to her husbands equal appetites,
Earnests and ieasts, and looks austerities,
Her self in all her subject powers applies.
Since life's chief cares on him are ever laid,
A good wife in most cares, should ever vn^^smaid comfort her husband.
In cares she ever comforts, vndismaid,
Though her heart grieves, her looks yet makes it slight,
Dissembling evermore, without deceit.
Simile.
And as the ^wins of learned Hippocrates,
If one were sick, the other felt disease:
If one reioyc't; joy the others spirits fed:
If one were grieved, the other sorrowed:
A good wife watches her husbands serious thoughts in his looke^ and applies
her own to them.
So fares she with her husband; every thought
(Weighty in him) still watched in her, and wrought.
Simile.
And as those that in Elephants delight,
Never come near them in weeds rich and bright*
Nor Bulls approach in scarlet; since those hewes,
Through both those beasts, enraged affects diffuse:
And as from Tygres, men the Timbrels sound
And Cimbals keep away; since they abound
Thereby in fury, and their own flesh tear:
So when t'a good wife, it is made appear,
That rich attire, and curiosity
In wires, tires, shadows, do displease the eye
Of her loved husband; music, dancing, breed^
Offense in him; she lays by all those weeds,
Leaves dancing, music; and at every part
Studies to please; and does it from her heart.
As greatness in a Steed; so dignity
Needs in a woman, courbe, and bit, and eye,
If once she weds, she is two for one before:
Single again, she never doubles more.
VIRGILS EPIGRAM of Play.
DEspise base gain; mad Avarice hurts the mind:
Ye wise, shun fraud; believe ye learned, ye blind.
At play put passions down, as moneys are.
He plays secure, whose trunks hold crowns to spare:
Who brings all with him, shall go out with none:
A greedy gamester ever ends undone.
Peace holy is to men of honest minds;
If ye will play, then courbe your warring splenes:
No man wins always. It shames man's true worth,
Of but three Furies, to fare like a fourth.
Correct your earnest spirits, and play indeed:
At staid years be not moved: nere play for need.
VIRGILS EPIGRAM of wine and women.
BE not enthralled with wine, nor women's love,
For both by one means hurt: as women prove
Means to effeminate, and men's powers decline:
So does the too much indulgence of wine,
Staggers the upright steps a man should take,
Dissolues his nerves, and makes his goers weak.
Blind love makes many all their thoughts express,
Whose like effect has brainlesse drunkenness.
Wild Cupid often beats up wars stern alarmes,
As often fierce Bacchus calls our hands to arms.
Dishonest Venus made Mars Ilion sease:
And Bacchus lost with war the Lapithes.
Lastly, when both make mad misgouern'd minds,
Fear, shame, all virtues vanish with the winds.
With Gives make Venus hold her legs together,
And bind Liaeus in his iuie with her.
Let wine quench thirst, sweet Venus children bear,
Whose bounds once broke, ye buy their pleasures dear.
VIRGILS EPIGRAM of this letter Y.
THis letter of Pythagoras, that bears
This forkt distinction, to conceit prefers
The form man's life bears. Virtues hard way takes
Upon the right hand path: which entry makes
(To sensual eyes) with difficult affair:
But when ye once have climbed the highest staire,
The beauty and the sweetness it contains,
Give rest and comfort, far past all your pains.
The broad-way in a bravery paints ye forth
(In th'entrie) softness, and much shade of worth:
But when ye reach the top, the taken Ones
It headlong hurles down, to^^e at sharpest stones.
He then, whom virtues love, shall victor crown,
Of hardest fortunes, praise wins and renown:
But he that sloth and fruitless luxury
Pursues, and does with foolish wariness fly
Opposed pains, (that all best acts befall)
Lives poor and vile, and dies despisde of all.
A FRAGMENT OF the Tears of peace.
O That some sacred labor would let in
The ocean through my womb, to cleanse my sin;
I, that beloved of Heaven, as his true wife,
Was wont to bring forth a delightsome life
To all his creatures: and had virtues hand
To my deliverance, decking every land
(Where war was banished) with religious Temples,
Cloisters and monuments in admired examples
Of Christian piety, and respect of souls,
Now drunk with Avarice and th'adulterous boules
Of the light Cyprian, and by Dis deflowered,
I bring forth seed, by which I am devoured:
Infectuous darkness from my intrails flies,
That blasts Religion, breeds black heresies,
Strikes virtue bedrid, fame dumb, knowledge blind,
And for free bounties (like an Eastern wind)
Knits nets of Caterpillars, that all fruits
Of planting peace, catch with contentious suites.
And see (O heaven) a war that inward breeds
Worse far then Civil, where in brazen steeds,
Arms are let in unseen, and fire and sword
Wound and consume men with the ravenous hord
Of private riches, like pricked pictures charmed,
And hid in dunghils, where some one is armed
With arms of thousands; and in such small time,
(Even out of nakedness) that the dismal crime
Sticks in his blasing forehead like a star,
Signal of rapine and spoil worse then war,
These wars give such sly poison for the spleen,
That men affect and study for their teene,
That it recures the wolf in avarice,
And makes him freely spend his golden thies:
Yet no one thought spends on poor Virtues peace.
Wars, that as peace abounds, do still increase.
Wars where in endless rout the kingdom erres,
Where misers mighty grow the mighty misers,
Where partial Lucre Justice sword does draw:
Where Eris turns into Eunomia,
And makes Mars wear the long robe, to perform
A fight more black and cruel, with less storm,
To make for stratageme, a policy driven
Even to the conquest* ere th'alarme be given.
And for set battles where the quarrel dies,
Wars that make lanes through whole posterities,
A^achne wins from Pallas all good parts,
To take her part, and every part conuerts
His honey into poison: abusde Peace
Is turned to fruitless and impostum'd ease,
For whom the dwarf Contraction is at work
In all professions; and makes heaven lurk
In corner pleasures: learning in the brain
Of a dull linguist, and all tight in gain,
All rule in only power, all true zeal
In trustlesse avarice: all the commonweal
In few men's purses. Volumes filled with fame
Of deathlesse souls, in signing a large name
Love of all good in self love: all deserts
In sole desert of hate. Thus Ease inuerts
Ease and Security described.
My fruitful labors, and swollen blind with lust,
Creepes from her self, travails in yielding dust;
Even recking in her neuershifted bed:
Where with benumd security she is fed:
Held up in Ignorance, and Ambitions arms,
Lighted by Comets, sung to by blind charms.
Behind whom Danger waits, subjection, spoil,
Disease, and massacre, and uncrowned Toil:
Earth sinkes beneath her, heaven falls: yet she deaf
Hears not their thundering ruins: nor one leaf
Of all her Aspen pleasures, ever stirs;
In such dead calmes her stark presumption erres.
For good men.
A Good man want? will God so much deny
His laws, his witnesses, his ministry?
Which only for examples he maintains
Against th'vnlearnd, to prove, he is, and reigns:
And all things gouerns justly: nor neglects
Things humane, but at every part protects
A good man so, that if he lives or dies,
All things sort well with him? If he denies
A plenteous life to me, and sees it fit
I should live poorly; What, alas, is it?
But that (refusing to endanger me
In the forlorn hope of men rich and ^ie,)
Like a most careful Captain, he does sound
Retraite to me* makes me come back, give ground
To any, that has least delight to be
A scuffler in man's war for vanity?
And I obey, I follow, and I praise
My good Commander. All the cloudie days
Of my dark life, my envied Muse shall sing
His secret love to goodness: I will bring
Glad tidings to the obscure few he keeps:
Tell his high deeds, his wonders, which the deepes,
Of poverty, and humblesse, most express,
And weep out (for kind joy) his holiness.
Please with thy place.
GOd has the whole world perfect made, and free;
His parts to the use of all. Men then, that be
Parts of that all, must as the general sway
Of that imports, willingly obey
In every thing, without their powers to change.
He that (vnpleasd to hold his place) will range,
Can in no other be containd, that's fit:
And so resisting all is crus^t with it.
But he that knowing how divine a frame
The whole world is, and of it all can name
(Without self flattery) no part so divine
As he himself, and therefore will confine
Freely, his whole powers, in his proper part:
Goes on most god-like. He that strives t'inuert
The universal course, with his poor way:
Not only, dustlike, shiuers with the sway;
But (crossing God in his great work) all earth
Bears not so cursed, and so damned a birth.
This then the universal discipline
Of manners comprehends: a man to join
Himself with th'vniuerse, and wish to be
Made all with it, and go on, round as he.
Not plucking from the whole his wretched part,
And into streights, or into naught reuert:
Wishing the complete universe might be
Subject to such a ragge of it, as he.
But to consider great necessity,
All things, as well refract, as voluntary
Reduces to the high celestial cause:
Which he that yields to, with a man's applause,
And cheek by cheek goes, crossing it, no breath,
But like Gods image follows to the death:
That man is perfect wise, and every thing,
(Each cause and every part distinguishing)
In nature, with enough Art understands,
And that full glory merits at all hands,
That does the whole world, at all parts adorn,
And appertains to one celestial borne.
Of sudden Death.
What action would you wish to have in hand,
If sudden death should come for his command.
I would be doing good to most good men
That most did need, or to their childeren,
And in advice (to make them their true heirs)
I would be giving up my soul to theirs.
To which effect if Death should find me given,
I would with both my hands held up to heaven,
Make these my last words to my deity:
Those faculties thou have bestowd on me
To understand thy government and will
I have, in all fit actions offered still
To thy divine acceptance, and as far
As I had influence from thy bounties star,
I have made good thy form infusde in me:
Th'anticipations given me naturally,
I have with all my study, art, and prayre
Fitted to every object, and affair
My life presented, and my knowledge taught.
My poor sail, as it has been ever fraught
With thy free goodness, has been ballast to
With all my gratitude. What is to do,
Supply it sacred Savior: thy high grace
In my poor gifts, receive again, and place
Where it shall please thee: thy gifts never die
But, having brought one to felicity,
Descend again, and help another up, etc.
Height in Humility.
WHy should I speak impe^ious courtiers fair?
Lest they exclude thee, at thy Court repair.
If they shall see me enter willingly,
Let them exclude me. If necessity
Drive me amongst them, and they shut the door,
I do my best, and they can do no more.
Gods will, and mine, then weighed: I his prefer,
Being his vowed lackey, and poor sufferer:
I try what his will is, and will with it:
No gate is shut to me; that shame must fit
Shameless intruders. Why fear I disgrace
To bear ill censure by a man of face?
Will any think that impudence can be
An equal demonstration of me?
It Is kingly, Cyrus (said Antisthenes)
When thou do well, to hear this ill of these.
But many pity thy defects in thee.
I mock them ever that so pity me.
Strangers they are, and know not what I am;
Where I place good and ill, nor ever came
Where my course lies: but theirs the world may know:
They lay it out, only to name and show.
If comfort follow truth of knowledge still,
They meet with little truth; for if their skill
Get not applause, their comfort comes to naught.
I study still to be, they to be thought.
Are they less frustrate of their ends then I?
Or fall they less into the ils they fly?
Are they industrious more? less passionate?
Less faltring in their course? more celebrate
Truth in their comforts? But they get before
Much in opinion. True, they seek it more.
For stay in competence.
THou that enioyst only enough to live,
Why grieu'st thou that the giver does not give
Food with the fullest, when as much as thou
He thinks him empty? It Is a state so low
That I am fearful every hour to sink.
Well said. Unthankful fearful, eat and drink,
And fear to sterue still. Know thou not who sings
Before the thief? The penury of things
Whither conferres it? Draws it not one breath
With great satietie? End not both in death?
Thy entrails, with thy want, together shrink;
He bursts with cruditie, and too much drink.
Will not thy want then with a cheerful eye
Make thee expect death? whom stern tyranny,
Empire, and all the glut of thirsty store,
Shun with pale cheeks affrighted ^uermore?
Earth is a whore, and brings up all her brats
With her insatiate gadflie: even her flats
High as her ^il^ look; lusting, lusting still,
No earthly pleasure ever has her fill.
Turn a new leaf then: thirst for things past death;
And thou shall never think of things beneath.
How should I thirst so, having no such heat^?
Fast, pray, to have it: better never eat,
Then still the more thou (...) the more des^re.
But will thou quench this ouerneedie fire?
Can thou not write, nor read, nor keep a gate^
Teach children, be a porter. That poor state
Were base and hateful. Is that base to thee,
That is not thy work? That necessity
Inflicts upon thee? that inuades thee to
Only as headaches and agues do?
That the great Ordrer of th'vniuerse sees
So good, he puts it in his master piece?
But men will scorn me. Let them then go by,
They will not touch thee: he that shifts his eye
To others eyebrows, must himself be blind.
Leau'st thou thy self for others? it is the mind
Of all that God and every good forsakes.
If he goes thy way, follow: if he takes
An opposite course, can thou still go along,
And end thy course? Go right, though all else wrong.
But you are learned, and know Philosophy
To be a shift to salve necessity:
Love syllogismes, figures, and to make
All men admire how excellent you spoke.
Your caution is to keep a studious eye,
Lest you be caught with carpes of sophistry:
To b^ a man of reading, when alas,
All these are caught in a Plebeians case.
None such poor fools, incontinent, covetous,
Atheistical, deceitful, villainous.
Show me thy studies end, and what may be
Those weights and measures, that are used by thee,
To mete these ashes barreld up in man.
Is not the wreath his, that most truly can
Make a man happy? And (in short) is that
Any way wrought more, then in teaching what
Will make a man most joyfully embrace
The course his end holds, and his proper place?
Not suffering his affections to disperse,
But fit the maine sway of the universe.
Of the Will.
THe empire of the Will is ever saved,
Except lost by it self, when it is deprau'd.
Of Man.
MAn is so sovereign and divine a state,
That not contracted and elaborate,
The world he bears about with him alone,
But even the Maker makes his breast his throne.
Of a Philosopher.
Does a Philosopher inuit, or pray
Any to hear him? or not make his way,
As meat and drink does? or the Sun excite
Only by virtue of his heat and light?
Of Ambition.
Who, others loves and honors goes about,
Would have things outward, not to be without.
Of Friendship.
NOw I am old, my old friends loves I wish,
As I am good; and more old, grow more fresh.
Friends constant, not like lakes are standing ever,
But like sweet streams, ever the same, yet never
Still profiting themselves, and perfecting.
And as a river furthest from his spring,
Takes virtue of his course, and all the way
Greater and greater grows, till with the sea
He combats for his empire, and gets in,
Curling his billows, till his style he win:
So worthy men should make good to their ends,
Increase of goodness; such men make thy friends.
Such nobler are, the poorer was their source;
And though with crooks and turns, yet keep their course,
Though till their strength, they did some weakness show,
(All thanks to God yet) now it is not so.
Will is the garden first, then Knowledge plants;
Who knows and wills well, never virtue wants:
Though o^t he fail in good, he naught neglects;
The affect, not the effect, God respects.
But as the Academickes ever rate
A man for learning, with that estimate
They made of him, when in the schools he lived;
And how so ere he scattered since, or thriu'd,
Still they esteem him as they held him then:
So fares it with the doomes of vulgar men;
If once they knew a man defective, still
The stain sticks by him; better he his skill,
His life and parts, till quite refined from him
He was at first; good drownes, ill still does swim:
Best men are long in making: he that soon
Sparkles and flourishes, as soon is gone.
A wretched thing it is, when nature gives
A man good gifts, that still the more he lives,
The more they die. And where the complete man
(Much less esteemed) is long before he can
The passage clear, betwixt his soul and sense,
And of his body gain such eminence,
That all his organs open are, and fit
To serve their Empress. The Other man of wit,
At first is served with all those instruments*
Open they are, and full, and free events
All he can think obtaines, and forth there flies
Flashes from him, thick as the Meteord skies,
Like which he looks, and up draws all men's eyes,
Even to amaze: yet like those Meteors,
(Only in air impressed) away he soars,
His organs shut: and twixt his life and soul,
Sue a divorce alive. Such never enroule
In thy brass book of Friendship: such are made
To please light spirits, not to grow but fade.
Nor friends for old acquaintance choose, but faith,
Discretion, good life, and contempt of death:
That foes wrongs bear with Christian patience,
Against which fighting, Reason has no fence:
That lay their fingers on their lips the more,
The more their wronged simplicities deplore,
And stop their mouths to every enemies ill,
With the will he does them. Thus good men do still,
And only good men friends are: make no friend
Of fleshie-beast-men, friendship's of the mind.
Of plenty and freedom in goodness.
NOt to have want, what riches does exceed?
Not to be subject, what superior thing?
He that to naught aspires, does nothing need: Resp.

Who breaks no law, is subject to no King.
Of Attention.
WHen for the least time, you lett'st fall thine ear
From still attending, things still fit to hear,
And gin'st thy mind way to thy bodies will:
Imagine not thou hold'st the raines so still,
That at thy pleasure thou can turn her in:
But be assured that one days soothed sin,
Will ask thee many to amend and mourn:
And make thy mind so willing to adiourne
That instant-due amendment, that twill breed
A custom to do ill; and that will need
A new birth to reform. What? May I then
(By any diligence, or power in men)
Avoid transgression? No, it is past thy power:
But this thou may do; every day and hour,
In that be laboring still, that lets transgression:
And worth my counsel it is, that this impression
Fixed in thy mind, and all means used in man,
He may trangresse as little as he can.
If still thou say, To morrow I will win
My mind to this attention: therein
Thou say as much, as this day I will be
Abject and impudent: it shall be free
This day for others to live Lords of me,
To lead and rule me: this day I will give
Reins to my passions, I will envious live,
Wrathful and lustful: I will leave the state
Man holds in me, and turn adulterate,
Vulgar and beastly. See to how much ill
Thou stand'st indulgent. But all this thy will
Shall mend to morrow: how much better twere
This day thou should man's godlike scepter bear:
For if to morrow, in thy strengths neglect,
Much more to day, while it is vncounter-checkt.
To live with little.
When thou see any honored by the king,
Oppose you this, thou thirsts for no such thing.
When thou see any rich, see what in sted
Of those his riches thou have purchased.
If nothing, nothing fits such idle wretches.
If thou have that, that makes thee need no riches*
Know thou have more, and of a greater price,
And that which is to God a sacrifice.
When thou see one linkt with a lovely wife,
Thou can contain, and lead a single life.
Seem these things small to thee? O how much more
Do even those great ones, and those men of store
Desire those small things, then their greatest own:
That they could scorn their states so bladder-blown,
Their riches, and even those delicious Dames,
That seast their blood with such enchanted flames?
For have not yet thy wits the difference found,
Betwixt a feu'rie man's thirst, and one sound?
He having drunk is pleased: the other lies
Fretting and lothing, vomits out his eyes:
His drink to choler turns, and ten parts more
His vicious heat inflames him, then before.
So while the long fit of his dry desire
Lasts in a rich man, such insatiate fire
He feels within him. While the like fit lasts
In one ambitious, so he thirsts, and wastes.
While the fit lasts, and lust has any fuel:
So fares the fond venerean with his jewel
There being linkt to every one of these
Fears, emulations, sleeplesse Ielosies,
Foul cogitations, foul words, fouler deeds.
Enough be that then, that may serve thy needs,
What thou can keep in thy free power alone,
Others affect, and thou reiect'st thine own.
Both will not draw in one yoke: one release
And the other use, or neither keep in peace
Twixt both distracted. Things within thee prise;
Only within, thy help and ruin lies.
What wall so fencefull? what possession
So constant, and so properly our own?
What dignity so expert of deceipts?
All trade-like beggarly, and full of sleights.
On which who sets his mind, is sure to grieve,
Feed on faint hopes, never his ends atcheeue,
Fall into that he shuns, and never rest,
But bad esteem his state, when it is at best.
Serve but thy mind with objects fit for her,
And for things outward thou shall never care.
Obtain but her true, and particular use
And obtain all things Nor let doubt, abuse
Thy will to win her, as being coy enclind,
Naught is so pliant as a humane mind.
And what shall I obtain, obtaining her,
Not wishing all, but some particular?
What would thou wish for her dowre more then these?
To make thee pleasant, of one hard to please?
To make thee modest, of one impudent;
Temperate, and chaste, of one incontinent:
Faithful, being faithless. Fit not these thy will?
Affect'st thou greater? What thou do, do still:
I give thee over, doing all I can,
Thou Art past recure, with all that God gives man.
To young imaginaries in knowledge.
Never for common signs, dispraise or praise,
Nor ar^, nor want of a^t* for what he says
Ascribe to any Men may both ways make
In form, and speech, a man's quick doom mistake.
All then that stand in any rank of Art,
Certain decrees have, how they shall impart
That which is in them: which decrees, because
They are within men, making there the laws
To all their actions, hardly show without:
And till their ensigns are displaid, make doubt
To go against or with them: nor will they
So well in words as in their deeds display.
Decrees are not degrees. If thou shall give
Titles of learning, to such men as live
Like rude Plebeians, since they have degrees,
Thou shall do like Plebeians. He that sees
A man held learned do rudely, rather may
Take for that deed, his learned name away,
Then giu't him for his name. True learnings act*
And special object is, so to compact
The will, and every active power in man,
That more then men illiterate, he can
Keep all his actions in the narrow way
To God and goodness, and there force their stay
As in charmed circles. Terms, tongs, reading, all
That can within a man, called learned, fall;
Whose life is led yet like an ignorant man's:
Are but as tools to goutie Artizans,
That cannot use them; or like childrens arts,
That out of habit, and by roots of hearts,
Construe and perce their lessons, yet discern
Naught of the matter, whose good words they learn:
Or like our Chimicke Magi, that can call
All terms of Art out, but no gold at all:
And so are learned like them, of whom, none knows
His Arts clear truth, but are mere Ciniflos.
But sacred learning, men so much profane,
That when they see a learn'd-accounted man
Live like a brute man; they will never take
His learned name from him, for opinions sake:
But on that false gound brutishly conclude,
That learning profits not. You beastly rude,
Know, it mor^s profits, being exact and true,
Then all earths high ways chokt with herds of you.
But must degrees, and terms, and time in schools,
Needs make men learned, in life being worse then fools?
What other Art lives into happy air,
That only for his habit, and his hair,
His false professors worth you will commend?
Are there not precepts, matter, and an end
To every science? which, not kept, nor shown
By understanding; understanding known
By fact; the end, by things to the end directed,
What hap, or hope have they to be protected?
Yet find such, greatest friends: and such profess
Most learning, and will preasse for most access
Into her presence, and her priuiest state,
When they have hardly knocked yet at her gate.
External circumscription never s^rues
To prove us men: blood, flesh, nor bones nor nerves
But that which all these uses, and does guide:
Gods image in a soul eternifide,
Which he that shows not in such acts as tend
To that eternesse, making that their end:
In this world nothing knows, uor after can,
But is more any creature then a man.
This rather were the way, if thou would be,
A true proficient in philosophy:
Dissemble what thou studiest, till alone
By thy impartial con^e^tion
Thou prou'st thee fit, to do as to profess.
And if thou still profess it nor, what less
Is thy philosophy, if in thy deeds
Rather then signs, and shadows, it proceeds?
Show with what temper thou do drink, and eat:
How far from wrong thy deeds are, angers heat^*
How thou sustainst, and abstainst; how far gone
In appetite and auersation*
To what account thou do affections call,
Both natural, and ad^entitiall:
That thou art faithful, pious, humble, kind,
Enemy to envy: of a cheerful mind,
Constant, and dantlesse. All this when men see
Done with the learned* them let censure thee;
But if so dull, and blind of soul they are,
Not to acknowledge heavenly Mulciber,
To be a famous Artist by his deeds,
But they must see him in his working weeds:
What ill is it, if thou art never known
To men so poor of apprehension?
Are they within thee, or so much with thee
As thou thy self art? Can their dull eyes see
Thy thoughts at work? Or how like one that's sworn
To thy destruction, all thy powers are borne
T'entrap thy self? whom thou do hardlier please
Then thou can them? Arm then thy mind with these:
I have decrees set down twixt me and God;
I know his precepts, I will bear his lode,
But what men throw upon me, I reject:
No man shall let the freedom I elect;
I have an owner that will challenge me,
Strong to defend, enough to satisfy:
The rod of Mercury, will charm all these,
And make them neither strange, nor hard to please*
And these decrees, in houses constitute
Friendship, and love: in fields cause store of fruit:
In cities, riches; and in temples zeal:
And all the world would make one commonweal.
Shun braggart glory, seek no place, no name:
No shows, no company, no laughing game,
No fashion: nor no champion of thy praise,
As children sweet meats love, and holidaies:
Be knowing shamefastness, thy grace, and guard,
As others are with doors, walls, porters bard.
Live close awhile; so fruits grow, so their seed
Must in the earth a little time lie hid;
Spring by degrees, and so be ripe at last.
But if the Ear, be to the blades top past
Before the joint amidst the blade, be knit,
The corn is lanke, and no Sun ripens it.
Like which art thou young Nouice; flourishing
Before thy time, winter shall burn thy spring.
The husbandman dislikes his fields fair birth,
When timelesse heat beats on unready earth,
Grieves lest his fruits with air should be too bold,
And not endure the likely-coming cold.
Comfort the root then first, then let appear
The blades joint knit, and then produce the Ear:
So Natures self, thou shall constrain, and be
Blessed with a wealthy crop in spite of thee.
Of Constancy in goodness.
Who fears disgrace for things well done, ye knows i^
Wrong ever does most harm to him that does it.
Who more joy takes, that men his good advance,
Then in the good it self, does it by chance:
That being the work of others; this his own.
In all these actions therefore that are common,
Men never should for praise or dispraise care,
But look to the Decrees, from whence they are.
Of Learning.
LEarning, the Art is of good life: they then
That lead not good lives, are not learned men.
For ill success.
If thou sustainst in any sort an ill,
Bear some good with thee to change for it still.
Of negligence.
When thou letst loose thy mind to objects vain
It Is not in thee to call her back again:
And therefore when thy pleasure in her good
Droopes, and would down in melancholy blood,
Feed her alacrity with any thought
Or word, that ever her recomfort wrought.
Of injury.
When thou art wronged, see if the wrong proceed
From fault within thy judgment, word or deed:
If not, let him beware that iniures thee,
And all that sooth him; and be thy state fr^e.
Of Attire.
IN habit, nor in any ill to th'eie,
Affright the vulgar from Philosophy:
But as in looks, words, works, men witness thee
Comely and checklesse, so in habit be.
For if a man shall show me one commended
For wit, skill, judgment, never so extended,
That goes fantastically, and does fit
The vulgar fashion; never think his wit
Is of a sound piece, but has bracks in it.
If slouenly and nastily in weed^
Thou keep'st thy body, such must be thy deeds,
Hence, to the desert, which thou well deseru'st,
And now no more for man's society seru'st.
External want to this height does express
Both inward negligence, and rottenness.
FRAGMENTS. Of Circumspection.
IN hope to escape the law, do naught amiss,
The penance ever in the action is.
Of Sufferance.
IT argues more power willingly to yield
To what by no repulse can be repeld,
Then to be victor of the greatest state,
We can with any fortune subiugate.
Of the Soul.
THe Soul serves with her functions to excite,
Abhor, prepare, and order appetite,
Cause auersation, and susception:
In all which, all her ill is built upon
Ill received judgments; which reform with good;
And as with ill she yielded to thy blood,
And made thy pleasures, God and man displease,
She will as well set both their powers at peace,
With righteous habits, and delight thee more
With doing good now, then with ill before.
Of great men.
WHen Homer made Achilles passionate,
Wrathful, reuengefull, and insatiate
In his affections; what man will deny
He did compose all that of industry?
To let men see, that men of most renown,
Strong'st, noblest, fairest, if they set not down
Decrees within them, for disposing these,
Of judgment, resolution, uprightness.
And virtuous knowledge of their use and ends,
Mishaps and misery, no less extends
To their destruction, with all that they prisde,
Then to the poorest, and the most despisde.
Of learned men
Who knows not truth, knows nothing; who what is best
Knows not, not Si absit scientia optimi, nihil scitur.
truth knows. Who (alone professed
In that which best is) lives bad: Best not knows,
Since with that Best and Truth, such joy still goes,
That he that finds them, cannot but dispose
His whole life to them. Servile Avarice can
Profane no liberall-knowledge-coueting man.
Such hypocrites, opinion only have,
Without the Qui opinioni absque mente, consenserint.
minds use: which does more deprave
Their knowing powers, then if they Prodest multis non nosse quicqua^.
naught did know.
For if with all the sciences they flow,
Not having that, that such joy brings withal,
As cannot in vnlearn'd men's courses fall:
As with a Nonne merit^, multa tempestate iactabitur^
tempest they are rapt past hope
Of knowing Truth, because they think his scope
Is in their tongues, much reading, speech profuse,
Since they are means to Truth in their true use:
Absurdam alia laudare, alia sequi.
But it is a fashion for the damned crew,
One thing to praise, another to pursue:
As those learned men do, that in words prefer
Heaven and good life, yet in their lives so err,
That all heaven is not broad enough for them
To hit or aim at, but the vulgar stream
Hurries them headlong with it: and no more
They know or shall know, then the r^dest Bore.
FINIS.

