THE COVNTRIE AGVE OR, LONDON her Welcome home to her retired Children.
TOGETHER, With a true Relation of the Warlike Funeral of Captain RICHARD
ROBYNS, one of the Twenty Captains of the trained Bands of the City of
London, which was performed the 24. day of September last, 1625. in Arms, in
the time of this Visitation, when the Rumor in the Country went current,
(...) not people enough left alive to bury her Dead.

Planxerunt D^ades resonat plangentibus Echo.

By HENRY PETOVVE, Marshall of the Artillery Garden, London.



Printed for Robert Allot, and are to be sold at the Greyhound in Paul's
Churchyard 16^^.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY FAVORITE OF ARMS AND Arts, Colonel HVGH HAMERSLEY, one
of the Aldermen of the City of LONDON, and the Noble President to that
remarkable Society of Citizens, exercising Arms in the Artillery Garden
LONDON. TO ALL THE GENEROUS Captains, and their Lieutenants of the same City,
and to all the rest of the Gentlemen of the same Garden, HENRY PETOVVE,
Marshall to the same renowned Society; wishes continual Health, increase of
Honor, Earths happiness, and Heavens felicity.
RIGHT WORTHY; and most worthy to be so styled, Right Worthy:
Colonel, Captains, and Soldiers; Your generous dispositions, in the most
loving and kind acceptance of these few Lines, which some ten Weeks since, I
Dedicated to your noble Patronage concerning our Foster Mother LONDON,
entitled London Sick at Heart, or, A Caveat for Run-awayes, has much
encouraged me to spend some of my best bestowed hours, in another kind and
Garb of writing, yet to purpose and according as these days and times
require: And my desires are, that I may shrowde these my Labors under the
Banner of your protection, against all opposition. Be you therefore pleased (my
Noble Martial Patrons) to veil me under the covert of your never vanquished
Ensign, and then no other Colors shall daunt me. I write no Fables, nor
Imaginary Toys, but lamentable Experience shall justify my writ.

London was never more Sick at Heart, then she has been lately many Months
together, her Lamentations will be remarkable to the end of Posterity. I treat
now in part, of a Country Ague, or of an Ague in the Country: They which have
gusted of it, and escaped, may thank God for their deliverance; But many that
fled from their Mother London, from the Visitation which the Almighty imposed
upon her, have felt the anger of the highest omnipotent Power, and were
returned Coacht, not with Life, but struck with the arrow of Death by that
Pestilent Ague. I dare not say, that the same Aguish visitation, was or is the
Plague or Pestilence: The Country timorous Gallants will then be frighted, and
leave their Mother Rus (like Rusticals) and Winter themselves under the Roof
of our ever tender and loving Foster Mother London. Which if they should? I
beseech you noble fellow Soldiers, to deigne them Courtesy, and kind
entertaynment; and let them know, that although they contemned and despised the
very Name of one of us, and would not vouchsafe so much as to look upon a
Londoner: yet for Charities sake, do you bid them Welcome. We will not lodge
them in Barnes and Hovels at the Towns end, though they bring the Ague with
them; but, on the best Beds our chiefest Innes can afford. Pardon me (brave
Soldiers) if I answer for you; for I know the nature of a true Soldier, is to
be pitiful and to show mercy, where imbesilitie and weakness rests.
Therefore (noble Soldiers) you that are the trusty Guardians of our famous
City, (under our Sovereign, his Lieutenant, and the rest of her grave
Senators) be pleased to lay down your Arms, and make no opposition against
any whatsoever he be; But let all our Foster Mother London her Gates stand wide
open, to entertayne all of what degree soever, Gentile, or Hindes, Clownes or
Peasants, any, and all whosoever they be, that they finding (as ever heretofore
they have done) Londoners, their goodness, love, court^sie, and great respect:
may blush for their ingratitude toward the m^n the Country. To which I
presume, your noble and charitable Spirits will condescend, And so I rest:

Yours, ever to do you service, until I rest for ever: Marshall PETOVVE.

THE COUNTRY AGVE. OR, LONDON her Welcome home, to her tyer'd retired Children.
I Have been (most dear and more entirely beloved Children) so much
burdened, pressed down and ouerladen with Lamentations, complaints, Miseries
and Calamities for your long absence, in your unhappy and unfortunate (yet no
otherwise to be looked for) Journey or wandering Pilgrimage, that I am almost
dead with languishing. But I hope I speak it in the Autumn of my woes and
heartbreaking sorrows; (I pray to my Savior I do.) It is the Autumn time
of the year; yea, of such a year: such a lamentable year, such a wonderful
year of Mortality by Plague and Pestilence, as in my time, for the time (to
my remembrance) is without and beyond any President. Oh woe is me therefore:
But my hopes are, and my assiduate and daily prayers, still shall be to the
Father of us all, who only can, and none else has power, to disburthen me of
that heavy dead-striking-mace of Plague and Pestilence, that has even bruised
me and mine in pieces. And therefore for your sakes (my endeared retired
Children) notwithstanding my Almighty Fathers exceeding and great displeasure
I will undertake to plead to him for Mercy in your behalf: But indeed I may
rather say in the behalf of my self: For had not the Lord been angry with me
for my intolerable sins, he would not have suffered my poor Children to
run away from me, and to leave me as they did: For which cause I have indeed
a long time taken it to heart, considering with my self which was my best and
surest course to take, to work my peace with my God, that he might take pity
and compassion both upon me and all mine.

At length, the holy Spirit of that eternal Essence Omnipotent Iehoua,
possessing my distracted memory with my Saviors infallible promise, Come unto
me all you that are heavy laden, and I will ease ye. Immediately with tears
of Joy and Comfort, I besought him on my knees and obtained his exceeding
Mercy: For immediately after my Dread Sovereign CHARLES (whom the King of Kings
ever protect both from his Foreign and Domestic enemies) Commanded a solemn
Fast and Prayer to be made and kept throughout my whole City, and the
remainder of my Divines continually Preaching and Praying in my behalf for the
appeasing and mittigating of the great displeasure of my Almighty Father:
which my said Father does begin to take (and praised be his name) does daily
take more and more to heart, thinking that it is now time to hold his Angels Rod
from further striking: Now the God of all mercy grant it may be so; and I hope
my prayer is to purpose; For me thinks (unless I dream) I perceive my
Children begin to retire, and to return home again to their Foster-mother
London, which they would not do; did not my blessed Savior lessen his weekly
Number: Is it so? nay then I perceive the old Proverb holds ( Home is Home, be
it never so homely) and the Prodigalls Story is likewise fulfilled; For they
poor Souls, having almost spent all, and finding no better entertainment in
the Country, are forced to return of mere necessity.

And are some of you returned, (my endeered Children:) and will all the rest of
your Brethren follow you do you think? I am very fearful, I shall want some
of my number. But howeuer, I must be contented; and in the interim I speak to
you with a loving Mothers tongue. Oh welcome, thrice welcome in very deed, you
are lovingly welcome, my thoughts persuaded me, that in regard the Almighty
God did visit me with the heavy Rod of his Pestilent affliction; you had been
only fearful of me, and not of him; but surely it now appears; and I am
very glad of it, that you have made your peace with God my Father in the
Country, and all of you repented of your Sins, in that you have found such
favor at his hands, and that he has given you life this dangerous time of
Infection, which (to say truth) if you had staid with me though in the chiefest
of my Territories, I could not have warranted; No marvel then you fled from
me. Nay, I am further surely persuaded, that you whom God has blessed with
longer days then many thousands of your deceased brethren; are such as left
your benevolence behind you, to and for the maintenance and keeping from
staruing those poor Creatures that did suffer and bear the public misery of
such a Contagious time as this has been without president: Or else with life
you could never have entered my Gates: for which I truly thank you, and no
doubt, but my gratitude shall double that with treble loan. But I pray give
me leave to question you a little farther? Do you all cast your days
Iourneys so, that you will not enter London streets, nay scarce her Suburbs,
before the black clouds of the duskie Night eclips the light of Luna from my
Mother Earth; for fear the small remainder of your poor afflicted Brethren
should call you in question for your flight, and upbraid ye with the title of
Run-awayes? No surely, not all; for some of you it seems, made your appearance
daily at Noone-Exchange without Dread or Fear. God be thanked the East India
Ships are come; and some from the Straights safely arrived? If it please my
heavenly Father to continue as he has begun, to cease the Rod of his
affliction and to sheathe his Sword: the Residue of my poor Children to whom
he has given life, no doubt but shall see happy days, to my comfort, their
profit and benefit, and all to the praise and glory of my eternal Father,
which the Lord of all Eternity grant for our blessed Saviors sake.

I am now at a stand, whether I with modesty may further question you or no:
But I hope you that have spent so long time in the Country may afford a
little time of Conference with your weeping Mother.

I pray give my desire satisfaction, and tell me whether any of my great ones,
or men of note, as Justices of Peace, Aldermen or their Deputies, Common
Counsel men, Churchwardens, Sidemen, or any other of my Officers which should
have employed their pains and care in the time of my Visitation; did they, or
had they any desire of repayring home, when they heard that my Poor cried out
for relief, and they absent which should relieve them (a Letter was all could
give them this notice, which Tom Long the Carrier brought, and never delivered
it, for he durst not.) But I dare answer for them; that had they doubted of
their entertainment in the Country; they would rather have continued at their
own Mantions under my government; then to be so slighted by base ignoble
Drones, as they were. Which I leave further to treat of: But they left their
Charity behind them, which was satisfaction, and gave content to that
clamor, and ceast the Rumor.

But now good Children I will yet further examine you, did not your illiterated
Peasants your Hobnayld Clownes, Raphe, Benedicke, Nick, Tom, Jack, Hodge, and
such like under the Justices tolleration even almost at mine own Gates? I am
sure it was within the sound of my night Ninth hour warner? Did they not keep
you out, with Pitchforkes, Staves, Hooks, brown Bills, and such like rustic
Weapons, and you demanded passage; answer was given: No, for you are Londoners,
true, we are so, we will not deny it, what then? You come not here; why says
one, you suffer Rogues to pass: so we may one replies, before any Londoner.
Can this be true that my poor Children should be thus misused, amongst my
Neighbors, such as have daily Commerce with me; If they bring me Food, I give
them Money, the Landlord must be paid. But thou foolish simple Countriman; he
will not be paid with Corn, Oxen, Hay, and such like good blessings which my
eternal loving and merciful Father bestows upon thee: For (says the
Landlord) I have of goods great store, I need them not; but as the greedy
Usurer he comes, give me my money; I cannot cloth my Wife and Children with
Hey, etc. Well, if it be so then, that thou must of necessity have money, or
be undone, and thy Lease forfeited, and thou, thy Wife and Children cast forth
of doors; what rests then to be done? Must thou not of force come unto me
thy charitable Neighbor London; and do not I from time to time, nay, at all
times help you in the midst of your extremity; Is not my Exchequer
continually open unto you: I have no Barrocadoes to keep you forth; but my
Gates all hours of the night are open for the meanest Hynde or Swain that
comes. I, nor none of mine examine what Countriman thou art: from whence thou
came? or whither thou will? but come and welcome. This is and ever has been
my carriage to my Country people: And now in the time of my Visitation, did my
poor fearful Children, come amongst you into the Country for a little
refuge or recreation, presuming upon the like welcome there, as you found here,
and did you give them Jack Drumes entertainment. Oh uncharitable, inhumaine and
ungrateful people: Indeed it argued no Christianity in you. Put case my
dearly beloved Children, should (as I cannot blame them if they do) take this
to heart; and should shut my Gates against you, and debar entrance to such
inhumaine Creatures: where would your Landlords have their Rent then?
Michaelmas you know is come: the half years Rent must be paid: the last day
of payment is at hand; Therefore because I will make you blush at your own
folly (if my Almighty Father will illuminate your darkened eyes of Ignorance,
that you may so the same) and that my Children (which will be ruld by me) may
show love for hatred: See our Charity is such, that all my Gates are open to
give you all entertainment* I will not examine you, or shut my Gates against
you for fear of your pestilent Fever: No, I crave your pardon, it is but an
Ague; But as the plain Country-woman said, I cannot tell whether it be but an
Ague, we and the Londoners both are visited within the Country; but I am sure
after they are dead, they have the Spots upon them: But howeuer my honest
Countrymen, let us in the name of our blessed Savior, jointly: entirely and
heartily pray to the Lord for mercy, that our Plague and Pestilence, and the
Country Ague (if you call it so) may at once and together cease with a full
period. Our Visitation here, and their affliction there in the Country, that
my poor Remainder, which at home have endured the Front and heat of my
Fathers pestilent Battle, may not be shaken in the Rear with their
pestiferous Ague; which I am very confident he will grant, upon our hearty
prayers and sincere repentance.

LONDON her Chabitable reprehension of her ignorant Suburbians for clamoring
against her retired Children.
HOw comes it to pass my little tender Iuvenals, in whom there is nothing but
ignorance, imbesilitie and weakness, that a Coach no sooner presents it self
with it full lading, or Horsemen mounted: their backs toward the Country,
and they facing the City: but you openly mouth it, with Exclamations and
horrible Showtings! Welcome home Run-awayes, many times over; not respecting on
whom you cast this aspersion, taxing as well those, that from my bosom in the
Morning took their leave to solace themselves few miles forth of the City,
and returning at night: yet your Clamours were all one, one and the self same
still; Run-awayes, Run-awayes, Welcome home Run-awayes!

Oh let it be so no more. If you see a Caroch with four Horses, come lagging
home full fraighted (as if they were tired with travel) your Imaginations may
strengthen your opinions so far: that they have come a long journey, and that
the freight or heavy load thereof, are some of my retired Children, you may
kindly and courteously bid them and give them a fair Welcome home: And why?
Because of the misery they have endured in the Country; pity it were but
they should have better entertainment here. I know they have undergone so many
Affronts, endured so much Dis(...), and suffered misery upon misery without
president. Tom Tell-troth, has Ballatized many of their miseries and bad usage
in the Country: you understanding his plain language, may rest your selves
satisfied: and leave the Censure of my great offenders, to those of more riper
and mature Judgments. And so I leave you, praying you to leave that Clamor
and Exclamation.

London. I have almost tired my self with demanding of many of my Come-agen
Children, whether Report table or no? but can receive no satisfaction.
Therefore my longing desire shall accommodate my will, to solicit that never
failing Echo to reuerberate truly, answers to my Intergotories.


And thus I begin.

LONDON. OH my endeered Echo tell me: My poor distressed Children blush, and
their Ears glow to hear how big I am with desire; till Resolution deliver
me. I have been wronged Echo, have I not, by those whom I most respected? Is
it not so?


ECHO. So.


LONDON. And why? because in my distress, and when the Violl of my Fathers
anger burst forth, and the blew black drops thereof sprinkled on the bodies of
my selected Children, whom God has singled forth to bear the public misery
the great ones fled from me,


ECHO. From thee.


LONDON. Why should they fly from her, who ever loved them, bred them, and
brought them up to maturitie; was it because I was touched with Calamity, with
Plague and Pestilence? was it therefore: or how sweet Echo tell me wherefore?


ECHO. Therefore.


LONDON. Thought they distrustful Children to fly from the Judgments of the
All-seeing, and every where being God by running from me?


ECHO. From thee.


LONDON. Why then I am sorry for them; they had but little faith?


ECHO. Little Faith.


LONDON. But my Omnipotent Father found them out?


ECHO. Out.


LONDON. And did he not scourge them?


ECHO. scourgd the^


LONDON. I prithee ( good Echo) tell me in what nature? was it with the
Pestilence or no?


ECHO. No.


LONDON. They say so?


ECHO. Say so.


LONDON. But with as bad or worse?


ECHO. Worse.


LONDON. As how: was it not the terrible Ague?


ECHO. Ague.


LONDON. That would shake them?


ECHO. Shakt them.


LONDON. Very fearfully even to the death?


ECHO. to'th' death.


LONDON. What are those brought home in the midst of day; one horse in the
Front, an other in the Rear, and the body in the midst. Nor Carted nor Coacht,
but Lytterd: was it to keep the body from shaking?


ECHO. Aching.


LONDON. It could not from shaking then? for the Ague fits them.


ECHO. Fits them.


LONDON. Is it an Ague Quarterne? Tertian? or Quotidian?


ECHO. Quotidian.


LONDON. That Quotidian Ague forced them to continual Prayer?


ECHO. Prayer.


LONDON. And that made them ready for God?


ECHO. For God.


LONDON. Then many of them dyed?


ECHO. Dyed.


LONDON. I prithee tell me, would the Country afford them burial or no?


ECHO. No.


LONDON. That was the reason so many dead bodies were Coacht to London?


ECHO. To London.


LONDON. That their Foster-Mother might give them Christian Burial?


ECHO. Burial.


Echo I hear too much, I will trouble thee no farther, my heart is almost
burst with sorrow. See my poor Children; you were ashamed to tell the truth.
But had those rustique irrational Beasts: (as I may rightly term them)
either reason, humanity, or faith in my Savior Jesus Christ? they would
shame, and fear ever to enter my Gates, to look me in the face; their base
abuse to my distressed Children, was so insufferable and intolerable. But what
entertainment should they expect from those, that never had or knew good
breeding or education.

Many of you in the Country style your selves Country Gentlemen; Few or none
of you, have shown any gentle carriage or respect, to many of my Children, that
might every way equal the best of you, that have offered them such base
affronts, and begger-like barbarous usage. Nay I can aver it for truth, and
it cannot be denied, that one of your Gubernators, I style him so, because the
vulgar should take no notice, whom or what he was: (did not shame) conuersing
at a Meeting himself with others his like Associats, and some of my Children,
(which were feign to dissemble their dwellings, and change their habits, before
they could gain entertainment, concerning Gods visitation upon my people in
London) did not shame (as I said before) to say for truth, that the dried
Salt-fish which he bought of a Fish-monger of London at Sturbridge Fair was
Twelue-moneth; this time of affliction, had the Tokens on it, his reason why?
was for that he heard, that his Fishmonger of whom he bought it, was now dead
of the Plague: Whereupon one of my Citizens which was then present, made him
this answer; Sir, said he, when I am at home in the Town where I live, I use
to go to Market my self, and going to the Fish-Market to buy a fresh Cod, two
or three; I make a special choice of those have spots upon them; for they are
accounted the best and dearest Fish; and no doubt but yours were such (said he)
before they were salted; so that discourse ended; But would any Creature that
ever feared God, dare speak such an incredible tale; my prayers shall be to
God to forgive them, they know not what they say.

You Loobies or Lobbes in the Country, I would with you hereafter, when your
seed is in the ground, to pray for the increase thereof, that therewith you may
fill your Barnes, Stables, and Hogstyes; and not with my dear Children, who
brought more Gold about them, then thy self and all thy Hogs flesh could be
valued at. Woe worth thee for doing so, A Pudding of a yard long, was as dear
as a Chain of gold comparatively, with such unchristianlike Turks; But let my
sister Rus and her rusticall illiterated Hounds and Hyndes take notice, that
(were not my Charity such) as to give way to their imbecillitie, and to lament
for it, the many Souls that groned under their Intolerable sufferance and
burdens in the Country, would call for vengeance: But I have persuaded with
them, and do find that (Quisquis sort con^entus) every one is contented with
his suffering.

I doubt it not (Courteous Readers) but some of you, know the Worshipful Town
of Vtoxeter in Staffordshire I will tell you a tale, done at some time or
other: There was a Waggoner did dwell and belong to the same Town (it matters
not for his name) who indeed when he had sufferance to come into the Town, did
dwell upon his own land And I am forced now upon special occasion, to
describe the barbarous usage of the ignorant Inhabitants of the same Town
toward him, (because it was in the time of Gods like Visitation as at this
instant) His custom then was to furnish some Londoners (who remained in the
City the time of the Infection) with Butter and Cheese, which he continued all
the time of the same Visitation, (being a very honest and sufficient man) which
the Townsmen of Vtoxeter, taking to heart: debarred him entrance into the
Town, at his return from London, insomuch, that he was forced to lie forth of
the Town in a Common where he did continue at every return from London from
the beginning of the Pestilence, till it pleased God to mittigate and appease
his wrath as he does now (his Name be glorified therefore.) Imediately then (as
they might do now) the discreet Governors of the same Town taking it more to
heart, dissembled themselves together, and being armed Capapee, with
extraordinary Weapon, sallied forth of the Town, Vi and Armis to kill the
Wagoners Horses, and with a Ch^rlingdish of Coals, to fire and burn his
Wagon: which they had done, had not a friend of the Wagoners entered into five
hundred pound bonds, (stay there) into an Obligation of five Marks, with
condition, either Endorsed or Subscribed, that the said Waggoner should not
come within three miles of the Town, after his then next return from London;
until he had be^^e ayred a full Month in the Country. I^ this exceed not the
Wise men of Goatham; Judge you.

I must strain a little more; It is not unknown to the Chief only, but to
the Inferiors of my afflicted City, that the doting and fearful Parents in
the Country, (dreading Gods Judgments should fall upon their Children in my
visited City, and his punishment strike them with the same visitation of
Plague and Pestilence;) could not forbear, but instantly (I may say
innocently) as soon as they had notice, that the hand of mine Almighty Father,
began to touch my poor Inhabitants, but every or most of their Fathers or
Mothers in the Country, whose Sons and Daughters were obliged as Prentices
to any of my Children in London; but Letter upon letter came with Contents,
beseeching and humbly entreating their Childrens Masters to give them leave to
spend their time with them in the Country, until it should please God to
cease his Visitation in London; whereunto my Children condiscended, but now
what ensues thereupon? This; The Landlords or Creditors of some of those
Parents cannot now (as I am informed) demand or require Rent or Debts; but
they shame not to offer this affront? That they have been and still are so
charged with their Children the Apprentices of London, that the remainder of
their estate is not able to make satisfaction. Woe is me that this imputation
should be laid upon my Childrens Children for being their Servants, they took
them for their own Children as they are bound by my Custom. Therefore sister
Rus if thou chide not thy Children for their Ignorance, and return home in
safety my Childrens children, I shall not only be very angry, but my
Sister-Cities throughout the Universe will condemn thee. Salve it good Sister
for your Reputation.

One thing more I would entreat at your hands, that you would summon your
great Commanders, for Charities sake; there may be order taken, to vnstake the
remarkable places of my Children, whom God took to his mercy in the Highways
and other places. Oh show your selves charitable: though you would not afford
them Christian burial. Let there no base stakie wooden memorial be left to
view, as if they had Misdone, Hanged or Drowned themselves, For Christianity
grant it; and withal clear all the Hedges and Trees of those lamentable
objects which hang upon them, that are a thousand times more moving Corasiues,
then the Executioners Wardrop at the basest Brokers stall. Now let you and I be
friends; For my Children which are left, do promise me faithfully, never to
trouble you again in that nature: They will stay with me in my extremity;
and eat a Capon, drink a cup of Claret, an other of Sack; and feed in that
gross fashion; rather then on your dainty Puddings and Hogs flesh. I have
done, and I beseech my Eternal Father, the only Omnipotent God, to make an end
to, of his greiuous Visitation, by his dangerous and fearful Ague with you
and yours; and his more fearful scourge of Plague and Pestilence with me and
mine, and that for his dearly beloved Sons sake Christ Jesus his only Savior
and Redeemer. Amen.

A seeming Friend hearing some few of these Lines read by the Author, before he
committed them to the Press, would entreat so much love from him, as to
Compose an Acrostique Verse (if he would thereunto condescend) upon these words
in the Margent: the Party having a Rope Tar'd Nosegay in his hand. whereupon
the Author styles his Verse thus.

To all your Rope-tard Nosegay-Bearers.
S Stand farther off's my subject, thus I write.
T It Is propper thereon, these days to endite:
A A man knows not his friend from any other,
N Nor can he now know his endeered Brother,
D Death hants them so, they know not one from the other
F Far must thou stand, if thou converse with me,
V Unless thou have like Nosegay; Do thou see,
R Rope Tarr'd I have, it keeps out Pestilence,
T The Devil as soon, or else thou have no sense,
H He that does think, by that to be Plague-free,
E Ever shall be accounted like to thee,
R Respected not; called fool for's Foppery.
O Omnipotent Jove bids thee repent and mend,
F For thy great sin (says he) this Plague I send,
F Fear thou, repent, and then my Plague shall end.
Amicus Mariscallus PETOVVE.

A true Relation of the Funeral of Captain RICHARD ROBINS, performed the 24.
of September 1625. in Arms.
EVEN then when fell meagre Death by the sacred Decree of Heaven began to
shorten his Weekly slaughter, and then, even then, when the vulgar Rabble of
the Rustiques in the Country, mouthed it with a most unchristianlike, and most
uncharitable rumor (viz.) That there was not people enough in London left
alive to bury their Dead) Then, even then I say, did the great Commander of all
power, call to his Mercy from amongst us, Captain Richard Robins, one of the
Twenty Commanders and Captains (under the renowned Colonells) of the Six
thousand trained Citizens, of the ever famous, though now distressed City of
London, who dyed of an Ague at Hackney in Middlesex, and was brought from
thence to London, and Buried in his Parish Church called St. Magaret upon Fish
street hill. Some few days after (as it is customarie amongst them) the
Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden, that were then in Town, considering the
weakness of their Number present, and yet might do no less, then give the
deceased Captain his right and Merit; treated with the then right Honorable
John Gore Lord Mayor of this said City; that he would be pleased to grant a
public Funeral in Arms. And for that most of the Gentlemen were at that
time in the Country, and therefore that the rest may strengthen themselves
with their Friends that were also Citizens and Soldiers of the Trained Bands
in London; to make a complete Company to make the Country wonder; whereunto it
pleased his Honor to condescend upon Saturday, being the 24. day of September
last 1625. was the Funeral, when all the Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers met at
the Artillery Garden, about two of the clock in the afternoon, where they
were ranckt by the Officers there (Souldier-like) according to the number,
three and four a breast, all the Musketieres both of the Prime and Reere
division of Musketieres, three in Rank; and the Pikes Four a breast in the
body. Captain Von was Leader that day, Associated with Captain Humphrey
Smith. So Marched they forth the Garden, to Leaden Hall, where the Hearse
attended, with an Epitaphe thereon diuulging to the world, the worth of that
worthy Captain, the Worshipful Company of Ironmungers, of whom he was a
member; The Masters also of St. Thomas Hospital, of whom in his life time he
was likewise one, attended with many more of his Friends. The number of
Soldiers that were completely Armed, both Pikes and Musketeers were Two
hundred forty four, besides two Captains, the Marsall, the Lieutenant, the
Alferus or Ensign, Four Serieants, four Drums, two Fifes, the Armourer,
the Gun-maker and their Servants; and Six Gentlemen who carried the Trophies
of his Arms before the Hearse. The beholders then present, were at least Ten
thousand people, who were eyewitnesses, that what is here related is true. The
exact and Souldier-like performance and managing of the business, I refer to
the judgment of the discreet and wise Spectators then present. Only I will
entreat you (judicious Reader) to take notice, that after he was Souldier-like
Enterred, he had three several Vollies of Shot given. Which being finished,
the Drums beat a Troop until the Soldiers came forth of the Churchyard
(where the Vollies were given) into the street upon Fishstreet-hill: where
falling into Ranks as before, the Captain commands a March to be beaten,
and so Marched through Gracious-street, Cornehill, the Poultry, and Cheapside,
that the Market people might report through the Country, that their rumor was
false. And so to the Lord Major his house, who presented himself at the gate,
and very Honorably and freely caused both Flaggons of Sack and Claret to be
brought forth, for all such as pleased to drink thereof; and there likewise
were two Vollies given; for which his Lordship gave the Gentlemen many thanks,
assuring them, that they had done great honor to the City, and greater
comfort to the Kingdom. Then took they a fair Farewell, and Trooped through
Cheapside, and so to the Artillery Garden; whereupon lodging of the Colors,
they concluded with their last volly, and so I leave them, but not you, for I
entreat you to read that which you have not yet read.

Epitaphium dignissimi Ducis RICHARDI ROBYNS.
ONe of the Twenty Captains here does lie
The rest must follow, for the rest must die,
Nineteen behind, and he is gone before,
To lead the way to the Elizian shore,
Whilst he did live, like to the God of War,
He many Soldiers bred, no'ne e're did mar,
He had as many Sons, as any man
(Complete for Soldiers) since the World began
Lieutenants some; others whom Ensigns bear,
The Rest can do as much, as any dare,
Against the Foe of Englands Sovereign;
We that h^^ follow will the same maintain.
He was a Lover both of Arts and Arms,
He taught a present Guard for em'nent harms:
That now we lose him, we his Death deplore,
He Is dead, yet lives, we hope for evermore.
Dead though he be, and from us quite bereauen,
Though dead to us, yet does he live in Heaven.
Viuit post Funera Vertus.
LONDON making her full period.
NOble Soldiers, and my valiant Children, you have lodged your Colors, and
finished your last Volly. Give me leave I pray you, to add one Volly more,
according to my nature and condition, and so I Will conclude. My shot shall not be
Bullets of Ammunition, but words of Admonition, which I will mildely and
modestly dart amongst you. You my dear Children, which have been so
barbarously used in the Country amongst those inhumane People, such of you
especially I speak to, who are Landlords and Creditours to your inferior
Brethren. Let me beg and entreat you (although you have endured much discontent
and sorrow in the Country) not to revenge it upon your poor Brethren in
London, who have undergone with me, more grief, more want, more sighs, more
tears, more Groans, and more Misery then my Tongue or Pen can express. Oh be
merciful my good Children one to another, as you would have my Savior to take
mercy upon you. You that are Landlords be not ouer-hasty with your poor
Tenants, for your Rents: Nor you that are Creditors, oh be not harsh nor severe
to your weak and impouerished Debtors: But consider the lamentable misery they
have a long time endured: and the extraordinary expenses they have been at,
and no means to get a penny, which you in your discretions cannot choose but
conceive; and I hope will take so much to ^art, that for Charity you will
spare them, until such time as my disioynted Estate be settled again; and my
Citizens have Commerse one with another as they have had, and Trading as
frequent as it has been, that thereby they may strive and endeavor to get,
what they of necessity have spent: and by their honest Industry and labor in
their Vocations, attain to their former Maturity in their several estates.
Which they may do, so your patience please to give them time and liberty;
which I beseech you grant, that all of you may have full satisfaction and
content. The Tenant content from the Landlord by his great patience, the
Debtor content from the Creditor by his much forbearance. And the Landlords
and Creditors from the Tenants and Debtors have full satisfaction. Such a
blessed time, and those happy days does your poor Mother desire to see; which
that both she and you, and all of us may see, let us all pray jointly to his
Divine Majesty, that only can grant our request.

Grant then good God, what we require of thee,
And we shall praise thy Name eternally.
Amen.
FINIS.

