The perfect path to Paradise: Containing diverse most ghostly and wholesome
Prayers, fruitful and Christian Meditations, for the comfort of every
afflicted conscience: Published in these dangerous days of wickedness, and
delivered to all those that fear God, and hope for salvation in Christ Jesus,
as a spiritual weapon to beat down sin, satan, and all the power of hell,
etc. By John Phillips.

Matthew 3. Repent and amend your lines for the kingdom of God is at hand.

Imprinted at London in Fleetstreete by H. Iackson. 1588.

To the Right Honorable Lord, Robert Deuorax Earl of Essex and Ewe, Visecounte
of Herrifard and Bourchire, L. Ferres of Chartley, Bourchire and Louaine:
Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter John Philips his humble well-willer, wishes the fear of God,
continual health of body and mind, peace and quietness of conscience with
all other the gifts of grace prrceeding from God the Father through the
intercession of Christ Jesus etc.
RIght honorable, when I call to memory how apt and ready we are of our selves
to fall into the filthy quagmire of the old Adams corruption, wherein we are
most monstrously soyled with all kinds of wickednesses, which make us
detested in the eyes of our heavenly father, whose love we by the exercise of
our notorious evils, daily committed against his divine majesty, we most
wilfully convert to hatred, I am driven into no small admiration. But truly as
these are the dangerous days of wickedness wherein sin abounds and
iniquity has obtained the pre-eminence and upper hand, so it is expedient for
all those that have the feeling of GODS grace in their consciences, to arm
themselves in this worldly Laberinth of uncleanness with a lively faith and
earnest repentance, and to continue in prayer and supplication to the
almighty, to abridge these days of wickedness, and to hasten his coming.
For unless this perilous season as Christ himself has foretold us, should
be shortened, wherein sin is exalted to the subversion of virtue, there
should no flesh be saved. It shall be necessary for us therefore, that seek
daily and hourly, by the usual practice of our innumerable euiles, to offend
the Lord our gracious God, whose heavy indignation we have worthily heaped up
unto our selves, and whose vengeance we have justly deserved. Now even now
and henceforth for cuer to return with David from our impieties, to mourn with
Magdalin for our iniquities, to weep with Peter for our offenses, and to cry
out with the prodigal child, for the mispending of our portions ryotously. Yea
and the^ the Lord our God whose wrath we have kindled up against us, like
consuming coals of fire, beholding the sorrows of our contrite hearts, the
grievous gronings of our sinful souls, and our wet and blubbered eyes, weeping
for our wickednesses, will repent him of these plagues that he had prepared to
pour forth upon us for our destructio^s. Yea he will cast aside the vioals of
his wrath, yea he will in his mercy quench the burning coals of his fury.
Yea he will unbend the bow of his anger and break asunder the arrows of his
displeasure, wherewith he had in his divine justice prepared to wound us: For
faithful prayer and hearty repentance are acceptable to God. The which weapons
if we will take upon to use, undoubtedly in steed of cursinges we shall obtain
blessings, in steed of penury, we shall reap plenty: in steed of battle we
shall have peace: in steed of sickness we shall find health, yea and at the
last of unclean vessels, we shall be made vessels of honor and heirs of his
heavenly kingdom. God for his son Christ his sake give us the grace
therefore whilst mercy as yet keeps his indignation at a baye, to continue
in prayer, and to show us hearty repentant for our sins, for the day of our
visitation draws nigh. Thus ceasing right honorable, I leave you to the
merciful protection of the almighty beseeching him in this life to bless and
defend you from al peril and danger, to continue your health to his good
guiding will and provident pleasure, to give you victory over all the enemies of
God and her royal majesty, and in the world to come to crown your head with
honor and glory.

Your honors in all humility and reverence. JOHN PHILIPS.

When that thou preparest thy self to pray, look that thou with all
humbleness of mind kneelest down, and lifting up thy heart, thy hands, and
thine eyes unto heaven, to God the Father almighty, pray on this manner.
O Lord open thou my lips, that my mouth may speak and show forth that,
which is to thy glory and praise.

A prayer for the Morning.
O Omnipotent Father, and everliving GOD, the Fountain of al felicity, from
whom only proceeds all good gifts, most hu^blie I beseech thee of thine
aboundante mercy and exceeding kindness, so to direct and govern me this day
and ever, with thy good guyding spirit, that all my thoughts, words and deeds,
may only be occupied in thy service, faith, fear and love, and so assist and
strengthen me with thy grace, O most merciful and loving father, for thy son
Jesus Christ his sake, that nether sin, death, hell, nor Satan, have the
dominion and upper hand of me, Indue my heart with the true understanding of
thy true and lively word, that I may be ready and proane manfully to fight
under the standerd of my glorious captain Jesus Christ, against the world, the
flesh, and that cruel Serpente the old Leuiathan, which hunteth continually
like a roaring lion, seeking the utter destruction of my soul. Make me
constant in time of temptation, ye when or at what time my rebelling and
sinful flesh, shall entice me to lust after the pomps and vanities of this
wicked world, I may by a strong, lively, and vnshakeable faith, through the
bitter torments that my savior Christ Jesus suffered for me, and all that
faithfully believe and call upon him, so mortify and subdue the old Adam, that
I may be dead and buried from sin and all iniquity, and the new man Christ
Jesus may continually dwell and reign in me, by whose means, I shall be
garnished and decked by the means of a fruitful faith, with immortality and
heavenly blessedness, vouchsafe (O Lord) I beseech thee, according to the
multitude of thy mercies to look upon me, and by thy celestial providence so
illuminate the eyes of my soul, that I may continually watch for the glorious
coming of thy anointed son Jesus Christ. Root out (O Lord) in and from me
the vilde and corrupt branches of rapine, deceipte, avarice, luxury,
concupiscence, and all ungodliness, let the motions of my mind altogether
depend upon thee, prepare my tongue to publishe thy praise, let my lips be
locked up from all scurillitic and uncomely talk, let mine ears loathe and
abhor to hear thy glorious and blessed name blasphemed, and thy truth to be
by any Sectarian ill spoken of, and slaundered, keep and defend me under the
wings of thy comfortable protection, from al errors, sismes, and detestable
heresies, make me with out fayning, firmly, and constantly to build upon the
truth, wherein is perfectly set forth thy great mercy and divine justice. Let
the zeal of thy promises in all distres be my chiefest joy and consolation, and
give me grace from above, that as I make my boast of thy mercies and loving
kindness, by virtue whereof, I am by my Savior Christ Jesus quickened from death
to life, and in his dearest death, and precious bloudsheding, regenerated and
borne a new, not of water but of the spirit by faith, so Lord, I may with thy
aboundaunt love shown to me ward, and the whole posterity of Adam, I may
be afraid, wilfully, or of a set purpose, to transgress thy commandments,
and so incur thereby thy displeasure, that the effects of thy justice, in the
day of thy coming to judgment, be pronounced against me, to the utter
destruction of body and soul, make me alwais willing good Lord to hear thy
word, by the power whereof my faith is increased, and therewithal plant in
me perfect love and obedience, and so direct my footsteppes in this vale of
misery, that I may tread the pathe that leads to thee, with whom my soul
thirsts to rest, even as vehementlye as the Heart longs after the water
brooks. Grant this O merciful God, for the honor and glory of thy names
sake. Amen*

A fruitful Prayer to be said at the g^yng to bed of every Christian.
Most merciful Father, I most wretched and unworthy sinner, prostrate my
self before the Throane of thy heavenly grace, yielding unto thee most
humble and heartye thanks, that have of thy exceeding love and favor,
preserved me this day from al peril and danger, humbly beseeching thy divine
majesty, this night to preserve me, for the love of thy only son, and my
sweetest Savior Jesus Christ, my Mediator and advocate, who continuallye
pleads and makes intercession to thee for me, and all the rest of thy
chosen children, presenting his bloody wounds, and his glorious body al to be
scourged in thy divine presence, who thereby does mittigate thy wrath and
indignation, justly conceived against me, a miserable and wretched creature,
and all mankind. Make me Lord still to confess mine unworthiness, and
weakness to be such, and so great, that of my self I am not worthy to lift
up mine eyes to heaven, much less to be called thy son, such and so great is
the burden of my sin and iniquity, so that by the means of my corruption
and filthiness, I acknowledge my self to be the child of death, and
destruction, yet build I still on thy promises good Lord, and in this great
danger, I come unto thee with tears, saying.

O father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son: of my self I have nothing, but by thee I have
al things: of my self I acknowledge I have justly deserved the heavy sentence
of thine ire, but by grace of thee, O mighty Emanuel, I am regenerate and
borne again from death to life: from danger to joy: from peril to peace:
from bondage to liberty, and so in fine, from Hell and damnation, to bliss
and salvation. Such is the effect of thy mercy, so abundant is thy love
toward me, and all those that with contrite hearts present themselves unto
thee. Increase my faith lord that it may abound in good and fruitful works,
so fortify me, yt I never swerue from thy verity, give me thy grace from
above, O merciful Jesus, that I may never shrink from thy sacred testimonies.
And more over, I with all humility, and reverence of heart and mind, beseech
thee this night, which thou have ordained for man to rest in, thou will guard
and protecte me with thy good guidyng spirit, and albeit, my sinful flesh
shall sleep and slumber, yet grant good Lord, that my soul may continually
keep watch and ward, let not the enemy find me slumbering and sleeping as
careless in the cradle of sinful Security, least that whilst I am unarmed,
that is naked and destitute of thy grace and favor, he enter in and break up
the house of my sinful body, and make such havoc and spoil, that my
infected and leaporous soul, deformed by means of mine iniquity, and wounded
with the dangeruos Darts of transgression, be thrown with the body of sin
to the Lake of destruction, wherein is continual wayling, and gnashing of
teeth. Make me still (O good Lord) to consider that the bed is a plain
pattern and similitude of the Grave, which continually calls for me and all
other thy Creatures, make me to understand that when I am laid (of my self)
without thy heavenly providence, I can not be able to rise again: make me to
acknowledge, that sleep is the very figure of death, to whose stroke, at thy
appointed pleasure, I must submit my self. Indue me with love and charity to
all men, let my Lamp (O Lord) be garnished with Oil, that whenever, or at
what time soever thy messenger death shall drawnie, and knock at the gates of
my house, I may at his sommons, in the day of the resurrection of the dead,
be ready to attend on thee and thy bride, with my burning Lamp, that is, with
a steadfast faith, when as by thee I shall be clothed a new, for my mortal body
shall then be covered with immortallitie, the corruption of my sinful and
rebelling flesh, shall be changed to incorruption and perfect puritye, thy
righteousness shall be mine, thy merits shall make me perfect and holy, by
virtue whereof hell shall loose his victory, death shall loose his sting, my
faith and hope shall have end and reward, and I with thy Saints, continuallye
dwell in love and charity with thee, the Heavenly Bridegroom Christ Jesus. To
whom with the father and the holy ghost, be ascribed all lawd, glory, power,
praise, and dominion, for ever. Amen.

A Prayer for the remission of sin, and to obtain a virtuous life.
FOr as much as (O Bountiful Lord) it is most meet, right, and just, that
all flesh should praise, magnify, and worship thee, and should without
ceasing give thanks unto thee, who only art the Creator and maker of all
things, as well visible as invisible, who only art the Treasure of all
goodness, the Well of life, only God and Lord, whom the Heavens, and Heavens
of Heavens, the Sun, the Moon the Stars, the earth, the Sea, with all that
move therein: yea, the heavenly company of martyrs, the souls of the
Prophets, and Apostles, Angels, Arckeaungels, together with the souls of al
just and righteous persons, do lawd and glorify. It is most requisite, that
each mortal creature, living in this world, should also acknowledge thy
magnificence, wherefore (most merciful Father) I with my heart and mouth do
acknowledge thee to be my king and Lord, the giver of all goodness, I
confess thee to be omnipotent, reverent, merciful, long suffering, God of all
consolation, comfort, mercy and pity.

I know that of thine infinite goodness only, thou did make man after thy
similitude and likeness, placing him in the most delectable place of Paradise,
and although he did transgress thy commandment, and thereby deserve eternal
death and damnation, yet thou like a most loving and pitiful Father, did not
utterly reject him, but gently correct him, and after that thou have sent him
into the earth, commanding him there to increase and multiply, thou did
instruct his posterity with thy law, thou did teach them by the Propehtes,
and after that, sentest down thine only begotten son, to take upon him our
nature, and to suffer death for our sins, thereby to make a recompense for
the offense which man had committed against thee, and all this thou did of thy
exceeding great mercy and kindness, without any deserte of mankind, not
being so much as by any one prayer, or yet entreaty, thereunto incited.

Therefore, I being boldened with such inestimable benefits, so freely given
and bestowed, do without any fear at this time, appear before thy divine
majesty, prostrating my self before the seat of thy mercy, and with all
humblenes of heart, and mind, do make this my prayer unto thee.

Despise me not (O Lord God) being defiled with sin and iniquity, for behold
I present my self before thee, not presuming upon mine own worthiness, but
trusting in thy goodness.

Be merciful unto me a sinner, light thou the dull sighted eyes of my mind,
open you the stopped ears of mine heart, ye I may both see, hear and perceive
and understand that which thou teach, and always do that which thou
command, make me not only a hearer of thy heavenly doctrine, but also a
perfect follower of the same: direct sanctify and govern my life, be thou
always present and ready, both to hear and to help me. Save and defend me
from al shame and reproach, be thou my shield and buckler against al
temptations, cleanse my mind and thought from all uncleanness, keep and
preserve me from all danger both of body and soul. This frail life is
nothing else but a continual warfare in this world, our sins most like to
cruel enemies assault us on every side, again our days are but few in
number.

Guide me therefore with thy grace, so to spend my small, short, and
transitory time in this world, the very Fountain, welspring, and vale of all
misery, that I may be made a member of Christ, and a partaker of thine
eternal felicity. To the which, seeing that through mine own deserte, I
shall never be able to aspire, (for sin truly so abounds in me, that each
deed and act of mine, is not only infected, but altogether poluted therewith)
none other remedy have I to ease my self, none other salve to ease my sore,
but only to take hold of that promise of thine, whereas thou say: Come unto
me all ye that labor, and be ouerloden, and I will refresh you, this is my
holdfaste, this is mine Ankor, and sure stay, for verily (sweet Savior) when
I look upon mine own fraylenesse, and behold how ready I am to offend
thee, then I quake for fear, then I am almost in utter despair, but as soon
as I call to mind thy great love and kindness, and how that thou will not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live, and that in what
day soever he does heartily repent, and call unto thee, thou will hear him,
then I am relieved, then I am not a little comforted, knowing surely that thou
will perform that which thou have promised. In faithful assurance whereof, I
now say unto thee.

Turn thou me (O my God) and I shall be turned, from all my wickedness
deliver me. Heal my soul which is wounded with sin for I do acknowledge my
iniquity, and am heartily sorry for mine offenses. Correct me, O Lord, but
yet not in thy fury, look not upon my weakness, but think upon thine own
worthiness, remember thy loving kindenes, and in the abundance and multitude of
thy mercies wipe clean away, pardon, and forget all my sins, throw which I
have either in word, or deed, thought, or any other kind of way offended
thee, blot them out of thy remembrance, and let the blood of that Immaculate
Lamb Jesus Christ wash them away, let mine old offenses so decay and die in
me, that I never commit them any more, or by any means renew them in thy sight.

And in the mean time do not withdraw thy grace from me, but cause me to do
all yt which good is. O Father remove thy wrath away from me, and restore unto
me thy favor. Turn thou thy loving countenance unto me, and plentifully pour
forth thy mercy upon me. Incline my heart to do that only which is
acceptable in thy sight. Guide thou my footesteps in thy paths, and suffer me
not at any time to stray from thy ways, let me always have the fear of thee
in my heart, and the remembrance of thy benefits fresh in my memory, and if at
any time through weakness and frayltie I do transgress thy commandments, yet
do not therefore reject and cast me out of thy sight, but be thou that good
Samaritane, and pour the Oil and wine of mercy and forgiveness, into those
wounds which sin shall make in me. Disdain me not for my reuoulting, but
have mercy upon me according to thy great goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies, wipe away mine iniquity, hide me under the shadow
of thy wings and protection, lighten me with thy holy spirit. Make me thy
servant, and so indue me with thy grace, that I may unfeignedly, with heart and
voice, serve, honor, and praise thee, all the days of my life. Amen.

A Prayer for patience in trouble, and meekely to suffer adversity.
O Gracious Lord, Omnipotent, whose mercy is everlasting and infinite, bow
down thine ear and harken unto this my prayer, which I make before thy
divine Majesty, most humbly beseeching thee of thine acustomed goodness to
indue me with the works of mercy, and deeds of charity, and above all things
to give me patience in adversity, meekly to suffer, and patiently to take
whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon me, and never to murmur, or to
grudge thereat, but always to think thy loving and gentle correction to be
much less than the deserts of my great and manifold offenses.

Again, if I be not under correction, then am I not thy child, for what
father is he who corrects not his Children, whom he most intyrely beloueth.
This the^ is an evident toke^ that thou love us, when as thou correctest us,
for as the scripture says: Whom God loves, him he chasteneth. Thou see all
things, thou understand and know al things, so that not so much as one
little Sparrow lights upon the ground, without thy knowledge: yea, our very
thoughts are foreknowen unto thee, thou disposest and orderest all things as
seems best to thy holy will and pleasure, by thy help I may do all
things, without thee I can do nothing. When thou powrest upon us thy
creatures, thy good gifts and benefits: When thou bestowest upon us
prosperity, health, wealth, and such like, thou do it to this intent, that
we acknowledging the same, should thereby be encouraged to serve, honor, and
humblye obey thee, and always praise and magnify thy glorious name,
contrariwise, when thou strykest us with thy rod of correction, as plaguing us
with great mortality, suffering our enemies to invade us: robbers for to
spoil us: poverty to oppress us: or fire to consume those things, which
thou have lent us, for the maynteynaunce of our bodies in this mortal life.
Thou do it to put us in mind that we have transgressed thy Commandments,
that we have not harkened unto thee, neither done that which is acceptable in
thy sight, but willingly falling into the puddle of sin, and following our
own appetites, have provoked thy just wrath and indignation against us. Thus
thou dealest with us, O Lord, to the intent that we suffering bodily punishment,
and feeling the smart of the same may thereby be admonished of our duty, and
with true compunction of heart, desire to be released from thy scourges which
we have deserved, and worthily receive, and then acknowledge our selves to be
lost children, and straying sheep, may both see and be ashamed of our
unbridled affections, and wilfulnes, which have brought us to calamity and
misery, and with ye true penitent to say.

We are not worthy, most merciful father, to lift up our eyes or voice unto
thee for our manifold sins and wickedness: nevertheless, presuming upon
thine aboundaunt mercy (who refusest none that do call upon thee) most
lamentablye we do cry, have mercy upon us* O Lord, have mercy upon us
miserable sinners, being now greeuouslye afflicted with the burden of
punishment and affliction, which thou have laid upon us, put thou therefore
away all displeasure conceived against us, thy poor creatures, and grant us,
that being warned by this, we may ever hereafter serve thee in newness of
life, and never commit any thing which shall displease or offend thee.

This O heavenly father, I acknowledge to be our duty, but although I for
my part, have not performed the same as I ought to do, yet I beseech thine
inestimable goodness not to execute the rigor of thy justice upon me, but to
stay thine hand, and before thou give me any greter wound, to behold my
humility and repentance, which being not able to recompense and satisfy the
trespasses which I against thee have committed, do offer unto thee according as
the poor Widdowe did, all that which I am able to give, that is a sorrowful
contrition of heart, for my former offenses done and paste. Thy Justice as it
is right, so is it rigorous to sinners, thou art so jealous and so much do
detest sin, that thou sparest not to punnishe thy very elect and chosen
servants, when as they fall into it.

Who was more acceptable in thy sight, then that holy Prophet king David? of
whom thou thy self did say, I have found a man according to mine own heart,
even David my servant: yet nevertheless, diverse and sundry ways did thou
punish him, when that he had swarued from thy testimonies. Thou sufferedst him
to be molested with the insurrection of his own son, thou did send the
Prophet unto him, to offer him the choice of plagues, which thou would send
upon him for his wicked living, but when he with sorrowful sighs, and
trickling tears, turned unto thee, confessing his fault, craving pardone, and
promising amendment of life, thou forgatest thine anger, and forgauest his
offense.

Other of thy chosen Uessels thou have permitted to be greeuouslye tormented,
and vexed by sundry troubles and adversities, only to try their faith and
steadfastness toward thee, as thou did suffer that pacyent man Iobe, for to
be most cruelly entreated by that enemy of all mankind, to have his houses
burned and spoiled, his cattle taken away, his servants driven into bondage,
his Children to be slain, his own body to be afflicted with most loathsome
diseases, plagues, and sores, and all this thou did not for any evil deed of
his, but to show thine Omnipotency and power, for when thou had tried him to
the utmost, and found that his ennemie the Devil could not prevail against
him, or by any (...) and grief, (...) him to blaspheme and speak evil of thee,
thou did reduce him to health, thou did enriche him again, thou did
restore unto him again his children, friends, familye, and all his goods, with
much more than ever he before possessed, showing most manifestlye, that thou
will* re ward them most plenteously, which do love thee, follow and observe
thy commandementes.

Wherefore I beseech thee to give me grace, that what soever way it shall
please thee, to visit me with thy punishment, I may take it patiently and
say: Naked came I into this world, and naked shall I return to the earth
again, the Lord gives, the Lord takes away, even as it pleases the Lord,
so be it. Suffer me not to despair, or to think that thou dealest unjustly
with me, but to say. Shall I receive prosperity at the Lords hand, and not
to be content with adversity: and always to think upon this. Happy are they
whom thou do punish, for though thou make a wound, thou also give a
plaster, though thou smitest, thy hand makes whole again, my iniquity is
great, but be thou merciful unto my wickedness. O deliver me from thine
anger, and press me not farther than I shall be able to bear, but now that I
acknowledge, that what soever trouble thou haste sent me, or wilt lay upon
me, is either for the punishment of mine iniquity, or for the trial of my
constancy, I may with repentant David, find remission of my sins, and with
patient Iobe release of my adversity, and obtayn such favor in thy sight, that
thou never again so grievously punish me, but that I may so pass this life,
that I may afterward live with thee, to who^ be honor and glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

A prayer against the fear of worldly casualties.
O Most bountiful and loving Father, mine only guyder and comforter, the Well
of mercy, the true light of the world, take away the darkness of my mind,
lighten my heart and senses, indue me with thy grace, arm me so strongly with
sure hope, confidence and trust in thee, that I never be driven into fear,
either by the subtle invasions of our ghostlye enemy Satan, or by the
crafty wiliness of the world, neither yet by loss, damage, hurt, or
hindrance of any of those vain and transitory things, which we in this world
do possess. But always whatsoever shall become of them, to think that they
are but things lent, and not our own, and that we shall make a straight
account for the use, or abuse of them.

Whereby the more we possess thereof, the greater shall be our pain, if we
abuse them. Wherefore take from me all inward heaviness, thought and care,
for any loss and discommodity received by worldly goods, and always to think
that as well poverty, as riches: needinesse, as abundance: sickness as
health: adversity, as prosperity: come from thee, and that it is known to
thine unsearchable judgment only, why and wherefore thou sendest either of
these upon us, and therefore let not my mind be troubled with any fear of
things to chance, saving only to fear to displease thee, but always to be
merry in thee with soberness, and to cast all my care of worldly affairs
upon thee. For as much as thou have commanded, that we should not be careful
what to eat or what to drink, or with what raiment we should be clothed, for you
will not see the righteous forsaken or their children begging their bread,
and that thou tournest all things to the best, to them that serve thee, and
fly unto thee for succor in the time of their distress.

Let this (O Lord) be ever more fresh in my memory, graven in my heart, and
ready in my mouth, so that I leaving all needless fear, may always give
thanks unto thee, and praise thy holy name. Amen.

The prayer unto God the Father.
Almighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom no deserte, merit,
or worthiness of ours, but thine own great clemency, mercy, and pity, caused
to send down thine only begotten son into this world, to bear the burden
of our sins, with the which, we most miserable sinners were ouerladen, and
that he should suffer most cruel torments, yea, and also most bitter and
shameful death, and sanctify the reprochefull name of the Cross, with the
renting of his blessed body, and shedding his most precious blood thereon.
Thereby to make atonement between thee and us: thereby to pay the ransom for
our souls: thereby to consumate and finish the perfection of our redemption
and salvation. Which thing it was thy good will, that he should do, not only
to aswage thy wrath and indignation, but also to bring us again into thy grace
and favor, and that we being delivered out of the bondage of sin and hell,
might serve thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life, and
by thy free gift and benefit of his death and passion, be made partakers of
his resurrection, and of thine endless and unspeakable glory.

Wherefore my God, my maker, my Lord, my king, seeing thou have so aboundauntly
bestowed thy Heavenly gifts upon me, and all mankind, and have so plentifully
poured out thy grace and favor on us, that for our sakes, thou would not
spare thy own son. How shall we escape thine indignation, which for this
care and kindness of thine, are most careless and unkind, and among all
other, which way shall I poor creature turn me? how shall I, who have been
most unthankful for his benefits, and most unmindful of them, be so
bold as to lift up my heart, or hands unto the heavens, and to call upon thee?
thou of thy singular goodness did so provide, that the wickedness of old
Adam should be purged and washed away with the blood of Jesus Christ, but I
have wilfullye fallen into sin again: Thou made me the child of light, but
I have made my self an inheritor of darkness: thou made me thine by
creation: I have made my self the child of perdition.

What shall I now therefore do? shall I doubt of any further mercy and
forgiveness? No, no (sweet Lord) so great is thy mercy which surmounteth al
thy works: so large are thy promises, so sure is the perfourmance of them, to
al such as take hold thereof (so dear in thy sight are the merits of thy
son Jesus) so acceptable unto thee is the hearty repentance of a sinner, that
with the remembrannce thereof, I am provoked to cry unto thee, saying: Father,
I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, I am no more worthy to be
called thy child: Nevertheless, behold thou me not as I am, a grievous
offendour, but as thy creature, have now no respect to mine offenses, but
behold my repentance, think not upon my wickedness, but upon the wounds of my
savior Jesus, look not upon my false heart, which has wauered from thy laws,
but behold the bleeding heart of thy son Jesus Christ, which was pierced to
release me and set me free, my sins I cast upon his back, beseeching thee
that his merits may bear them, and thy mercy pardon them.

Hear me, O Lord, my God, hear me, for I know the more earnestlye that I
seek for, and desire thine aid, the readier you art to stretche forth thine
hand to help me. Hear me therefore, O Lord, bow down and incline thy ear unto
my prayer, inspire me so with thy holy spirit, that I may love thee above al
things, and that I never fail to put my hope and trust of salvation in him,
whom thou would to be my Redeemer and savior.

Make me by the forsaking of all wickedness, so to rise from falling into
sin, that I may obtain the true serving of thee with innocence and pureness
of life. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory. Amen.

A Prayer unto God the Son.
O Most sweet Savior, O most merciful Redeemer: O bountiful Jesus, the
son of God, who although thou art high, yet thou art most humble, although
thou art Omnipotente, thou art also most meek, and as thou art most
mighty, so art thou most merciful. To thee O Christ, the guide of al
felicity, the Father of heaven has given all power, both in heaven and in
earth.

Thou art the true Pastor of our souls, thou art our Messiah, you castest off
none that sue unto thee, but as thou have taken away the hand writing that
was against us, and have fastened it to thy Cross, so art thou ready to imparte
the merits of thy Passion, unto all such as with true repentance of their
sins call upon thee faithfully. Wherefore, my sweet Jesus, I most
faythfullye and unfeignedly acknowledge ye benefits that thou have bestowed
upon me, and steadfastlye believe, that thou being an Immaculate Lamb, in whose
mouth was never found guyle, did suffer most cruel torments at the hands of
sinners, for the love of us most wretched sinners, for the which cause I most
heartily beseech thee, and most humbly pray thee, to accept me into the number
of the^, whom thou will make Coinheritours of thy bitter pains, and although
I of my self, be most unworthy thereof, yet thy merits can make me worthy:
to them do I fly, craving that I may be so armed, and defened by them, that I
may subdue the world, the flesh, and the Devil, even as thou have gloriously
conquered sin, death, and Hell. Thou see, O my Savior, how I am daily and
howerly beset, with these three ennemies, and so hardly beseeged of them, yt
without thy help, I can by no means escape, but that I must needs be a pray
unto one of them. Strengthen me therefore, O Lord, that neither the one with
carnal lusts, neither the other with delectable pleasures, nor satan him
self with all his crafty and subtle devises, get the dominion over me. Thou
haste bought me, thou haste paid for me, take thou me, save, keep, and defend
me, be always ready at the voice of my crying, pour into me thy grace
patiently to abide thy divine will and pleasure in all things, make me both at
this present, and all ye days of my life, to have in mind and profoundlye to
root in my heart, the mysteries of thy painful passion, and so to be filled
with the remembrance thereof, that sin may no more enter into me and that
Satan mine old enemy, may well perceive, that he has neither part nor
fellowship in me. But that I am both body and soul altogether thine. To whom
be all praises world without end. Amen.

A Prayer unto God the holy Ghost.
O Holy Ghost, O blessed and Holy Spirit, comforter of them that be
afflicted. Thou proceeding from the Father and the Son, art the true
instructour and teacher of the divine and heavenly veritye. Wherefore I with
all humility, pray thee to renew and make in me a clean heart, to grafte
a right spirit in me, Guide and govern me, that I may think nothing, speak
nothing, do nothing, but that only which shall please thee.

And whereas I have not ceased to offend my Lord God and Maker, and most
greeuouslye to transgress against Jesus my redeemer and savior, I pray thee
that I may have inward sorrow, repentance and shame thereof, and that ever
hereafter, I may perform my duty as I ought to do, and so bring forth the
fruits of repentance, that the passion of Jesus Christ may defend me from all
sin and wickedness, and bring me to the joys of Paradise. So be it.

A devout Prayer.
REmember not, O Lord GOD, thine anger against me an offender, but be
myndefull of thy mercy toward me a true penytente, forget that through
pride, I have provoked thee to ire, and fauourablye harken unto my prayer. What
is Jesus, but a Savior? therefore O bountiful Jesus be thou my Savior, rise
up in thine own strength to help me, say unto my soul, I am thy safegarde.
In thy goodness do I trust, in thee is my hope, and for as much as thou have
willed that we should without ceasing seek and sue unto thee, behold I being
counsayled and foretold by thy co^mandementes, do now both ask, seek, and
knock. But thou which command me to ask, grant that I may receive, thou
bidst me seek, make me to find. Thou have taught me to knock: open unto me yt
stand knocking: strengthen me that am weak: restore me that am lost: revive
me that am dead by sin: make me to serve thee: to live to thee: to give my
self wholly to thee.

I know my God, that because thou made me, I owe my self unto thee, and for
that thou have redeemed me, I should owe thee more than my self. But behold, I
have no more to give, neither can I give my self unto thee, unless thou make
me willing thereunto. Take thou me, draw me unto thee, that as I am thine by
creation, so I may be thine by following of thee, which live and raignest for
ever and ever. Amen.

An other Prayer.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me, most miserable Creature,
which do that which I ought not, and fear that which I have most justly
deserved, if I weigh with my self the wickedness that I have done, the
punishment thereby deserved, is not half so great as the sin that I have
committed, but you art a merciful God, and thy judgments are right, neither
do thou at any time punish us unjustly. Thou almighty god made us, when
as we were not, and when as we were lost and damned, thou did miraculously
restore us. I know and am sure, that our life is not led by sudden and
uncertain motions, but is disposed and directed by thee, thou have a fatherly
care of us al, but specially of all such as do put their whole trust and
confidence in thy mercy.

Therefore I humbly pray and beseech thee, that thou would not deal with me
after my deseruings, but according to thy great mercy, which does exceed the
sin of the whole world.

And as often as thou do punish me outwardly, give me grace inwardlye with
patience, to bear the same and that thy praise never depart out of my mouth.
Order my doings, even as shall be most necessary both for my body and soul.

Thou only have power over all things, thou know all things, to thee be al
honor for ever. Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining of mercy.
Behold, out from the bottom of my heart, do I cry unto thee (O lord)
beseeching thee, that thou would save me from the bottomless pit of Hell.
I know that there is mercy with thee. Do not therefore mark what I have done
amiss. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for then can I by no means
be justified in thy sight.

The remembrance of mine offenses is grievous unto me, and therefore I right
humbly crave pardon thereof. My heart is troubled, my soul is vexed, there is
no health in my flesh. Forsake me not mine only stay and comfort. Despise not
my contrite heart, open the bosom of thy mercy, take clean away mine
iniquity, bring my soul out of tribulation, turn the extremity of thy
justice into thy tender mercy, and when thou shall come to judge ye quick and
the dead, be not revenged on me by eternal damnation, but to take me amongst
thine elect, into the blessed state of Salvation. Grant this O Father, for
Christ's sake, our Mediator, and Advocate. Amen.

An other Prayer.
O Lord my GOD, although I have committed that, whereby I am an offendour, can
I make my self not to be thy creature? though through sin I have lost my
cleanness and purity, have I also taken away thy goodness, and mercy?
though I have committed that, wherefore thou may condemn me, have thou not
done that, whereby thou may save me? True it is (O Lord) that my conscience
does show me, that I have deserved damnation, but thy mercy exceeds all
offensyon. Spare me (O God) because it is not impossible for thy power: it is
not unmeet for thy mercy: it is not unaccustomed, or yet contrary to thine
infinite goodness.

Wherefore thou which have created me, do not destroy me. Thou (O Jesus)
which have redeemed me, do not condemn me, thou which have made me, let not
thy work be cast away by my wickedness. Wype away all that is mine, and draws
me from thee, and knowledge all that is thine in me, and may bring me unto
thee. Which live and raignest one God in persons three, to whom be al honor,
now and ever. Amen.

A necessary prayer in Meeter.
O Lord my God, make thou my heart,
repentant for to be:
The spirit of contrition,
do thou ingrafte in me.
Unto mine eyes let there be given,
abundance of weeping:
And let my hands be occupied,
With often alms gyuing.
O thou my king quench out of me,
all foul fleshly desire:
And with the love of thee alone,
set thou my heart on fire.
O my Redeemer drive away,
the spirit of pride from me,
And grant to me that great treasure,
of meek humility.
Take from me, O my Savior,
the furious rage of ire;
The shield of patience give to me,
the which I do desire.
O Creator root out of me,
all spitefulness of mind:
And grant in steed thereof again
meeken^sse that I may find.
O Bountiful father give me,
a faith that shall endure:
With hope agreeing thereunto,
and charity most sure.
O thou my guide, keep from my lips,
all lying vanity:
And from my mind, drive far away,
all vain inconstancy.
All wavering tak^ from my heart,
and from my mouth scoffing:
With all proud looks and glottony
backbiting, slandering.
Covetousness wipe clean away,
with curiosity:
The fond desire of vain glory,
with all hypocrisy.
Let me never the poor despise,
nor yet the weak oppress:
And let me not blaspheme, for then
I dye remediless.
O thou which did me form and make
take all rashness from me:
And leave me not such a mind as
will not with peace agree.
Take from me idleness and sloth,
with heavy lumpishnesse:
Take from me disobedience,
and also stubburnnesse.
O my God, for thy dear Sons sake,
I humbly beseech thee,
To grant me the works of mercy,
abundance of pity.
That I may thee both love and fear,
and eke pity the poor:
Make me good men always to love,
and wicked to abhor.
Make me so little to esteem,
those things that worldly be:
With heart and voice that I may crave
in Heaven to be with thee,
amen.
Being tempted by the ghostly ennemy (as all that fear God are) to doubt in
any article of the Catholic Faith, to despair in Gods mercy, to yield to
melancholye fantasies, to be vexed with unkindness of friends or the malice of
ennemies, to be troubled with sickness, or any other ways oppressed with
grief of body and mind, say devoutly as follows.
I Humblye accept most merciful Jesus, this heavy temptation, which now I
suffer at the hands of thy divine prouydence, and would a greater if thou
please to lay it on me for thy sake. Who has ordained this from the
beginning, for the tender love thou bear to the health of my sinful soul,
and I most heartily thank thee for it, I confess I have deserved worse for my
sin and unkindness toward thee, and I am not worthy to receive any
comfort or consolation at thy hands, therefore to the honor of the passion and
death, which thou wyllinglye sufferedst on the Cross, I offer my self to
sustain this, or any other adversity with all my heart, not seeking other ways
ease or relief, then in and by thee (O Lord) and as thy good will and
pleasure shall appoint, yet this one thing I crave and beseech thee, for the
tender love thou bear to me, and all mankind, (for in me is no virtue, or
ought that is good) to help and assist me with thy holy spirit, (as my trust
is thou will) who promises that no man shall be tempted more than he shall be
able to bear and give me all what ever shall be necessary to sustain with
patience this painful Cross and temptation, which thy divine wisdom has
appointed for me, to the intent that I bearing ye same wyllingly with thee here
in this world, may conceive assured hope to be partaker of thy glory in the
world to come: grant me my request most merciful Savior, not for my merit
or deserving, but only for the merits of thy death and bitter passion, I
humblye beseech thee. Amen.

A Prayer for the obtaining of grace and mercy.
O Most merciful Lord God, whose Majesty is incomprehensible, and power
infinite, whose magnificence is exalted above the heavens, vouchsafe I beseech
thee, from thy high Throne, to behold the work of thy hands. Have pity on
the unhappy and desolate condition of thy creature. I am a sinner conceived in
sin, and of my self I have no good thing: wherefore (O Lord) I cleave to the
Altar of thy mercy. Thou art my Ankor, my hope, my refuge, and stay.
Therefore O Lord, have mercy upon me, for no flesh can be justified in thy
sight. Thou know the frayltie and weakness of men, we are taught by the fall
of Peter, yt we can do nothing without thee. Grant us therefore good lord thy
grace, without which in this world, we are like by the waves of temptations, to
be swallowed in the gulf and whyrlepoole of sins, to be drowned as the ship
without Ankor and Pylate, in every Tempest to run on the Rock and perish:
Guide us therefore by thy grace (good Lord) through the floods of this careful
world, that we may rest for ever in the pleasant Port, and happy haven of
everlasting joy, with thine elected, thorough our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.
To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, in all
worlds. Amen.

A Prayer for the Penitent.
O Lord, I am a sinner, my sins are heavy upon me, the burden of them is
intolerable, refresh me with thy grace, wash away mine offenses, and I shall
be whiter than the snow, let the cheerful beams of thy countenance shine
upon me, and give light to the darkness of my life. We can look for nothing
as deserved, but punishment due to our offenses. Wherefore good lord* not
according to thy justice, but in the multitude of thy mercies deal with thy
servant. Remember not the sins of my forefathers, think not on the
misdemeanor of my youth passed, have pity on thy creture, which acording to
the likeness of thy self, thou have made and shaped of earth. How long will thou turn thy face away from me? forsake me not, O my God, but renew in me
thy holy spirit. Pluck away from me all that withdraws me from thee. Graft
in my heart thy grace, yt I may love thee, and fear thee, and so finallye
rejoice in thy goodness with thy elected, and praise thee in thy wondrous
works for ever. Grant this most mighty God, for our Savior Jesus Christ his
sake. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for Faith.
O Blessed savior Jesus, son of the everliving God, the unspeakable joy of
thy servants, most present comfort to sinners, which came into ye world to
save offenders, which so love the world that thou sparedst not thy most
pecious blood, to redeem the loss of our first father Adam, and to make us
Coheires of the forfaited inheritance with thy self, that al which believe in
thee might be saved, good Lord which have promised to them that knock, it
shall be opened, and that they which seek shall find, grant I beseech thee,
that I may search thy holy laws, and find the truth of thy holy word,
that I may always constantly confess and show thee and thy goodness, as
well in my words as living. Inspire me with thy holy spirit, that I may know
thee, stedfastlye trust in thee, and serve thee in prayers and well doing, all
the time of my life. O most merciful Lord and savior of the world, for the
glory of thy names sake I beseech thee to hear my prayers. My soul rejoice
in God thy saving health, for he has been good to thee, he has kept thee
from the snare of the hunter, and blessed thee. The lord is a merciful God, let
all the earth fear him, let the mouths of all men sound praises unto him.
God is a good Lord, and daily increases his good gifts to his servants, the
Lord will increase my faith in him, and I shall be saved, Amen.

A Prayer for righteous judgment.
O Lord God of all justice, which in equal Balance do weigh the cause of
the Prince and of the poorest man, which despisest not the suits of the
simple, which deliuerest the Captive, and comfortest the desolate and
careful. O Lord which have blessed them that are poor in spirit, relieve
thy servant oppressed with grief, remove from me the clouds of my sorrows.
O Lord stretche forth thy mighty hand and help me, let me not sincke in the
Seas of slander and shame. Thou know the secrets of my heart, defend me in
mine innocence. Plead thou my cause against the ungodly, which have laid
their nets for me. O God, thou which have delivered Joseph, Danyell,
Mardocheus, and Susanna, from captivity and instant death, and did cloth
them with honor, good Lord strengthen me, and be my defendour against all
evils, and let not the poisoned arrows of malicious tongues do me any harm.
Grant these my prayers (good Lord,) I bseeche thee, for our Savior Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer against lying and evil imaginations.
O Lord cleanse my heart I beseech thee, from all impure and wicked
cogitations, and thoughts, and give me a clear conscience, shamefast eyes,
innocente hands, and a tongue to tell the truth. Seeing that there is nothing
hid that shall not be discovered, good lord I beseech thee to search my
thoughts, and renew in me thy holy spirit, direct my feet in thy ways,
that walking after thee, in the pathe of the righteous, I may pass through this
vale of misery, bearing thy banner stowtly in my warfare, and obtain
everlasting joy the promised hire to such as here have patiently borne thy
cross, and valiauntlye fought with the armoure of faith, against temptations
and all evils, vouchsafe (O Lord) to grant my peticions, I most humbly
beseech thee, for thy only begotten son, our Savior Jesus Christ his sake
Amen.

A thanksgiving for the goodness of God to us.
O Almighty God, and ever ruling King, whose infinite power and majesty our
wyts cannot comprehend: whose glorious brightness with our mortal eyes we
cannot behold: whose wondrous works and manyfold mercyes, the tongues of me^
cannot sufficiently declare: Good Lord I yield thee most humble thanks, for
thy singular great gifts and benefits, bestowed upon me a sinner. Good Lord
thou have blessed me with knowledge with increase and plenty of all things,
thou have given me friends, health, and rest. That I should eat my meat with
joy, and praise thee in all thy gifts and works: I know that I have no good
thing, but it comes from thee, and only for thy mercies sake, thou have so
regarded me thy servant, wherefore (good lord) I beseech thee to grant me thy
grace withal, that I may use these thy gifts to thy honor and glory, and the
comfort of them that need, that using the talent which thou have lent me, I
may become a good servant, and obtain eternal bliss, the promised hire to
such as do well. Uouchsafe good Lord, for thy son our Savior Jesus Christ
his sake to hear my prayers.

Almighty God, refreshe me with thy grace, I beseech thee, comfort me with thy
mercy, and bless me, that safe from all evils, free from fear of all
dangers, in peace and quietness, I may sing praises to thy holy name, and
rejoice in thee, with thine elected for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to live well.
GOod Lord so rule the eyes of my heart, that they being kept simple and pure,
my body may be a clear and shining temple of thy holy spirit, so kindle in
us the love of thy glorious son, that we following his steps, may do that
which is good, and declyne from the evil, so that our light shyning before
men, we may glorify thee by our good works, with thy blessed son our Savior
and the holy Ghost. To whose infinite majesty, in trinity and unity, be all
honor and glory, for ever. Amen.

A confession for the penitent.
O Most merciful Lord God, I have offended against the Throane of thy
Majesty, my sins are ever before mine eyes, I am not worthy to live or enjoy
the fruits wherewith thou have blessed the earth, my own conscience is my
tormenter, bringing testimony and witness against me. The Sun does hyde his
light against me, and the place is the worse wherein I become. O Lord, what
shall I do, shall I despair? No, thou art merciful, and more ready to
forgive, then we to ask, I will confess my sins to thee. I am weary of my
sinful life, I am sorry in my soul for mine offenses, wherefore good Lord
thou which do case them that are laden, and refreshe them that travail,
thou which have promised mercy to the penitente, look on thy servant with thy
cheerful countenance, behold me with those pitying eyes, with which thou
did Mary Magdalen, and the woman taken in Adulterye, thou which have shed
thy blood on the Alter of the Cross, offering thy most precious body, an
eternal Sacrifice for our sins, dispyse not that which thou have redeemed:
Thou which came into the world to call sinners to repentance, and to save the
lost sheep of Israel, have mercy upon me, and lead me by thy grace to the
Foulde, among thy Sheep, for they go in sweet Pasture, and are not in danger
of Wolves, for thou art their shepherd, and keep good accounte of every one
of them, though I have gone astray wandering from thy flock, and borne the
marks of the world, yet good Lord disclaim not thy right, I beseech thee,
but take me unto thee, that I may be safe under the shadow of thy wings. He
may sleep soundly, whom thou do keep, thou art the watchman of Israel.
All honor and glory be unto thee for ever.

A Prayer for humility.
O Lord I am a sinner, and sorry for mine offenses, I cannot make satisfaction
for my defaultes, if I have any good thing it comes of thee. The most
acceptable sacrifice to thee, is a contrite and humble heart. O God let me not
be oppressed with the waves of sin, let me not sink into the Whyrlepoole
and gulf of despair: thou which liftest up the fallen, and raysest the humble
and meek, clothing them with purple, and sets them up with Princes in the
seats of honor: thou which despisest the imaginations of the proud, and
resistest their enterprises, bless me in all my doings, send me happy
success in all my affairs, that I may rejoice in thy goodness, with thine
elected for ever and ever. Accept my humble suit good Lord, I beseech thee,
for the glory of thy names sake. Amen.

A Prayer to be delivered from enemies and dangers.
O Most mighty Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which did lead the
children of Israel through the red Sea, and made the streams of Iordane run
back into their springes again, that thy people might pass through the
midst thereof: good Lord whose heastes the floudes obey, at whose voice the
hills do leap, and the earth does tremble, O most mighty Lord, which
can destroy the prowdest kings with very Flies and Ants, which made little
Dauyd to tryumphe on the Gyaunt Golyath, which deliueredst his enemy King Saul
into his hands, gave Gedeon thy servant with his few Souldioures, victory
of so many Legyons of strong men: Thou which have subdued so many mighty kings
and sundry Nations unto thy people Israel. O God, which workest all in all
things, which give victory always as seems best to thy unsearchable
wisdom: defend me always I beseech thee, against mine enemies and all
evils, that my ship tossed and beaten in the waves of this world, may rest in
thy happy Haven of everlasting joy.

My soul cleaves unto thy mercy, as to an holy Sanctuary. O God, if thou
should not be merciful, who could abide the heat of thy displeasure? but
thou (O Lord) art good to thy servants, and I hope to see thy goodness in
the land of ye living. All glory be to thee most high and merciful God, for
ever and ever. Amen.

The Penitent longs for comfort.
How long (O Lord) will thou turn away thy face from me? How long will
thou be angrye with thy servants? How long shall I abide mourning and
solitarye, as the byrd that has lost her young? O Lord think on me in thy
mercies, and do not correct me in thy wrath, for then shall I become as the
duste and smoke in the wind. O Lord forsake not thy servant Israel, whom
thou have chosen, my heart comforted in thy mercyes, shall rejoice, and I will
sing unto thee, and praise thee in thy good works and Miracles, which thou have
done in our forefathers time.

A godly Meditation.
I Altogether unhappy, and comfortless, have greeuouslye offended my Lord
God, what shall I do? whether shall I go? I cannot hyde me from his sight:
how often have I trespassed against him? how often have I deserved his
displeasure? and yet how seldom has he punished me? how often has he
been good and merciful unto me? how often have I promised and vowed
amendment, and how little and seldom have I performed it: this is a
woeful case. Who will have pittye on me, I dare not lift up mine eyes toward
Heaven, because I have sinned against it, and in earth I can look for no
refuge, because I have been a slander and shame to it. What then: should I
despair? No, God is a merciful, and a good savior, he does visit them
that live in darcknesse, and is a cheerful light to them that sit in the
shaddowe of death. He wills us to forgive our brother, though he offend
seventy times, yea, infinitely. And God is more merciful than any man can be,
and he must be the only refuge and comfort, he will not despise his creature,
the image of himself, return thee to thy Lord God, pray to him humbly on
thy knees for grace, and continue to bewail thy sins past, because that he
which loves thee, provoke thee daily with his gracious gifts, and
blessings to love him, and will not leave until he have made perfect his work
begone, and brought his mercy to full effect in thee. What natural cause
begins his work, and leaves it in the half way imperfite: the virtue of
the seed does not cease, till ye fruit be brought to perfection, yet that
nature works not at once, but first prepares the matter, and then disposes,
and makes it fit to receive the shape, which is the perfection and end
thereof, and as by natural order, and right course, things do proceed, and
increase by little and little, from the less to the more, even so does God
first dispose us to his mercy, and then increasing his goodness daily,
bestows on us in the end, the treasure of his grace, the inheritance of
everlasting ioies. What bird forsakes her young, till they be able to live of
themselves? and yet no avail for their pain comes to them, very love
works in natural causes, to bring forth their affectes to perfection, if it
be so in creatures, what will the Creator do, which is love it self, and
infinite goodness? He will withdraw thee from thy sins, make thee clean and
pure, and finally bless thee with eternal life, which he has prepared for
thee. O Lord I come to thee sad and mourning, I sit at thy feet, humblye
waiting for thy mercy, thou art my hope and helper, according to thy great
mercyes, have mercy upon me. Amen.

A Prayer against Couetousenesse, or too much care of the world.
GOod Lord, seeing that it is thy pleasure that we shall not be careful for
worldly things, if a Sparrow falls not on ye ground without thy foresight,
how much more care do thou take of us thy children, good Lord, thou
feedest the birds of the air, and cloathest the Lyllyes of the Field, which
take no care. Wherefore good Lord, so provide for our necessity and
sickness, we beseech thee* that we casting all our care upon thee, may
chieflye study to please thee, and serve thee, and not to be so wrapped and
entangled in the desires of worldly things, like little children, who for
light trifles of no valor, will forsake the most ample inheritance that is.
So in like manner, those whom the Scripture calls the children of this
world, are so adicted to trifles, are so given to transitory and moment
things, that for them they despise the inheritance to come, and in comparison
of them, they contemn everlasting felicity of heavenly things: Grant us
therefore good Lord, that we be not so overcome with the desire of worldly and
transitory things that thereby we loose the rich inheritance of everlasting
life. Grant this good Lord which live and raignest King of all Kings, for
ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer that we may live uprightly.
O Lord, seeing that the righteous shall dwell in thy tabernacle, grant me I
beseech thee a pure and undefiled soul. O what is the shape of the earth,
wherein Gods ennemies have abiding? in comparison of the wonderful beauty of
Heaven, wherein righteousness does dwell: in comparison of that place, wherein
Angels Arckaungels, all good men, yea, and God himself is abiding. What are
the plesures of the world, wealth honor, company of our parents and friends,
wherein all our pleasure and sweetness, is mixed with sowernesse and sorrow,
wherein every perfection has his imperfection. What is all this to the
unspeakable joy in the kingdom of GOD, what is ye company of frinds etc. here,
in comparison to the company of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the Patriarchs and
Prophets, and all the Saints of God. O the infelicitie of everlasting life,
which is without all discommodities, perpetual without all perrill and
molestation: Oh the glorious majesty, the singular mirth and passing joys of
the life to come, the eye has not seen, nor the heart of man is able to
conceive in any part the happy estate of the blessed souls in heaven. Oh how
amiable are thy Tabernacles? my soul has a desire to enter into the (Courts
of the Lord,) my heart and my soul rejoice in the living god, blessed be they
that dwell in thy house, they may be always praising thee. One day in thy
Courts is better than a thousand else where, I had rather to be a door keeper
in the house of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of ungodliness. The Lord
God is a light and defense. My soul is a thirst for God, even for the living
GOD. When shall I come before the presence of my God. My flesh longs after
thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is. Good Lord remember me, and
grant that I may wear the white Garments of innocencye, with thine elected,
in thy everlasting kingdom. Amen.

A thanksgiving for benefits received at Gods hand.
O Most merciful father, I yield thee most humble thanks, for thy great
benefits bestowed upon me a sinner, of thy free mercy, only thou haste of
thy fatherly love, brought me up tenderly, and instructed me in thy holy law,
thou have given me knowledge, and understanding, thou have preserved me from
many dangers and evils, which diverse men have felt: thou have blessed me with
health, quietness, joy, plentye, and wealth, which a number do want, thou have
taken care of me, and done all things for me. O Lord though I can deserve
nothing but punishment, by thy just displeasure, yet good Lord, I trust to
thy goodness, I ask thy mercy, and not justice, and for thy mercies sake, I
beseech thee to continue thy grace, and to increase thy good gifts toward me,
and have me in thy protection, till my lives end: good Lord bless me, that I
may enjoy the fruits of the earth, and use them to thy honor and glory: good
Lord be thou my aid and guide me in all my doings, my buckler and defense in
all dangers, that I may freely and ioyfullye sing praises to thee, which
live and raygnest, one God almighty, and incomprehensible, world without
end. Amen.

A Godly Prayer.
MOst mighty God which by thy word have made all things, whose voice the
floudes and hills do know, whose heast both quick and dead, heaven and hell
obey, at whose displeasure, the Devils in hell do tremble, let thy word so
lighten our hearts, that by our good works, we may testify our profession,
seeing that the Tree which bears not fruit, shall be cut down and thrown
into the fire. Grant that I may not only be a hearer, but also a doer of thy
holy word, that so finallye I may be partaker of thy everlasting joy and
bliss. O Lord grant me wisdom to know thee, and grace to follow thee in
true humility, that as thou did suffer to be spitted at, and smitten of
thine enemies: so we may bear the displeasures of the world, and rage of our
ennemies with patience: thou have blessed the little ones, and revealed unto
them the things hidden from the wise, for thou will have mercy where it
pleases thee. O set thy fear always before mine eyes, and graft thy faith so
in my heart, that I may love thee, and glorify thy holy name, for ever. Amen.

A godly Prayer to be said of every christian.
GOod Lord, which with thy hands do stay the frame and engyne of the
earth, and rulest the course of the swifte heavens, disposing, and ordering all
things by thy divine providence, which have appointed bounds to our life,
which we cannot pass, I beseech thee, that by my living, I learning to dye,
mortifying by thy spirit, the affections of the flesh, though not expelling
them, yet subduing the rage of them, I may at the last by the Haven of Death,
land in the most glorious City of everlasting life, where our bodies, which
are now darcke, miserable, and corruptible, shall be most brighte, glorious,
and incorruptible, like to the immortal shining body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall be like to Christ our Savior, even as he is, so shall we
be, as we have borne the Image of the earthlye, so shall we bear the Image of
the heavenly, and shine like to the sun, as the face of Christ did in his
transfiguration, Oh Lord Jesus, blessed Savior, which by thy death haste
tryumphed over sin and death. Thou have trodden on the sting of the monster,
our hydeous enemy, the Gates of Hell have not prevailed against thee, grant
to me true and lively faith, by which men pass from earth to heaven, from
death to eternal life. This can we not do without thee, thou must be our
Mediator, for a child of a nights birth, is not pure in thy sight. In sin
were we borne, and by nature we are the children of perdition, and
fyrebrandes of Hell, but thou O blessed Savior, art the perfection of the
Law, to them that believe. As death came by sins, so by thy death and
precious bloodeshedding, is death conquered and exiled, and we that believe,
washed and cleansed of our sins, all the prophets bear witness, that they
which believe in thy name, shall receive remission of their sins. If we
confess our sins, thou art righteous to forgive us our iniquities.
Whosoever calls on thy name, shall be saved, thou have no pleasure in the
death of a sinner, but rather desyrest yt they should live and be converted,
thou have so loved the world, that thou not only did become man and took our
nature upon thee, but were content also to suffer most cruel death on the
Cross, to purge our nature from mortal sin and corruption, and adorn it
with immortality and eternal glory, not only in thine own person, but in us
also, to satisfy the justice of the father for our sins. O blessed
shepherd, thou doubtest not to spend thy most precious blood, to save thy
beloved sheep from rauine and spoil, Good Lord so increase thy grace in me,
that thy holy word may take root and flourish in me, that the good seed may
not be choked with thorns, so order my living, that when by course of
nature, I shall be dissolved from the prison of my body, I may come to thee,
that when thou more brighter then the sun shall come in the midst of the
Legions of Angels, in the shyning glory and Majesty, to judge the quick and
the dead, I may be in the number of the blessed ones, whom thou shall call to
possess thy kingdom prepared for them, by thy father, saying: Com ye blessed
children of my father, receive y^ kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world. Thou which did dye and rise again, wilt raise and bring to
life all those that are dead, believing in thy faith.

Comfortable Exhortations against the manifold assaults of Satan.
IF thou perceive that the storm of temptation does very often and grievously
assault thee, dismay not therefore thy self, neither be displeased with thy
self, as though almighty God nothing regarded thee, but rather thank him that
he instructs and teaches thee, as one to be his heir, that he punishes
and corrects thee as his most dear son, that he proves and assayeth thee
as his well-beloved friend. It is a manifest and great token that man is reject
from the mercy and favor God, when he is troubled with no temptation. In thy
temptation remember the holy Apostle S. Paul, which being wrapped to the
mysteries of the third heaven, was v^xed with the aungel of satan: remember
the temptation of the holy man Job, and other which were grieuou^ly troubled
with their offenses. O happy and fortunate man in whom this earthly Adam is so
mortified and subdued, that it in no wise resists the spirit, but whether
this perfect quyetnes may be in any, I will not affirm, peradventure it is not
necessary to be. For Paul in this life, notwithstanding his high perfection
and grace, had a motion of the flesh to vex and trouble him. And when he
thrice desired God to be delivered from the said motion. He only had this
answer. Paul my grace is sufficient, for virtue is made perfect by vexatio^.
Paul was vexed by pride that he should not be proud, to be perfect and strong
in God, he was caused to be weak and feeble. For he carried the treasure of
heavenly revelation in a frail and britle vessel, that the honor and victory
should only be in God, not in himself: this one example of Paul is eruditio^
and lerning in many things when that we be intised and moved to sin, that we
diligently call to almighti god by prayer. Remember that David the Prophet, King
Solomon and Peter the Apostle, notwithstanding they were great lights and
examples of holiness, yet they fell into grievous and great sins, whom
almighty God peradventure suffered to fall for this cause, specially that thou
should not dispa^re. Lift up thy self therefore upon thy feet, and with
high courage and bold stomach return again into battle against thy
enemies, not only more fierce and bold, but also more ware and diligent, and
think with thy self what intolerable and invincible temptations Christ
suffered for thee, wherein there appeared no help, comfort, aid, nor defense any
where, wherein God and the whole world seemed to be his most cruel and
malycious enemies, when that he cried alowd: My God my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Truly this was a most grievous, paynfull, and bitter temptation,
which Christ suffered for us, that he might make the way of the cross easy for
us. Therefore prepare thou thy ^elf patiently to drink of that Cup, which
Christ Jesus thy head, has so willingly drunk on, for the salvation of al
mankind. And seeing therefore that Christ so willingly put himself in
subjection and dipped himself in those so horrible and intolerable sorrows
and calamities (our most loving and heavenly Father willing the same out of
doubt) he also understands and knows our infirmitye, out of doubt he
taking compassion on us, will not extremely deal with us, but will rather
bear with our imbecillitye and weakness. Does not he himself, calling al men
unto him, say: Come unto me al ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you: what more greater comfort I pray you can be given us. How could
Christ speak more merciful unto us. There be many things that grievously vex
and trouble man, but what thing can more cruelly vex and torment his
conscience, overwhelmed with sin, then when he doubte^h of the mercy of God,
when he dreadeth least God be his adversary and will reject him, when he is not
able to conceive this faith of his mercy, and does imagine himself to be cast
away, as a dry member that is cut of. Be present here, O Jesus Christ with
thine aid and help, here we have need of thy comfort, let not this black,
violent and horrible tempest of troubls overthrow and drown wretched man: but
there is no cause why we should doubt. Christ is true, he will make his promises
to appear, he will help us and refresh us. Therefore where as thy faith is not
strong enough, whereas thou feel thy self to doubt of Gods mercy, and haste
well near no faith at all, straight ways call upon God, bewail tho misery and
lack of belief before him, seek for his aid and succor by fervent prayer, and
he will both help and refresh thee he has taken upon him thus to do, and he will
bring it to pas: but take heed thou cease not to call upon god beseech thou
without al ceasing, the Father of all consolation and comfort, with sighs from
the bottom of thine heart, that he turn not his face from thee, lay thy
weakness upon him, and pour out into his bosom all things which trouble and
torment thee. Cry out with his disciples, O Lord increase my faith. Likewise
say thou with the Father of the lunaticke child: lord I bele^ue, help thou mine
unbelief. Make have O lord to help me, before that I oppressed with this
weight be drowned. O most loving and mest merciful Father, lord God of my
health, our only help and refuge: Enter not into judgment with thy
servants. Christ is my righteousness, redemption and innocencye, which
suffered most bitter and cruel death for my sake. Let those things move thee,
O Father of all compassion, have mercy upon me for thy sons sake, confirm and
strengthen my heart by Faith in Christ: Comfort me with the consolations of
the holy ghost, that I may enjoy the true joys of everlasting life, through
the merits of my Lord and savior Jesus Christ to whom with the Father and the
holy ghost be all praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Psalm to be said at all times.
Rejoice in GOD my soul, for he is my light and my defense, my help the
lantern to my feet, he has heard my prayer, when I called on him, he has
helped me in my need, he has delivered me in my dangers. The Lord is the
keeper of my life, from whom shall I shrink, whom shall I fear, lying
prostrate at the feet of my Lord, I bewailed my case, and he heard my
complaint, he forsakes not his servant. Wherefore, if armies of men stood
up against me, I should not fear, for if God be on my side, who can prevail
against me? He is happy and safe, whom God the mighty God of Israel keeps,
the sun shall not burn him by day, nor the Moon by night. Thryse blessed is
he that fears the Lord, for he shall see happy days. As the Heart
thyrsteth after the water springes, so my soul has longed for my Lord the
living God. When shall I come to appear before thy presence, to see thee in
thy glorious Majesty, face to face? O Lord let thy kingdom come. Come Lord
Jesus, that I may see the day of my redemption. Good Lord make have to help
me. All glory, majesty, and Empire, be unto God the Creator, God the
redeemer, and God the holy comforter, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to be said of the sinful soul.
MY sinful life increasinge, and my sins still abounding (good Lord) to whom
shall I fly, or to whom shall I resort for succoure? from offendinge thee I
cannot cease, neither day nor night, and my sins are heavy upon me, pressing
me down even unto Hell, such is the weight thereof. Moreover, when I prepare
my self to amendmente of life, and think steadfastly to serve and please thee,
even soon after does my corrupt and infected nature, offend and displease thy
Deuyne majesty, so that I am proane and ready to run headlong into all kind
of wickedness and sin, such is my strength, such is my force, or rather
weakness in performing those things which thou requirest at my hands. So that
good Lord, I am ready utterly to despair, and forsake thee, unless thou of
thy great mercy and pity, send thine aid from above, and pour into me thy
most healthful grace, that I may make have to fly unto thee with most bitter
tears, a sorrowful heart and bowing knees, lamenting my sinful life, and
grievous offenses committed against thee, trusting most assuredlye, and
faythfullye in the merits of my savior Jesus Christ, that by his most bitter
death and bloodshedding, which is of far greater force, virtue and effect, in
preserving me, then all my sins and offenses are, in condemninge and casting
me away, for whose sake I most assuredly believe all my sins and offenses
are clearly forgiven, and shall never be laid to my charge, but that I shall
enter with thee in the last day into thy everlasting kingdom, there to be
with thee for evermore, to whom be all honor praise and glory, for ever and
ever.

A Prayer for the obtaining of Gods grace.
Shine we beseech thee, O almighty and merciful God, through the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the comfortable woorking of thy sacred Spirit,
the heavenly comforter, upon our minds and hearts with the glorious beams of
thy heavenly grace, give us such plenty of wisdom and understanding from
above, that through the knowledge of thee, the man of u^n, that is, our frail
and feeble flesh, with the wicked lusts, and desire of concupiscence, may lie
dead and buried in us, give us good Lord the feeling of thy grace, that by the
virtue and divine operation of thy word, the eyes of our souls may be
illumyned, and made so light, that the Prince of Darkness, with all his
unrighteous ministers may be expulsed and banished from our memories, and so
establish us in thy truth, that our hearts, minds and thoughts, may
continuallye be occupied in thy testimonies, that thereby thou good Lord
effectually shyning in our hearts, by the virtue of thy good spirit, we may
learn to know and understand, what is the fulness of of our calling, and how
ritche thou art in the glory of the celestial and Heavenly heritage of thy
Saints, and that excellent greatness of thy power and loving kyndnes toward
us, which believe without fayning thy holy Gospel, according to the might and
force of thy strength, which thou shewedst in Christ Jesus, when thou did
raise him from the dead, and did set him on thy right hand, far above all
Empire, power, authority, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only
in this world, but in the world to come, by whose precious death, and dearest
bloodshedding, we are assured, that sin, Death, and hell, are vanquished,
overcome, and utterly destroyed, and if we believe without wavering, we shall
in him be able to resist all the power of Hell, and in Christ as Conquerours,
to tryumphe with victory over sin, Death, and Satan, and at the last, to
have and enjoy the fruition of his rich and glorious kingdom, which he by
most paynfull agonye, bloody strypes, grievous and bloodye wounds and lastly
by his most painful death purchased for his chosen and elect. To whom for our
sanctification, justification, redemption, and our salvation, be rendered with
his Celestial Father, and the holy Ghost, all lawd, glory, power, honor, and
dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for a woman that is great with child, to be repeated by her heartily,
before her travel, which will be maruaylous comfort unto her.
Thy wisdom Lord in all thy ways,
and power great to perform it:
We cease to search, and only praise,
they pass so far the reach of wit.
And thus we muse, and marvel much,
of all thy works, and yet we find:
No marvel, nor no wonder such,
as daily forming of mankind.
Of such beginning, such an end,
and of such seed, such frune to grow:
With David well we may contend,
to mase, to muse, and nothing know.
The matter earth, the shape from Heaven,
does knit both soul and flesh in one,
Whereof such strife is them between,
from whence they came, they would be gone.
And yet in all thy wonders great,
thy mercy Lord does far pass all:
Which do vouchsafe to work this feate,
in me pore wretch; thy bond and thrall.
And as good Lord then do me make,
thy shop to shape the work therein:
Thy handworke so do not forsake,
but end the thing thou do begin.
Thy goodness Lord did once make light,
this burden now which sore does grieve,
Until which woe did wrap each wight,
the wilful work of woeful Eve.
That Eve has lost, let Christ restore,
that guilt has made, let grace amend:
Why should the fault of Eve do more,
then grace in Christ, God it defend.
Oh Lord the time approaches near,
that throws of Eve I must sustain:
And that I may the same well bear,
increase my strength, or less my pain.
Thy will this burden on me laid,
thy goodness eke will ease the same:
Where Christ has once the ransom paid,
why should the deed of Eve bring blame?
Thus (O Lord) I me in thy will,
do put eke wholly in thy hand,
I will not once swerve from thy skill,
to dye, or live, to fall, or stand.
A Godly and earnest Prayer in time of travail or Childbyrth, of every
Christian and faithful woman.
ALmighty GOD, my Heavenly and most merciful Father, I feel thy promised
punishmente at this present to take effect on me, which for the guilte and
transgression of my progenitors, has been by thy deuyne majesty, justly
pronounced against me, and the whole generation of Adam, great and intolerable
are these bitter pange and piercing pains that in this my travail of
Childe-byrth, I endure and abide. Now feel I as it were, a cruel and sharp
conflicte betwixt death and life, now feel I (O Lord) the rod of thy
correction, according to thy justice, laid heavy upon me, for the use and
exercise of sin and iniquity, yet when it shall please thee (good Lord)
look upon me with the eyes of Fatherlye compassion and pity, and according
to the multitude of thy manifold mercyes, be thou now present with me, arm
me with perfect patience, ioyfullye to bear thy correction, and in the midst
of these my sharp and bitter bruntes of grief, give me grace still to call
upon thee, strengthen me a poor wretched woman, give me comfort and
heavenly consolation from above, and when thou shall think it meet and
convenient, send me safe deliverance, that I may enjoy the fruit of my womb,
the sight whereof shall adorn and deck me anew with joy and gladness:
Otherwise good Lord, if in this season thou determine to take me hence unto thy
self, by thy messenger Death, to whose stroke all Creatures (when thou
think it meet and expedient) shall bow, make me constant and faithful in
thee, whose I am, whether I dye or live, forget my sins and offenses committed
by me, against thee, let the blood of the Lamb Jesus, wash away my
deformity, let the spots of my corruption, be purged and taken away, let
my infected soul that is putrified therein, be purified therein: Give me
grace always, whether I live or dye, to call upon thee continually: give me
power to pitch ny confidence only and alone in the bloudye wounds of Christ
Jesus, to whom in this my distress I fly and appeal for remedy and
comfort. Grant this, O gracious God, which live and raignest world without
end. Amen.

A Prayer to be said of every woman, after the time of deliverance.
HOw much, and how greatly am I bound to laud, praise, and extol thee (O my
Lord God) even now was I assailed in my body, being a wretched and sinful
woman, with sundry and diverse dolors, and grievous grypes of perrillous pains,
in such sort, that my Agonyes abounding, Death himself, seemed to me, to
knock at the gates of my body, thy rod of Justice lay so heavy upon me, so
that I judged my self a creature more meet for the grave, whose clamor I
thought still sounded in my ears, then to reap the benefit of life. By my
pains Lord God, in this my travail, I am forced to confess and acknowledge
that thou art just in thy promises, and art ready to punish sin and
iniquity: by this my safe and sure deliverance, I am bound to acknowledge,
that with thy justice, thou always frequentest pity, commixing thy mercy
and justice together, in such sort, yt I must needs confess thee to be most
righteous and merciful. I cannot (O my God) but protest that thou have dealte
fauourablye with me, and those pains which I abode were laid upon me for my
sin and wickedness, and yet haste thou not dealte severely with me, neither
given sentence against me in thy fury, which have iustlye deserved the same,
for had thou, O Lord, respected my deserts, I had porished everlastingly,
and been utterly confounded, my grievous groans thrown forth unto thee, pierced
the very Bowels of thy anointed son Jesus Christ, who beholding my agonyes
and bitter payns, became an intercessor to thee for me, through whose earnest
entreaty, and loving meditation, thou co^uertedst thy displeasure to mercy,
and for his sake alone, that dyed upon the cross for my offenses, thou have
assuaged my torments* and in the fu^nesse of thy b^^nty and loving kindness,
thou have given me a living soul to glad my heart, for the which I am bound of
right, to give thee hearty and humble thanks, humblye be seeching thee, being
now faint and feeble in body, to strengthen me in soul, mind, and heart, that
my tongue may be the Organ that may continually publish forth thy everlasting
praise. Grant this (O gracious God) for the love of thy only begotten son
Jesus Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given all lawde,
power and dominion, for ever and ever. A^^^.

A godly prayer for the true worshipping of God.
EStablyshe our hearts and minds, O most gracious God, in the true
worshipping of thy divine Majesty, make us to believe thy holy and sacred
Gospel, wherein we are daily and hourly instructed to love, fear, honor,
and obey thee, to hate sin and iniquity, to renounce al superstitious
ceremonies whereby thy worship is defaced, thy glory profaned, and thine
honor greatly dyminished: Give us thy grace to hate sin and iniquity, to
renounce and forsake the vanities and wanton pleasure of this wicked and
sinful world, arm us we beseech thee to mortify and bring under, the
rebellyous appetites, and strange lusts of the flesh, and finallye give us
power from above, to wythstande Satan the prince of darcknesse, and all his
damnable ministers, who by diverse temptations, provoke and alure us from godly
purity, and perfect integrity (which passes only from Christ Jesus to us,
who is the fullness of our perfection and holiness) to all kind of evil,
impiety, and uncleanness, by means whereof, thy worship is greatly
profaned, and of a set purpose contemned. Make us constant to skirmishe
against the world, sin, death, and hell, and by the power of afruitfull
faith, give us grace to resist and bridle the concupiscence of our flesh, in
such sort, that our souls may triumph with victory, and continue constant
in worshipping thee, from whom passes the fullness of our joy, prepare our
hearts and minds (good Lord) to spread forth the glory of thy name, keep
our tongues from al filthy talk, and uncomely iesture, least by the exercise
of such sin, we contemn thy worship, and provoke thee to displeasure and
indignation, set thou a watch before the gates of my mouth, that my lips may
by thy grace, be always made open to sound forth thy praise and everlasting
glory, be merciful to our offenses, think thou not on our unrighteousness, but
upon thy clemencye, forgive thou freely, and pardon graciously our sins,
make us faithful in Christ Jesus, shorten the dangerous days of iniquity,
increase the number of thy chosen and peculier saints, hasten thy coming, O
savior Christ, that we with the fellowship of thy saints, heavenly Angels, and
the blessed company of Martirs may celebrate thy praise, and worship thee in
thy glorious kingdom, before thy father our God, and the holy Ghost, to whom
be praise for ever. Amen.

A Prayer against the fellowship of the ungodly.
PRotect and defend me (O heavenly and most merciful father) from the
fellowship of the ungodly men which daily imagine mischief in their hearts,
to harm the innocent: keep me from the counsayles of the foolish and ungodly,
which speak proud things against the glory of thy blessed name, defend me
from faithless and deceiptfull ones, whose guilty stomachs are gorged with
grudge, envy, malice, hatred, disdain, and al uncharitableness, for their
throts are like unto an open sepulcher, or swallowing grave, their tongues are
given to slander, and backbite their neighbors, the poison of Adders lies
hidden under their lips, and in fine, they as thine enemies blaspheme thy
holy and blessed name, and contemn thy testimonies, O Lord gine me thy grace
to be conversant with good and godly men, such as favor thy glorious Gospel,
and do their endeavor to practice thy precepts to the glory of thy holy and
blessed name: make me by their example to exercise my self in the heavenly
verity, that thereby I may be instructed in the lively knowledge of thy
commandments, and obtain such wisdom from above, that by says I may
cleave to thee, and the fellowship of those yt fear thy holy name, and so
avoid the company of the wicked, and ungodly worldlinges, which have laid
snares to entrap me. Grant this, O most merciful Father, for thy son Jesus
Christ his sake, who ever lives and reigns with thee, and the holy Ghost,
to whom be all lawd, glory, power, and praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to be purged from syn and uncleanness.
TAke away from me (O Lord) the burden of my corruption, which by the
continual exercise of my sin and wickedness, has wounded my soul wofullye,
with the dangerous darts of transgression, so that I feel my putrefaction
abounding, and my festred conscience ouerladen with uncleanness, so that I
have no other mean or remedy, but to prostrate my seffe before the Throane of
thy glorious Majesty, beseechyng thee intyrely, of thy gracyous goodness, to
salve my sores with the comfortable Oil of thy mercy* thou only (O Jesus)
art the sweet physician of my soul: sprinckle upon me Isope, and I shall be
made whyter than snow, if thou of thy exceeding bounty and favor, good Lord,
wilt vouchsafe to wash away the spots of my sin and wickedness, that
heapeth thy indignation and furye against me, I shall then excel the Gold that
has been purified in the Furnace seven fold: let it therefore good Lord and
merciful Father, seem pleasant unto thy deuyne Majesty, to touch my
corrupted and unclean heart, with the heavenly finger of thy grace, that I
may bring forth the fruits of true repentance, which are more acceptable
to thy glorious and deuyne presence, then the offering of Calves, Bullockes,
sheep, Goats, or any other burnt offering, or sacrifice of peace, a contrite
and sorrowful soul, is the thing that thou do most delight, an humble and
a lowlye spirit, is the oblation that thou do desire: A clean and pure
heart, O Lord my God, I know thou do love and favor, wherefore I
beseech thee, to purge me from my sin and iniquity, of thy great mercy, let
the bitter deploration of mine offenses and hartye contrition, thorough thy
glorious merits and paynefull passion: (O Jesus) be y^ only mean and way, to
set me free from the powers of hell, death, and damnation, and since I am by thy
goodness, begotten and borne anew, strengthen me good Lord, that I never slide
nor fall from thee, but that I may continuallye bear in my remembrance, the
state whereto I am called by thee, through thy aboundaunt love and kyndenesse,
wype away good lord all my sins out of thy remembrance, cleanse me in the
blood of thy spotless Lamb Jesus Christ, and I shall be made clean, pure
and safe. Grant this most merciful God, for the honor and glory of thy name
sake, through the bitter death of thy son Jesus Christ, my mediatoure and
Advocate, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given lawd, glory, power,
and praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to be said in time of peace and prosperity.
Give us good Lord the comfortable and healthful spirit of thy grace, and
aboundaunt favor, that we may without ceasing make our continual boast of
thy praise, we know and from the bottomes of our heart confess, that thou
have dealte more louinglye with us, then thou have done with our next
neighbors, whose painful miseries and bloody broils, may be a sufficient
warnyng unto us to hate our sin and iniquity, least the like calamity or
ever we be aware, do compass and hedge us round about, give us grace
therefore in time of peace, and happy prosperity, so to walk, that thy
fatherlye blessing be not withdrawn nor taken from us, and the rod of thy
sharp correction be laid upon our necks, even in such sort, as thou have
visited our brethren in other Countries, whose bodies by the means of cyuill
discention, have been made a pray to the sword, we hear and understand,
that not far off, but even hard at the gates of our borders, the father is
ready in arms, to seek the destruction of his son, the son is as greedye
to gape for the blood of his father, we hear how vyolentlye the brother
thirsts after the blood of his brother: frind is against friend: neighbor
against neighbor: young men are murdered: old men are sodaynlye slain:
many a wife is husbandlesse: many a child is desolate and fatherless: the
cruel hearted enemy spares none: he makes havoc: no tears can stay him
from his affectioned Tyranny, the tender infantes are haled from the earnfull
paps of their weeping mothers, and torn to peecemeale before the sorrowful
eyes of their careful parents: Old age is contemned: godly Matrons are
abused: Uirgines are deflowred, and ravished by violence, a spectacle or
extreme cruelty for us to behold, and a glass of great carfulness for us
to look upon, that have worthily deserved like or far greater punishments,
yet withholdeste thou from us thy scourge, although our offenses are so great
and diverse, that might heap up the sentence of thy exceeding justice against
us, in place of war and bloudye battle, thou have given unto us prosperity
and perfect peace: in place of penury, dearth, and scarcity, thou have given us
increase, fullness, and great plenty: in stead of discord and discention,
thou have sent us unity and concord, and by thy celestial prouydence, we
are defended from the cruel enemy, and from the domestical and civil war,
and besides these thy gracious gifts, to heap up our consolation and joy,
thou have given us thy true and lively word, as a Lantern to direct and guide
our footsteps: from vanity to virtue: from wickedness, to godly wisdom:
from lycentious liberty, to newenesse of life, and godly conversation, besides
all these thine inestimable graces, freelye bestowed upon us, thou haste given
us godly and zealous Preachers, which plenteously break unto us out of thy
eternal testament, the bread of life, whereon (good Lord) give our souls
such power to feed by faith, that they may be nourished to eternal joy, and
we by the diligent observing and obeying of thy commandementes, may be
preserved from all kind of discention, and peaceably enjoy the fruits of pure
peace, and trusty tranquillity. Grant this (O merciful father) for thy Son
Christ's sake, our only Savior and Redeemer, Christ Jesus.

A godly and fruitful prayer to be said in time of bloody Battle.
O Lord, our heavenly father, and euerlyuing God, we thy wretched and most
miserable Creatures, confess and acknowledge, we have worthelye deserved the
rod of thy correction and punishment, and do merit many sharp and bitter
stripes, that knowing thy blessed and glorious will, have of set purpose
contemned thy divine and heavenly precepts, for which cause the sentence of thy
wrath is sharply kyndled against us, even as it has been against thy
chosen people Israel, in the days of our forefathers, who glorying in their
wickedness, were plagued in the fullness of thy indignation, the sword of
their enemies beset them round about, and hemmed them in on every side, the
Iebusits, the Amonits, the Philistines, and the Amorites oppressed them
diversely, their strong holds were rased, their Cities were besieged, their
houses were ransackt, their goods and their riches were carried away, by force
of the bloudthirstie enemy, their young men were led away captyue, their
virgins were woefully deflowred, but in fine, when thou Lord God, did
behold their hearty and earnest contrition, thou did withdraw thy frowning
countenance, and sent them speedy and safe deliverance, one while thou Lord
sentest them Moses to bring them out of the servitude of Pharao, the stony and
stubborn hearted king of the Egyptians, another while Iepthah set them free
from the sword of the Amonites, wherewith they were greeuouslye afflicted, and
to make thy power and excellent glory fully known, thou gave Sampson such
fortitude to bridle ye proud Philistians: Over and besides these, thou of thy
love and myraculous goodness, have made feeble women, mighty and victorious
conquerours, Debora was a shield to thy people, Judith comforted the distressed
Bethulians, and cut off ye head of proud Holophernus, that thy self good
Lord, when thou beheldest their tears, and hearty sorrow for their offenses,
did prepare thy self to go forth with their hosts, thou thy self with the
breathe of thy Nostrels, did confound and overthrow their enemies, so good
Lord, be thou now present with us, in the fullness of thy deuyne power, look
upon us with the eyes of thy favorable pity, forget our corrupt and most
filthye offenses, let our contrite and sorrowful hearts be a mean to vanquish
thy displeasure conceived against us, be thou present with us in this time of
necessity and trouble, set thy hand to help and assist us against the enemy,
be thou present with us, in this time of perrill and danger, go thou forth
with our hosts, then shall we be assured to prevail, let not the multitude
of furious foes dismaye us, for victory we do know consists not in the power
nor strength of many men, the strength of horses, armor nor weapons: but it is
thou O merciful father, that give ye conquest, where, and to whom thou
please. To thee therefore in this great extremity we fly and appeal,
beseeching thee of thine inestimable love and kyndenesse, for the love of our
savior Christ Jesus, to look upon our true repentante hearts, and in the
fullness of thy misseration and pytties, to set us free from the power of the
raging enemy, and to pardon our sins and grievous offenses, that henceforth
we vow and dedicate our hearts and minds wholly to walk in integrity, and
newness of life. Which grant good Lord, to whom with thy son Christ
Jesus, and the holy Ghost, be praise and glory attributed for ever and ever,
world without end. Amen.

A Prayer against presumptuous pride, and vain glory.
WE hear (O Heavenly father) and are daily taught and instructed out of thy
eternal word, how greatly the grievous sin of presumption, pride, and
vain glory, displeases thy deuyne Majesty, we are learned that for the
practice of this pestilente and heinous evil, thou haste not spared the very
Angels, but haste thrown them in thy displeasure, for their pride,
vayneglory, and presumption, from beatitude, to miserye, from joy without end,
to perdurable pain: from brightness of thy glorious presence, to utter extreme
and palpable darkness, from the glorious fruition and participation of thy
everlasting kingdom, to the bottomless pit of hell, Death, damnation, and
endless flames of fire, besides this, we are taught that by the transgression
of Adam, whose hawtye presumyng, through the intisemente of the subtle and
perilous alurement of the Serpente, thought to be as thy self, but in fine,
thy justice condemned him and all his posterity, this pestiferous sin of
pride drowned him in the floudes of all dangerous evils, as gluttonye, luxury,
and such other perils, that had not thy mercy taken effect, to keep and hold
Plea for his and our sauegarde, and thy son Christ imbrased the glory and
power of his deuyne Essence, and taken upon him our flesh and frail nature,
sin only excepted, who freely offered his innocente body to the death of
the Cross, we had perished euerlastinglye, and been utterly confounded. Print
therefore good Lord, and write these examples in my memory, that I fall not
from thy favor, by the exercise of this detestable sin, make me still to
consider that the proud and disdaynfull are always abhorred in thy sight, and
since it is thy good will and gracious pleasure, to regard the humble and lowly
man, give me such meekness from above, that I may continuallye present thee
with the Sacrifice of a gentle, meek, and contrite spirit, that I may avoid
the plagues and punishments which thou have prepared for the proud and hawty
minded. Grant this (good Lord) for Jesus Christ his sake, my only Mediator
and Advocate, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy ghost in glory
permanent and majesty everlasting.

A Prayer to be said in time of affliction and trouble.
O Eternal and ever living god the father of al consolation, and comfort,
vouchsafe of thine infinite love and kindness, to strengthen me with thy
heavenly grace, patiently to bear, and with meekness to suffer this Cross
of affliction and trouble, which thou have laid upon me, for the use of sin
and iniquity, I know (O gracious and loving father) that my deserts are
such, as worthily have provoked thee to displeasure the burden of my sins
are intolerable, for the which I must acknowledge, and earnestly from the
bottom of my heart confess, that iustlye thou haste corrected and visited
me, yet not in the fullness of thy furye, but according to thy fatherlye love
and kyndnesse, and albeit, thy rod lie heavy upon my shoulders, yet in this
time of thy correction, I am comforted greatly, knowing assuredlye that you
correctest and smytest where thou love, thou woundest and healest again,
thou throwest down to Hell, and thou liftest up to Heaven, such and so great
is thy omnipotency, that thou rulest above the Firmament, in earth, floods,
and the lowermost parts of hell, in Heaven the Angels, Arckaungels, the souls
of thy saints, the blessed company of martyrs give thee praise, glory, and
veneration, the Sun, the Moon, and glistering stars, each one of them in
their course and quallitie, show themselves obedient to thy will, in earth ye
beasts of the field, and the siely fethered fowls of the Air, in their order
seem to set forth thy glory and praise, in the deep waters the fyshes of
the Seas are ready to observe thy will, and in their manner, they as thy
creatures, give thee due honor and reverence, but amongst these, man whom
thou by thy divine will and pleasure haste endued with reason and in his
creation, concerning the inward man, have fashioned him to thy similitude and
likeness, is now most prone and willing to be by thy ministers of
darckenesse, seduced and carried away from virtue to vice: from godliness to
all impiety: from obedyence to wilful breach and contempt of thy precepts,
so that diligence is banished by negligence, and such is the power of our
flesh, that our eyes which should have their chiefest co^templation and delight
in perusing and reading thy glorious and sacred Gospel, wherein we may
behold thee crucified and slain: O sweetest Savior Christ Jesus, perfect
God and perfect manne, by whose innocent death and bloody passion, the
atonement betwixt thy Father and us, are so daseled with the dimmy and dark
mysts of Satan, that they are occupied in the beholding of mundane and
transitorye pleasures, al which in effect vanish and wear away, even as the
Flower that either is parched by the force of Phoebus radiant beams, or by
Winter storms and horye frostes consumed, our ears which thou haste given
unto us to hear, and understand the sacred and divine mysteries contained in
thy holy law, are made deaf of purpose, so that they glory more in fables and
loathsome leasinges, then they conceive delight in the zealous predication of
thy Evangelical and heavenly doctrine, our hearts are hardened like the
Adama^t, so yt for the greatest part, they cannot brook thy testymonies, they
continually lust and desire to be satisfied with worldly wealth, honor and
dignity, and who beholds not in these days, what cruel conflict and bloody
fight, there is betwixt good conscience and filthy avarice, the root of all
myschiefe and evil: Nay who sees not in this age, plain dealing murdered
by deceyte, and faythlesse frawd: Who now beholds not true meaning strangled
by forged flatterye and loathsome leasinges? the bowels of compassion and pity
are shut up by vyolent oppression and tyranny, our feet are willing to tread
the paths of pride, fornication and uncleanness, our hands are ready to offer
wrong and injury to the innocent: yea, and in fine, whatsoever thou have given
unto us, to spread and set forth thy glory and honor, is by sin so
corrupted, that we make the members of our bodies, which by grace and of pure
love are ingrafted in the body of Christ, the rich and great shepherd of our
souls the very members of Satan, so that of set purpose our transgression
abounding, we fly from Christ the rock and strong pillar of our salvation,
and run headlong to death, and utter destruction of body and soul, yet like a
loving God and merciful Father, thou call us home again by thy word,
wherein not only thy mercies, but also thy terrible threats are thundered forth
against us for our impenitencye, but when neither thy manifold mercies freely
of thy abundant goodness offered unto us in Jesus Christ, can move nor stir us
to handfast contrition, neither yet thy terrible comminations and threatenings
can exclayme, nor call us back from the dangerous puddle of our sins, then
you sendest forth thy plagues and punishments, as pestilence, famyne, and
bloudye sword, intending thereby to drive us to amendment of life, and to
acknowledge thy omnipotency, but when thou beholdest our true repentaunt
hearts, our sobs and sighing tears powered forth, before the Throane of thy
deuyne Majesty, thou withdrawest from us the terroure of thine indignation,
and vengeance, the Rod of thy correction is laid aside, thy displeasure
justly conceived against us, for the continual exercise of sin, is utterly
forgotten, and by the intercession of thy son Jesus Christ, that sits on
thy right hand in glory permane^t and everlasting, like a loving Father, and
most merciful GOD, thy Syluered Scepter of peace is offered unto us, with al
other thy gracyous benefits, that thy anger is converted to clemencye, thy
displeasure is turned to loving kindenes, and in fine, thy indignation is so
calmed by thine abundant grace and mercy, that like a loving and gentle
father, thine arms are stretched forth ioyfullye to embrace and receive us to
thy favor again, all this I know to be most certain and true, for when,
or at what time soever, we shall appear before the gates of thy mercy, and
by the virtue and power of a constant and lively faith knock thereat, thou art
ready to open unto us, not for any of our deserts, but for the merits of
Jesus Christ, the fullness of thy deuyne misseration, compassion and pittye,
and whenever we shall call upon thee, with lowlynesse and meekness of our
hearts and minds, bewayling woefully our heinous offenses committed against
thee, thine ears are most attentive to hear, and willyngly do grant us
our peticions, wherefore (O most gracious and loving father) we come unto thee
with sorrowful and contrite hearts, beseeching thee for the love of thine
anointed son Jesus Christ our Messiah, savior and redeemer, beseeching
thee to behold and look upon us with the eyes of compassion and pity, and
albeit we have worthily deserved this thy plague and punishment, yet respect
thou not our deseruings, least in thy fury and indignation, we be confounded
and perish, have an eye rather to thy son Jesus Christ, behold his bloody
wounds, which yet are fresh and green, and never stint bleeding, think upon
the bitter and painful torments that he suffered for us upon the Cross, in
whose name we beseech thee favorably to look upon our infirmities,
mercifullye to hear our prayers and peticions offered unto thee, and
graciouslye for the glory of thy names sake, to take and withdraw from us this
thy heavy rod of correction, which our sinful lives and contempt of thy
precepts has heaped heavily in our necks: give us patience to suffer
whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon us: give us grace always to call
and cry upon thy holy and blessed name, and faythfullye with tears to say unto
thee continually. Spare us good Lord, spare thy people, who^ thou have redeemed
with thy precious blood, neither yet good Lord be thou angrye with us for
ever. Grant this (O merciful father) for the love of thy only son Jesus
Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and
praise ascribed, for ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the Lords supper.
OMnipotent God, and father everlasting, whose mercy is infinite and whose
kingdom has no end, vouchsafe I beseech thee of thine exceeding goodness
to increase our faith, that as thy Guestes repair to the Table of thy son
Jesus Christ, who has left unto us before he gave his body to be crucified,
and his blood to be shed largely on the Cross for our redemption, as a
pledge of his great love and abundant kindness, the celebration of his
glorious Supper, wherein as it were in a looking Glass, the death of our great
master, the high shephearde of our Souls Jesus Christ, is most lively set
forth unto us, give us grace therefore from above, rightly to understand the
deuyne mysteries offered unto us thereby, and not to wreste or wring the same
contrary to thy will. Let it be far from our thoughts, (good Lord) to leave
thy eternal verity, and to build on the doctrine of men, who following their
own imaginations, run headlong to the gaping Gulphe of danger and
destruction, pluck the Scales of ignorance from our eyes, that we may
clearly disearne and behold, by the light of thy glorious Gospel, how we
may truly Communicate and participate the fruits of thy grace, represented
unto us in this comfortable Sacrament, indue us plentifully with such pure
knowledge, that we may not once think or say after any gross form or carnal
manner, we feed upon, or eat thy flesh reallye, or carnallye, make us
always constantly to believe that thy glorious body is ascended up into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of thy father, concerning thy humanity,
and cannot be thence removed, till the time that thou shall come with Legions
of Angels, to judge the quick and the dead, before whose presence, shall run
a consuming fire, and moreover, we do most humblye beseech thee, so to
confyrme us in the truth of thy blessed Testamente, that we may confess thy
divine nature to be equal with the father and the holy Ghost, and to believe
that thy power is not a power particular, but a power general, and such as
does and shall govern in Heaven and Earth, in the deep and low waters: yea,
and in the neathermoste parts of Hell, strengthen us therefore good Lord that
stand, least that in falling from the true knowledge of thee, we perish
everlastingly, and since thou have called us by thy word, as thy Guestes, to
this blessed banquet, wherein the mouths of our carnal bodies are fostered
and fed with bread and Wine, so Lord confirm our faith in thee, that the
mouths of our souls may feed spiritually upon thy sweetest flesh, and
drink thy dearest blood, and so be norished to everlasting life and heavenly
blessedness, which reward as a dowry due, thou haste promised to all those
that faythfully^ build upon thee, which art the Rock and strong Pillar of our
Salvation, and as these must set forth unto us most lively thy death and
passion, so make us thankful to thee for the same, and thereby give us grace to
prynte in our hearts thy great love and exceedyng clemencye, that sparedst
not to give thy body to the most vylde, shameful, and slanderous death of
the Cross, and thy blood to be shed for our offenses, indue us with love and
charity to all men, make us ready to forgive, love, and pardone our
enemies, persecuters and slandoers, turn our hearts and minds from al
impiety, covetousness, blasphemy, pride, glottonie, fornication, and al
other detestable evils, and if at any time we have defeated y^ fatherless of
his right, the widow of her dowry, or gathered together our goods wrongfully,
by vyolence, oppression, fraud, by collusion, or deceyt, give us grace to make
restitution, and to ask with sorrowful playnte and floods of tears, from the
bottom of our hearts, pardon and free forgiveness of thee, for such and all
other our offenses, whatsoever we have don, or committed, in thought word,
will, and deed, against thy deuyne Majesty, or any other our brethren. Take
away from us all bitterness, curssed speaking, and backbyting, give us grace
to come worthelye by the virtue of a true and fruitful faith, to this holy
and blessed Supper, that our souls feeding faithfully on thy sweetest flesh,
and drinking thy dearest blood, we may both in body and soul be nourished
by thee to everlasting and endless glory in Heaven, where with thee and the
fellowshippe of thy chosen saints, we shall enjoy the fruition of thy
everlasting kingdom, which thou haste ordained for all those that only and
alone without wavering, do build upon thee, sanctify and make clean our hearts
and minds by the power of the holy Ghost, the very comforter of thy chosen,
purge thou our canckred consciences infected with sin, by the working of thy
good grace, least that by the presuming to this thy table (O Lord) we incur
thy displeasure, and being unrepentant for our offenses, we be found unmeet
Guestes, to come to thy holy banquet, and so we eat and drink to the utter
confusion of our souls and bodies, give us grace therefore (good Lord) to
convert us wholye unto thee, and we shall be turned from all our sin and
iniquity: give us grace to rest only upon thee, and we shall be made safe:
give us thine aid from above, we beseech thee, by faith to strive with the man
of sin, and so to vanquishe him, that he may die in us, and we may live to
thee, which art the giver of life. Grant this, O most gracious God, for Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given all praise,
honor, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer or thanksgiving to be said after the receiving of the Communion.
WE give thee most hearty thanks, O heavenly father, that have at this present
fed and refreshed our hungry Souls with the flesh and blood of our savior
Christ, not carnallye, but spirituallye, give us grace therefore continuallye
by the means of an increasing and fruitful faith, to believe that thy flesh
is meat in deed, and thy blood is drink in deed, and that vnneaths we eat
thy flesh and drink thy blood, we cannot enter into thy kingdom, nor be
saved in the day of thy coming. (Give us grace therefore, being unprofitable
servants and unworthily called, by the reason of the multitude of our sins,
to banquet at thy table, whereas the celebration of thy Supper has been used,
and thy death by the vysible Elements of bread and Wine represented unto us,
to offer up unto thee continually the fruits of true repentaunt and sorrowful
hearts, that thy name may be glorified, we by thy grace comforted, thy
displeasure be turned to love: thy wrath to compassion: our sins
pardoned, and forgotten, and our names written in the book of life. And as it
has pleased thee at this present to account us for thy guests, and not only
to feed us with visible creatures, namely bread and wine, but also in soul
which is thine own similitude, to cherishe us with thy flesh and blood,
whereon by the virtue of a lively faith, we have to our great comfortes, most
plentifully fed. So now (O Lord) we beseech thee of thine aboundaunte
goodness, to increase our faith, yt it may wax strong in thee, and
fruitfully, to exercise the works of Charity and love to all men, that
thereby as we have now been at the celebration of thy glorious and blessed
Supper, so we may, whenever it shall please thee to call us to thy heavenly
banquet, be found furnished, not empty, not naked, but armed and covered with
fruitful faith and truth, and so as thy guestes, or vessels of honor,
enjoy the participation of thy heavenly and rich palace, whereas joys never
fade, but continually endure, take from us the burden of our corruption,
set us free from the cursed clogge of sin, deliver us from the snares of
death and destruction, give us willing minds to obey and hear thy
commandementes, cleanse thou our hearts from all iniquity, and give us grace
henceforth to walk in newness of life and godly conversation, that thy name
may be glorified, and we saved in the day of thy coming to judgment. Grant
this for Jesus Christ his sake, our Mediator and advocate. Amen.

A Godly Meditation often to be remembered.
O GOD (my Lord) my hearts delight, with who^ my soul longs to dwell, in
that heavenly Jerusalem wherein is continual health, eternal felicity, happy
liberty, and perfect blessedness, where men shall be like unto the Angels of
God, and just men shall shine as the Sun, in the everlasting kingdom,
wherein is no heaviness, no sorrow, no grief, no fear, no labor, no death,
no disease, no lack no hunger, no thirst, no cold nor heat, no weariness of
fasting, nor temptation of the enemy, no will to sin, nor power to do evil,
no old age, no lame or deformed person, no fear of poverty, or weakness by
disease, but a quiet harbor of all joy, and everlasting happiness, where men in
the society of Angels, shall continually dwell, without any infirmity of the
flesh. For there is infinite joy, and eternal bliss, from whence none shall
be removed, that once by thy providence shall enter therein. There is rest
from labors, peace from ye enemy, a new kind of joy and delight, such as no
heart can co^ceyue, save only by taking a meruaylous delight, and exceeding
pleasure in the beholding of thee my Lord God, my glorious redeemer, and the
heavenly comforter, which proceeds from the Father and the Son. O
heavenly Jerusalem, thou art sweet and beautiful in all thy joys and
delyghtes, there are no such myseries in thee as we feel and suffer in this
poor and miserable life. There is in thee no darkness nor change of time the
shyning of the Moon, the twinkling brightness of the stars gives not light
in thee, but only the God of all power, glory and majesty, the light of
lights, for in thee the son of Justice gives light, to those that are
adopted in his blood to euer-during blessedness. The bright and imaculate
Lamb, a most beautiful light, is thy light, that does illuminate his chosen
Children. The king of kings is in the midst of thee, environed on each side
with his beloved Saints, and ready to crown them with everlasting glory: In
thee are Legions of Angels, singing of sweet Hymns and songs, that set forth
thy praise and honor of thy name: In thee are the fellowshippe of heavenly
citizens: In thee rests the sweet solemnity of al such as return from this
miserable pylgrimage unto thy glory, the company of the prophets, Apostles,
and victorious army of Martyrs, holy men and women, which have vanquished the
pleasures of the world, have their abiding with thee: There are young children
and maide^s, which have passed over their days in holiness of life publishing
thy praise. Every one reioiceth in his degree, though not equal in glory, yet
like in joys and gladness, for there reigns perfect charity, and God is al
in all, whose majesty without end they see continually, and still in beholding
him their love increases. Of this eternal blessedness, the holy Apostle Peter
had as it were a shadow or a taste upon the Mount Thabor, at the
tra^sfiguration of Christ from whence he desired he, might not depart. Paul
also had a proof of it, when he was rapt or taken up into ye third Heaven,
where he heard words and saw things so maruailous and secret, so far
passing al man's understanding, and such as were not to be told or revealed
vntome^. Moses his face became so bright, through the conversation that he had
with the divine glory upon Mount Sina, that the Israelites could not abide
it: what then shall become of us, when perpetuallye with thee, which art the
Lord of al glory, we shall be conuersaunt after the manner of thy children and
famylier friends? Who is he then, that will not seek and desire by all means
possible to be a dweller there, both for the desire of peace, joy, and
eternity, and for the perfect sight of God.

Contrariwise, who is able to express y^ torments appointed for the ungodly,
and unrepentant livers, in that deadly place, called Hell, which Satan
himself abhors: what other thing can be there, but continual pains,
eternal tribulation, and infinite calamity, repleate with all evils. There
dwells wicked and ugly Angels, whose horrible looks brings sudden fear,
grievous pains, and fearful death, with continual clouds of ever during
darkness: There is nothing but howling, wayling, lamentation and mourning
without all end, fearful ^criches, and confused cries are there in all
places suddenly raised: There the worm of conscience never dies. In that
damnable dungeon there is fire unquenchable, and perpetual gnashing of toeth:
The miserable soul finds there no rest, but is afflicted with all kind of
torments, and such as can never be expressed, all which endure for ever. Alas
little avail it those that are subjected as fire brandes of bell to cry unto
the Lord, for he will not hear them, then shall they know, that all things
which they had in this life, are vain, and such things as they thought to be
pleasant, to be found more bitter then Gall or poison. Then where is the
pleasure of the flesh so termed falsely? for there is none other pleasure, but
to fear the Lord. Then shall they confess, and say, that the judgment of
God is true, and righteous, saying: did we not hear of this, and yet would
not be converted from the wicked deeds, but then shall nothing prevail: No
sorrow can find comfort, no complaints, no remorce, no torments, nor
paynefull passions an end, such and so increasing are the vexations of the
second death, wherewithal the bodies and souls of the unrighteous shall for
ever be environed. Since therefore (O heavenly father, and most gracious God) it
seems good to thy eternal wisdom by the knowledge of thy everlasting truth,
to give me knowledge of thine inestimable mercy offered freely unto me in
Jesus Christ my merciful Savior, in whose bloody death and paynefull passion
I am assured of eternal life and blessedness. Give me grace to printe in my
remembrance thy manifold mercies, that feeding in soul by faith in thee, I
may attain unto those end less joys, that thou haste. prepared for thy
adopted sons and chosen children, in thy kingdom of everlasting
righteousness. And so escape those everlasting torments, which thou haste
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, from the which place of woeful vexation
and endless misery, deliver me, O heavenly father, for the love of Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all lawde and
praise, for ever. Amen.

A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
MOst mighty art thou O Lord, in all thy deeds, and most holy in all thy
ways, blessed be the name of my father, my God and glorious creator, who by
his divine power, and celestial providence, of nothing made all things, fish,
flesh, fowls, fruits, trees, herbs, and all other things, whatsoever are
contained both in Heaven, earth* Seas, and the nethermost parts thereof. Man
concerning the outward parts, thou by thy celestial providence, and fatherly
bounty, framedst and createdst of clay, but concerning the inward substance of
thy creature man, thou did fashion and make even according to thine own
similitude and likeness. Moreover, such and so great was thy love and good will
toward him, that all the Creatures, or works of thy creation served to his
use. In earth thou haste made him Lord and king over the fruits thereof, the
beasts of the Field, the Fowls of the air, and the fishes of the little
floods and great waters. In the Firmament, thou have placed the glistering
Sun with his oryent beams to give him light by day, and therewith thou have
given him the Moon and the stars to govern him by night, for the which cause,
above all other, the works of thy creation, man should and ought of right to
give thee that glory that to thee belongs. But alas, such and so great is the
corruption of our frail and sinful flesh that for all these thy graces, we are
carried away from thee, and enter into contempt of thy precepts, for which
cause thou oftentimes do correct and punish us, to the intent we might
thereby feeling thy rod of correction be driven to embrace hearty and true
repentance, but when thy threats and the stripes of thy displesure laid upon
us, cannot take place amongst us, thou oftentimes give us up to follow our
lusts and affections, but at last when thou do behold our inormities, thou
in a moment, by the power of thy divine justice, restrained the rope of our
disordered liberty, and cuttest in sunder the Bridle of our voluptuousness,
either by sudden death, sword, fire, famine, or other thy divine sentences of
thy conceived ire, to the intent, that other thy creatures might by the terror
of thy Justice, avoid sin, and learn to amend their lives, least they fall
into the like calamity or danger. True, and most true it is, good Lord,
that by the exercise of sin, we are the children of death and destruction,
but by grace of the almighty and victorious conqueror, sweet Jesus Christ, we
are the adopted sons of thy father, and made fellow heirs with thee our
perfect Emanuel, in whose name with all humility and lowliness of heart and
mind, I come unto thee in this great extremity and danger of death,
beseeching thee to be present with me, to forget mine offenses, to think
upon thy mercies, and although I have not deserved so much as the least drop of
thy favor, by means of the great burden of my sins, which are in the presence
of thy divine majesty, most ugly and loathsome to behold, yet respect thou not
(O Father) mine iniquity, but have an eye, I beseech thee to the merits of my
savior Christ Jesus, to whom as my mediator, savior and Redeemer, I apeale,
who has promised comfort and sweet consolation to all those that in thy name
fly unto thee for relief, I confess th^e worthily thou have visited me, and
yet not according to the multitude of my sins but in the fulness of miseration
and fatherly pity, give me grace therefore in these bitter bruntes of death,
who vehemently at this present, begins to combat with fainting and feeble
life, constantly to cleue unto thee, let not ye plesures of this wicked world
be a let or impediment for me to come unto thee, let not my frail and feeble
flesh, subject to sin, which has through my transgression made me a bondsman to
death, move me to despair in thy great mercy, neither yet let that cauilling
adversary, ye enemy of mankind, at my last end triumph over me, give me
patience to suffer and gladly to bear and abide this thy scourge and
visitation, and so fortify me in soul and body, that so long as life shall
endure in me, I may never cease to call upon thy holy and blessed name, yea,
and when death is most busiest, make thou me most constant, yea, when he
seeks most strongly to assail my feeble body, give me thy grace, good
Lord, that I may in spirit, heart, mind, and all the powers of my soul, give
praises unto thee, that of thy grace and inestimable kindenes, have sent thy
son Christ Jesus to ransom me by his blodie death and passion from the
power of hell: Give me grace therefore now that thou have appointed thy
messenger death, to finishe the days of my pilgrimage, and to call me by his
sommons from out this vale of misery and wrecchednesse, to build steadfastly
upon him, and faithfully to hope for life and salvation, in and alone through
him, let the remembrance of my (...) wickedness, be (...) upon, (...) thy
glorious ^ight, b^h^^de my sorrow^^l and true repentant heart, which come unto
thee with tears, not building on my merits, but upon thy mercies, though I
be sinful, thy son my savior is righteous: though I be wicked, yet he is most
holy: though I be full of iniquity, yet he full of all goodness: though I have
grievously offended thee, yet he has fully contented thee: though I have
transgressed thy law, yet he has fulfilled the same, and has promised in his
blood, to wash away their sins, that by faith continue in him constant to the
end I therefore in (...) g^^at and ^aynefull ^^onie, beholding Death (...)
heat at the gates of my body, come unto thee by the virtue of a fruitful
faith, beseeching thee, when thou shall see it meet and convenient, that he
shall dissolve the bands of this fadyng life, which endures but a while, for
a thousand years are as yesterday in thy sight to take my soul into thy
glorious and blessed hands, and so to confirm me thy truth, that at the last
when it shall please thee, by the sound of a trumpe, to raise my body from the
grave, when and in which time, body and soul shall unite, and come before thy
presence, I may by faith in thee, pass over the mount of my corruption, shake
off the bands of sin be set free from death, and destruction, and being by the
virtue of thy righteousness made holy, I may triumph with happy victory over
sin, death, and all the powers of hell, and enter with thee, and the fellowship
of thy chosen Saints into everlasting rest, grant this most loving father for
Christ Jesus sake, to whom with thee and the holy ghost be rendered al laud,
glory, honor, and praise, for ever. Amen.

THe Lord God be merciful unto me, pardon and forgive me my sins, look
upon me with thy gracious and blessed countenance, preserve me from the
second death, and everlasting destruction of body and soul. The Lord God
justify me in his death and blood, cloth me with his everlasting
righteousness, and register my name in the book of life. The Lord God comfort
my guilty conscience with the everlasting light of his bountiful favor, and
lot my place among his saints in his heavenly kingdom. The Lord God for his
mercies sake, after this my bodily death, give me the fruition of his presence,
in his right palace of endless glory, to whose merciful protection I commend
with all humility and reverence my soul, Lord Jesus preserve me, Lord Jesus
comfort me, Lord Jesus refresh me, Lord Jesus pray for me, for only into thy
hands that have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, I commend my soul. Amen.

A prayer unto the holy Ghost, against the temptations of Satan, the malicious
and wicked spirit.
AH Lord, the everlasting and heavenly spirit which sanctifiest and quicknest
the hearts of the faithful. For as much as there is an other spirit which
contrary to thy heavenly mocions, moves and provoke unto infidelity malice,
lying, pride, wrath, whoredom, fornication, glotonie, dronkeship, envy,
covetousness, contention, error, deceyte, hypocrisy, strange religion,
feigned holiness, impiety, desperation. etc. which is called the Prince of the
world, the great dragon of Hell, the authority of all euilles the father of
lying and a murderer from the beginning, to whom it is evident that we are
poor wretched and miserable, fallen away from God, walk in the lusts of the
flesh, live after the trade of the world, and do that that is pleasant to the
corrupt affections, and are far away estraunged from the city of righteous
Israel, and as strangers partaine nothing unto the covenant and promises of
grace. Wherefore while we thus consider this our damnation and the word of thy
promise and commandment, we are earnestly moved to fly unto thee, humbly to
desire and beseech thee, trusting that we shall obtain. For thou promisest and
also commaundest to trust an look for this, that through the good will of thy
spirit, thou will gather and receive us into thy people, that we may be made
a spiritual Israel, and renew us, that is to say beget us a new unto
repentance and godly living turn us and with an earnest zeal of our heart
draw us unto thee, that from henceforth we may abstain from the works of
darkness and death. Destroy in us the kingdom of sin that is to say
exclude from us not only evil words and deeds but also pluck out of our
minds all evil thoughts, noisome councils furious effects and the stinking
course of this flesh. Turn us from evil ways unto the right path of
repentance. Let our members be so addict to righteousness and sanctification,
that they may be made fit to serve thee. Let us increase and be plenteous in all such works as be pleasant unto thee. Forsake us not in tentatio^, but
rather stre^gthe^ us with that thy secret virtue and inward power. Bring to
pass that we give no ear to his flattering deceits, nor yet to his beautyfull
and glistering falaces, least he corrupt our minds and abuse our flesh unto
our destruction, which at the beginning full craftily he brought to pass by
his subtyle and sweet suggestions but rather throw down and tread under our
feet this our cruel enemy, that we being free from his deceitful tyranny may
through thy ghostly inspiration obtain such peace and quietness in our hearts,
that we may serve thee with a clean body and pure mind, through Jesus Christ,
unto the laud praise and glory of God the heavenly father. So be it.

A prayer for true repentance and for the coming of the kingdom of Christ.
O Lord and our God Jesus Christ the scripture testifies of thee that when thou
wast in the world thou did preach repentance and the coming of the
kingdom of heaven, and after thou wast risen again thou saidest, that it
behooved thee so to suffer, and on the third day to rise again from the
dead, and that both repentance and remission of sins should be preached to
every creature in thy name. And that whosoever believed and were baptized
should be saved. Again, than full lovingly did bid them that labor and
are laden to come unto thee, and promised that thou would unlade and
refreshe them. Uerely it is no small company of wicked spirits cleueth, which,
is also a roaring Lyo^, and earnest accuser of the sons of God, yea and such an
enemy of God and of the^ that pertain unto him, as by no means neither will nor
may be reconciled. Therefore we and all of us, which through thy grace are bound
and given over to serve God most humbly beseech thee O holy spirit, that thou will defend us against all the wicked temptations and pernicious breathings of
the most wicked spirit, that all vice excluded all virtue and godliness may
spring grow and increase in us until we be made perfect and ancient in Christ
Jesus our Lord and in his holy law. Take away infidelity, and engraffe in our
breast a true and unfeigned faith. Take away pride, wrath, envy, debate,
whoredom, glotonye, dronkeshippe, covetousness error, hypocrisy with all
kind of ungodliness, and print in our hearts humility, love, chastity, and
concord, purity of life, temperance, sobriety, mercy, liberality toward the
poor, truth, pure holiness, with all kind of virtue. Take away from us all
that ever is of Satan, the flesh and the world, and give us that which only
comes from the heavenly father, and from his only begotten son and from
thee that holy spirit, Teach us all truth, enarme us with the shield of true
faith that we may so quench the fiery darts of Satan. Grant that we may so
watch and show such diligence, that we may perceive his crafty assaults and
dangerous unto thee, that we live not hear after in the flesh, but rather
that we abhor from all filthiness and impuritie thereof, and that we being
brought into the kingdom through thy precious blood may obtain daily more and
more perfect remission of our sins. So be it.

A prayer for the knowledge of Gods will.
O Lord God our heavenly father, give us grace that we may never cease
diligently to call upon thee, and with most humble minds to desire thee, that
through thy great mercies we may be fulfilled with plenteous and rich knowledge
of thy divine will, and that we may increase daily more and more in us by the
virtue of the word of God by the use of preaching and ministration of the
Sacraments, which knowledge of thy will is a spiritual knowledge and an
heavenly science whereby we being also endued, do those things that are right
and pleasant before thee, yea wherewith we have such knowledge, that we take
nothing in hand, but that only which thou most of all do approve. Grant
that we being fruitful in good works, may increase in the same knowledge, that
we may be made strong in all virtue and godly power according to the
exceeding abundant glory of thy Majesty and that we may be enarmed with
patience, long suffering, cheerful perseuera^ce so well in adversity and
peril as in sorrow and death. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

A prayer for true christen love.
O God the almighty Lord which art the very love it self, and he that abides
in love, abides in thee, and thou in him through Jesus Christ we miserable
Creatures cry this day unto thee with a bitter and sorrowful heart, and for
our little strength we earnestly desire, that thou will power out into our
hearts the true christen and unfeigned charity through the holy ghost whereby
we may love one another, not only in words but also in works, that we may
abundantly declare our faith, as newely borne from above of the immortal seed
by the word of the living God, Help us O God and give us so much light that
we may know perfectly all feigned love wherewith we beheld our selves, and
our false boasting, which comes not from a pure heart, lest under the
pretense of love we do against faith, and against the godly truth, and by
this means fall away from the true love which is gotten by the same cross and
blood of Christ. Through the same our Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

A prayer to obtain godly learning.
THy servant am I, give me understanding, O Lord, that I may learn thy
commandments. For thy law is pure and undefiled, it turns souls, it gives
wisdom to babes: Thy ordinances are right making hearts cheerful Thy
commandementes are bright lightening eyes. The declaration and preaching of thy
words makes them to see that are blind, and gives understanding to the little
ones. Lighten therefore my eyes, O Lord, and give me knowledge and
understanding in thy holy law. For thou O Lord alone give wisdom, and out
of thy mouth comes prudence and knowledge. So shall I with a glad heart
search thy law, and sing perpetual praises to thy most blessed name.

A prayer for the faithful ministers of Gods word and for the fruit of the
Gospel.
O Lord Jesus Christ, let very mercy move thee to have pity and compassion on
us, which being destitute of all other help, wander abroad and are dispersed
like sheep that are without a shepherd. And for as much as there is much
harvest and few work men, send forth thou which art Lord of the harvest,
many faithful workmen, to finish it. And those that thou shall send, endue
and replenish them with thy grace, yea, to guide them, that they may bring
forth much fruit that great heaps of them that believe may plenteously be
gathered into thy barn, that there may be plenty of that pure spiritual
wheat unto thy praise which live and reignest with God the father in the
unity of the holy Ghost very God for evermore. So be it.

A prayer for the Magistrates and head officers.
O Almighty everlasting God, of whom al power is ordained we commend unto
thee all them, which by thine ordinance are our superiors, as Emperors, Kings
Princes and other Magistrates to whom thou have committed the sword and given
power to govern the subjects. We beseech thee, that thou will make them to be
feared of the unrighteous and tra^sgressors, and that through thy gift they
may overcome the enemies of thy name maintain public peace and tranquillity
look upon and defend widows and them that be succurlesse.

Moreover grant to the subjects an obedient mind that they do not resist thine
ordinance unto their great hindrance, but that they diligently obey their
Magistrates in all lawful things not only for the fear of pain but also for
conscience. Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A prayer for the common people.
O Merciful everlasting, God thou know right well how earnestly our most
cruel adversary Satan as a roaring Lion wandreth about the congregation of the
faithful, and through the weakness of our flesh brings in among us
manifold incommodities, diseases and sundry temptations.

In consideration whereof we are provoked according to the commandment of thy
son our Lord Jesus Christ continually to watch that is to say, to use fervent
prayer.

Wherefore we desire O most merciful father that thou will help and comfort
them that are afflicted lighten the^ that are blind teach the ignorant, grant
to the weak strength, to them that begin to go show the paths of thy way, to
them that are going already, send daily the increase of grace, and give the^
that have obtained some perfection of godliness constancy and stedfastnes that
every one of us according to the measure of the gift of his faith may be made
perfect. Through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer to be said in affliction, trouble, or sickness.
O Most gentle redeemer, which art always merciful, always a Savior, whether
thou sendest us prosperity or adversity, this is a token of great mercy and
of loving kindness, while by afflictions as by bitter plastures or salues thou
do heal the inward man, and by temporal pains preparest unto us
everlasting joys. And for as much as thou have before declared unto us eue^ by
thine own steps that this is the way, unto the true felicity, grant I
beseech thee, that I may patiently and obediently drink out this cup, which
thou have reached unto me. Uerely these things are unto frail nature very
grievous, but yet thou suffered more grievous things for me and I have
deserved far more grievous things which have so often deserved hell.
Notwithstanding thou know the frayltie of man's condition, and therefore
even as that merciful Samaritane do thou pour into our wounds wine which
fretteth and sharply biteth our vices, but thou put to it also ye oil of
thy consolation, through the which we may suffer those things, that are
intolerable to us. If it be thy pleasure to increase my pains, give me also
the gift of patience and grant that these afflictions of the body may turn
unto the remission of my sins. O if thy fatherly pity be contented with this
gentle chastysement where-wyth thou did now nurture me, then let me
receive at thy hand my health again, that I may give thee thanks for both,
that is, because thou have mercifully chastened me thine unprofitable servant
and also taken away ye bitterness of my affliction with ye sweetness of thy
comfort. So shall I remember thy benefits, and sing praise and glory to thee
for ever and ever worlds with out end. Amen.

A prayer against the councels of the enemies of God and of his divine verite.
AH Lord thou puissant strong and mighty God which destroyest the councels of
the ungodly, and riddest away the tyrants of this world out of the earth at
thy pleasure, so that no council or strength at all can resist thine eternal
wisdom and everlasting determination, which thou have to fore appointed by
thine unsearchable wisdom from the beginning. We thy poor creatures, simple
wretches and unprofitable servants, do most instantly and heartily desire thee,
for the love that thou haste to thy well-beloved, and only begotten son, our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that thou will look upon thy cause, for it is
time O Lord, and bring to naught all those things that are or shall be
appointed, determined and fully agreed upon among the wicked against thee, and
thy holy word. Let not the enemies of thy truth so miserably oppress thy
servants which seek thy glory, tender the advancement of thy pure religion,
and above all things wish in their hearts that thy most holy name may only
be glorified among all nations.

Whatsoever the ungodly go about contrary to thy glory and thy word, let it
not take effect, O sweet father, yea rather destroy it and utterly bring it to
naught, that all men may know that thou alone art that almighty and
everlasting God, which rulest and subduest all inhabiters of the earth, from
the highest to the lowest, after thy most holy will and pleasure. But to them
that walk not in the council of the ungodly, nor tread not ye way of sinners,
give thou good luck and prosperous success in thy name, that their holy
travails and virtuous enterprises may come unto a godly end. Defend them, that
they sit not in the chaier of the pestilent scorners, which spitefully railing
on thy truth, do defend with high tirannie both their wicked doctrine and
living. Grant to thy servants the mouth of thy wisdom which no man may
resist, whereby they may know yt thou alone art the Lord, and that none is to
be compared unto thee, all the enemies of thy Godly truth with their wicked
counsels destroyed and put out of the way, we may with fervent minds receive
the truth of thy most holy word, order our life according to the same, and
sing perpetual praises to thy most blessed name world without end, through
Jesus Christ thy son our Lord. So be it.

A prayer for the unity concord and perfect agreement in things concerning
Christian religion.
O Everlasting and merciful God which art the God of peace, love, unity and
concord, and not of strife, debate, discord and confusion, thou see how
miserably thy holy congregation is rent, torn, and divided into diverse sects,
while fleshly me^ leaving the wholesome instruction of thy most blessed word,
which is the alone truth and righteousness, set forth and maintain every man
as his fancy leads, things of their own brain, invented by carnal
wisdom, without the authority of thine undefiled law. And hereof comes it
to pass that so great dissension reign now a days in the world, and that so
many and diverse sects, schisms and heresies, spring up in every place,
unto the great perturbation of the christian public weal. For so long as men
set aside the rules and ordinances of thy holy Scripture, and appoint things
of their own imagination, and stiffely defend them, it cannot come to pass
that christian peace and unity of spirit, with hearty concord can have
place among us. Therefore we wretched sinners, to whom knowledge of these
things through thy grace, have chanced, do pray and most fervently desire thy
great mercy, that for as much as there is but one everlasting God, and one
heavenly father, which thou art, and one faith, and one baptism, which we al
profess ye call on thy name, thou will through thy only spirit, gather together
such as are dispersed into diverse sects, into ye unity of true and pure
understanding of thy word by faith, and bring them again, whose minds are
disseuered, into one body, that there may be no dissension among them. But
specially O most merciful father, grant, that we which do breath, and for
our little power labor unto the true unity in Christ, may lay aside al
dissension, and seek that thine only everlasting truth, which is contained in
thy word, that we together may grow into one judgment, sentence, and mind,
yea and that which flows and comes forth from the intelligence and
understanding of our Lord Jesus Christ, and evermore guide and lead us again
unto him that we with one perfect agreement of mind and with one mouth may
praise, and magnify thee, the celestial father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through the same Jesus Christ thy son and the holy ghost. So be it.

A prayer for spiritual joy.
O Lord Jesus the redeemer and comforter of mankind, which have prepared for
them that forsake the vain pleasures of this world for thy love, far better
delectations and pleasures, through ye holy ghost that most sweet comforter
which the world knows not, measuring the griefs of this life with inward
and secret comforts, and renew to us as a certain gage or pledge of the
glory that hereafter shall come, wherewith we being refreshed and comforted,
may run unto thee with the more cheerful minds. I beseech thee that the
annoynting of thy sprite may continually beat out of me the tediousnes of
evils, and make my mind merry with healthful joy, and be anointed through thy
abundant mercy, with the oil of gladness and ghostly comfort, which live
and reignest with the father and the same spirit, very GOD world without
end. Amen.

A prayer unto Christ our savior for the glory of heaven.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the only and everlasting son of God the
father, which also becamest man for our sake, that thou should bring us
unto God ye father, and therefore thou going unto the father occupiest his right
hand, grant that we may be co^uersant now with thee, through faith in the holy
Ghost after an heavenly manner, and that after this exyle and banishment we
being illumined with thy brightness, may remain with thee for ever, which
live and reignest with God the father and the holy ghost, very God world
without end. Amen.

Thanks gyuing to God for his benefits.
O Lord God our heavenly father, we right heartily thank thee for thy manifold
and inestimable benefits, which thou haste given to us, deserving nothing
less than to receive of thy bou^tie so great kindness. We thank thee that it
has pleased thee of thy great mercy first to create and make us according to
thy likeness, and to place us in joyful Paradise there perpetually to have
remained, if through the subtle and deceitefull suggestions of Satan our
adversary we had not transgressed thy most holy commandment. We thank thee
also, O most bounteous father, for thy loving kindness which thou show
unto us, when we were all perished and lost, through the sin of Adam. For
when thou might justly have condemned us, and cast us into perpetual
damnation thou like a father of singular great love had pity on us, and
sauedst us by the death and passion of thy well-beloved son our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, which gave himself a ransom for all our sins, and
paid sufficient price by his precious blood for all the wickedness that we
ever committed in times past, or hereafter shall commit through our frailty
and weakness, so that we repent and believe. Neither wast thou thus contented
he should only dye for our sins, but thou did raise him also again for
our justification, to make us righteous in thy sight. Moreover after that he
had showed himself unfeignedly alive to his apostles by manifest and evident
tokens, certain days after his resurrection, through the power of his
Godhead, ascended up into heaven, perfect God and perfect man, where he sits
now on the right hand and makes intercession for us, being our only Mediator
and alone Advocate.

From thence we look for him to come again at the day of Judgment, not as a
cruel Judge to condemn and cast us away into perpetual damnation, but as a
most loving Lord and gentle Savior to carry us with him into perpetual glory,
there always to remain in everlasting joy, praising thee world with out
end. For these thy most bounteous gifts and for other innumerable, which daily
thou give unto us of thy great mercy, we thank thee most gentle and
merciful father, desiring thee with all humblenes of mind that thou will give
us grace through thy holy spirit not to be unthankful but to walk worthy this
thy kindness, and so to behave our selves in this wretched world according to
thy word, that at the last day we may be found in the number of them to whom
thy only begotten Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ shall say, come ye
blessed of my father possess that kingdom, which was prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. Lord let it so come to pass, Amen.

An other confession of our sins to our Lord Jesus Christ.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the only and alone Physician of the wounded
conscience, we poor and miserable sinners, trusting on thy goodness and
grace, do here briefly declare unto thee the evil tree of our heart, with
the roots, branches, leaves, and fruits of the same, which all we unfeignedly
confess to be evil and wicked. For thou do no less consider, weigh, and
ponder the inward lusts of our heart, which is froward and unsearchable, then
these outward gross sins, that we wickedly commit either in word or deed.
Therefore we beseech thee and pray thee, even so heartily as our weakness will
suffer, although we be very unapt to pray, that thou will mercifully
circumcise and cut away our stony heart, yea for this old heart, create in us
another new heart, replenish it with thy spirit, water it and make it moist
with the juice or humor of heavenly grace, and with the fountaynes of
Spiritual waters, that the inward poison and the noisome juice of the flesh
may be dried up, the custom of the old man abolished, and our heart after
this no more bring forth thorns and cockle, fit stuff ^or the fire, but
spiritual fruits in righteousness and holiness unto everlasting life. So be it.

Grace before meat.
Give thanks to God
the Lord o^ might,
as it becomes
Christians right.
And ever when
thou (...) thy meat,
Remember God
before thou eat,
And then God will
remember thee,
An^ wi^h his food
will nourish thee,
And after thi^ life
ended is,
We shall remain
with him in bliss.
God save his universal Church,
Our noble Queen defend:
G^aunt that thy people may enjoy,
thy peace unto the end.
Grace after meat.
OF Dyues and Lazarus
the scripture tells plain*
How Dyues lived in wealth, and ease
and Lazarus in great pain.
The rich man he was clothed well,
and (...) of the best:
But Lazarus for hunger great,
could have but (...) rest.
But full of sores lay crying still,
for some man to re^^eue him:
With (...) that fell from Di^es (...)
whereof no man did give him.
Thus perished poor Lazarus,
and that for lack of food:
And also the rich glutton died,
for all his worldly good.
Therefore all ye that present be.
remember this thing well,
That how this man unmerciful,
is buried now in hell.
From the which torments great,
the Lord us all deliver,
And grant we may be merciful,
while we live here together.
Then sha^ we reign with Lazarus
with joys that be indinab^e.
Even by the blood of Jesus Christ
for our hea^th most profitable.
Now therefore lord we thee beseech,
to make us all consent,
Grace before meat.
To pity those that have most need
and the our sins repent.
Grace before meat.
ALl that is and shall be,
set upon this lord,
Be the (...),
by the Lords word.
So be it.
Grace after meat.
HE that is king,
and Lord over all,
Bring us to the table,
of life eternal.
Grace before meat.
THanks be given unto our lord Jesus Christ, both now and always for these
and all other his benefit^, so mercifully, lovingly, and abundantly powered
upon us. Amen.

Grace after meat.
THe God of all glory and peace, who has created, redeemed, and presently fed
us, be blessed for ever an^ ever. Amen.

FINIS.

