THE GOOD SHEEPEheardes duty.

By George Phillips.

Ecclesiast. 24.39. Behold how that I have not labored for my self only, but
for all them that seek wisdom and knowledge.

printer's or publisher's device P S
ET VSQUE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA

Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1597.

To the Worshipful and right Christian Gentleman, M. Thomas Aldersey Esquire,
health and salvation.
KNowing (right religious gentleman) that Idleness is as like the mother of
goodness, as ignorance is to the mother of devotion, and having no meeter
matter whereon to meditate then how I should bestow my study, nor fitter
opportunity wherein to exercise my talent, I durst not lay it up in a napkin,
for I know that my Lord will have his own with advantage: I have so near as I
could among many fields made choice of good ground, for there is hope of
fruit, that he which sows and he that reapeth may rejoice together: may it
stand with your good liking to accept of my poor pains, indicted to suppress
Idleness, and presented to your self in sign of good will, etc.

Your worships to be commanded in all Christian duty George Phillips.

To the Christian Reader, grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and his
son our Lord Jesus Christ.
SEeing Paul was not ashamed to write one thing often, Phillip. 3, 1
I hope to be vnblamed for publishing that to their eyes, that never heard it
with their ears, Leuit. 21, 3
that all may make public use of my private pains, like the clean Kine that
chewed the cudde: as Jacob was not content to have his bones buried in Egypt,
Genesis 47, 30
but made his son swear to carry them unto Cana: so my desire was that more
might be edified by reading these small pains, then could have been profited
by preaching of it in a long season, whereby thou see (gentle Reader) how
Christ stands at thy doors, knocking: Open to me my sister, Cant. 5.2
my love, my dove: excuse not thy self then, with I have put off my clothes,
and how shall I put them on? he ever loves thee: for he never leaves thee
until thou have given him entertainment, Acts. 12, 16
as Roda let in Peter: if thou art as desirous to find him as he is diligent
to seek thee, Luke, 15.4
leaving 90, and 9. in the wilderness, to win one that wandereth: Cant. 1, 6
inquire after him. Where feedest thou at noone, where sleep thou at night?
that I may come unto thee. Matthew. 17.2
The Lord grant thee to see him in his kingdom, as Moses and Elias did on
mount Thabor.

Thy servant for Christ's sake George Phillips. 2 Cor. 4, 5


The Text.
Ecclesiastes. 12. verse. 9. And the more wise the Preacher was, the more he
taught the people knowledge: and caused them to hear.


THis scripture which I have taken in hand, shows the pains of a faithful
Pastor: first it commends the calling, Hebru. 5.4
as the author to the Hebrews did Aarons Priesthood, by saying that no man
takes that honor to himself, but he that is called of God as Aaron was: and
it shows what diligence is required of him that is called, Mala. 2, 7
for as Mallachy said: The priests lips must preserve knowledge: so Solomon
said, The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people
knowledge. The preachers mouth is like the gold pot wherein Manna was preserved
for posterities: Exo. 16.33
we will hear of the goodness of this calling, and then know what pain is
expected from him that has this dignity. Exodus 2, 16
The holy tongue does honor Iethroe the priest of Madian with the name of a
Prince, as here Solomon does the name of a Preacher with the person of a
King: and God admonishing Ezechiell of his place and charge, said: Son of
man I have made thee a watch man over the house of Israel: Ezec. 33, 7
and to Jeremy he said, Thou stand before me as my mouth: that none
should doubt but that they are Gods Lieftenants upon earth in spiritual
affairs, so God aduanceth his ministers above the rest, as Pharaoh lifted up
Joseph above all the Egyptians: Genesis 41, 40
look what they command you in the Lord, that must you practice in your life
as Israel said unto Joshua: Joshua. 1, 17
even as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey thee, only the Lord
thy God be with thee as he was with Moses. Therefore said Solomon The words
of the wise are like goads and nails fastened by the masters of assemblies,
given of one Teacher: Eccle. 12, 11
Goads to prick you forward to Godward in the way of goodness, wherein you are
as slow as the leaden heeled Ass, and the Snaile paced Ox: Colos. 3, 16
Apoc. 10, 10
Nails fastened: because the word of Christ should dwell in you. As John did
eat the Angels book, and men are like a rotten poast, wherein nothing tarieth
that is not fastened well or driven up to the head: by the masters of
assemblies, because the Pastor is the master of the congregation: Therefore
said the Disciples unto Christ, Master, Luke. 11, 1 John. 10, 14
teach us to pray, etc. Given of one teacher, because Christ is the head
shepherd, and we all learn of him what to say, Ezec. 33.7
as you learn of us what you should do: Christ reasoning with the
harebrained Jews about their gadding into the wilderness to see John the
Baptist, mocketh their folly with, Matthew. 11, 7
Went you to see a reed shaken with the wind, went you to see a man in silken
raiment? or went ye to see a Prophet? and at the last tells them that he was
more then a prophet, by how much he that says: Christ is come, excels him
that said long sithence, Christ will come: so that all this being laid
together, John Baptist is better then a man of mean or weak gifts, John Baptist
is better then a silken Courtier, John Baptist is better then a Prophet:
teaches that men should speak as reverently of the preacher, as the son of
God did of this Prophet. Apoc. 2, 1,
Therefore the spirit graced the seven Ministers of those seven Churches in
Asia, with the name of Angel. God has honored them diverse ways at sundry
times, partly, by woorking miracles by them, as when Peter and John restored
his lyms that was a cripple all his life before, Acts. 3, 2
to signify that God was with them, speaking to him by them, as he did to
Ierichoes walls by seven trumpets of Rams horns, Joshua. 6, 20
partley by persuading men to amendment of life by them, as Agrippa said to
Paul, thou almost perswadest me to be a Christian: Acts. 26, 28
But especially by euicting and conuincing the hardest heart by them, as Pharaoh
confessed to Moses and Aaron, The Lord your God is holy, Exodus 9, 27
but I and my people are wicked: when Paul spoke of his education, he said:
Acts, 22, 3
I was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, signifying that men should honor
their teachers, Luke. 10, 39
as Mary kneeled at Christ's feet: and therefore the king is commanded to
receive the law at the hands of the Priest, 2 King. 12
as Iehoash the Prince was instructed by Iehoiada the priest: and they that
will understand the excellency of this calling, Hebr. 7, 7
must know that when Abraham the Patriarch is blessed of Melchizedech the
priest, the lesser is blessed of the greater. As the place is great, so the
pains of the Preacher cannot be little, as Paul said: 1. Tim. 3, 1
He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires a worthy work: whether you
take it for the place or for the pains, for he that desires the place, must
deserve it with his pains, because: Iere. 48, 10
Cursed is he that handles the works of the Lord negligentlie. I tell you
the small care and great ease that a number have, is a great cause why Gods
building goes forward so slackly. Wisdom is not compared only to a feast
for the pleasure of it, Prou. 9, 2
but to that tree of knowledge, for the profit thereof, that men might desire
to eat of it every day, Genesis 3, 22
as the people flocked about Christ to hear the word. Matthew. 13.4
The fear of God is wisedoms ingresse, the knowledge of God is wisedoms
progress, and the glory of God is wisedoms perfection.

The first point is, 1 Reg. 3, 9 Eccles. 5, 16 Acts. 7, 22
as Solomon desired wisdom, so he excelled in wisdom: as Moses did in the
Egyptian knowledge. This was the means of Joseph's adua^cement in Pharaos
kingdom, Genesis 41, 40 Dan. 2, 48
and of Daniels preferment in Babylon: and you may see how the spirit of David
the father spoke in Solomon the son: the father said, Psalm. 78, 7
I feed Israel with a faithful heart: the son said, The more wise the
preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge. Solomon was like his
ships, 1 Reg. 9, 28
that when they had gotten gold at Ophir, they brought it home to him: for he
seeks for wisdom to serve his people with it. The Queen of Saba first
heard the report of Salomons great wisdom, and after that she must needs
come to try it: so the wisdom of God resembles the Adamant, by drawing unto
it the furdest heart, 1 Reg. 10, 6
as it did the Queen of Saba: and the Iron rod brusing the hardest heart,
Psalm. 2, 9
Exodus 9, 27 Dan. 4, 30
as it did Pharaohs: and the right scepter, by suppressing the proudest king,
as it did Nabuchadnezzar; if you lack heavenly wisdom, you must come to the
Preacher, in whose mouth knowledge is preserved, like the manna that was laid
up in the golden pot, Exo. 16, 33
for the spirits of the Prophets being subject to the Prophets: 1 Co. 14, 32 1
Co. 14, 12
some have the utterance of wisdom, as Paul like a wise master builder laid
the foundation of religion in Corinth, 1 Cor. 3, 10
but if a man had as much wisdom as Solomon had, yet so like a bottomless pit
is Gods wisdom, that as he which cannot number the stars is taught to be
content with seeing them: Job. 22, 12
so what we cannot express, we must admire, as Paul said: O the depth of the
riches, Romans 11, 33
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! we may conjecture that Gods
wisdom is exceeding great, Matthew. 2, 1
in that the wise men came from the East to seek more wisdom from his son.
And in that they only are accounted right wise, Matthew. 7.24
that hearing his word will be led by it, as the wisards followed the star.
Matthew. 2, 9
For although me^ say of themselves, like Laodicea, Apoc. 3, 17
I am rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing, yet for so much
as she was wretched, poor, and blind therefore Paul's counsel is, Roma. 12.3
Be not wise in your own conceit. Matt. 23, 34
And the spirit spoke not in sport that said: Behold I send unto you wise
men: but me^t that the neglecting of Gods mercy, is the next way to pluck
down his justice. 1 Samuel 3, 13
As old Ely brake his neck for not nurturing his young sons. You are never
so safe as when ye serve God.

Ely forgetting God, 1 Samuel 4, 18
brake his neck from falling with a low chair, as soon as Iesabel by
tumbling out of a high window. 2 Reg 9, 33


And they that stand (in their own conceit) were best to take heed of a fall,
1. Co. 10, 12
and use the Preachers knowledge like a looking glass: indeuouring to amend
the fault while ye are before the glass; Iam. 23, 24 25
least going away, ye forget what was amiss. And then one sin will draw on
another, as Lots daughters first made their old father drunken, Genesis 19, 33 34
and then lay with him. Or use it as salt (for you must have salt in your
selves) as if you were either shaped out of the pillar that was Lots wife:
Mark. 9, 50
or Elizeus had sprinkled some of that salt upon you which he cast into the
spring of Ierico. 2 Reg. 2, 21
Solomon will note unto us now, what properties are found in a faithful
Pastor.

The first is knowledge or wisdom found in Solomon the Preacher: as if he had
read the book offered to Ezechiel. Ezec. 2, 9


The second is zealous teaching, as if Salomons mouth had been set a kindling
with the coal of zeal that touched Esayes mouth: Esaias. 6, 6
for the more wise the preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge.
The third is holy life, wherein such men participate of the goodness of God:
leading men by example of life, as well as by word of mouth. And therefore a
book and hand were both presented to Jeremy. Iere. 1, 9
And this causes the people to hear as willingly, as the preacher speaks
diligently. As Solomon caused the people to hear: so Christ says, Matt. 15,
10
we must hear and understand: for Solomon taught the people knowledge.

Hauilah has not only good gold: but it has also Bdelium, Gene. 2, 11 12
and the Onix stone, and wisdom comprehends many good things. Much
teaching, and little learning: much speaking, and little hearing: much
preaching and little practicing, 2 Co. 14, 28
makes men in years children in understanding. The wisdom of Solomon has
proceeded immediately from God, that granted him that favor in Gibeon, 1
Reg. 3.6
and as God gave it him, so he gives it to his people: for such as have
freely received must freely give. When the Queen of Saba had sounded
Salomons wisdom she said: 1 Reg. 10, 9
Blessed be the Lord thy God which loved thee, to set thee on the throne of
Israel, because he loved Israel ever, and made thee King, to do equity and
righteousness.

Honoring the giver, and praising the teacher of wisdom. Psalm. 78.73
David ruled the people by the dexterity of his hands, and Solomon instructed
them by the wisdom of his heart. So the king that cares not for his
subjects, like Solomon, 2. Chro. 15 3
is like Asa that let his people be without a priest, to keep them in
ignorance. The Magistrate that does not zealouslie endeavor to minister
discipline, is like the unjust Judge, Luke. 18.5
that would not do justice but for shame. The pastor that instructs not his
flock painfully, is like the abomination of desolation: Matt. 24, 15
for he sits where he ought not. The father that brings not up his son
in the fear of God, 1. Sam. 2, 22 23, 24
is like old Elie: And the mother that nurtureth not her daughter virtuously,
can claim no kindred of the wife of Abraham: 1. Pet. 3.6
for they be Saraes daughters who do Saraes duties. Paul commended the
grandmother and natural mother of Timothy, for their careful keeping of him
in that faith, which makes men wise to salvation. 2. Tim. 1, 5


And he thought that Titus was never wise enough, Titus. 2.2
until he could teach all sorts their duties. Because the Church is like a
ship, and like a vine, and like a harvest, and like a body. For since it is a
ship, all should help to guide it (like the Mariners that were troubled in
the tempest where Jonas was) for their own safety. Iona. 1, 4, 5
Seeing it is a vine al should help to plant the vine, in hope to drink the
wine: as Noah drank of the vine that he planted. And seeing it is an harvest,
they that look to mow must learn to sow. Gene. 9, 21
And if it be a body, let every member do his duty. When Elie was old,
and sat in his chair with his sight dim, his hands shaking, his legs
feeble, his back weak, and his heart trembling, he was so unwieldy that with
fear he fell from his chair, 1 Samuel 4.18
and brake his neck. Serve God then while you are young, that he may save you,
when you sit in a chair for very age like old Elie. The impotent must be
borne withal, for they show that we may have our limbs, but not the use of
them, as a man may have fire in a flint stone, and yet feel no heat.
Therefore said Christ, that Lazarus lay at the rich man's gate. Luke. 16, 20


An image is so called, partly because it is the likeness of the thing it
does represent: but specially because it is the imagination of man, Gene. 6, 5
whose thoughts being only evil, he imagined that he could make his
maker. As Iereboam said, Iere. 44, 17
The calves that he erected in Dan and Bethel were the gods that brought Israel
from Egypt: 1 Reg. 12, 28
So the meaning of the Preacher is, that he which has the chief place in the
Church, and yet is like Dagon in the Temple: having a mouth that is shut up
like Iericoes gates: A tongue, Joshua. 6, 1
and yet possessed with a dumme devil, having ears and hears not his
duty, and eyes but leads not the blind.

He whose wisdom is pregnant, whose learning is competent, and whose body is
healthful, and yet is in all points helples in his calling, that is an Idol.

The purest water with still standing soon stinketh, and is noisome, like those
waters of Ierico. 2 Reg. 2, 19 James. 5, 3
Coin horded up, is subject to cankering. And one talent must be used: Luke.
19, 23
for thy Lord looks for his own with advantage. He that said, Psalm. 128, 2
Thou shall eat the labor of thy own hands, meant that men should earne
bread before they eat bread. As Paul said, 2 These. 3, 10
He that will not work let him not eat. For such as eat that which they
earne not, Gen, 3, 19
do refuse the burden of the sons of Adam. And transgress that law: 2.
These. 3, 12
eat your own bread. But Solomon is like the honey Be, giving us the sweet
that we never sweat for.

Solomon had not all his wisdom at once, but the more wise he was the more
he taught the people knowledge. Exo. 24, 18
He attended on Gods leisure for wisdom, like Moses for the law. And the
people tied them selves to the preaching time, as the Cripples at Bethesda to
the Angels moving of the water. John. 5, 3
All cannot say like Esaias, Esaias. 50.4
The Lord has given me a tongue of the learned: Esaias. 62.1
but all must say like Esaias, For Sions sake I will not hold my peace. They that
cannot do what they would, must will what they can. Acts, 3, 6
As Peter said: Gold and silver have I none, but such as I have I give thee.
Job said, Job. 31, 17
that he gave of his bread to the hungry: and Solomon imparted his wisdom
to the ignorant. As birds record not always, but sometimes they sing out: as
after buds comes fruit: Number. 17, 8
So preachers devise how to make you heavenly wise: and bud like Aarons rod,
John. 5, 17
to give unto you the never dying fruit. My father works hitherto, and I
work (said Christ) So no time is left for idleness, nor any occasion slipped
over, wherein or whereby we may benefit our brethren by interpreting the
Scriptures, as Christ did to the Disciples in the way to Emaus: Luke 24, 27
Matt. 13.52
that they may be able so bring out of their treasure things both new and old.

There be short tales, and our life is likened to one of them: to admonish us
that seeing our days wear out of date, Psalm. 90, 9
as a short tale that is told draws quickly to conclusion, therefore all
our life is little enough to do good in, and we should still be helping them
that do most need, and chiefly desire our aid.

Whether it be in temporal matters, or in spiritual affairs, Nehemiah said
at the feast of Taberna^les: Eat of the fat, Nehe. 8, 10
and drink of the sweet, and send part to such as have none.

And Christ opened the Scrip^ures to them that talked of the scrip^ures: seeing
the Preacher taught the people knowledge, how say the Papists, that
ignorance is the mother of devotion? The doctrine of Solomon the preacher was
it from heaven or of men? if it be from heaven, upon pain of damnation they
must believe it: if of men, for shame let it not be vnconfuted. Christ was of
Salomons mind, for he said: John. 17, 3
This is eternal life, to know thee the true God and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent: but by the Popes principle they that will be saved, must be
ignorant. Roma. 10.2
Paul condemned that devotion that was not begotten of knowledge: the papists
commend devotion, and condemn knowledge, as though every one should not love
him that does beget, John. 5, 1 Matt. 22.29
as well as him that is begotten. You err because you know not the scriptures
(said Christ) nay says the Pope, the Church cannot err. Such as are blind,
and would feign see, think themselves still out of the way: but they that are
wilfully blind, think like Papists that they cannot step awrie.

They that kept knowledge under lock and key, Matt. 23, 13
claim kindred of the Papists: for they neither open to other nor enter
themselves. When talents were delivered, Luke, 19.13
the owner said, Occupy till I come: soft and fair says the Papist, for we
may do works of supererogation, and so you may soon have your own with
advantage: Luke. 17, 10
as though none of them were unprofitable servants, but could perform their
duties and more too. You ^^e how truly the Pope is called An^^christ, Matt.
28, 19
for opposing himself against christ: Christ said, Go and teach all ^ations:
The Pope says, stay and hold ^our peace. Esaias. 62, 1
Therefore Esaias thwar^^th him with, For Sions sake I will not ^old my peace.

Preachers love Sion for Sions sake, ^hey love the Church, because it is ^he
Church of God. 1 Cor. 4, 1, 2
They study to ^nstruct you, and therefore are called ^tewards to give that to
you which is ^iuen to them: of whom it must be ^ulfilled that was said to
our Savior Christ: Mark. 12, 14
Thou teach the way of God ^ruly.

And the people must profit by his pains, as the Corinthians did by Paul's
preaching, 1 Corin. 1, 5
who thanked God that they were made rich in all learning and knowledge.
Eccles. 1.7
As all rivers run into the Sea that it may send them back to benefit a
common wealth: so God has heaped many blessings upon one man, that he might
help other yt has them not. Therefore Solomon caused the people to hear that
the Pastor and the people might consent together in the word; 1 Reg. 7, 13
Acts. 4, 6
as Solomon and Hiram agreed in the Temples work: he must teach like the
Apostles, and they must hear like Mary. Luke. 10, 39


The teacher applying him to the capacity of the hearer, and the hearers
harkening attentively to his doctrine: Exodus 25, 20
as the Cherubins that covered the mercy seat looked one toward another. God
moved attention before he spoke to Israel, and David (by Gods example)
conditioneth with them, That if they will come and hear him, Psalm. 34, 11
he will teach them the fear of the Lord, which proves not that if the
flock hold back from hearing them, the preacher may with draw his speaking.
If Sion would not hear for her own good, Esaias. 62, 2 Ezec. 2, 5
yet Esaias must open his mouth for the churches sake: and Ezechiell must speak
in the name of the Lord, that they may know that there has been a Prophet
among them: for his sure discharge, and their certain confusion.

The Israelites always camped where the Arc was, Joshua. 3, 5
and if Christians would attend upon the Church, that would be verified of
the Preachers pains in them, that was spoken of the twelve stones that Joshua
erected in Jordan: Joshua. 4, 9
There they have remained until this day. But this makes a great many to
spend their time as idly as the prodigal son consumed his money vainly. Luke.
15.13
That sin has so many and so mighty patrones to sooth it up: as the high
priests hearted the Soldiers with we will save you harmless. Matt. 28.14


Therefore men are seldom or never touched in conscience with the Preachers
pains, John 23, 22
as the Disciples were in spirit with Christ's spirit: but sit in the Church
as though they neither knew where they were, nor what to do as Israel in
captivity said, How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange land? Psalm.
137, 4


But take heed, for your conscience is like your eye: for as the least hurt
offends the tender eye, so your conscience will accuse you both of every idle
hour, and of every minute that you have misspent. And men sleep most, when
they should wake most, like those fond Virgins who thought their oil would
never be spent, Matthew. 25, 5
and as the prodigal son thought his purse bottomless: but you see it is
wisdom to have oil of our own, for The just man must live by his own faith.
Abac. 2.4


Though the Preachers have the book in their hands, yet they hold the law
in their mouth. Therefore said God to Ezechiel, Ezech. 2, 8
Open thy mouth and eat that I give thee. And to Iosuah: Joshua. 1, 8
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth. Matthew. 11, 7
So you must hear with your ears, and hearken with your heart, because the
Jews went but to see John Baptist, they carried eyes chiefly: but such as come
to hear a Preacher, bring ears specially. Every gift was given to edify, as
eyes to see with, ears to hear with: and they must be employed in their
several service. Therefore said John that he wrote that which our eyes have
seen, 1 John. 1, 1
our ears have heard, and our hands have handled of the book of life. Genesis
2, 17
He that of all the trees in the garden kept but one untouched, of all the
seven days requires but one to be sanctified to himself: Exo. 20, 10
and if we cannot affoorde him that we wrong him much. As the mean is
directed to the end: so God sanctified the seventh day unto us, that we
might still keep it holy unto him. And therefore we assemble our selves to
the house of God to hear the word of God: as the people said one to an other
concerning Ezechiels preaching: Ezec. 33.30
Come I pray you, let us go to the house of the Lord, and hear what is the
word that comes from the Lord.

When God commanded that bells should be hanged on Aarons garment he gave
this reason for it; That when Aaron goes into the holy place before the
Lord, Exo. 28, 35
his sound may be heard. So that if Preachers must sound like Aarons bells in
their office of teaching, that they may be heard, then people must harken
like Israel to his sound, that they may be fruitful like the pomegranats on
Aarons garment. GOD would have a course of speakers, and a course of hearers:
a course of teachers, and a course of learners: a course of Preachers, and a
course of practisers: Psalm. 122.3.4
when the Psalmist said that Jerusalem was builded like a City at unity in it
self; he proved it with: For thither the tribes go up, even the tribes of
the Lord to testify to Israel to give thanks to the name of the Lord.

So that Jerusalem is never builded like a city at unity in it self, until
the servants of God assemble themselves willingly to serve the Lord.
Therefore come diligently and spend your time fruitfullie in the house of the
Lord, least ye depart from the word like Judas from the Sacrament, Luke. 22.3
as though you had tasted the savor of death. Luke, 22.3
Sit not in the house of God like Joseph in the Iaile: Gene, 40, 14
thinking every minute a month until you be gone, you must forget your own
people, and your fathers house, and incline your ear to consider what God
says before he will have pleasure in your beauty. Psalm. 45.10 11


Matthew. 13.7
Some trees are fruitless of themselves, and keep the ground so too, and such
are dumme ministers, who have no heavenly wisdom themselves, and much less
can teach the people knowledge: Matt. 21, 19
and therefore are cursed like the Fig tree. Some ground is barren by
nature, and makes the trees fruitelesse that grow therein, and such are the
hard hearted people; in whom the immortal seed can take no deep root: and
these are hopeless, Matt. 13 20 21
like that stony ground in the Gospel, who have only the name, Apoc. 3, ^
but not the nature of the true Church; as the Sardians were said to live when
they were dead indeed.

Zechariah 11. verse. 17. O idle shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword
shall be upon his arm, and upon his right ye. His arm shall be clean dried
up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

FINIS.

