THE FISHERMAN.

A Sermon preached at a Synod held at Southwell in Nottinghamshire.

Showing 1. The necessity of calling and gifts enabling in a Minister. 2. The
danger intruders are in. 3. Whose fault it is that such are in the Church. 4. A
good life requisite in all that profess Christianity, but especially in
Ministers. 5. Wisdom and learning absolutely necessary in Preachers. 6.
Unlearned and frothy preaching does much hurt. 7. Gods work goes best forward
when his workmen agree well amongst themselves. 8. Contempt of Gods Ministers
shall not be unpunished. With other points of moment.


By Ierom Phillips Bachelour in Divinity.

LONDON, Printed for W. I. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold in Ivy Lane.
1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, AND REVEREND FATHER in God, JOHN by divine
providence Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England.
Right Honorable,
I Present unto your Lordships view this short Discourse of the trade of
Fishing: Fishing for Men, the best trade that mortal men can spend their time
in, though all come not to it with the best minds: for some are fishers of
Saint Peter's trade, for this hope only, that they may happily speed, as once
Saint Peter did, Math. 17. vlt.
to cast an angle into the sea, and pull up a fish with money in the mouth of
it. Such seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ. Phil. 2.21.


But howsoever, they that come with good affection to the work, and perform it
with good effect, cannot be free from the poison of Aspes that lies under the
lips of some men. For if any exorbitancie be sound in any of our coat and
calling, it is strange to see how our adversaries insult thereupon, and
exclaim against all of the Clergy; from the highest to the lowest, as if
thereby there were cause enough given to pull down the whole fabrik of our
Church, and for themselves to take up that cry of the cursed Edomites, Down
with it, down with it, Psalm. 137.7.
even with the ground. We all have our faults, and too many of us too many:
but what then? shall the innocent bear the reproach with the nocent? Or shall
the reverend Fathers of the Church be taxable for the crimes of some
Churchmen, which they cannot mend?

Shall the Master bear the blame, because some of his Disciples eat with
unwashed hands?

I doubt not, but many a thousand in the Land, Prelates, and other good
Pastors, that stand in peaceable conformity with the Church, can as ill brook
scandalous life and unsound doctrine in a Minister, as any of those fiery
spirited declamors.

The Gouerners of the Church cannot be so circumspect but through the craft and
malice of man and Satan, some such may craftily creep in; that shall dishonor
God and defile the priesthood. Nehem. 13.20.


Since by the providence of God, and his Majesty's most judicious choice, you
are called to so high a place of honor and weighty emploiment for the Church
and Kingdom; it is the hope of good men, that the Church shall have cause to
rejoice much in your Honors advancement: and that goodness in you shall
receive no loss by the access of greatness, but rather much gain, In te
factam esse hanc mutationem confido, Bernard. ad Eugen.
non de te, nec priori statui tuo successisse hanc promotionem, sed accessisse.
It is the confidence of them that conuersed with your Lordship whilst you
lived in these parts, and in this confidence have I bin bold to present your
Honor with this little Treatise. I can say nothing for my self, why I should
be so bold, saving that the subject requires such a Patron, and my self am
yours in the service of the Church, having pastoral charge in your Lordships
Diocese. It was first made public, I confess, by delivery in the Province
and Diocese of that most reverend Archbishop of York, to whom I am much
obliged for many courtesies, according to his accustomed benignity toward all,
even of the least deseruings in the cause of the Church: yet herein I thought
to make somewhat an equal division betwixt his Grace and your Honor, since
you both have interest in me: that as it was preached by his Graces
appointment; so now it may be published under your Honors protection. Thus
humbly craving your Lordships acceptance, I commend you to the God of grace and
glory. From Althorpe in the Isle of Axholme.

Your Lordships in all humble and dutiful observance, Ierom Phillips.

THE FISHERMAN.
MARK. 1.17. Follow me, and I will make you Fishers of Men.


FRom the ninth verse of this Chapter, the Evangelist does record the Baptism,
Fasting, Temptation and preaching of Christ. The next thing, is his calling of
others to the same work of preaching. He calls here two pair of brethren;
Simon and Andrew his brother; James and John his brother.

They were but men, yet he will make them workers together with God: 1. Cor.
3.9.
they were but simple fishermen, yet he will make them Fishers of men. Follow
me, and I will make you Fishers of men.

Consider in the Text two parts: 1. Calling; Follow me. 2. Qualifying; I will
make you Fishers of men.


Before I speak of the parts, let me consider the order and disposition of the
parts: First, Calling; then, Qualifying. First, Follow; then, be made fishers.

This first calling of the Apostles, is not to the work of Apostleship, but
rather to the school of Discipleship. It is not Follow me, and straightwayes
be fishers; but, Follow, and I will make you Fishers. Neither did these fishers
upon this call, immediately leave their nets, and preach the Gospel; but they
left their nets and followed Christ Jesus, and expected another calling and
deputation to that great work: they were not as yet gifted for so high a
calling. They must learn before they can teach. First be Disciples, before
they can be Apostles; Followers before Fishers.

Many ouer-skip this degree, and make themselves Apostles, that never knew what
it was to be Disciples of Christ Jesus: Prophets they are made, that never knew
the School of the Prophets, nor what it is to be among the sons of the
Prophets: having got a place in the Church; if you ask them, whence they came
thither? if they will answer truly, Job 1.7.
they must say as Satan did, From compassing the earth, and from walking to and
fro in it, as wanderers that could never settle in any good course of living;
their indowments of body and mind are so mean, as that no Calling in the world
could afford them bread, for their pains, and therefore are feign to say (as
it was Gods curie upon Elies wicked sons) Appoint me, 1. Sam 2. vlt.
I pray thee, to one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a morsel of
bread. Prou. 6.11.
Thus necessity pursuing them like an armed man, as Solomon says, they fly
from their enemy, and take hold on the horns of the Altar; there they eat
the Shewbread, which is not lawful to eat, but for the Priests only.

They that are driven to this Calling for bread only, and have no other
testimony of an inward calling, nisi quod inanitate intestina murmurant, Plaui.
Cas.
for the most part they will transgress for bread in the execution of their
offices, and frusto panis conduci possunt, vel vri taceant, vel vti loquantur;
they will speak good of evil, or evil of good, as they shall find to make
best for their own private advantage.

It is the Apostles sentence, Act. 6. It is not meet to leave the word of God,
and serve tables: we may inuert the sentence, and say, It is not meet that men
should leave serving of tables, to become dispensers of Gods word; It is not
meet that Ministers should turn Serving men; nor that Seruing-men and such
like, mercenary and mechanical men void of learning and gifts enabling,
should turn Ministers. If ever God open the eyes of these men, to let them see
the danger they are in, and feel the weight of the burden that is on their
shoulders, and how unable they are to bear it, they will the^ come in,
fulfilling the prophecy of Zachary, and say, I am no Prophet, but an
husbandman: Zach 13.5.
for man taught me to be an-herd-man from my youth. Though they have now high
places in the Church, and are great in their parochial purchases, though they
sit upon pinnacles of the Temple, yet if they consider that the Tempter set
them there, to cast them down headlong, to break their necks, they will be
glad to get down the fairest way. Though they have now the honor of Prophets,
yet if they consider that they are but the devils workmen in Gods house, and
that it may be said of them as of Saul, Inuasit eum spiritus malus, 1. Sam.
18.10.
and prophetabat; the evil spirit comes on them, and they prophecy: the evil
spirit comes on them, and they turn Priests. When they well weigh these
things, they will be glad for the peace of their consciences to betake
themselves to their old trades again, and leave this Calling to those that can
better execute it, and that can derive their pedigrees from Aaron. Nehem. 7.64.


If you ask the cause, why in a well governed Church such Locusts can so
swarm? One is, sacrilegious Patrons give their livings upon such dishonest
terms, that no man of gifts or grace can accept of them; and therefore they
are feign to find out such as will accept of them upon any terms, even for
Michaes wages, Judge. 17.10.
ten shekels of silver by the year, a suite of apparel, and meat and drink.

But others say, if no such Ministers were made, the Church should not be
pestered with such unworthy creatures. It is true indeed; and if any that have
power to ordain, admit such wittingly and willingly, it will be heavy for him
to answer for it before the great Bishop of our souls. But to speak truly in
the just defense of those reverend Fathers (quos vtinam omnes possem liberare)
the cause for the most part is amongst our selves: for it is not possible that
any Bishop should know the life, and conversation, and education of every one
that is to be admitted into the ministry, but by the testimony of those that
know them. Ministers and Gentlemen, for favor or for by-respects, are too
liberal of their hands, in giving testimony to them whom either they know not,
or know, not to be deserving; Et hinc illae lachrimae. They that thus commend
unworthy ones to the work of the ministry, let them consider (though they be
no Bishops) whether in so doing they have not transgressed the Apostles
precept, 1. Tim. 5.22.
Ne cui cito manus imponas, Lay hands suddenly upon no man, neither be partaker
of other men's sins.

There is another sort that outrun their calling too, which being called to
follow, straightwayes run to this fishing before they be furnished: being
called to be Disciples, straightwayes they run to the Apostolik function;
contrary to the Apostles precept, Neophitus ne sit, 1. Tim. 3.6.
Let him not be a young Scholar. Before years and experience, reading and
other helps bring them to maturitie of judgment, they take upon them to divide
the word of God to his people. Let it be granted that these be (some of them)
of the Tribe of Leui (I mean young men trained up in the Schools for the
Ministry) yet for their forwardness it may be said of them truly, as the
factious company to Moses mutinously, Numb. 16
You take too much upon you, ye sons of Leui. Under the Law the Levites had
their appointed times for their ages, Numb. 4.
before which they might have no admittance to the service in the Tabernacle,
though they were never so ripe and pregnant. It was not well with the
sacrifices when Priests boys were permitted to intermeddle; they never came to
do any good service either to God or to his Church: 1. Sam. 2.13.
but they came with their flesh-hookes to fetch sweet morsels from the Altar,
and these caused the sacrifices of the Lord to be despised. When the young
sons of the Prophets shall be set to gather herbs to make pottage for the
food of Gods household, they may happily in stead of wholesome pot-herbes, bring
in Colloquintida; that when the broth is served in, they that taste of it, may
say, Mors in olla, 2 King 4.40.
O man of God, death is in the pot.

I doubt not but God may enable some, as he did young Timothy with rare gifts
for his work, though they have not many years: but it is not common, it is
not ordinary. Et da mihi talem Timotheum, says Bernard, Bernard.
and ego illum cibabo auro and potabo balsamo.

Thus far the order and disposition of the parts. Now follows the parts of
tne Text in order.

1. Calling; Follow me. 2. Qualifying; I will make you Fishers of men.
To follow Christ Jesus, is not to follow him on foot only, Augustinus de
bono virginali.
but to follow his precepts and example of life: Hunc in eo quisque sequitur,
in quo imitatur, says Saint Augustine. To follow Christ, is to be a Disciple
of Christ; Math. 28.19.
to be a Disciple, is to be a Christian. For they that at the first were called
Disciples, Act. 11.26.
afterward at Antioch began to be called Christians. Then to follow Christ, is
to become good Christians by the imitation of Christ. And this is the first
step to the office of the ministry: he must first be a good man that will be a
good Minister. And this first step you (beloved, of the Laity) must tread with
us. For though to follow Christ, be here propounded as the first staire to the
office of preaching the word; yet else where our Savior Christ and his
Apostles make it a common duty belonging to all that bear the name of Christ,
and are called Christians. It is not said of the Pastors only, but of the
sheep also, that they follow the chief Shepherd: My sheep hear my voice,
John 10.27.
and they follow me. And to the whole Church at Ephesus, Be ye followers of
God, as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1.
and walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, etc.

No sheep in Christ's fold is barren of good works, They all go up from the
washing, every one has twins, Cant 4.2.
and none is barren amongst them. Show me thy faith by thy works, says Saint
James. Thy faith is best seen by thy following of Christ Jesus.

The life of a Christian is his faith, the life of his faith, is his good
works: for faith without works, says Saint James, is a dead faith. Iam. 2.17.
A sound Religion makes the professors thereof trees of righteousness, says
the Prophet; not barren and dead trees, like the fig tree our Savior Christ
cursed, having leaves, and no fruit on it; but fruitful trees, Math. 21.19.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 92.13.
shall flourish in the courts of our God; they shall bring forth fruit in their
age, they shall be fat and flourishing. Though we do not teach you to merit
heaven by your good works, yet we must tell you, that your faith that is
empty of good works, is no good faith. Justifying faith and a good conscience
are inseparable companions, and say one to another as Ruth said to Naomi, Ruth.
1 17.
Where thou dwell, there will I dwell; and where thou die, there will I
die. A fruitless faith is a dead faith. Give me children, Genesis 13.1.
says Rachel to her husband, or else I die. So says Faith to the professors
thereof, Let good works be the fruit of my womb, or else I am but dead.

We glory much to compare our age enlightened, to the darkness of the age of
our forefathers, what darkness they sat in, and what light we now do see. But
if we look well about us, our wants are as great as theirs: they walked in
darkness, because they had no light: but this is the condemnation of this our
age, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more then light,
because their deeds are evil. The former age indeed was as Leah, bleare-eyd,
yet fruitful in many commendable works: our age as Rachel, quick sighted,
and beautiful to the eye, but barren: we are fruitful indeed in professed
religion, but fruitless of the true practice of piety. Many that profess to
follow Christ Jesus, aequis passibus, as it were at the very heels, yet are
found to halt, and so discredit themselves and their profession, 2. Sam. 12.14.
and cause the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. The more glorious you are in
your profession, if your actions be not answerable, the more do you wrong the
Church wherein you stand, and wound your own souls. Angels tongues, would
have Angels lives, Saints lives at the least. But where there are Angels
tongues and devils lives, there are devils incarnate; Satan transformed into an
Angel of light. It is better that wickedness should be seen in her own
colors, then under the hood and habit of virtue. A wicked Professor is worse
then a professed wicked man.

But this duty of following our master Christ, is here chiefly intended to us
of the Ministry, we must so follow, as that we must be examples to our
flocks: we must follow Christ so near, as that they may follow him in
following us; that we may say to them as the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 11.1. Be ye
followers of me, as I am of Christ: so we must teach them as well by example of
life in following, as by doctrine in preaching Christ.

We are by resemblance stars; Apoc. 1.10.
stars we are in this life, and shall be stars in heaven too, if we fulfill
our Ministry effectually: Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to righteousness,
shall shine as stars in the firmament for evermore. Starred have light, that
points at our doctrine; stars have influence too, Job. 38.31.
that points at our good works. Can thou restrain the sweet influence of the
Pliades, or loose the bands of Orion, says almighty God to Job. As the
Philosophers define, Stella est densior pars sui orbis, a star is a massier
part of his orb: so should good Ministers be more compact of goodness and
grace, then the rest of the people, amongst whom they live.

Wherefore, beloved brethren, stars of this constellation, since our Calling
is high and honorable, let the condition of our lives be suitable: let there
not be disparitie and disproportion betwixt our callings and conuersations: Ne
sit seeds prima, and vita ima. Ad Oceanum.
It is Saint Ieroms annotation upon the name of Pastor given to us: Talis
^ligendus est Pastor, prae quo reliquus populus grex est. The like note may we
as well have here from this name of Fisherman: Talis est eligendus Piscator,
prae quo reliquus populus pisces sunt. He ought to be so conspicuous for Gods
graces eminent in him, that it may be said of him as of the man whom God did
choose to be the first King over his people Israel: Videte virum quem elegit
Dominus: 1. Sam. 10.24.
Behold the man whom the Lord has chosen, higher then all the people by the
head, there is none like unto him of all the people.

We aim at, not only the gross and greatest sins of the people, but even
at the least too, even motes must we take away: and how clean must he be
himself, that should be a mote-finder in other men's lives? We may not go with
beams in our own eyes, to pull out motes out of our brothers eyes: if we do,
they will as soon suffer us to pull their eyes out of their heads, as any
motes out of their eyes. For such is the perverseness of people, (I may well
call it perverseness in them) they will not be taught by their doctrines whose
lives teach not too; Math. 7 5.
but they have learned to say, Hypocrite, first pull the beam out of thine
own eye, then shall thou see more clearly to pull the mote out of thy
brothers eye. Motes in our eyes are beams, they are beams indeed in the
peoples account, nay, they are beams in Gods account; I would to God then they
might be so in our account too. Our motes are beams in Gods account: for mark
it, and it is observed by Chrysostom, Dial. lib. 6, cap. 10.
that under the Law there was as much sacrifice to be offered for the sin of
the Priest, as for the whole multitude; to signify, that for the dignity of
his place, and for the common mischief ensuing upon his fall by example, his
sin weighed as much as the sin of all the people. And the Priests daughter
that did not intermeddle in the Priests office, yet in regard of her descent
and family she comes of, her sin was much more heinous then the same sin in
another woman: Leuit. 21.9. Cum reliquis vero in eadem culpa depre^ensit mitius
agebatur. Exodus 22.16
if she played the whore, she must be burned with fire, though the same sin
in another had an easier punishment.

The world is much given to fault-finding with us for our lives, and many times
without a cause: for they think to extenuate their own faults, by agprauating
ours; Genesis 3.12.
and plead in defense of their sins like Adam: The woman that thou gave me,
gave it unto me, and I did eat. The Pastor that thou did set over me, was an
example unto me of sinning, and I did sin. Querentes licentiam male viuendi,
August. de vita and moribus clir. Sermon. 2.
querunt sibi exempla male viuentium, and multos infamant, vt socios inuenisse
videantur: And if they find such examples amongst us, though it excuse not
themselves, yet it makes us inexcusable if we be guilty.

Voi soli non potestis perire. Ber^
Beloved, it stands us in hand to look to our own footing. We live not to our
selves; many do stand or fall by our example. The sins of Elies sons made
the people of the Lord to trespass. And exemplary sins must have exemplarie
punishments.

The next in the Text, is qualifying: I will make you Fishers of men. First,
Fishers must be skillful

Secondly, Fishers must be painful, always busy about their fishing, either
letting down their nets for a draught, or pulling them up, or launching into
the deep, or haling to the shore, or mending or washing their nets.

Peter says, I go a fishing; the rest agree, and say, We will go with thee.



1
First for Skilfulnesse. Since our fishing is not for transitory things, but for
gaining of souls to God, it behooves us to use our best skill for the
effecting of so great a work: all the helps of nature and art are to be
sought for for this work: arts and tongues, meditations and readings, should be
hand-maides for this Art.

Gods fishermen here by the like metaphors are called Gods builders, 1. Cor.
3. In the building of the material Temple, there must not be a stone laid,
nor scarce a pin driven but by divine art taught of God. How shall men untaught
then presume to work in Gods spiritual building with untempered mortar, and
hands unsanctified for the work?

It is intolerable and impious boldness, that every unskillful know-little
shall presume at his pleasure to divide the sacred word of God, the holy
Gospel to Gods people, and that in the sight and presence of God himself, and
all his holy Angels. He that does this work aright, Isa. 12.3.
does draw water from the well of salvation for the people of God, says the
Prophet. Let therefore every faithful Pastor draw this water; but every one
with his own pitcher. If any have not a pitcher, or but a broken pitcher, how
should he draw. I may say with the woman of Samaria, the well is deep, Ioh.
4.11.
and if thou have nothing to draw with, whence should thou have that water of
life.

Many to avoid the imputation of dumb dogs in the Church, break silence, and
become Preachers, sometimes (through ignorance) of unsound doctrine, many times
of unsavory, that works nothing either to the information of the judgment,
or to the reformation of the affections of the hearer. I speak not to
discourage any of mean gifts, if they can be any ways profitab^e. He that
has but one talent, if he use it well, shall have his reward with God. But I
would have no man presume, that he has a talent in his napkin, when he has
but an empty napkin.

This frothy kind of preaching makes the multitude to contemn so high and holy
an ordinance: when after a long and tedious Sermon heard without fruit, it may
be said of the hungry multitude, as the Prophet speaks of Ephraim, Hos. 12.1.
Ephraim is fed with the wind: for they get nothing but emptiness: Vox est,
praeterea nihil, a great sound of much food, but no sound food at all.

Of such teachers, which through ignorance many times prove teachers of lies, I
say no more, but as Job said to his comfortless comforters, Job 13.5. O that
you would hold your tongues, that it might be imputed unto you for wisdom.

Some of these, though but meanly qualified, yet if in humility they would
take notice of the meannesse of their gifts, they might be more profitable in
more silence: but whilst they think to clear themselves of insufficiency
and of idleness by their often preaching, they are feign for want of matter,
to fill up their hours with vain tautalogies and idle discourses, that the
meanest of their auditory can discern their barrenness, and count their
preaching but babbling.

When the people of Rome heard that the fields belonging to some of their
Colonies waxed barren, their advice was (as Pliny records) that the
Husbandmen should melius arare, Not. hist.
and minus serere, plough better, and sow less: so when Gods field waxes
barren, and the people profit not by preaching of the word, by reason of a
negligent kind of preaching, I hope it will not be counted ungodly counsel to
such as cannot speak often, and well too, that they spend more time in their
studies, and be less seen in their pulpits. If they have fished all night and
caught nothing, it were not amiss that they should sit down a while upon the
shore and mend their nets, afterward with Gods blessing they may fish with
better success.

Till I come (says Saint Paul to Timothy) give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, and to doctrine. 1. Tim. 4.13.
The better we give attendance to reading, the better we shall be furnished for
doctrine and for exhortation. He that hears, speaks continually, says
Solomon, Prou. 21.28. And since auditus est sensus disciplinae; by hearing (in
this place I take it) is not only meant the hearing of the ear, but any means
whereby the mind is enriched with knowledge, whether it be hearing, or
reading, or meditation, or conference: in this sense then, he that hears
speaks continually. But he that will be speaking continually, and never
hears, shall be sure always to speak that that is not worth the hearing. It
is better the people should hear fewer Sermons to their edification, then many
without profit. Col. 4.6.
Let our words be gracious always, says the Apostle, and seasoned with salt:
and let us not more regard the number of them, then the weight. 1. Cor. 14.19.
I had rather (says Saint Paul) speak five words with understanding, and to
the edification of others, then ten thousand in a barbarous tongue without
profit.

But to those that are able to be frequent, the counsel of the King and
Preacher is to be followed, Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in
the evening let not thy hand cease: for thou know not whether shall prosper,
this or that, or whether both alike. But to others (such as now I speak of)
they should speak no oftener in the name of God to his people, then when
almighty God commands them to speak: and then only God commands to speak,
when he furnishes his speaker with good matter; according to that of Elihu in
Job, Job 32.18. I am full of matter, and the Spirit within me compels me.

It behooves us, not only to have the tongues of the learned, to speak sound
and justifiable doctrine; but also to have the tongues of the discreet too, to
speak seasonably, respecting persons, times and places: this was the Prophet
Isaies gift, Isa. 50.4. The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that
I should know to minister a word in due season to him that is weary. It
behooves us to know how to give to every one his portion in due season; milk
to them that are weak, strong meat to the stronger. We must learn to know
the maladies of the people, and how to cure them, and not always (which the
Prophet reproues) to heal the sores of Gods people with sweet words. Ier. 6.14.
If the wound be festring and putrify, we must know how to make incision; if
it be a broken wound, how to heal it up. We must know how to use sometimes
oil to supple a wound, sometimes wine to search it: the good Samaritan used
both, Luke 10. he powered in wine and oil.

A skillful Pastor must sometimes be a Boanerges, that is, the son of
thunder, to thunder out the curses of the Law against obstinate sinners. Again,
he must sometimes be a Barnabas, that is, the son of consolation, to comfort
with the sweet promises of the Gospel those that feel the weight and burden
of their sins. It is not the least part of our skill to know how to reprehend
with good effect. Many do lose many times the reprehension and the man too,
because they are not cautelous in the application of it: if it have the least
savor of ill will and revenge, it marres all. The very matter of reprehension
has in it a certain kind of harshnesse and bitterness; therefore must be
qualified in the manner. We must do as Physicians, that use to give their
wholesome-bitter pills lapt up in sweete-meates.

To a natural man to be reprehended for his sin, his sweet sin, his darling
sin, oh it goes like daggers to his heart; he is ready to cry out, Murder,
murder; Act. 7.28.
Will thou kill me as thou did the Egyptian yesterday? There is in this a
Christian art to be used, Vt secantem gladium sentiat aeger antequam cernit,
says Bernard, that the soule-ficke man may gulpe down his physic before he
is aware, and let it work on him afterward.

Many omit this duty of reprehending altogether, especially toward great
ones, lest they should offend; and so do not fulfill their ministry wholly, but
in part only: that is no good course: Habet etenium suum virus blan^a
adulatio. Seneca.
great persons must not be always poisoned with flattery; Is there for them no
balm in Gilead? Must they be always served in with butter in a lordly dish to
their own confusion? No, they must be admonished too, but in good terms, and
with due respect. De regim. Abbatif. ad Eustoch.
Nihil est in rectore periculosius quam vana humilitas ad correptionem erga
superbos protervosque subditos, says Ierom, It is dangerous humility to be
afraid to speak in Gods cause, and for the gaining of any, of what degree
soever. Fishers do not use to cast nets for small fishes, and let great ones go:
we may not so make fish of one, and flesh of another: yet regard must be had to
the quality of the person. Is it fit (says Elihu to Job) to say unto a King,
Job 34.18.
thou art wicked; and to Princes, Ye are ungodly? No; Saint Paul would have a
difference observed toward persons of meaner quality: Seniorem ne
increpaueris, sed obseora vt patrem, 1. Tim. 5.1.
Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a father.

David could well brook that Nathan should tell him of his greatest sins;
because as he did his message faithfully from the Lord, so he did it with due
reverence, and respect to the person of the King. Vir sanctus (says Bernard)
and regem considerans, and peccatorem. But whem Shimei rebuked him for the same
sin, he was highly displeased with him, and that justly; for he used
vnreuerent and disgraceful railing on the King.

The second quality in Fishermen, is Painfulnes. Fishing is a painful trade.
As Peter's trade of fishing for fishes of the Sea was painful, in the sweat of
his brows: so this his trade in fishing for men is as painful, in the sweat
of his brain. For as in that he had many times sore travel, without fruit:
so in this it may sometimes befall him to have cause to complain with the
Prophet Isay, I have labored in vain, Isai. 49.4. and 55.2.
I have spent my strength in vain: all the day long have I stretched out my
hands to a rebellious people. This Chair of Peter's, is not a Chair to sit and
sleep in: he that sits in it, must think that spoken to him, which our master
Christ spoke to Peter: Peter, love thou me? then feed my sheep, feed my
lambs; if thou love me Peter, feed. The lips of the righteous (says
Solomon) feed many. Prou. 10 21.
And the hungry flock of Christ's fold expect their food from them that are
their Pastors: they must therefore with all diligence give them their meat in
due season. Many Pastors are not painful in feeding, because their flocks are
ignorant, and cannot judge of their pains: and some Pastors rejoice that they
have such a people, with whom they may be idle, and none complain of their
idleness, whether it be silent idleness in not preaching, or speaking
idleness in preaching without meditation. Such a stupiditie in the people,
should be no rejoicing to the Pastor, but rather stir him up to greater
pains. Crat. ^iguri habitae.
Impostoris est non probi viri stupidos and ignaros quaerere auditores quos
possit fallere, says Peter Martyr. Some there are that presuming upon their
own extemporall faculty, and their peoples simplicity, bid fair for that
curse that almighty God denounces against those that do the work of the Lord
negligently, Ier. 48.10. In the 34 of Ezekiel, amongst many other curses which
almighty God threatens against idle Pastors, this is one, that they shall be
deprived of their gifts. A talent hid in a napkin, shall be taken away.
Excellent gifts are lost many times, because they are not used. Wherefore let
the heart indite a good matter, and then the tongue will be the pen of a ready
writer: but if the heart wax fat with idleness, no marvel then though the
tongue cleave to the roof of the mouth, and the right hand forget her cunning.

And this is not the only punishment of idleness, to be deprived of
goodness. A field, if it lie untilled, is not only barren of good fruits, but
also fertile of weeds: so is it with our minds, if they be not busied with
good, they set themselves on work to mischief: for God has given to man a
working mind, Eccles. 3.11.
that cannot rest. The world is in man's heart, says Solomon. The mind in this
may be compared to a Mill, which if the wind carry about empty, it sets it
self on fire: when man's wit cease to work good and profitable things, it
sets it self on fire to mischief; and then the more wit and learning the man
has, the more pernicious an enginer he proves of wicked attempts. Magna etenim
ingenia nil efferunt mediocre. And hence comes Sects and Schisms in the
Church, whilst that some for their stomach against their superiors, and other
misdemeanors, might not without dangers to the Church be permitted to go on in
their factious preaching, but must rather be enjoined silence, have now leisure
enough to use their tongues and their pens for railing and raising up tumults
against the Church. As soon as ever they left feeding, straight ways they
began to destroy: as soon as they left building, they began to pull down,
even that themselves had built.

Thus much for the second quality of Gods Fishermen, Painfulnesse.

The third is Concord and agreement, which is their work, that they can catch
no fishes: so Gods fishermen, if there be disturbance and contentions amongst
them, they thereby so alienate the minds of men, that they can win none.
Therefore our Savior Christ here makes choice of such as the bond of nature
firmly binds to concord and amity, brethren and kinsfolks, Simon and Andrew
his brother, James and John his brother. And let the Prophet David tell them
how good and how comely a thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity.

Saint Peter's Bark is a fisher-boate, not a man of war; it is not furnished
with mortal engines and warlike munition, but with nets only to take fish
withal. If there be amongst the Apostles a sword or two, they must take heed
how they vnsheath them. If Peter deserved to be reprehended for drawing upon
Malchus, what reprehension think you had he bin worthy of, had he drawn upon
any of his fellows?

Saint Matthew distinguishes the whole company in the ship in this order:
there is the father, the brethren, and the hired servants; and these are all
names and relatiues of love; the father must needs love his children, the
children must love and honor their father, and love one another, the servants
that labor together, must love one another, and love, honor and obey their
master and their masters children. The father sits at the stern to rule and
direct the ship; for age has made him less able to take corporal pains, but
experience has made him fitter for government.

The reverend Fathers of the Church guide the stern of Gods ship, they are set
over Gods Church Praesunt vt prosint. If the Church be a ship floting upon the
seas, they are the pilots; if she be a flock wandering upon the mountains,
they are the Pastors, they rule the sheep of Gods pasture, they rule non
tanquam suas, sed tanquam Christi oues, not as Lords of Gods heritage, but as
Stewards, and such as must give an account for them. If there be debate
between Pastor and Pastor, or between flock and flock, these interpose
themselves in the controversy, and with their gravity and wisdom take up
the matter, sometimes but with a fatherly admonition, like Abraham to Lot, Let
there be no strife, I pray thee, between thee and me, neither between thy
herd-men and my herd-men, for we be brethren: sometimes with a more strict hand
and compulsory sentence (as the cause shall require) veniunt cum virga, with
the staff of discipline. They will always know to put a difference betwixt the
iarres of brethren (which may sometimes fall out in the best governed families)
and the wars that are raised by enemies, and in their censures they will
distinguish these, like Moses, when the strife was betwixt two brethren, two
Israelites in Egypt; he takes up the matter with a friendly check, Sirs (says
he) ye are brethren, why then do you wrong one to another? But when the strife
was betwixt a brother and an enemy, an Israelite and an Egyptian, he kills the
Egyptian, and defends the Israelite.

Our Savior Christ well knew that concord and amity is best maintained
amongst the fewest in number; therefore when he sends forth his Disciples to
preach the Gospel to the world, he ioynes two and two in a commission
together. When two and two are joined together, and bear the yoke equally
betwixt them, then the work goes well forward: but if they be joined at the
tails, that one draws one way, and another another way, like Samsons foxes,
two and two to a firebrand, Judge. 15 4.
then their waiwardnesse tends to nothing else but to combustion.

Beloved brethren, Isa. 57.19.
the best fruit of our lips is peace; let us pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
Psalm. 122.
Peace be within her walls, and plenteousnesse within her palaces. If we shall
set up altar against altar, doctrine against doctrine, discipline against
discipline, ceremony against ceremony, or rather (as the manner of some is) no
ceremony against lawful and profitable ceremonies, what do we else but break
down the walls of Jerusalem? we cause our friends to be sad, and our enemies
to rejoice. It was the argument of Dion to his contentious soldiers, In vita
eius ^^ud ^atarch.
pointing to the Castle of their enemies, Sirs (says he) your enemies see your
mutinous behavior. All the enemies that the Church has, do see, and are glad
to see, and make use of what they see, when they behold our contentions.

Some there are, that for the maintenance of an opinion about the wearing of a
garment, or an indifferent ceremony, are so violent and virulent, that they
will not care to break peace with fathers and brethren, when others of better
moderation can tell them with Saint Augustine, August. de sermon. De ^n mont.
lib. 2. cap. 28,
that Non ideo debent oues odisse vestimentum suum, quia illo se occultant
lupi, sheep clothing are never the worse for sheep wearing, though wolves
wear the like.

In these differences and such like, some use such bitterness and vehemency,
that they dare call for fire from heaven to consume their brethren that are
contrary minded, Tantaene animis coelestibus irae, should heavenly minds be so
reuengefull? Do they well know of what spirit they are of? is this heavenly
zeal? is this fire kindled at Gods altar? is this wisdom from above? no,
Saint James tells us, that the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, Iam. 3.17. Where there are such
seditions, there is no other wisdom, but earthly, sensual and devilish.

double honor. 1. Tim. 5.17. Heb. 2.2. Exodus 20.19.
Once our work was the work of Angels; afterward (for man's frailty) the
perpetual office was committed to men, but those men to be styled with the
title of Angels. Though we be but earthen vessels, yet we bear the heavenly
treasure; and the vessel ought to be esteemed for the treasure it contains.

The Church is the Kings Daughter, Psalm. 45.14.
all glorious within: why then should a Kings son think her too mean a
match for himself to be married unto?

The King of glory Christ Jesus, whilst he lived upon earth, thought not this
calling too mean for him, but lived in it, and died in it.

Well, the Calling is a good Calling, good enough for any man, and too good for
any man that thinks it not good enough. But now though there is honor enough
for us with God and with good men, yet the profane world has nothing but
scorn and contempt for us; and we may complain with the Psalmist, Psalm. 123.4.
Our soul is filled with the scornful reproach of the wealthy, and with the
despitefulnesse of the proud. It was not so from the beginning; 2. Sam. 6.14.
it was otherwise when good king David rejoiced to dance before the Arc in a
linen Ephod. And once that name and office of Priest, which now is
contemptible, it was a Kings ambition to affect it. 2. Chro. 26.16.
When Vzzia, though he were a King, thought it an addition to his honor, that
he might be a Priest too. But now Ieroboams sin is very rife. Ieroboams sin,
you will say, what is that? 1. King. 12.31.
Jeroboam made the meanest of the people Priests. That is their sin, that
make base and unworthy Priests, or any ways further and procure their making.
Yea but Ieroboams sin is of a larger extent: Jeroboam made the meanest of the
people Priests. It is the sin of this age to make their Priests meaner then
the meanest of what tribe soever he be: if he be a Priest once, that is an
attainter of his blood, (in the estimation of some;) and if he be nobly
descended, an abatement of his Gentery; so is this high Calling dishonored and
disesteemed. God grant this sin be not laid to the charge of this generation.

FINIS.

