THE TRIVMPHANT AND SVMPTVOVS ARCH erected by the Company of English Merchants
residing in LISBONE, upon the Spanish Kings entry made thereinto.

Together with The Architecture thereof described, the painted Quadrants, the
Figures of half and whole stature, the Ornaments, jewels, rich vestiments, the
Histories, AEnigmes therein employed, with their declarations; and the Latin
mottoes, and Spanish verses expressed in English.

Wherein also, Mention is made of the magnificent present the Duke of BRAGANZA
gave to the King, the number of the train that followed him, the wonderful
provisions, and buildings set up for the Grandes of Spain, with the other
Lords and servants of his Majesty's Court, the salues of Artillery, with the
fires and lights that were made all over the City, on the day that he came
within sight thereof, to Almada, a place on the other side of the River, half
a league distant, and right over against LISBONE.

Faithfully translated out of the Spanish original.

LONDON Printed by E.G. for Henry Seile, at the Tigers head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1619.

THE KING OF Spaines entertainment into LISBONE.
AMongst other assignments and distributions made by the renowned City of
Lisbone, (at the request, and for the peculiar offices of some Nations there
residing) of certain parts and quarters, by which his Majesty was to enter,
and pass, there was allotted to the English, the first Port of the City
walls, which is the Arche, called the old Pelourino, for which the two little
Arches of stone, and the houses standing thereon, were demolished, leaving some
fifty hands breadth of entry, and an hundred and ten in height, the which,
with the fifteen, that the Figure takes up, that finisheth the Arche, makes a
hundred twenty five, there remaining on the top of the Port, forty four in
the concaue, twenty four in the entry, and on the sides, fifty in height and
twenty seven in breadth.

In the first Quadrant over the Architecture of the said Port was cut in whole
stature the statue of the City of Lisbone, in a rich vestement imbroydered,
with a Crown on her head, holding in her right hand two keys, one of steel,
signifying her strength, and the other of gold, implying her wealth and
opulence; who extending her hand, offered them to the King. Her left hand she
reposed upon an Anchor of gold, to note, the sustentation, and defense she
enioyes by the Sea, with the City arms hanging thereon, which are a ship, in
which the glorious Martyr S. Vincent, her Patron, came thither, to take
harbor, and underneath it this inscription.

Lisbone the great, a City of renown,
The fair Metropolis of Portugal;
Famous for loyal service to the Crown,
As likewise for her strength and courage tall:
To offer to your Majesty is bold
These keys, this golden anchor, and this shield,
With all the worth and power she does hold.
In which, she gives you, all her bounds can yield.
In the Quadrants, that comprehend this picture, in the midst was delineated
the taking of Lisbone by the King Don Alfonso Henriques, together with the aid
of a strange Navy, which being in their course toward Jerusalem, miraculously
there took Port. On the right hand is pourtrayed the King with the Prince his
son, and some other great personages, and by them his Army: and in the left
Quadrant, William Long-Espee Earl of Salisbury, with his English nobility,
who accompanied him, to the winning of this City, and over his own, the arms
of Jerusalem, being a Cross of gold enameld, with other four Crosses of the
same: as likewise in the same Quadrant hard by him, is painted and set forth
his whole fleet, of an hundred and fourscore sail, with this inscription
underneath: The faithful English, which with fair pretense
Do soiourne now within this famous place;
Because that many of their ancient race
Did hold therein their noble residence.
And got this passage like victorious Pears
Joining the strength of Portugal to theirs.
Though Strangers counted; yet with humble hearts
Will be the first shall serve your hie deserts.


In the other Quadrant above this Figure, which forms the Arch, there are five
personages raised in whole stature, each of them being twelve hands breadth in
height. One was Don John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, son to the King of
England, armed only with a gorget, his gauntlets, and coat of male, with his
Spanish cape, a hat on his head, and a plume of feathers in it, after the
English fashion; at his feet his Scutchion of arms, which are the golden
Lions of England: and for a difference from the Scutchion of arms royal, a
red-rose: he was portraied, giving with his right hand his daughter Catherine,
to King Henry of Castile, and with the left his daughter Philip, to King Don
John of Portugal the first, they being very gallantly clad after the English
manner, and the Kings Statue in the same form as the Dukes, each of them in
their usual attire, and habit, and at their feet, their Scutchions of arms:
that of Don John, being a Cross of Auis, of which Order he was Master, and
this inscription underneath.

From these two Ladies of Great Britains Isle,
The fair remembrance of whose glorious worth,
Does now enrich the Kingdom of Castile,
And sets with honor Lusitania forth;
Long since did your Progenitors descend,
As by this story you may plainly know:
And for this cause, great Monarch we pretend
That you your Hearts-loue to the English owe.
Upon the Base, which is the full Continent of this Architecture, stood Saint
George on horsbacke treading upon the Serpent, in manner and form as the Kings
of England wear him, for their Patron, and bears such an inscription.

He did, being Patron to great Englands King,
Assist the Portugal in every thing.
Alluding to the signal that the Portugalls made of his name, in company of
these Strangers which aided them, as we may see, in the battle of Saint
George.

In the inward parts were two Impreses, and others on the upper part, which
expressed the intent of the Quadrants, in this form. On the one part are
deciphered two Faulcons flying in the air at an Herne, which at last yielding,
they seize upon, with this Motto: Eodem parta labor.

On the other are two trees, which grow from roots conjoined, spreading their
tronckes broad and wide, being far distant one from an other, out of their
branches come two braces of arms, in form as if they would claspe and
embrace, with this Motto annexed; Donec iungantur and ipsae. On the upper part
of the Arch there is another Imprese, of the Grandes, or Great-men, of England
and Portugal which are painted on the sides of the gate. There is portraied
the Sun beating with his beams from on high upon two crystal
Looking-glasses, which with reciprocal beams, reuerberate and give light one
to another, with this Motto: Alter, alteri lucet.

On the right side, which answers justly to the Quadrant of King Don Alfonso,
there is placed in four Niches, four demi statues, of brass coulor'd, which
were four famous men of Portugal, that exalted themselves in England, in
dignity, and by arms. The first was, the Infant, Don Pedro, son to King Don
John of Portugal, who was Knight of the Order of the Garter in England (where
he performed many Heroical Acts) with an azure bandell, and English letters,
expressing thus much in French: Honi soit, qui mal y pense. Which is the Motto,
or Inscription of the said Order, and Garter, and a Scutchion of his royal
Arms: and for his Impresse a Crown of Oak with akornes, in the midst of it,
a Balance, and at his feet, this Inscription.

I am Don Pedro, the Infant of great fame,
Renowm'd for Arms in every foreign State;
None yet my valor ever ouer-came,
But the harsh Envy of my cruel Fate.
Brave Englands King, saw my atcheiuments such
He did me Knight with warlike Hand:
Nor thought the honor of his Garter much,
For one so famous in a Stranger-land.
The second was the Infant, Don Henrique his Brother, Knight of the same Order,
and afterward Master of the Order of the Knights of Christ's in Portugal, with
a blew Garter, and the said letters written: a royal Scutchion or shield, and
in the said shield a bar of difference, and at each end thereof three Flowers
De luce round about the shield, as it were abroad Belt, which reaches to the
Button, and in it the same Poesy of the Garter written, bearing for a creaft,
a Crown of Oak, with the habit of his Order in the midst of it, and at his
feet this Inscription.

Henry am I, who in my bosom bring
True wisdom with me, courage, hie-command;
Son to that warlike, and heroike King,
Who honored Portugal his native land.
By my exploites within the English coast
I there the Order of the Garter gained:
From thence returned with my victorious Host,
The Mastership of Christ's I here obtaind.
The third was John Vasquez, d' Almada, son to Aluaro Vasquez, Count of
Abranches, who performed many noble exploites in England, where he died: he
wears the honorable Order of the Garter, whereof he was Knight, and the
arms of the Almada's, in his Scutchion, with these verses underwritten.

Much celebrated is my worth and fame,
From the Sun rising to his going down;
John Vasquez of Almada is my name;
Who gave one Earl more to the French kings crown:
Europe has known the mettaile of this sword;
For England and Castile it stoutly stood:
Fair England me her Garter did afford,
And sweetly harbourd my congealed blood.
The fourth was Airs de Silua, who remaining in England as Portugal
Ambassador, for his worthy demerit, was made Knight of the Honorable Order of
the Garter, he wears his Order bearing in his Shield a Lion rampant of the
Siluas, and at the foot this inscription: Airs I am of Sylua by my name
A Lusitanian borne, and one whose fame,
In every corner of the world does ring;
Sent with an Embasie to Britains King
Whose love by courtly carriage I obtaind,
And by my wisdom such acceptance gaind;
That now each Province does entitle me,
Saint Georges Knight a style of hie degree.


In the Quadrant right against that of William Long-Espee Earl of Salisbury,
there are four other famous persons of England which made themselves renowned
in Portugal, by their valiant and heroike actions. The first was Edmund son
to the King of England, who valiantly aided King Don Ferdinando of Portugal in
his wars. He has his Scutchion of the arms royal of England, with the
difference of a red-rose, and these verses underneath.

Great Edmund I, the son of England's King,
Whose valiant arm great victories did bring
To Portugal, and to his native land,
Led by the guiding of great Ferdinand:
With warlike Heart I did my self address,
To meet my foes, where dangers most did press.
Whereby much fame to Britain I acquired
And Spain throughout my Prowesses admired.
The second was, Aymon Earl of Cambridge, son to the Duke of Lancaster, who
achieved marvelous enterprises, in this kingdom, in the vauntguard of the
Royal battle of Saint George; At his feet he has this inscription: The
Poet following some Spanish Author (as it should seem) has mistaken the right
English names, which (gentle Reader) you must pardon.
Sprung from the house of Lancaster am I
Haymon by name of courage bold, and stout,
The Earldom of Cambridge was my dignity;
And Portugal did sound my praises out.
With her I conquered often, through freindly chance;
Spain knew my Virtues did so far extend,
That highly she my glory did advance;
And joyed that I did from her Kings descend.


The third was Don Liberche, who assisted King Don Alfonso, at the taking of
Lisbone, and from him, and his Followers, the town of Almada took her name,
of which they were Lords: In his shield he bears the arms of his name, and
these verses underneath subscribed: Full often made I the proud Barbarian feel
The keener edge of my well-temp'red steel.
And made this passage triumph in their blood,
That sought to force it, against the public good.
Since when Almada has her name retaind,
From him and his who thus her safety gaind.
Great Britain, France and Portugal do know
What loss the Mores by him did undergo.


The fourth was Don Chil de Rolim (to whom King Don Alfonso gave the royalty
of Azambaia, and from whom, the Rolines, and Mores of this kingdom descend)
with his Scutchion of Arms, and this poetical subscription.

English by birth, in worth I did abound,
And was the first, that sought by force of Arms
To lay these Rampires level with the ground,
Frighting the Mores with many fierce alarmes.
By my renowned and thrice glorious Fame,
I satisfy the House, which from me came,
More then Zambaia, which to me befell,
A petty Lordship, and a little Cell.
On the back part of this work, there are two Quadrants, which take up the
whole Base of the Figures, in the greatest whereof, Corporal Force, or Valor
is pourtrayed in the form of a lusty young man armed, being of robustious
members, and haughty aspect, his helmet resting upon a marble Column, his
arms powdered over with hearts, trampling under foot, a Trophie, of banners and
arms of all kinds; and somewhat lower hard by his side, two women,
representing the English and Portugal Nations, to whom, he stands presenting a
Palm, and crown of Laurel, and at his feet these verses subscribed, That
look so much desired, which with smiles
The hearts of Men combines and reconciles,
Not suffering Valor to admit Distrust,
Nor Mildness to be trampled in the Dust;
Has now by Force and his Associates made,
Peace twixt two Nations, which shall never fade.
And War diuides the Laurels, which she brings,
Alike to Englands, and to Castiles Kings.


In the little Quadrant, which finisheth the whole work on the back part,
answering to the Quadrant of the Alliances, and Marriage, is painted a Lion, and
a Leopard, one bearing the Shield of Spain, the other that of England, with
sharp pointed swords goaring and thrusting one at an other, yet in the midst
of the same swords toward the points, two Olive branches were drawn, being
the symboles of peace, with this motto, Iam mutata, quiescunt.

The conceit of this Imprese is, that the English Nation did hereby intimate
to the King, their noble demerit in the Conquest of Portingall, by their
ancient descent, and the inviolable amity they have retained with the Kings of
this Kingdom, implying further, their desire of love and peace between the
Kings of Great Britain and Spain.

The King entered into Portingall, on the eleventh of May, stilo novo, with
extraordinary demonstrations, both of joy and magnificence, (which shall be
specified in an other relation) in the number whereof, the greatest and most
worthy of note was, that the Duke of Braganza, with his son the Duke of
Bracelos, came to entertain him with a 1000 men in their train, betwixt
servants and the assistance of his name and family. He presented the King with
three hundredth Bucks, an hundred Beafes, two thousand Muttons, two thousand
Connies, four thousand Hens, two thousand pair of Peacocks, four thousand
Pigeons, four thousand Chickens, two thousand gammons of Bacon, and a great
quantity of sweet meats, with bread, wine, fruits of the season, and many
other things of great price, and esteem. He prepared also sufficient
provisions for all the Kings Courtiers, and servants, so as till this day,
there was never a more famous thing seen. The King made his entry into Elues,
and from thence he went to Estremos, and so passed to Euora, where the
Inquisition presented him, with their acts and ceremonies. On friday being the
four and twenty of May, he went to Casillas, and Almada, half a league cross
the river, right over against Lisbone, and that night both by land and Sea,
there was a triumphant peale of great ordinance in the City, and there were so
many fires made, and lights burning in every house, that the whole body
thereof, appeared like a burning Globe. A rumor was spread, that he would
secretly view the Procession, of the Corpus Domini, and that from thence, he
would go down to the Monastery of Belin, where he would remain till
Thursday the thirty of June, the Festival day of S. Antonie of Padoa, on which
day it is constantly affirmed, that he will make his solemn entry into
Lisbone. Certain aduertisements shall be published hereof in due time, and in
the mean while, those things which have succeeded and past, shall be imprinted
more at large, according to the form and descriptions sent in writing, from
Don Gabriel Formento, Chaplain to the Marquis of Alenquer, Viceroy and
Captain General of the Kingdom of Portingall. And because other
understanding Gentlemen, and worthy of credit, who have bin herein sued unto,
to afford their true relations, as eyewitnesses of the Kings entries, into
Merida, Medellin, Truxillo, Badaioz, and Elues, have not as yet sent these
their reports, this present discourse is prefixed, but as they are sent or come
to hand, they shall be divulged and made known incontinently.

FINIS.

