A petite Palace of Petty his pleasure: Contaynyng many pretty Hystories by
him set forth in comely colors, and most delightfully discoursed.



Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci. To the gentle Gentlewomen Readers.
GEntle Readers, whom by my will I would have only Gentlewomen, and therefore
to you I direct my words. May it please you to understand, that the great
desire I have to procure your delight, has caused me somewhat to transgress
the bounds of faithful freindship: for having with great earnestness
obtained of my very freinde Master George Petty the copy of certain
Histories by himself upon his own and certain of his friends private
occasions drawn into discourses, I saw such witty and pithie pleasantnes
contained in the^, that I thought I could not any way do greater pleasure or
better service to your noble sex, then to publish them in print, to your
common profit and pleasure. And though I am sure hereby to incur his
displeasure, for that he willed me in any wise to keep the^ secret: yet if it
please you thankfully to accept my goodwill, I force the less of his ill will.
For to speak my fancy without feigninge, I care not to displease twenty men,
to please one woman: for the freindship amongst men, is to be counted but cold
kindness, in respect of the fervent affection beetweene men and women: and our
nature, is rather to doat of women, then to love men. And yet it lies in your
powers so to think of his doings, and to yield him such courteous
consideration for the same, that he shall have more cause to thank me, then
think ill of my faithles dealing toward him. Which if your courtesies shall
perform, you shall increase my duty toward you, and his good will toward
me: you shall make me show my will and him his skill another time to pleasure
you: you shall bind both of us to remain ready at your commandments. For
mine own part, I can chaleng no part of praise or thanks for this work, for
that I have taken no pains therein, neither by addinge Argument, Note, or any
thing, but even have set them forth as they were sent me: only I have
christened them with the name of a Palace of Pleasure. I dare not compare this
work with the former Palaces of Pleasure, because comparisons are odious,
and because they co^taine Histories, translated out of grave authors and
learned writers: and this contains discourses, devised by a green youthful
capacity, and reported in a manner ex tempore, as I my self for diverse of
them am able to testify. I dare not commend them because I am partial, I
dare dedicate them to you Gentlewomen, because you are courteous. And that you
may the better understand the drift of these devises, I have caused the letter
also which my freinde sent me with this work, to be set down to your sight.
Thus commending mine own faithles enterprise, and my friends fruitful labor
and learning, to your courteous protection, I wish you all, beuty with bounty,
and cumlinesse with courtesy, from my lodging in Fleetstreete.

Yours readily to command. R. B.

The Letter of G. P. to R. B. concerning this work.
FOrced by your ernest importunity, and furthered by mine own idle opportunity,
I have set down in writing, and according to your request, sent unto you
certain of those Tragical trifles, which you have heard me in sundry
companies at sundry times report, and so near as I could I have written them
word for word as I then told them: but if any of them seem better unto you now
then they did then, you must attribute it to my lisping lips, which perchance
did somewhat disgrace the grace of them: and if any seem worse now then than,
you must impute it to this, that perchance there was then some Pallas in place
which furthered my invention. For I am in that point of Ovid his opinion, that,
Si cupiat sponte disertus erit. But whether they seem unto you good or ill, I
trust you will take them as a token of good will, and that is the only
commodity I look to reap by them. I pray you only to use them to your own
private pleasure, and not to impart them to other, perchance to my prejudice,
for that diverse discourses touch nearly diverse of my nere freindes: but the
best is, they are so darkely figured forth, that only they whom they touch, can
understand whom they touch: yet to avoid all captious constructions, I pray
you in any wise let them be an object only for your own eyes. If this mislike
you in my discourses, that I make Camma, use the example of the countess of
Salisbury, the Duchess of Sauoy, and such who were of far later years, then
the ancient CAMMA is, with the like in diverse other of the stories: you must
consider that my Camma is of fresher memory then any of them, and I think in
your judgment, of fresher hew then the fairest of them. Likewise, if you like
not of some words and phrases, used contrary to their common custom, you must
think, that seeing we allow of new fashions in cutting of beardes, in long
wasted doublets, in little short hose, in great cappes, in low hattes, and
almost in all things, it is as mutch reason we should allow of new fashions in
phrases and words. But these faults, or whatsoever else, I care not to excuse
unto you, who are the only cause I committed them, by your ernest desire to
have me set down these trifles in writing. And as my words hitherto have
tended to this end, that you should take these trifles well, so now I am to
exhort you that you will use them well: that with the spider you suck not out
poison out of them: that by some light example you be not the sooner incited
to lightness. For believe me (I speak it freindly, therefore take it
freindly) I think it more needful to send you a bridell then a spur that way.
And if my example may be a bridle to restrain you from vanity, do but
imitate me hereafter, or if my counsel may contain you in continency, do
but follow this advise: if you be free, that you come not into bonds: if you
be bound, vt te redimas captum quam queas minimo: for trust me, the broad
blasphemy of Pigmalion, and the sudden Apostacy, or rather right conversion of
Alexius, have settled me in this faith, that I think him Terque quaterque
beatum, qui a consortio mulierum se cohibere potest. You marvel, I am sure to
hear these words of me, and that I should so soon turn my tippet and
recant, who but yesterday, as it were, entered into heresy. But believe me (my
B.) nunquam nimis cito est ad bonos mores via. Qui non est hodie, cras minus
aptus erit.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas conualuere moras.
Errare humanum est, in errore perseuerare, belluinum.

Sins often assaied, are thought to be no sin:
So sin does soil the Soul it ^eth in.
Thus have I sent you in that book some fruits of my former folly, and in
this letter the profession of my present faith, desiring you to use the one to
your honest pleasure, and to follow the other to your godly profit. I mean*
god willing, the next spring to go on pilgrimage with Alexius, and if you were
so devoutly disposed, I should think my self most happy to have such a
companyon. From my lodging in Houlburn this. 12. of July.

Tuus semper, aut suus nunquam: Omnia in mundo, immunda. G. P.

The Printer to all Readers of this Book.
Having sumtime in my custody this Book in written hand, which by means of
a special friend of mine was committed unto me, I was by him eft soones
ernestly solicited to publish the same in printe. Who being such an one,
whose request I would not willingly deny, I fell to perus^nge the work, and
perceived at the first by the Auctours letter, that he was not wylling to have
it common, as thinkinge certain points in it to be to wanton to be wrought
by that wit which by this work appears to be in him: which, as I
conjecture, moved him to write to his freinde to keep it private to his own
use, as may appear by his freindes Epistle, and his Letter going before.
Nevertheless, to accomplish the desire of the one, and not to incur the
displeasure of the other, as also to pleasure you, the freindly Readers hereof,
I have put the same in printe, using my discretion in omitting such matter as
in the Aucthours judgment might seem offenciue, and yet I trust not leaving
imperfection in the discourse, whereof if I have not gelded to mutch, I think I
have deserved the less blame. And considering that in matters of pleasure, the
Prynter may sooner offend in printyng to mutch, then in publishyng to little: I
have applied my self to the contrary, hoping that how mutch the less I have
printed, reserving the discourse perfect, so mutch the less I shall be blamed
for the deed. As for the Gentleman that wrote this work, and his freinde
that procured it to be published: as they are unknown to me both, so had I
conference with neither, whereby the less I could use their advice in abridging
any thing, which may be some cause of the disgracinge of that, which
doubtless the Auctour had penned with great excellency, and eloquence. If
herein, as I fear, I have offended, I am willing, being aduertysed thereof,
to be reformed, crauinge pardon of him especyally, and of all other freindly
Readers, for the ouersightes whatsoever herein committed: for whose pleasure
and profit I have left undone, and done, what soever I have done in this
behalf. I have also of my self added an argument to every history, that the
effect of the discourse may be the more easily carried away.

Fare ye heartily well.
Sinorix and Camma.
SINORIX, chief governor of Sienna in Italy, glancing his eyes upon the
glitteryng beauty of Camma, wife to Sinnatus, a Gentilman of the same city:
falls into extreme love with her, and assaieth sundry ways to win her
goodwill. But perceiulnge his practices to take no wished effect, and
supposinge the husbands life to hinder his love, causes him to be murdered
by a russian. Camma, to the intent she might be revenged upon the chief
conspiratour, in grauntinge him marriage, dispatcheth her self in drinkinge to
him, and him in pledging her in a draught of poison, which she had prepared for
that purpose.

AS amongst all the bonds of benevolence and good will, there is none more
honorable, ancient, or honest then Marriage, so in my fancy there is none that
does more firmly fasten, and inseparably unite us together then the same
estate does, or wherein the fruits of true freendship do more plenteously
appear: In the Father is a certain severe love and careful good will
toward the child, the child bears a fearful affection and awful
obedience toward the Father: the Master has an imperious regard of the
servant, the servant a servile care of the master. The friendship amongst men
is grounded upon no law, and dissolved upon every light occasion: the good
will of kinsfolk is commonly cold, as mutch of custom as of devotion: but in
this stately state of Matrimony, there is nothing fearful, nothing feigned,
all things are done faithfully without doubting, truly without doubling,
willingly without constraint, joyfully without complaint: yea there is such a
general consent and mutual agreement between the man and wife, that they both
wish and will, covet and crave one thing. And as a sience grafted in a strange
stalk, their natures being united by grothe, they beecome one, and together
bear one fruit: so the love of the wife planted in the breast of her husband,
their hearts by continuance of love become one, one sense and one soul serves
them both. And as the sience severed from the stock withers away, if it be
not grafted in some other: so a loving wife separated from the society of her
husband, withers away in woe, and leads a life no less pleasant then
death, as the sequel of this history shall show, wherein you shall see a
meruaylous Mirror of blessed Matrimony, and a terrible tipe of beastly
tyranny.

In the City Sienna was a married couple, the husband named Sinnatus, the
wife called Camma, who as they were by estate worshipful, by virtue honorable,
and by goodness gracious, so were they in riches fortunate, in children
fruitful, in friends flowrishinge, and in love so loyal each to other, that
they long time led a louinge and quiet life together: but either fortune
envying their prosperity, or the devil displeased with their virtuous life, or
God disposed to try their truth, and make them patterns to their posterity,
converted this hapy life to heavy estate, and raised up one Synorix to raze and
beat down the firm foundation of their faithful buildinge and bydinge
together. For this Sinorix glauncing his gazing eyes on the blazinge beuty of
Camma, received so deep an impression, of her perfection in his heart, that
immediately he fixed his fancy upon her comely corpse. And being the chief
ruler of the city, he persuaded him self that there was none in the city so
stout but would stoup to his lure, nor none so fair but would feign employ
them selves to pleasure him: but on the other side the renowned virtue of Camma
came to his mind, which persuaded an impossibility to his purpose: and floting
thus between hope and despair he entered into these terms.

O miserable wretch that I am, to whom shall I address my complaints, is it
the heavenly powers and gods of love that have deprived me of my senses, and
showed their divine working in me, or is it the hellish Hags and spirits of
spite that have bereeued me of reason, and executed their cruelty on me? is
it love that leads me to this lust, or is it hate that haleth me to this
hurt and mischief, no no the gods guide us to goodness, the furies of hell it
is that force us to silthynesse: neither does it any way deserve the name of
love, which brings such torment to my troubled mind, that all the devils in
the world could not do the like. But see my rashness why am I so blindly bold
beastly to blaspheme against that which proceeds altogether of nature, which
nature has imparted to all men, and which I ought to follow without repininge
or resistinge: for so long as I follow nature as my guide I cannot do amiss,
and seeing nature has taught us to love, why should I not rather prove her
precepts, then reprove that which by natures lore is allowed: and touching
torment of mind, or either inconvenience that it brings, is it all able to
impair the least joy which I shall enjoy in imbracinge my Camma, is it not
meet that he which would reap should sow, he that would gather fruit
should plant trees, he that would reach the sweet rose should now and then be
scratched with the sharp briers? I mean it is meet if I purpose to possess
so proper a piece, as Camma is, that I should sly no labor or refure any peril
in the pursuit thereof. And here upon he determined to follow the fury of his
fancy what pangues or perils soever he incurred thereby: and having reuolued
many ways in his mind how he might aspire to his purpose, at length he
resolved upon this to institute a sumptuous Banquet, whereto he invited the
cheeif of the city, among whom Synnatus and his wife Camma were not forgotten,
to wit the only autors of the feast. Now for the more royal receiuinge of his
guestes he met them at the entry into his Palaice, and gave them this greeting.

Fair Ladies as I am right joyful of your presence, so am I no les sorrowful
for the pains which you have taken in undertaking so great a journey this dark
and misty evening, for the which I must account my self so mutch the more
beholdinge to you, by how much greater your labor was in coming, and by how
mutch less your chere shall be able to counteruayle it now you are come: and
taking Camma by the hand, he said softly unto her, I pity the peines of these
gentlewomen the les for that you were in their company, whose piersing eyes as
celestial stars or heavenly lamps might serve for lights in the dark,
whose sweet face might parfume the aier from all noisome smells which might
annoy them: and by beholding your lovely looks and perfect shape they might
take such delight, that the weariness of the way could nothing molest or
grieve them.

Camma hearing her self so greatly praised of so great a personages as he
was, could not keep the Roseal read out of her Alablaster cheeks, and
thinking no such serpentine malice to lie hid under these merry and sugared
words, she gave him this courteous answer.

If Sir the company had made no better provision for lights and other things
necessary then such as you speak of, they might soon have slipped into the
mier, but as I perceive by your words you are disposed to jest and be meery,
so I am content for this once to be made the instrument thereof, thereby to
ease some part of the pains which you are like to take in receiving such
troublesome guestes as we are: and for our chere you need take no thought,
for it shall be so mutch to good for us, by how mutch less we have deserved any
at all at your hands.

After this amarousin counter, he caused the company to sit down to the
banquet, and so disposed the matter, that Gamma sat right over at the table
against him, whereby he freely fed his eyes on that meat which converted rather
to nourishment of sickness, then to wholesome humors of health. For as the
finest meats that be, eaten by one in extremity of sickness, resolve not to
pure blood to strengthen the body, but to watrish humors to feed the fever and
disease: so though her face and looks were fine and sweet, and brought
delight to all the beholders else, yet to him they wrought only torment and
trouble of mind: and notwithstanding he perceived her beauty to breed his
bane, and her looks to procure the loss of his liberty, and that as the
Cocatrice by sight only sleath, so she by courteous countenance only killed
and wounded his heart, yet could he not refrain his eyes from beholding her, but
according to the nature of the sickly pacient, which chiefly desires that
which cheiflye is forbidden him, he so incessantly threw his amarous glau^ces
toward her, that his eyes were altogether bleared with her beauty, and she
also at the length began to perceive his loving looks toward her, which made
her look pale in token of the little pleasure she took in his toys, and of
the great fear she had least, some other should mark them, whereby her good
name might come in question. The banquet being ended, every one prepared
themselves to hear a stage play, which was then ready to be presented. But
Synorix being able to play but one part, which was of a pore passionat lover,
determined to go forward with the tragedy already begun between Camma and him,
and seeing her set out of the husbands sight, placed him self by her, and
entered into reasoning with her, to this purpose. If (faier lady) this simple
banquet had been so sweet and pleasant to your seemly self and the rest, as
your sight is delightful to me, I am persuaded you would not have changed your
chere for Nector and Ambrosia, which the Poets faygned to be the food of the
gods: but seeing there was no cause of delighte in the one, and the other
contains that in it which may content the gods them selves, I shall desire
you in good part to accept the one, and courteously to accounte me worthy to
enjoy the other. And though I have not here tofore by dutiful service
manifested unto you the loyalty of my love, yet if my poor heart could signify
unto you the assaults it has suffered for your sake, I doubt not but you would
confess, that by force of love I had won you, and were worthy to wear you.
For albeit by humane laws your husband only have interest in you, yet by
natures laws, which being more ancient ought to be of more auctority, he
ought to enjoy you which ioyeth most in you, which loves you best, and
indureth most pain for your sake: and for proof of natures laws, it may
please you to consider the quality of the she woulfe who always choseth that
woulfe for her make who is made most lean and foul by following her: besides
that, my title marches under the ensign of justice, which is a virtue giuinge
to every one according to his deserte, and that the desert of love is only
love again, I know you are not to know: for all the goods in the world are
not able to requite good will, the one belonginge to the mind, the others
incident to the body, but from the equity of my cause I appeal to your good
grace and favor, and at the bar of your beauty I humbly hold up my hands,
meaning to be tried by your courtesy and mine own loyalty, and minding to
abide your sentence either of consent unto life, or of denial unto death.
Camma hearing this discourse, asso^e looked red for shame, as soon pale for
anger, neither would disdain let her make him answer, neither would her grief
give her leave to hold her peace, but standing a while in a maze between
silence and saying, at length she brake of the one and burst out into the
other in this sort.

If (Sir) your banquet had been no better, then this your talk is pleasant to
me, I am persuaded the dishes would have been taken whole from the Table
without touching, but as the one was far better then the company deserved, so
the other for a far worse woman might more fitly have served, and if your
sweet meat have such sower sauce, the next time you send for me, I will
make you such answer as was made to Cratorus the Emperor by Diogenes, when
he sent for him to make his abode with him in his court, who answered he had
rather be fed at Athens with salt, the^ live with him in all delicacy: so for
my part I promise you, I had rather be fed at home with bread and water then
pay so derely for dainty dishes. Touching the pains you have endured for my
sake, I take your words to be as false toward me, as you would make my
faith toward my husband, but admit they were true, seeing I have not willingly
been the cause of them, I count not my self bound in conscience to counteruayle
them, only I am sorry they were not bestowed on some more worthy your estate and
less worthy an honest name then my self, which being the chief riches I
have, I mean most diligently to keep. The interest which cauilingly you
cleime in me as it consists of false premises, so though the premises were
true, yet the conclusion which you infer thereof follows not necessarily, for
were it so that your love were greater toward me then my husbands (which you
can not induce me to believe) yet seeing my husband by order of law has first
taken possession of me, your title succeeding his, your success and suit must
needs be cold and naught: for as your self say of laws, so of titles the
first are ever of most force, and the most ancient of most authority. Your
Wolves example, though it show your Foxely brain, yet does it enforce no such
proof to your purpose, but that by my former reason it may be refelled, for
y^ the Woulfe is free from the proper possession of any: but therein truly you
observe decora^ very duly, in vsyng the example of a Beast in so beastly a
cause: for like purpose, like proof: like man, like matter. Your manly
marchyng under the ensign of Justice, if reason be your captain general to
lead you, I doubt not, but soon to turn to a retire: for if it be goodwill
which you bear me, I must needs grant you duly deserve the like again: but
when you are able to prove it goodwill to deflower my chastity, to beereeue
me of my good name, to despoyle me of mine honor, to cause me to
transgress the bounds of honesty, to infringe my faith toward my husband,
to violate the sacred Rytes of Matrimony, to pollute the Temple of the Lord,
with other innumerable enormities, when I say you are able to prove these to
proceed of good will, then will I willingly yield consent to your request. But
see the unreasonableness of your suite, would you have me in showing courtesy
toward you, commit cruelty toward my self? should I in extendyng mercy to
you, bring my self to misery? should I place you in pleasure, and displace my
self of all joy? for what joy can a woman enjoy having lost her chastity,
which ought to be the joy Jewel and Gemme of al Gentilwomen of my calling and
countenance? your appeal from your own cause to my courtesy bewrays the
naughtiness thereof, for if it be not ill, why stick you not to it? if it be
good, why appeal you from it? but seeing you have constituted me Judge in
this case, you know it is not the part of a Judge to deal partially, or to
respect the man more then y^ matter, or to tender more mine own case then your
cause: therefore indifferently this sentence definitive I give, I condemn you
henceforth to perpetual scilence in this suit, and that you never hereafter
open your mouth herein, being a matter most unseemly for your honor, and
most prejudicial to my honesty: and in abidyng this sentence (if you can be
content with honest amity) for the curte^ie which I have always found at
your hands, and for the good will which you pretend to bear me, I promise
you, you shall enjoy the second place in my heart, and you shall find me
freendly in all things, which either you with reason can ask, or I with
honesty grant.

Synorix having heard this angel thus amiably pronouncing these words, was so
rapt in admiration of her wisdom, and ravished in contemplation of her beutie,
that though she had not enjoined him to silence, yet had he not had a word
to say: and least his looks might beewray his love, and his countenance
discover his case, he secretly and suddenly withdrew him self into his
chamber, to study what face to set on the matter: and casting him self upon his
bed, after he had dreamed a while upon his dotinge devises, at length he
awaked out of his wavering thoughts, and recovered the possession of his
senses again: by which time the play was ended, and his guestes ready to
depart, whereupon he was driven to come forth of his chamber to take his leave
of them: and bidding his Misteris good night, (...) gave her such a look,
that his very eyes seemed to plead for pity, so that what his tongue durst not,
his eyes did. His guestes beeinge gone, he disposed him self to rest, but
love, which was then his good Master, willed him otherwise to employ that
night, which was in examyning perticulerly every point of her answer. And
though the first part seemed sumwhat sharp and rigorous, and the second
contained the confutation of his cause: yet the third and last part seemed to
be mixed with mettell of more mild matter, which he repeated to himself a
thousand times, and there upon, as upon a firm foundation, determined to
raise up his building again with the two former parts of her answer had
utterly ^ansakt to the ground. But mistaking the nature of the ground whereon
the foundation was laid, his building, as if it had been set in sands, soon
came to ruin: for by that promise of freendship, which she freendly made him,
he sinisterly conceived hope of obtaining that which she neither with honor
could promise, neither with honesty perform, and feeding him self with that
vain hope in great bravery, as in a manner assured of the victory, he wrote
unto her to this effect.

Albeit good Misteris, you have enjoined my tongue to silence, yet my hands
are at liberty, to bewray the secrets of my heart: and though you have taken
my heart prisoner, yet my head has free power to plead for release and
releife. Neither would I you should count me in the number of these cowardly
Soldiers, which at the first Canon that roareth, give over the siege of the
city they assaulted, for I have been always settled in this opinion, that the
more hard the fight is, the more haughty is the conquest, and the more
doubtful the battle, the more doubtie the victory. And as it is not the part
of a politic Captain to put himself in peril, without hope of pray, or
praise: so to win the Bulwarks of your breast I count it a more ritche booty
then Caesar had in ransacking so many Cities, and a more rare praise then ever
Alexander had in subduing so many nations. And though my presumption may seem
great in practicing one of so high a calling as your sweet self, yet seeing in all degrees of friend ship, equality is chiefly considered, I trust you will
clear me of crime that way: neither would I, you should think my flight so
free to stoup at every stale, for as the haughty Hawk will not pray on
carrion, so neither will courtely silks practice country sluttes. But because
I know that to be in you, which both concerns my calling, and consents
with my fancy, I have chosen you for the Goddess of my devotions, humbly
beseechinge you with pity to hear the prayers, which I with pain power
forth before you, that it may not be said your name has been called on in
vain, whereby you may lose that honor, which others of duty, and I of
devotion do unto you. The benefit which you bestow on me in granting me
the second place in your heart, as I must acknowledge though somewhat
unthankfully, so must I crave a greater though somewhat impudently: for seeinge
my whole heart and body are yours, me thinks a piece of your heart is a poor
piece of amends. Way the matter uprightly, consider my case courtiously, and
take compassion on me speedely. Yours altogether, Don Sinorix de Sienna. Camma
having received and red this letter was assailed diversely, sometime with sorrow
in thinking on the time she first saw him or he her, sometime with repentance
of her former promise made him, sometime with pity on his part, sometime with
piety on her own: but at length piety vanquished pity, and caused her to send
this rough reply to his letter.

The little account you make of me and my goodwill, I perceive by the little
care you have to satisfy that which I gave you in charge, you would ill have
done as the knight Virla did, who at the commandment of his lady Zilia,
forbear the use of his tongue and remained dum the term of. i^ years: but as
you subtly think to discharge your self of my charge by writing and not
speaking, so by writing I simply do you to understand, y^ from henceforth you
look for no more at my hands then at a strangers, I will not say an enemies,
for seeing my promise was but upon condition, the condition being broken, my
promise is boyde: And seeing you have played ye pelting Merchant ventrer, to
hazard that goodwill and credit you had with me to get more, the tempest of
my just displeased mind has driven your suit against the rough rocks of
repulse, and you have made shipwreck of all: your courageous persisting in
your purpose proves you rather a desperate sot then a discrete soldier: for
to hop against the hill, and strive against the stream, has ever been counted
extreme folly: your valiant ventring for a pray of value proceeds rather of
covetousness then of courage, for the valiant soldier seeks glory, not
gain, but therein you may be more fitly resembled to the Caterpiller which
cleaves only to good fruit, or to the Moath which most of all eats the best
cloth, or to the Canker which commonly breeds in the fairest Rose, or to the
Woulfe which by his will will kill y^ fattest sheep. The equality which you
pretend to be between us is altogether unequal, for both you exceed me in
degree, and I excel you in honesty, so y^ neither in calling nor quality is
there any equality beetween us. Whereas you have chosen me for your goddess, I
beseech you suffer me to remain an earthly creature, and serve you that god
which can bridle your wanton desires, and give you grace to give your
neighbors leave to live honestly by you. Least you take his name in vain, who
will verily punish your vanity at the length, though for a time he suffer you
to wallow in your wickedness, for it is the prudent policy of god to suffer y^
sinful long time to swim in their sin, to make their sinking more sorrowful,
by their sudden shrinking from prosperity to adversity. For adversity is ever
most bitter to him who has long time lived in prosperity: neither must you
think that that which is deferred is taken away, for as your self or any other
that owes many, though you defer your creditour for a time, yet you defraude
him not altogether of dis due, so though God take days with you for a time,
yet assure your self he will pay you truly at the length, yea and perchance
with large usury besides the due det. For as a hawk the higher pitch she
flies from the ground with the more force she stoupeth down upon her pray
and can the more easily command it, or as a stroke or blow the higher it is
lifted the heuier it lights, so gods vengance the longer it is deferred, the
more it is to be feared. And this good counsel take of me as the last
benefit which you shall ever receive at my hands. Yours nothing at all
Constantio Ca^ma. Sinorix having seen this rigorous resolution of his Misteris,
went another way to work, he suborned an old woman of the city, well seen in
soliciting such suits, to go unto her and to present her from him with many
rich tewels, and which he willed her to tell, he would willingly bestow for
one simple consent of her good will. The old woman having done his shameful
message without shame, said of her self in this sort.

Surely, Misteris Camma, if the experience which old years have given me,
might crave credit for the counsel which I shall give you, I would not wish
you to refuse the friendship of such a one as Sinorix is, who is able to fill
your purse with perles, and fulfill you with pleasure every way: neither is it
wisdom for you to spend your golden years but in golden pleasure, and not to
be tied to one diet which brings satiety and lothsomnesse, but to have
choice of chaung which breeds appetite and lustiness. The chaste ears of
Camma not able to endure this course discourse, she cut of her gostely
counsel with these cutting words, gentlewoman, if you were endued with as
many good conditions as you have lived years, you would never have undertaken
so shameless a message and were it not more for reverence of your years, then
respect of your errant, I would make your filthy trade of life so famous, that
you should ever hereafter be ashamed to show your face in any honest company.
What do you think, though money can make you a baude, that it can make me a
harlot, and though you for gain fly no filthiness, that I for glory follow
no faithfulness, either toward my spouse and husband, either toward my^
Lord and god? Do you judge me so covetous of coin, or so prodigal of min^
honor, that to get theone I will loose the other? Or does he that sent you
think so abiectly of me, that gain may more prevail with me then goodwill,
money more then a man, coin more then courtesy, Jewels more then gentleness,
Perls more then perils and pains which he has endured for my sake: no let
him understand, if any thing could have caused me to swerve from my duty,
love of luker should not have allured me thereto. But as I am fully resolved,
faithfully to keep my vow and promise made to my husband, so I beeseeche him
not to bestow any more labor in attempting that, which he shall never attain
unto: for before this my resolution shall be reuersed, he shall see the
dissolution of my body into dust. But if he will not thus give over his suit,
he will cause me to make those privy to his dealing, who will make him
ashamed of it: and for your part, you may pack you hence with this your trashe
and trumpery to those, which measure their honor by the price of profit, and
their glory by the gwerdon of gain. This honest woman being gone a way with a
slay in her ear, Camma began to think of the matter with aduysed
deliberation, and entered into reasoning with her self in this sort.

What fearful folly is this in me to contemn the friendship of so great a
lord as Synorix is, whom the greatest Lady in this land would willingly
receive for husband, and yet I rigorously refuse for servant? What is that
honor whereon I stand so stiffly, shall it not rather increase mine honor to
have so honorable a servant? And what is that chastity which I seek so
charily to keep, do not some men say that women always live chastely enough, so
that they live charily enough, that is so that they convey their matters so
covertly that their dooinges be not commonly known, for otherwise to
incontinency were added impudency: likewise, for a woman to enter into
conversation with a rascal of no reputation, can not but be a great blemishe
to the brightness of her name, (for a foul adultrer is ever worse then the
adultry it self) and it is a great sign she greatly lotheth her husband when
she likes one better, which is eueri way worse: but to have a freende of
reservation whose very countenance may credit her and her husband, me thinks
can be no great dishonor to either the one or the other. What dishonor was it
I pray you to Helen when she left her husband Menelaus and went with Paris to
Troy? Did not y^ whole glory of Greece to her great glory go in arms to fetch
her again And if she had not been counted a piece of price, or if by y^ fact
she had defaced her honor, is it to be thought y^ Grecians would have
continued ten years in war continually to win her again? But to leave honor
and chastity, and come to commodity and safety, what do I know what perils
will follow of this repulse: is it likely Sinorix will put up this reproach
patiently? may I not justly lok^ to have his love turned to hate, and that he
will either by tyrannous means seek the subversion of my husband and his
whole household, either by treacherous means woork the overthrow of me and my
good name? For the first, Edward a king of England may serve for an example,
who when the countess of Salesbury would not consent to content his
incontinent desire, he so raged against her parents and friends, y^ the father
was forced to persuade his own daughter to folly: and the mother as a baud to
prostitute her to the kings lust, and bring her to his privy chamber. For the
second, the Earl of Pancalier may serve for testimony who when y^ duchess of
Sauoy would not yield to his lassciuious lust, wrought such wyles, y^ she was
condemned for adultry, and judged to suffer most shameful death by burning.
Now to prevent either of these perils it lies in my power, and seeing of evils
y^ least is to be chosen, I think it better then to hazard life, living, or
good name, to lose that which shall be no great loss to my husband or my self,
for as the sun though it shine on us here in Italy, yet it gives light
likewise to those that are in England and other places: or as the sea has fish
for every man, or as one good dishe of meat may well suffice two persons
though very hungry, so is there that in me where with Synnatus may be
satisfied, and Synorix sufficed. And this incourageth* me hereto the rather,
for that I see by experience in most of my neighbors, y^ those are ever most
made of by their husbands, who that way deal most falsely with their
husbands. Besides that how openly soever they deal in these affairs, their
husbands never hear of it, and though they do hear of it, yet will they not
harken unto it, and though they do in a manner se it, yet will they not believe
it, and though they do be leeue it, yet will they love them the better to
have them leave it the sooner. Again, what know I whether my husband deal
falsely with me and row in some other stream, which if it be so, I shall but
save my soul in paying his debts, and oxercise the virtue of justice in
requiting like for like. And touching corrupting of my childrens blood, I
think it made more noble in participating with a blood more noble then my
husbandsis. But can thou harlot call him husband, whom y^ meanest so wickedly
to betray? Am I in my wits to use these witles words? Is it my mouth y^ has
vttred this blasphemy, or was it the devil within me that delivered it forth?
No, if I were gyltie but in thought hereto, I would restore y^ fault with
criminal penance, yea if I felt any part in me apt to any such evil, I would
cut it of for fear of infecting the rest of y^ body. Good god, whether now is
honor fled, which was ever wont to be the fairest flower in my garland?
Whether now is chastity chas^d, which has been always the chiefest stay of my
state? Shall the sun of my shining life be now eclipsed with an act so
filthy, that the very remembrance thereof is no less greenous then death? Why,
was Helen for all her heavenly hew, any other accounted then a common harlot,
and was it not only to be revenged on her and her champion Paris, that the
Grecians continued their siege so long? And touching the inconveniences I may
incur by this refusal, is any evil worse then honesty? Is there any thing to
be fled more then offense? Is not the loss of goods less, then of ones good
name? Is not an honorable death to be preferred before an infamous life. And
touching y^ Countess before rehearsed, had she ever married with the king if
she had not continued in her constancy to the end? And for the Duchess of
Sauoy what hurt sustained she by that false accusation? Did it not make her
glory and virtue show more splendently to the whole world? Yes no boubt of it,
for like as streams the more ye stop them the higher they flow: and trees the
more ye lop them the greater they grow, or as Spices the more they are beaten
the sweeter sent they send forth: or as the herb Camamile the more it is
trodden down the more it spreads abroad, so virtue and honesty the more it
is spited, the more it sprouteth and springs, for honor ever is the reward
of virtue, and does accompany it as duly as the shadow does the body. And as
the sun though it be under a cloud keeps still his brightness though weo see
it not, so virtue though it be dimmed with diuelishe devises, yet it keeps
her strength and power still, though to us it seem utterly to be
extinguished, so that so long as I remain virtuous and honest, I need not
care what man, malice or the devil can devise against me. No no dear
children you shall not by my means be suspected to be bastardes, neither will
I make thee sweet husband ashamed to show thy face amongst the best of them:
and I will let thee understand the villainy which that viper Synorix indeuoureth
to death. And shall I deal so fondly in deed, is not the repulse punishment
enough, unless I be wray his dooinges to my husband and so procure him
further displeasure? Yea I might thereby be occasion to set them together by
the ears, whereby it might fall out (as the event of battle is always
doubtful) that my husband might be hurt or slain, and then the common report
would be (as the people are ever prone to speak the woorst) that I being an
ill woman had conspired his confusion and seh Synorix to slay him. And though
no such thing chauncet (as God forbid it should) yet this at least I should
be sure to get by it, that my busbande ever after would be ielious over me,
and right careful would he be to keep that which he saw others so busily
to seek. And such is the malice of men, perchance he would judge some light
behavior in me, to be the cause that encouraged Synorix to attempt my
chastity. For men have this common opinion amongst them, that as there is no
smoke but where there is some fire, so seldom is there any fervent love, but
where there has been some kindness showed to kindle ones desire. Moreover
this toy may take him in the head, that it is a practice between us two to
prevent suspicion and cloak our love, and with the firm persuasion of my
invincible chastity, to lull him a sleep in security, and then most to deceive
him, when he least suspecteth guile: and if at any time he hear of it by
other, I may stop his mouth with this, that I my self told him of it, which
if I had meant to deal falsely with him, I would not have done: yea what know I
whether he will like the better or the worse of me, for breeding such a bees
nest in his brain: lastly I should derogate mutch from mine own virtue, and
in a manner accuse my self of pronenesse to fall that way, as though I were not
strong enough to withstand his assaults without the assistance of my husband.
Yes, god in whom I repose my trust, shall fortify me against the fury of my
foes, and give me grace with wisdom to escape his wiles, with charines to
eschew his charms, and with piety to resist his prauitie.

Now to return to Synorix, so soon as that old Pandarina had related unto
him at large the answer of his Misteris, he fell from the place he sat, flat
upon the ground, and lay in a trance a great while, and now those sparks which
before love had kindled in him, were with continual sighs so blown, as it
were with a pair of bellows, that they break forth into fiery flames, and
that which before was fancy, was now turned to fury: for being come to
himself, or rather beeinge quight past him self, with staringe looks, with
pale countenance, with fiery eyes, with gnashing teeth, with trembling
tongue, in rage he roared forth these words.

And shall I thus be frustrate of my desire? shall I with words and works,
with prayers and presents, pursue the goodwill of a dainty disdayninge dame,
and receive but labor for my love, and greeif for my goodwill? But ah frantik
fool, why do I in my rage, rage against her who is the most fair and
courteous creature under heaven? No it is that churl Synnatus that sows the
sede of my sorrow, it is his severity toward her, that causes her cruelty
toward me: the fear she has of him, is the cause she dares not take
compassion on my passions: and shall he swim in bliss, and I lie drencht in
deep despair? Shall he be ingorged with pleasure, and I pine away in pain? No
I will make him feel that once, which he makes me feel a thousand times a
day. And hereupon determined with himself by some means or other to procure
the death of Synnatus, thinking thereby the sooner to obtain his purpose of
his wife. And calling unto him one of his swearing swash buckler servants,
he laid before him the platfourme of his purpose, and told him plainly if
he would speedily dispatch Synnatus out of the way, he would give him a
thousand crowns in his purse to keep him in another Country. His servant,
though altogether past grace, yet for fashion sake began to advise his master
more wisely, saying.

For mine own part it makes no matter, for another country is as good for me
as this, and I count any place my country, where I may live well and wealthily,
but for your part it be hooueth you to look more warely to your self, for
that your love toward Camma is known to diverse of this city, by reason
whereof, if I should commit any such act, it must needs be thought that you
must needs be accessarie thereto, which will turn, though not to your death,
for that none has authority above you to execute the rigor of the laws upon
you, yet to your utter shame and reproach it can not but convert.

Tush (says his master) the case is light, where counsel can take place:
what talkest thou to me of shame, that am by injurious and spiteful dealyng
deprived the use of reason, and dispossessed of my wits and senses. Neither
au^ I the first that have played the like part, did not David the chosen
servant of God, being blasted with the beutie of Bersabe, cause her husband
Vrias to be set in the forefront of the battle to be slain, which done he
married his wife? And why is it not lawful for me to do the like? But I know
the worst of it, if thou will not take it upon thee, I will either do it my
self, or get some other that shall.

The man seeing how his Master was bent both to satisfy his mind, and to
gain so good a sum of money promised to perform his charge which with
opportunity of time and place he did. And seeing Synnatus on a time, (in ill
time) passing through a blind lane of the City, he shrouded himself in a
corner, and as he came by, shot him through with a Pistol: which done he
forthwith sled the country. Camma hearing of the cruel murder of her
husband, and by the circumstances, knowing Synorix to be the author thereof,
tearing her heir, scratching her face, and beatyng her body against the
ground, s^ soon as the fluddes of tears had flowen so long that the
fountain was dry, so that her speech might have passage, which before the
tears stopped, she began to cry out in this careful manner.

O God, what injustice is this in thee, to suffer the earth remain polluted
with the blood of innocents? Did thou curse Cain for killing his brother
Abel, and will thou not crucify Synorix for sleayng Synnatus? Is thy heart now
hardened that thou will not, or are thy hands now weakened that thou can not
preserve thy servants from the slaves of Satan? If there be no safety in
innocence, wherein shall we repose our selves? If thou be not our protector,
who shall defend us? If the wicked vanquish the virtuous, who shall set forth
thy honor and glory, or who will so mutche as once call upon thy name? But
what mean I wretched wight to exclayme against God as the aucthour of my
evil, whereas it is only I my self that am guilty of my husbands death? It
is I that pampred up my beutie, to make it glister in the sight of every
gazing eye, in the thriftlesse threade whereof this Tirant was so entangled,
that to unwind himself thereout he has wrought all this mischief. It is I
that would not detect his doings to my husband, whereby he might have
prevented the peril which hung over his head. And seeing I have been the cause
of his death, shall I being a murderer remain alive? Did Alcyone seeing the
dead carkas of her husband Ceix cast on shore, willingly cast her self into
the Sea to accompany his death. And shall I see my sweet Synnatus slain, and
not drink of the same cup? Did true Thisbe goare her gorgious body with the
same sword, wherewith princely Piramus had pricked him self to the heart: and
are not my hands strong enough to do the like? Did Iulietta die upon the
corpse of her Romeo, and shall my body remain on earth, Synnatus being buried?
No gentle death come with thy direful dart, and pierce my paynefull heart, and
with one death rid me out of a thousand deaths at once. For what thought do
I think on my Synnatus, which does not procure me double death? What thing do
I see belongyng to him, which is not a treble torment unto me? But it is
cowardlinesse to wish for death, and couragiousnesse valiantly to take it. Yes
I can and will bestow my life for my Synnatus sweet sake: but O God shall that
Tyrant remain alive to triumph in his treachery, and vaunt in his villainy?
Shall I not see his fattall day before my final end. It is his blood that
will be a most sweet sacrifice to the ghost of Sinnatus, not mine: and then can
I end my life contentedly when I have offered up this acceptable sacrifice: and
until such time as I have opportunity hereto, I will prolonge my doleful
days in direful grief, and only the hope of reuengment, shall heavily hold
my loathsome life and sorrowful soul together? For other cause why I should
desire life I have not, for that I am utterly deprived of all joys of life.
For as the bird that is bruised with some blow lies aloof on the leaves, and
hears his fellows singe, and is not able to utter one warblinge note out of
his mournful voice, but rather hates the harmony which other birds do make,
so I, my heart being broosed and broken, sit solitarily alone and see some
hang about their husbands necks, some closely clepe them in their arms,
some trisle with them, some talk with them, all which sight redoubleth my
pain to think my self deprived of those pleasures: yea to a wretched wounded
heart that dwells in dole, every pleasant sight turns to bitter spite: and
the only obiecte which shall ever content my eyes, shall be the destruction
of that tyrant, which has brought me to this desolation.

Now Synorix thinking that time had taken away her tears and sorrow, and
supposinge that neither she, neither any other had suspected him for the
murder of her husband, began to enter into the listes of lust again, and with
a new incountry of incontiuency to set upon her. But she so mutch abhorred
him, that if she but heard his name it caused her nature to fail in her, and
all her senses to faint: so that when he saw no posibility to impell her to
impiety, he meant to move her in the way of marriage and caused her nere
kinsfolk and friends to solicit his suit unto her, who partly for fear of
his displeasure, partly for that they knew it would be greatly to her
ad^auncement, labored very ernestly in the matter, and were so importunate
upon her that no answer would satisfy them. Now Camma seeing she could not
be rid of her friends, and foreseeing that by this means she might be rid of
her enemies, agreed to take him to husband. And the day of the solemnizing of
the marriage beeinge come, they went together to the temple of Diana where al
things according to custom being consummated, the bride wife (as the use was)
drank to her husband in drink as he thought, but indeed in poison which
she had provided of purpose: and when she saw he had drunk up his death,
she said unto him go now and in steed of thy marriage bed get thee a grave,
for thy marriage is turned to murder, a punishment most just for thy outrageous
lust and cruel tyranny 'for vengeance asks vengeance, and blood blood, and
they y^ sow slaughter, shall be sure to reap ruin and destruction. Now
Synorix hearing these words and feeling the force of the poison to work
within him, assaied all the remedies he could to cure him self, but al in
vain. Camma also feeling the poison to prevail within her, fell upon her knees
before the altar of Diana vttringe these words.

O goddess, thou know how since the death of my sweet husband, this life
has been most loathsome and sower unto me, and that the only offeringe up of
this sacrifice kept me from him, which now in thy presence I have performed I
think my self to have satisfied my duty, and purchased thereby a pasport to
pass to the place and Paradise where my husband has his habitation.

Immediately upon this so well as she could she crauld home to her house,
where she was no sooner, but she had certain tydinges brought her that
Synorix was dead. Wherewith with great joy she cast her self down upon her
bed, and called her little children about her, and blessing and bussing them
said.

Alas pretty Impes who shall now defend you from your foes, who shall redress
your wrongs* Your father is gone, your mother is goinge, and you poor souls
must bide behind to abide the brunt and bitter blastes of this wretched world.
Ah if the love which I bare my husband had not been exceeding great, nature
would have caused me to have had some care of you, and for your sakes to have
suffered my self sometime longer to live, but now as I have showed my self a
loving wife, so have I scarce showed my self a natural mother. But alas it
was reason I should prefer him before you, who was the author of you, and who
blessed me with you. Well I see now my time is come, my tongue begins to fail,
come dear children, and take your last conge of your lost mother, god shield
you from shame, God preserve you from peril, God send you more prosperous
fortune the^ your poor parents had. And thus farewell my fruit, farewell my
slesh, farewell sweet babes, and O welcome my Synnatus, who^ I see in the skies
ready to receive me, and so in sorrow and joy she gave up the ghost.

Now I would wish you blazing stars which stand upon your chastity, to take
light at this lot, to take heed by this harm, you see the husband slain, the
ruffian fled, the lover poisoned, the wife dead, the friends comfortles, the
children parentlesse. But it is naturally incident to women to enter into
extremities, they are either to louinge or to lothinge, to courteous or to coy,
to willinge or to wilful, to merciful or to merciless, to forward or to
froward, to freindly or to feendly, the mean they always meanly account of.
Otherwise she might with reason sooner then rigor have repressed his rage.
But howsoever my words run, I would not you should take them to tend altogether
to her dispraise, for as I must condemn her cruelty, so can I not but
commend her constancy, and chastity, and think her worthy to be compared
to Lucrece, Penelope, or what woman soever that ever had any pre-eminence of
praise for her virtue. And I would wish my gallant youths, which delight to
gaze in every garish glass, and to have an Oar stirring in every beutifull
boat, not to row past their reach, not to fix their fancy upon
impossibilities, not to suffer themselves to be blasted with the beams of
beauty, or scorched with the lightning of loving looks: such love toward
the married is ever without law, such fire is without fear, such suits are
without shame, such Cankers, if they be not at the beginning cured, grow to
the confusion of the whole body. Therefore Gentlewomen I leave it to your
judgments to give sentence, whether be more worthy reprehension, he or she.
He had the law of love on his side, she had the law of men and of marriage
on her part: love led him, which the gods themselves cannot resist, chastity
guided her, which the gods themselves have lost: he killed him whom he
counted his enemy, she killed him whom she knew her fleshly freinde: she with
reason might have prevented great mischief, his wings were to mutch limed with
lust to fly forth of his folly.

Tereus and Progne.
TEREVS King of Thrace, enamored of Progne, daughter to Pandion Prince of
Athens, obtains her in marriage, and conueyeth her into his own country.
Progne, desirous to see her sister Philomela, moves Tereus to go to Athens,
and to get license to bring her into Thrace, who on the way fallinge into
unlawful likinge of her, forces her to his pleasure, and cutteth out her
tongue, that she might tell no tales. Progne, having hereof secret
intelligence, in lieu of that foul fact, murthereth his and her own Sun,
young Itys, and dresseth him in meats for his Fathers mouth, Which horrible
deed when Tereus would have revenged upon the Mother and Aunt, they escape
his hands, and are transfourmed into Birds.

IF it were meet for mortal creatures to complain of their immortal
creator, then truly may we justly prepare complaint against our maker, for
that of al his creatures he has made man most miserable. Herbs, Trees and
plants he has framed without sense, whereby they neither feel the force of
winters blastes, neither y^ fire of summers blaze: fowls, fishes and beasts
he has be reaued of a reasonable soul, whereby they bear the brunt of their
bodies only, and are not molested with the motions of the mind: but man he
has made subject to infirmities of the body, to miseries of mind, to all
storms of strie^e and panges of pain:: And as the Cameleon changes him
self into y^ color and hew of every thing he does view, so man is made apt
to be transfourmed into any misfortune, and to receive any evil y^ reigns
upon the face of the earth: yea, if we consider the whole course of our life,
we begin with cries, and end with cares: for we are no sooner out of our
mothers womb, but we forthwith cry to signify the sorrow which will ensue in
our succeeding age: in our infancy our tender bodies are subject to many
infirmities: in our childhood our weak minds are troubled with many toys:
we are plied sore to silence, which is of hard digestion to us, we fear the
masters lowringe lore, which is a continual torment unto us: but oh, the sea
of sorrow and waves of woe which then ouerwhelme us, when we once arrive to
man's estate, what vain desires? What fantastical follies? What careless and
sparelesse spendinge? What prodigal pride? What fiery flames of love? What
harebraind heates of hate? What pensife fear of parents displeasure? What
solitariness in single life? What mind to marry? What misery in marriage? What
charge in children? What care of their instruction? What fear of their
destruction, and touching our own bodies, what often surfetinges? What
perilous plewrises? What fearful fevers? What danger in war? What peril
in fight? Yea what sorrow which this age is not subject to? Lastly in old age
we couetously carke for coin, we toil for trashe, we think we never have
enough, we think all to mutch that is spent, we take little pleasure in any
thing, we think the world is changed, and that it is far worse then it was
when we were young, only because our bodies are changed, and our vital heat
so vanished away, that nothing seems pleasant unto us, though it be the
same it was wont to be, so that we think the alteration to be in the
thing, when it is in our self. And then not only our memory fails, our wits
wax weak, and return to infancy again, but our bodies also are broken with
cares, taken with crampes, shaken with paulseies, tormented with the stone,
lamed with the gout, dried with dropsies, our sight waxes dim, our hearing
deaf, our smelling small, our tasting untoothsome, our feelinge feable, yea all
our senses are almost without sense: and yet we are loath to die and leave our
worldly mucke, the fear of approaching death does daily daunt us, and at
length his deadly darts do utterly distroy us. And surely the consideration
of this our miserable estate does so resolve me into sorrow, that if your
presence did not sprinkle me with some deawe of delight, I should hardly frame
my wits to procure you pleasure by any pleasant history, but rather continue
a dolorous discourse of our calamity. And yet the history I mean to tell shall
not be altogether estraunged from the argument of my former discourse, but
though it manifest not our manyfolde misery, yet shall it at least set forth
the frailty of our felicity. The history is this.

The flowrishynge common wealth of Athens had to their prince one Pandion,
whose estate both fortune beutified with great wealth, and God blessed with
goodly children, to wit two daughters of excellent beutie, the eldest named
Progne, the youngest Philomela. Now fame being a tatlyng Goddess, blazed the
brute of Progne abreade into diverse countries, until at length the rumor of
her reno^me ronge about the ears of Tereus king of Thrace, who being a
young lusty gallant, made no great account of the commendations which were
given her, knowing, if he were disposed to marry, he might make his choice
amongst a great number as good as she was, and more nere neighbors unto him
then Athens was. But destinies so drove that shortly after this, on a night in
his sleep he seemed to see her stand apparently before him (only a strong
imagination assuring him that it was she) which sight sunk so deeply into
his heart and brought him such excessive delight, that he presently awaked,
and missyng the party that procured him such pleasure, his joy was tournd to
anoy: neither could he ever after that find any contentation in any thought
or deed, but only in this determination to go have a true sight of her, whose
seemyng shadow had so dazeled his eyes: and with all speed repaired his
ships, and prepared al things necessary for such a voyage, and by the help
of good wind and will, shortly arrived there where his heart had already cast
anchor: and sent ambassadors to the king to certify him of his coming, who
received him with royalty fit for his regal estate. And at the first
incountry of the two princes Tereus said.

My coming unto you O noble prince is not as an open enemy to invade you, for
you see I am unarmed, neither as a secret traitor to entrap you, for you know
I am your friend: but that you may not marvel at my sudden cummyng, you
shall understand it is to see your daughter the Lady Progne, for you shall
soon perceive I pretend well unto her. Pandian answered.

As (most worthy prince) the cause of your coming is friendly, so can I not
but friendly accept it, and how much I think my self honored thereby so mutch
I count my self bound unto you.

And after a little parlee passed between them of the estates of their realms
and manners of their countreies, Pandion preferred him to the sight of his
daughter, whom after Tereus had saluted with a courteous conge, he entered into
discoursing with in this sort.

If fair Lady, I should tell the truth of my coming into this country, I
think you would take it but for a trifling toy, yea if I should in words
plainly set down y^ cause of this my interprised journey, and the case which
through your means I remain in, I doubt you would neither believe the cause,
neither relieve my case: for y^ the strangeness of the one would breed great
incredulity and for the other the small acquaintance I have with you and less
deserts toward you can crave small curtesy: yet if it please you to know,
neither the desire to see this country, neither the renoume of your virtue and
beauty brought me hither, for though the report thereof be great, yet now I se I
must needs say, y^ fame has rather framed your praise maliciously then
reported it truly, for one good part reported to be in you, I perceive by your
countenance such confluence of good conditions, that I can not but count the
rumor which run of you, rather sparing speech then right report. But the
cause of my hasty coming and heavy case is this, it pleased the gods to
present your seemly self to my presence, in the same lovely likeness wherein
you are at this present, what time I took such veiwe of your sweet face,
that approchinge this day to your fathers palaice, before I knew who you
were, what you were, or where you were, as you looked if you remember it, out
at your chamber window, I said to my servants, lo yonder stands the peereles
peragon princely Progne: and since y^ sight in my sleep, I take the heavens to
witness I never inioyed one quiet sleep, but continued in co^templation how I
might be placed in possession of that personage which drove me into such
admiration. Now saying it pleased the gods thus miraculously to move me to
traueile to see you, and seeing the sight of your sweet face has fast fettred
my fancy in links of love, these may be humbly to desire you, neither to
resist the motion of the gods, neither to reiecte the devotion of my good
will. And if I have preferred your love before all the Ladies of my own land,
if I make you that profer which many princes have pressed for, if neither
wearines of way, neither perils of sea could prohibit me from pursuing your
good will, if I be content to resign my kingdom, liberty and all that I have
into your hands, I shall desire you not to contemn my curtesy, but to
counteruaile my pain and to return my goodwill with like love and affection.
This request also rests to make unto you that you drive me not of with
trifeling delays, for neither will the extremity of my perplexity permit long
delay, neither will the estate my kingdom stands in, suffer me long to be
away.

Progne hearing the ernest suit of this prince, and seeinge nothing in him to
be misliked, considering also what haste his request required, stood not upon
the nice terms of her virginity, but with a reverence of majesty made him this
answer.

Most worthy prince whatsoever were the cause of your coming into this
country, the king my father has to hold himself mutch beeholding to your
majesty, that it would please you too do him the honor to visit him: but
touching the cause you pretend, I doubt not but your wisdom knows that
dreams are doubtful, and visions are altogether vain and therefore I must
crave pardon if I hardly believe, y^ upon so light a cause you would undertake
such heavy travail: and I mutch muse that in your sleep the gods had no
seemelier sight then my self to present unto you: but whether before you came
hither, the gods moved your mind, or whether being here your own fancy
forced your affection toward me, assure your self this, if your love be as
loyal, as your words seem wonderful in showing the original thereof, you
shall not find me either so discourteous as to contemn your goodwill, either
so ungrateful as not to requite it, mary as I may, which is for your hearty
goodwil to give you my heart, for any benefit of my body it is not in me to
bestow on you: for if you do me that injury to exact any thing at my hands
lasciuiously, honesty will not allow it, whose bounds I mean not to
transgress, and if you do me that honor to pursue my good will in the way
of marriage, perchance my parents will not permit it, who only have power to
place me at their pleasuer. So that as the one half and moytie of me is not
mine, so the other part, if your goodwill be as great as you pretend, shall be
yours. Presently upon this he preferred his suit to her parents, who were no
less glad of such a son in law, then he of such a wife? And so out of
hand y^ marriage with great solemnity was celebrated. Which done he joyfully
departed from his sorrowful father in law, and in short time safely land with
his wife in his own land, where they lived together the space of five* years
in such joy as they commonly enjoy, who carry fortune as it were upon their
shoulders, and abound in all things which they can wish or desire. But see the
frailty of our felicity, mark the misery which mortal men are subject to. A
man would have thought this married couple in love so loyal, in estate so high,
in all things so happy, had been placed in perpetuity of prosperity. But alas
what estate has fortune ever made so inuencible, which vice can not vanquish?
Who has ever been established in such felicity, but that wickedness can
work his overthrow? What love has ever been so fast bound, but by lust has
been lo^sed? Yea the most faithful bond of friendship between Tytus and
Gysippus, through lust was violated: the most natural league of love between
Antiochus and his own son, through lust was broken: and this most loyal
love between Tereus and Progne through lust was turned to loathsome hate. For it
fortuned that Progne after they had been married together a while entered into
great desire to see her sister Philomelia, and lay very importunately upon her
husband to go to Athens and request her father Pandion to let her come unto
her. Tereus loved his wife so entirely that he would deny her nothing, but
presently imbarkte him self and went to fetch Philomela unto her. And being
arrived at Athens, he made Pandion, privy to y^ cause of his coming. The old
man was assailed with great sorrow to think he must part from his fair
Philomela the only stay and comfort of his old years, but Tereus entreated so
ernestly that he could not deny him easily, and Philomela was so desirous to
see her sister that had so louingely sent for her, that she hung about her
fathers neck kissed him and used all the flatteries she could to force him to
yield his consent to her departure, wherewith he beeinge vanquished with
weeping eyes in great grief and dolor delivered his daughter to Tereus saying.

It is not my daughter only I deliver you but mine own life, for assure your
self my life can not last one minute longer, then I shall hear she does
well, and if her return be^ not with speed, you shall hear of my speedy
return to the earth from whence I came.

Tereus desired him to be of good chere promisinge to be as careful of her
well doing as if she were his own sister or child. Where upon the old man
blessinge his daughter gave her unto him. But like a simple man he committed
the seely sheep to the ravening Woulfe.

Nay, there was never blouddy tiger that did so terribly tear the little Lamb,
as this tiraunt did furiously fare with fair Philomela. For being in ship
together, he began filthily to fix his fancy upon her, and castinge the fear
of god front before his eyes, rootinge the love of his wife out of his heart,
contemninge the holy rites of matrimony, and the sacred state of virginity, he
fell to fleshly daliance with her, and attempted to win that point of her,
which she held more dear and precious then her life, and which ought to be of
curious regard to al women of honest behavior. But having no other weapon but
weepyng to defend her self, by pitiful exclemations and cries she kept him
from satisfiyng his insaciable desire. But as the rauenyng Woulfe having seized
in his tearyng claws some seely Lamb, seeks some den to hide him in, that
nothing hinder him from quietly inioyinge his pray, so he was no sooner
arrived on the coasts of his own country, but that he secretly conuayed her
to a graunge of his own, far from any town or city, and there by force
filthily de^lowred her. The poor maid thus piteously spoiled, so soon as her
grief would give her leave to speak, spit forth her venom against his
villainy in this sort.

Ah most tirrannous Traitor, have thou thus betrayed my father and sister,
had thou no other to work thy wickedness on but me, who was the jewel
of my father and the joy of my sister, and now by thy means shall be the
destruction of the one, and the desolation of the other? O that my hands had
strength to tear these staring eyes out of thy hateful head, or that my
mouth were able to sound the trumpet of this thy trumpery, either to the court
of my sister, or country of my father, that they might take revenge on thy
villainy. O cursed be the womb from whence thou camst, and the paps which
gave thee suck: O cursed be the cause of thy conception, and the Father that
begat thee, who if he never otherwise in his life offended, yet does he
deserve to be plonged in the most paynfull pit of Hell, only for begetting so
wicked a sun.

Tereus not able to endure this talk, and fearyng least her words might bewray
his wickedness, made no more a do but took his knife, and like a blouddy
butcher, cut her tongue forth of her head. This done he caused her to be
locked fast in a chamber, taking every thing from her whereby she might use
violence toward her self, and so went home to the Queen Progue his wife,
with this forged tale.

I am sorry sweet wife it is my chance to be the messenger of such sower
news unto you, but seeing of force you must hear it, as good I now impart it,
as other here after report it unto you. And seeing it is an accident which
ordinarily happens to mortal wightes, I trust of your self you will give
such order to your sorrow, that you will suffer it to sink no depelier into
your heart then wisdom would it should: caryinge this in your remembrance
that we are borne to die, and that even in our swathe cloutes death may ask
his due. Alas (says she) and is Pandion departed? No (says he) Pandion
lives, but his life is such that death would more delight him.

Then farewell my Philomela (says she) thy death I know is cause of this
desolation, and thy death shall soon abridge my days. In deed (says he) so
it is the gods have had her up into heaven, as one to good to remain on earth.
Ah unjust gods (says she) she is to good for them also, what pity, what
pieti, what right, what reason is in them, to deprive her of life now in the
prime of her life, before she have tasted the chief pleasures of life, or
any way deserved the pain of death?

Ah sweet wife (says he) I beeseech you by the love which you bear me, to
moderate your martyrdom and assuage your sorrow, and only in me to repose
your felicity: for I protest by these hands and tears which I shede to see
your sorrow, that I will be to you in steed of a father and a sister: yea if you
had a thousand fathers and a thousand sisters al their goodwils together, should
not surmou^t mine alone.

These louinge words caused her somewhat to cease from her sorrow, and she
began, to take the matter as patiently as her pain would permit her. But to
return to Philomela who beeinge kept close prisoner determined to pine
herself to death, but the hope of revenge altered that determination, and she
began to cast in her head how she might open the injury to her sister, which
that Tirant had offered them both: at length she went this way to work, she
wrought and imbrodred cunningly in cloth the whole discourse of her course and
careful case, which being finished, fortune so framed that a gentleman riding
late in the night had lost his way, and seeing a light in her chamber a far of,
drew nere to the window, and called to Philomela inquiringe the way to the
next town, whereupon Philomela opened the window, and seeing him to be a
gentleman whom she thought would not stick to put him self in some peril to
redress a Ladies wrong, showed him the cloth which she so cunningly had
wrought, and in the first place thereof was plainly written, to whom it should
be delivered, and from whom. The gentleman took it at her hands, and
plighted to her his faith, safely and secretly to deliver it to the queen. See
the just judgment of god, who will suffer no evil done secretly, but it
shall be manifested openly, as in times past he made the infant Daniell an
instrument to detecte the conspiracy of the two Judas judges, who falsely
accused the good Lady Susanna, and other times other ways: but this tyranny of
Tereus was so terrible that the very stones in the walls would have beewrayed
it, if there had been no other means used. Now Progne having this cloth
conuayed unto her, and fully understanding how the case stood, not
withstandinge her grief were great in the highest degree, yet (a marvelous
thing a woman could do so) she ^oncealed y^ matter secretly, hoping to be
revenged more speedily. But yet her husbands villainy toward her, caused her to
inueigh against him in this vehement sort.

O devilish deep dissembling of men, who would have thought that he which
pretended so great goodwill toward me, would have intended so great ill
against me? Why if my person could not please him, could none but my sister
satisfy him? and if he thought her most meet for his mischief, yet was it
not villainy enough to vanquish her virginity, but that he must mangle and
dismember her body also? but what pity is to be looked for of such Panthers
which pass not of piety? He shows his cursed careless kind, he plainly
proves him self to proceed of the progeny of that traitor Eneas, who wrought
the confusion of the good Queen Dido, who succored him in his distres. It is
evident he is engendered of Iasons race, who dis^oyally forsook Medea y^ made
him win y^ golden ^leece? He is descended of the stock of Demopheon, who
through his faithles dealing forced Phyllis to hang her self. He seems of
the seed of Theseus, who left Ariadne in the deserts, to be devoured,
through whose help he subdued the Monster Minotaur, and escaped out of the
intricate Labirinth. He comes of Nero his cruel kind, who carnally abused
his own mother Agrippina, and then caused her to be slain and ripped open,
that he might se the place wherein he lay being an infant in her belly. So
that what fruits but filthiness is to be gathered of such graftes? What
boughs but beastlines grow out of such stems? no I will never make other
account but that faith which a man professes is nothing else but forgery: truth
which he pretends nothing else but trifling: love lust, words wyles, deeds
deceit, vows vanities, faithful promises faythlesse practices, ernest oaths,
errant arts to deceive, sorrows subtelties, sighs slightes, groans guiles,
cries crafts, tears treason: yea all their doings nothing but baytes to
entice us, hooks to entangle us, and ingins utterly to undo us. O that my
mouth could cause my words to mount above the skies, to make y^ gods bend
down their eyes to take view of the vilany of this viper, then no doubt but
either the city would sink wherein he is, or the earth would open and swalow
him up, or the at least some plague should be thundered down upon him, which
might most painefully punish him. Or why may not the gods use me as an
instrument to execute their vengeance on him? The wife of Dionisias the tirant
wrought the will of the gods on her husband, and miserably murdered him, and
why is it not lawful for me to do the like? Yes I can and will devise such
exquisite punishment for this Tiraunt, that it shall fear all that come after
from the like filthiness.

Now to further her fury she had this opportunity offered her, it was the same
time of the year that the sacrifices of Bacchus were to be celebrated, what
time the use was for the women to go about the country disguised as if they
had been mad, where upon the Queen took a troop of women with her and gat to
the graunge where Philo. was, brake open the doors, and brought her home with
her to her Palaice, and there they two, the one with signs, and the other with
words, entered into consultation how to be revenged on the treachery of
Tereus: and surely if a man be disposed to do his enemy a displeasure in deed,
if he follow my counsel, let him follow the counsel of a woman, nay all the
Devils in Hell could not so have tormented Tereus as they did, so that I think
your selves will say her fury exceeded his folly, and her severity in punishyng
his cruelty in offendyng. For he had by her one only sweet sun named Itys.
My tongue is not able to tell, and my heart rendes in twain to think, that a
reasonable creature should so rage in rigor, that a woman should so want
compassion, that a mother should work such mischief to her own child. For
as I was about to tell you, she had by her husband one only son, and she
his own mother miserably mente to murder him, thereby to be revenged on her
husband. O ruthlesse rage, O merciles mother: I have read of a woman named
Althea who wrought the death of her own son Meleager, for that he before
had slain two or three of her brethren, likewise Agaue helped to tear in
pieces her own son Pen^hey, for that he would not do honor to the god
Bacchus: but for a mother to murder, to mangle, to make man's meat of her own
child being an innocent, an infant that never did or thought amiss, who ever
heard any thing more monstrous in nature, more beastly in Tyranny, or more
blouddy in cruelty? For mark the manner of this murder, as her sister and
she sat in her privy chaumber meditatinge of this mischeife, in came Itys the
pretty elfe being two or three years of age, and seeing his mother sit sadly
said unto her, Mam how do, why do, weep, and took her about the neck
and kissed her, saying I will go call my dad to come and play with thee: but
she like a tirannous Tiger ^long him from her saying: Away impe of impiety,
how like thy father thou art, not only in favor, but in slattery also: I will
make thee make thy Dad sport shortly: the infant rose again, and came run
dugling to her saying, why do you beat me mam, I have learned my Criscrosse to
day so I have, and my father says he will buie me a golden ceate, and then
you shannot kiss me so you shannot, but this trisling daliance could not
turn her diuelishnesse. But (O dreadful deed, O lamentable case) she took
her pretty babe by the hear of the head, and drew him into a privy corner
provided for the purpose, and first cruelly cut of his harmeles head, then
butcherly quartered his comely carkas, and between her sister and her dressed
it in order of meat, which done, (as the custom was in those feasts of
Bacchus) she sent for the king her husband to suppe with her, and set before
him for the first service his own sun. Who after he had fiercely fed on his
own flesh, and filled his belly with his own bowels, he asked for his little
son I^ys: the queen answered, why do you not se him? I am sure you feel
him, and as he stared about the chamber to have seen him, out stepped Philomela
from behind a cloth of Arras, and slang the childs head in the fathers face:
whereby he knew what banquet he had been bid to, and so soon as his senses
were come to him, which that sower sight had taken away, he drew his rapier
and thought to have offered up the blood of his wife and her sister for a
sacrifice unto his son, but they fled from him, and as Ovid reports were
turned into birds, meaning they were not worthy human shape or the use of
reason, which were such cruel monsters altogether deuoyd of ruth and reason.
It were hard here gentlewoman for you to give sentence, who more offended of
the husband or the wife, seeing the dooinges of both the one and the other
near in the highest degree of diuelishnesse, such unbridled lust and beastly
cruelty in him, such monsterous mischief and murder in her, in him such
treason, in her such treachery, in him such falsenesse, in her such
furiousness, in him such deuilish desire, in her such reuengful ire, in him
such hellish heat, in her such haggish hate, that I think them both worthy
to be condemned to the most botomles pit in Hell.

Germanicus and Agrippina.
GERMANICVS, a young Gentleman of small living* of the kin, and in the court
of Octauian the Emperor, becummyng amorous of the Lady Agrippina, through
great suit gets her to wife: and through his valiencie wins to be
proclaimed heir apparent to the Empire. Whose state Tiberius his cusin
envying, dispatcheth him privily with poison: and Agrippina for grief thereof
refusing all bodily sustenance, most miserably famisheth her self to death.

THe Astronomers are of this opinion that the Planets have pre-eminence over
us, and that the Stars stir us up to all our enterprises, but I am rather
settled into this sentence that not the Planets but our passions have the chief
place in us, and that our own desires not the destines drive us to all our
doings: which opinion I may justify by the example of a Gentleman named
Germanicus, whose fortune, neither the Fates fixed, neither the Planets
planted, neither the Stars stirred, neither the destines drove, neither the
Shies caused, but first his own fond fancy framed, and then his own
ambitious desire finished as by the sequel of this History you shall see. For
this Gentleman Germanicus frequenting the court of Octauian the Emperor,
chanced to fix his eyes on the face of a noble Gentlewoman named Agrippina,
the daughter of M. Agrippa, and as the Mouse mumpeth so long at the bayte,
that at length she is taken in trap, so he bit so long at the bayte of her
beutie, that at length he was caught in Cupids snare: and on a time as she
was at Cards in the Presence chamber, this youth stood staryng in her face in
a great studdy, which she perceiving to bring him out of his studdy, prayed
him to reach her a boale of Wine which stood upon a Cupboord by: and as he
approached therewith to the place of her presence, his senses were so ravished
with the sight of her sweet face, that he let the boale fall forth of his
hands: and retiryng back with seemly shamefastness, went for more, and
being come therewith she thanked him for his pains saying, I pray God that
fall of the Wine hinder not my winnyng and bring me ill luck, for I know many
that connot away to have Salt, or Drink, or any such like thing fall
toward them.

Madame says Germanicus I have often heard it disputed in schools that such
as the cause of every thing is, such will be the effect, and seeing the cause of
this chance was good, I doubt not but the effect will follow accordyngly: and if
any evil do ensue thereof I trust it will light on my head through whose
negligence it happened. Agrip. answered. As I know not the cause, so I fear
not the effect greatly, and in deed as you say hethervnto you have had the
worst of it, for that thereby you have been put to double pains.

If that be all (says he) rather then it shall be said any evil to have
insued of this chance, I will persuade my self that every pain which you
shall put me to, shall be double delight and treble pleasure unto me. You must
use (says she then) great eloquence to your self to persuade you to such an
impossibility. Oh if it please you (says he) there is an orator which of
late has taken up his dwelling within me, who has eloquence to persuade me
to a far greater matter then this.

If (says she) he persuade you to things no more behouseful for your self
then this, if you follow my counsel, you shall not give him house room long.
Madame (says he) it is an assured sign of a free and freendly mind to give
good counsel, but it is hard for one in bondage and out of his own
possession to follow it. For what knows your honor whether he have already
taken entire possession of the house wherein he is, which if it be so, what
wit is able to devise a writ to remove him from thence? If sir (says she) he
entered by order of law and paid you truly for it, it is reason he enjoy it,
marie your folly was great to retain such a tenant, but if he intruded
himself by force you may lawfully extrude him by strength.

In deed (says he) he entered vi et armis forcibly, but after upon certain
parlance passed between us, I was content he should remain in peacible
possession: marie he has paid me nothing yet, but he promises so frankely
that if the perfourmance follow, a house with beams of beaten gold, and
pillars of precious stones will not counteruaile the price of it: yea if I were
placed in quiet possession thereof I would think my self ritcher, I will not say
then the Emperor, but which is most then god him self who possesses heaven
and earth: and as the hope of obtaining the effect of that promise, heaueth
me up to heaven, so the doubt to be deceived thereof drives me down to hell.

And what ioyly fellow (says she) is this that promises so frankely, will
he not promise golden hills and perform durty dales? Would to god (says he)
your semely self were so well acquainted with him as I am, then would I make
you judge of the worthynesse of the thing he has promised, for that you know
the goodness thereof none better? The lady smellinge the drift of his devises,
and seeinge the end of his talk seemed to tend to love and that touching her
own self, thought not good to draw on their discourse any longer, but
concluded with this answer.

As I am altogether ignorant what your obscure talk means, so care I not to
be acquainted with any such companion as your Landlord is, for so methinkes
by you I may more fitly call him, then term him your tenant: and so departed
away into her lodginge: Germanicus likewise his Misteris being gone gat him to
his chamber to entertain his amarous conceits and being alone brake forth
into these words.

O friendly fortune if continually hereafter thou furiously frown upon me,
yet shall I all the days of my life count my self bound unto thee for the
only pleasure which this day thou have done me, in giuinge me occasion of
talk with her, whose angels voice made such heavenly harmony to my heavy
heart, that where before it was plunged in perplexity, it is now placed in
felicity, and where before it was oppressed with care, it is now refreshed
with comfort. Yea every lovely looks of her is able to cure me if I were in
most deep distres of most dangerous disease, every sweet word proceeding
from her sugared lips, is of force to fetch me from death to life. But alas how
true do I try that saying, that every commodity has a discommodity annexed
unto it, how does the remembrance of this joy, put me in mind of the annoy
which the loss of this delight will procure me? Yea it makes all my senses
shake to think, that some other shall enjoy her more worthy of her then my
self: and yet who in this court, nay in all Christendom, nay in the whole
world is worthy of her? No if she never have any until she have one worthy
of her every way, she shall never have any. And shall I then being but a
poor gentleman seek to insinuate my self in place so high? Shall I by my
rude attempt purchase at least the displeasure of her friends and parents,
and perchance hers also, whom to displease would be no less displeasant unto
me then death? Alas and must love needs be rewarded with hate? Must curtesy
needs be counteruayled with cruelty? Must goodwil needs be returned with
displeasure? Is it possible y^ bounti should not abide where beuty does abou^d,
and that curtesy should not accompany her comeliness? Yes I am sure at the
least she will suffer me to love her, though her young years and high estate
will not suffer her to love me: and though she will not accept me for
husband, yet I am sure she will not reiecte me for servant: and though she
will not receive my service, yet I doubt not but she will courteously take the
tendringe thereof unto her. And touching her parents displeasure, what care I
to procure the ill will of the whole world, so I may purchase her good will.
Yea if I should spend the most precious blood in my body in the pursuit of so
pereles a piece, I would count it as welbestowed as if it were shed in the
quarrel of god my prince or country. For she is the goddess whom I will
honor with devotion, she is the prince whom I will obey with duty, she is
the country in whose cause and quarrel I will spend life, living, and all that
I have. Neither is there mutch cause why her friends should storm much at the
matter, for though my lands and revenues are not great, yet am I of y^ blood
royal, and nere kinsman to the emperor, who will not suffer me to want any thing
pertaining to my estate and degree. Why Alerane, a youth like my self,
practiced the mighty emperor Otho his daughter and darling Adalesia, stole
her away and married her, and do I stick to attempt the like with one of far
meaner estate, though of far more worthiness? And though frowning fortune
tossed him for a while in y^ tempestious seas of aduersiti, yet at ye length he
arrived at the haven of happy estate, and was reconciled to the good grace and
favor of the Emperor again. And though at the first my ship be shaken with
angry blastes, yet in time I doubt not but to be safely landed on the shore,
and have my share of that which the showers of shroad fortune shall keep me
from. He is not worthy to suck the sweet who has not first sauored the
sower. And as the beauty of a fair woman being placed by a foul, blaseth
more brightly, so each joy is made more pleasant by first tasting some sower
sops of sorrow. Did not the peril which Leander ventred in the sea, and the
pain which he took in swimming, make his arrival to the haven of his
heavenly Hero more happy and pleasant? Yes no doubt of it, for besides the
feelinge of the present pleasure, the rememberance of the peril past
delights. Beesides that by how mutch more a man hazardeth him self for his
misteris sake, by so mutch the more he manifests the constancy of his love,
and meriteth meede at her hands the more woorthily. This saying also is no
less tried then true that fortune ever favors the valiant, and things the
more hard the more haughty, high, and heavenly: neither is any thing hard to
be accomplished by him which hardily enterpriseth it.

With these and such like sayings incouraginge him self, he purposed to
pursue his purpose, and failed not daily to attend upon his Misteris withal
duty and diligence and sought all occasions he could to let her understand
his loyal love and great good will toward her, which she perceiving
disdayned not acknowledge by her amiable and curtuous countinaunce toward him,
wherewith he held himself as well satisfied as if he had been made Monarche
of the whole world. And though he were often determined in words to present
his suit unto her, yet when it came to the point he should have spoken, fear
of offending her altogether disappointed his purpose, and made him mute in the
matter he minded to utter, but at length perceiving that delay bred danger, for
that she had many other suitors, and feeling by experience, that as fire the
more it is kept down, the more it flameth up, so love the more he sought to
suppress him, the more fiery forces he expressed within him, he began to set
fear aside and to force a supplye of courage in his faint heart, and seeing
his Misteris sit in the presence alone, he entered into reasoning with her in
this manner.

Madame for that I see you without company I am the bolder to presume to preace
in place, whereof though I be altogether unworthy, yet am I altogether willing
to supplye it, and if my company may content you as well as your sight
satisfies me, I doubt not but you will accept it in good part: and so mutch
the less I hope my company shall be combersome unto you, for that you are busied
about nothing whereto my presence may be prejudicial. And verily when I
consider the common cource of life which your sweet self, and other maids of
your estate lead, methinkes it is altogether like the spendinge of your time
at this present, which is with your leave be it spoken, idly, vnfruitefully
without pleasure or profit, and if my credit were such with you to crave
credit for that which I shall speak, I would not doubt but to persuade you to
another trade of life more commendable in the world, more honorable amongst
all men, and more acceptable in the sight of god. For believe me I pity
nothing more then virgins vain piety, who think they merit meede for living
chastely, when in deed they deserve blame for spending their time wastly.

Sir (says she) as your company ^ontenteth me well enough, so your talk
likes me but a little, for though I must confess I sit at this present
without dooinge any thing, yet in my fancy it is better to be idle, then ill
employed, as your self are now in reprehendinge that state of life, which
excels all other as far as the sun both a star, or light darkness, and
wherein I mean for my part to pass the pilgrimage of this my short life, if
either god dispose me not, or my friends force me not to the contrary.

God forbid (Madame says he) you should continue your time in any such
trifling trade of life, which indeed is to be counted no life at all, as the
Grecian Ladies most truly testyfie, who (as Homer reports) count their age
from the time of their marriage, not from the day of their birth: and if they
be demanded how old they be, they begin to reckon from their marriage and so
answer accordingly. For then only (say they) we begin to live, when we have a
house to govern, and may command over our children and servants.

Tush (says the Lady) this is but the sentence and proper opinion of one
peculyer people, who perchance by the nature of their country, or otherwise
are more desierus of husbands then other, neither is it any more reason that we
should be tied to their example, the^ they be bound to follow our virgin
Vestals or other, who consume the whole course of their life without
contaminating their corpse with the company of men. Nay rather (says he)
without receiuyng their perfection from men, according to the opinion of
Aristotle. But Madame I did not produce that example as necessary for all to
follow, but as probable to prove and show, what course a count they made of
virginity, which you so highly esteem of. But to leave particular opinions,
and come to general constitutions and customs, I mean both natural, human
and divine laws, and you shall see them all to make against you. And first if
you consider natures laws, which in the doings of creatures without reason
are plainly set down you shall see no living wight in the universal world,
but that so soon as by age they are apt thereto, apply themselves to that life
whereby their kind may be conserved and number increased. Behold the high
flyinge Faulcon which soareth so high in the air that a man would think she
would stoop to neither Lure nor lust, yet she is no sooner an entermuer or at
the fardest a white Hawk, but that of her own accord she comes to the
call of the tassell gentle her make. Likewise the Do which s^ingeth so freely
about the wooddes as though she made no account of the male, yet she is no
sooner a sores sister, but that she seeks the society of the bucke. Yea if it
would please your seemly self to enter into the consideration of your own
nature, or if your curtesy would accounte me worthy to have the examination of
your secret thoughts, I doubt not but you would confess your self to ^lee a
fiery force of that natural inclination which is in other creatures, which
being so you must grant to deal unnatural in resisting that natural motion
which cannot be ill or idle, because nature has planted it in you: for God
and nature do nothing vainly or vily. And in that some do amiss in
rebellinge against nature, their own scrupulous niceness is the cause, when
they will lay on them selves heavier burdens then they are able to bear, and
refuse to bear those burdens which nature has appointed them to bear:
which are but light.

What talk you sir (says she) so mutch of nature and of creatures without
reason, as though we ought to follow either the instinct of the one, either
the example of the other. I have been always taught that reason is the rule to
direct our dooinges by, and that we ought to lay before us the actions of
creatures endued with reason to follow and imitate. For if you stick so
strictly to the example of reasonles creatures, you should use the company of
women but once or twice at the most in the year, as most of them do, with
their females, whereto I am sure you would be loath to be tied.

Madame (says he) a gentlewoman of this city has answered this obiction
already for me. Why then (says she) will you condemn their doings in some
poinctes, and place them for paternes to be practiced by in othersome?

Yea why not (says he) otherwise you might generally take exception against
the example of men, for that some men in some matters do amiss. The good ever
is to be used, and the ill refused. But to come to the doings of men which
you seem to desire, does not every man so soon as his daughter is arrived to
ripe years, travel to bestow her in marriage, whereby she may enjoy the fruits
of love, and participate with the pleasures incident to that estate: whereby
they plainly show that the cause why they begot them with pleasure, and bring
them up with pain, is to have them enter into that trade of life, wherein not
only themselves may live happily abounding in all pleasure, but also by the
fertile fruit of their body, make their mortal parents immortal: that when
they with age shall be wasted and withered away the seed of their seed may
begin greenely to grow and flowrishingly to spring, to the great comfort of
both the father and daughter. For what pleasure the graundfather takes in the
sportinge pastime of his proper daughters pretty children, I think you partly
understand, and what delight the mother takes in the toys of her little son,
you soon shall perfectly perceive, if it please you friendly to follow the
friendly counsel which I frankely preach unto you. For do you think if
virginity were of such virtue, that parents would not rather pain them
selves to keep their dear daughters modest maids, then strain them selves
and their substance to join them in Iunos sacred bond? Yes persuade your
sweet self if your mother were so persuaded she would rather lock you up
close in her closet, then suffer any to enjoy the sovereign sight of your
beuty, or once aspire to your speech whereby you might be persuaded to some
other kind of life. But she experienced by years knows best what is best
for your behouse and would you should follow her example and make no
conscience to loose that which she her self has lost, which except she had
lost we had lost so rare a Jewel as your seemly self are, with what a loss
it had been to my self I dare not say lest you count verity vanity, and truth
trifling and flattery. But to our purpose, you perceive as I said your parents
pleased with the access of gentlemen unto you, whereby you may conceive their
mind is you should accept such service as they profer, and partake with those
pleasures which they prefer unto you.

Why sir (says she) you altogether mistake the meaning of men in this matter,
for when fathers tender marriages to their daughters, it is not for any mind
they have to have them married, but only for fear least they should fall to
folly otherwise, for knowing the fickle frailenesse of youth, and our
procliuyty to prauity and wickedness, they provide us marriages to prevent
mischiefs: and seeinge of evils the least is to be chosen, they count marriage
a less evil then lightness of our life and beehauiour.

Alas good Madame (says he) why do you so mutch profane the holy state of
wedlock, as to count it in y^ number of evils, whereas the gods themselves
have entered into that state, where as Princes pleasantly pass their time
therein, whereas by it only mankind is preserved, and amity and love amongst
men conserved, of the worthiness whereof I am not worthy to open my lips.

Sir (says she) I speak it not of my self, but according to the opinion of
the most wise and learned Philosophers that ever lived, amongst whom one
Aminius so mutche misliked of Marriage, that being demanded why he would not
marry, answered, because there were so many inconveniences incident to that
estate, that the least of them is able to slay a thousand men.

Why Madame (says he) you must consider there is nothing in this mortal life
so absolutely good and perfect but that there be inconveniences as well, as
commodities incurred thereby: by that reason you may take the S^une out of the
world for that it parcheth the summers green, and blasteth away the beutie of
those that blaze their face therein. But to leave natural and human laws and
come to the divine precepts proceedyng from Gods own mouth: does not God say
it is not good for man to live alone, and therefore made Eve for an helper and
comforter? Likewise in diverse places of Scripture he does not only commend
Marriage to us, saying, Marriage and the bed undefiled are honorable, but also
commands us to it, saying: you shall forsake Father and Mother and follow
your wives.

Why sir (says she) and does not God say it is good for man not to touch a
woman, and if thou be unmarried remain so. But why allege you not this
text, it is better to marry then to burn, whereby is plainly showed that
Marriage is but a mean to medicine the burning in concupiscence and lust, and
as I said before of two evils the least, and therefore preferred. But because
we be entered into divine mysteries, I could refer you to a place of
scripture, where it is reported that in Heaven Uirgins cheeifly serve God and
set forth his glory. And Mahamet the great Turk (who was in heaven) says he
saw there Uirgins, who if they issued forth of Heaven would lighten the whole
world with their brightness, and if they chanced to spit into the sea, they
would make the whole water as sweet as Honey, but here is no mention of married
folk.

Belike (says he) those Uyrgins be like your self, and then no marvel
though God be delighted with the sight of them, which perchance is the cause
he has them in Heaven to attend upon him, as first Heue and after Ganymedes
did upon Jupiter. But generally of women the scripture says that by bringinge
forth of children they shall be saved and enjoy a place in heaven, which must
be by marriage if honestly. But because I am persuaded that it is only for
argument sake that you disalow marriage, and that you pretend otherwise in words
then you intend to do in works, I am content to give you the honor of the
field, and thus far to yield my consent to your opinion, that virginity
considered of it own nature simply without circumstance is better then
Matrimony, but because the one is full of peril, the other full of pleasure,
the one full of iepardy, the other full of security, the one as rare as the
black swan, the other as common as the black crow, of good things I think
the more common the more commendable.

If (says she) I have gotten any conquest hereby I am to thank mine own
cause not your curtesy who yield when you are able to stand no longer in
defense.

Nay Madame say not so (says he) for in that very yelding to your opinion, I
proved marriage better then virginity for that is more common: neither would I
have you turn my scilence in this matter, into lack of science and knowledge,
or reprehend me if I spare to enforce further proof in a matter sufficiently
proved already, no more then you would rebuke a Spanniel which cease to hunt
when he sees the Hawk seized on the Partridge. But you may marvel madame
what is the cause that makes me persuade you thus earnestly to marriage, which
as mine own unworthiness wills me to hide, so your incomparable curtesy
incourageth me to disclose, which makes me think that it is no small cause
which can make you greatly offended with him who bears you great goodwil,
and that what suit soever I shall prefer unto you, you will either grant it or
forgive it, pardon it or pity it. Therefore may it please you to understand y^
since not long since I took large view of your virtue and beauty, my heart has
been so inflamed with the bright beams thereof, that nothing is able to
quench it, but the water which flows from the fountain that first infected
me, and if pity may so mutch prevail with you as to accept me, I dare not
say for your husband, but for your slave and servant, assure your self there
shall no doubt of danger drive me from my duty toward you, neither shall
any Lady whatsoever have more cause to rejoice in the choice of her servant
then your self shall, for that I shall account my life no longer pleasant
unto me then it shall be employed in your service.

Agrippina dying her lily cheeks with Vermilion red, and castinge her eyes on
the ground gave him this answer.

As I am to yield you thanks for your goodwill, so am I not to yield consent
to your request, for that I neither mind to marry, neither think my self
worthy to retain any such servant: but if I were dispoled to receive you any
way, I think the best manner mean enough for your worthynesse.

Immediately here upon there came company unto them which made them brake of
their talk, and Agrippina being got into her chamber began to think on the
suit made unto her by Germanicus, and by this time Cupid had so cunningly
carved and ingraued the Idol of his person and beehauiour in her heart, that
she thought him worthy of a far more worthy wife then her self: and
perswadinge her self hy his words and looks that his love was loyal
without lust, true without triflinge, and faithful without faygninge, she
determined to accept it if her parents would give their consent thereto. Now
Germanicus nothing dismayed with her former denial for that it had a courteous
close, so soon as opportunity served, set on her again in this sort.

Now Madame you have considered my case at leisure I trust it will stand with
your good pleasure to make me a more comfortable answer.

I beeseech you sir (says she) to rest satisfied with my former answer, for
other as yet I am not able to make you.

Alas Madame (says he) the extremity of my passion will not suffer long
prolonginge of compassion, wherefore I humbly beseech you presently to pass
your sentence either of bale or bliss, of salvation or damnation, of life or
death: for if the heavens have conspired my confusion, and that you mean
rigorously to reiecte my good will, I mean not long to remain alive to
trouble you with any tedious suit, for I account it as good reason to honor
you with the sacrifice of my death, as I have thought it convenient to bestow
upon you the service of my life.

Alas sir (says she) this jesting is nothing joyful unto me, and I pray you
use no more of it for the rememberaunce of that which you speak of in sport,
makes me seele the force thereof in good ernest: for a thousand deaths at once
can not be so dreadful unto me, as once to think I should live to procure
the death of any such as you are.

If says he you count my words sport, jest and daliance, assure your self
it is sport without pleasure, ieste without joy, and daliance without delight,
as tract of time shall shortly try for true. But if you love not to hear of my
death, why like you not to give me life, which you may do only by the consent
of your good will.

Why sir (says she) you know my consent consists not in my self but in my
parents to whom I owe both awe and honor: therefore it be hooueth you first to
seek their consent.

Why Madame (says he) shall I make more account of the meaner parts then of
the head, you are the head and chief in this choice, and therefore let me
receive one good word of your good will, and then let heaven and earth do
their woorst. It is not the coin, countenance, or credit of your parents
that I pursue for to win, such wealth as your good will. I could be content
to lead a poor life all the days of my life, so that you be maintained
according to your will and worthiness.

Well (says she) seeing I am the only mark you shoot at, assay by all the
means you may to get my freindes good will, and if you level any thing
strait you shall not miss me.

Germanicus upon this procured the Emperors letters to her father in his
beehalfe, who having perused those letters said he trusted the Emperor would
give him leave to dispose of his own according to his own pleasure, and that
his daughter was to nere and dear unto him, to see her cast away upon one, who
for lack of years wanted wisdom to govern her, and for lack of lands,
living to maintain her: and calling his daughter before him, he beegan to
expostulate with her in this sort.

Daughter, I ever here tofore thought you would have been a solace and comfort
to my old years, and the prolonger of my life, but now I se you will increase
my hoarie hears and be the hastner of my death. Does the tender care, the
careful charge, and chargeable cost which I have ever used in bringyng you up
deserve this at your hands that you should pass a grant of your goodwill in
marriage without my consent? Is the piety toward your parents, and the duty
of a daughter toward her father so utterly forgotten, that you will prefer
the love of an unthrift before my displeasure, and to please him care not to
displease your parents, who travail to bestow you with one worthy your estate
and ours? No never think Germanicus shall enjoy you with my goodwill, nor
never take me for your father if you grant him your goodwill.

Agrippina hearing this cruel conclusion of her father, with bashful
countenance and trembling tongue, framed her answer in this form.

I beeseeche you good father not to think me so graceless a child as once to
think, mutchlesse to do any thing which may heap your heaviness or hasten
your death, the least of which two, would be more bitter unto me then death.
For if it please you to understand, I have not granted my good will to any,
unless your consent be gotten thereto. Neither have I, as you say, preferred
the love of an unthrift before your displeasure, but as I cannot let that
noble gentleman Germanicus to love me, so can I not, to confess the truth,
but love him: mary in heart only, for my body as you gave it me so shall you
dispose of it: and as I faithfully promise you by the love which of duty I owe
you, that I will never have any to husband without your good will, so I humbly
beeseeche you for the affection which by nature you bear me, that you will
never force me to any without my good will.

For if for the transitory life you have given me, you make me pay so derely
as to be linked with one against my likyng, I must needs count it a hard
pennyworthe, and well may I wish that I had never been borne. I beeseche you
sir consider the inconveniences always incident to those marriages, where
there is more respect of money then of the man, of honors then of honesty, of
goods then of good will of the parties each to other.

What strife, what iarres, what debate at bed and at bourd, at home and
abroad, about this about that, never quietness with contentation, never
merry countenance without counterfaityng, never loving deeds without
dissemblyng. And whence but from this rotten root springs so many dishonest
women, so many ill living men? Is it not the lothyng of never liked lips that
makes women stray from their husbands to strangers? And is it not either the
difference of years, either y^ diversity of manners, or disagreement of
natures, that makes the husband forsake his wife and follow other women? And
where are any of these differences or in equalities beetween the married, but
where the force of friends not liberty of love linketh them together? These
things by your wisdom considered, I trust as you restrain me from one whom
I love, so you will not constrain me to any whom I love not. In so doing
doubt you not but you shall find in me modesty meet for a maid, virtue fit
for a virgin, duty meet for a daughter, obedience fit for a child. Her father
having mildly heard her modest talk, told her he meant not to force her to
any, but would provide her a husband whom he doubted not should like her
better every way then Germanicus did, and therefore willed her to put out of her
mind the likeinge she had conceived of him, and so gave her leave to depart.
And being in her chamber she began to devise all the means she could to
root out of her heart the love she bare Germanicus: and as soon revoked to her
memory his lack of living his little countenance and credit, as soon her
fathers displeasure, and her own preferment, with many other discommodities
arising that way. But nothing prevailed, for as the bird caught in lime, or
conny in hay, or dear in toil, the more they strine the faster they stick,
so y^ more diligently she labored to get out of the Labyrinth of love the
more doubtfully was she intricated therein. And as one climbing on high his
feet failing and he in danger to fall, more firmly fasteneth his hold then
he did before: so love seeinge him self ready to be dislodged out of her
breast, took such sure hold and fortified him self so strongly within her,
that no force was of force to fetch him from thence. Which the good
gentlewoman perceiuinge thought best for her ease and quiet to yield to the
sommonce of love to be disposed at his pleasure. Wherein no doubt she had
reason, for as the swifte runninge stream if it be not stopped runs
smoothly away with out noise, but if there be any dam or lock made to stay
the course thereof, it rages and roareth and swells above the banks, so love
if we obey his lore and yield unto his might deals gently with us and
reigns over us like a louinge Lord, but if we withstand his force and
seek to stay the passage of his power, he rages over us like a cruel
tiraunt. Which this gentle woman as I said perceiuinge, without any more
resistance determined in her heart to love Germanicus only and ever.

Now Germanicus notwithstanding the angry looks of the father, the frowninge
face of the mother, and the strange counterfayte countenance of the daughter,
followed his suit so effectually, used such apt persuasions to the maid, and
in short time insinuated himself so far into her familiarity, that her
parents lowred not so fast, but she allured as fast, and thought she
received no other contentation in the whole world but in his company: which
her parents perceiuinge, and besides dreadinge the Emperors displeasure,
thought as good by their consent to let them go together, as by severity to
keep them a sunder whom the gods seemed to join together. And so mutch the
rather they were induced thereto, for that they saw their daughter so affected
to Germanicus, that the hearing of any other husband was hateful and
hurtful unto her. And hereupon the marriage was concluded and consummated: and
to this bargain only the fancy of Germanicus forced him, now see whither his
ambicious desire drove him: for being in proper possession of his proper wife,
he was not able to maintain her according as his princely mind desired, for y^
his own living was little, and her parents would not part with mutch, because
she had matched her self not any thing to their mind: where upon in hope of
preferment and aduauncing his estate, he applied him self diligently to the
Emperors service, and in short time with valiant exploytes atchiued in war,
and great wisdom and discretion showed in time of peace, he won such
credit with the Emperor, that he held him most dear unto him, and caused
him to be proclaimed heir apparent to his crown and Empire. With which news
Germanicus congratulated his new married wife in this sort.

It is not unknown unto me (dear wife) that for my sake you have somewhat
sustained the ill will and displeasure of your friends and parents, it is not
unknown likewise to you that for your sake I have sustained some labor in
seeking our preferment and getting the Emperors good will who only may prefer
us: now as the one has made your life less pleasant then I desire or you
deserve, so the other shall advance our state so high, as your self can wish,
or I be able to wield: so y^ the commodities of the one, shall counteruaile the
inconveniences of the other. For you shall understand that the Emperor does
not only for the present time provide for me as if I were his own child, but
also for the time to come has proclaimed m^e sole heir to his Diadem and
realm. Which estate as I never sought so mutch as in thought for my self,
knowing me to be altogether unworthy of it, so I think my self most happy
to have aspired thereto, only for your sake whom I know worthy of all the
honor in the world. For as it would have been a hell and horror to my heart to
have seen you live in meaner calling then you are worthy of, so will it be
a heavenly mirth to my mind to see you a prince in state as well as in stature
beauty and virtue.

Master Germanicus (says she) I promise you by the love which I bear you,
for greater bond I have not to confirm my words by, that it does me more
good to see you thus pleasantly disposed then to here y^ news which you have
imparted unto me, for the one I am sure cannot hurt you, but what harm the
other may procure you I fear to think and faint to say. Alas my Germanicus
are you to know the perils which princely stat brings, the falsehood in
friends, the treason in nobilyty, the rebellion in comminalty, the envy of the
weak, the injury of the strong. Besides you see boystrous winds do most of
all shake the highest towers, the higher the place is the sooner and sorer is
the fall, the tree is ever weakest toward the top, in greatest charge are
greatest cares, in largest seas are sorest tempests, envy always shoots at
high marks, and a kingdom is more easyly gotten then kept. For to get is the
gift of fortune, but to keep is the power of prudency and wisdom, especially
where there be many that catch for it, yea and when a man shall have no
faithful friends in saving it. For Ennius says flatly, there is no freendly
or faithful dealinge to be looked for at any man's hands, in matters
pertayninge to a kingdom: and Euripides makes it in a manner lawful for a
kingdoms sake to transgress the limittes of law, nature, and honesty. Which
opinions I may justify by many examples, as of Numitor and Amulius etc. who
though they were natural brethren, yet Amulius beeinge the younger deposed
his elder brother from the kingdom of Rome, s^ue his sons and made his
daughters virgin Vestales that they might not marry and have issue male to
succeed the crown: likewise of Romulus and Remus who being brethren borne
at one birth, yet because Remus should enjoy no part of the kingdom, Romulus
found means to make him away. The like is reported of Eteocles and Polinices,
of Iugurth toward Hyempsal and Adherball: all which were brethren and by
natures laws most nearly linked together. But of others that by blood have
not been so near, which in cases of kingdoms have dealt far worse, the
examples are in strangeness wonderful, in number infinite, and in success so
sorrowful, that it makes me cold at heart to consider of it. I spoke not this
my Germanicus to forespeake you, you may enjoy the Empire quietly, and so I
trust you shall, but I know not what the matter is, methinkes my mind gives
me some mischief will ensue thereof. Alas (good husband) was it for my sake
you sought the Empire? Do you think I can not be content with the estate which
fortune shall assign to you? Yes if it were to beg my bread from door to door
as Adalesia did with her Alerane, I could be contented therewith, so you were
not tormented therewith? It is you (sweet husband) that are the riches which
I seek to possess, you are the only honors which I look for, you are the
only kingdom which I care for, for so long as I may enjoy you, come poverty,
come mean estate, come sickness, yea come death it self so I may die between
your arms. Therefore (good Master Germanicus) if you follow my counsel,
resign your title to the Emperor again to bestow on some that has more
need of it then (thanks be given to god) we have: for for my part I think
my self endued with the greatest riches in the world, to wit your person and
mine own contented mind. And beesides the evils before rehearsed incident to
a kingdom this inconvenience is commonly incurred thereby, that it alters the
nature of the person which takes that name upon him, for honors chaung
manners, and no doubt the diversity of delights which a prince possesses be
but pricks to pleasure, inticementes to folly, and allurementes to lust. Was
not Saull (I pray you) in the beginning of his reign a good prince, but after
declined to impiety? Solomon beegan his reign godly, but afterward gave him
self in pray to women. Caligula, Nero and Hannibal beegan to reign like good
princes, but after the whole world was troubled with their tyranny. I could
aledge infinite other examples to like purpose, but these shall suffice, neither
do I allege these, for that I fear y^ change of your good nature, but to
fear you from the change of your estate: and yet the better I know your
nature to be, the more cause have I to fear the alteration thereof. For
freshest colors soonest fade, and ripest fruit are rifest rotten. But to leave
the louringe lottes which light on high estate, which are more then I am able
to rehearse, let this request take place with you, that seeinge for my sake
only you coueted the empire, at my suit only you will forgo it again.

Ah (sweet wife says he) embracing her in his arms, what is it under the
Sun which you may not command me to do without desiryng? But I beeseche
you suffer not the tender care you have of me, to deprive you of the honor
due to you? For to cast the worste of it, though open enemies or treacherous
traitors, or rude rebels shall set me beesides my regal seat, and deprive
me of life, yet shall you remain a princess, and be matched again with some
other more worthy your estate, and so long I care not what beetide of my self.

Alas (sir says she) I be seeche you use no more of those words, unless
you count my great grief your great good. Can I live when you are dead, shall I
be married again and you made away? In deed (says he) I need not use such
extreme doubts in a matter nothing dangerous for the numbers are infinite of
those who have wielded far more weighty empires then this without hazarding
them selves any way, as the Emperor Octauian has consumed the whole course of
his life without peril, and Alexander being but five and thirty years of
age took upon him the Monarchy of the whole world. Besides if I should now
refuse the Empire offered me, it were a sign of a base and ignoble mind, and
the Emperor would think I made no account of his good will. Well says she
do as God shall put in your head, and of me make this account, that though you
be the meanest man in the city yet will I honor you as if you were the
Emperor: and though you make me a Princess, yet will I be as obedient to
you as if I were your hired hand maid. Ah good wife (says he) leave those
terms of humility to those y^ like them, or look for them, for for my part I
have you in such reverent estimation, y^ I think the best state which ever I
shall be able to bring you to will be to base for your worthiness, and if it shall
please you to rest satisfied with the service I can do you, to remain content
with the calling I can give you, to return lovingly the good will which I will
bear you* it is all that ever I will look for at your hands, and the only
felicity I force of in this life.

God forbid (master Germanicus says she) that I should either look for
service of you, or mislyke the lot which you shall allow me, or not restore
with interest the good will which you shall bear me. Yes persuade your self
this, though you surmount me in all other things, yet will I not fail, if it
be possible, to exceed you in good will. Shortly upon this the whirlyng wheel
of Fortune turned their talk to tears, their words to waylyng, their
gladness to sadness, their happiness to heaviness, yea their life to death.
For a certain thirst of the kingdom, began to assault one Tiberius a
Gentleman in the Emperors court, who being of the blood royal, persuaded her
self if Germanicus were made away, the Emperor being dead, he should
succeed in the Empire. Which greedy desire of the kingdom so blinded his
understanding, that he passed not to pervert both human and divine laws for
the accomplishyng thereof, no rules of reason, no bond of freendship, no care
of kynred, no fear of laws, no pricks of conscience, no respect of honesty,
no regard of gods or men could prohibit him from his pestiferous purpose. For
if freendship had been of force with him, why they were familier friends. If
kindred, why they were nere kinsmen. If laws, he knew his deed contrary to
all laws. If conscience, he knew it terrible. If honesty, he knew it most
wicked. If gods or men, he knew it abominable in the sight of both the one
and the other. But too true it is, desire of a kingdom cares neither for kith
nor kin, friend nor foe, God nor the devil, as by this traiterous Tyrant may
be plainly proved, who by poison procured the death of this worthy Gentleman
Germanicus, to the intent to inioye the kingdom of Rome. Now Agrippina seeing
her sweet husband so suddenly dead, was surprised with such sudden sorrow, y^
for a long time she could neither speak word, neither let fall tear, but at
length she cast her self upon the corpse of her Germanicus, kissyng his cold
cheeks, and embracing his breathless body, sighyng and sobbyng forth these
words.

Alas wretched wight that I am, whose misery is like to mine, whose grief so
great, whose life so loathsome? no flowing tears, no griping groans, no
careful cries, no throbbing sighs can sufficiently set forth my sorrows. My
life my love, my hope my husband, my joy my Germanicus is miserably murdered
and made away. Ah vain desire of wordly dignity, ah devilish deed of blouddy
cruelty. But in vain it is to complain, when my care is without cure, and
none can redress my wrong. For gods I know there are none, otherwise I
know the good should not be so made away by the ill: and men there are none
that can medicine my malady, and raise my Germanicus to life again: so that
nothing rests for me but by death to be rid of the most bitter panges of
death. I could prolong my life and seek by some means to hasten the death of
that tirant Tiberius, but alas his death can not bring Germanicus to life, no
let him live still on earth where I doubt not but he shall ten thousand times
in his time, feel the force of death. For he wilbee so tormented with his
own example, that (as the poets report of Suspicion) to be plonged in all the
pits of hell will not be so painful unto him. Well the gods (if there be
any) give him as he has deserved, and give me leave to go to the ghost of my
Germanicus. Here upon she resolved with her self, that as her husband indeed
his life by receiving into his body that which he should not, so she would
end her days by not receiuinge that which she should, and so defrauding her
self of food, distillinge her self as it were into tears, pitifully pined
away. And when the Emperor Octauian caused meat to be thrust in her throat,
she cast it up again saying, sorrow was the only sustinance, and moan the
meat which she either could or would take, and so in short time died.

I shall not need here (gentlewoman) to exhort you to take the death of your
husbands when you shall be married, and when it shall happen more patiently, for
that I know your wisdoms to be such that you will not so wilfully work
your own confusions, neither do I think you are to know that we must live by
the living not by the dead, and that there has been never any one husband so
good, but there may be others found as good: yea and though they be not
perfectly so good, yet in respect of chaung which most women delight in, they
are commonly counted better: as your selves if you were once married perchance
would say, or at least think. But I think this needful to put you in
mind, that by the example of Agrippina you counsel your husbands to content
themselves with their calling not to soar to high, and stie above their
seat, and with foolish Phaeton and youthful Icarus come to confusion. It is
your parts also to way your husbands wealth, and not to deck your heads and
necks with gold when he has none in his purse, not to swim in silks when
he is drowned in debt, not to abound in bravery when he is pinched with
poverty. For you know it is your part to take such part as he does, whither
it be poverty or riches, woe or wealth, pleasure or pain. But surely in my
fancy that man is to be begged for a fool who will prefer his wives pleasure
before his own and her profit, her will before his own wealth, her vanity
before his own ability. And as it is great inciuilyty and churlishuesse in a
man to deny his wife any thing which is reasonable, so is it great imbecility
and childishness to grant her any thing which is unreasonable, and hereof
comes the utter undoing of a great number of young gentlemen. And as it is
wise and louinge carfulness to provide well for ones wife, so is it fond and
doatinge curiousness to seek and provide better for her then be would do for
himself, whereof came the confusion of this noble Gentleman Germanicus.

Amphiaraus and Eriphile.
AMPHIARAVS a Gentleman Argiue, sueth for marriage to Eriphile a widow, either
likyng others possessions better then persons. Infortunio, burning in fond
affection toward the same trull, seeing Amphiaraus land preferred before his
loyalty, is at poynct to destroy himself. Amphiaraus hidyng himself to escape
from the wars, is betraide by Eriphile for couetice of reward: and setting
foot within the Theban soil, the earth opens and swaloweth him up. Eriphile
eftsoons a widow, profereth her love to her old suter Infortunio, by whom
being repulsed, in choler she consumes away and dies.

THe aunciet Ppilosophers are of this mind, that there is nothing that does
more argue and show a base mind, then covetous desire of coin and riches,
and nothing more sign of a noble heart, then not to desire wealth if one want
it, and liberally to bestow it, if he have it. But I am of this mind, that
nothing does more argue a mad mind, then to desire goods which never did
good, but which have been always the cause of all our calamities. What a world
of men has desire of wealth wasted in war? What huge heaps has it drowned in
the Sea? What infinite numbers has it caused Physicians to kill? How many has
it moved Lawiers to undo? How many has it driven Deuines to send to the
Devil? Of how many Murders, thefts, flaughters, parricides, patricides,
treasons, rebellions, periuries, forgeries, adultries, fornications, has it
been the cause? As Jupiter himself abused gold and pelf to abuse Danae that
virgin. But you will say though the desire of goods be detestable, yet the
possession is profitable. Whereto I pray you? to maintain us in bravery, in
gluttony, in venery, in security, in impunitie, in pride, in prodigality, yea
to bring us to perdition and destruction as king Midas wished that every
thing which he touched might be gold, whereby he was starued to death.

Fabritius an ancient Romain waighed wealth so little, that though he had been
Prince and Consul of Rome three or four times, yet at his death he had not so
mutch goods as might suffice to bring him honorably to his grave, but was feign
to be buried at the common charge of the city. But though the immoderate
desire of riches be to be reprehended, yet must I needs say that moderately
to account of them is not be misliked, for they are given us by God to pass
the pilgrimage of our life withal, and we may use them and yet not abuse them,
we may make of them and yet not make our Gods of them. And as by duly
desiryng and truly vsyng them, they convert to our commodity, so by greedy
couetinge and naughty consumyng them, they turn to our trouble, care, and
confusion: as partly before has been showed, and plainly here after by the
history following is proved, which is this.

In Greece amongst the people called Argiues dwelt one Amphiaraus, who being a
man of great possessions and wealth, heard of a Widow in the same country of
like living unto him self, her name was Eriphile, and her nature was such,
that she thought gain sweet how so ever she got it. It fortuned this
Gentleman to come to her house to see and assay her in the way of Marriage, and
not withstandyng he had more likyng to the living then will to the woman, yet
he labored his suit as ernestly, as if he had loved vehemently: and at
convenient time commenced his suit in this sort.

Gentlewoma^ I think it not needful to enter into terms in commendation of
marriage thereby to persuade you the sooner thereto, for that you know the dignity
thereof, and have already tasted the pleasures and commodities beelonginge to
the same: but this chiefelye lies me upon earnestly to persuade, and humbly
to request at your hands, that when it shall be your good pleasure to enter
into that life again, you will count me worthy (though altogether unworthy)
to serve you in steed of a steward to order and dispose your things as your
seemly self shall please to appointe, and to ease you of the trouble of
trauailinge in your own affairs: which I am sure for that you have not been
accustomed thereto, must needs mutch molest you. For it is not meet your
young years should be tied to any trouble or travail, but to pass your time
in pleasure according to your bringinge up and calling, and according to the
custom of your kind, and sex. And that you may not think my suit to proceed
of any desire to your goods, your self I think partly know and by little
inquiry may perfectly understand, that my lands and liuinges are sufficient
to maintain the port and countenance of a Gentleman of worship: all which I
willingly yield into your hands to be disposed at your pleasure, if it shall
please you to yield your body into my arms to be embraced at my pleasure: so
y^ in acceptinge my offer you shall not only increase your substance, but also
have a gentleman at your commandment, who shall make more account of you then
of all the goods in the world. His talk ended Eriphile smylinge made him this
smooth answer.

Sir, by how mutch more I know the inconveniences and infinite troubles mixed
with marriage, by so mutch less do I like to enter into that estate again. And
as I was once linked with one according to my liking, so look I not to be
placed again with any, in whom I can take such pleasure: And as by holy oath I
firmly bound my faith unto him, so in this mind I am in, only my death shall
dissolve that bond: and y^ sower remembrance of my sweet husbands death,
shall take away the renewinge of all pleasures of life, and altogether mortify
in me the mind to marry any more. For his love was so exceeding great
toward me, that I fear to find the like at your hands or any man's else.
For where you profess to be my steward and servant, I am sure if you were once
sure of that you seek for, you would think your self good enough to be my
Lord and master, and you would dispose my goods neither at my pleasure,
neither to my profit, but that which is mine should be yours and yours your
own. And where you pretend to prefer me before al worldly goods, I take it
rather for words of course then talk of troth, for as in the fairest rose is
soonest found a kanker, so in fairest speech is falsehood and faigning rifest.
For I know the fashion of you men is by your subtelty to deceive our
simplicity, and by a few filed words to bring us into a fools paradise. Yea
you have set it down as a settled sentence amongst you, that he which knows
not how to dissemble, knows not how to live. Therefore I yield no other faith
to your words then their faygned falshoode deserves, nor no other consent to
your request, then the small acquaintance you have with me, may justly crave.
But if hereafter in deeds I shall see as plain proof of perfect goodwill, as
your words import likelihood of ernest love, perchance I shall be as zealous
to cast liking toward you, as now I am ielous to cast doubts of you. By this
time dinner was served in, whereupon their talk ceased, and presently after
dinner the Gentleman had occasion to depart. Now Eriphile beeinge alone in her
own house, beegan to discourse upon this matter by her self, and
notwithstanding she had no great mind to the man, yet she felt in her self
a great lust to his lands, and thought her self more then happy if she might
have them safely assured and made over unto her: and in this thought, vttred
words to this sense.

Why what though I can not find in my heart to love and like him above all
other. Is it requisite that every marriage be grounded on love, as though we
see not daily some to marry in respect of riches, some in respect of honors,
some by constraint of freindes, and some upon sundri other considerations: and
for my part I count it sufficient to have married once of mere love* and
having lost him whom I did love entirely, I think it not lawful, or at least
not possible, ever to love any again heartily. For true love ever decays,
when the party truly beeloued dies. And as my heart is hardened to take his
death patiently, so will it not be mollified to suffer the love of any other
to sink therein deeply. Like as the potters clay being once hardened in the
Oven, will not be made soft again to receive the impression of any other
form. But to speak my fancy freely, I see not how we women are bound to love
our husbands so mutch, we are only commanded to honor and obey them, which
I count sufficient, and more then for my part I mean to perform. Besides
that love consists in the heart, now it is our bodies only that are bound to
our husbands as by joining of hands before the congregation is plainly
showed. But if I determine not to love him, how can I look for any love at his
hands? Tush that is the least matter amongst a hundred, so long as I may
abound in bravery, ruffle in riches, and participate with his goods, I care
not to communicate in love with him: I am to old now to live by love. And yet
wherefore is women's wit counted full of wyles, if I be not able so to
dissemble the matter that he may think I love him deeply, though I hate him
deadly. But if it should come to the woorst, that he should perceive my
dissembling toward him, and reward my cold kindness, with heat of hate,
why I know the worst of it.

So that all things considered I see not how I can do better then to accept
this gentleman's offer, whose large lands and revenues are able to supply al
other wants whatsoever. For what disease is so desperate which money may not
medicine? what wound so deadly which coin can not cure? What life so loathsome
which goods can not make gladsome? Shortly after this there made repair unto
her house* a youth more wilful then wise, named Infortunio, who having seen
her once or twice before, was so bleared with her beauty that it dazeled his
sight, and took away his foresight in all things: and coming to her presence
he proferred such lamentable suit, and ghostly resemblances unto her, that a
rigorous repulse seemed sufficient to procure him a present death. The
Gentlewoman seeing the furious assaults of this fresh water soldier, knew
how to train him to the field of her falsehood, and to make him march under
the ensign of a marciles Misteris and cruel captain: and sometimes fed him
with words of comfort, to put him in hope, and by and by feared him with
doubts of denial, to drive him into despair. And as the North East wind
first gathers up the clouds, and then by puffes puts them abroad again,
so she first by lovely looks allured to bring him in, and then with
frowninge face lowred to drive him away: the only end being to sport her self
in his pain, yea and if she could of his good will to make some gain. The
poor gentleman perceiuinge these haggard tricks, and that as soon she would
be well coming to the lure, and by and by check at it and soar away, was so
amazed there at that he knew not what to resolve upon. And as a tree hewn
round with axes ready to fall with a blow or twain* tottereth every way,
being uncertain which way to fall* so his mind distracted with doubtful
devises, wauered vnconstanly, now bending this way, now bowing that way,
willing to retire his desire, but not able to set his fancy free. And not with
standinge her perverse dealinge pitifully perplexed and terribly tormented him,
yet he persuaded himself that as from most sharp thorns, to wit the Rose
tree, spring most sweet flowers, so from bitter annoy would come pleasant
joy, and of his heavy suit happy success. Tush (says he) y^ Merchant often
sliceth the seas, though not sure to return with gain. The soldier often
ventreth his body in the field, though not sure of booty: the husband man still
tilleth the ground though not certain to save his seed: but yet hope of good
hap carries all these to their enterprises, and why should not the same hope
work the same effect with me? Yes nothing venture nothing have, I will pursue my
purpose whatsoever come of it.

Now the gentlewoman (as I said) ceased not to bayte him continually with
courtly banquets, as dissembled favor, uncertain hope, courteous congies,
amiable looks and such like: but he on the contrary as one that meant truly,
ceased not to feed her with fair words, with faithful promises, with ernest
oaths, with many a rich jewel and costly gift, which she willingly received
without condition, and wilyly kept with out restitution. In this mean while
came the other wooer again to renew his suit a fresh, and seeinge this young
Gentleman, as he thought in great favor, began greatly to fear his own
part, and thought the grass had been cut from under his feet: and as a
conning Pilot seeing the seas rough and the wind contrary to his course,
casts ancker least his ship be driven against the rocks, or into some coast
contrary to his mind: so this Gentleman fearinge least wilful waves in y^
gentlewoman, should set her fast in the sands of slipper subtelty, and dash his
suit against the rocks of repulse, hauld in the maine shete of her mind, and
by the anckers of advise so stayed her course, that no wind which my wilful
youth could blow, could cause her any thing to bow or waver: and by assuringe
her to a large ioynter he was chosen to rule her stern, where the other was
kept still under the hatches. Who all this while that they were concluding the
contracte, was in his chaumber busily deuisinge verses in the praise of his
Misteris: but hearing of the sorry success of his suit, by a handmaide of the
Gentlewoman, he was so confounded in him self, that his inuencion was clean
marred, and his devise utterly dashed: yea he was so far from writing that he
had not a word to say or a thought to think. And surely in my judgment he
reaped the right reward of his doatinge desire, for there only grafts of grief
must needs grow, where such raw conceit does set, and such rash consent
does sow. For neither was his love grounded upon virtue, wherewith she was
not endued, neither upon beauty wherewith she was not adorned. For neither can
cruelty be cloaked under virtue, neither the treason of untruth covered under
beuty (for the disposition of the mind follows the constitucion of the body)
so that it was his own self will and fond fancy that drew him into such
depth of affection, and therefore with grief was faigne to gather the fruits
of his folly. And being come to him self he began to rage in this sort.

And is my true love thus triflyngly accounted of? Shall he with his trash
more prevail then I with my truth? And will she more respect gain then good
will? O iniquity of times, O corruption of manners, O waueryng of women. Be
these the fruits of thy fair looks? Is this the hap of the hope thou put
me in? Is this the delight of the daliance thou use with me? Here in truly
thou may be fitly resembled to the Cat, which plays with the Mouse, whom
straight she means to slay: or to the Panther who with his gay colors and
sweet smell allureth other beasts unto him, and being within his reach he
rauenously deuoureth them. But if I should set thee forth in thy colors I
think the savage beasts would be loathe to be likened unto thee: for
cruelty thou may compare with Anaxarete, who suffered Iphis to hang himself
for her sake: for inconstancy with Cressed, who forsook her trusty Troylus:
for pride with Angelica who contemned all men: for treason with Helen, who ran
away with Paris from her husband Menelaue. But what rashness is this in me
to rage and rail against her, whereas it is love, and the destines that have
decreed my destruction. For Marriages are guided by destiny, and God has
endued women with this property, to be wedded to their wills: Neither does
love learn of force the knots to knit, she serves but those which feel sweet
fancies fit: for as streams can not be made to run against their course, so
unwilling love with tears nor truth cannot be won. So that this only choice
is left for me either to die desperately, or to live lothsomely: and as the
bird enclosed in cage, the cage doare being set open, and the Hawk her
ennemy sitting without, watching for her between death and prison piteously
oppressed stands in doubt whether it be better still to remain in prison, or
to go forth to be a pray for the hawk, so stand I in doubt whether it be
better by loosing life to get liberty, or by lyuinge to become thrall and bond,
and live in continual torment and vexation of mind. For love has taken so
deep root in me, that neither reason can rule, neither wisdom wield my
witched will. But as the bytinge of a mad dog rages and rankleth until it
have brought the body bitten to bane, so the poison of love is so spread into
every part of me that it will undoubtedly bring me to death and destruction.
O cruel captain cupid is this the pay thou give thy soldiers? O vain
Venus is this the victory thou vouchsafest thy champions? Would thou have
been content thy darlinge Adon should rigorously have rejected thee, when thou
were furiously inflamed with his love? But the parish priest forgets that
ever he was clarke, and those that be in happiness themselves way not the
heaviness of other. Yea perchance thou favor the falsehood of this woman the
rather, for that thou thy self playedst the false harlot with thy husband
Vulcan the smith, and made him a forked tool more then before he had in his
shop: but remember yet how he took thee and the adultrour Mars tardie in your
treachery and lechery together stark naked in an iron net, and then called
all the gods to take view of your victous conversation, to thy utter shame
and confusion. And so it may fall out that this your pupil may so long
delight in deceit, that she may be taken in the net which she lays to
entangle other. But what mean I to blaspheme against the gods who do but
punnish me justly, for loving so lightly and ouely mine own careless faut, is
the cause of this curelesse fate. Wherefore O death to thee I make ernest
request, that thou will speedily send Atropos unto me, to cut in sunder the
twyst of my troublesome life: and seeing my love does loath me, good death do
thou desire me. I know thou sentst out process for me even in my swath
cloutes, and now I beeseeche thee serve it on me, when I am most willinge and
ready to appear before thy presence. While this foreldrue gentleman continued
in these careful contemplations, the marriage was consummated between the
widow and Amphiaraus, who lived quietly together about a year or two, she
shewinge a presentiall obedience toward him, and he bearinge an ordinary
affection toward her: but in short time it pleased god to give occasion to
try the treachery of the one, and to work the destruction of the other. For it
fell so out that Adrastus king of y^ Argiues was upon urgent causes moved to
infer war upon the Thebanes, and in mustringe his men he thought Amphiaraus a
meet man to make one of his captains, and willed him to prepare him self for
that voyage, who being well seen in astronomy and other secret sciences, knew
if he went to the wars he should not return alive: for which cause he
covertly hid himself in his own house, making only his wife privy thereto.
Now the king taking muster of his men missed Amphiaraus, and knowing the
cause of his absence, was in great rage, saying he thought he had had no
such cowardes in his kingdom, and promised great rewards to them that could
bring tidings of him: Eriphile having intelligence of this rich reward
promised, was merueylously set on sier in the desire thereof: and
notwithstanding she was plentifully endued with riches, yet was she in desire
as greedy as if she had been in estate most needy: and as dropsy pacients drink
and still be dry, neither is any lycour able to alay their thurst, yea the
more they drink the more they desire it, so she continually heaped in wealth
and yet was never satisfied: yea the more she had the more she desired to have.
And being possessed with this loathsome lust of lucre she entered into reasoning
with her self in this sort. Who unless they be out of their wits will refuse
offered gold? no the savor of gain is sweet of what thing so ever it be
gotten. Why Tarp^ia a Roman maid did betray the Tower of Rome for a few
Bracelets to the Sabines that laid siege to ye city, and shall not I for
great Duches of Gold bewray my husband to the King, who means by his means
to preserve our city? for if it come to the worst, that he never come home
again, why I know the worst of it, two or three days weepinge will wash away
al woe and sorrow, and then shall I be Lady of his lands and lyuings, and be
married again to some that perchance shall better content me every way then
he does: and who is so foolish that will not be content to change for the
better? and in this good mind gat to the King, and told him, that preferring
the safety of his person, and the profit of the common wealth before her own
private pleasure, she was constrained to detect her loyal mate unto his royal
majesty (which her deed she humbly desired him to conceal) and not
withstanding the absence of her loving husband would greatly annoy her, yet the
commodity of her country, which she hoped through her husbands help should be
procured, would as greatly joy her. And that she might sauely see her sweet
husband again, with a few feined tears forcibly wroung forth, she humbly
requested the King that he might be placed in such part of the battle, that
he might not be subject to the shot, and lie open to the army of the
aduersarye. The King plainly certified by her of the den wherein the fore was
hidden, giving her the promised reward went forth with to vnkenuell him: who
hearing of the Kings coming, and by what means he was discovered, fell to
raging against his wife and other like women for her sake in this sort.

Ah fond fool that I was to repose any trust or confidence in women, whose
sex is s^btil, whose kind is cruel, who are constant only in inconstancy,
who are wytty only in wiles, who as Aristotle says are monsters in nature,
altogether imperfect, weak vessels, ignorant in all things, yea (which we may
most lament) they are naturaly endued with baits to allure men, with poison to
infect men, and with charms to change men from men to beasts, as Cyrces did
the servants of Ulysses: yea what man has ever been so wise but by women
has been seduced to folly? as Pharo his daughter caused Solomon to fall to
idolatry: what man has ever been so godly but by women has been depraved? as
Bersabe drove king David to diuelishnesse: what man has ever been so strong,
who by women has not been made to stoop? as Dalila took away ye force of
Sampson by cutting away his heir: who has ever been so perfect, but by women
has been drawn to imperfection? as Adam by the means of Eve lost the
perfection of Paradise: who has ever been so faithful, but that women have
enforced them to infidelytie? as a handmayde made Peter deny his master
Christ: who so valiant, but by women has been vnquished? as Omphale made
Hercules serve her and spinne amongst her maids: and after by Dynira was done
to death: who so learned, but by women has been taught new points of schole?
as Tully by Terentia, Marcus Aurelius by Faustina, and Ovid by Cornina were
often abused: with infinet other. But if the wise, the godly, the strong, the
perfect, the saithfull, the valiant, y^ learned, have been bewitched beguiled
and abused by women, is it reason I should challenge any proper or peculier
fortune to my self, and not remain content with the lot which is common to al^yes
I am content my rage in rule to bind, but not withstandinge the comfort by
other men's calamity be miserable, yet it does me good to think that other
have been as sluttishly served by women as my self, as Tullia conspired the
death of her own husband Tarquinius, then of her Sister, and lastly married the
brother of her own husband who before was housband to her own Sister: as the
fyftie daughters of Danae all but one slew their husbands the first night of
their marriage: as Candaules by the counsel of his wife was slain by Gyges,
who after married her: as Dyonisius notwithstanding his wary watch and watchful
warenesse for the preservation of his life, was by his own wife Aristomacha
miserably made away.

By this time the king was come into his house where upon he was driven with
shame to show and present him self to his majesty, humbly crauinge pardon
for his offense, and seeing no remedy, made preparation for the wars,
disposing his living so well as the shortness of time would give him leave,
and dispossessinge his wife of so mutch as he could possibly. Which done
amongst the rest he mournfully marched forward, but he no sooner set foot
in the Thebane soil, but that the earth opened, and swallowed him up. Of which
news so soon as his wife was partaker, for fashion sake she put finger in
the eye, and attired herself in mourning apparel: but she quickly cast it of
again and began to cast in her head how she might be sped of any other
husband: and calling to mind y^ deep affection wherein Don infortunio was
drowned toward her, she thought none more fit to make a fool of then him,
and therefore by letters did him to understand, that considering his former
goodwill toward her, she thought her self bound in conscience to
counternayle his courtesy, by any convenient mean she might: and in that
before time she set so light by his love, the cause was for that before his
coming she had betrothed her self to Amphiaraus, so that as thn she was not
able to yield him the meede of his merit: but now if his affection were not
altered, and if he were disposed to deal with her by order of honesty and
limits of law, he might be paid his due debt with double interest. Now the
young gentleman by ye aid of absence, by the assistance of time, by ye change
of diet, by remembrance of his repulse, by dregs of disdain by the virtue of
necessity, and by the help of reason being fully cured of his folly: having
heard also of the treachery which she used toward her other husband, rejected
her offer, returning her answer, y^ being at liberty he meant not to come in
bonds, and being now set free from her fraud and falsehood, he would no more
be trained to her treison. Neither (says he) does that hold or castle merit
mercy, which yeeldes rather for want of fresh supply, then at the suit of the
beseiger. Neither is y^ prisoner to be pitied, who beeinge judge, ioyed only
in staerity and cruelty: neither is that clientes cause to be considered, who
being a counsaylor, dealt in the cases of other without conscience. The
gentlewoman seeinge her self thus reprochfully repulsed, in very colorike
conceits consumed away and died.

I am here gentlewomen to admonish you not to suffer your selves to be carried
away with covetousness, you see to what miserable end it brought this married
disloyal couple: and as well for your sakes as mine own I would wish you who
are endued with wealth sufficient to make a man (as they say) and who are at
your own disposition and choice, not to yield your selves as a pray to any who
has no need of your wealth, neither will gratefully accept your goods, but
rather frankly to bequeath your selves to some poor younger brother, who may
think himself made by marrying you, who may thank his wise only for his
wealth, who may impute his happiness only to having you: whom you may bind
to you by benefits, who will no doubt endeavor to counterpeise your living with
his love, and your goods with his good will: who will rather serve you, then
seek superiorytie over you: who will rather be your man then your master: your
Liege, then your Lord: your subject then your sovereign: whereby you shall live
as you list, your profits shall pleasure you, your gooddes shall do you good.
And what so ever be your common saying, that you must as well love to live, as
live to love, yet surely in my fancy I think it far better for a married
couple to live together without living, then without love: for what little
living will suffice nature, who knows not, but what lothed lives be where
love does lack, look but into the lives of the parties, but now reported unto
you. And if you credit not my report of them, no more but mark your poor
neighbors how quietly and merrily they pass their time in poverty, assisted
only by the calm of contentment and love: and then convert your eyes to the
view of many oother estates, and look how unpleasantly and vncontentedly they
spend their days, molested by the storms of strife, debate, and hate. Which
contemplation I hope will so confirm your judgments that you will always
prefer love before living: or at least not so to respect the one, as to neglect
the other: or at least, if it be posible, to join the one with the other.
Another thing also the death of Eriphile may drive into your minds, that you
rage not like tyraunts over those, whom your beautye has made your bonslaues:
for you must know that it is more glory to use the victory moderately, then to
get it mightily: and far more holds have been woonne by clemency, then by
cruelty. For when the inhabitants know the captains courtesy, they will rather
yield to his assured mercy, then stand to the doubtful event of battle: so
gentlewomen if you mind to make breach into the hearts of many, and to win the
fort of their faithes unto you, if you crave to conquer the goodwilles, and to
be courted with the service of suitors, you must with modesty make much of
them, with courtesy counteruaile their kindness, with gratefulness accept
their good will, with liberality requight their love, and with honest
plainness answer to their demaundes: you must not feed them with falshod,
draw them en with delay, and torment them with trifling as Eriphile did her
Infortunio, to her own unfortunate hap as it luckely afterward did light: for
it is Gods word and will that such measure as is met shall be measured again,
and they that delight to drown other in dolor, shall not swim long in
pleasure them selves: I know not what effect my words will take, for that I
know not how you courtlye dames accounte of my cunninge: but before mine own
face I am able to assure you this, that the girls of our parish think that
welsh Sir Richard him self can not make a better preach then I can: but it
may be you will think me over saucy with my lisping lips to prefer persuasions
to them, who are as void of folly every way as my self of wit any way. Yet
considering how quietlye you took the rude railing of Amphiaraus against you,
I need not doubt but that you will take in good part words which are well
meant toward you, and if not follow them, yet not mislike them, and rather
weigh the will of the speaker, then the worth of the words.

Icilius and Uirginia.
ICILIVS a young Gentleman of Rome, falling in love with Virginia, is refused
by her friends for want of sufficient wealth, but privily contracteth himself
unto her, and departs into the wars. Appius Claudius burning with unchaste
lust of the same maiden, the better to obtain her, causes Clodius his client
to claim her for his bondslaue, and gives wrongful judgment on his side.
But Virginius her father, at her ernest request, slays her with his own
hands to preserve her virginity from the villainie of Appius, who for that
fact is cast into prison, where desperately he does himself to death.

IT is a doubt often debated but not yet decided, whether love discendeth from
the heavens, deriueth of our own nature, proceeds of the similitude of
manners, comes of acquaintance and familiarity, takes original of our
education and bringinge up together, whether it arises of beauty or of virtue,
whether it enters in at the eyes, or first be rooted in the heart, whether the
cause come from the party that loves or the party loved, or whether it be in
our power to love or to leave, I leave to other to resolve upon, for for my
part (I yield god thanks for it) I have as yet been so little troubled with
love, that I know not what it is, nor from whence it comes, and when I muse
thereon I am as bad troubled as Symonides was to think and say what god was:
but if an opinion grounded upon reason without any proper experience on mine
own part may take place, I think love chiefly to be grounded upon the
similitude of manners showed and signified by familiarity and abode together.
For it is daily seen that those parties who at the first incountry and view
have rather dis^iked then loved each other, by continuance of conversation and
by conferring each others conditions and nature together, have fallen into the
fire of most fervent affection. For true love and faithful freindship is to
will and to nill one thing, to have one object of appetite, and to have like
effect of affection. I know there are infinite instances to be given to this
assertion, for that some have been surprised with love only upon a loving
look, some upon a courteous word, some upon a single sight, some upon a vain
vision, some upon a doubtful dream, some upon an uncertain report, and some
some other way. But as one swallow makes not summer, so one particularity
concludes no generality. And as an Ethiopian is said generally to be black
though his teeth be white, for that for the most parts of him he is black,
so I think love may be said generally to proceed of the similitude of
manners, for that for the most part it does so. And besides infinite other
examples which I can allege for proof hereof, the history which you shall
presently hear shall also confirm it.

In the renowned city of Rome made his abode one Icilius, who though he were
a gentleman of a worshipful house, yet by reason that his parents were yet
lyuinge, his patrimony was not great, neither his living more then might
suffice to maintain the port of the place and countenance he carried in the
city, by reason whereof he remained unmarried, as being not able to maintain
a wife according to the estate of his calling. It was his chance amongst
other youthful company to pass the time for the space of a sennight in
feasting and making merry at the house of one L. Virginius, a worshipful
gentleman of the same city, who had to daughter a damsel named Virginia, who
as she was of ripe years, so was she of ripe judgment and discretion in
every point beelonginge to a virtuous virgin and modest maid. Her shape though
it were not precise, yet was it perfect: her face though it were not blasinge,
yet was it beautiful: her corpse though it were not curious, yet was it comely:
and as nature plentifully planted perfection in her, so God super abundantly
bestowed his benefits upon her, such gravity in gesture, such modesty in
manners, such curtesy in conversation, such troth in talk, such wit in
reasoning, that Minerua her self could not have mended her: that it was
doutfull whether men were more rapte into admiration of her wisdom, or
ravished in contemplation of her beauty, the one contayninge contentment for
the body, the other solace and delight for the mind. Now Icilius being in the
company and society of this saint used little other behavior toward her above
his common regard to all the Gentlewomen of the troop, but spent his time in
dauncinge, dysinge, cardinge, and other such pastimes. And notwithstanding
this while he often felt a certain restraint of liberty in his affections, an
alteration of mind and as it were a ciuell assault and discord within him
self, yet by reason of his young years and small practice in the pangues of
love, he could not conjecture the cause of his sudden passions: but this made
him most to muse, that when he was in his most dumps, if she chanced to
present her self to his presence, his heart was presently lightened of that
which lay so heavy in his stomach, and as when the sun shines the clouds
vanish away, so when her beauty blazed in place, the clouds of care were
clear consumed. Likewise beeinge often desirous to talk with her, and enjoy
the present pleasure of her pleasant speech, his senses were so ravished with
the sight of her, y^ he could not utter one word unto her. Sitting also at the
table with her and casting a gazinge glaunce round about him, his sight was
never satisfied until he had lent her a look, and seemed only to resolve his
fancy upon her face. But notwithstanding all this he did not thoroughly
perceive the cause of his sudden trouble of mind, and thought it as it was a
toy lightly taken so would it be lightly left again, and therefore departed
from her fathers house without preferring any suit unto her, or adding
execution to the advantage of the time and place. But beeinge gone home, and
gotten solitarily to his chamber, good god what mountains of smooke did
scaldinge sighs send forth of his mouth, what drops of blood did galdinge
grief make his heart to bleed, what flouddes of tears did flow from his eyes,
what careful complaints did he send unto the skies? saying O heavens why
heap you my heaviness? O planets why plant you my pain? O destines why
decree ye my destruction? O Gods why deprive you me of liberty, now my
young years challenge to live most freely. O fortune why do thou mix my
sweet meat with such sower sauce y^ is more bitter then gall, and nolesse
pleasant then death unto me? Must the little delight which I took in the
company of Virginia (whereof I fully understood not her to be the cause
neither) be counteruayled with such direful dispight? and for the pleasure
which her presence procured me, must her absence purchase me such
displeasure? then to true do I find that every dram of delight has a pound
of spite, and every inch of joy, an ell of annoy annexed unto it: then well
may I curse the chance, y^ cause and the company which caused me to come to
that place, which has caught me in such bondage. And may I term it bondage
to live in the service and contemplation of my Virginia? Is it slavery to be
thrall to virtue? It is her bounty not her beutie that binds me, it is her
curtesy, not her comeliness that I care for, it is her perfection not her
person that I pass of, it is her condiditions not her color that I acount of:
for beuty bideth not, comeliness continues not, personage perishes, color
fades, but bounty, courtesy, perfection, and conditions remain for ever. So
that if I live in bondage, it is to virtue, if I be a slave I am virtues
slave. But does virtue use to torment men thus, beelike that is the cause there
are so few honest and virtuous? No I ought not to count my trouble a torment,
but the fine gold must be purified in the flaming fire, and white silver is
wrought in black pitch: glory must be gotten through depth of danger, and
pleasure must be purchased with the price of pain. And though absence now be
some torment to try me, and though dolor now drown me in the seas of
sorrow, yet doubt I not but shortly to swim in the fluds of feliciti, and take
land there where my heart has already pitched his abode. But O presumptuous
fool, whether does folly force mec? do I hope to win her whom my
unworthiness wills me not so mutch as to wish for? Yea which way soever I
go to work, I am sure to have a cold suit of it: for if I profer her my
service dishonestly, why her virtue abhors it: if I make love in way of
marriage, her estate and riches refuses it. O god and shall goods be more
accounted of then goodwill? lucre more then love? Is the counsel of
Themistocles altogether rejected, who wills men rather to marry their
daughters to a man that wants money, then to money y^ wants a man to use it?
Is the world so blinded in covetousness to prefer living before learning,
wealth before wit? Then farewell true freindship if it be not grounded upon
love: then farewell true love if marriage be not the end of it: then farewell
true marriage if money make it: then rests for me only to beewayle my evil
hap, to lament my luckelesse love, and never to attempt that I am like never to
attain unto.

By this time the earth was covered with a dark mantell, and by reason that
the Sun was departed out of our Horizon, the light of the stars which the Sun
lends them, beegan to appear in the firmamente, where upon this poor
passionate lover weried with woe, disposed him self to rest: but he whose
bane love has brued, neither by night nor by day, neither in company nor
solitary, neither sleeping nor waking, can take any rest or quiet. For he was
no sooner in a slumber but the goddess of his devotions presently presented
her self before him, saying: Mine own, why do thou thus torment thy
self for my sake, who suffer no little grief to see thy great sorrow, wherefore
be bold to ask any thing at my hands honestly, and be sure I will grant it
willingly: for I persuade my self the heavens have reserved me for thee.
Icilius hearing (as he hoped) this heavenly voice, and seeing (as he
thought) that saint by his bed side, with open arms reached to embrace her,
but beeinge awaked with open eyes he saw he was deceived: which sudden fall
from heaven to hell took away his breath from him for a while, but being come
to him self he began to cry out in this careful manner.

O God, is it not sufficient to vex me with vanities in the day time, unless
thou torment me with visions also in the night? have I not woe enough awake,
but that beesides I must have sorrow in sleep? What grievous offense have I
committed, that deserves such grievous punishment? if this be the reward of
them that love, woe, woe be to them that hate: thou have commanded us all to
love one another, and if thou thus punish the fulfillers of thy law, what
shall beecome of the transgressors thereof? but if thou be disposed to punish
me, and displeased with my deeds, never suffer me hereafter to do any thing
but cast me into such a sleep wherein I was erwhile, and therein let me
continue continually. O happy was Endymion, who long time inioyed the like
sleep. O ten times happy are the dead, if death be any thing like this
sleep. But O hundred times unhappy am I, to whom wakyng is waylefull, whereas
to all things else it is joyful. But was this but a vision which deluded me?
was it but a dream which I doated on? And if it were but a dream, does it
portend nothing? and may there be effect in dreams? Yea god wot commonly the
contrary: or (as Cato says) we see sleeping that which we wish for wakyng.
So that neither in dreaming nor doing, neither in sleepyng nor seeing, neither
in thinkyng nor saying, find I any cause of comfort or see any sign of
solace. This youth passed his time so long in these and such like passions,
that ye careful carriage of his eyes bewrayed his careful mind, and his pale
countenance his painful case. Which a special friend of his perceiuyng, took
such compassion and pity on his painful state, that he sought all means
possible to sift out the cause of his sorrow, to the intent to seek some
medicine for his malady. And having opportunity of time and place, he brake
with him in this sort.

Good freende, if I should show you what great sorrow I sustain by your
heaviness, you would perchance judge my words to proceed rather of flattery
and trifling then of truth: but no more but try how willing I will be to ease
your pain, and by that judge how greatly it greeueth me. But how great so
ever my greeif be, my wonder is more then great to see you transfourmed from
the estate of a pleasant Gentleman into such solitary regardes, that you
seem rather a Tymon of Athens, then a courtier of Italy: and so mutche the
more cause I have of marvel, by how mutch less I see any apparent cause
which should work any such alteration in you. For if want of worldly wealth
could work your woe, why you want nothing: if you would eat gold (as they
say) you might have it. If loss of friends molest you, why you have an
infinite number which love you entirely. If you be disposed to travail to
see strange countries, your parents wilbee well pleased with your departure.
If you be weary of your single life, your friends will forthwith provide
for your Marriage. If any repulse received of any dayntie dame do daunt you,
why the Gods them selves have suffered the like: as Daphne a seely damsel
refused the God Phoebus: Syrinx a simple maid rejected the God Pan, with
infinite other. If you have fixed your fancy in place you think impossible to
possess, why you have reason to rule your affection, you have wit to compass
your desire, you have friends to further it, you want nothing to finish it.
With this his color beegan to change, and he fetched a deep sighe or two,
whereby his friend perceived he had touched the cause of his calamity, and
sore of his sorrow, praying him very ernestly to unfold the secrets of his
thoughts unto him, saying two wits are better then one, and that which you
blinded perchance by love can not see, I stirred up by desire to do you good,
may perceive. And for secrecy in your affairs, assure your self, that never
Pithias to his Damon, Pylades to his Orestes, nor Gys^ppus to his Titus was
more true, then I will be to you. And though your learning and wit to know
what is best for your own behalf be far better then mine, yet the
simpleness of my wit shall be supplied with the sincerenesse of my will, which
shall be always so ready pressed to pleasure you, that if my service may satisfy
you, you shall command me, if my company may content you, I will never be out
of your sight: if I may any way stand you in any steed, account me your own
only.

Icilius hearing this friendly discourse could not but say in his heart, O
friend unfeigned, O love most loyal, O curtesy incomparable and imbracinge fast
his friend in his arms said, if all the miseries in the world did muster in
multitudes about me, yet this thing only is of force to fence me from their
furies, to think I enjoy so firm a friend as your self are, and if I may
live but to requite some part of your good will, it is the second felicity I
look for in this life. But touching the cause of my perplexity I must crave
pardon if I make courtsy to disclose it, for that many evils carry this nature,
rather to be concealed with grief, then revealed in hope of releife. And as a
green wound by taking the air spredeth farther abroad and is the hardlier
healed, so I think my tormente and grief beeinge once discovered, would not
be so easily cured. If (says his friend) the original of your evil proceed
of love as in my fancy it does, then undoubtedly the more it is uncovered the
sooner is it cured, for as coals of fire covered cloase with ashes keep their
heat long time, but lying open soon wax cold and black, so the fiery
flames of love raked up in silence, burn furiously within a man, but beeinge
by discourse disclosed they soon convert from flame to fume and smoke.
Wherefore (good freinde) stick not to imparte unto me this matter which does
import you so nere, promising you by the inviolable bond of freindship to
travail so ernestly in your affairs, that what wants in power, you shall
find in the pains which I will take in your cause. Alas sweet friend (says
Icilius) rather then you should think I have any diffidence or distrust in
you, or think you unworthy of credit in any cause whatsoever, I will make
you privy to the cause of my pain what pange or peril so ever I incur thereby.
Wherefore you shall understand that since the time I was at the house of L.
Virginius, as you partly know, the conditions of his daughter did so well
content me, her nature agreed so well with mine, her affections were so framed
to my fancy, that I am constrained to resign my liberty captive unto her, and
to make her person the prison of my heart. And the less hope I have of
obtaining her, the more do I love: and the more deeply I do desire her, the
more deadly do I despair of her: which is the cause of all my care and sum
of all my sorrow: yea this is it which has made me an enemy to my self, a
stranger to my freindes, to abandon all good company, to sit in solitariness,
and this is it which, if it be not in time provided for, will preuente by
death all other mischeifs. God forbid good friend (says his friend) that so
light a cause should so deeply distres you: what, do you think either so
superstitiously of her, either so abiectly of your self, that you deem this
matter so impossible to be brought to pass? Why her person is not of such
perfection, but that yours may match it: her freindes are not of such state,
but that yours may stand by them: her portion is not so great, but your
parents are able to make yours equal unto it. No, doubt not but your love
shall sort to lucky end, and have such success you seek for: and I am
heartily glad, that seeinge it was your chance to loose your liberty, it is
lodged in such a place, which is rather to be counted a Paradise of pleasure,
the^ a prison of pain, of whose worthynes I would somewhat say, but that
perchance you will think me partial to the party, and besides that I should
rather kindle new coals in you, then quench old flames. But because I
persuade my self I may do somewhat with the party which puts you to this
pain, doubt not to commit this charge to me, and I warrant you I will
discharge it to your contentation. Ah dear friend (says Icilius) if I thought
you as well able to give order to my sorrow and redress my woe, as I see you
willing to comfort my carfulness and keep me from despair, I should think
my self the happiest wight in the world, and I would account of you as the
preserver of my life, but I can not tell what the matter is, meethinkes the
more fervent is my fire, the more faint is my fear. Phy (says his friend) you
show your self to very a coward, fortune you know favors not the faint
hearted, neither are they worthy to win the pray you press for, and therefore
for shame take a good heart unto you, and do your endeavor, and let me alone
with the rest: there is no hawk soareth so high but she will stoop to some
pray, neither any so rammishe and wild but in time she may be reclaimed and
made to the lure. And if you follow my advise, I think good you solicit her by
letters until such time you have convenient time to go thither your self.
Which counsel he forthwith put in execution, and indicted a letter to his
Mistress in this manner.

Good Mistress, to set forth in words the feruency of my affection, and
vehemence of my passion, I think would be both tedious to you, and I am sure
grievous to my self for that the remembrance of my passions would be as it
were a renewing of my pain, and though I altogether use silence therein, yet
the loathsome life which I lead, may by report advertise you of my lucklesse
love, and my drousy looks to all which see them, are signs sufficient of my
drouping heart. Therefore may it please you plainly to understand, that beeinge
at Master Virginius your fathers house, I received such contentation in your
company and sight, that since I have been deprived thereof, I think my self
deprived of all the pleasures of life: And unless your curtesy surmounte my
deserts, and that you vouchsafe to pity my painful estate, I shall have just
cause to say, that at your fathers I received in steed of meat misery, for
drink dolor, yea I may count my fare fire, and my cheer very dear which
must cost me no less then the loss of my liberty at least. But if yet at the
last course it shall please you to send and serve in to the table of my
troubled mind some confectes of comfort with the fruits of freindship, I
shall think my self to have fared most daintily, whereas otherwise I shall
count my self entreated disdainfully. Look not good Mistress to my living but
to my love, way not my wealth but my will, mark not my money but my meaning in
the way of honest and lawful marriage, and speedily send the messenger of
present consolation to him, which pineth away in pain and is yours only and
ever: ICILIVs.


Virginia having vewed this letter, and likinge it never the worse for his
sake that sent it, replied unto it in this short and sober sort.

Sir, because I know in my self no such due desert any way, to drive you to
such deep desire, I am the hardlyer induced to believe your words, and
though I adhibited full credit unto them, yet perchance as yet my fancy is
not fully framed to like so well of you as you either desire or deserve: and
though I could find in my heart to like you above all other, yet I know not
whether my freindes will yield their consent thereto. So that it is in me only
to thank you for your goodwil, but not to satisfy your request. Yours as she
may: VIRGINIA.


This letter bringinge some comfort to his careful mimde, made him make have
to repair in person to the place of her presence, where he presented her his
suit with such assured signs of perfect love and loyalty, that she thought
with good conscience she could not contemn his good will. But her parents
for that he was not able, his father being alive to make her such ioynter as
they enjoined him to, deferred the consummation of the marriage from time to
time, hopinge that time would mortify the affection of either the one or the
other lover. But as the smith his forge by casting on cold water burns more
fiercely, so their love by these delays increased more vehemently, which
caused them to betroth themselves each to other. But Icilius endued with a
courageous mind, perceiuinge the lack of living to hinder his happiness,
determined to go to the wars and by dint of sword to win either coin or
credit, or to loose life and love. And beeinge on point to take his journey
he gave his Misteris this farewell. If ever woeful creature had cause to
complain his careful case, then undoubtedly may I duly preace for the
foremost place. The horse now and then cease from his travail, the Ass from
bearing the Ox from drawing, and so of all other creatures, but my poor heart
is never at rest, but as the wheel continually turns, so my mind
continually tosseth, still devising how I may aspire to the end of my desires,
and be placed in full possession of your perfect person. And having reuolued
many ways in my mind, I am now resolved upon this to go to the wars and
there to win with prowess and pain, that which god and fortune have denied
me: where the remembrance of your seemly self shall arm me with such
courage, that I shall count nothing dangerous to attempt or hard to attain.
And whatsoever worthy feats you shall hear I shall enterprise, I shall
desire you to persuade your self that they are done for your sake. And if in
my absence it shall please you to continue constant in goodwill toward me, it
is the only shield that shall shadow me in field and fight. Remember
Penelope passed twenty years in the absence of her Ulysses, and assure your
self Ulysses never hazarded him self in more perils, then I will put my self
to for your sake.

Virginia having heard this short and sower discourse, castinge her self into
his arms, after she had beedewed his face with the tears which fell from her
eyes, replied in this sort.

Ah (Master Icilius) my tongue is not able to tell the hurt which my heart
sustayneth by the covetous cruelty of my parents, who in a greedy desire of
goods, go about to stay me from that whereupon my life does stay and depend,
and were it not that your great courtesy and love toward me did somewhat
moderate and mitigate my martyrdom, I should never be able to bear the
unsupportable burden thereof. But now I understand by you I shall lose your
company, which was my only comfort and consolation, what rests for me, but
notwithstanding I was never married, yet to continue and lead a woeful
widows loathsome life, and to spend my golden years in galdynge greeife. I
could rehearse unto you, and you your self can better tell, the infinite and
imminent perils which always wait on war, but that I doubt thereby I should
rather increase your greeif, then alter your determination, but this request at
least, yea and perchance the last, let me make unto you, that in war you be
wary, in battle rather to backward then to bold in field rather to flying
then to forward, and if you take no care of your self, yet make some spare of
me. For persuade your self this, out of every wound which your body shall
receive, will issue as well my blood as yours.

And for constancy in your absence assure your self, Virginia will always be
the vowed vassal of Icilius. And as the Laurel or Bay tree cease not to be
green, notwithstanding the parchyng Summer, and pinchyng Winter, so will I
never cease to be fresh in freendship, and green in godwill toward you,
nothwithstandyng the sharp storms of absence, the distance of place, and
difference of time. But here tears stayed the talk of the one, and time took
away any longer abode of the other, whereupon they were constrained after a few
careful kisses, to give each other a faintyng farewell. Neither is it easy to
point forth the pain wherewith this partinge pinched both these poor
lovers, but surely in my fancy of al greifes it is most gripyng when freindes
are forced to part each from other, when one heart is placed in two places,
when one member is torn as it were from another, when ownes self is separated
from him self, or at least his second self. But their partyng was not so
paynfull, but that shortly after their meetyng was as mornefull. For not long
after the departure of Icilius: as Virginia walked abroad somewhat to recreate
and solace her sorrowful self, it was her fortune unfortunately to be seen
by one Appius Claudius, one of the Decemuirs, who were the chief rulers of the
city, who by the furies of Hell was so set on fire in libidinous lust toward
that virgin, that he sought all the means possible to win her to his wicked
will: but seeing her to firmly fortified in virtue, to be by consent
vanquished by villainy, he determined by force to force her to his filthiness.
And as nothing is so impossible which frantike fury will not enterprise,
nothing so shameful which unbridled desire will not undertake, nothing so
false which fleshly filthiness will not forge, so to bring his purpose to
pass he coined this devise, he caused one Marcus Cloudius a client of his,
to lay claim to the maid as his bond slave: Who partly for awe of the
tyrant, partly being apt of himself to undertake any evil, took the matter
upon him, and the next time he took her out of her fathers house, he laid
hands upon her, commanding her to follow him home, to the end Appius might
have had his pleasure of her. But by the pitiful exclamation of the maid and
her nurse, a great multitude of people began to muster about them, who hearing
whose daughter she was, and that she was beetrothed to Icilius, thought it
unseemly that in the absence of her father and friend (who were both in the
wars) she should be violently carried into bondage, the title being not
discussed by the laws, and thereupon with held M. Cloudius from having her
away. Who seeing his might ouermatcht by the multitude, told them he meant
not to deal by force, but his mind was for the plain proof of his title and
interest in her, to have her before the chief magistrate of the city, and
only judge in civil controversies, who was Appius Claudius the only author of
this evil.

Being come before him, he told a solemn tale for the confirmation of his
right in the maid, saying she was the daughter of a bond woman of his, that
in her infancy she was stolen from her mother, conveyed to Virginius, and from
that time brought up at his house and taken for his natural child, and for
proof hereof he brought in two or three knights of the post to depose. The
freindes of the maid not able to refell this forged tale, desired of the Judas
judge that the matter might be adiourned until the coming of her father
Virginius. Apius answered that he thought it good the matter should hang in
suspense until the return of her supposed father, but it was no reason but
that he who pretended, yea and had proved to have such right to her, should
have her in his custody, until the matter were more examined: and upon his
honor he promised she should be forth coming to appear at the time of
her fathers approach. The people hearing this injurious judgment of Appius,
rather murmured at it, then durst make resistance against it, by reason whereof
Marcus Cloudius beegan to draw the maid to be defloured, as the tiger in
Hyrcane wooddes haleth the lamb to be devoured. But god ye righter of al
wrongs and protector of all pure virgins, prevented the peril which hong over
her head, and sent home from ye wars to succor her, her uncle Numitorius,
and her spouse Icilius: who hearing the haynousnesse of the matter, presently
presed to the place where Appius sat in judgment, but he commanded his
officers to keep Icilius back, whereupon Icilius inueighed against him in this
sort.

Albeit (O Appius) by force you keep me from keepeinge mine own out of your
hands, yet shall you not stay my tongue from detecting the villainy which you
endeavor to do. For the truth is, this virgin is betrothed to me, and my
mind is to marry her a chaste maid, therefore assure your self if it lie in
me to let, she shall not remain one minute of an hour out of her fathers
house. Is it not sufficient for you to deprive the people of the chief
pillors of their liberty, but that our wives and children also must live in
slavery to your tirranny? Exercise your cruelty on our bodies, at least let
chastity be in safety.

Ought princes to give light of life to their people, and will you make your
self a mirror of mischeife to your posterity? But if you mind to take her
away from us by force and from her, her virginity, never think to do it while
I have any breath left in my body, for in this just cause and quarrel of my
wife, life shall sooner leave me then loyalty. Appius thinkinge the power of
Icilius would prevail above his, for that the multitude meruaylously inclined
to his side, said he would have another time to repress the rebellious rage
of Icilius, and touching the maid for her fathers sake he was content to
defer the pronouncinge of sentence against her, until the next court day that
her father might be present, in the mean while he would entreat Marcus
Cloudius to forbear his right: but if her father came not by the next court
day, he would defer the execution of justice for no man's pleasure. Presently
upon this he dispatched letters to the captain general of the army, that he
should not in any wise dismiss Virginius or suffer him to come home: but
Icilius had sent for him with such speed that he had leave to depart before
those letters came to the captain, so it pleased god to prevent the policy
and wicked purpose of Appius. Now Virginius beeinge come to Rome, went with his
daughter to the judgment place, and did there lamentably implore the help of
the people, saying: while I with the rest of the soldiers have hazarded our
lives in the defense of you and your children, I am in danger to have mine
own daughter dispoyled: and whereas by my help our city is preserved from
enemies, I my self am brought to such misery, as if it were taken by our
enemies and utterly razed to the ground. For what greater villainy can be done
to the vanquished, then to see before their eyes their wives and children
desloured and defiled? But neighbors and freindes if you suffer me to
sustain this injury, assure your selves your staff stands next to the door,
and look no longer to be husbands over your wives, and parents over your
children, then it shall please these tirantes to give you leave. Any evil at
the first entering in of it may easily be avoided, but let one or two
presidentes pass patiently without resisting, and it will run into a custom,
and from thence to a law, and you will never be able after to rid your hands
of it. And if your own safety drive you not to succor me, yet let my old
years, my hoary heirs, the honest port which I have ever maintained, and the
chaste life of my daughter move you to put to your hands to help redress my
wrong. By this time Appius was come to the judgment place with a great troop
of armed men, and seeing Virginius there contrary to his expectation, and
perceyning no color of law could cloud his doings, he set down his own will
for a law, and said he would defraud Marcus Cloudius no longer of his right,
and seeinge the maid was convicted by proof and witness to be his bond maid,
he gave sentence that he should presently have her away, not suffering her
father to allege any thing for her freedom. Virginius seeing this extreme
dealing of Appius threatningly shook his hands at him, saying, I have
beetrothed my daughter to Icilius not to thee (O Appius) and I have brought her
up to be an honest married woman, not thy harlot. What do thou think under
the pretense of bondage, to make her bound to thy beastliness? Appius not
regarding his railing caused his officers to make the multitude give place to
Marcus Cloudius that he might quietly carry away his bond maid, by reason
whereof Virginia was left void of help and rescue, which her father perceiving
and seeing him self not able to deliver her out of her enemies hands, to defer
the time hopinge still for help, he used this policy: he desired Appius he
might have his daughter aside, and between her nurce and her examine the
matter, that if it were found he were but her fained father, he might the
more willingly depart with her. Which being by Appius granted, they three
went aside together, where Virginia fell down upon her knees and made this
ruthles request unto her father.

I perceive (dear father) it is not without great cause that the philosophers
were of this opinion, that the greatest felicity is never to be borne, and the
second soon to die, now seeing by your means I am deprived of the first I
beseech you by your means let me enjoy the second: and to counteruayle the
lucklesse and loathsome life which you have given me, vouchsafe to bestow on
me an honorable death. And as by your fatherly care I have continued a
continent virgin hitherto, so by your furthering aid I pray you let me dye
an honest maid presently: least my life hereafter, contaminate y^ commendation
of my life heretofore: and seeing I can be no longer suffered to live honestly,
good father let me die honorably? For an honorable death is always to be
preferred before an infamous life, of evils the least is to be chosen, and
death of body is to be counted a less evil, then distructio^ of body and
soul. I think I may by more right crave your help herein, for that partly by
your means I am fallen into this extremity, for y^ you would not agree to y^
consummation of the marriage between Icilius and me, and how you can deliver
me, but by delivering me to death I see not, for that your power is to weak
to wreak the wrong which is offered me, and your force is to feeble to fence
me from the fury of my foes. Therefore seeing he will needs have my body
(sweet father) let him have it dead, that I may not feel the filthiness which
he purposes to force me too. Her father melting into tears at her pitiful
suit, carefully kissing her, commended her courageous mind, rather confirming
her in her constant couragiousnesse, then disswadinge her from her purpose. By
this time the tirantes train beegan to flock about them to have her away,
which Virginius seeing snatched a butchers knife from the shambels and thrust
therewith his daughter to the heart, saying: O daughter, by this only mean
whereby I may do I make thee free. Icilius seeinge his spouse thus spoiled,
spent no time in triflinge tears, but by the help of his father in law
Virginius, prosecuted the matter so ernestly against Appius that he was
thrown into prison, where for shame of his deed and dread of deserved
punnishment, he did him self desperately to death.

You see here Gentlewomen, a most lamentable death of a most virtuous virgin,
wherein you may note a noble mind in her to desire it, a stout courage in her
father to do it, and most outrageous tyranny in Appius to drive them to it:
whereby you may learn that virtue and chastity is to be preferred before
world or wealth, before friend or father, before love or living, before life
or death. Therefore, if I were either in wit able or otherwise worthy to give
you counsel, I would advise you to avoid the trains of such tyrauntes, to
keep you out of the sight of such seedsuckers, and to fly from such Senes
fornecatores: such raueninge wolves in sheep cloathinge are rediest to
devour such sweet sheep, such old dogs ever bite forest, such gravity
for the most part contains most incontinency. For if their lust were not
more then outrageous, either their great discretion would repress it, either
their many years would mortify it, either their own wives would satisfy it.
But use of evil makes us think it no abuse, sins often assayed are thought
to be no sin, and these grayheaded gamesters have the habit of this
mischeife so deeply rooted in them, that concupiscence will fry their flesh,
till breath do leave their bodies.

And as I would you should avoid these old youths in the way of wickedness,
so if my wish might wield your wills, you should neither meddle with them in
the way of marriage. For perfect love can never be without equality, there can
be no good agreement of affections, where there is such difference of years.
Can fire and water, can flowers and frost, can warmth and winter, can mirth and
melancholy agree together? No surely Gentlewomen but if you will have it so, I
will believe this matter moves you nothing: Yet what say you to another point,
and that a most perilous point, when to impotencie shall be added Ielousy? This
is a pill of hard digestion, this is a pill which if it be a little chewed, it
will be so bitter that you will never be able to abide it. For when such an
one shall measure your deeds by his own desire, and your life present by his
own life past, when he shall think you to be naught, because he him self
has been naught: good god how cloasely then will he mew you up? how carefully
will he look to you? How lothsomely will he cloy you with his company? Then
will you wish you unmarried, then will you wish you had married with a young
man: they will love and not doat, they will be zealous and not Ielous. And if
your parents in some curious or covetous respect go about otherwise to
dispose of you, humbly request them you may choose where you like, and link
where you love, that you may be married to a man rather then money, to quiet
rather then coin. Dutifully tell them that such presinesse of parents
brought Pyramus and Thisbe to a woeful end, Romeo and Iulietta to untimely
death, and drove Virginius miserably to murder his own daughter Virginia.

Admetus and Alcest.
ADMETVS son to ATYS king of Lybla, falling in love with Alcest, daughter
to Lycabas king of Assure, who recompensed him with femblable affection, are
restrained each from other by their parents, but being secretly married,
wander in wildernesses like poor pilgrims. Atys shortly after dies, whereof
Admetus being advertised, returns with his wife, and is established in the
kingdom. The destines grant him a double date of life if he can find one to
die for him, which Alcest her self perfourmeth: for whose death Admetus most
woefully lamentyng, she was eftsoons by Proserpina restoared to her life, and
lover again.

IT is a saying no less common then commonly proved true, that Marriages are
guided by destiny, and amongst all the contractes which concern the life of
man, I think they only be not in our own power or pleasure: which may plainly
appear by this, that when the choice of such marriages does chance unto us
as we our selves can wish, when they may by their parents and freindes
countenance us, by their dowry and portion profit us, by their person and
beauty pleasure us, by their virtue and perfection every way place us in
paradise, yet it is often seen that we set little by them, neither make any
account of such profitable profers, but by a contrary course of the heavens
and destinies, are carried, as it were against our wills, some other way, and
caused to settle in affection there where heaven and earth seem to withstand
our desire, where freindes frown on us, where wealth wants, where there is
neither fecilitie in pursuyng, neither felicity in possessing: which the
history which you shall hear shall more plainly set forth unto you.

There raygned in the land of Lybia one Atys, who had to his neighbor more
near then was necessary one Lycabas king of Assure, which princes rather
coveting their neighbors dominions, then co^tentyng themselves with their
own, incroched each one upon others right, and continued continual war one
against the other. But at length Atys, whether he were weried and wasted with
war, or whether he had occasion to bend his force some other way, or whether
he were disposed to enter into league and amity with his neighbors I know
not, but he sent his one son Admetus to Lycabas to parlee of a peace. Now
Lycabas either thinkyng he had him at some aduau^tage, either not minding to
put up iniu ries before received, would accept no conditions of peace, but by
Admetus sent his father flat defiance. So that the war continued between them
in as great rage as it had done the former time of their raygne. But yet hate
caused not such hoate skirmishes between the parents, but that love forced as
fierce assaults between the children. For it was so that Lycabas had a
daughter named Alcest, who what time Admetus was in her fathers court to
entreat of peace, chanced out at her chaumber window to have a sight of him,
and he at the same time happened to encounter a vewe of her. And as small
drops of rain engender great flouddes, and as of little seeds grow great
trees, so of this little look and sight grew such great love and delight that
death it self could not dissolve it. For as women be of delicate and fine
metal, and therefore soon subject to love, so Alcest after this first sight
was so ouergone in goodwill toward Admetus, that she fixed her only
felicity in framyng in her fancy the form of his face, and printyng in her
heart the perfection of his person. And as nothing breeds bane to the body
sooner then trouble of mind, so she perseuered so long in such pensive
passions, and careful cogitations, that her body was brought so lo for lack
of the use of sleep and meat, that she was feign to keep her bed: and by
reason that she covertly concealed her grief, it burned so furiously within
her, that it had almost clean consumed her away. Her father seeinge her in
this heavy case, assembled all the learned physicians he could learn of in
the country, who having seen her were all altogether ignorant of her disease,
and were at their wits end what medicine to apply to her malady. Some thought
it a consumption, some a burning fever, some a melancholy humor, some one
thing, some another. And her father examyning her how it held her, and what
disease she thought it to be, she answered that it was a sickness which it
pleased god to send her, and that it was not in y^ help of Physic to heal
her, but her health was only to be had at gods hands. Now Admetus on the
other side having the profer of many princes made him in the way of marriage,
made very careless account thereof, and seemed in his mind to be very angry
with those offers: and as the sight of meat is very loathsome to him whose
stomach is ill or has already eaten his fill, so that little sight which he
had of Alcest had fed his fancy so full, that to see, or so mutch as think, of
any other woman was most grievous unto him. And notwithstanding the gripinge
pain of love caused some graftes of grief to begin to grow in his heart: yet
by reason that he had the conducting of the army royal under his father, he
was so busily occupied that he had no great leisure to lodge any loving
thoughts within his breast. But see how the destinies dealt to drive this
bargain through. There aroase a quarrel beetweene the two armies touching
certain points wherein the law of arms was thought to be broken, to decide
which controversy Admetus was sent post to Lycabas: who sitting by his
daughters bed side, had word brought him that Admetus was come to the court
to impart matters of importance unto him. Now at this instant there chanced
one of the Physicians to hold Alcest by the arm and to feel her pulses, and
where before they beat very feebly as if she had been ready to yield to the
sommance of death, she no sooner heard that message brought up to her father,
but that her pulses began to beat with great force and liveliness: which the
physician perceiuinge persuaded him self he had found the cause of her
calamity: but for more assured proof he whistered the king in the ear
desiring him that Admetus might be sent for thither and there to make relation
of his message unto him: which the king caused to be done accordingly.
Admetus was no sooner admitted into the chamber, but her pulses beegan to beat
again with wonderful swiftness, and so continued all the while he was in
the chaumber. Who seeinge his love in such danger of her life, though he
understood not the cause thereof, yet he cast such a careful countenance
toward her, that she easily perceived he did participate in pain with her:
which made her cast such glaunces of goodwill toward him, that he easily
understood it was for his sake she sustained such sorrow and sickness. But
the fear of her father, who was his mortal foe, and the urgent necessity of
his affairs, forced him to depart without manifesting unto her the manifold
good will he bare her. And though his departure were little better then death
to the damsel, yet for that she knew her love to be incountred with like
affection (whereof before she stood in doubt) she beegan to drive away the
dark clouds of despair and to suffer the bright light of hope to shine upon
her. Admetus being gone, the Physician took the king a side and told him his
daughters disease was not derived of any distemperature of the body but only of
the disquietnesse of the mind: and to tell you the truth plainly (says he)
it is only the fervent affection she bears to that young prince Admetus
your enemy that forces this feebleness and faintnes in her. And told the
king by what means he tried the truth thereof. The king at these words was
meruailously disquieted persuading himself that it was so in deed, and that
Admetus on the other side bare affection to his daughter, for that all the time
of his talk with him, he continually turned his eyes toward her bed, and
would often times give him answers nothing pertinent to the questions which
he proposed unto him, as having his cogitations conuersaunt in other matters.
Upon this the king went to his daughter, and as the physician first ministers
to his patient bitter pills and purgations to expel gross and ill humors,
and then applies lenitiues and restoratiues to breed and bring again good
blood, so he first used sharp threatenings unto her to expel the force and
fury of her love, and then used gentle persuasions to restore her to her former
health and quiet of mind. But neither the sowernesse of the one, neither the
sweetness of the other could prevail, for salues seldom help an ouerlong
suffered sore, it is to late to shut the stable door when the steed is stolen,
it booteth not to stop the breach when the town is overflowed: it is to late
to dislodge love out of ones breast, when it has infected before every part
of the body. For as sowninge mortifieth every member, as pestilence infecteth
every part, as poison pierseth every vain, so love if it be not in time
looked too, will bring both body and mind to utter confusion. For this virgin
was so vanquished by love, that she neither forced her fathers fair words,
neither feared his fierce threatninges, but told him plainly she would not
deny the love she bare Admetus, neither could cast out of her mind the liking
she had conceived of him: and therefore humbly craved pardon if (says she) it
be an offense to love him honestly, which deserves it worthily. But her
father in a fury flunge from her saying, she should never enjoy him with
joy, and that she should never find any more fatherly furtherance at his
hands, then the greatest enemy he had. The young princess perceiuinge her
fathers goodwill thus alienated from her, reposed her only comfort and
confidence in Admetus, hoping that he would stand her in steed of both a
friend, phere, and father. And with as convenient speed as she could, wrought
a letter to him to this end.

If (most peerless prince) necessity or love had law, I might be thought
perchance to transgress the law and limyttes of modesty in first giuinge the
onset where as I ought not easily to have yielded being assaulted. But seeinge
necessity and lack of opportunity, by reason of the rigor of the wars
perchance causes you to conceal that which you would discover, and vehemente
love and fervent desire forces me to discover that which I should conceal, I
think it less offense by this means to supplye your want and satisfy mine
own desire, then, by standing upon the nice terms of my maidens estate, to
suffer both of us to pine away in pain for lack of being privy to each
others mind and purpose. Therefore you shall understand the cause of my writing
is this. What time your good hap (I hope) was to be at my fathers court, I did
perceive (if desire to have it so did not deceive me) that your affection was
great toward me, and that you seemed not a little to be pinched with my
pain, to ease you of which grief I thought it my duty to certify you, that
the certain hope which I thereby conceived of your love and good will, did
presently restoare me to perfect health, and further to let you understand,
that the only cause of my sickness was the first sight which I had of you, and
the despair that I should never be so fortunate as to obtain you. Now as the
same hand which did hurt me, did help me, so if I have any way wounded you,
I shall be ready to make you what plaster it please you to heal your hurt? And
iudginge the sincerity of your mind by the cleerenesse of mine own
conscience, I commit my self wholly into your hands, presuminge thus far of
your perfect love toward me, that you will not any way seek the
disperagement of mine honor (which I hold far more dear then love or life)
but accept me for your lawful and loving spouse. And that way you only and at
any time shall dispose of me at your pleasure. My father by ill fortune has
found out our love, and stormeth greatly thereat, so that I think his haggard
heart is by no means to be reclaimed. But I think indirect dealinge by the
daughter may be used, when the father by rage rather then reason is ruled.
Therefore if you think so good, I will secretly conueigh my self to what place
you will have me, but I commit this matter to your wisdom, and my self to
you, remayninge yours only and ever: ALCEST.


Now Admetus ever after his return from the court of Lycabas was driven into
such doleful dumpes, and governed his charge of men with such heavy cheer,
that his father examining him very stractly of the cause thereof, enforced him
to confess his careful case. Which he no sooner heard, but he forthwith
discharged him of his charge, saying he was fitter to be one of Cupids carpet
captains, then to march under the mainly ensign of Mars: and that he would
have no such lascivious knights is his army. For (says he) if any part of
the body be putrified, it must be cut of for fear of infectinge the whole
body. And told him plainly if he went forward with his folly, he would
never take him for his son, neither should he ever succeed in the kingdom
by this consent. The young prince withdrew himself out of his fathers
presence, and got him to his pauilion or tente, where he was no sooner sadly
set down, but he was presented by a trusty messenger with ye letter of
Alcest, which so soon as he had red, he seemed to be rapt into the third
heaven: but considering on the other side the difficulty of reapinge the
fruits of his love, and wayinge the peril of his fathers displeasure, he was
thrown into the deepest dungeon of hell. And as a boat borne by the tide
against the wind, feels double force, and is compeld to yield both to wind
and wave, so this young prince, beeinge driven by the force of love against
the mind and pleasure of his father, felt double dolor, and was tormented
with both. But at length love gat the victory, and all other doubts cast
aside, he returned his Misteris this answer.

Who was ever exalted to the highest degree of happiness, and driven to the
deepest extremity of evil at once but I? who ever flowrished in felicity,
and faded in misery together but I? who was ever placed in paradise and
plunged in perplexity jointly but I? for heaven it self cannot yield me
better bliss then the consent of your goodwill and love, (most peerlesse
prince and princely piece) and hell it self cannot yield me more bitter
bale, then to be destitute of means to enjoy the fruits of your favor and
benefit of your beutie. If Craesus came and offered me all his wealth, if
Alexander yielded me his empire, if Juno came from heaven with her kingdoms,
Pallas with her wisdom, or Venus with her Helen, assure thy self (sweet
Mistress) that neither any one of them, neither all of them together, should be
so gratefully or gladly received of me, as the profer which your letters have
made me. And can thou (dear wenche) prefer my love before thine own life,
my pleasure before thy fathers displeasure, my contentment before thine own
commodity, and shall any doubt of danger drive me from the duty which I
ought to do unto thee? No let father fret, let freindes frown, let living be
lost, let kingdom be made from me, let hap what hap will, thou have promised
to be mine, and I protest by the heavens to be thine. What though the king
your father be greatly incensed against me, what care I for any man's
freindship if I have your favor? What though the way unto you be long and
dangerous? What pass I to pass a thousand perils to pleasure you? what
though mine enemies lie in wait for me? What way I to be hewn in an hundred
pieces in your presence? Yea if I had a thousand lives I think the loosinge of
them all little enough to requite the great goodwill and courtesy you have
showed me. But meethinkes I hear you say, the spendyng or loss of my life,
is the greatest loss and evil that possibly can happen unto you, and
therefore I must take heed how I hazard it. Well I will (sweet wenche)
preserve my life only to serve thee, and the care I have of you shall cause me
to have care of my self. But touching the conueigh of our affairs I am at my
wits end which way to work, for if your father chafe at this matter, mine
rages and stormeth, and watches me so narrowly that not so mutche as my
looks but he looks to them. But I will ease him of this labor ere it be
long, for this life I am not able to endure long: yea I had rather live with
you in most misery (if he may possibly be miserable that inioyeth such a
jewel as you are) then here in most happiness (which of me is not to be
had without you) therefore waywa^d fortune has only left us this way, if it
please you so mutch to dishonor your self, and to do me so mutche honor,
as meet me the tenth of this month at the chapel of Diana, standing as you
know six leagues from your fathers court, I will there god willing meet you,
and a priest with me to marry us, which done we will shift our selves into
Pilgrims apparel, and so disguised endure together such fortune as the fates
shall assygne us. And thus till then I bid you farewell.

Yours ever, or his own never: ADMETVS.


Now see the valiantness of a vyrgin, or rather consider the force of love
which makes the weak strong, the witless wise, the simple subtle, yea and
the most cowards most courageous. For the day prescribed in the letter of
Admetus being come, the young princess before day attired her self in one
of her Pages apparel, and trudged out of the city as if she had been sent to
the Camp on some message: and so fast as her faynte legs (but strengthened by
love) could carry her, she hasted through the desert and waylesse woods to this
forlorn chapel, where the God whom she only honored was ready to receive
her: Who though at y^ first he knew her not, but thought she had been Cupid
or Mercury fallen from the heavens, yet at length by her loving looks cast
upon him, he knew who it was, and imbrasing her fast in his arms said, if
Jupiter (sweet wenche) should see thee in this Pages apparel, no doubt but he
would forgo his Ganymedes, and take thee up into heaven in his steed. O most
soueraygne Lady and mistress, what service shall I ever be able to do you,
which may counteruayle this kindness? What duty can be a due recompense to
this goodwill? If I by any means can quite this curtesy, I never doubt to be
deemed ungrateful while I live. But accept (good Lady) I beseech you that
which is in me to perform, which is the faithfullest heart that ever was
vowed to Lady: which when it swarueth from you, let all the torments of
Tantalus, Tytius, Sisiphus and all the rufull rout of hell be heaped upon me.
Alcest hearing him so earnest said:

Few words (most worthy prince) are enough to win credit to a matter already
believed: for only upon confidence of your constant and faithful heart
toward me, I have thus unadvisedly adventured mine honor as you see,
destringe you not sinisterly to think of this my attempt, being boldned
thereto by the great love which I bare toward you, and by the loyalty which I
look for of you toward me. Ah says Admetus, if I should make any ill
interpretation of your virtuous love and sincere affection toward me, I were
the veriest villain on earth, for I take god to witness I take your forward
will for such freindly good will, that I doubt my deserts will never be able
so to answer thereto as I desire. But here he aptly ended his talk upon her
mouth, and they entered into such privy conference, their lips being joined
most closely together, y^ I can not report the meaning of it unto you, but if
it please one of you to lean hitherward a little I will show you the manner of
it. Now having continued some time therein, they at the length entered into the
temple, where the marriage according to the sacred rites was solemnly
celebrated: which done they entered into a poor cotage, in steed of a princely
palace, joining to the temple, where long they durst not tarry for fear of
apprehension by posts which pursued them. Therefore puttinge on their pilgrims
apparel again, they went hand in hand and heart in heart, waylfully and
wilfully, wandering out of their own native country, to avoid their parents
punnishment and displeasure. O lamentable lots of love which drove two princes
from their pleasant pallaices, from their flourishinge freindes, from their
train of servants, from their sumptuous fare, from their gorgeous garments,
from variety of delights, from secure quietness, yea from heavenly
happiness, to wild wilderness, to deserte dens, to careful caves, to hard
cheer, with hawes and hippes, to pilgrims peltes, to peril of spoiling, to
danger of devouring, to misery of mind, to affliction of body, yea to hellish
heaviness. O pitiles parents to prefer their own hate before their childrens
love, their own displeasures before their childrens pleasure, to forget y^
themselves were once young and subject to love, to measure the fiery slames of
youth, by the dead coals of age, to govern their children by their own lust
which now is, not which was in times past, to seek to alter their natural
affection from their children upon so light a cause, shewinge themselves rebels
to nature, to endeavor to undo the destines and disappointe the appointment of
the gods, showing themselves traitors to the gods. But the one of them,
the father of Admetus reaped the just reward of his rigor. For Atys after the
departure of his son took the matter very heavily, abandoned all pleasures,
avoided all company, and spent most part of his time in discoursinge with
himself in this sorrowful sort.

If nature by the divine providence of god did not move us to the maintenance
of mankind, surely the charge of children is such a heavy burden, that it
would fear men from entering into the holy state of matrimony. For to omit the
inconveniences of their infancy, which are infinite, when they draw once to
man's estate, what time they should be a stay to our staggeringe state, good
God what troubles do they torment us with? What cares do they consume as
with? What annoyes do they afflict our old years with all? They say we are
renewed and revived as it were in our ofspringe, but we may say we die daily
in thinkinge of the desperate deeds of our children. And as the spider feels
if her web be pricked but with the point of a pin, so if our childred be
touched but with the least trouble that is, we feel the force of it to perce
us to the heart. But how well this tender care is by them considered, alas it
makes my heart bleed to think if we look for obedience of them, and that they
should follow our counsel in the conuaighe of their affairs, why they
think we doat, and that their own wits are far better then ours: if we
warn them to be wary and thrifty, they think it proceeds rather of
covetousness then of kindenes: if we provide them no marriages, it is because
we will depart with no living to them: if we persuade them to marriage, it
is because we would have them forsake all good fellowship, and live like
clownes in the country by the Plowe tail: If we persuade them to learning
it is that they might live by it without our charge: if we persuade them to
one wife rather then another, it is because the one is ritcher then the other:
if we look severely on them, we love them not: if we use them familiarly,
we feed them with flattery because we will give them little: and so of all
our loving dooinges they make these lewd devises: yea when we have brought
them up with great care and cost, when we have travailed all our time by sea
and by land, early and late, in pain and in peril, to heap up treasure for
them, when we have by continual toil shortened our own lives to lengthen and
enlarge their liuinges and possessions, yet if we suffer them not to royst and
to riot, to spill and to spoil, to swashe and to lashe, to lend and to spend,
yea and to follow the fury of their own frantike fancies in all things, this
forsooth is our recompense, they wish an end of our lives to have our livings.
Alas a lamentable case, why has not nature caused love to ascend as well as
descend? Why has she endued the Storke with this property to feed his damme,
when she is old, and men with such malice to wish their parents death when
they are aged? But I speak perchance of mine own proper grief, god forbid
it should be a common case, for my son (Ah why do I call him son) has
not only wished my death but wrought it. He knew he was my only delight, he
knew I could not live he being out of my sight: he knew his desperate
disobedience would drive me to a desperate death. And could he so mutch doat
of a light damsel, to force so little of his loving father? Alas a wife is to
be preferred before father and friend. But had he none to six his fancy on
but the daughter of my most furious foe? Alas love has no respect of persons.
Yet was not my goodwill and consent to be craved therein? Alas he saw no
possibility to obtain it. But now alas I would grant my goodwil, but now alas
it is to late: his fear of my fury is to great ever to be found, his fault is
to great ever to look me in the face more, and my sorrow is to great ever to
be saluted. And thereupon got him to bed and in five days space his natural
moisture with secret sorrow was so soken away, that he could no longer
continue his careful life, but yielded willingly to desired death. So it
pleased God to provide for the poor pilgrims, who having past many a fearful
forest and dangerous desert, were now come to the sea shore mindinge to take
ship and travel into unknown coasts, where they might not by any means be
known, and being on ship board they heard the master of the ship make report
that Atys king of the Lybians was dead. Whereupon Admetus desired to be set on
shore again, and dissemblinge the cause thereof, pretended some other matter
and got to the next town wherewith the money and jewels he had about him, he
furnished him self and his lady with the best apparel could be provided in
the town, and with such a train of men as he could there take up: which
done he made the greatest expedition he could unto his own country where
he was royally received as prince, and shortly after joyfully crowned King.
And being quietly, settled in the regal seat, he presently dispatched
Ambassadors to Lycabas his fathers foe, and his father in law, whose ambassade
contained these two points, the one to entreat a peace for his people, the
other to crave a pardon for his wife, who willingly granted both the one and
the other. Whereby he now lived in great quiet and tranquillity. A meruaylous
mutabylity of fortune which in the space of a month could bring him from happy
joy to heavy annoy, and then from annoy again to greater joy then his former
joy. For as the sun having been long time overwhelmed with dark clouds,
when it has bannished them from about it, seems to shine more brightly then
at any time before, so the state and condition of this prince having been
covered with the clouds of care, now it was cleared of them, seemed more
pleasant and happy then at any time before. And verily as sharp sauce gives a
good taste to sweet meat, so trouble and adversity, makes quiet and
prosperity for more pleasant. For he knows not the pleasure of plenty, who
has not felt the pain of penury, he takes no delight in meat, who is never
hongry: he cares not for ease who was never troubled with any disease.

But notwithstanding the happy life of this prince, albeit he abounded in as
great riches as he required, albeit he had as many kingedomes as he
coueted, albeit he had such a wife as he wished for, yea and inioyed all
things which either god could give him, fortune further him to, or nature
bestow upon him: yet to show that there is no sun shines so bright but that
clouds may over cast it, no ground so good but that it brings forth weeds as
well as flowers, no king so surely guarded, but that the gamesome gods
fortune will at least check him, if not mate him, no state so plentiful in
pleasure, but that it is mixed with pain, he had some weeds of woe which
began to grow up amongst his flowers of felicity, and some chippes of sorry
chance did light in the heap of his happiness. Yea fortune presented her
self once again upon the stage and meant to have one flinge more at him. For
this prince possessinge such a pleasant life, took great delight in good
house keepinge, and gave such good entertainment to strangers that his fame
was far spread into foreign countries: yea the rumor thereof reached to the
skies, in so mutch that Apollo (as the poets report) having occasion to descend
from heaven to the earth, went to see the entertainment of Admetus: who was so
royally received by him, that the god thought good with some great kindness to
requite his great courtesy. And as Philemon and Laucis, for their hearty house
keepinge, were preserved by the gods from drowning when all the cuntry and
people besides were overflowed, so the god Apollo meant to preserve his life,
when all his country and people then living should lie full lo in their
graves. And of the destinies of death obtained thus much for him, that if when
the time and term of his natural life drew to an end, if any could be
found who would willingly die and loose their own life for him, he should
begin the course of his life again, and continue on earth another age.

Now when the time of his natural life drew to an end, there was diligent
inquiry made who would be content to abridge their own days, to prolong
their princes life. And first the question was put to his freindes (who were
nearest to them selves) then to his kinsfolk (whose love was asmutch of
custom as of kindness) then to his subjects (whose affection was as mutch
for fear as for favor) then to his servants (who thought their life as
sweet as their master did his) then to his children (who thought it reason
that as their father did first enter into this life so he should first depart
out of this life) so that there could none be found so frank of their life
to set this prince free from the force of death. Now Alcest seeing the death of
her dear husband draw near, and knowinge her own life without his life and
love would be but loathsome unto her, of her own accord offered her self to
be sacrificed for her husbands sake, and to hasten her own death to prolonge
his life. O loyal loving wife, O wight good enough for god him self. And yet
had she a husband good enough for her self, for he loved her so entirely
that though by loosing her he might have gained life long time, yet would he
not by any means consent to her death, saying, without her life his life
would be more grievous unto him then a thousand deaths. But she persuaded
with him against herself all that she could saying, I would not (O peerles
prince) you should take the matter so kindly at my hands, as though for your
sake only I offered up my life, for it is in deed the commodity of your country
and mine own, beeinge under your domynion, which drives me hereto, knowinge
my self unable to govern them you being gone. And considering the daily
war, the spoylefull wastes, the bloody blastes, the troublesome strife which
your realm is subject too, I thought you had not loved me so little as to
leave me behind you to bear on my weak back such a heavy burden, as I
think Atlas him self could scarce sustain.

Again, considering that death is but a fleeting from one life into another,
and that from a most miserable life to a most happy life, yea from bale to
bliss, from care to quiet, from Purgatory to Paradise, I thought you had not
envied me so mutch, as to think me unworthy of it. Do you not know that
Cleouis and Byton had death bestowed on them as the best gift which God could
devise to give them, and do you think it can do me harm, especially seeing
I may thereby do you good? Alas sweet wife (says Admetus) this your piety is
unprofitable which is subject to so many perils. But if death be so good (good
wife) let me enjoy it, who am enjoined to it, and to whom only it will be
good, for death is only good to me whom it is given, not to you who are not
appointed to it. For it is not lawful for any to leave this life without
special permission of the gods. And as in our court it is lawful for none to
have access unto us unless by us he be sent for, so neither is it lawful
for any to appear before the heavenly throne, unless by the gods he be
sommoned. Neither will death be so easy to you as to me, whose nature is apt
to yield unto it. For you see fruit which is not ripe, will scarce with
strength be torn from the tree, whereas that which is ripe falls easily of
it own accord. Therefore (good wife) give me leave to die to whom it wilbee
only good and easy to die. Why sweet husband (says she) the god Appollo
allowed any that would to die for you, otherwise to what purpose was that which
he obtained of the destinies for you? And for the vneasines of death, nothing
can be uneasy or hard unto a willing heart. But because your pleasure is so, I
am content to continue my careful life, and with sorrow to survive you. And
so left her husband and went privily to the Altar and offered up her self to
death to prolonge her husbands life. Which when the king knew, he would
presently have spoiled him self, but his hands had not the power to do it,
for that by the decree of the destinies he must now of force live another age
on earth. Which when he saw, he filled the court with such pitiful wayling,
such bitter weeping, such hellishe houlinge, that it pierced the heavens and
moved the gods to take remorse on his misery. And Proserpine y^ gods of hell
especially pitying y^ parting of this loving couple (for y^ she her self knew
the pain of partinge from friends, being by Dys stolen from her mother Ceres)
put life into his wife again, and with speed sent her unto him. Who being
certified here of in his fleepe, early in y^ morning waited for her coming
seeing her come a far of he had much a do to keep his soul in his body from
flying to meet her. Being come he received her as joyfully, as she came
willingly, and so they lived long time together in most contented happiness.

This seems strange unto you (Gentlewoman) that a woman should die and then
live again, but the meaning of it is this, that you should die to your selves
and live to your husbands, that you should count their life your life, their
death your destruction: that you should not care to disease your selves to
please them: that you should in all things frame your selves to their fancies:
that if you see them disposed to mirth, you should endeavor to be pleasant:
if they be solemn, you should be sad: if they hard, you having: if they
delight in hawks, that you should love Spanniels: if they hunting, you
hounds: if they good company, you good housekeeping: if they be hasty, that
you should be pacient: if they be ielous, that you should lay aside all light
looks: if they frown, that you fear: if they smile, that you laugh: if they
kiss, that you cleepe, or at least give them two for one: and so that in all
things you should conform your selves to their contentacion: so shall there
be one will in two minds, one heart in two bodies, and two bodies in one flesh.
Meethinkes I hear my wish, wish me such a wife as I have spoken of, verily
(good wish) you wish your wealth great wealth, and God make me worthy of you
wish and your wish and if I might have my wish I am persuaded you should have
your wish. But if I be so good a husband as Admetus was, if I forgo father,
freindes, and living, if I be content to change joy for annoy, court for
care, pleasure for pilgrimage for my wives sake, if I had rather die my self
then she should, if she beeinge dead, with mournful cries I move the Gods to
raise her to life again, I shall think my self worthy of so good a wife as
Alcest was. I shall hap to have a wife who with Cleopatra will sting her self
to death with serpents at the death of her Antonius: who with Hylonomo will
slay her self at the death of her Cyllar: who with Singer will vanish away
into air for the loss of her Picus: and who with Alcest will be content to
lose her life to preserve her Admetus.

Scilla and Minos.
SCILLA, daughter to Nisus king of Alcathoe, disdaynefully rejecting the
humble suit of Iphis, a young Gentleman of her fathers Court, becomes
unadvisedly amorous of king Minos, her fathers and countries mortal foe,
lyinge in siege about the City. To whom by the counsel of Pandarina she
beetrayeth her father, in stealyng away his golden hair, and presentinge it
unto Minos in token of her love, which he reprochefully rejects. And being
embarked to depart homewards, she assayeth to swim after him, and is drowned
in the Sea.

MAny are of opinion that the virtues of love are very many, and that it is of
force to reduce us from savageness to ciuilnesse, from folly to wit, from
covetousness to liberality, from clownishnesse to courtlinesse, yea from al
vice to all virtue. But if the effects thereof be rightly considered, I see
not but that we may more justly say, that the inconveniences of love be
infinite, and that it brings us from modesty to impudency, from learning to
lewdness, from stayed firmnes to staggering fickelnesse, from liberality to
prodigality, from wariness to wilfulness, from good beehauiour to dissolute
living, from reason to rage, yea from all goodness to all vanity. As may be
justified by the gods themselves, by the godliest men that ever were, by the
wisest men that ever were, and by the valiantest men that ever were. Who by
love have been brought to most outrageous impiety, to most extreme folly, and
most vile villainy. But Gentlewomen, because most of you be maids (I mean at
least taken so) I will manifest unto you the mischief of love by the example of
a maid, in that estate (though I hope not every way) like unto your selves,
that admonished thereby, you may avoid the like inconvenience in your selves.

Therefore you shall understand that over the town Alcathoe reigned one Nysus,
who had to daughter a damsel named Scilla, a proper sweet wenche, in
goodlinesse a goddess, in shape Venus her self, in show a saint, in
perfection of person peerless: but in deeds a dayntie daine, in manners a
merciless maid, and in works a wilful wenche, as by her life you shall
perceive. For there was attendant upon her father in his court a proper youth
named Iphis, who, as the freshest colors soonest fade the hue, and as the
finest metals soonest break, so the more noble blood he came of, and the
finer wit he was endued withal, the sooner was he made thrall and subject
to love: And the more courageous mind he had, y^ more haughty conquest did
he endeavor to atchiue. For being in the daily sight of Scilla, he beegan
firmly to fix his fond fancy upon her fine face. And by reason of his
young years being ignorant that under most green grass lie most great
snakes, and under intisinge baytes intanglyng hooks, he bit so greedely at
the bayte of her beutie, that he swallowed down the hook of hateful hurt^,
and hurtful heaviness to his heart. But like a man he sought means to subdue
his sorrow and to vanquish this virgin, and first like a bashful young man
he solicited his suit by pitiful looks, thinkyng thereby to let her
understand his desire. But she on the other side perceiuyng his intent, cast
coy countenances upon him to drive him to despair: so that where before his
own ^fulnesse kept him from discovering his purpose, now her coyness caused
him to cover it. Yet extreme love drove him to this extreme shift, he
imparted his purpose to an uncle of his, a noble man of great countenance in y^
court, humbly desiryng him either by counsel, countenance, pain or policy
to stand him in some stead to the attaynyng of his purpose: his vnckel gravely
advised him to avoid such vanity and not to attempt any such enterprise
whereby he should incur the Kings displeasure, and per co^sequens his own
undoing. But he told this tale to one that had no ears to hear, for the
deepenesse of his love caused deafness in him to hear any thing which might
help to heal his harebraind head, for forward he would with his folly
whatsoever came of it. The old Gentleman seeing his unadvisedness, told him he
would so far as he durst feel the fancye of the young Princess, and thereby
he should perceive how likely he were to prevail in his purpose. And having
convenient time he fell to sifting her thoughts in this sort.

Fair Lady, we have letters come to the Court containing this news, that two
or three young Princes have directed their course into this Country to see and
assay you in the way of marriage: wherein I doubt not but you will deal to the
Kings majesty's contentation, and to our Countries commodytie: and to consider
that the stay of the whole kingdom stands upon your marriage, for ye he
which marries you must after the kings decease succeed as lawful heir unto
the crown. Now if you match your self with a stranger, it is greatly to be
feared that we shall be greatly molested with the fury of foreign force, for
that the Kings guard and court for the most part shall be of his own Country:
and so strangers shall be preferred to offices, and we set besides our living,
whereas if it shall please you to take to husband some of your own country you
shall be as it were King and Queen your self, and he as it were your seruante
and subject. And so shall you reign in great soueraignitie and we live in great
tranquillytie. His talk being ended the Princess made him this proud answer.

My Lord, touching my marriage it touches me more nearly then you, and my
father the Kings counsel I mean cheefely to follow therein: neither will I so
respect your commodity to neglect mine own honor, neither will I have more
consideration of the stay of my Country, then of the state of my calling,
neither in that point by your leave will I prefer the common wealth before mine
own private will: for that it is only I must marry, which if I do to my
liking, I am like to live pleasauntly, if otherwise I am sure to live sowerly
all the days of my life. And for marryinge any of mine country, I promise you
for my part I know never a Prince in all this country my father excepted.
Meaning she would match with none under the degree of a Prince. Immediately
after this the noble man called his nephew unto him telling him he thought it
as easy a matter to climb to heaven with ladders, as for so mean a man as he
to aspyre to the height of her haughty mind. The young Gentleman thinking
that his ^kle for fear of displeasure durst not deal in so dangerous a
matter, neither gave great credit to his words, neither yielded him any
thanks for his pains, but determined notwithstanding of himself to pursue
his suit. And knowing that proper Gentlewomen delight in pretty Jewels, and that
the Gods them selves are pleased with gifts, he gat the most precious Pearls
and dearest Diamonds in the country, and caused them to be presented unto the
Princess from him. But disdainful rigor so ruled her, that she would not so
mutch as look upon them, saying she had no need of his gifts, that he might
better bestow them on those who were not his betters, and that she thought it
shame a Princes person should be purchased with perles. The Gentleman though
greatly dismaide to see both his goodwill neclected, and his gifts rejected,
yet like a valiant Soldier he gave a fresh onset upon her with friendlye
loving Letters which he wrote in this wise.

Most peerless Princess, though love has almost blinded me in all things,
yet I humbly beseech you not to think me so forgetful either of the meanness
of mine own estate, either of the majesty of yours, as to presume to practice
you in the way of marriage, for in my judgment I think no man on earth
worthy that honor, but my pitiful petition is this, that you will accept me
for your slave and servant, and ye what country soever you shall be married
into, I may give attendance upon you, to y^ intent still to enjoy the sight of
your sweet face, and feed my fansy in y^ conte^plation of your beuty. For I
am so vowed to your virtue, y^ only the sweet remembrance of you shall mortify
in me y^ mind to any other woman whatsoever. For I persuade my self to find
more felicity in one friendly look of yours, then in any others faithful
love. And though these blotted words be to base an object for your heavenly
eyes, yet waighing the cause in the skales of curtesye, I trust you will take
them in good part. The cause of the blots was the tears which fell from my
eyes at the making hereof, the cause of the words is the good will of the
writer. Thus prayinge you to pity the one and to accept the other, I leave,
lyving only to do you duty and service.

Yours, though not yours: IPHIS.


The Princess having this letter delivered unto her, by one of her waiting
women, so soon as she knew front whence it came, floung it from her, saying
she had nothing to deal either with him or his letters, and straightlye
charged her women not to salute her with any thing from him. But Fortune so
framed that as she flung the letter from her, in came the king her father and
caused the letter to be reached unto him, and knowing the contents thereof, sent
for my youth Iphis, shook him up with sharp threatenings, and charged him upon
pain of punishment never after to be seen at the Court. The young Gentleman
seeing the ground which he tilled altogether barren, and that it yielded him
but care for Corn and grief for grain, determined to bestow no more cost or
labor thereon: and besides fearing the Kings fury and displeasure, with as
convenient speed as he could coueied himself in to the country, and there
assuaged his sadness with solitariness: and setting her cruelty toward him
against his courtesy toward her, her visdainfulnes, against his own
dutifulnes, he soon set himself free from his folly. This matter thus enued,
greater storms began to brue, and such a tempest arose that Scilla who before
kept other in bands, was now her self set in the sands, and where before
she sailed in ship with top and top gallant, setting out flag of defiance, now
she was driven to strik sail and veil bonnet even to her fathers enemy. For
it fell so out that King Minos, moved justly thereto for the murder of his
son, waged war and came with a puisaunt power against King Nysus, and laid
so hard to his charge that he made him keep his Castle. Now while Minos lay
at the siege thereof, it fortuned the young Princess to have a sight of him
out at the window of the tower wherein she lay: and now Cupid meant to be
revenged on the cruelty which she used to his Captain Iphis who fought so
faithfully under his banner: and shot such darts of desire into her toward
King Minos, that unless she might have him to husband she thought her self
but a woman cast away: and after a sobbinge sigh and trickling tear she fell
out with her self in this sort.

Ah fond foolish girl, and can thou find in thine heart to bear freindly
affection to thy fathers feendly foe? Can I love him kindly, who seeks to
spoil my country cruelly. Could I valiauntly withstand the assaults of a
flourishinge young man, and shall I cowardly yield to a fadinge old man
without any assault? O love without law, O rage without reason, O will without
wit, O fansy fraught full of fury and frensy. Good God where are now beecome
those lofty looks I was wont to use to lovers? Where are the coy
countenances, the haughty words, the solemn salutacions, the dainty
dealinges, the curious congies, and such like? Alas now I am made to stoop
without stale, to come without call or lure, yea to the empty fist. But alas
who is privileged from the force of love, no there are none so stout but love
makes them stoop, none so wise but love makes them fools, none so shamefast
but love makes them bold. And though I should first bewray my affection and
make love to king Minos, the offense is rather to be pitied then punished.
Yea the more frankly I offer him my goodwil, the more freindly no doubt but he
will accept it: and the less he has deserved it, the more will he endeavor
himself to be thankful for the same. Neither can he but take it as an
undoubted sign of deep goodwill if I give the first onset in this skirmishe:
neither can it any way redound to my shame, the end beeinge honest and my
meaning in the way of marriage. And if it be lawful to follow the example of
creatures without reason, does not the Cow lo to the Bull, does not the Mare
neigh to the Horse, does not the Yeaw blea to the Ram, does not the Faulcon
call to the tossell gentle, the gerfaulcon to the Gerkin, the sparehauke to the
Musket? And so of all other creatures the females are more forward that way
then the males. Besides that by how mutch weaker women are then men, by so
mutch the more they are to be borne with all, if they be less able to bear
the heavy burden of love then men. Again by how mutch more the love of women
is more fervent then of men, the more fiery flames of force must fry within us,
which without great grief cannot be concealed or covered. And whereof
springs this error that women may not first make love but only of a precise
and curious custom, nay rather a preiudicall and careful custom I may term
it to us women: for whereof comes it that so many of us are so evil matched in
marriage, but only hereof, that we are tied to the hard chose of those that
offer their love unto us: where as if it were lawful for us to make love where
we lyked best, we would never marry but to our mind and contentation. Lastly
I am not the first that have played the like part, and that which is done by
alowable example is lawfully done. For Venus her self yielded her self to her
darlinge Adonis without any suit made on his part: Phaedra made suit to
Hippolitus: Oenone pleaded her right with Paris: Dido did Aeneas to understand
how deeply she desired him: Bryses besought the goodwill of Achilles: Adalesia
by her gouernesse made love to Alerane: the Duchess of Sauoy went on
pilgrimage to y^ Knight Mendoza: infinite like exampls I could allege, and why
is it not lawful for me to do the like, and make love to King Minos, who
perchance would first have sued to me, if he had first seen me? yes let the
world judge what they will, I will do what I shall judge best for my self, and
with as convenient speed as I may I will either by letters or deeds do Minos
to understand what mind I bear him. And as she was busely beating her brains
here about, one of her most trusty and loving women came* unto her, humbly
requestinge her to make her privy to the cause of her perplexity. Alas good
misteris (says she) if you want any thing, let your friends understand it, and
it shall be provided. If my poor service may any way serve your turn, assure
your self neither respect of honor, living or life, shall let me from doing
any thing, which may deliver you out of distress: if you have imprisoned your
liberty any where, and giued your self in the fetters of fansy, I know a
Gentlewoman, my familier friend, who can stand you in as much steed for y^
obtaininge of your purpose as any gentlewoman in this Court.

The princes desirous of aid in her distres, prayed her woman to procure the
coming of that Gentlewoman with all possible speed. Whereupon the waiting
woman caused one of the princesses gentlemen to go to this honest woman, and
in her name to desire her to come to the princess. You shall understand this
gentlewomans name, who was sent for, was Pandarina, in her youth a seruinge
woman, and one which knew more fashions then was fit for honest women. But
now married to an honest Gentleman, she entered into a new religion seeming
to renounce her old faith, and settling her self in such hipocrysy, y^ she
rather counterfaited cunningly the^ lived co^tine^tly. But to paint her out
more plainly she was more coy the^ cumly, more fine the^ well favored, more
loftly the^ lovely, more proud then proper, more precise the^ pure, more
superstitious then religious, more of spighte then of the spirit, and yet
nothing but honesty would down with her, more Ielous then zealous, either judging
her husband by her self, or iudginge her self unworthy the several use of so
commodious a commen as her husband was. Well such as she was this young
gentleman of the young princess was sent for her, and at ye first coming
according to the fashion he kissed her, and having done his message, with
frowning face she told him she could not go to the princess, and though
she could yet would she not go with him. The Gentleman somewhat abashed
hereat, returned to the gentlewoman that sent him, and told her what answer
this honest woman made. Who meruailing mutch thereat went presently her self
unto her, desiring that gentleman to accompany her. Beeinge come to her
lodging, after a few salutacions, Pandarina prayed the gentlewoman either to
send unto her a more modest messenger then the gentleman she sent, or else to
teach him to kiss more continently. The gentlewoman blushinge for bashfulnes,
told her she had not the skill to teach men to kiss, she thought that
cunning concerned common harlots, or at least married women rather then her,
but, says she, I will tell him of it, that of him self he may amend his
fault, and calling the gentleman aside unto her, she asked him how he had
misused him self toward Misteris Pandarina in kissinge her. No way (says
he) that I know for, but if I kissed her boldly, I trust she will attribute
it to young men's bashfulnesse, and if I kissed her kindly, I trust she will
impute it to good will. Yes mary (says the gentlewoman) it was more hindely
then she cared for or liked of. Uerily (says he) if it were over kind, it
is more then I know, or more then I meant for to speak my fancy freely, I know
never a gentlewoman in this land, that I like of worse: and if she be aferde
I be to far in love with her, I will be bound in what bond she will, to hate
her no man more. But gentlewoman, if you adhibite any credit to my counsel,
fly her familiarity, eschew her company, such saints in show are Satan's in
deed, such feigned holiness is double diue lishnesse, such counterfayte
continencye I count little better then baudry. For sure this is a most sure
mark to know dissemblers by, that they will always far exceed the mean,
for fear of being found in their fayning. As those that feign to weep, houle
out right: those that feign to be freindly, show them selves plain Parasites:
as those that feign to be valiant, brag most gloriously: and as she
counterfaytinge continency, shows her self altogether curious and
hipocritiall.

But notwithstanding I have had no knowledge of her life and conversation, yet
dare I lay my life on it, that either she has been naught, is naught, or
will be naught whenever she can get any foul adultrour fit for so filthy an
adultresse. The Gentlewoman hearing him so ernest, prayed him to put up the
matter patiently, saying she thought it was but a shift to excuse her not
coming to the princess: and so went to Pandarina telling her the Gentleman
was sorry he had offended her, and so away they went together to the princess.
I have wandered, Gentlewomen, somewhat beesides the path of my promised purpose,
but yet not clean out of the way of mine own will and intent. For though this
digressio^ pertain little to the history I have in hand, yet it may serve to
admonish you that you take not executions of curiosyty against kisses which are
given you of curtesy: and if there chance to be any fault in them, either
modesty to conceal it, or presently to return the kisses again to him, which
gave them. But in excusing my former digression, I shall enter into another
digression, therefore to the matter and purpose proposed. Pandarina beeinge
preferred to the presence of the Princess, having done dutiful reverence
humblye craved to know her pleasure. Nay rather answered the princess, it is
my pain Gentlewoman which I mean to make you privy to: and blushing either
for giltinesse or for bashfulnesse, she unfolded yt secrets of her thoughts to
Pandarina in this sort.

Gentlewoman, but that I know to whom I speak, I should perchance be in
doubt what to speak in this matter, which is somewhat unmeet for my maydenly
estate. But considering you are a woman, and one who no doubt in your time have
felt the force of love, I persuade my self I may boldly impart unto you the
panges of my passion, as to one who (I hope) will rather seek a salve for my
sore, then think sinisterly of my dooinges. Therefore you shall understand that
the sight of King Minos, who lays siege to our city, has made such a
breach into my heart, that I lie altogether open to his assaults, and am feign
to yield my self his prisoner and captive. And though it may seem strange
unto you that his forces beeinge not bent against me, should have such force
over me, yet it is often seen that a dart leueled at one, lights on another.
And though you may marvel to see me yield before any onset be given, yet
no doubt that city merittes more mercy which yields without assault, then
that which stands to the doubtful event of battle, and after mutch
effusion of blood, yeldeth when it is able to stand no longer in defense. For
here the loss in the siege, takes away the gain in the conquest, the pain
in pursuing, takes away the pleasure in possessing, and the hardness in
winning drowneth the happiness in wearing. And surely if maids would follow
my counsel, I would not wish them to set such solemn looks, to use such
nice denials and dainty delays to those, whom they think worthy of them, and
whom they mean only shall enjoy them. For they gain nothing hereby but defer
their own releife, and increase their lovers grief. Beesides that when they
are so hardly won, it is a sign they yield rather by importunity of the
wooer, the^ by any inclination of goodwill on their own part. But what need I
use this defense, where no body charge me with any offense? This rather
lies me upon, ernestly to crave your aid and assistance in this my
distress, and that you will either by counsel cure my disease, either by
pain or policy put me in possession of my desire.

I am thus bold to commit this matter unto you, presuming of your good wit,
and goodwill toward me. And if you show such faithful freindlynesse
herein, as I verily look for, assure your self I will in such freindly
manner requite it as you shall very well like of. Misteris Pandarina having
attentively attended her talk, dutifully replied in this sort.

Most excellent Princess, I am humbly to thank you that it pleases you to
repose such credit in me as to discloase your secrets to me, and I shall
think my self most happy, if my duty may any way do you good, or my service
satisfy your expectation. And touching your love it is such that you need
not be ashamed to show it, yea in my judgment it is rather to be commended
every way, the^ condemned any way. For first in that your fancy is fixed on a
prince, you show your princely mind in lyking your like: then in that you seek
to join your self to him in marriage, you show your godly disposition, in
desiring to quench the desires of your heart by that godly mean which god
has made and appointed. Thirdly in louinge your fathers so, you follow gods
commandment, who wills you to requite good for evil. Yea and by this
means you may be a mean to make peace and amity between two enemies, and
save your city front siege and sack. Lastly in that you yield so quickly to
the alarms of love, you show your fine nature and wit which are soonest subject
to the impression of love. And for your opinion touching the dealing of dainty
damsels, you are no doubt (Madame) in the right. For those which are so coyishe
and wild, or so haggarde like, that searce in seven years suit they will be
reclaimed, they plainly show themselves either to be of base metal, as not
to be capable of love, either of gross wits as not to understand when love
is made unto them, either of slender judgment as not to accept good offers,
either of incontinent conversation as being loath to be tied to one diet,
either of inconstaunt conditions, as judging men as light of love as themselves
are lend of life, or else some way imperfecte that they are not meet for the
holy state of matrimony.

Now whereas you crave my counsel and help to the bringing of your good purpose
to pass, good Madame would I were as well able as willinge to do you good:
but so far as my simple wits can see in the matter, I think this way the best
to work your will: you know your father has on his head a golden hair
whereon depends the stay of his state and puissance of his power, no more but
when your father is a sleep, pull of the the heir and present king Minos
therewith and no doubt but he will embrace you as the author of his victory, and
receive you for his lawful and loving wife, so shall you redress your own
distres, and preserve the life of your father and his people, who perchance by
the continuance of this war, may come to confusion. The princess likinge
reasonably well of this practice of Pandarina, gave her thanks for her good
counsel, and departed into her chamber by her self to think more of the
matter, where she entered with her self into these contrarieties.

I see there is no disease so desperate, but if it be taken in time physic may
help it: no matter so hard but polycie can prevail in it, nor no policye so
good but experyence will put into our heads: as may be seen by the sound
advice and perfect polycie of Pandarina. I warrant I am not the first clyent
that this counselor has had, I am not the first Pupil that she has
practiced for, this is not the first sluttish suit that she has been Solicyter
in, this is not the first honest match that she has made. But stay, let me not
commend her cunning and counsel to mutch, before I consider better of the
goodness thereof* I must forsooth pull of my fathers golden hair and present
Minos therewith: a light matter it seems to pull of a hair, but alas, that
hair contains my fathers help, his hope, his hap, his strength, his power,
his conquest, and his kingdom. Shall I then so mutch transgress the laws of
nature to bring him to a miserable plight, who was the cause that I came into
this joyful light? Who from my infancy carefully cherished, and fatherlye
fostered me up, whom by human and divine laws I am bound to obey honor and
love? No, auaunt unlawful love, thou art rated at to high a price to be
reached: auaunte foul beastly ba^de, thy counsel is without conscience, thy
advice without honesty: they which cleave to thy help shall be served as he
which ready to fall from a hedge, catches hold of a sharp bryer to stay
himself: they y^ follow thy physic shall do as he which to heal his ag^e,
slew himself: they which provide for their fathers peace and preservation as
thou would have me to do, shall with the Daughters of Pelias kill their
Father to make him young again: They which love their Father as thou would
have me to do, shall with Thais to her Phaedria shut him out of the doors, and
out of his kingdom for love. But what, do floudes drown fields before they
find a b^ack? can one be exalted without another wrack? Can I be preferred
to pleasure without some others pain. But it greeues me my father should be
pinched for my pleasure. Why it is reason the grief should be theirs, whose is
the gain. But it is perilous for me to enterprise so great a matter. Why is
it not reason the peril should be mine in pursuing, when the pleasure shall
be mine in possessing? but alas it nippeth me nere to lose my father the
victory, to win my self my love. Why alas grievous wounds must have
smarting playsters, and those medicines ever soonest heal us which most
grieve us. And shall I then prefer mine own pleasure before my fathers
profit? why every one ought to be nerest to them selves, and their wisdom is
nothing worth which are not wise for them selves. Nay rather shall I prefer
the commodytie of King Minos before the commodytie of King Nysus? why Nysus is
my father: why Minos will be my Phere: why Nysus gave me life: Why Minos will
yield me love: Why Nysus made me a maid: Why Minos will make me a mother:
Why Nysus cherised me being young: Why Minos will make mutch of me beeinge
old: why nature binds me to love my father: why God commands me to love
my husband: Ah fool, do I call him husband who will not have me? do I call
him phere who forces not of me? Is it lykely he will receive a runnagate
from her city, a beetrayer of her Father? Can he think to find me
faithful toward him, that am faithless to mine own father? Tush he will
attribute all this to love, and love me y^ better for it. He will excuse and
bear with my doings by the example of his own daughter Ariadne, who betrayed
him to her lover Thesius: by the example of Medea, who betrayed her father to
Jason: by the example of Hyppodame, who procured y^ death of her father by
matching with Pelops And therefore al doubts done away, I will without delay put
the policy of Pandar* in practice. The night following (such have her hot
love required) she showed her self Misteris of her word though not of her
self, and performed that which she said she would. For her father being a
sleep, she got softly to him and cut of his precious hair which had in it
such virtue. Which done, she went to King Minos and presented him therewith,
who in most reprochefull words reprehended her deed, and in most disdainful
sort rejected her love. But she not meaning to leave her love while she had
life, leapt into the sea to swim after him as he sailed away. And so quenched
her desire in the bottom of the sea.

You see here, Gentlewomen, she y^ would not look upon her Iphis, could not
be looked upon by her Minos. She that would make no account of her inferriour,
could not be accounted of by her superior. For it is a plain case, (and
therefore look to it) that they which deal rigorously with other, shall be
rudely dealt withal themselves. But I am by this story chiefly to admonish you
that you pull not of your fathers hair that is, y^ you pull not their hearts out
of their bodies, by unadvisedly castinge your selves away in matching in
marriage with those who are not meet for you. That is to pull of your fathers
hair, when you shall cast of the bridle of obedience, rashly run at randon,
rudely neglect his precepts, and presumptuously place your selves in marriage
contrary to his pleasure: that is to pull of your Fathers hair. But
(Sovereign) now your father is gone, I will give you more sound advice: I will
admonish you all not to pull of your own hair, that is not to bind your
selves to the froward faust of your politic parents, but to make your choice
in mar riage according to your own minds: for over widows you see Fathers
have no prehemine^ce of power touching their marriages: and you are not to know
that marriage is a contract consisting of the free consent of both the parties,
and that only is required in the consummation of marriages: and the Rodians
have this law, that only the mothers have rule over the Daughters. But mum,
lupus in fabula. I must (I say) admonish you y^ as your parents gave you your
bodies, so they may dispose of them. That you requight all their love, care and
cost, at least with obedience. I must tell you that if you honor not them your
days will be short on earth: I must tell you that Ravens will pull out the
eye that blinds the Father, and neglects the good instruction of the
mother, as Solomon said.

Curiatius and Horatia.
CVRIATIVS a young Gentleman of the City of Albania in ITALY, fallinge into
extreme love with Horatia a young Gentlewoman of the City of Rome, after
long suit, and many delays, obtains her grant to be his wife. But in the
mean time, contention fallinge out beetwene the two Cities. Curiatius is
slain in the field by Horatius, brother to the said Gentlewoman, to whom he
was assured. Whose death Horatia most pitifully bewaylinge, her brother
greatly disdayneth thereat, and cruelly thrusts her to the heart with his
Sword.

SUrely Gentlewomen, either according to Ovid his opinion Forma numen habet,
Beutie has some divinity or Godhead in it, or else contrary to the common
opinion, love is some heavenly influence and no earthly accident. For of every
earthly and mortal motion there may some probable reason or natural cause be
given: as every lyving creature desires that which is good and agreeable to
it nature, because every thing is dear to it self, and desires the
conservation of it self in it kind. As the earth draws downward, because
it is heavy, the fire flies upward because it is light, the water contrary
to it nature oftentimes ascends to the top of high hyls to avoyde
vacantnesse. The air for the same cause often times discendeth into the pores
of the earth: as cholerike complexions are soonest intensed to anger, because
they abound with heat, as women are not so subject to anger as men because
they are more cold of nature. And so of all human actions and natural
effects, there may be some probable reason and natural cause yielded. But of
love it is so far without the compass of reason and bounds of nature, that
there can no reason, no cause, no coniectur be given of it. Neither what it
is, working such diverse effects, neither whence it is, proceedinge of so
diverse causes, neither whether it will being never satisfied. Therefore no
earthly thing but some supernal power sure it is, as your selves (I think)
will say by that time you have hard the History of Curiatius who was suddenly
strocken therewith as if it had been with some thunder or lightning from
heaven. For you shall understand this gentleman dwelling in a town named
Albania, situate near unto the City of Rome, he made daily repair unto
Rome, both in respect of profit, as to deal with merchants in matters of
weight, and in respect of pleasure, as to frequent the fellowship of lusty
young Gentlemen which flourished in that City. Now it was his chance as
he strayed about the streets, to see a proper Gentlewoman named Horatia,
sittinge at her Fathers door to take the air, and to recreate her self with
the sight of those that passed by: and notwithstanding he had never seen her
before, yet through the divine power of love, he was so blasted with her
beauty, that he presently proclaimed her the sovereign of his thoughts, and
gouerness^ of all his doings. And having passed by her twice or thrice with
looks showing his love, and salutations signifiyng his suit, he could not be
so satisfied but banishing bashfulnes, he courageously incou^tred her in this
manner.

Gentlewoman, God save you, and send you that which you wish, and to wish that
which I would. God Misteris may it please you to know that though my feet have
force to carry my body from this place, yet my heart will not suffer me to
turn my head from beholdinge your sweet face, which is the cause that has
made me thus boldly to intrude my self into your company. But setting your
goodness against my rudeness, I doubt not but you will attribute it rather
to abundaunce of goodwill, then to want of good behavior, and rather take it
for good meaning then ill manner. But if it please you not thus frindly to
interpret it, yet at least I beseech you not to impute it to my boldness, but
to your own beauty: for as the Larketaker in his day net has a glass
whereon while the birds sit and gaze they are taken in the net, so your face
has such a glisteringe glass of goodlynesse in it, that while I gazed
thereon I was caught in the snares of Cupid. Or as the Spider in her web does
fast wind the little Fly, so your beauty does so fast bind me in the beams
thereof, that I am feign presently to yield my self a pray to your good
pleasure: humbly beeseeching you to account of me, not according to my
deserts which as yet are none, but according to the loyal service which I
faithfully vow hereafter to do unto you. Neither mean I to crave other reward
for my service, but only that it will please you in good part to accept it.
Horatia having harkened to this talk with a certain disdainful and solemn
scilence made him this waspishe answer.

Gentleman, this liberty of speech in you shows the lightness of your
love, for as I have hard those that love most speak least, as hearing their
cogitations conversant in the contemplation of the Saints whom they serve, but
your smooth tale and fine filed words show that your practice is rather
fainedly to pretend love then faithfully to love. And for my part I would not
you should think me either so simple as to believe your colored words, either
so ouergone in lykinge of my self, but that I take the commendation which you
give me, rather for triflinge mockinge then true meaning, and I promise you I
had rather you would use some other to exercise your eloquence on then my
self, for that I neither like of your unlikely love, neither mean to be
framed to your folly. Your coming to me upon no acquaintance contenteth me
well enough for that I may leave your company when I list, and so turned in at
the door from him. The Gentleman seeing her rigorousnesse to exceed his own
rudeness, laying aside a little more good manner, took her fast by the arm
desiringe her to stay a word or twain which he uttered to this effect.

O good Misteris, go not about to torment him so terribly which loves you so
entirely, deprive me not of that sight which does only work my delight,
absent not your self from him whom nothing under the Sun pleases but your
presence. And whereas you challenge my liberty of speech, may it like you to
understand that though this sudden love has made me loose in a manner the
remembrance of my self, and caused me to be carlesse and negligent in all
other affairs though of never so great importance, yet the beeholdinge of your
seemly self does so revive my senses and quicken my spirits that it makes
all my parts to do their part in praying for pity and praising your person:
wherein if I should be speechelesse, I might justly be thought to spare the
truth and spighte your perfection, And that my love is modest without mocking,
true without trifling, and vehement without vanytie, I take the heavens to
witness: and beesids let this be practiced for proof, that if it please you to
employ me, you shall find me as speedy to end my life to do you good, as
ready to spend my time to do you service. Mary (says she) perchance so, for
I think I shall find you neither speedy in the one, neither ready in the
other. But they that have once passed the bounds of shamefastness, may ever
after lawfully be impudent, and you that have beegunne to scoff and gybe,
think by authorytie you may continue in it: such a one I count you to be and
so I account of you. And so left my youth without doors. Who seeinge him self
so coursly accounted of, fell to raginge to him self in this manner.

Ah the bravery of these fine girls, the more they are courted the more they
are coy, the more humbly they are sued unto, the more loftyly they look. And
if a man practice them in the way of marriage, good God what show of
shamefastness will they make, what visors of vyrginitie will they put on, what
colors of continency will they set forth, what chariness will they make of
their chastity? they never forsooth mean to marry, saying that single life
is the only sweet life, that marriage is invented rather for necessity then
for any goodness that is in it, that their years yet require no have of
marriage, and that if God would give them grace, and their friends would not
force them to the contrary, they would never know what man means while they
live. Whereas in very deed they desire nothing more then marriage, neither
covet any thing more then the company of men. Again if a man making love in
way of marriage do but so mutch as touch one of these tender pieces, they cry
phy away, away, but let one that is married, or one that means not marriage
dally with them, why they are as lose of their lips and as free of their
flesh as may be: For let a man beehaue himself toward them according to the
common course of courtesy, he shall obtain any thing of them, for they know
he is soon lost if he be not soon loved, but let one direct his doings by
the line of love, and be drawn into great depth of affection toward them,
why they will raygne like princes over him: yea they will make him glad of one
glaunce of goodwill given by the eye: for they know a little thing pleases a
fool, and they think him to fast hampred in folly to give them the slip on
the sudden. And because they count the number of suitors a great testimony to
their bentie and proof of their perfection, they use twenty shifts to have
if it be possible twenty suitors, some they feed with looks, some with love,
some with promises some with practices, some with vows some with vewes, some
with triflinge some with truth, some with words, some with works, some with
kisses some with curtesy some with wit some with wyles, some with faith some
with fraud, some one way some another, so that by their wills they will have
as many suitors as themselves have sleightes to entertain them. And yet these
girls on Gods name are to young to have a husband, they are loath to leave
suckinge their dame. But ah blasphemous beast that I am to cast such devilish
doubts of her honesty, whose very countenance contains continency in it,
whose visage seems to be without vice, and looks without lust. Is it likely
she will yield her body to be abused by any, who will not suffer her self to
be used by any? And she y^ will not enter into modest matrimony, is it likely
she will fall into filthy fornication? No I think her to be as free from
folly, as I think my self far from wisdom who seem to doubt of her honest
dealing because she will not yield consent to my hasty meaning. What know I
whether she be consecrated already to some other saint, which if it be so,
with what reason can I look to reap any thing at her hands but a repulse?
For as gorged Hauks will stoop to no lure, so a woman vowed already to another
man, the sickness of other suitors will not cure: or it may be thus, that as
the Fauconer when he first draws his Hawk out of the mew, gives her washed
and unpleasant meats to make her after like better of better meats, so
perchance her policy be first to feed me with bitter brothes, that
hereafter dayntie fare may more delight me: and now to toss and torment me
with the rigorous storms of repulse, that hereafter the caulme of her consent
may the better content me. For spring time would never seem so pleasant
unto us, but by reason of the sharp winter which went before: peace would not
so mutch please us, but by reason that war before spoiled and wasted our
country. So that if she be coy of consent to make me enjoy the greater joy,
may I think my self misused? Again would I have her so light of love to
yield to the first onset? No she deserves to be pursued with endless
pain, yea and I will travail in continual toil but her good will I will
attain. Now as the good Spaniell having sprung the partridge cease not to
raunge the fields and beat the bushes until he have retriued it again to
serve the Hauk which flew at it, so he having once seen this saint sought all
occasions to come to the sight of her again, and if it were possible surely to
seize upon her. Now it pleased fortune to be thus frindly to further his
purpose with this opportunity.

There was in the city a very solemn wedding sumptuously celebrated, where
he by inquiry learned that his Misteris was, whereupon he assembled his
companyons together, and prepared themselves the same night to go thither in a
mask: and being come to the house, after they had marched up and down the
great chamber, y^ first masker having taken the bride, he being the second
addressed him self to his Misteris with great devotion, and when the sownd of
the instruments ceased, he entered into reasoning with her in this sort.

Good Misteris, you have allowed to your lot in steed of a masker a mourner,
and for one to delight you with plesaunt discourse you shall have one to weary
you with ru^ull requests: for you shall understand I am your careful
Curiatius whom nothing but the consent of your good will can cure, and having
no other way to aspire to your speech, I thought best under this disguised
sort to discipher plainly unto you the constancy of my good will toward you.
And if I could in words set forth but half the heaviness which since the
first sight of you has sunk into my breast, I hope your heart would not be so
hard frozen but that the shininge sun of pity would thaw it again. For if
plaintes may prove my pain, I have still continued in careful cries: if
sighs may show my sorrow, the smoke of them has reached to the skies: if
tears may try my truth, the water has flowen as a sloud from my eyes. And as
these things have passed heretofore to my pain, so if hereafter the sheddinge
of my blood may show my constancy or work your contentation any way, assure
your self I will be so prodigal thereof, that your self shall have just
cause to say I lived only to serve you, and died to do you good. By this time
the instruments sowned another measure, at the end whereof she began to reply
in this sort.

Sir, I am sorry you have taken so great pain for so little thank, for if the
end of your mask be to make me march under Venus banner, yea or Iunoes
either, your success will be such that you shall have cause to count this your
labor lost, and that you have cast away so mutch cost. And for my part I
promise you I had rather have been matched with a merry masker then a leude
lover, for the one might delight me, whereas the other does ut spite me. And
if (as you say) you mask without mirth so assure your self on the other side
I dance without delight: neither can it but greatly greiue me to be troubled
with so unreasonable a suitor, whom no reasonable answer will satisfy. This
rigorous reply of his Misteris converted him from a masker to a Mummer, for
he was struck so dead herewith that the use of his tongue utterly failed him.
But at length being come to himself again, he entered into this vehemence
with her.

O Gentlewoman, suffer not the bright sun of your beauty to be eclipsed with
cruelty: contaminate not your cumlinesse with coyness: remember beauty and
cumlinesse continue not, whereas curtesy and clemency remain for ever. Consider
that virtue is the true beauty which carries co^mendacion with it at al times,
which makes men love those whom they have never seen, and which supplieth all
other wantes whatsoever. Did not Antonius that lusty gallant of this city
prefer Cleopatra that black Egiptian, for her incomparable curtesy, before all
the blasinge stars of this city? and did not the puisant knight Persey, in
respect of her virtue, fetch Andromade from the black Indians. Whereby you see
that bounty before beutie is always to be preferred. Which bounty I beseech
you embrace both to preserve my life and your own good name. Alas what renown
shall you reap by killinge cruelly him that loved you entirely? What glory
shall you get by driving into despair him y^ was drawn into desire toward
you? No, pity is the only patheway to praise, and mercy is the mean to make
you immortal. At the end of the next measure she replied in this sort.

Why Gentleman, do you think it cruelty not to condescend to the requests of
every one that makes love? Do you count it vice not to yield to the assaults
of every lascivious young man? Do you make so mean a count of marriage that you
think it meet for a maid so rashly to enter into it, without sufficient
knowledge of your self, ignorante of your life and conversation, not knowing
your state, parents, or freindes: again without the consent of my freindes,
without their good will and furtherance, and which is most of all, without mine
own love and likinge? No, I will have more trial of him whom I mean to marry
then I have had of you* and I will feel in my self more fervent affection
toward him, then as yet I do bear you. You must consider it is not for a day
or a year that man and wife must continue together, but even for the whole
term of their life: and that they may not for any respect change, beeinge
once chayned together: but must remain content the one with the other in
solace and in sorrow, in sickness and in safenes, in plenty and in penury.
Way again that the happy life of the wife only consists in the loyal love
of her husband, and that she reposeth her self only in the pleasure she has
in him. She for the most part sits still at home, she hauketh not, she
hunteth not, she diseth not, she in a manner receives no other contentation
but in his company. He is the only play which pleases her, he is the only
game which gladdeth her, he is the field she delights to walk in, he is
the forest she forces to hunt in. So that in my judgment in taking a
husband, no heed can be to wary, no choice to chary. And therefore you must
make a count that marriage is a matter neither so rashly to be required as you
do, neither so easily to be granted as you would have me to do. And if you
adhibite any credit to my counsel, I would wish you to sow the seed of
your suit in a more fertile soil, for in me no graftes of grauntes, or
flowers of affirming will by any means grow, but only double denialles and
ragged repulses. His reply here to with diverse other discourses which passed
beetween them, I will omit, lest I should weary you with the weary toil which
he made of it. And besides I would not you should take example by her to hang
of so straungly, when you are sued to so humbly: and not to feign dislikinge so
deeply, when in deed you love entirely. For notwithstanding all his ernest
su^e he could not receive so mutch as one good word of good will. At length
the dauncinge beeinge done, the banquet was beegunne whereupon their talk
ceased, but his love daily increased: in so mutch that he fully resolved with
himself (hopinge thereby somewhat to be eased of his grief) to forsake
country, friends, lyuinge and all that he had. And there upon wrote a letter
unto her to this effect.

Seeinge (most mercylesse Misteris) neither my person can please you, neither
my lyuinge like you, neither my calling content you, neither my singular
affection toward you cause you to requite it with like love, I mean utterly to
abandon the place of your abode, and to bestow my self in some such fare
country, whyther not so much as y^ report of your virtue and beuty shall come:
hopinge thereby somewhat to appease my pain, and to assuage the rygour of my
raginge love. For as the sense of seeinge is most sharp, so is that pain most
pinching, to see the thing one seeks, and can not possess it. Like as the
Greyhounde is grieved to see the Hare if he be kept in slip, and the Hawk
the Partridge if she be tied in lunes, and as the common saying is, y^ which
the eye sees, the heart geeueth. Likewise to hear of your happy marriage with
some other, would be little better then death unto me, to think any other
should enjoy that which by law of love is proper to my self: and to hear of
your unlucky linking with any, would be death it self unto me, to think
that my only joy should live in annoy. Therefore I think the best way to
mitigate my martyrdom, is to absente my self from both hearing and seeing. I
could reaue my self of life, and so rid my self of strife, but alas to imbrue
my hands with mine own blood, would but bring to my body destruction, to my
soul damnation, to my freindes desolation, and to your self defamation. Where
as by contynuinge my carefulll life, I may at least or at last make manifest
the constancy of my love to the whole world* and some way employ my self to
do you service. For assure your self this, that what land soever I shall
lodge in, my heart and body shall be dedicated to do you duty and service. And
thus ready to go to seaward, I stay only to know whether it stand with your
good pleasure to command me any service.

yours while he is, CVRIATIVS.


Horatia having red this letter and thinking, she had sufficiently sounded y^
depth of his devotion toward her, returned him this comfortable answer.

Albeit sir, I nothing doubt of your departure out of your country, for that
nothing is more dear to any man then his own native soil, and besides I know
you use it only for a mean to move me to mercy, yet to confess the truth the
secret good will which long since I have borne you, will not suffer me to
conceal from you any longer the secrets of my thoughts. Therefore you shall
understand I have not used this strangeness toward you for that my mind
has been enstraunged or alienated from you, but only to try the truth of your
good will toward me. For if for one repulse or two (like an ill hound which
for one loss or twain gives over the chase) you would have given over your
suit* I might have judged rightly that you had loved but lightly. But now I see
you continue to the end, there is no reason but you should be saved, if I may
term it saving, the having of so worthles a wife as my self. But assure your
self this, I have not showed my self heretofore in love so cold and fainte,
as hereafter you shall find me in affection fervent and faithful. I think
your labor shall be little to get my freindes good will, for if their judgment
agree with mine they will think you worthy of a worthier wife, and rather
thankefully accept you then daintily delay you. Thus ready to restoare the
injury I have done you with any curtesy convenient to my maydenly estate, I
cease, not ceasinge daily to record the depthe of your goodwill in the bottom
of my heart, and in devouring by all means possible to show my self
thankful for the same.

Your^, and her own if yours: HORATIA.


This letter so louinge, so unlooked for, so sweet, so sudden, raised him
from heaviness to happiness, from hell to heaven, from death to life. And
presently hereupon he procured her parents consent who were so willing
thereto that they gave him great thanks that it would please him to match in
their stock and kindred, thinking perchance that he had been a man of a higher
calling then in deed he was, and prayed to god that their daughter might
become a wife worthy of such a husband. And hereupon the day of the
solemnizing of the marriage was appointed, but many things (as the saying is)
happen between the cup and the lip, many things chance between the bourd
and the bed: man purposes and God disposes, and it is the fashion of fortune
commonly thus to frame, that when hope and hap, when health and wealth are
highest, then woe and wrack, disease and death are nighest. For in this manner
it happened this marriage to be marred. There arose a quarrel beetween the
town Albania and the city of Rome, which not with words but only with
weapons must be decided: great hurly burly there was in either town, nothing
but war, war, war, the Cannons roard, the barbed horse neighed, the glitteringe
armor shined, the boystrous bills and pearcing pikes pressed forward, the
darts were dressed, the bows were bent, the women wept, the children cried,
the Trumpets sowned Tan tara, tara the Drums stroke up the mournful
marchinge forward, and the soldiers on both sides marched in battle array
unto the field. Amongst whom Curia. as one of the most courageous captains and
boldest bloods of the Albanes, was the foremost. But to leave the battle and
come to the conflicte which Horatia had with her self when she heard that
her beloved was in arms against her city. She fell forsooth to reasoninge
with her self in this sort.

O most doubtful distres that ever poor damsel was driven to. For whom shall
I offer up sacrifice, for whom shall I make my vows? For whom shall I pray
for victory, to whom shall I wish the overthrow? on the one side fights my
freinde, on the other side my father: on the one side the city wherein I am is
in danger to be sacked, on the other side the town whither I must go is in
peril to be spoiled, on the one side I am like to loose my love, on the other
side mine own life. So that I know not to whether part, I ought to incline in
heart. No can? Why a woman ought to forsake father and mother and follow her
husband. But ought any thing to be more sweet unto me, then the city to
be counted mine, we being both one flesh? But life is sweet to every one:
full sower God knows to me without his love and life. So that if my will
might work effect, I would rather wish that of the two, Rome might run to
ruin. But alas, dares he lay siege to the city wherein I am? Is he not
affraide to overthrow the house that harbors me? Doubts he not least some
piece should perce my tender breast? Yes no doubt of it, he deeply doubts
it: but alas, they that are bound must obey, he must follow of force his
general captain, unless he will incur the suspicion of cowardlinesse, or
treason, or both. Like as Ulysses was greatly defamed because he feigned
himself to be mad, for that he would not go to the siege of Troy. No god shield
my Curiatius from shame, god send him either friendly to enter into the city,
all quarrels being ended and truce taken, either valiantly to venture into the
city, and with triumphant arms to embrace me. By this time both the armies
were met, and to avoid the effusion of blood, the general Captains entered into
this agreement. There were in either army three brothers of great courage and
countenance, the Romans were named Horatii, brothers to the Gentlewoma^
before spoken of, the Albanes were called Curiatii, whereof one was y^ gentleman
before mentioned. Now it was concluded that these brothers on both sides should
by dint of sword stint the strife between these towns: and if the Hor.
conquered the Curiatii, that then the Albanes should remain under the rule and
empire of the Romans, if otherwise, then otherwise. Hereupon these sire
valiant champions at the sound of the Trumpets entered the listes, and fell to
furious fight: within short time two of the Horatii were slain, and all the
three Curiatii wounded: the Roman remaining alone to withstand three,
re^ired somewhat back, to the intenfe to single his enemies one from another,
which done, he slew them all one after another. This valiant victory atchiued,
with great joy and triumph he returned into y^ city, and among^ y^ rest ready to
receive him, was his sister Horatia, who knew nothing perticulerly of y^ which
was done in y^ field, but only y^ the Romans were victors. But seeing a far of
about her brothers shoulders y^ coat armor of her Cur. which she her self with
needle work had curiously made, being thereby fully assured of his death, she
was driven into these doleful plaints. Oh Heavens, what hellish sight do I
see, far more dolorous and dangerous then monstrous Medusaes head? And is my
Curiatius slain? then care come cut in sunder my corpse, the^ dole deliver me
to y^ dreadful darts of death. For what life (alas) in this life is to be
counted life, without his life and love? for so to live, as not to live: why
should I long any longer to live? What joy in this common joy can I count joy,
and not him enjoy who was my only ^oy? No though the whole City singe in
triumph, I must sorrow in torment: though the Romans vaunt of victory, I must
complain of overthrow: though they flourish in prosperytie, I must fade in
adversity: though they swim in bliss, I must bath in bale: though they live
in peace, I must lead my life in war: though they possess pleasure, I must
pine away in pain. For my triumph, my victory, my prosperytie, my bliss, my
peace, my pleasure, is perished. Yea now my marrying is turned to mourning, my
wedding to weeping, my wealth by war is wasted, my slowre of joy by the cold
frost of cankred fight is defaced. Yea what flower can flourish where no Sun
does shine? what Sun can shine enclosed close in earth? My sun alas is dead,
and down for ever rysinge again, and the world with me is at an end and
done for ever ioying again. W^e w^rth the cause, the quarrel, the conflict,
that brought my Curiatius to this cureles case. O would to God my City had
been sacked, my friends spoiled, and my brothers brought to bane, rather then
my Curiatius should have come to this careful end. O brother y^ have not only
slain thy foes but thy friends, thou have not only killed Curiatius but thou
have wounded thine own Sister to death. Her brother passinge by her and
hearing her heavy plaints, being therewith rapt into great rage, and with pride
of the victory almost beesides himself, drew his sword and forgetting al laws
of nature and humanytie thrust his Sister therewith to the heart, saying: get
thee hence to thy kind spouse with thy unkind love, who forgettest thy
brothers that are dead, thy brother that is alive, and the conquest of thy
country. And so come it to every Roman that shall lament the death of an
enemy to the Romans.

You have hard (Gentlewomen) that one harmefull hand made a hand of two
harmless wightes, and that hand had hanged himself to, if his father by his
pitiful peticion had not purchased his pardon. Now I would hear your
indgementes to whom you think this lamentable end of these lovers ought to be
imputed. Surely I think Horatia chiefly in fault for holding of so long
before she would accept and acknowledge the love of her beloved. For if she
would by any reasonable suit have been won, they had been married long time
before this war begun. They had dwelled quietly together in Albania, and
Curiatius being a married man should not have been pressed to the wars, but
should have been suffered to try his manhood at home with his wife. So that
her lingering love hastened her and his death, her selfewill wrought her self
and him wrack. And for her Brother his offense was little, for in killing
Curiatius he procured conquest to his Country and commendation to himself:
and in killinge his Sister, he eased her of so mutch labor, and saved her
soul from damnation. For he knew she would desperately do her self to
death and considering the misery she was in, he thought he could not do
her a greater pleasure then to cause her to die for her Curiatius his cause.

Cephalus and Procris.
CEPHALVS a lustye young gallant, and PROCRIS a bewtifull girl, both of the
Duke of VENICE Court, beecum each amorous of other, and notwithstanding
delays procured, at length are matched in marriage. Cephalus pretending a far
journey and long absence, returns before appointed time, to try his wives
trustiness. Procris falling into the folly of extreme jealousy over her
Husband, pursues him privily into the wooddes a hunting, to see his
beehauiour: whom Cephalus heeringe to russhell in a bushe wherein she was
shrouded, and thinking it had bin some game, slays her unawares, and
perceiuinge the deed, consumes himself to death for sorrow.

IT is the provident policy of the divine power to the intent we should not
be to proudly puffed up with prosperity, most commonly to mix it with some
sower sops of adversity, and to appointe the river of our happiness to runge
in a stream of heaviness, as by all his benefits bountifully beestowed on
us, may be plainly perceived, whereof there is not any one so absolutely good
and perfect, but that there be inconveniences as well as commodyties incurred
thereby. The golden glisteringe sun which gladdeth all earthly wightes,
parcheth the Summers green, and blasteth their beauty which blaze their face
therein: The fire which is a most necessary element unto us, consumes most
stately towers and sumptuous Cities: the water which we want in every thing we
do* deuoureth infinite numbers of men and huge heaps of treasure and riches:
the air whereby we live, is death to the disceased or wounded man, and beeinge
infected it is y^ cause of all our plagues and pestilences: the earth which
yields food to sustain our bodies, yields poison also to our bodies: the
goods which do us good, often times work our decay and ruin: children
which are our comfort, are also our care: marriage which is a mean to make us
immortal, and by our renewing offspring to reduce our name from death, is
accompanied with cares in number so endless and in cumber so curelesse, that
if the preservation of mankind, and the propagation of our selves in our
kind, did not provoke us thereto, we should hardly be allured to enter into
it. And amongst all the miseries that march under the ensign of marriage, in
my fancy there is none that more torments us, then that hateful helhounde
Ielousy, as the history which you shall hear shall show.

You shall understand in the Dukes Court of Venice, spent his time one
Cephalus, a Gentleman of great calling and good qualities, who at the first
time he insinuated himself into the society of the Ladies and Gentlewomen,
made no special or curious court to any one, but generally used a dutiful
regard toward them all, and showed himself in sport so pleasant, in talk
so witty, in manners so modest, and in all his conversation so cumlye, that
though he were not specially loved of any, yet was he generally lyked of all,
and though he himself were not specially vowed to any, yet was he specially
vewed of one, whose name was Procris. a proper Gentlewoman, descended of noble
parentage. And though at the first her fancy toward him were not great, yet
she seemed to receive more contentation in his company, then in any other
Gentleman of the troop. But as material fire in short time grows from
glowinge coals to flashing flames, so the fire of love in her, in short time
grew from flytting fancy to firm affection, and she beegan to settle so surely
in goodwil toward him, that she resolved with her self, he was the only
man she would be matched to, if she were ever married. And beeinge alone in
her lodginge, she entered with her self into this reasoning.

How unequally is it provided that those which worst may, are driven to hold
the Candle? That we which are in body tender, in wit weak, by reason of our
youth unskillful, and in all things without experience, should be constrained
to bear the loadsome burden of love, whereas ryper years who have wisdom to
wyeld it, and reason to repress it, are seldom or never oppressed with it?
Good God what fiery flames of fancy do frye within me? what desire, what
lust? what hope, what trust? what care, what despair? what fear, what fury?
that for me which have always lived free and in pleasure, to be tormented
therewith, seems little better then the bitter pangues of death. For as the
colte the first time he is ridden snuffeth at the snaffle, and thinks the bit
most bitter unto him: so the yoke of love seems heavy unto me, because my
neck never felt the force thereof before, and now am I first taught to draw
my days in dolor and grief. And so mutch the less I like this lot, by how
mutch the less I looked for it, and so mutch the more sower it is, by how
mutch the more soddaine it is. For as the Bird that hops from bough to bough,
and vttreth many a pleasant note, not knowinge how near her destruction
draws on, is caught in snare before she be ware: so while I spent my time
in pleasure, as soon playing, as soon parling, now dawncing, now dallying,
sometime laughing, but always loytering and walking in the wide fields of
freedom, and large leas of liberty, I was suddenly enclosed in y^ strait bonds
of bondage. But I se and I sigh, and sorrow to see, that there is no clothe so
fine but moathes will eat it, no iron so hard but rust will fret it, no wood
so sound but worms will putrify it, no metal so course but fire will
purify it, nor no Maid so free but love will bring her into thraldom and
bondage. But seeing the Gods have so appointed it, why should I resist them?
seeing the destinies have decreed it, why should I withstand them? seeing my
Fortune has framed it, why should I frown at it? seeing my fancy is fast
fixed, why should I alter it? seeing my bargain is good, why should I repent
it? seeing I lose nothing by it, why should I co^plain of it? seeing my choice is
right worthy, why should I mislyke it? seeing Cephalus is my Saint, why should
I not honor him? seeing he is my joy, why should I not enjoy him? seeing I
am his, why should not he be mine? yes Cephalus is mine, and Cephalus shall be
mine, or else I protest by the Heavens, y^ never any man shall be mine.

Ever after this she observed all oportunities to give him intelligence, as
modestly as she might, of her goodwill toward him. And as it happened a
company of Gentlewomen to sit talkinge together, they entered into commendation
of the histories which before had been told them, some commending this
Gentleman's stories, some that, according as their fancy forced them, but Pro.
seemed to prefer the histories of Cephalus, both for that (says she) his
discourses differ from the rest, and beesids, that me thinks the man amendeth
the matter mutch. Cephalus though out of sight yet not out of hearing, replied
in this sort. And surely (Gentlewoman) the man thinks himself much mended
by your commendacion, and assure your self you shall as readily command him,
as you courteously commend him.

The Gentlewoman blushing hereat, said she thought he had not been so near,
but touching your answer (says she) I have not so good cause to command
you, as commend you: for as I think you well worthy of the one, so I think my
self far unworthy of the other: but be bold of this, if at any time I
command you, it shall be to your commodytie. I can not (says he) but count
your commaundment a co^modytie, only in that you shall think me worthy to do
you service: neither will I wish any longer to live, then I may be able, or at
least willing, to do you due and dutiful service. If sir (says she softly
unto him) it were in my power to put you to such service as I thought you
worthy of, you should not continue in the condition of a servant long, but
your estate should be altered, and you should command another while, and I
would obey. It shall be (good misteris says he) in your power to dispose of
me at your pleasure, for I wholly commit my self to your curtesy, thinking my
estate more free to serve under you, then to reign over any other whatsoever:
and I should count my self most happy, if I might either by service, duty, or
love, counteruaile your continual goodness toward me. Upon this the
company brake of, and therewith their talk. But Cephalus seeing her goodwil so
great toward him, began as fast to frame his fancy toward her, so y^ love
remained mutual beetweene them. Which her father perceuing, and not lyking
very well of the match, for that he thought his daughter not old enough for a
husband, nor Cephalus rich enough for such a wife, to break the bond of
this amity went this way to work. He wrought so with the Duke of Venice,
that this Cep. was sent post in ambassade to the Turk, hoping in his absence to
alter his daughters affection. Which iourny, as it was nothing^ joyful to
Cephalus, so was it so painful to Procris, that it had almost procured her
death. For beeinge so warely wacht by herwaspish parents, that she could
neither see him nor speak with him before his departure, she got to her
chaumber window, and there heavily beheld the Ship wherein he was sorowfully
sailing away. Yea she bent her eyes with such force to beehold it, that she
saw the ship farther by a mile then any else could possibly ken it. But when it
was clean out of her sight* she said: Now farewell my sweet cephalus,
farewell my joy, farewell my life, ah if I might have but given thee a careful
kiss and a faintinge farewell before thy departure, I should have been the
better able to abide thy abode from me, and per chance thou woul dest the
better have minded me in thy absence, but now I know thy will, will waver
with the winds, thy faith will fleet, with the floods, and thy poor Procris,
shall be put clean out of thy rememberance. Ah why accuse I thee of
inconstancy? No I know the seas will first be dry, before thy faith from me
shall fly. But alas, what shall constancy prenayle, if thy life do fail? me
thinks I see the hoysinge waves like a huge army to assail y^ sides of thy
Ship: me thinks I see the proulyng pirates which pursue thee: me thinks I
hear the roaring Cannons in mine ear, which are shot to sink thee: me
thinks I see the ragged rocks which stand ready to reaue thy Ship in sunder:
me thinks I see the wild beasts which rauenously run with open mouths to
devour thee: me thinks I see the thieves which rudely rushe out of the
woods to rob thee: me thinks I hear the trothlesse Turk enter into
conspiracy to kill thee: me thinks I feel the furyous force of their wicked
weapons, pitiously to spoil thee. These sights and thoughts, deprived her
both of seeing, and thinkinge, for she fell herewith down dead to the
ground: and when her waiting woman could not by any means revive her, she
cried out for her mother to come help: who being come, and having assayed all
the means she could for her daughters recovery, and seeinge no sign of life
in her, she fell to outrageous outcries, saiing: O unjust Gods, why are you
the authors of such unnatural and untimely death? O furious feende, not god
of love, why do thou thus diuelishly deal with my daughter? O ten times cursed
be the time, that ever Cephalus set foot in this Court. At the name of
cephalus the maid beegan to open her eyes, which before had dazeled, which her
mother perceiving, said, beeholde daughter thy Cephalus is safely returned and
come to see thee. Wherewith she start from the bed whereon they had laid her,
and staring wildly about the chamber, when she could not see him, she sunk
down again. Now her parents perceiving what possession love had taken of her,
thought it labor lost, to endeavor to alter her determination, but made her
faithful promise she should have their furtherance and consent to have her
cephalus to husband at his return, wherewith she was at length made strong
to endure the annoy of his absence. It were tedious to tell the prayers, the
processions, the pilgrimages, the Sacrifices, the vows she made for his safe
return, let this suffice to declare her rare good will toward him, that
hearing of his happy coming toward the court, she feared least his sudden
sight would bring her such excessive delight, that her senses should not be
able to support it, and therefore got her into the highest place of the house,
and beheld him coming a far of, and so by little and little, was partaker of his
presence, and yet at the meetinge, she was more free of her tears then of her
tongue, for her greetinge was only weeping, word she could say none.

Cephalus inflamed with this her unfeigned love, made all the freindes he
could to hasten the marriage beetweene them. But the old saying is, have makes
waste, and bargains made in speed, are commonly repented at leisure. For
married they were, to both their inexplicable joy, which shortly after turned
to both their unspeakable annoy. For the increase is small of seed to timely
sown, the whelps are ever blind that dogs in haste do get, the fruits full
sone do rot, which gathered are to sone, the malt is never sweet unless the
fire be soft, and he that leapeth before he look, may hap to leap into
the brook. My meaning is this, that Cephalus his share must needs be sorrow,
who would so rashly and unadvisedly, enter into so intricate an estate as
wedlocks is.

The Philosophers will us to eat a bushel of salt with a man before we
enter into strict familiarity with him, but I think a whole quarter little
inoughe to eat with her with whom we enter into such a bond that only death
must dissolve. Which rule if Cephalus had observed, he had preserved him self
from most irksome inconveniences. But he at all adventures ventred upon one
of whom he had no trial, but of a little trifling love. I like but little of
those marriages which are made in respect of riches, less of those in respect
of honors, but least of al, of those in respect of hasty, foolish, and fond
affection. For, soon hot soon cold, nothing violent is permanent, the cause
taken away, the effect vanishes, and when beuty once fades (whereof this
light love for the most part arises) goodwill straight fails. Well, this hot
love she bare him, was the only cause of his hasty and heavy bargain, for
womanlines she had none (her years were to young) virtue she had little (it was
not used in the court) modesty she had not mutch (it belongs not to lovers)
good government and stayed wit she wanted (it is incident to few woomen) to
be short, his choice was grounded rather upon her goodlinesse then
godliness* rather upon her beauty then virtue, rather upon her affection
then discretion. But such as he sowed, he reapte, such as he sought he
found, such as he bought, he had, to wit, a witles wenche to his wife.
Therefore I would wish my freindes, ever to sow that, which is sound, to seek
that which is sure, to buie that which is pure. I mean I would have them in
the choice of such choice ware, chiefly to respect good conditions and virtue:
that is the only seed which will yield good increase, that is the only thing
worthy to be sought, that is the only thing which can not be too derely
bought. And who soever he be that, in any other respect whatsoever, enters
into the holy state of matrimony, let him look for no better a pennyworth then
Cephalus had, which was a loathsome life, and desolate death. For within a year
or two after they had been married, his fancy was in a manner fully fed, and his
disordinate desire of her began to decay, so that he beegan plainly to see and
rightly to judge of her nature and disposition, which at first the parciality
of his love, or rather outrage of his lust, would not permit him to perceive.
And seeing her retchles regardes and light looks, which she now used
toward al men, rememberinge therewithal how lightly he him self won her,
he began greatly to doubt of her honest dealinge toward him, and having
occasion of far iourny and long absence from her, he wrought this practice to
try her truth. He told her his aboade from her must of necessity be forty
weeks: but at the half years end by that time his hair was wildly grown,
he apparelled him self altogether contrary to his wonted guise, and by reason
of his hair so disguised him self that he was not known of any, which done,
his necessary affairs dispatched, he returned into his own country, and came
to his own house in manner of a stranger which trauayled the country, where
he found his wife in more sober sort then he looked for, and received such
courteous entertainment as was convenient for a guest. Having soiourned there a
day or two, at convenient time he attempted her chastity in this sort.

If (fair Gentlewoman) no acquaintance might justly crave any credit, or
little merits great meed, I would report unto you the cause of my repair, and
crave at your hands the cure of my care: but seeinge there is no likelyhoode
that either my words shall be believed, or my woe relieved, I think better
with pain to conceal my sorrow, then in vain to reveal my suit. The
Gentlewoman somewhat tickled with these triflinge words, was rather desirous
to have him manifest the mystery of his meaning, then willing he should desist
from his purpose, and therefore gave him this answer.

I am (Sir) of opinion, that credit may come diverse ways besides by
acquaintance, and I my self have known mutch good done to many without desert:
and therefore if your words be true, and your desire due, doubt not, but you
shall be both credited, and cured.

For the trueness of my words (says he) I appeal to the heavens for
witness, for the duenesse of my desir^ I appeal to your curtesy for judgment.
The words have to utter are these.

There chanced not long since to traueile through the country wherein lies
my living, a Knighte named Cephalus, and though the report of the port and
house which I mayntaine be not great, yet it is such, that it sends me many
guestes in the year: it pleased this Cephalus to soiourne the space of three
or four days with me, and in way of talk to pas away the time, he made
relation at large unto me of his country, of his condition and state, of his
special place of abode and dwelling, of his lands and living, and such like.
I demanded of him whether he were married, saying, all those things before
rehearsed, were not sufficient to the attaininge of a happy life, without a
beutiful, saire, and loving wife. With that he fetched a deep sigh, saying, I
have (Sir) I would you knew, a wife, whose beuty rese^bleth y^ brightness of
the sun, whose face does disgrace all the ladies of Venice, yea Venus
herself, whose love was so exceedinge great toward me, that before I was
married unto her, having occasion to go in Embassage to the Turk, she
almost died at my departure, and never was rightly revived till my return.
Good God, said I, how can you be so long absent from so louinge a wife? How
can any meat do you good, which she gives you not? How can you sleep out
of her arms? It is not lawful (says he) for every man to do as he would,
I must do as my business binds me to do. Besides that, every man is not
of like mind in like matters. Lastly, it is one thing to have been happy, it
is another thing to be happy. For your business (said I) it seems not to
be great, by the good company, which I thank you, you have kept me this
four days. For your mind, I know no man that would willingly be out of the
company of such a wife. For your present happiness, in deed it may be your
wife is dead, or that her love is translated from you to some other. No (says
he) she lives, and I think loves me, but what good does gold to him that
cares not for it? And can you (said I) not care for such a golden girl? Then
may I say you have a wife more fair then fortunate, and she a husband more
fortunate then faithful. Alas (says he) with tears in his eyes, it is my
great care that I do so little care, but no more hereof I beseech you. But my
blood being inflamed with the commendation which he gave to your beuty, and
pityinge your case to have so careless a husband over you, I lay very
importunately upon him to impart the whole matter unto me, and with mutch ado
I wrung these words from him. Sir (says he) I shall desire you to impute my
doings not to my fault, but to the fates, and to think that whatsoever is done
ill, it is done against my will. It is so, that I remained married with my wife
the term of two whole years, what time I did not only make of her, but I made
a goddess of her, and rather doltishly doated on her, then duly loved her:
now whether it were the punishment of the gods for my fond Idolatry committed
unto her, or wehther they thought her to good for me, or whether the destinies
had otherwise decreed it, or whether love be lost when fancy is once fully fed,
or whether my nature be to like nothing long, I know not, but at the two
years end I beegan suddenly in my heart to hate her as deadly, as before I
loved her deeply: yea her very sight was so loathsome unto me, that I could
not by any means endure it. And because her freindes are of great countenance,
and I had no crime to charge her withal, I durst not seek diuorcement, but
privily parted from her, pretendinge urgent affairs which constrained me
thereto. Hereafter I mean to beestow my self in the wars under the Emperor,
not minding to return while she lives. And for my maintenance there, I have
taken order secretly with my friends, to conueigh unto me yearly the
revenues of my land. Thus craving your secrecy herein, I have revealed unto
you my careful case. The strangeness of this tale made me stand a while in a
maze, at length I greatly began to blame his disloyalty, to conceive without
cause so great disliking, where there was so great cause of good likinge. But
Gentlewoman, to confess the truth unto you, my love by this time was so great
toward you, that I never persuaded him to return unto you, meaning my self
to take that pain, and knowinge him better lost then found, being no better
unto you. Shortly after this he departed from me toward the Emperors
court, and I took my journey hither as you see. And this is the tale I had to
tell you.

Procris having heard this forged tale, with diverse alterations and sundry
imaginations with her self, sometime fearing it was true, for that he rightly
hit diverse points which had passed between her husband and her, sometime
thinkinge it false, for that she had firm confidence in her husbands faith
and loyalty toward her, as soon castinge one likelyhoode one way, as soon
another another way, at length fully resolving with her self that his words
were utterly untrue, she replied unto them in this sort.

Good God, I see there is no wool so course but it will take some color, no
matter so unlikely which with words may not be made probable, nor nothing so
false which dissembling men will not feign and forge. Shall it sink into my
head that Cephalus will forsake me, who did forsake all my freindes to take
him? Is it likely he will leave country, kinsfolk, freindes, lands, living,
and (which is most of all) a most louinge wife, no cause constrayning him
thereto? But what use I reasons to refell y^ which one without eyes may see is
but some coined devise to cosen me? No sir knight, you must use some other
practice to effect your purpose, this is to broad to be believed, this color
is so course that every man may see it, and it is so black that it will take
no other color to cloud it, the thread of your hay is so big that the Connies
see it before they come at it, your hook is so long that the bayt can not
hide it, and your devise is to far fetched to bring your purpose near to an
end. Gentlewoman (says Cephalus) I see it is some men's fortune not be
believed when they speak truly, and others to be well thought of when they
deal falsely: which you have verified in your husband and me, who doubt of
my words which are true, and not of his deeds which are false. And this I
thought at the first, which made me doubt to discloase this matter unto you:
for I know it commonly to be so, that trauaylors words are not much trusted,
neither great matters soon believed. But when the time of your husbands
return is expired, and he not come, then will you say that Sir Sulahpec (for
so turning his name he termed him self) told you true. For my part not
withstanding, the great good will I bare you, would not suffer me to conceal
this matter from you that you might provide for your self, yet I am very well
content you should give no credit to my words, for I would not you should
believe any thing which might grieve you any way, and I would wish you to
think well, till you see otherwise: for every evil brings grief enough with
it when it comes, though the fear before procure none. Therefore I crave no
credit for my words, my desire is that you will believe that which you see,
which is, that for your sake I have trauayled with great peril and pain out
of mine own country hither, to your house, that upon the report of your
beauty I was so surprised therewith, that I thought every hour a year till I
had seen you, that having seen you, I have resolved with my self to live and
die in your service and sight. Now if in consideration hereof it shall please
you to grant me such grace, as my goodwil deserves, you shall find me so
thankful and grateful for the same, that no future fortune shall force me to
forget the present benefit which you shall bestow upon me, and if it chance
that your husband return, you shall be sure always to enjoy me as your faithful
friend, and if he never come again, you shall have me if you please for your
louinge spouse for ever. Yea mary (says Procris) from hence came those tears,
hereof proceeded your former fetch, this is it which has separated my
husband from me, which has sent him to the wars, which will cause him
never to return, a fine fetch forsooth, and cunningly contrived. Did that
report which blazed my beuty (which god knows is none) blemish my name (which
I would you knew is good) in such sort, that you conceived hope to win me to
your wicked will? Were you so vain to assure your self so surely of my
vanity, that only thereupon you would undertake so great a journey? No, you are
conuersaunt with no Cressid, you have no Helen in hand, we women will now
learn to beeware of such guyleful guestes. No, if you were as cunning as
Jove, y^ you could convert your self into y^ likeness of mine own husband,
(as Jove came to Alcmena in the likeness of her husband Amphitrion) I doubt how
I should receive you til, the pre fixed time of my husbands coming were
come: mutch less shall your forged tales or importunities constrayne me to
receive you into that credit, and admit you into that place which is and
shall be only proper to my husband. And this answer I pray you let suffice you,
otherwise you may leave my house when you list. Cephalus liked this gear
reasonably well, and persuaded him self, that though he had a wanton wife, yet
he had no wicked wife. But knowing it the fashion of women at first to refuse,
and that what angry face soever they set on the matter yet it does them good to
be courted with offers of curtesy, he meant to prove her once again, and went
more effectually to work, to wit, from craft to coin, from guyles to gifts,
from prayers to presents. For having received great store of gold and Jewels
for certain land, which he sold there whyther he trauayled, (the only
cause in deed of his travail) he presented it all unto her, saying, he had
sold al he had in his own country, minding to make his continual aboade with
her, and if she meant so rigorously to reject his goodwill, he willed her to
take that in token thereof, and for him self, he would procure him self some
desperate death or other, to avoid that death which her beuty and cruelty a
thousand times a day drove him to.

The Gentlewoman heering those desperate words, and seeing that rich sight,
moved somewhat with pity, but more with pencion, beegan to yield to his
desire, and with Danae to hold up her lap to receive the golden shower. O
god gold, what can thou not do? but O devil woman, that will do more for
gold then goodwill? O Gentlewomen, what shame is it to sell vily that which
God has given freely, and to make a gain of that which is more grateful to
women then men, as Tyresias gave judgment. Hereof came that odious name of
whore, which in Latin is Meretrix, a merendo, of deserving or getting: a thing
so unnatural, that very beasts abhor it, so unreasonable, as if one should be
hired to do ones self good, so dishonest that the common stews thereof took
first their beginning. But to return to our story, Cephalus seeing the
lewdness of his wife, bewrayed himself unto her who he was, whereupon she
was surprised with such shame, and he with such sorrow, that they could not
long time speak each to other: at length she fell down upon her knees, humbly
crauinge his pardon. Cephalus knowing women to be to weak to withstand the
might of money, and thinkinge that her very nature violently drew her to him,
whom being her husband, though to her unknown, she loved entirely, he
thought best for his own quiet, and to avoid infamy, to put up this
presumption of this evil in his wife patiently, and to pardon her offense, and
so they lived quietly together a while. But within short time she, partly for
want of government, and partly thinking her husband would revenge y^ wrong
which she would have done to him, fell into such a furious gelosy over him, y^
it wroght her own destruction and his desolatio^. For this monstrous mischief
was so merueilously crept into her heart, that she beegan to have a very
careful and curious eye to the conversation of her husband, and with her
self sinesterly to examine all his words and works toward her. For if he
used her very familiarly, she supposed that he flattered her, and did it but
to color his falshod toward her: if he looked solemnly on her, she feared
the alteration of his affections, and the alienation of his goodwill from her,
and that he rowed in some other stream: if he used any company, and
frequented any man's house, she thought by and by that there dwelt the saint
whom he served: if he lived solytaryly, and avoided company, she judged
forthwith that he was in love some where: if he bid any of his neighbors to
his house, why they were his goddesses: if he invited none, she thought he
durst not least she should spy some privy tricks beetweene them: if he came
home merely, he had sped of his purpose: if sadly, he had received some
repulse: if he talked pleasauntlye, his misteris had set him on his merry
pinnes: if he said nothing, she remembered it was one of the properties of
love to be silent: if he laughed, it was to think of his love: if he
sighed, it was because he was not with her: if he kissed her, it was to
procure appetite against he came to his misteris: if he kissed her not, he
cared not for her: if he atchiued any valient enterprise at arms, it was done
for his misteris sake: if not, he was beecome a carpet Knight: if he fell out
with any, it was some open enemy to his priuye friend: if he were friends
with all men, he durst displease none, least they should detect his doings to
her: if he went curiously in his apparel, it was to please his mysteries: if
negligently, he lived in absence: if he ware his hair long, he mourned
because he could not be admitted: if short, he was received into favor:
if he bought her any apparel or any other pretty trifling tricks, it was to
please her, and a babble for the fool to play with: if he bought her nothing,
he had enough to do to maintain other in bravery: if he entertained any
servant, he was of his misteris preferment: if he put away any, he had some
way offended her: if he commended any man, he was out of question his baude:
if he praised any woman, she was no doubt his whore: and so of all other his
thoughts, words, and deeds, she made this suspicious suppose, and ielous
interpretation: and as the Spider out of most sweet flowers sucketh poison, so
she out of his most loving and friendly deeds toward her, picked occasions
of quarrel, and conceived causes of hate. And so long she continued in these
careful conjectures, that not only her body was brought low, by reason that
her appetite to meat failed her, but also she was so disquieted in mind, that
she was in a manner beesides her self, whereupon in great pensiveness of
heart, she fell to preaching to her self in this sort.

Ah fond fool, will thou thus wilfully work thine own wrack and ruin? if
thy husband commit treason against thee, will thou commit murder upon thy
self? if he consume himself away with whores, wilt y^ then consume thy self
away with cares? will thou increase his mischief with thine own misery? if he be
so wickedly bent, it is not my care can cure him, for that which is bred in
the bone will not out of the flesh. If he be disposed to deal falsely with
me, it is not my wary watching which will ward him from it, for love deceived
Argus with his two hundred eyes. If he should be forbidden to leave it, he
will use it the more, for our nature is to run upon that which is forbidden
us, vices the more prohibited, the more provoked, and a wild coult the harder
he is rained, the hotter he is. If I should take him tardy in it, it would but
increase his incontinent impudency, for being once known to have transgressed
the lawefull limits of love and honesty, he would ever after be careless of
his good name, which he knew he could never recover again. And why should I
seek to take him in it? should I seek to know y^ which I ought not to seek,
no not so mutch as to think on? was ever wight so bewitched to run headlong
upon her own ruin? So long as I know it not, it hurts me not, but if I
once certainly knew it, God knows how suddenly it would abridge my days. And
yet why should I take it so grievously, am I the first that have been so
served? Has not Juno her self sustained the like injury? But I reason with my
self, as if my husband were manifestly convicted of this crime, who perchance,
good Gentleman, be as innocent in thought, as I wrongfully think him to be
nocent in deed: for to consider advisedly of the matter, there is not so mutch
as any likelihood to lead me to any such lewd opinion of him, he uses me
honestly, he mantayneth me honorably, he loves me better then my leude
dealinge toward him has deserved. No it is mine own unworthiness that makes
me think I am not worthy the proper possession of so proper a Gentleman: it
is mine own lustful desire that makes me afraid to loose any thing: it is
mine own weakness y^ makes me so suspicious of wrong: it is mine own
incontinency which makes me judge him by my self. Well, the price of my
prejudicial doings toward him is almost paid, and if pain be a punishment,
then have I endured a most painful punishment, but let this dear bought wit
do me some good, let me now at length learn to be wise, and not to think
of evils before they come, not to fear them before I have cause, not to
doubt of them in whom is no doubling, nor to mistruste them in whom is no
treason, and faithfully to love him that unfeignedly loves me. After this she
endeavored to do such fond toys forth of her head, for a while she lived
lovingly and quietly with her husband, but suddenly by reason of one look
which he cast upon one of his neighbors, she fell into her old vain of
vanity again. And as second falling into sickness is ever most dangerous,
so now her folly was grown to such fury, and her disease so incurable, that
she could not conceal it any longer, but flatly told her husband to his
teeth, that she thought he did misuse her. Cephalus knowing his own
innocence, and seeing her imbecillitie, gently prayed her not to conceive any
such evil opinion of him, saying: If neither regard of God, neither respect
of men, neither reverence of the reverent state of marriage could fear me
from such filthiness, yet assure your self the loyal love I bear you, would
let me from such lasciviousness. For beeleeue me, your person pleases me
so well, that I think my self sweetly satisfied therewith. Yea if Venus her
self should chance unto my choice, I am persuaded I should not prefer her
before you. For as her beutie would intisingly draw me to her, so my duty
would necessarily drive me to you. Therefore (good wife) trouble not your self
with such toys, which will but breed your own unrest and my disquiet, your
torment and my trouble, yea and in time perchance both our untimely deaths.
Let Deinyra be a president for you, who suspecting her husband Hercules of
spouse breach, sent him a shert died with the blood of the Centaure Messus,
who told her that shert had virtue to revive love almost mortified, but
Hercules had no sooner put it on, but it stock fast to his flesh, and fried
him to death, as if it had been a fury of hell. Which when she knew, with her
own hands she wrought her own destruction. See y^ unworthy end which that
monster ielousy brought this worthy couple too, and foresee (sweet wife) that
it bring not us to the like bane. These words could work no effect with her,
but rather increased her suspicion, persuading her self, that as in fair
painted pots poison often is put, and in goodly sumptuous sepulchers rotten
boanes are ryfe: so fairest words are ever fullest of falsehood. Yea, the more
courteous he showed him self, the more culpable she thought him to be. Which
Cephalus seeing, because he would take away all causes of suspicion, abandoned
all good company, and spent his time so lytarily, hunting in the wooddes, and
seekinge the spoil of spoylinge savage beasts. But this helhounde Ielousy,
did so haunt and hunt her that she could in no place be in rest, but made her
plod from her Palaice to the wooddes, to watch whether he there hunted a
chaste chase or not. And one day as she dogged him, where he was laid down
to rest amongst the green leaves, she heard him utter these words: Come
gentle Air and refresh my weried spirits, with such like words of
daliance, which he being hot, spoke to the gale of Wind which pleasauntly
blew upon him: but she thought he had spoken to some woman with him,
whereupon she furiously fell to the ground, tearing her hair and scratchinge
her face, and though her grief would not give her leave to speak, yet to her
self she thought this: And can the traitor thus trecherously deal with me?
Had the sorrow which I sustained only for his absence before I was married to
him, or any way owed him any thing, almost cost me my life, and now shall his
presence procure my death? Did I pour out pensive prayers for his safe return
from the Turks, and does his return return my good will with such dispight?
Oh would to god the Turks had torn him in pieces, that he had never come
home to martyr me in this manner. But Wolves never pray upon wolves, his fraud
was nothing inferior to their falsehood, and therefore it had been in vain
for them to have haulted before a creeple: but me, being but a simple sheep,
see how sone this subtle* Fox could deceive. Is this the fruit of my
feruente love? is this the felicity I expected in marriage? had I known this,
I would never have known what the subtle sex of man had meant: I would
rather, as they say, have led apes in hell after my death, then have felt all
the torments of hell in my life. But had I wist, is ever had at the worst, they
that cast not of cares before they come, can not cast them of when they do
come. It is to late to cast Anchor when the ship is shaken to pieces against
the rocks, it booteth not to send for a physician when the sick party is
already departed. Well, I will yet go see the cursed cause of my careful
calamity, that I may mitigate some part of my martyrdom, by scratching her
incontinent eyes out of her whoorish head: and thereupon roused her self out of
the shrub wherein she was shrouded. Cephalus hearing somewhat rush in the bush,
thought it had been some wild beast, and took his darte, and struck the tame
fool to the heart. But coming to the place, and seeing what he had done, he
fell down in a sown upon her, but with her striving under him with the panges
of death, he was redused to life, and said, Alas my Procris by my self is
slain. Which she (not yet dead) hearing, said, Alas your Air has brought
me to this end. With that he understood how the matter went, and said, Alas
(sweet wife) I used these words to the wind. Why then (says she) not you,
but that wind gave me this wound. And so ioyninge her lips to his, she
yielded up her breath into his mouth, and dyed. And he with care consumed,
tarried not long behind her, to beewayle either his own deed, or her death.

Now Gentlewomen, let the casual end of this Gentlewoma^ be a caveat to keep
you from such wary watching of your husbands, it is but a mean to make them
fall to folly the rather, as the thoughtful care of the rich man causes the
thief the sooner too seek the spoil of him. But if you will know the
chiefest way to keep your husbands contin^ent, it is to keep your selves
continent: for when they shall see you which are the weaker vessels strong in
virtue and chastyty, they will be ashamed to be found faint in faith and
loyalty, when they shall see you constant in good will toward them, they will
fear to be found fickle in faith toward you, when they shall see you love
them faithfully, you shall be sure to have them love you fervently. But if you
shall once shake of the sheet of shame, and give your selves over to choice of
change, then assuredly make account your husbands will eschew your
companyes, loath ^your lips, abandon your beds, and frequent the familiarity of
they care not who, if not of you.

Minos and Pasiphae.
MINOs King of Creete, regarding the beauty of Pasiphae, a waiting gentlewoman
in his Court, falls in love with her, and makes her his Queen. Whom
VERECVNDVS, a young Gentleman also of the same Court, having solicited to
lewdness, for fear of the Kings displesure, escapes away by flight* MINOS
enters into such rage of gelousy over his wife, that in his absence he
sets spies over her, to bewray her doings. Pasiphae beecumminge unnaturally
amorous of a Bull, by means of the Carpenter Dedalus, brings forth a
monstrous Child, in part resembling the Sire, and in part the Mother.

OF all the ordinary accidents incident to the life of man, there is none of
more moment to our prosperytie, or misery, then marriage: which estate if we
advisedly enter into, it makes us in happiness equal to Angels: but if we
rashly run into it, it prolongeth us in the pains of the furies of hell. And
amongst all y^ inconveniences, which are to be foreseen in this bargain,
there is none more dangerous, then inequality of estates beetweene the
parties: for, what agreement of affections can there be, when the one shall
be of a mean mind, the other hautie, the one lowly, the other lofty? how
can there be one heart in two bodies, when the one wishes one thing, the
other wills another? When the one is disposed one way, the other inclined
another way, according to the secret instinct of their proper and peculier
natures? For the nature of nothing may be altered: that which nature has
given, connot be taken away: and that which is bred in the boane, will not
out of the flesh. So that for one of mean parentage, to be married with one
of princely race, I think as good a match, as beetweene Lions and Lambs. And
as well they will agree together, as Dogs and Cats, and as the saying is, the
Mastiue never loves the Greihounde. Besides, unequal Oxen draw not well
together in one yoke, Coks unequally matched, make no good battle in the pit,
meats of contrary qualities, digest not well in the stomach: and parties of
contrary callinges, agree not well together in the bond of blessed matrimony:
as the history I will tell you, shall show you.

In the Country of Creete, reigned one Minos, a King and Monarch of great
might, to whom the blind gods Fortune assigned a wife of far more meanness,
then was meet for the majesty of his mightiness. For there chanced to be in
his Court attendaunt upon a noble woman, a proper piece, named Pasiphae. Who by
birth was but the daughter of a Knight, but by beauty seemed to be a heavenly
wight. On her cheeks, the Lilly and the Rose did strive for interchange of
hew, her hair cumly curld, glistered like gold: her pierceinge eyes,
twinckled like stars: her alabaster teeth stood as a rank of precious
pearls: her ruddy lips, were soft and sweet: her hands fine and white, yea
all her parts so perfectly proportioned, that nature sought to win great
commendation in caruing so cunningly so curious a carkas. But as a rusty Rapier
is no trusty Rampire to defend a man, though the Scabbord be of fine velvet:
so a woman with foul conditions is coursly to be accounted of, though her
face be fair, and body bewtifull. But destinies so drove, that this King by
chance cast a glaunce upon this gorgious gods, and at the first view was so
vanquished by vanity, that he thought his life no longer pleasant unto him,
then he was in her sight: And failed not daily familierly to frequent the
misteris company, for the maids cause. And having attempted her chastity by
showing her his great goodwyll, by beestowinge on her great gifts, by large
promises of preferment, and many other means, and nevertheless failing of his
purpose, in pensive perplexity fell to parley with himself, to this purpose.

I ever heretofore thought a Princes life to be void of strife, and that they
had always passed their time in pleasure without pain: but now I see we are
subject to sorrow, so soon as the meanest subject we have. Likewise before
this I was of opinion, that number of frindes, aboundinge in wealth, abidinge
in health, and such like things which pertain to the body, were sufficient to
attain to a happy life in this life: but now I see, it is the mind which
makes mirth, and stirs strife, yea the contented mind is the only
riches, the only quietness, the only happiness. Good God, how unsavory seem
those sweet meats unto me, wherein I was wont to delight? how vnpleasa^t are
y^ sports, wherein I was wont to take pleasure? how cu^bersome is y^ company,
which was wont to content me? no game glads me, no daunsing delights me, no
iusting joys me, no plays please me, no triumphs, no shows, no hauking, no
hunting, no nothing under the Sun does solace me. And would I know the
cause? why, I have not a contented mind: the perfect parts of Pasiphae do so
diversely distract my mind that only her sight is sweet, only her company is
comfortable, only her presence is pleasant unto me. And would I know the
cause? why, in her y^ fates have fixed my felicity, in her the heavens have
heaped my happiness, with her must I live, and without her must I die. Why, I
have pursued her goodwil with prayers and with presents, with love and with
liberality, with gifts and with goodwill, and yet am never the near. And
would I know the cause why? I sought not her goodwill in the way of marriage.
Only marriage is the mean, only wedlock must lock, and lincke us together.
And shall I so much debase the height of my estate, as to match in marriage with so
mean a mate? as though many princes have not as meanly matched themselves: as
though the Gods themselves have not married with earthly creatures. And for my
Pasiphae, though she be inferriour to me in parentage, yet in personage, she
is good enough for God himself. And for her dowry or wealth, what need I way
it, who have the most part of the world under my dominion? no, there shall no
regard of honor, or respect of riches, detain me from that which does only
contain the contentment of my mind. And in this mind meant to attempt her in
the way of marriage: but runninge from Charibdis, he rusht upon Scilla:
flying from one rock, he fell upon another: thinkinge to quench the coals
of his desire, he fell into hot flames of burninge fire: as hereafter you
shall hear.

Now so soon as he had opportunity offered him, he made Pasiphae partaker of
his purpose in these terms.

Seeing the only touchstone to try true and loyal love from loathsome lust,
is marriage, I mean, if you be content, to consent thereto, to seal the
sincere affection I bear you, with the sacred ceremonies and holly rites of
matrimony: and as I have preferred your love before all worldli respects, so I
trust you will return my love with such loyalty, that I shall have cause to count
my self as well matched, as if I had married with the greatest princess in the
world. Pasiphae hearing these words, was so ravished with joy, that she could
not on the sudden make the king an answer, but having changed color twice
or thrice, from red to white, and from white to red, in token of a mind moved
with hope, assailed with fear, and passioned with pleasure, at length she
said unto him. As (most worthy prince) I ever thought my self far unworthy of
any such honor, so if it please your highness plainly to hear the truth, I
ever thought my self far to worthy, to yield to your desire in the way of
wickedness: which was the cause I made so course account of your curtesy
heretofore. But seeinge it has pleased you to lodge your love thu^ low, and to
think me worthy the honor of wedlock with so worthy a wight: assure your
self your majesty shall find me in love so loyal, and in obedience so
dutiful toward you: that in the one, I will supply the part of a loving wife:
and in the other, satisfy the duty of a diligent handmayd. Neither would I you
should think, that it is the name of a queen, or estate of a prince, y^
wins me thus willingly to your will, for I know that name to be vain, and
that estate full of pain: but it is your exceedinge love toward me (O noble
prince) that linketh my lykinge with yours, it is your incomparable curtesy
which forces me to yield the forte of my faith and virginity into your
hands.

For as the sun the higher it does ascend in the firmament, the more heat
it does extend to the earth, so virtue and curtesy, in the more high and
princely person it is placed, the more force it has to win the wills, and bind
the hearts of people to embrace it. And as my love is grounded upon your
virtue, so I trust so to behave my self, that hereafter you shall have as
great lyking to my conditions and virtue, as now you have love to my color and
beuty: that when years shall take away the pleasure of y^ one, you may take
delight and solace in the other. The king was so deeply delighted with this
dutiful discourse, that he had not a word to reply, but satisfiyng him
self for the time with a few sweet kisses, presently gave commandment to
his officers, to make preparation for the sumptuous celebrating of his marriage,
which shortly after was consummated with such royalty, as is requisite in a
matter of such majesty. So this married couple, consumed two or three years in
the highest degree of happiness. But the sun being at the highest,
declineth: and the Sea beeinge at full tide, ebbeth: caulme continues not
long without a storm, neither is happiness had long without heaviness, as
by this couple may be seen. For when the kings fancy had been once fully
fed, the vehemence of his desire beegan to vanish away, and he began to love
his new married wife rather with reason then with rage: by reason whereof with
indifferency of judgment, he could now note her naughty nature, which at
first partialyty of love, would not permit him to perceive. For what Gentleman
soever she saw in the court, endued with a virtuous disposition and noble
mind, she would with the king hinder his preferment by all means possible,
still aduaunsing the vylest, to tipe of dignity. If any Gentlewoman were famous
for her honesty and chastity, by some sluttish slights or other, she sought to
slander them. So that those in whom the king did only delight, she
endeavored with all dilygence to molest and spite. Which the king perceiuinge,
and consideringe how from low estate, he had brought her to height of honor,
thought he might more boldly refourme her faults, and began (with severity
sufficient, and in deed, more then was meet beetweene man and wife,) to
admonish her of her malicious disposition, toward those which were of
virtuous inclination: and made no curiosity though without curtesy, to tell
her, that she beeinge ignoble her self, could not like of those which were
noble. But to mutch familiarity had bred so mutch contempt in her, that she
beegan impaciently to pout, to loure, to snuff, to chase, to think her self
mutch iniuried by those words, and said plainly she would like of whom she
list, shewinge her rude bringing up, her want of wit and government, her
currishe nature, her cursed conditions, and how unfit she was for the place
she was in. Well, the king was fayn to make a virtue of necessity, and to
take patiently, that which he could not take away easily. For she still
perseuered in her perverseness, and hated those chiefly, whom her husband
loved especially. And amongst all other, there was one proper young gentleman
named Verecundus, attendant upon the king, and in great favor and credit with
him, whom when she could by no means bring into displeasure or dislikinge,
she went about to entrap by this train of treason: she began to cast
glaunces of good will toward him, and by alluringe looks to thrall him in
the thread of her beuty. The young gentleman being made of fine metal, and
therefore very apt to receive the impression of love, in short time was so
framed to her fancy, that he yielded faith to her fraud, and requited her
feigned looks with unfeigned love. And as a pleasant pray soon intiseth a
simple theife: so he thought her beuty such a booty, that in his opinion, no
young man in the world but would hazard hanginge to have it. And hereupon
fell to debatinge the matter with him self in this sort.

It is a common opinion amongst men, that he which is once chayned in the
linkes of love, is forthwith restrained of his liberty and freedom, but if
true lyberty be to live as one list, I cannot but think my self to live in
most large and licentious liberty, for that I lust not, or desire to lead any
other life then that which I do: which is, in the secret service and
continual contemplation of my princely Pasiphae. Yea I think every sorrow
sweet, and every pain pleasure, which any passion proceeding of her beuty
procures me: and I think my self more then happy, that the heavens think
me meet to suffer any martyrdom for her sweet sake. And if I might end my
days in doing her service, I should think it the only beginning of joy, the
way to life, and the ready and perfect path whereby to pass to the pleasures
of Paradise. Oh that fortune would minister some occasion whereby I might
manifest unto her the manifold goodwill I bear her: and if without prejudice
to her person it might be done, would to god she were drowned in some such
depth of danger, that nothing but the hazardinge of my life could preserve
her from peril: then should she see the service which I have sworn to do
her, then should she see the duty which I have vowed to owe her, then should
she plainly perceive, that neither the pleasures of the world, neither the
solace of freindes, neither the sweetness of life, neither the sowernesse of
death should withdraw me from sheadynge the dearest drop of blood in me to
do her good. And then would she say (if any curtesy be contained in her)
that my love is most loyal, and my friendship most faithful, then would she
pay (if any gratefulness be grafted in her) my danger and peril with the
price of her person. But alas, how can she pay me with that which is not in her
own power? There is another only who has interest therein, she has already
paid her person as a price of a prince and his whole kingdom: so that I plough
the barrein rocks, and set my share into the shore of the Sea: I till with
toil such a kind of soil, whereof another by right must crop the corn. But
admit she were disposed to incroche somewhat upon her husbands right, yet is it
likely she will look so low, as let so mean a man as my self grow into so
great acquaintance with her? No, fortune denies me any such favor, my good
will as yet has deserved no such gwerdon, my desire is far above my deserts,
my ambition above my condition. Why, my birth is better then hers, why should
she then neglecte me? But her calling is better then mine, why should she
then respect me? My desire proceeds of love, why should she not then accept
it? But alas, it is contrary to law, why should she not then reiecte it? I am
of noble blood, why should she refuse me? But she has a noble prince to her
husband, why should she misuse him? Yea if I my self were not a villain,
altogether deuoyd of virtue, I would not suffer it so mutch as enter into my
thought to abuse him, who has always used me honorably, who has sought my
prefermente by all means possible, who from my childhood has brought me up
like a loving lord and Master. Shall I requite his liberalytie toward me
with such disloyalty? shall I deceive the opinion which he does conceive
of me, with such destable villainy? shall I return the trust which he
reposeth in me, with such treson? shall I defile my faith toward him, by
seeking to defile his bridly bed? But (alas) love is above lord or laws, above
Prince or privilege, above friend or faith. Where love leads no master is
made account of, no King cared for, no friend forced of, no duty respected, no
honesty regarded, but all things done according to the passion which
prevails over us. And seeinge it is not in our power to prevent that passion,
for it is either derived of our own nature, or descended from the heavens,
there is no reason I should requier any proper or peculiar fortune to my
self, and seek to be dispensed withal from that which is common to all: and
so mutche the rather I am induced to yield to the instinct of love, and to
pursue my purpose, for that I perceive by the wanton looks of the Queen, that
she is determined to entertain some secret friend, beesides the King her
husband, and if I flatter not my self, her very countinance toward me
imports some lykelyhood of love she bears me: therefore I think it wisdom
to strike while the iron is hot, and if it be posible to ease my heart of the
grief, which her beuty has bred me. And if she be disposed to arm her
husband with horned harness, as good I be the instrument thereof, as some other
of meaner calling and countenance. After this, he sought all means possible
to insinuate himself into her familiarity, and courted her continually with
dutiful service and secret signs of sincere affection: he so bribed her
maids with benefits, and corrupted them with coin, that they made him a God
unto their misteris: she could not look out at her chamber window, but that
she saw him walk solitarily underneath, casting up countenances which seemed
to contain humble prayers for pity and compassion, and throwing up such
sighs as might plainly signify the sorrow of his thoughts. If she chanced
to walk abroad, he would meet her like a ghost in such ghastly manner, with
such a pale countenance, and pined carkas, that it would have moved the stoany
rocks to ruth. But the Queen seeing him so fast fettered in folly, had that
she desired, and now she left her louinge looks toward him, and the more
painfully she perceited him tormented, the more disdainfully she lokt upon
him, and would not by any signs which he did show of his affection, seem to
know it, to the intent he should by writing make manifest his meaning unto
her. The young Gentleman, seeing the hope which at the first he conceived of her
goodwill, altogether without hap, and in a manner dispairing of his purpose,
he could take no longer days with his desire, but that he must know a final
resolution one way or other: And being driven to careless desperatnesse, he
feared not to commit his life to a tell tale piece of paper, and beewrayed his
misery to his misteris in this manner.

Because (most sovereign Lady) my duty and service heretofore has been
nothing acceptable to you, I have devised a new way to work your
contentation, which is by writing to do you to wit, that since it likes you
not to give me life, I mean to beestowe upon my self a desperate death, the
only thing I think which may procure you pleasure: and so long as it may
delight you, I way not how mutch it spite me. Yea love has dealt so
extreemly with me, that though I would my self, I cannot keep my corpse from
confusion. For as the frettinge Fistula past all cure, runs in the flesh
from place to place, and makes the sound flesh as rotten as the rest, so y^
deadly poison of love first entered in at my eyes, and after spread into every
part of me, has now dangerously infected my whole body unto death. But yet my
death will be nothing so grievous unto me, as to think what a blemish it will
be to the brightness of your beuty, when your tyranny shall be taken to be the
cause thereof, yea and when you shall have no cloud at all to color your
cruelty. For if you allege for your self, that you durst not make so deep a
wound in your honor, as to commit your body to any, but to him who by
marriage has merited it: why a lovely look only would have satisfied me,
yea one glaunce of goodwill going from your eyes, will more content me then all
the actual pleasure in the world, received of any other woman in the world.
But seeing fortune does will, and you do wish my destruction, I am content to
obey the decree of the one, and satisfy the desire of the other: beeseechinge
you to take these witless words for a final fainting farewell, wishing you
continuance of beauty, with increase of bounty.

Nether yours, neither his own: VER^CVNDVS.

This Letter besprinckled with tears, he gave to one of her maids of honor
to give her. But true the proverb is, that fish bred up in durtie pooles will
taste of mud, one descended of mean race, cannot be endued with virtue fit for
princely place: set a beggar on horsback and he will never alight, extol one
of base stock to degree of dignity, and who is so haughty? who is so proud?
for this crafty coy Queen having red his letter, though she were right glad
thereof, for that thereby she meant to purchase his utter discredit with the
King, yet she seemed to be in a great chafe, calling him traitor, that durst
injury her eyes with such leude letters, with diverse other imputations of
reproach, and went presently to the King and showed him this letter: who in a
great rage sent his guard to apprehende him, but he having intelligence
thereof, was feign to fly the country. See the force of fraud and the end of
lawles love, but mark moreover the reward of her treachery and tyranny. Her
husband ever after this, was so ielous over her, that he would never suffer
her to be out of his sight, and doatinge somewhat of her beauty, but doubting
more of her honesty, he never rode forth any iourny, but that he set wary
watch and ward over her at home, yea this furious feende of hell did so
torment him, that he could take no rest day nor night, but his fancy still ran
either upon the^ Gentleman that would have done him that injury, either upon
some other that should be like to serve him in like sort: so that the
pleasure which her proper person procured him, was drowned with y^ doubt, lest
she would not remain proper unto him, and that she would be as common in
possession, as she was proper in personage. Alas, (says he) now my joy is at
an end, y^ clouds of care have quight covered my sun and light, of solace and
delight: yea the greater pleasure I take in practicing with my Pasiphae, y^
greater fear I have yt others deeply desire to participate with y^ pleasure.
And the more free she is in such freendship toward me, y^ more franck I doubt
she will be toward other. Ah, would to God I had never been married, rather
then to be thus martired, or else would I had matched with some such, whose
princely nature would have participated only with Princes, and whose royal
blood and birthe might have feared the baser sort to presume to practice her
to their purposes: but my chance was to choose one, who if (as the saying is)
like, like best of their likes, is like to like better of any other then of my
self, for that in nature and conditions there is such difference beetweene
us. But repentance now comes to late, this only rests to be foreseen,
that unto the great grief which mine own conceit procures me, her abuse
add not infamy and dishonor. And if the heavens have assigned me such heavy
fate, as due to my doatinge desire, yet this at least let me take heed, that
with the loss of her own honor, she procure not the loss of my life. And
hereupon appointed certain of his assured friends, to have the custody and
keeping of the queen: who seeinge her self thus disloyally without cause
abridged of her liberty, beegan to curse the time that ever she came to be
queen, wishing she had continued in meaner calling with fruition of liberty,
rather then to sit in chair of dignity, with suspicion of dishonesty. What
pleasure, says she, does my princely estate procure me, which must live as
a prisoner? Who will honor me for queen, which am suspected for a queen and
harlot? How shall I dare to show my face in the Court, when the king doubts
of my dealinge toward him? My looks have not been so light, my courtesy has
not been so common, my glaunces have not been so garish, whereby he should
enter into this sinister suspicion of me. But love (they say) is light of
beeleefe, and ielousy is grounded upon love. Auant fond foolish love, God send
my husband rather to hate me, then to bear me any such love, which bereueth
him of rest, and me of renown, which breaks the bond of faithful
freindship and entire amity between us, which causes him to doubt me, and me
to dread him, which makes both our lives so loathsome, that I wish death to
dispatch either the one of us or the other. But this froward fate, I must
ascribe only to mine own fault, and fraud toward Verecundus, who has now
just cause to triumph that I my self am fallen into the pit I dug for him.
Well, I must retire to patience perforce, and hang in hope of some good hap to
redress my woe and misery.

But you shall understand (Gentlewomen) this was not all her punnishment, nay
this was but a trifle in respect of that which after followed, a matter in
haynousnesse so horrible, in desire so detestable, and in lust so loathsome,
that it is no less strange to be told, then hard to be believed: so that I
think my words will rather carry wonder then credit with you. For, whether
it were gods plague for y^ husbands ielousy, or for her iolity, pride, and
subtelty, I know not, but thus it pleased him to suffer the devil to deal
with her. Being by her husbands commandment in his absence kept from
company, her chief solace was to walk in a pleasant grove joined to her
palaice, where used to feed a heard of beasts, amongst which was a goodly
white bull. I dare not say she fell in love with the bull, least I should
drive you rather to laughinge at my story then listninge to it, but surely so
it was. Yea she was not only in love with the beast, and went every morninge
and with her own hands brake down boughs for him to brouse upon, but, which
was more, she was ielous over him: for what cow in all the herd she saw he
liked best, she caused to be had from the heard and killed, as she pretended
for sacrifice, but in deed for fatisfiyng her ielous mind. And as the beast
was opening, she would take the inwardes in her hand, saying, now go thy way
and please my love if thou can. And taking delight a while in this daliance,
at length her lust grew to such outrage, that she felt in her self an
impossibility to continue her cursed life, without the carnal company of the
bull. And notwithstanding she assayed the assistaunce of reason, the policy
of perswations, the help of herbs, and the mean of medicines, to mortyfy her
beastly desire to the beast, yet nothing would prevail, yea beeinge often in
mind to make her self away, her heart would not suffer her hands to do it:
not that death feared her, but that desire forced her first to fulfill her
filthy lust. But Gentlewome^, because you shall not enter into colorick
conceits against me, for publishing in this presence, a history which
seems so mutch to sound to the shame of your sex, I mean not to justify
the truth of it, but rather will prove it false by the opinion of one Seruius,
who writes, that Pasiphae indeed played false with one Taurus (which
signifies a Bull) secretary to her husband in the house of Dedalus, and after
being delivered, had two sons, the one like Minos, the other like Taurus, and
thereupon the Poets feigned the fable aforesaid: but whether being a woman
she used the carnal company of a beast, or whether like a lewd wife she
gave her husband the badge of a beast, her offense was such, that I cannot
(though gladly I would) excuse it. Yet must I needs say that in my fancy her
husband deserved some blame: for no doubt his suspicion without cause, caused
her in such sort to transgress marriage laws. For seeing her honesty
doubted of, and her good name as good as los^e, she thought as good to be
naught for somewhat as to be thought naught for nothing. And surely the
experience is to common, y^ suspicion and slander makes many to be that
which they never meant to be. But some are of this foolish opinion, that it is
simple and sottishe folly, for a woman to deal truly with him, which deals
ielously and cruelly with her: some again lewdly think, y^ if a woman cannot
conceive by her husband y^ she may lawfully enter into co^uer sation with some
other: some wickedly ween, that if the husband be not able to satisfy the
insatiable desire of his wife, that to avoid concupiscence, she may
communicate with some other: but surely (Gentlewomen) I am settled in this
opinion, that no suspicion or jealousy ought to cause a woman to transgress
the bounds of honesty: that rhastitie is the only Jewel which women ought to
be chary of, that women having lost their chastity, are like broken glasses
which are good for nothing, that they make shipwreck of all, if the cabels of
constancy be once crakt, and the anchors of honesty slipped: y^ it is better
for the^ to be fools then false, to be simple then subtle, to be doves then
devils, to be abused then abuse: y^ it is better for the^ to be barren then
beastly, to be without fruit then faith, children then chastity: that
concupisence is only to desire other besides their husbands, that they which
burn in such desire, shall burn in hell fire, y^ no adultresse shall
inherit the kingdom of heaven: that all women ought to be like y^ matronesse
of Rome, which knew y^ savor of no man's breath but of her husbands, like the
wife of Fuluius Torquatus, who died with longinge, rather then she would go
forth of her chaumber in her husbands absence, to see a wild Aegiption with
one eye in his forehead, whom she longed to see: that women ought to spin with
Penelope, to spill with Camma, to kill with Lucrece, to be slaundred with
Susanna, with Sauoy, and with others, to endure any torment, rather then to
lose one jot of their chastity and honesty.

Pigmalions friend, and his Image.
PIGMALION, a Gentleman of Piemount, continuing the space of certain years,
in honest affection, and virtuous love with PENTHEA, wife to Luciano a noble
gentleman of the same country, is at length by her rejected, in respect of a
base stranger. Pigmalion, abandoning the company of all women, and giuinge
himself to the art of Caruing, burns in love with an Image, which himself
had fashioned: whom, at his earnest suit Venus transformeth into a fair Maid,
and he takes her to Wife.

TO make the reckoning without the host, is the way soon to be* ouershot in
the shot: to resolve certainly upon incertenty, is the way never to be in any
certenty: to look for constancy, of those y^ like of inconstancy, or to
determine of those things which are not in our powers to perform, is nothing
else but to be deceived of our expectation, and to be driven to alter our
determination: as the History which you shall hear, shall yield example of
both the one and the other.

In the country of Piemount had his beeinge one Pigmalion, a gentleman
descended of noble birth, endued with perfection of person, and perfectly
pourtraied forth with y^ lineame^ts of learning, so that it was dooubtful
whether he were more indebted to fortune for his birth, to nature for his
beauty, or to his parents for his learning. But as beauty, birth, riches,
and the rest must needs give place to learning, so no doubt but his parents
deserved the pre-eminence of praise. For the other are but dim stars, where
learning gives light. And as when the sun shines, the light of the stars
is not seen: so where learning appears, all other gifts are nothing to be
accounted of. Besides that, beeside his learning, he was endued with a great
dexterity in all things, in so mutch as nothing came amiss unto him, which
was meet for a Gentleman: in feats of arms no man more courageous, in
exercises of the body none more active, in game or play none more politic,
amongst the ancient who more grave? amongst the youthful, who more merry? so
that there was no time, no person, no place, whereto he aptly applied not him
self. By reason whereof, he was acceptable to all good companies, and well was he
that might entertain him in his house. But most of al he freque^ted y^hous of
one Luciano a noble Gentleman of the same countri, and in continuance of time
grew so far in familiarity with his wife, that he reposed his only pleasure
in her presence. Yea she had made such a stealth of his hearts, that neither
Father nor Mother, Sister nor Brother, nor all the friends he had in the
country beside, could keep him one week together out of her compani. Yea this
faithful love he bare her, seemed in a manner to extinguish all natural love
toward his allies, and kinsfolk: Who beeinge (as they were wont) desirous of
his company at hauking, hunting, and such like pastimes, could not by any
erauing or importunity obtain it: but being ignorant of the cause, they
thought it had proceeded of this, that his mind upon some occasion had been
alienated from them, which caused them on the contrary, somewhat to withdraw
their goodwils from him. But he forced little thereof, he cared not whom he
displeased, so he might work her contentation: she was the star by whose
aspect he did direct his doings, she was the haven wherein he sought to
harborough, she was the heaven whyther he coueted to come, she was the saint
to whom he did lend such devotion, that he could find in his heart to bend
no liking to any other whatsoever. In so mutch, y^ having the profer of many
rich maryages, he always refused them, as having his heart so replenished with
the love of her, y^ there was no roomth for the love of any other to remayn
within him. Now she, on the other side, whose name was Penthea, beeinge a
courteous courtly wenche, gave him such freindly entertaynment, and used him so
well in all respects, that, her husband excepted, she seemed to hold him
most dear unto her of any wight in the whole world. She never made feast, but
he must be her guest: she never rode journey, but he must be her companion:
she never daunced, but he must direct her: she never dised, but he must be
her partner: she, in a manner, did nothing, wherein he did not something. Her
Husband all this while beeinge fully assured of her virtue, and very well
persuaded of the honesty of the Gentleman, susspected no evil beetweene them,
but lyked very well of their love and familiarity together, neither in deed
had he any cause to the contrary. For Pigmalion knew her to be endued with
such constant virtue, that he thought it impossible to allure her to any
folly: and besides that, his love was so exceedinge great toward her, that
he would not by any means be the cause to make her commit any thing, which
might make her less worthy of love then she was. And if at any time (as the
flesh is frail) the vehemence of his affection forced him to persuade her to
folly, he did it so faintly, that it might plainly be perceived he was not
willing to overcome. For he deeply doubted, that if by the force of her love
toward him, or of his persuasions toward her, she should have yielded the
forte of her faith and chastity in to his hands, his love toward her (with
the sun being at the highest) would have declined and decreased, which would
have been the greatest grief to him in the world. No, he lived with such
delight in the contemplation of her chastity and virtue, that he was void not
only of Libidinous lust toward her, but also toward all other women
whatsoever. Yea, he received more pleasure of her by imagination, then of any
other woman by y^ act of generation. So that between these friends was no
cause of suspicion, no cause of jar, no cause of jealousy: but they lived
together the space of three or four years in most heavenly haven of most
happy life. The flood of their felicity flowed from the fountain of most
faithful friendship, the building of their bidinge together was raised on the
rock of virtue, so y^ it was to be thought, no seas of subtlety, or floudes of
fickelnesse could have undermined it. But what perpetuity is to be looked
for in mortal pretenses? What constancy is to be hoped for in kytes of
Cressids kind? may one gather Grapes of thorns, Sugar of Thistels, or
constancy of women? Nay if a man sift the whole sex thoroughly, he shall find
their words to be but wind, their faith forgery, and their deeds
dissemblinge. You must not (Gentlewomen) take these words to come from me, who
dare not so mutch as think so mutch, mutch less say so mutch, for that truth
gets hatred, I mean such as tell not the truth, as he in no wise should
not do, which should blow forth any such blast of the most faithful and
constant feminine kind. But you must take these speeches to proceed from
Pigmalion, who, to speak uprightly, had some cause to discommend some in
particular, though not to condemn all in general, as you shall forthwith
hear. For it fell so out that an Ambassador came out of a strange country
into Piemount, and was appointed to lie at the house of Luciano the time of his
aboade in the country. Now amongst the company which came with him, there was
vne young Gentleman, in whom though there were nothing worthy of commendation
any way, yet whether it proceeded of the daintiness of women, who (as
Pigmalion thought) wilbee soon weary of one diet, or of their wavering (who are
constant in nothing) or of their imperfect nature (which tends always to the
worst) I know not, but this lady began to conceive a very good opinion of him,
and in short time in affection far to prefer him before her old faithful
friend. Which Pigmalion perceiving, being in their presence, drunk up his
sorrow in scilence, but having withdrawn him self out of their company, into
his solitary chamber, he entered with him self into this raging railing.

O feigned fawning, O counterfayt curtesy, O deep dissembling, O honey mixed
with gall, O heaven turned to hell. Now do I perceive thy frendshyp heretofore
was nothing but flattery, thy love, leude thy curtesy of course, now am I
assured thou made of me a virtue of necessytye, to serve thy turn for lack
of other company. Did I prefer thee before father and friend, and can thou
prefer before me a stranger, whom thou never saw before, of no
countenance, credit, or constansy, but wauereth with the wynd? Did I bear
thee faithful and entire affection, and can thou bear greater goodwill to
him, who cares not for thee? who bears steadfast affection to none, in whom
is nothing but flitting fantasy, and mere vanity? and can thou thus prefer
lewdness before learning, tryfling before truth, clownishnes before
courtlynesse, vanity before virtue? then farewell reason, thou restest not in
woman's head: then farewell wit, thou wieldest not women's doings: then farewell
faith, thou art no woman's pheare: then farewell women, you are no mates for me.
And hereuppon verily determined with him self utterly to abandon her company
for ever: but reprehending his own rashness, he meant to have a further
troyall of her triflinge toward him, and also to look more narrowly into the
dooinges and behavior of that other Gentleman, that if he could see any
thing in him whereby he worthily deserved to be preferred before him self,
he might more patiently endure it. Whereupon dissembling his grief so well as
he could, he made repair again unto her house, and there noting her love by
her looks, her fancy by her face, and her conceits by her countenance, he
easily perceived to whom she bent her best devotion, and who was her holiest
Idol. Likewise, diligently considering the conversation of the gentleman, he
persuaded himself that in indifferent judgment, where affection did not make
blind, the best guiftes either of body or mind which were in him, were not to
be compared to the worst which were in him self: the one being not perfect any
way, the other imperfect noway. So that seeing neither his own worthynes,
neither the others unworthiness, could settle her affection as it should be, he
utterly apealed from her unworthy and unequal judgment, and giving her the
bezolas manos, he altogether estraunged himself from her society. See the
meruaylous power of his love, who notwithstanding he never inioyed y^ use of
her body, and certainly knew that the other had not won that point of her
neither, yet he took it so grievously, that she should seem to bear greater
goodwyll toward the other then him, that he fully resolved with him self, to
esche we the company of all other women for her sake, and never to suffer the
love of any to sink again so deeply into his heart. And surely (Gentlewomen)
this Pigmalion may be a presedent and proof to confute the error of those,
who think there can be no hot and fervent love between a man and a woman,
unless it* proceed of some pleasant practice between them. And if they see
any freindly familiarity between a young Gentleman and Gentlewoman, they
forthwith conceive an evil opinion of their honest affection. Which error, as
it is most gross, so may it be defaced by sundry reasons. For how it is
possible that of an il cause, can come a good effect? That firm freindship can
flow from fading fancy? That the heavenly consent of minds, should proceed of
the brutall conjunction of bodies? Which, if it were so, those men (if I may
call them men) which daily deal with common women, should be very faithfully
and freindly affectioned toward them: but it is so far of, that in my fancy
after the fact, they rather loath them, then love them. Both for that a loathsome
repentance follows it, and also (as Aristotle says) men thereby are made
less perfect. So that I think the conjunction of bodies, rather a disjunction
of mind then otherwise. And true freindship beetweene man and man, or man and
woman, is grounded only on that which is good and honest. Yea, I am persuaded,
that the wanton lover himself, is as well satisfied with the good
countenance, loving looks, and perfect agreement of his misteris mind with
his, as with the use of her body. Which, although he oftentimes ernestly
desire, yet I think it be as mutch to know thereby her unfeigned goodwill
toward him, to confirm it with a natural bond, and to procure her
contentment, as for that he reposeth the fullness of his felicity therein.
So, if then a lewd lover altogether vowed to vanity, can love without lust,
how mutch more easily may a faithful friend be fervent in affection, and yet
cold in desire? And as Pigmalion may be a plain president, that a man may
love loyally, and yet not desire laciuiously: so may Florinda be a fruitful
example to the feminine sort, to do the like, who bearyng such fervent
affection to her freinde Amadour, that she held him more dear then her own
life, that she received more contentacion in the company of him, then of
husband, father, mother, freinde or whosoever: yet she was so far of from
filthy affection toward him, that she avoided, so near as she could, all
occasions which might draw him into any disordinate desire toward her. In so
mutch, that having occasion of privy conference with him in a privy place,
before she came, she foully defaced her face, and bruised it with a stoane,
that he might not be inflamed with the feature thereof, and diverse other
ways at diverse other times, valiantly withstoode all alarms of lust. Therefore
they are no doubt deceived, which think that love cannot be without lust,
neither fervent affection without fleshly fancy. And I would not wish any to
judge so injuriously of the familiarity of freindes, such light judgments,
prove but a light judge: such suspicious opinions, for the most part proceed
from suspected persons: and they are commonly such themselves as they think
other to be: for mala men's, malus animus: an evil disposition breeds an
evil suspicion. But to return to Pigmalion, who, for all his fervent love,
being frustrate of the fruits thereof, and not incountred with the like, got
from the house of his fickle freinde, and being alone in his own lodginge,
he entered with him self into this discourse. Notwithstanding my love has
been always guided rather by reason then rage, and my fancy never at any time
turned to fury, by reason whereof I have not been greatly pinched with the
panges thereof, yet when I consider the common course of lovers, and of love,
surely of all punishments inflicted on mankind, there is none that does more
afflict us, then the Iewde lots thereof, and the fiery darts of Cupid. For all
other evils by nature we fly from, by reason we redress, by policy we
prevent, by pleasure we mitigate, by patience we moderate, by labor we
lighten, by pain we appease, by counsel we cure, by time we take away, or
by some means or other set our selves free from. But this hateful love by
nature we follow, it bereeneth us of reason, policy has no place in it,
pleasure doubleth our dolor, patience purchases no ease, labor is lost,
pain preuayleth not, counsel conduces not, time tieth and intangleth us,
no, nothing is able to lead us out of this intricate Labyrinth: And though* ye
pleasures pertayuing to love, seem great: yet who so ever purposes to
purchase them, let him assure him self to buy them at an unreasonable rate.
Every pecke of pleasure shall cost him a quarter of care, for every pint of
honey he shall taste a gallon of gall. Yea though the entry which leads to
the lodginge of love seem easy, and the porche paradise unto him, yet shall
he find the hall a hell, and the whole house a hateful prison and place of
bondage. For as Mariners y^ under a show of calm wether, commit them selves
to the sea, are oftentimes with tempests so tossed, that rushinge against the
rocks, their ships are shaken to pieces, and they devoured in the depth of the
sea: so he that under the courteous countenance of a wavering woman yields
himself to love, is commonly so wrapped in the waves of wiles, that he is
altogether drowned in the depth of deceit, and hardly escapes with the loss
of his liberty and lyuinge. We see the fly plays so long with the flame,
that he is scourched therewith, and the experience is no less common then
lamentable, that men dally so long with dainty dames, that at length they are
scorched in the flames of fancy, and the wings of their free will quight
burned away. And then, good God it is strange to consider their case, how
carelessly they deal in all things, how leudly they spend their time, how
prodigally they consume their gooddes, how negligently they regard their
freindes, how lothsomely they like good counsel, how resolute they are in
their own fond determinations, how dissolute in their beehauiour, how
solytaryly they sit in scilence, how secretly they conceal their grief, how
sorowfully they spend their days, how fantastically their minds are troubled,
how feebly their bodies are weakened, what broken sleeps, what doubtful dream,
what vain visions they have. And touching their beeloued, how curiously they
commend them, how partially they praise them, how doltishly they doat on
them, how wilfully they are blinded in the^, how supersticiously they think of
them, how idolatroucly they worship them, how zelously they love them, how
ielously they look to them, how warely they wach the^, how willingly they
serve the^, how painfully they employ themselves to pleasure them, how readily
they run under their commandments, how obediently they bow at their beck and
cum at their call, how deadly they hate their enemies, how deeply they love
their freindes, how charily they seek their goodwill, how childishly they
fear their ill will, how gladly they take a good look, how sadly they receive
a sower countenance, how foolishly they fulfill their desires, how fondly they
frame the^ selves to their fancies, how with looks they show their love, and
with signs signify their goodwil, how it greeueth them to have any other
looked upon or spoken to, how in y^ presence of their ladies they fry as hotly
as Mount Aetna, how in their absence they frize as coldly as the Hill Caucasus,
how present they prefer suits, how absent they send salutations, how present
they flourish, how absent they fade: to conclude, how present they live, how
absent they die. But on the other side, to weigh the dealings of their darlings
toward them, it makes my heart sore to think, that any man should be so mad,
as not utterly to abhor them. For, first while they see a man free from folly
and without the compass of their cozenage, they fetch many a windlas to drive
him into the nets of naughtiness, and to entrap him in their treachery: and if
they perceive him so strongly armed with wisdom, that their bolstred beuty
cannot bleare his eyes, then forth with they go about to compass him with
their counterfeit courtesye, then, forsooth, they frame such friendly
countenaunces toward him, and pretend to bear him so great goodwill, that he
cannot (unless he will show himself altogether ungrateful and
discourteous) but frame his fancy toward them again. Now, so soon as they
see him reasonably well reclaimed to the lure of their alluring looks, they by
and by stop the lure upon him, and cause him to houer in hope and teach him to
fly a high pitche, for a pray of little profit or pleasure. For then they cast
very coy countenances toward him, yea they will not so mutch as with a glaunce
give any sign of goodwil: but when they have made him lie so long in the air,
that he is ready either to take a stand, or soar away, they flinge forth a
train of treason, and cast some slattringe hope, and feigned fawning for him
to feed on, lest his kindness by their coldness should quail, and so he retire
his desire. But if they see him to be so sharp set, y^ he will stoop at every
stale, or know him to be an eyesse which will never away, the^ they make him
fly and never serve him, they bangle him out and bob him as they list, then
they keep themselves out of his sight to make him more sharp, then in his
presence they lend loving looks to other, then they make the matter so
strange, that he is driven to beegin again, and to renew his suit afresh. And
the end of all this is, to sport themselves in his pain, to glory in his
grief, and to triumph in his torments. Such malice they bear him that
bears them great goodwill. Yea he which loves them best is sure to be
handled ye worst, for they know he is armed with love to endure the force of
their fraud, and like an Ass to bear any burden which they shall lay on his
back. Yea they will not stick to yield their bodies to some course quidem in a
corner, rather then they will bestow on him one courteous countinance, such is
their ill nature to cleue to the worst, and proudly to disdain him that humbly
desires them, and openly to reject all men though never so noble, and secretly
to refuse no man though never so base. And as the Humble be flies all the day
in the pleasant air, and thinks mutch to light even upon the sweet
flowers, but at night takes no skorne to lodge in a Cowes foul sharde: so
these dainty dames, in company think skorne to yield love to any, but in
corners they care not to practice with some loathsome skullion, or horse boy.
But if they think this lover, whom they have so daintily dealte withal, have
oil to coal their furious flames, and be every way fit for their follye, he
shall perchance, after this tedyous toil, and long suit in the court of
curtesy and conscience, be advised and admitted for a more speedy dispatch of
his living, to enter his action in the common place: I mean, he shall be receued
into their good grace and favor, and be now and then feasted with the best
banquets in their bodies. But by that time the reckonnyng be paid, he shall
find his chere* so chargable, that all things considered, he might have fared
better far better cheap, at the most cutthrote Inn in a country. Then must
the Chains, the Bracelets, the Jewels, the Kings, the Diamonds, the Pearls,
be provided: then must he buie for every part a piece, for every finger a
fangle, for every toe a toy: then must their maids be monied, their bauds
bribed, their scouts considered, their servant satisfied, and ever as they
lie open to him so his purse must lie open to them and theirs. And hereof
comes the spoil of a number of noble and lusty young Gentlemen: yea and
the nobler blood and the franker heart they are of, the sooner and sorer is
their decay and confusion. For like as the fire having stones cast into it does
only alter their color and make them black, but cannot consume them, but
having wood thrown into it, it wastes it clean away: so these cousoning
Curtizanes, if some hard mettald lover light unto their lot, they only alter
his estate, and bring him from very wealthy to somewhat needy, but if a free
and frank child chance upon them, they wholly consume him body and goods. A
thing surely on our part rather to be punnished then pitied, who being by
God endued with greater wits, should suffer our selves so villanously to be
vanquished by the weakness of women. But verily as Spiders convert to poison
whatsoever they touch, so women infect with folly whom so ever they deal
withal. And I think them made of God only for a plague and woe unto men, as
their name imports. And as Eve caused Adam to be deprived of Paradise, so I
think her sex is ordained to deprive Ada^s posterity of prosperiti. Yea in
marriage it self where only they are counted necessary, I see not but y^ they
are accompanied with more care then commodity, more cost then comfort, more
pain then gain, more grief their good. Such falsenesse if they be fair,
such silthinesse if they be foul, such wiles if they be witty, such
fondness if they be fools, such proudnesse if they be noble, such
rudeness if they be base, so nice if they be virtuous, such vice if they be
vicious, such lustiness if they be young, such lothsomnesse if they be
old, such lightness if they be merry, such sullennes if they be sad, such
often desire of sport if they be healthy, such seld in quietness if they be
sikly, such vnholsomnesse if they be barren, such quesinesse if they be with
child, such longeing, such daintiness, such waiwardnesse: at all times in
fare such finenes, in apparel such costlines, in household stuff such
curiousness: at most times so immodest, such poutinge, such lowringe, such
chidinge, such chafing, that to conclude with scripture, I think best for man
not to touch a woman.

Gentlewomen, you must understand, this Gentleman was in a great heat, and
therefore you must bear with his bold blasphemy against your noble sex: for
my part, I am angry with my self to have vttred it, and I shall like my
lisping lips the worse for that they have been the instruments of such
evil, neither shall I think them sauory again, until it shall please some of
you to season them with the sweetness of yours. But yet he himself was so
fully confirmed in this faith and belief, touching the fraylty and fraud of
women, that I think no torment, no not the fury of fire could have forced him
to recant his opinion. For ever after, he sled al occasions of women's company,
persuading himself, that as he which touches pitch shall be defiled therewith,
so he that uses women's company shall be beeguiled therewith. And as the mouse
having escaped out of the trap, will hardly be allured again with the
intising bayt, or as the Hawk having been once canuassed in the nets, will make
it dangerous to strike again at the stale: so he having been caught in the
snares of crafty counterfaytinge, and now having vnwound him self thereout,
and won the fields offreedome, avoided all occasions which might bring him
eftsoons into bondage. But man purposes, and God disposes, men determine,
but the destinies do: for what shall be, shall be: no policy may prevent y^ power
of the heavens, no dooinges of men can vndoethe destinies. For he was so far
of from being able to keep him self from beeinge in love with women, that he
fell in love with a senceles thing, a stoane, an Image, (a just punnishment for
his rash railing against the florishinge feminine sex. For continuing (as I
said before) his solitarily life, separated from yr society of women, he
consumed ye most part of his time in caruing and grauing Images, and amongst
all other his works, he made out of Marble y^ likeness of a proper wench (as
by like) notwithstanding y^ new religion he was entered into, having most fancy
to a feminine form, and having fashioned and finished it in the finest manner,
he fell to looking on it: and as love first enters in at the eyes, and from
thence discendeth to the heart, so he looked so long thereon, that at length
he fell in love with it, yea he was so wonderfully bewitched with it, that he
fell to imbrasing, kissinge, and dallyinge with it. A monstrous miracle no
doubt, and rather to be wondered at then credited: And yet I have heard of some
that have been so possessed with melancholy passions, that they have thought
themselves to be made of glass, and if they had gone in any street, they
would not come near any wall or house, for fear of breaking them selves: and
so it may be that this Pigmalion thought him self some stoane, and knowinge
that like agree best with their like, he thought he could make no better a
match, then to match him self to a stone. Or it may be he was one of those,
whom after the general flood (as Ovid reports) Ducalion and his wife Pirraha
made by casting stoanes at their backs: and then no marvel though he bear
meruaylous affection to stones, being made of stoanes. Or whether his religion
were to love images, I know not: neither is it any more to be meruayled at in
him, then in an infinite number y^ live at this day, which love images right
well, and verily persuade themselves y^ images have power to pray for them, and
help them to heaven. Or whether it proceeded of this, that every one is lightly
in love with that which is his own, I know not: but this I read reported of
him, that when neither by the feelinge of his senses, neither by the force of
reason* neither by the assistance of time, neither by any other mean he could
rid his tender heart of this stoany love, he took his image and laid it in
his bed, as if it had been his bird, which done, he went to the temple of
Venus, and there sendinge up sighs for sacrifices, and uttering his passions
in steed of prayers, rufully repentinge his former rebellion against the
majesty of the Goddess Venus, for that he had blasphemed wickedly against
women, and neglected the laws and lore of love, and sought to lodge himself
in liberty, he humbly requested her now to rue his ruthles case, and he would
remain her thrall all the days of his life after. And that if it seemed good
to her godhead to give him a wife, that she might be (he durst not say his
image) but like unto his image. Venus very well knowing what he meant by this
request, remembering also the wrong which Penthea before had profred him, for
that he loved her loyally the space of three or four years with out any
reward, except it were double disse^bling for his singular affection, and
therefore had some reason to rage against women as he did, she thought her self
bound in conscience to cure his calamity, and seeinge how Idolatrously he was
addicted to his Image, she put life into it, and made it a perfect woman. The
like miracles we have had many wrought within these few years, when images
have been made to bow their heads, to hold out their hands, to weep, to
speak, etc. But to Pigmalion, who having done his devotions, returned to his
lodging, and there according to custom fell to kissing his Image, which seemed
unto him to blush thereat, and taking better taste of her lips, they began to
wax very soft and sweet, and entringe into deeper dal^aunce with her, she
bad him leave for shame, and was presently turned to a perfect proper maid.
Which he seeinge, magnified the might and power of Venus, joyfully took this
maid unto his wife. And so they lived together long time in great joy and
felicity.

You have heard (Gentlewomen) what broad blasphemy y^ ficklenes of Penthea
caused unworthily to be blown forth against you all: wherefore to avoid the
like, I am to admonish you that you prefer not new fangle freindes before old
faithful freindes: that you neither lightly leave the one, neither lightly
love the other, for it is great lightness to do either the one or the other.
And beesides the incurring of the blot of inconstancy and wavering, it is very
perilous for you to commit your selves and your secrets to those, of whose
trustines you have made no trial. For all is not gold which glistereth,
counterfayte coin shows more goodly then the good: and it is most easy to
deceive under the name of a friend. The common saying is, the change is
seldom made for the better, and your own saying is, that of your servants
you had rather keep those whom you know, though with some faults, then take
those whom you know not, perchance with more faults. How mutch more then
ought faithful freindes to be kept and accounted of, whom you know to be
perfectly good? They are not surely for any chance to be changed, they are
not for any respect to be rejected, they are the only Jewels to be ioyed in,
the only perles to be preserved, the only pillars to be trusted to. We like
a picture made in marble, better then in wax, because it will last longer: we
like the rich Diamonde chiefly because it lasts long, and will not lightly
lose it bright hew: so likewise, you ought to like those freindes best which
last longest, and have lived longest with you. For you must consider, true
friends are not like new garments, which will be the worse for wearing: they
are rather like the stoane of Scilicia, which the more it is beaten the harder
it is: or like spices, which the more they are pounded, the sweeter they are,
or like many wines, which the older they are the better they are. But to leave
true friendship, and come to trifling friendship, consisting in pleasant privy
practices, I would wish those women which deal that way (although they be no
sheep of my flock, yet for their sex sake, I wish them well) I mould, I say,
advise them to use wary heed in ridding away those friends they are weary of.
It is a dangerous piece of work, and imports as mutch as their good name
comes to, for if they shall, without discretion and great cause, disclaim a
man's freindship, it is the next way (unless his government of himself be
very great) to make him proclayme what freindship he has had of them in times
past. This was it which made Fausline so famous as she was: thi^ is it which
blazed the brute of Blanch maria through out the world. And surely I know not
well what counsel to give in this case, it is a matter of hard digestion to
a man to see her become strange to him, who was wont to be most familier
with him, to have her his enemy, who was wont to be his friend. Therefore I
would advise them to stick to their old freindes still, but if they cannot
frame their fickle nature to such firmenes, the best way is, by little and
little to estraunge them selves from their freindes, to pretend some ernest or
honest cause, to profess that never any other shall possess that place with
the^, to promise that in heart they will be theirs during life.

Alexius.
ALEXIVs given ernestly to follow the study of his book, and the knowledge of
the liberal Sciences, is diligently exhorted by his father to take a wife,
whereunto though unwilling, he applies himself, and is matched with such a
one that in respect of her good graces, he utters great commendation of woman
kind. But shortly after, fallinge into lothinge of that which before he most
loved, he repents himself of his bargain, and forsaking both house, and
wife, and all worldly pleasures, consumes the remainder of his life in
Pilgrimage, and traueile.

CIcero was of this opinion, that the greatest doubt which does most deeply
distress a young man, is to determine with himself, what life in this life
it be best to enter into: wherein no doubt he had reason, for beesides the
diversity of lives which are to be chosen, there is such a confused Chaos of
conceits in young men's heads, that our wits are confounded with them, are lost
as it were in a Labyrinth, not findinge any way out: so that if we chance to
enter into this deliberation, we are asson^ in one vain, as soon in another,
and so many veins so many vanities: if virtue draws us one way, vice drives
us another way: if profit persuade one way, pleasure provoke us another way:
if wit way one way, will wresteth another way: if friends counsel one way,
fancy forces us another way: yea some like Horace his guestes are so daintily
disposed, that no life at al will like them. Kingdoms (they say) are but cares,
in honor is envy, no majesty in mean estate, penury in poverty, in single
life solitariness, in marriage troubles, and touching studies and faculties,
divinity is contemptuous, Physic filthy, law laboursome, touching other
trades of life, merchandise is but base, the country life is clownish, warfare
is dangerous, in travail is perrill, living at home is obscure, yea what life
so ever it be they count it loathsome: so that it is hard sor them to resolve
upon any one, who can frame them selves to fancy none. But for such as covet
to be of the corporation of the common wealth, and to be profitable members
thereof, I think these two points in this choice of our life chiefly to be
considered. First, that we apply ourselves to that life whereto by nature we are
chiefly inclined, for it is not possible well to go forward in any thing,
Inuita Minerua, nature not consenting thereto. Then, not so to addict our selves
to any one life, but that we may adopt our selves to another, if need shall
require. For no man is so surely settled in any estate, but that fortune may
frame alteration: like as no ship sayleth so directly to the wisshed haven, but
that some contrary wind may convert her course against the wrackfull rocks.
Which may be justified by the example of a young Gentleman named Alexius, who
being settled in a steadfast state of life, as was to be thought, yet was he
driven to change, and change again. For first being desirous to pass the
pilgrimage of this short life in pleasure, he avoided (so near as he could)
al worldly vanities, reposing his chief pleasure in serching out the sacred
skill of learned books, so that study was his only pleasure in prosperity,
his only solaco in adversity, his only exercise being fresh, his only
refreshing being weary, his only sport, his only play. And notwithstanding he
had good skill in hauking, huntinge, diceing, carding, with such like, and
sometime for recroation sake used them, yet he counted all those pastimes a
pain, in the respect of the pleasure which study procured him. His Father
seeinge him settled in this solitary life, seemed to mislyke thereof, and
dissuaded him from it, in this sort.

I see, son, there is nothing so good, but by il using may be made naught,
and true, that saying is, that every excess is turned into vice. I mean your
study, which of it self is lawdable, yet the immoderate use thereof makeeth it
rather to be reprehended, then commended: and while you seek your own
careless security, you neglect your countries commodity, and live (like a
drone by the honey) of other men's hands, and by the sweet of other men's swet.
For you must know, all the praise of virtue consists in doing, from the which
to be withdrawn with the doubt of danger or trouble, is a sign of one which
prefers his own private safety, before the common society. And yet he y^
will not endeavor to defend other, is commonly left destitute of help himself.
What won Archimedes by his earnest study, who while Marcellus woonne his
city Syracusis, was so busily drawing figures of Geometry in the ground, that
he knew not the city was taken, and Marcellus sendinge for him to come unto
him, he answered he would not come, until he had finished his figures,
whereupon the messenger in a great rage finished his life: An end fit for all
such, who to satisfy their own minds, will not satisfy their duties to
their rulers, Country and common wealth. Therefore I think good, you leave
this labourlesse life, and to enter into the world, and take a wife, whereby
you may beecome a profitable and fruitful member of your country. You know
the law maker Lycurgus valued in a manner with man^ears, those which would of
set purpose abide barren, saying, that he did in a manner deprive a man of
life, which did not help to bring a man into this life, when he might: and
the difference is little, beetweene doing an injury, and sufferinge an injury
to be done, when one may prohibit it. You know also the reproach which he
suffered that ancient unmarried captain Dercillidas to receive, who passing by
a young princocks, had no reverence done unto him (which amongst the
Lacedaemonians was the greatest dishonor that might be) the Captain
complaining hereof, the young man answered him, why sir, you have got none
which may do reverence to me when I come to age, and therefore it is no reason
you receive that honor at my hands: which answer Lycurgus allowed of,
thinkinge none worse Citizens then such as would not marry. Wherefore if you
will avoid the like inconvenience, and frame your self to enter into that
honorable state, I will depart with such part of my living unto you, that you
shall be able to live in good credit and countenance in your cuntry, and have
cause to think your life as pleasant as this you now lead.

Alexius having diligently given ear to his fathers words, dutifully made
answer in this sort.

Sir, if it please you, I am of this opinion, that a good thing, can not be
to mutch used, and that the more common it is, the more commendable it is,
neither is it possible to seek learning to mutch, whereof there was never any
man yet but had to little: and I think it shame to cease from seeking, when the
thing sought, is the only thing worthy to be thought. For what toil can
seem tedious to find the way to wit, and path to prudency, the line of life
and vain of virtue? And for the commodity of my country. I doubt not, but you
know, that the studious standithe common wealth in as great steed, as the
industrious otherwise. Yea who first brought men within the compass of a
common wealth but only the learned? Who brought them from sauagenes to
ciuilnes, was it not the learned? Who reduced them from rage to reason, was it
not the learned? Who brought them into the society of a city, who prescribed
them laws, who taught them religion, who invented marriage it self, which you
are so ernest to have me enter into, was it not the learned? Yes no doubt,
learning is the life of the common wealth, the maker and mayntainer of it. I
must confess that those which use trades of travail in the common wealth, do
mutch good to the common wealth, but I must say, the learned do more good. I
must confess that soldiers often defend the common wealth: but I must say
that lerning must lead them, otherwise they will sooner offend it, then defend
it. I must confess that soldiers often win wealth to their country: but I
must say that Senators must keep it, and the cunning to keep, is no less
commen dable then the courage to get, and courage god knows is little worth
abroad, unless there be good counsel at home. For what worthy exploytes
did any captain ever atchiue abroad, but by the advice of counsaylors at home?
As the valiant victory which Themistocles had over Salamis, was atchiued by the
counsel of the Senate which Solon had constituted. The overthrow of Carthage
was wrought by the advice of Cato a counsailour. The destruction of Troy was
wrought not by lusty prowess, but by learned policy. The taking of Babylon
by Darius, was not done by the strength of his army, but by the skillful
subtelty of his servant Zopyrus. And so almost in all notable victories,
policy preuayleth above power. Which was the cause that Agamemnon in y^ siege
of Troy, wished rather for ten such as Nestor (who was a grave counsaylour)
then for ten such as Ajax (who was a valiant captain): that Traianus y^
Emperor, when he went into the camp, ever had Dion the Philosopher with him
in his own chariote: that Alexander never went into the feelde without the
philosopher Calisthenes with him: Zerxes never without Damarathus: that Alexander
had evermore Homer his Iliades lyinge under his beds head: that Julius Caesar
studied in the night, and set down in writing, y^ which he did in the day:
that Epaminondas, Mithridates, Themistocles, Adrian, Marcus Antonius, Marcus
Aurelius, Alcibiades, Scipio, Brutus, Anniball, Alphonsus, Solomon, David, with
infinite other, who were courageous Capitains and Kings, gave themselves most
earnestly to study and learning. For they very well knew he could not be a
perfect captain, which was not perfectly seen in all sciences and learning. In
Grammar, to attayn to the lattin tongue, and by it to the knowledge of other
tounges, whereby he may not be deaf and dum amongst those with whom he
shall have to deal in war. In Rethoricke, cherefully to persuade his
soldiers to such enterprises as he would have them attempt. In Logike,
probably to reason with his soldiers in doubtful matters, which are to be
discussed amongst the^. In Arithmetic to number his soldiers, to divide them
into bands, as best may serve for the battle. In Geometry, to measure the
ground, to judge of the distance of places, whereby he may cast his trenches,
raise his bulwarks, and place his ordinance and munition to most advantage. In
Astronomy, to know the course of the stars, the place of the Poles, the sight
of the Zones, and such like, whereby he may be able to direct his army by
night (either on sea or land) into what coasts he shall have occasion. In
Music, to recreat himself being weary, to sing Psalms praises to God for
the victory. And as these seven liberal sciences are showed to be most
necessary for a captain: so is there no art or knowledge but ought to be known
unto him. Philosophy, to take away y^ terror of death, to ease y^ evil of
grief, to cool the heat of hate, to bridle rage with reason, to turn rashness to
stayednes, as it did in Fabius y^ noble captayn qui cuncta^do restituit rem: to
mortify y^ desires of y^ flesh, as it did in Alexa^. toward y^ wife and
daughters of Darius: to increase abstine^^y, as it did in y^ same Alexa. who
having been three or four days without food, would eat nothing him self
till all his soldiers were satisfied: to make pacient in pain as it made
Marius abide martiring without binding: to teach to endure hardness, as it
made Agesilaus to go almost naked in the midst of winter, that his
soldiers by his example might do the like: to teach to set little by riches,
to despise vain glory, to avoid infamy, with infinite other commodities,
wherewith philosophy does furnish us. Cosmography, to know the situation of
cities and countries, to take the opportunity of mountains, woods, and waters.
Surgery, to beale his wounds. Physic, to cure his diseases, and keep himself
in health. Law, to Minister justice to his soldiers, to divide the booty
indiffently amongst them, to observe inuiolably the law of arms. Divinity,
to dehort his soldiers from swearing, from blaspheming, from drinking, from
whoring, and in the hour of death from dispairing. So that counsel, learning
and knowledge ought to be the chief weapons and complete harness of a
captain, yea knowledge is the armor of proof which neither Cannon, Hargabus,
nor Pistol can peerce. And what commodity is in courage without counsel, may
be seen by many rash coustictes of many raw captains. And not to touch any
of f^esh memory, it may please you only to call to your remembrance one
Callicratides, who beeinge captain of the Lacedaemonians, in an expedition
against the Athenians, was advised by the Senate not to encounter with them,
but to remove his navy from them, till more convenient opportunity might be
taken: but he thinking it would have been some derogation to his manhood
sumwhat to have retired, at al adventure ventred upon them, to his own utter
overthrow, and to the great weakening of the wealth of his common weal and
country. If then learning be so necessary to war (whereto many think it
rather a hinderance, as the french nobility forsooth at this day scarce dares
deal with it, for fear of marring their martial feats) how needful must
we think it to other parts of the common wealth? Can the Prince set forth
Gods glory, and see to the realms safety? can the nobility provide for the
preservation of their prince and countries commodity? can divines truly preach
the gospel? can judges duly minister justice, can lawiers defend the innocent,
can Physicians heal the sick, yea in war can the surgions cure the wounded
without learning? Can Merchaunts safely pass the dangerous seas without
skillful Pilotes? Can they mutually trafique and bring in necessaries into the
realm without skillful interpreters? To be short, there is nothing done to
the countries commodity, whereto there is not had the help of skill and
learning. So that learning and wit is the only wealth of each country, the only
conqueror in war, the only preserver of peace. Litigiousnes without
learning can do no good, Mars without Minerua can make no good mart. Therefore
(sir) well you may restrain me from study, but you shall never diswade me
from it. And whereas you persuade me to enter into the state of matrimony, I
can not but think that the great desire you have to do me good, does so dim
your understanding, that you perfectly know not what will do me good,
otherwise you would not go about to bring me (as they say) out of Gods
blessing into a warm sun. For if you knew the commodities of this life,
which I now lead, and considered the discommodities of that life you would
have me to lead, I know you would never counsel me to cleave to the one
and leave the other. In this such quiet, in that such care, in this such
purity, in that such prauitie, in this such virtue, in that such vanytie,
in this such contentation, in that such vexation, in this such caulmes, in
that such storms, in this such safety, in that such ieopardie, in this
such felicytie, in that such misery, that I mutch muse that you your self
murmur not at the miseries in marriage, and seek to be settled in the sweet
solace of single life again.

The people called Massagetes living in mountains without houses, enacted
this law amongst them, that every inhabitant should have two tons, or fats,
in the one should lie the husband, sons, and men servants, in the other the
wives, daughters, and maid servants, they never eat together but on holy
days, and may not lawfully lie together, but only once a week. Pompeius
having occasion to travel that way, demanded of them, why they lived in y^
separated sort? They answered him, The gods had given them but short time to
live on the earth, which they meant to spend quietly, which beeinge together
with their wives, they said they could never do. And Licurgus himself, whom
you allege in commendation of marriage, was almost of the Massagetes mind,
for he willed men not to lie continually with their wives, but to use their
company seldom and by stealth, whereby you may see that marriage is a
dangerous thing, and daintely to be dealt with all, and that he had need to
be armed with more years then I am, that shall venture upon it. For my part,
if you be so content, I mean to continue as I am, and not to change for the
worse, and with Glaucus to give golden harness for Diomedes his brazen, or a
precious stoane for a barley corn with Aesops cock. His Father seeing how he
was bent, willed him to do as he would, and half angrye, left him to his
own lykinge.

I have hitherto (Gentlewomen) done you some wrong in framinge my talk to the
condition and capacity of these Gentlemen, who, as you hard at dinner, held
so hotly that learning was not necessary for a captain, now I will perform
my promise to you, and I will not only pay you the principal, but because
you have so quietly forborne your due so long, you shall hear I will yield you
some interest besides.

May it please you then to know, that Alexius seeinge how desirous his Father
was to have him marry, thought it the part of an obedient child, to apply
himself to the pleasure of his parents, and to enter into that trade of life
wherein his father before him had trodden: whereupon he somewhat intermitted
his earnest study, and beegan to peruse those books, which treated but of
little learning, and in steed of schools, frequented those places where at the
first being a fresh man for the principles of his science, he was taught with
looks, not with letters, and with the eyes, not with the mouth: well in short
space it fortuned one of his good instructors, by lendinge him a look to
learn him such a lesson (as best wits are soonest caught by Cupid) that he
could not be quiet till he had gotten out alone by himself perfectly to con
it: where he said it without book in this sort.

I perceive now that saying is true, that the greatest clarks are not the
wisest men, and that in respect of experience, learning is little to be
accounted of. For I see the foolishness of my Father (if it were possible
there should be any in him) to be far better then all my wisdom and
learning. He only knows what is profitable, what is pleasant for me. He
knows and he told me, but I would not then beeleeue him, that the married
life is the only life. Well, now I se it to be so indeed. Good god what good
did those loving looks only, which that lovely wench cast upon me, do me?
what then may I judge of the rest, if only looks like me so well? no never
any work of other men's, or invention of mine own, never any History,
Commedie, Oration, or Uerse, have procured me half the pleasure, as this
beautiful book has. Therefore now farewell Minerua, welcome Venus, farewell
Aristotle, welcome Ovid, farewell Muses, welcome maidens, farewell learning,
welcome Ladies. But what shall I thus neglect Gods commmaundement, wisdoms
lore, my fathers he^es, and give my self over to fond and foolish love? Why,
as though God allowed not of marriage, as though Pallas her self were not
subject to love, as though my father him self did not in a manner force me
hereto? Yes I will evidently let this my goddess understand my goodwil, I will
humbly crave her love again, I will make my father privy to my practice, I will
cause al ye friends I have to further the marriage between us.

Now this young Pun^ having perfectly learned his first lesson, and liking it
very well, was taken forth another lesson, he was taught now forsooth his
parts of speech, he was driven to speak for himself, to prefer many
pitiful prayers, to feign, to flatter, to vow, to promise, to swear, to make
verses, to write letters, and to use all means to prove his own love, and to
purchase hers, and this lecture also liked him well enough, for that in y^ he
was otherwise a good scholar, and endued with a good wit, he was well able every
way to discharge it, and besides that the gentlewoman seemed at length almost
willinge to be woonne to his will. Then he proceeded further in his learning,
and came to numbers, he was driven to number and tell out his coin, and to
buie rings, tablets, chains, and such like, to send to his misteris, as
tokens of true love, to link liking, and to bind fast the bargain. After
this, he attained to the knowledge of the articles, for now articles must be
drawn of their agreement, her ioynter must be appointed, all the conueiances
concerning this contract are concluded. This lesson neither disliked him, for
that his father was able every way to perform it. Immediately upon this, the
marriage day was appointed, and he must needs take forth one lesson more, to
be fully instructed, and now forsooth he is come to the conjunction of
cases, and ioyninge of genders together. And this was the lesson in deed that
liked him, this he thought y^ lesson of al lesson, y^ only lesson which led to
perfect learning, y^ only instruction which truly taught right construction,
the only lesson of life, the only pathway to Paradise. This lesson he soon
had learned, and yet thought with himself that he never had sufficiently
learned it, which made him in short time make repetition of it a thousand
times. And for recreation after his study, his exercise always was either to
triumph of his own happiness, either to trisle and talk with his misteris,
either in verse curiously to commend her, or else in prose lively to paint
forth the praise of women, and amongst many other his frantic fancies, he
presented in writing to his wife, this mutch in effect.

As it somewhat eases the afflicted to utter their annoy, so no doubt, it
greatly increases our happiness to express our joy. And I am persuaded that
all the delightful things we see, all the joyful things we hear, and all the
pleasant things we feel, would procure us little pleasure, if we had no
means to manifest the^, or friends to impart them to. Therefore I will unfold
my joys to my joy, my pleasures to my Peragon, my mirth to my mistress. For who
ever swamme in such seas of delight? who ever bathed in more perfect blis? for
first, what could I have wished more of God then to have mine own Father the
author, the beeginner, the perswader, the practiser, the furtherer, and the
finisher of my felicity? to impart unto me his counsel, to depart with his
coin, to give me his goods, to leave me his lands, and to do more for me then
I had either reason to require, or so mutch as durst to desire? O Father, thou
only know how to bless thy children? then what more happiness could happen
unto me then to have a wife, whose countenance coueteth only to content me,
whose looks are framed only to my lykinge, whose words are only wrested to my
will, whose deeds are only directed to my delight, whose beauty then the sun
beams is more bright, whose bounty, wit and virtue is more rare then to be
comprehended in a mortal wight, who in shape Venus, in wit passes Pallas her
self, who is the only star which gives right light, who is the only worship
of the world, the only honor of her age, the only Phaenix of the earth, whose
government is such, that she can guide her self wisely in all companies, in
all causes, whose discretion is such, that she can apply herself fitly to
all times, to all places, to all persons, who loves me so loyally, that I
cannot but like it, who honors me so dutifully, that I cannot look for
more, who at all times entertaineth me so courteously, that I cannot but be
content with it, who daily fills my ears with such sugared words, that they
can not but delight me, who at board feeds me so daintily that a prince
would be pleased with it, who at bed feasteth me so delicately that Cupid him
self would be glad of it? O Misteris, thou only know how to make thy
husband happy. But what marvel is it to see a good tree bring forth good
fruit? what wonder is it to see one woman good, when there are none ill? And
how is it possible there should be any ill, when y^ matter whereof they are
made, and causes whereof they come are right good? For first they are made of
the purified metal of man, whereas man was made of y^ gross earth: And as in
stils out of herbs is gotten pure water: so out of man was gotten y^ pure
metal of women, as may be plainly perceived by the finenesse of their
form, by the softness of their flesh, by the clerenesse of their color and
such like. The^ for the constitution of their bodies, they are most commonly
cold, by reason whereof they are most patient, modest, mild, and merciful,
most constant without lightness, most continent without lewdness, neither
offend, either in excess of meat, either in fleshly heat, so often as men
of fiery and hot complexions do. Besides that, the purity of their bodies may
be perceived by this, that no corruption coming by the grosenesse of meat or
otherwise, can continue long within them, but that they have continually
euacuation of all ill humors: such force has that which is fine, to expel
that which is filthy. And as their bodies are most perfect, so also their
souls are most pure. For whereas men receive from Adam origynall sin, women
are altogether void of that infection, which may be partly coniectured by the
excellency of many of their complexions, and cleerenes of their skins: so that
no man almost would think y^ there could lurk any lothsomnes to be misliked
of, under so cumly a covert as their fair faces are, but only they y^ have
proved the contrary. But notwithstanding this perfection wherwt they are
endued, yet (as things most excellent are ever most envied) their want not
those which want so mutch gouernmente, that they will not stick ernestly to
inueigh against the noble feminine sex, and amongst the rest (as who is so
bold as blind bayard.) Mantuan like a mad man, most rudely and rashly raueth
and rayleth against them. But his words are so void of wit, and his railing
so without reason, that if he were alive, I think him rather with torments
to be confounded, then with arguments to be confuted. Before him Aristotle,
as an Ass sotted with over mutch studdy makes a great speak, saying: women
are monsters in nature, and he alleges a profound reason to prove it, for
that nature, forsooth, always intends to bring forth that which is most
perfect, and therefore would bring forth only men if she might. Apythy
argument, he reasons as though it were granted him, that men were more
perfect then women, which with all his philosophy, he shall never be able to
prove. And if he make this reason, that the male is ever more perfect then the
female, nature her self will quickly confute him, who in most of her creatures
has made the female far more perfect then the male. And not to use many
instances, what need we go any farther then consider the kind of Hawks,
where we shall see the Goshauke far better then the Tossell, the Gerfaulcon
then the Gerkin, the Lanar then the Lanaret, the Spar^hauke then the Musket,
and so of all the rest. But Aristotle can make a better reason, for that women
by mutual conjunctions receive their perfection from men, a reason truly
without all reason. What woman was ever more perfect then the virgin Mary, who
never knew man? Then the Roman vestall virgins? Then our vowed virgins, who
continued the whole course of their life without the company of men? But Ceny
forsooth beeinge a maid desired to be made a man. But will you know the cause?
Not for that she coueted to be of the kind of man, but that she might be
free from the filthiness which men did force her to (for before she had been
ravished by Neptune) like as y^ little chicke being caught by the kyte, would
wish with all his heart he were a Kite, and yet the kind of Kites is not to be
thought better then of the chicken. But to leave Aristotle his railyng reasons,
and to reason indifferently of the matter, what one perfection any way are men
endued withal, that women want? Do men (I say) either in natural wit, either
in politic government, either in valiant courage, either in skill and
learning, either in virtue and living, any thing excel them? And first for
wit, Aristotle himself proves them to be more apt in wit, for that they are
more soft in flesh, and we our selves have a common saying amongst us, that
women are never without an excuse, which is a sure sign of a most sharp and
ready wit. And if I were driven to allege examples of witty women, I could
recite whole countries, to wit, Flaunders, Holland, Zeland, and most of the
low countries, where the women wittily deal in all things, discreetly order
their households, courteously entertayne strangers, and wisely wield most
weighty affairs, whereas the men deal only with drink, and like drunken
doltes lie under the bourde. In France also, the Gentlewome^ generally are
more witty in words, and eloquent in talk the^ the men. The like no doubt may
be truly reported of diverse other nations. Then for politik government, is it
likely that they, who can govern them selves and their affections discreetely,
their families and housholdes orderly, are to seek in the polytike government
of public matters? For (no doubt) it is far more easy to see wittily into
other men's affairs then into our own: and Solon says, that they only are fit
to govern other, who can well guide them selves, neither is the difference so
great between a private family and public society, but that they which can
govern the one, may wyeld the other. Again, seeinge in matters of love (which
blind the wisest men that are) women can deal so politikely, that though they
themselves bear great affection to a man, yet they will so handle the matter
that they shall humbly make suit unto them, and ernestly desire them to it,
which they of them selves most ernestly desire, seeinge in privy stealthes they
can practice so politikely y^ their husbands, though never so wary, shall never
be ware of it, but rather the more they are deceived, doat y^ more of them. Is
it to be thought they are to learn of men, or any way inferior to them, in
the conuaigh of ordinary accidents, and matters of common moment? But women are
not admitted to the administration of the common wealth: but what forsooth is
the cause? For sooth the malicious spite of men: and I may say it to my self,
it stands us upon so to do, for if they should be allowed to execute public
offices, whereby their discreet and good government might be generally known,
it were greatly to be feared that we should be set to the clout and kitchen
another while, and they placed in those offices, which we now, not so worthy
of them, wrongfully usurp. And yet to the intent all such bright lights
should not be put under a bush^ll, it has pleased god to set some of them on
the hills of high estate, to give light of life and good government to the whole
world: as namely the wife of Aeneas, named Lauinia, after his death governed
the most turbulent state of Italy, with such policy and wisdom, that though
the title of her husband to the kingdom were very tickle, beeinge a Trojan and
stranger, though her neighbors on every side were given to spoylyng,
incroching, oppressyng, and usurping, yet she kept her people in peace, and
her kingdom quiet, until her son Ascanius came to ripe years, and then
safely set him in the regal seat and royal dignity of his father. As Debora
for her wit and policy was appointed judge over the Israelits, by whose
counsel and courage that courageous captain and capital enemy to the
Israelits, named Sysara was subdued. But what should I rehearse examples of the
politic government of women, whereas laws (the only ground of all good
government) were first invented and made by Ceres, a woman?

Therefore to the third point, which is valiant courage: wherein we our selves
confess them to be nothing inferriour unto us, in that we say women are
always destrous of soueraintie, which evidently argues a noble and haughty
mind. Beesides that, how mutch weaker their bodies are then men's, so mutch
the more strength and virtue is contained in their minds. For it is the
justice of God commonly, to supply the debilitie of the body, with the might of
the mind. Again, how mutch shorter lived are they then men, according to
Aristotle his opinion, so mutch the more virtue of body and mind they are
endued withal. Like as by daily experience, we see that those children which
are destined to death in the prime time of their life, are far more witty,
discreet, and perfect every way, then those who have long time granted them
to live on earth. Lastly, if particularyties might prove a generality, what man
was ever more courageous then Semiramis, who in the habit and apparel of a
man governed y^ Assirians, most courageously? then Tomiris, who slew the mighty
King Cyrus most valiently? then the wives of the city of Scio, who repulsed
their enemies most reprochefully? with infinite other, who in stoutnes of
stomach, and couragiousnes of mind, have been equal to any man, that ever had
any praise for his prowes and virtue. The fourth point is learning, which to
be proper as it were to women may be proved by this, y^ the Muses the authors
of all lerning were women. It may be said that the people called the Latins
lent us mutch learning, but it must be said that a woman named Nicostrata
first taught them their letters. It may be said that Athens has been the
author of many arts, but it must be said y^* Aspasia instructed Pericles the
Duke thereof in learning. Solomon was most wise and learned, yet Saba was able
to dispute with him. Zenobia had learned sons, but she her self taught
them. So that it is evident that women are rather the author of learning, then
any way inferior to men in learning. The last point is virtuous life. Alas it
greeueth me to think how far we come behind in this comparison. How strange
is it to hear a woman to be a swearer, a stealer, a murderer, a traitor, a
rebel, an extorcioner, a per^urer, a cosener, or any such like* To our shame I
speak it, we wallow in those wickednesses. How hard again is it to find a
man of co^tinent conversation, of modest manners, of mild mind, of gentle
disposition, of courteous inclination, of pitiful heart? To their praise I
speak it, women abound in those virtues. So that to speak indifferently,
beetweene the life of men and women, is as mutch difference as beetweene light
and darkness, beetween virtue and vice, beetweene God and the devil.
Therefore, seeing women excel men in perfection of body and soul, in wit and
government, in courage, in learning, in life and conversation, what merueile is
it if my misteris make me happy? what wonder is it if she win me to her
will? what meede do I deserve, if I serve her all the days of my life? For duty
no doubt is due unto her, and I think my service not sufficient to show the
goodwil which I am bound to bear her.

You have hard (Gentlewomen) what praise Alexius for his misteris sake has
bestowed upon you all, which I doubt will drive you into so good an opinion of
your selves, that you will think so mean a man as my self not worthy of your
company: but I would wish you to take heed, for in so doing you might show
your selves to want that wit and courtesy which Alexius has attributed unto
you, and if you prove him false in one point, it is as likely he has lied in
all the rest. But to speak my fancy freely of the praise which he has given
you, though some particular examples be so manifestly true, that all the world
does acknowledge them, yet his general reasons are altogether sophistical and
full of fallacies, set forth without any lively color, only with fayning and
painting: and the fine Marble you know needs no painting, that is needful
only for ragged walls. I mean not that he meant women were ragged walls, and
therefore painted them out in such sort, but surely the sequel of his doings
was such, that it evidently appeared he thought not so well of women in deed
as he set forth in words. For having (as I said before) often said his
lesson of the conjunction of cases and genders together upon the book, and
either seeing it impossible to attain it without the book, either beeinge
weary with the often repetition of it, either seeing there was no end in it, or
else being desirous to learn farther and take forth a new lesson, he left
this lesson with despair, and proceeded to the declensons, he began now to
decline, which lesson he said to himself in this sort.

Good God I see there is satietie of all things, and Honey it self, if one
have to mutch of it, seems nothing sweet unto him. How unpleasant now
seems the pleasure of practicing with my misteris, which but even now I
thought heavenly happiness? How are my fiery flames vanished to dead coals?
How is my lust turned to lothsomenesse? but what should be the cause of this
sudden alteration? The beauty of my misteris blazeth as brightly as ever it
did, her affection toward me is as fervent as ever it was, and my flesh as apt
to follow folly as ever it was. The cause is this, I perceive by this pleasure
of the body my mind to be molested. I see that by this vanity vice has
vanquished virtue in me, I se hereby my wit dulled, my understanding blinded,
my memory weakened, my senses sotted, and all my parts able to play but one
part, which is pleasantly to practice with my misteris. I see hereby all
exercise of virtue, al respect of religion, all care of godliness utterly
extinguished in me. I see pleasure the very pathway to perdition, I see women
the way to wrack and ruin. Which seeinge I see, shall I wilfully work mine
own destruction? shall I greedely devour the bait, which I know has a
hook hidden in it to hurt me? shall I frequent y^ pleasure, which I know will
turn to poison? shall I continue her company, which will convert to my
confusion? shall I with the Dog redire ad vomitum? shall I with the devil,
dessendere ad infernum? shall I prefer a fair wife before a verthous life? my
goddess before my God? transitory pleasure, before eternal bliss? No, let
me first seek my beloved, who is gone down into his garden to the beds of his
spicerie to gather up Lilies, and then shall I know how to love my earthly
beloved as I ought to do. First let me lay up for my self treasure in heaven,
and then shall I enjoy true pleasure in earth. First let me seek the heavenly
kingdom, and then shall I abound in earthly bliss. First let me learn to serve
my Lord aright, and then shall I serve my Lady without any vain delight.

Ever after this, this Gentleman gave himself to such godliness, that he gave
over all vain delights of the flesh, reposing his chiefest pleasure in divine
contemplations: and seeing the sight of his sweet Misteris to be a great
hinderance to his heavenly cogitations, he altogether separated himself from
her company, left freindes and country, and spent the remaindour of his life
in pilgrimage and travel.

You Gentlemen may learn hereby not to doat to mutch of wives or women, but
to use them as necessary evils, and that if you be bidden to the heavenly
banquet, you ought not to return answer that you have married a wife, and
therefore cannot come, but rather to forsake wife and wealth, and take up the
cross of Christ and follow him as Alexius did.

You Gentlewomen may also learn hereby, not to repose any permanent pleasure
in practicing with your husbands, but only to use their company as a solace,
to sweeten y^ sowernesse of this life withal, and to think that such
supersticions love toward your husbands, does withdraw you from the true love
which you ought to bear toward god. But I could preach better to you in a
more pleasant matter, I will leave this text to master parson, who while he is
unmarried I warrant you will dissuade you so earnestly from such (...) (...)
doting on your husbands, that he will not stick to tell you beesides that you
ought to have no respect of persons* (...) to love an other man or him self so
well as your husband^*

FINIS.
Printed at London, by R. W.


