MORBVS EPIDEMICVS, OR THE CHVRLES SICKNESS.

IN A SERMON Preached before the Judges of the Assizes.

BY T. P.

1. TIM. 6.10. The desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some
lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with
many sorrows.

LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Creed for Arthur Johnson, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the White Horse, near the great North door
of Powles. 1615.

TO MY NOBLE AND worthy Patron, Sir Thomas Beamont Knight, of Coleorton, in
the County of Leicester.
NOble Sir, I shall need (I hope) neither long-winded Periods, nor circklings
and trauersings to discover, how much I am in duty for ever engaged to you:
since it is apparent enough that my whole maintenance hitherto has been from
you alone, nor thereby to draw you to think that I mean as I speak: which I
am already fully persuaded you do. Let it suffice then, that I protest, there
was no other motive or inducement of publishing this Sermon, but only a desire
the world should take notice, that if I could do any thing, it should be to
you principally directed. God knows I am far from thinking any thing in this
worth a good thought, it being a thing fashioned and begotten in the extremity
of my sickness (and so will seem I know to all of sound judgment) and in
the minority and infancy of my studies in Divinity: yet it is by just title
yours, whose I was then, and am still, and for Whose service it was then
delivered. And I trust you are able to quitte me from any piece of pride or
ostentation in this matter: So that all my ambition in this publication is
(next Gods glory) to please you, who perchance in not assenting to their
opinion, do many times afford me the commendation, whereof I confess my
self altogether unworthy, unless it deserve any praise, that I am, and ever
will be a faithful honourer of you, and your Noble Lady, beseeching the
highest not to take his blessings from you, nor from your children after you.

THOMAS PESTELL.

MORBVS EPIDEMICVS, OR The Churles Sickness.
ECCLESIASTES 5.12. There is an evil sickness I have seen under the Sun.


A Reverend opinion (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and beloved in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) is exacted fiem us in regard of the Author of
these words. It Is a King that speaks, a wise, apreaching King, King Solomon
the Preacher. Nay, lo! a greater, a wiser then Solomon is here: He was a wise
King; the wisest; had a wise Spirit given him of God. Here Is the King, the
spirit the God of wisdom himself. Solomon only, the Penne-man, who winged
with this heavenly spirit, did ouersoare and escape the vain things which are
done under the Sun: One of which he here entreates of, and call's it Nalum
Infirmum, a sick illness, or an evil sickness. There Is an evil sickness I have
seen under the Sun.

This Text has two parts: First, an Assertion, There Is an evil sickness.
Secondly, a Probation, or evidence, and that is double: First, I have seen't
(says Solomon) Secondly, the place where. Under the Sun. The Assertion is a
Description of Covetousness, It Is an evil; it is a sickness, and it is an
evil sickness.

Covetousness (says Austine) is in all things, in every desire, as of
honor, knowledge, etc. and so is termed the root of all evil: but more
strictly taken, it is defined by the three causes: First, the formal, an
immoderate desire; 2. the material riches; 3. the efficient, a diffidency or
distrust in Gods providence. Which vice (says the Philosopher) consists
especially in three things. 1. An ouer-earnest, and covetous desire of getting.
2. A griping and ouercarefull keeping. 3. baseness and beastliness in
dispensing. Now though Solomon speak principally of one, or mixtly of two of
these; namely, the anguishing Now though Solomon speak principally of one, or
mixtly of two of these; namely, the anguishing and torturing of the covetous
soul, receiving no joy in the enjoying of his wealth, no quiet or contentment,
but on the contrary is hurt and endammaged. For so it follows in the verse. I
have seen an evil sickness, to wit, Riches reserved to the owners thereof,
for their evil. Yet since he speaks in the 15. verse, against this vain
desire in general, and calls it there by the same name, Anouill sickness:
Therefore I purpose to discourse of the words, as a general description of
this sin. And indeed I may discourse and handle it at my pleasure, but to
small purpose. For what should this assembly hear of covetousness? Is this a
fit Text for the Assizes? I might have kept this Sermon for the City, among
Tradesmen and Usurers: But I will rest a while, and show you the fitness of
such a Theme for this time, place, and persons.

First then I must entreat you to understand and remember (Right Honorable and
Christian audience) that Covetousness, as it is an immoderate desire of
riches, in the interior affections of the soul; so it is opposed to liberality;
but as it imports an exorbitant and unmeet acception, and keeping up of money:
so it is contrary to Justice, and in that regard not unfit for the time.
Again, because this sin is a superfluous love of having riches; it exceedes
in two things. First, it is excessive in retayning: and on this part arises
hence an obduration and hardness of heart against mercy, when a man turns
clemency into vengeance, and is not relieuefull to the poor: Secondly, it
exceedes in taking, and so it falls two ways into consideration; either as it
is in the affection, and so thence arises anguish, and disquietnesse,
superfluous cares and busy distraction. 2. or as it is in the effect: and thus
whiles it couets other men's goods: it uses sometimes force, which belongs to
violence; and sometimes craft, which craft if it be committed in any
business, then as it respects the things themselves, it is deceit, but as it
concerns the persons, it is betraying as in Judas. But be the craft used in
word only, then it is cousonage in a simple and bare word: and if an oath be
added, periuty. And all these (says Gregory) are the spawne and brood of
Covetousness.

Now we all know, that these vermin, this generation of Vipers, will be very
busy at every Assizes, violence and oppression, crafty deceit, and
cousonage, betraying and perjury. Which being true, I fear me, the cursed
damme will likewise find a room amongst us. Especially, if we call to mind,
that Encomion of Basil concerning this sin, which is (says he) the mother
and mistress of all sin and mischief, which commits sacrilege, theft and
rapine; makes wars and slaughters, sels and buys by Simony: asks and
receives wickedly, does commerce and take usury vniuflly; dealing falsely by
craft and cousenage; dissolues covenants, and violates lates oaths, corrupts
testimonies, and peruerts judgment. And to come to examine the present times.
What Is now the reason, that almost half the world is turn de Inclosers,
Usurers or Banqueroutes, that the common Gaoles have more poor debtors, then
desperate fellons? What Is the fountain of so many suites and law-cases, but
only this eu^ll? Men are sick of Covetousness. Achah would have Naboths
vineyard. What makes so many periuries and false accusations, but
Covetousness? In any wrong done to our soul or body, by wounds, by disgrace,
or infamy; we can many times put up, and be quiet, but the least private
endamagement is enough to set us together by the ears. It our wealth be
impaired but the value of nine pence, oh then our Freehold is touched: it will
bear an action, let him look to it. If once Meum and Tuum (says one) any
wrangle for private profit, be on foot, then we presently bustle, we ride,
run, crouch, kneel, use the cappe, the bar, the tongue, the sword. Then
the young son enquires of his old fathers years, and sendes out Form-dons
after his death, quarrels with his mothers Ioynture, threatens his brothers
with an entayle, and upon question of Assets abridges his sisters portions. And
therefore it so sittes the time, that if with old Latimer I should cry nothing
but Beware of covetousness, Beware of Covetousness, it would (peradventure)
prove a sufficient preservative against this poison, which Saint Paul calls:
radicent, the root of all evil: and Solomon here, an evil sickness.

The first part of which Text is (as I told you) a description of
Covetousness; and the first part of the Description is, It Is an Evil I.

Evil properly taken (says the School) and by it self, is not any thing
created or existing, but signifies a mere absence of that good which should be
present, and is opposed to good priuatiuely, not positiuely; and as in
Philosophy it is double, Natural and Moral: So in Divinity there is Malum
Culpae, and Malum Sp^^^, an evil, which is sin, and an evil which is a
punishment for sin. And in both these kinds we shall find this sin to be
an evil. First, it is an evil of sin; a sinful evil, an evil full of
sin: nothing more sinful. Anaro nihil scelestius, nihil iniquius quam
amare pecc^tiam, Ecclus. 2. It Is the root, the element, the Metropolis of all
sins. All other, as Bribery, Simonie, Vsary, Extortion, Deceit, lies, Oaths
are (says one) Factors for this, and serve as Porters to fetch and bring her
living in. A sin first against God, therefore for bidden to the chief men,
Leuit. 17.17. For the covetous man despises him: He blesses himself, and
contemns the Lord, Psalm. 10.3. He makes gold his hope, and the wedge of
gold his considence. It Is flat and plain Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. preferring his
coin before God, as the Gadarenes did their swine before Christ: For he holds
it his creator, thinking himself made and undone by it, and his Redeemer and
preserver from depth and danger, and differs from the Idalat^r in this, that
where he has but one Image, the covetous man has many Maumets.

A sin secondly, against our neighbors, Venenum charitatis (says Austirte)
the poison of charity, doing injury to so many as he is able to relieve:
making men murderers, liars and thieves: Marderers: They lay wait for blood,
and lie privily for their lives; such are the ways of every one that is greedy
of gain, Proverb. 1.18. And in Isaiah, 32.6. The niggard will speak of
niggardnesse, and his heart will work iniquity, to do wickedly, and speak
falsely against the Lord, (there he is a liar) to make empty the hungry soul,
and cause the drink of the thirsty to fail: there he is a thief.

A sin even against common honesty, against friendship, seuering very
brethren: Luke 13. A sin which as it makes a man monstrous, with such an heart
as no man has, without a bottom: so it is monstrous in it self, unnatural,
infinite. Monstrum horrendum ingens, cui lumen ademptum; wanting the light of
reason, and natural understanding, which sin if it may admit comparison with
any natural things; they must be either the two outrageous elements (for so
it is violent as fire, seeding on the subjected matter, and at once embracing
another; and furious as water, bearing down all before it like a torrent, or a
water-wracke) or else it may be equalled with the devouring Harpyes, and birds
of prey, that are cruel to all, and therefore affect and select solitary and
unfrequented places.

I ast of all it is an evil that makes a man every beasts fellow, nay, the
worst beasts companion: for he is an horse-leach (says Solomon) crying,
still give give; a Moldewarpe, black by his wickedness, blind in his ignorance,
and so many possessions, so many Mole-hils, in which he buries himself by
perpetual anguishing and torturing his own soul. Like an Hog (says
Prudentius) ever rooting, never doing good till he die: and as the Hog sends
one Acorne down his stomach, chewes an other, and greedily snatcheth at a
third: so this Hogge-mans hunger is insatiable. Like a Dog (says Seneca)
that what ever is cast unto him, choppes it in whole, and stands gaping for the
next.

Thus you see it is Malum culpae, and evil of sin, a sin impious,
uncharitable, dishonest, bloody, the euish, lying an unnatural, monstrous and
beastly evil. And not only thus is it an evil of sin, but it is also Malum
poenae, an evil punishment for sin: In sese armatus furor: for it is a sin
against a man's self, his own soul and body. His soul, so says Austin,
Amor terrenorum, viscus spiritualium pennarum: The excessive love of earthly
things is the birdlime of a man's spiritual feathers, lyming and entangling
both the souls wings, her understanding, and her will; and is therefore noted
to be a spiritual evil, Mark. 7.23. coming from within, and defiling a man,
always breeding and begetting a swarm and Hydra, and wheel of cares in his
bosom; dulling his very heart, and making it like Nabals, hard and heavy as a
stone.

Against his body: For the covetous wretch is careful to rise early in the
morning, to go late to bed, eating the bread of pensive carfulness: he
tro^s up and down to the market, turns over his Calendar, Fit ex Domino
Procurator, (says Sencca) of a Lord and Master, he becomes a base servant or
a drudge; base and sordide in his apparel, using himself to meats, not
only vile, and of no price; but even hard and horrible to be looked upon:
defrauding, cousening his own Genius both of food and rest. Surely, to a man
that is good in his sight, God gives wisdom and knowledge, and joy: but to the
sinner he gives pain togather and heap up, Eccles. 2. vlt. So that he
gathers riches, as the Phoenix does dry sticks to burn her self. He is a
mere possessor of wealth: for his covetous heart keeps the Key of it, and
locks it from his comfortable use: He sits by his money, as a sick man by his
meat, and has no power to take it: He couets to covet, labors to labor; as
an Ass, which all day carries treasure, and is much galled and bruised with
his burden, but enioyes no comfort in his carriage: And therefore Chrysostom
compares a covetous man, to a man possessed with a Devil, who is vexed and
anguished in his body. So that, if a man will have but so much care as Peter
wished Christ to have, to be good to himself: it will be cause enough to draw
him from this cursed evil, which is not only an evil of sin, but an evil
punishment for sin.

But because many evil and covetous worldlings esteem themselves
notwithstanding all this evil, to be yet in good estate, and in health; it
now follows, that we prove it to be a sickness, and all such men in danger
of their souls health: There Is an evil sickness.

The covetous man imagines himself a possessor, but himself indeed is
possessed; and we may as truly say, this sickness has the man, as this man
the sickness. A disease then it is even by Tullies confession: Illi morbo qui
permanat in venas, and inharet in vi^ceribus, nec erelit potest. nomen est
Auaritia, quae it a mentes hominum asirictas tenet, vt cas nullo modo respirare
permittat: That disease (says he) which sinks into the veins and bowels,
and cannot be drawn thence, giving a man no time of breathing, is
covetousness: So that it seems to be no acute sickness, (as Physicians
speaks) for fourteen days, but rather a Chronicall disease for longer
continuance, and where all other diseases have commonly four parts; this has
but two: a beginning and an increase; but neither State, nor Diminution, and
therefore in this there is no place left for a (...), to be expected. Now as
all weakness and diseases of the body, are from some wickedness, either from
some defect in our conception, or disorder in our conversation; so this last
gives being and beginning to this of the soul; for it rises upon a repletion,
a suefet, an ouercharging; not caused by the intemperature of the Heavens, or
any external violence. A repletion not of digestible food, but as if if a man
should eat sticks and stones, and fire, and brimstone; no marvel if they
make him sick: nay it is a dangerous sickness, a sickness unto death: and
if a man be taken with it, we may justly sear his life; for we are taught,
that he which hates covetousness, his days shall be prolonged upon earth,
Prou. 28.16. And this sin it has all the signs and symptoms of a disease;
First, vomiting. He has devoured substance, and shall vomit it, for God shall
(be his Physician, and purge him, and shall) draw it out of his belly, Job.
20.15. Secondly, want of sleep and rest: All his days are sorrow, and his
travel is griese, his heart also takes no rest in the night. Eccles. 2.23.
Whose estate is therefore more base, (says Olimpiodoras) then the most
wretched servants; for the covetous man's money which is his Master, will not
allow him sleep. He cannot indeed possibly take any rest, but is ever
tumbling and tossing, as King Achab, when desire of Naboths vineyard had once
pierced and possessed his soul, the Text says, He came home heavy and evil
apaied, throws himself upon his bed, and there he languisheth, and winds
himself, turns away his face, and would eat no bread; for he was maw-sick,
stomacke-sicke of covet ousnes.

Thirdly, to show apparently. that covetousness is a disease, be the dreams of
the ^^men, who are sick of it: As the hungry man dreams, and be hold he
eats, and when he awakes, his soul is empty; or as a thirsty man dreawes,
and lo, he is drinking, and when he awakes, behold he i^ faint, and his
soul longs. Isaiah, 29.8. So (says David) When these men have slept their
sleep, and have awaked, they have found nothing in their honds: And as sick
men are (...) by troubled with fant^sticall and terrible dreams (...) no
question but these men's dreams ar^ ful^ (...) horror and affrightment, still
thinking o^ the (...) and robbers, that came to despoyle them of their goods,
their gods of silver and gold: or if their dreams, like allusions of the
Devil seem merry; yet they are sad and sorrowful in the event and
interpretation. The rich man in the Gospel speaks betwixt sleeping and waking;
Soul take thy ease, Thou have goods laid up instore for thee, for many
years. This was his dream, and it was a very fine one, and a merry; but when
Christ comes to expound it, you know what he says: Thou fool, this night
will they fetch thy soul from thee, then whose shall those thing be that thou
have gathered together, Luk 12.20.

Thus you have heard it proved an evil, and a sickness: Now put them both
together, and you shall find it an evil sickness.

For first, it is a Leprosy, a spiritual Leprosy, though it turnde to a
real and a corporal Leprosy in Gehezi; who by Covetousness became a Leaper
as white as snow, 2 Reg. 5. vlt. And as in the Leper, there is an universal
deprauation and corruption of all the humors; and a general infection of all
his members: so in this sickness all the humors; that is, all the good
affections of his soul are corrupt; especially, the Humidum radicale, the
moisture of his root and heart; his Charity, that is consumed and dried away.
Nay, in all the powers and saculties both of soul and body, he is altogether
corrupt, and become abominable.

Again it is an evil sickness: for it is a perpetual inward wasting and
Dysentery: and therefore the phrase in Jude, is, that such men are powered out,
or cast away by the deceit of Balaam; wages: so violent is this evil, so
raging is this sickness, that it makes men dissolute and cast-awayes: It is an
evil sickness.

It is the Spleen: for as that increasing; all other natural parts decrease;
so the increase of Covetousness, is the downfall and decay of all Christian
virtues, Liberality, Justice, Charity, etc. Which swelling covetous Spleen so
grows upon a man, that it hardens it self against all soft and supple
medicines. All their gentle pills will not move him, ti^l he come at length
to a consumption; that he may say with David, My days are like a shadow, and
I am withered like grass. Psalm. 102.11.

An evil sickness; for its a Lethargy; a dull and sleepy disease, causing a
man to take no true comfort in heaven and heavenly things; but setting and
settling, and rooting his affections on the earth, never enjoying one dram or
scruple of contentment, always drooping and heavy. For the Devil has given
him such a drousie Opiate, that all their Electuarium Exhilarans cannot rouse
him from his Melancholy, nor their Latificans Galem shake him from his dumpes,
and make him merry.

It is yet worse, to wit, the Greedy-worme. For the heart set on fire with
covetousness, cannot be satisfied or quenched with boughs and wood of
riches; but only with the earth of the grave. This is Gods punishment (says
one) on the covetous heart, that neither with enough, nor with too much be
should be contented. It Is in truth more then the Greedy-worme, it is the Wolf,
still eating, and yet still keeping the body lean: It Is past the (...) and is
come to Caninus Appetitus, an l hungry, a dogged disease, catching at others:
nay, Lupinus a Woluish disposition, even dispatching themselves.

An evil sickness: for it is a burning Fever, and as in that, so in this are
commonly gnawing of the stomach, intolerable thirst, watchings, and many
times rauings. A burning Fever: for so (says Bernard) The insatiable love of
riches, does far more heat and torture men, then their use does cool and
refresh them. Saeuior ignibus Actnae, ardens amor scruet habendi (says
Boethius): A right Ague: for the covetous man has three several sits (says
Gregory) for while he lives here, he burns twice, in the hot concupiscence,
and in the manifold care of getting and keeping his wealth; Et post modum
ardebit in Gehen^a; and shall burn afterward in hell fire: there is like to
be his forest fit, when he shall have both an hot and a cold fit, when
he shall both extremely burn till he cry again. There shall be weeping
says our Savior, when he shall be cold extremely: for There shall be
gnashing of teeth: And of this Fever let him never hope for recovery; It will
then turn to a perfect Quotidian Ague for every day, nay for ever, and a day.
An evil sickness.

For it is indeed a madness, which commonly brings with it Debility and
weakness of the head, watchings, thoughts, fancies, ravenous appetite, and
hollow eyes: And as mad men are wont to conceive strange things of themselves,
that they be Kings or great men: so those which are tainted with this malady,
do imagine many goodly matters; making their riches a strong City, and an high
wall in their imagination (saves Solomon) Prou. 18.11.

An evil sickness, nay worse then usually evil; It Is the plague: And therefore
as the ghost of Hector, in the fire of Troy, cried out to Aeneas: Heu fuge Nate
Ded, teque his eripe stammis, Fly thou son of a goddess from amidst these
flames. So the Apostle S. Paul, having called the desire of money, the root of
all evil, adds in the next place: But o thou man of God fly these things,
Fuge Nate Deo, Thou child of God, she these things; fly from this mischievous
desire, as from an infection: Per mare* per saxa, and therefore our Savior
giving warning to shun this plague says, Take heed of it Take heed of it,
as an evil: Beware of it as a sickness: Take heed and beware of it at an Evil
sickness. Take heed and beware of Covetousness, Luke 13.1. And we shall find
that this plaguey covetous man's company and breath are infectious, to eat and
drink with him dangerous: Eat thou not the bread of him that has an evil
eye, neither desire thou his dainty meare: for as though he thought in his
heart, so he will say unto thee, Eat and drink, but his heart is not with
thee: Thou shall vomit the morsels thou have eaten, etc. Prou. 23.6.7.8. And
to conclude, as men infected with the plague, are kept up by others: so these
men do keep and hurdle up themselves, having indeed the marks and tokens of
Gods wrath in then flesh to be seen (as Saint James says) Your gold and
silver is rusty, and the rust thereof shall be a witness against you: It
shall feed upon your flesh like fire.) And to whom we may well say, as to men
in that case: Lord have mercy upon them.

Last of all, it is worthily entitled an Evil sickness: because it is a
sickness and disease incurable. So the Philosopher in his Ethics calls it Malum
insanabile: and therefore is it incurable, because th^se men being sick, are
notwithstanding unwilling to be eased, when that is the first part of health
(says Sencca) V^lle sanari: to wish for cure. And Saint Austin, Ipse sibi
denegat curam, qui suam Medico non publicat causam: Which the covetous man will
not. He cannot abide any wholesome prescriptions, and unless you will minister
unto him Vnguentum aureum, or Electuarium de Gemmis, he will none of your
Physic: We may see it exemplified. The young man in the Gospel, who (as
with a Tympanie) was swollen and grown big with great possessions: Our
Savior would have purged him thoroughly: Go and sell all: but he would none.
Such a plague is this evil, such a madness, such a burning Fever, such a
Greedyworm, such a Lethargy, such a Spleenfull Consumption, and so contagious a
Leprosy, that there is no means to redress or remedy the same, unless these
sick Lepers (like him in the Gospel) will fall down at the feet of Christ
Jesus, and cry unto him: Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean and
whole: for with man (says Christ) it is impossible.

Thus much for the first part of the Text, the Assertion, There Is an evil
sickness. The first part of the Evidence follows, which is, I have seen it.

In that Solomon the wise King does here report that he had seen it: we
may thence derive this point of doctrine, that for a man to be covetous is an
high point of foolerie: for so he seems to infer. I have seen it, and but
seen it, seen it in others, not known it in my self: so that the only
seeing, and no more, proves Solomon wise, but more then seeing, seeking, and
hoarding up of wealth, argues men fools and sots. I, you may call them at your
pleasure; but you cannot prove them so. No, Why? what greater sign of a fool,
then to do a thing for no cause, and to no end. The fool (says Solomon) is
wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can render a reason. So that
rendering a reason is put for a point of wisdom, which in this point, the
covetous man can no point perform. For so says David, Doubtless, man walks
as a shade, and disquiets himself in vain, heaping up riches, and cannot tell
who shall gather them, Psalm. 39.6. There is no end of his travel, neither
thinks he for whom do I travel, and defraud my self of pleasure. Eccles.
4.8. They labor for nothing: for the wind, as it is afterward in this
Chapter. They conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble: Isay. 33.11. Having no
end in their desire, no end for their desire, no final cause: Only covetous
to hide it, as Achan confessed in Joshua: 7.21. I saw among the spoils a goodly
Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of
fifty shekels weight, and I coueted them, and took them, and lo! they lie hid
in the midst of my tent. Was not this (think you) a goodly wisdom? Cannot an
Ape or a Iacke-daw do as much? Again, is it not an high point of base foolery
for a man to sit over his earthly trash, like an hen or a brood-goose; and in
the mean time to neglect the inward and and spiritual riches of the soul? as
though a Noble man or great Personage should trifle out his time in buying
pinnes; pinnes? Nay worse, plain Mucke (says the Scripture) and dung: and
therefore the Apostle calls it Filthy Lucre, because always some dirt cleaues
unto it. Tirus did build her a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust,
and gold as the mire in the streets. Zachar. 9.3. Shall not all these take up
a Parable, and a taunting Proverb against him, and say, Hoe! He that
increases that which is not his: and he that lades himself with thick Clay.
Habac. 2.6.

Furthermore, would any but a fool forget heaven, his true, his new Mansion:
and fall to building, in his Inn, to think of furnishing and hanging it with
Arras, where he is sure he cannot continue? For God will but only blow upon
wealth, and it will melte. Riches make themselves wings like an Eagle, and fly
away: And therefore Christ speaking of Dives, says, Erat, There was a
certain rich man. David says, He saw him spread and flourish like a green
Bay Tree: Well? what became of him: I passed by his place, Et non erat, and he
was not. He was (says our Savior) and is not. I saw him (says David) and
he was not. Ecce, Behold, Erat, and non erat, He was, and he was not.

And lastly, for a full proof of this, we may compass our selves with a
whole cloud of witnesses. Tullie, Nihil tam angusti, tamque parui animi, quam
amare pecuniam: Nothing argues so poor and narrow a mind as the love of money.
The Rich man in Horace confesses it; Populus me sibilat, The people mock at
me for a fool; And Solomon implies it: where he says: Travel not too much
to be rich, but ^^^se from that wisdom: J, for that is a senseles wisdom,
no better then folly. Pro. 23.5. They that will be rich (says S. Paul) fall
into many foolish and noisome lusts, and in the case of wrangling and going to
law he asks them. Is there not a wise man amongst (...) But the Prophet
Jeremy more plainly. As the Partridge gathers the young which she has not
br^ught fort^: So he that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in
the midst of his days; and at his end shall be a fool, Iam 17.11. Nabals
his name, a Churl and a Fool* 1 Samuel 25.23. and as though ^t were some
Bable-foole: Job says, Every man shall ^appe their hands and hiss at him out
of their place. Job. ^7.22. And as he lives and dies like a Fool; so he shall
be buried like an Ass, even drawn and east out, bidem, ver. 19. And therefore
let every wise man con^ent himself with King Solomon here, to see this e^ill,
not to feel it, to see it, and but to see it; to see it in others, not to know
it in themselves.

The second part of the proof or evidence is from the place; Under the Sun.
From whence we observe the Generality of this Sin. It Is MORBVS EPIDEMICVS,
every where under the Sun: a disease and a plague infecting the whole world; or
at least, Maxima pars hominum, morbo iactatur eadem: possessing the greater
number. The Prophet says all, From the greatest to the least of them: Every
one is given to covetousness; And from the Prophet to the Priest, they all
deal falsely. Ierem. 6.13. And therefore the Wise man says If any rich man
escape it, he is a blessed man, and works wonders in the world: for indeed
this sickness seizes all. All men have confessed themselves Bondmen thereto: In
Court of Record, Princes, as Saul and Achab: Prophets, as Balaam: Judges and
Rulers, as Foelix: Scribes and Pharisees, young men, women, and shepherds.
Such a general Pragmatique fellow is the covetous man, that he is for all
Companies. He will sometime be at Court, but not much. In the City he is all
one with an Usurer, or Broker; an Extortioner is his right hand. Nay, in these
very astemblies; he will sometime be of the great Inquest: sometimes a
Plaintiff pleading in forma pauperis: and which I marvel at, he is frequent
with all sorts of scholars: and with Lawyers in drawing Conveiances, not a
quirke escapes him: A r^re Physician, he will let blood strangely: o he will
pluck and suck like an Horse-leach: and he is very well seen in roots: for
he has the root of all roots, Radicem omnium malorum, Of all Naladies, a
true Paracelsian: All in his Alchymie, and extraction, deals with nothing but
Minerals, and auru^ potabile, and is as fair for the Philosophers stone, as
the best of them. He is a very fierce Sophister and Logician; wresting the
premises any way: so he may bring or wring in his conclusion, regardles of
either Mood or Figure: and a Musician, but he neither observes time nor rest,
full of stops and frets, and idle crotchets; and in some moods a Gra^marian:
Marry, he is most in the Optatiue mood: his sign is vtinam: and o si angulus
ille proximus accedat qui nunc denormat agellum! wishing ever for new
purchases; or if he grow so potentiall in the world that he can pass to the
Subiunctiue; that he fall once to join house to house, and land to land: then
he never leaves till he fall into the Infinitive: And yet we do not hear
all; yet we do not hear the worst of him: for as before we heard it proved:
that this sin makes him a Murderer, a Liar, and a Thief: so it is a way to
make him also a Coniurer, drawing the Devil and all within his Circle; It
makes him a Iugler; a Cheater, a Coyner, a Clipper, a Washer, and last of all,
a very Impe and Zame of the Devil. For as he can turn himself into an Angel
of light, so this his puney can lurk and skulke under a light Angel;
sometimes we may find him in a cracked Crown, or a brass shilling: So that as
he is every where, so he does mischief in all places. Thus you see many
maine Inditements against him; and therefore look to him Iaylour, look to him
Jury; Be wise now therefore and learned, o you Judges of the earth, that this
general Malefactor may receive condign punishment. If he be found guilty
but in some of these matters; you may touch him; but if in the greatest he be
guilty: of blood, theft, violence, grassation, and oppression of the Poor;
you may touch him, and twitch him too: Trust him no longer, for it is full time
he were trussed.

Again, in this evidence of the place, we have to observe the opposition to
that place above the su^ne: I have seen't (says Solomon) under the Sun. For
there is no such thing above the Sun. There Is a God above: a bountiful GOD,
gracious, and liberal, Rich in grace, abundant and plentiful in mercy. Nay!
the Creatures themselves, the stars of heaven are no Nigards, dispensing
daily their light and influence to the inferior world. The Sun, the right
Emblem of Liberality, continually shooting forth his glorious beams of Light.
Nay: yet lower, the Moon, and the inferior Planets are not covetous: The three
superior Elements are all free from this evil: For that Tralucent Fire above
us is no deuourer like ours, foul and foetulent here below. And if Rich men
were so good to their empty Brethren, (says one) as the Air and water are
to other empty things, as there is no void place in the World, So there would
be no empty person in the world. It Is then thus low under the Sun, that it
rests only in the dull and Foggie Element of Earth: for that indeed is
Covetous, never says Hoe: never says, It is enough: So then it is the earthly
and muddie mind, which is infected with this sickness; This disease is only
the Churls Sickness, no sprightly nature: no virtuous or active disposition is
subject thereunto. And give me leave (I beseech you, right honorable and
Christian Auditors) to follow this Allegory yet a little; because in it, by
way of application, I purpose to shut and wind up this discourse. Under the
Sun; (The Sun says Macrobius) is the King of Stars: So we may justly
say of our most gracious King and Sovereign, that he is the Sun amongst
men. Now then yet it holds good that this disease is under the Sun: For
though Covetousness has been proved to be Principium malorum, yet it is not (God
be thank't) malum principis: Though it be captain and king of evils, yet
he is free from it, it is under the Sun: Next under him, and those Noble
Stairs of honor fixed above is your place (right Honorable) who like those
Planetarie bodies do move and Circuit about, for the preservation and good of
the whole. O let not, let not this vile and wicked Infection stick in you, as
it is under our gracious King the Sun, so let it still descend far beneath
your Throne of Justice: Be not like those wicked Judges which Sophonie speaks
of, like Wolves in the Evening, that leave no boanes until the Morning: nor
like to Samuels sons, which turned after Lucre, and took reward, and
perverted judgment: nor like to Falix, who locked to receive some thing of
Paul, but such rather as Moses elected by Iethroes counsel. Provide thou
among all the people Men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly and hating
Couetousties, and appoint such over them as rulers. Exodus 18.21. Such indeed
are fit to rule: For a covetous Judge is but a blind guide: For a reward puts
out his eyes: it blindes the wise. Deuteronomy. 27.17. Nay, it is a thing clean
opposite and contrary to Justice; as it should seem by Saint Paul's speech;
who, when he had warned Tymothy to fly from Covetousness, adds presently,
and follow Justice. Remember that you are here placed in Gods stead; nay, Ipse
Dixi. I have said ye are Gods. God changes names with you: for as he is
called a judge by Abraham; so a Judge is st^led a God by David. Be then in
this like God; This evil sickness is not in him: no, it is Malum Infirmum, an
evil of infirmity, of infirm, weak and miserable men. Think upon this high
and godlike function; think that the inferior Justices are in your hands, to
frame their consciences; to stir them to action: And therefore in the name of
the Lord take heed, and beware of Covetousness. O men of God fly these
things, and follow Justice, etc. Let no cunning shift make offenders slide
through your fingers; grow not dim n^, or thick sighted with old Isaacke,
lest you like him be deceived in the feeling of Iaacobs hands. And the better
to enforce this duty: Learn (Right Reverend in the Lord, to avoid the
respect of persons. For observe what Solomon has in Prouer. 28.21. To have
respect of persons in judgment, is not good. Why? For such a man will do
evil, even for a piece of bread: See a respecter of persons falls presently
into this evil disease, this ravenous and dogged appetite; that he will snap
at a Crust, do evil even for a piece of bread. Shun then wickedness; for it
is not good to have any respect of persons in judgment: He thus says to the
wicked, thou art righteous; him shall the people curse, and the multitude shall
abhor him, and follow Justice: For he that walks in Justice, and speaks
righteous things refusing gain of oppression, shaking his hands from taking of
gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and shutting his eyes from
seeing of evil, he shall dwell on high; his defense shall be the munition of
rocks, bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure. Isa. 33.15.16.
Give not the people cause to take up the complaint of the Prophet; Judgment is
turned backward, and Justice stands far off, Truth is fallen in the
streets, and equity cannot enter: but rather affoorde them cause to say with
Solomon: I have seen under the Sun, the place of judgment, where was
iniquity, and the place of Justice? where was wickedness? And that this
contagion may yet descend lower. Let not the Justices and Gentlemen suffer
themselves to be tainted: Let not them fall into a violent grassation, and
grinding of the poor, racking and cramping, and squeesing their poor tenants,
like the cruel Nero, Hoe agamus, ne quis quicquam habeat: Let us look to this
one thing, that no man have any thing, falling upon the poor like a tempest or
a whirlewinde, leaving naught behind it. And you the sage and prudent Lawyers,
beware of this sickness, take heed of tipping your tongue with silver, or
rolling it in golden eloquence.

You are styled by one of Gods own names, Counselor: Learn then to resemble
him in Nature, scorning this base and earthly disease of covetousness.

As for D uines, I hope well, the most part are free from this sickness,
because it is a foul shame for the souls physician to lie sick of this
unseemly diseas.

One word to the Jurors. Let nothing (I beseech you) friendship, or favor;
especially, let not covetousness hinder your conscience in right verdicts:
neyth^r be too covetous of your Lords or Landlord (...) ^or c^untenance,
making him as that common, yet fearful saying is) to damn a dozen; but with
courage and clear soul proceed in judgment.

Last of all, let every covetous man, of what estate or condition soever, that
yet remaynes, obdurate and hardened in this sin of covetousness, possessed
with this Caco-daemon, this evil spirit, labor by hearty prayer and
repentance, in time to escape from the griping fangs and claws thereof;
remembering that great and general Assizes, when we shall all appear (as the
Apostle speaks) before the Tribunal seat of Christ, to receive our doom;
whose judgment no writ of error can reuerse, nor any attaint undo his
verdict. At which time all cruel and covetous oppressors shall stand environed
with those poor Orphans and Widows, whom they unjustly rooted out, and sold
for shoes, now rising up to accuse them: the judge of heaven and earth; the
Lord chief Justice of all the world over them: hell gaping under them, when
all their Pettyfoggers, that now swarm, will get them out of fight; when no
Councellor or Advocate will dare to open his mouth and plead for them: though
they would give him double and treble fees, when his own conscience shall be
a thousand clamouro^s witnesses to depose against him. In what a fearful
estate will this man be then, who now goes on boldly, committing daily this
wickedness in the face of heaven, and under the Sun? Surely, he shall then
wish himself under the earth, and cry to the mountains to fall down and
cover him. I dare not longer presume upon your patience: only if this which I
have already spoken seem tedious, I may in in some sort, plead excuse from
the nature of this evil sickness, whereof I have discoursed; it being
infinite in it self, and without end, has drawn me likewise to be a little
covetous of the time, and suffered me no sooner to make an end. To Ged
Almighty, only wise, the blessed Father, Son and holy Spirit, be all
praise and glory both now and for evermore. Amen.

Gloria Deo in excelsit. FINIS.

