A SOMMON to Repentance.

Given unto Christians for a loking Glass, wherein we may behold our own
deformities. and therein and thereby, we are not onley forewarned of our
destructions, but we are learned to humble our selves in these dangerous days
of wickedness, before the throane of Gods mercy, that we may be preserved
from the Lake of damnation, in the great and notable day of Christ's coming to
judgment.

Published by J.P. student of Cambridge.

Math. 3. Repent and amend your lives, for the kingdom of God is at hand.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by D. Jackson, dwelling in fleetestroete. 1584.

To the right Honorable Sir Edward Osbourne Knight, her Majesty's Leiftenante,
Lord Mayor of her Highness most honorable City London, the right Worshipful
Knight Sir Rowland Haiward, Alderman of London, the right worshipful Master
John Spencer Alderman and Shriue of London, and the right worshipful of the
fraternity, and misterye of Clothworkers. John Phillip the son of Robart
Phillip Clothworker disceased, wishes the fear of God, peace and prosperity
in our merciful Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. etc.
IF this small present right honorable and worshypful, rendered into your hands
with all humility and reverence, may find favor in your sight, I shall not
only accounte my self happy, but hereafter show my self industerious to
pleasure you with some other treatise, which with this shall redowne to the
glory of god, your well liking, and the commodity of my native cuntrimen. In
the mean season, I most earnestly beseech your good Lordship, and every of you,
to pardon my boldness, and to satisfy your minds with this poor mite of mine,
which to the comfort of the godly, and the reformation of the maleuolent is
published, not doubting but as you are virtuous and godly affected, so your
honor and every one of you being patrons and members of this common weal, in
as much as in you shall consist, will do your endeavors to beat down syn, whose
branches are so monsterous, that they begin to over shade virtue, the which
thing to call unto our memories, is a thing of al things to be lamented: who
hears not in the Gospel how diligently our wickednesses committed against the
majesty of eternal God are reproved? but who or where are they that convert
and turn to the Lord in this our last time of our age and calling? no, we
glory in our iniquityes and hate to be reformed, and generally to speak the
truth, we I say for the most part and greatest number of us that profess the
name of Christ, are rockt and lulled in the corrupt cradle of our own
securities, and therein we sleep so soundly, that neither can the remembrance of
Gods graces, signs and tokens, his grievous threat nings and terrible
comminations serve, to rouse us up out of the dangerous and most perrilous
slumber of our iniquyties, and it cannot be chosen (right Honorable and
Worshipful) but that the day of our visitation is at hand, and except we
repent, we shall perish in our wickednesses, for Gods heavy indig^tion is
ready to enter into the gates of our Cities, the v^ols of his wrath are ready
to be powered forth upon us, and our God is ready in the fullness of his
displeasure, to hew us down with the Axe of his vengeance for our ingratitude,
to blo^ our names out of the book of life, for the contempt of his
commandments, and to leave us (...) pray for our abominable actions, to our
ancient adversary satan. I exhort your good Lordship therefore, and every
one of you, to whom God hat^ given authority, in the bowels of Jesus Christ,
to persevere and go forward from virtue to virtue, and to the uttermost of your
powers, to banishe from your Cities and Towns, all the masters of misrule,
that both contemn God, and despise good order. Thus shall you please God in
discharging your duties, and show your selves obedient subjects to her
excellent majesty, that puts you in trust to bridle the outrage of the
wicked, that range as graceless after their uncleanness. Thus wishing you
right honorable and every one of you the fear of god, peace and prosperitye in
Jesus Christ, I leave you to his gracious and heavenly preservation, beseeching
him of his infinite good nes, whilst his mercy holds his indignation at a
bay, to give us the grace with humble and contrite hearts, to prostrate our
selves before him, to crave pardon at his fatherly hands for our offenses, to
weep bytterly for our sins, and to bring forth the fruits of repentance,
thus shall we pacify his heavy displeasure, convert his fury to favor, his
(...) to love, and his conceived wrath to comfortable kindness, the which we
shall inioye in this life and after when the course of this our pilgrimage is
fully finished, we shall stand before him in purity, be sanctified with his
holiness, be crowned with honor and glory, and be made fellow heirs with Christ
Jesus of his celestial kingdom, the which God for hi^ son Christ his sake
grant you and every of you.

Your humble and faithful well willer in the Lord.

John Phillip.

A Sommon to repentance, given unto Christians for a looking glass.
IF we would consider (dear The (...) of Godmigh^ s^ir us up to (...) and
newn^s of life.
christians) the inestimable graces, of our loving God poured forth vp^n us,
that have little or nothing at all deserved his fatherly favor, it ^ere a
thing that might move us sinful and most wretched crea^ures, not only to
walk as it becomes ^s in godly integrity, and newnes of life, but
therewithal we would like adopted sons, by his (...) grace, continue our
obedience toward him, that like a most careful Father, and gracious God,
s^keth all the means possible that (...) be to nourish and feed us, both in
so^ and body, to everlasting life and heavenly blessedness. In spirit and
soul by the operation and working of a lively faith, through his divine
grace, we are prouidently f^d, ^n the truth of his (...) The inn^cent (...) of
Christ is the tood of the soul and his guitles blood the drink spiritual,
that quenches the thirst, of the faithful.
testament, with the sweetest flesh, and drink the d^rest blood of our
immaculate and spotles lamb Christ Jesus, who gives himself most willingly
to all those that constantly believe, not carnally but spirituallie to be fed
upon by faith, and freely (...) unto us his most precious blood (without our
deserts) to aswadge the thirst of our souls, that Satan Only by (...) in
Christ Jesus we are delivered from the (...) of hell and (...), if we (...)
constantly.
through sin had (...) to (...) death and destruction everlasting, from the
which by the unspeakable providence and inf^te wisdom of our omnipotent GOD,
through Jesus Christ, we are delivered, Si sumus fideles. And as by his grace
we enjoy this delectable food and most (...) Nectar, to the comfort of our
souls, so with these his divine benefits, Gods temporal blessings are given
us (...) without our (...) for the nourishment of our carnal bodies.
h^ most lovingly inricheth us with his temporal blessings. For in body
(...) our feeble and weak natures most carefully, are by his only
goodness, fostered from his bountiful hands, with meat and drink, and all
other the glorious gifts of his grace, without the which we could not
continue. But (alas) neither the (...) w^ cont^ne the spiritual foo^ of our
souls, so do^ we abuse these his tem porall bles^ heaping (...) unto our
(...), vengeance in the day of (...).
one, nor the other, is of us accepted, and (...) of us as it ought to be, for
as we enter into contempt of his graces, l^uinge carelessie, as men carnally
and worldelie affected, so loath (...) Christ JESUS, so cont^e we in our
actions, (as lip laborers) the Gospel of his grace, and therewithal we
despise Manna, I mean the Spiritual Lamb that f^th with his blessed flesh,
and (...) with his guiltelesse blood, o^re hungry souls. The which thing to
consider, is a thing of all things most lamentable and miserable, requiring
for our deserved contempt, deserved punishment. But is this all? No, though we
be christians by name, we are contrary to Christ in We are very ready
talkers of Christ and his gospel, but we are over ^ll and slow walkers after
his will.
deed, we pro^esse him carnally with words, but our hearts are alienated
and far of him, we are busy talkers of his gosgell: but we are ashamed to be
^arnest walkers after his heavenly will, we live lasciuiouslie, prodigally,
and wantonlie: we that were contracted to Christ in our new regeneration, are
now wedded to our own untamed lusts, and straieng affections: we that had
vowed by an invincible faith, to take our rest in Christ Jesus, have given our
consents to Satan as the enemies of the lamb, and are ^ulled fast a sleep in
the sinful cradell of our own securities. And thus, as people past grace, We
have forsaken Christ and given our consents to satan as peo ple past grace and
falsely forsworn, neglecting our spiritual begetting to God through Christ.
we are become wilful truce breakers of his holy commandments, contemners of
his blessed co^enant, periu^ed people and creatures falsely forsworn,
forgetting our new birth and bearing again to God, through grace in Christ
Jesus, who has made the atonement for our ^ffences, appeased the fury of our
creator, canceled the bond of our gu^tie trespasses, and bro^ a sunder, yea,
eu^n to very piece As we ^orget the rich graces that our ^ng God in Christ
Jesus has bestowed (...) us, so for the most part of us do we cast from our
memories the spiritual conslict that he has fought for us.
meal, the seal of our condemnation, which we deservedly had heaped up unto
our selves, and that most worthelie, by the reason of our to mani^old sins
and wickednesses, but as we forget these his great and inestimable rich graces,
so d^ we also cast from our memories (for the most part) his bloody death and
painful passion, the triumphant conquest that he has made for our sins on
the cross. The sharp and most (...) battle that he fought for us against the
world, sin, death, satan, and all the power of hell is of us nothing at all
remembered, and yet we will be christians by external profession and outward
show, when as within we are full of all filthiness, and repugnant to Christ,
but the greater shall be our plagues in the day of desolation. Thus as we
persevere and go forward in the ways of our uncleanness, soyling our selves both
in body and soul, with the blemishes of our corruption, and as it were
utterly despising of his celestial graces, and contemning of his (...)
^orments y^ he su^ed on the cross for our As we abuse his (...) ^races, so
(...) and d^spise we h^s (...) bene^ts. Mon^rous sins r^gning in co^nterfait
christian^.
iniquities, so like shaml^s Ep^ures and bea^lie b^lly gods, we abuse his
terrestrial gifts and benefits. Measure is s^ldome or in any place
observed. Riot every where and in all places ruffleth as master of misrule.
Sobriety is forsaken, drunkenness imbra^ed. H^militie is cast down,
arrogancy advanced. Virtue is defaced, monstrous vice flourishes. Charit^e
forg^ten, cr^lty (...).
Chastity is disdained, incontinen^ie esteemed. Truth is oppressed, ^atterie
vpholden. Simplicity is banished, (...) well welcomed. A golden mean is
utterly vanquished. Coue^ousnesse has gotten the pre-eminence. Charity as
convinced quaketh* her ^oints Hospit^litie murdered by (...).
are benumbed with cold. Cruelty is wrapped in his furs. Liberality is not
able to stir for lamenesse, an inmeasurable nigardise has neither left him
hands to distribute to the poor, ^eete to go to the sick, nor yet eyes to
behold the indigent. Hospitality is very faint and so ^eeble that he ^are
not peep abroad nor be seen, and all by the reason of pro^igalitie, who I
fear me has (...) True friendship banished by ^tion.
him to the death. True friendship aamongst mortal men is neglected,
dissimulation is so deeply harbored almost in the hearts of all estates and
degrees. Just dealing is an outcast, bribes are taken to betray the innocent.
Neighborli^ God by the exercise of our outrageous sins is greatly dishonored.
love is no more thought upon, God is greatly dishonored, Mammon is highly
worshppied, and to conclude, enui^, hatred, wrath, oppression, and the filthy
fruits of all uncharitableness reigns generally in all places and ages of
this our last time. (^las) what a whirlepoole of wickedness do we continue
in? What a Sin pla^ us by these our (...) acti^s unto the bottomless take of
perdition.
filthy sincke of Sodomitrie do we wallowe in? What a perilous puddle of
uncleanness and corruption do we plunge our selves into of a set purpose? Or
into what a stinking channel of all kinds of impieties determine we to cast
ourselves headlong? Is God delited think we with these o^r outrageous sins,
will he be pleased with unsavory cockle in the day of the great and mighty
harvest when he looks for good and perfect wheat? The Lord of the har^st
comes ^or wheat he will not be pl^sed with the c^kle of corruption.
Will we give him course branne, when ^e comes for fine flower? O what shall
become of us then? Uerilie we shall lose the diadem of life, the eternal
crown of glory, the comfortable fruission of his Every one o^ us o^ght to
examine our selves dilige^tlie whether we do those things that God has (...)
us, or whether we do them not at al, and when we find our imperfections to be
such that we cannon do that we should let us not cea^e to cra^ assist^nce of
^ur (...) father by (...).
glorious pre^nce, and be thrown as most miserable outcasts to the dungion of
hell, wherewith Satan and his angels, we shall be tormented everlastingly.
Let us therefore every one of us from the highest to the lowest, whilst we
hau^ time, enter into our own consciences, and by a deep and earnest
confidence of our selves, let us behold diligently whether we do those things
that God commands we should do, or whether we leave them altogether for the
most part of us undone, and then when that we find and feel our imperfection
to be such and so great, that we cannot perform that thing which God by his
word and will has tied and bound us unto, let us not cease by the in^ocation
of his holy and blessed name, to crave and desire the assistance of his holy
spirit with humble and contrite hearts, that by the effectual and lively The
righteou^nes (...) our sa^or Christ shall ^ouer our imperfections, if we
believe, and sin death and hell shall die in us, and we shall live for ever.
working thereof, we may inde^or our selves to walk in the light, to shun the
darkness of death, to live as it becomes godli^ affected christians, to
^ast of the old Adam and to cloth our selves with Christ the new and heavenly
Adam, and then his grace shall supply our wantes, his righteousness shall
cover our imperfections, finne, death, and hell, shall die in us, and we shall
live to him, by whose blessed merits we are sanctified, for ever and ever. But
if we will harden our hearts in our wickednesses, and stand up in our sins
against the Lord, as our forefathers have done, that wilfully rebelled against
his majesty, we shall not only with them in^r his heavy displeasure, but
sodeinly with his mighty arm be confounded in the imaginations and devises of
our own hearts. Let us see what God requires of Note what thing God requires
of us his cr^tures.
us his creatures. First and above all other things, he has given us an
especial charge, to serve, honor, worship, prai^e and glori^e his holy nam^,
and as God is truth, so looks he to be worshipped of us in spirit and truth
solely, only and alone, neither may we give or attribute that praise honor
and reverence that to him belongs to any other, for the Lord ou^ God is a
great, a mighty and gelou^ God, his wisdom is (...), and his kingdom has
no end, the scepter o^ his seat is a righteous sc^pter, and his dominion
shall endure for ever. The Lord our God is without beginning and end.
This our God was and is without beginning, and ending, and this our God in
purity and holiness must be worshipped of us from the beginning of our ^ais
even to the finishing and ending of our lives, for gracious is the Lord our
God, and his truth shall continue for ever. Let us therefore if we will w^ship
the If we will worship the Lord our God we must walk before (...) in inno^.
Lord our God truly, walk before him in innocence, continu^llie stand in
aw^ of his displeasure, humble our selves with reverence before the throne of
his grace, come before his presence with joy and (...), show our selves glad
in him with psalms, and always and ever let us speak good of his name, ^r he
by his wisdom of nothing has ^ade all things, and the seat of our God is ^e
glorious heavens, he sits between (...) Cherubins, his chariot is the wings
(...) the winds, and the whole earth is his ^otstoole, and other gods besides
this our ^od there is none, his name be blessed, and The (...) of the proud
Phara^cs ought not to received of godly affected c^ristians, (...), (...) we
m^st d^re of God for Christ ^is sake to be made new^ do^gh.
^aised for ever and ever. If we will wor^ip this our God, namely, the Father,
^onne, and holy Ghost, three persons in tri^itie, and one only God, we must
^denor (...) cast away far from us the lothsom lea^en of the proud prattling
Pharasies, that ^asted of their own righteousness and ^stification, and we
must earnestly ^ire of God, and that vnceasantly with ^mble and contrite
hearts, that we may (...) made new dough, that is, that our con^ences, our
minds, and souls may be tho^wly seasonned with the most pr^ious ^me of his
grace, by the power whereof ^rough Jesus Christ, and the comfortable ^iding of
the holy Ghost, we may be di^ed The holy Ghost is the director of the
faithful. into all truth
into al truth, and therein by his proui^nce we may be so strongly confirmed
^at neither the temptations of satan, the sinful suggestions of the flesh,
(...) policies of his disceaueable minister that are possessed with the spirit
of lie^ False teachers are the ministers of ^than.
teaching their own traditions contr^ rye to Christ, neither yet the vain a^
fading corruptible pleasures of thi^ world, may be able to prevail to wit^
draw us from the worship of our Go^ Christians ^ust go for^ard from virtue to
virtue.
but that we may as it becomes godl^ and true regenerate children, perseu^
and go forward from virtue to virtue and constantly continue with clea^
hearts, undefiled consciences and purifi^ souls in the blood of our savior,
the se^ uice of our God, and then he will beco^ Christ will (...) our (...)
heard and we shall be the (...) of his ^sture.
our shepherd, and we shall be the she of his pasture, he will remain our gra^
ous and loving father, and we shall be the children of his blessed inheritance,
the which our Christ has purchased for (...) those that believe with the prise
of h^ heart blood. If we will worship God w^ must love him, because he is the
founta^ of love, and loved us from the beginni^ Oc^sions to ^ue us to the
worship^ing of God.
even when we were his enemies. F^ what love could be greater than this, (...)
^at he gave his only begotten son christ Jesus to suf^r for our sakes all the (...) that could be devised: to bear (...) our sakes being forlorn for
our sins, ^he altogether holy and innocent, the heavy ^rthen of his fathers
displesure, and ther^ we believing steadfastly in him to make (...) that were the
children of death, the ^ires of life and salvation. O inestima^e love and
abundant kindnesses gran^d us freely without our deserts through ^ace in Christ
Jesus, even when we ^ere the children of damnation and the ^rie fire brands of
hell, who for this his ^ceeding love and grace would be so vn^nd but to love
him again, that for all ^ese his bountiful bestowed benefits ^ueth nothing
at our hands but that ^e love him as he has loved us, conti^allie, Note and
consider ou^ frowardne^ against the Lord our God.
and that without feining? Naie, ^ho forgets not this his great love, ^d
recompenseth him that has loved (...) with monstrous ingratitude? Who
^orshippeth him in heart and mind as he commanded? nay who prophaneth not ^s
honor and ^lorie? Who is chedient to his blessed will and heavenly ordinan^ The
fruits of (...) neglected.
Naie who impugneth not his statutes breaks not his commandments. (...)
these the fruits of gods glorio^s (...) that he requires at our hands: Do
(...) we are commanded? Do we our (...) to ^oath and adorn our selves (...)
the (...) o^ his holy name, or by (...) hearing of his heavenly word, with
(...) spiritual Adam Christ? Nale do we (...) (...) are worshippers ^f God
with o^r external (...), but our ^rts are far from him.
^ather devise to re^est and cover our (...) with the transgressions of our
old (...) rentes, to the condemnation of our (...) dies and souls eter^ally?
Thu^ throu^ the hardness of our hearts that worship^ God with our lips, and deny
him in (...), y^ (...), is (...) and mighty in all abomination, read^ to
(...) the worke^ of (...), leave the worship ^f our God, and to ser^ our (...)
adversary (...) the (...). Thus our innocent souls the (...) rye and tr^ ^age
of God, is by the (...) (...) m^n desir^ (...) innocent (...).
(...) of our ^dies w^nded (...), to ^ternall dea^, she mourn^ (...), but who
rega^ (...) soul^ (...). The outwa^de man is gi^en to pleasure and ease. The
soul is ^inched with penury and pain, and never A comparison betwixt the
flesh and the soul.
can have rest. The soul through ^he actions of the fleshly m^nded man is
^isgarnished of the vesture of gods grace, though the man of sin be pranked
up ^n menstrous pride. The flesh is stout and sturdie, the soul is saint and
feeble. The flesh is lusty and healthie, poasting Body and soul through ^nne,
detested in the cies o^ the Lord.
after pleasure: The soul is sick and so^owfull for want of the feeling of
gods ^race: The flesh is affected to all kinds of ^niquities, and thereby the
soul is dange^ously wounded with transgression so that both body and soul is
become most ^onstrous in the eyes of the Lord our God, and al because we will
not learn t^ ^orship him, nor to walk in his ways, ^ut who is he y^
considers these things? ^aie who is not rather delighted to All men have
erred and (...) astraie in the sight of the ^rd, no good nesie among the sons
(...).
work wickedness and to do evil in the sight ^f the Lord our God? Uerily all
have (...) from the highest to the lowest, and (...) be short God has from his
dwelling ^lace looked down to the face of the earth and knows that there is
no goodness among the sons of men: who hastes the to shroude himself by an
earnest deploration of his sins under the covert of The coming of Christ to
judgment from our memories.
the glorous wings of Gods grace? Naie, rather who wandereth not wide from his
heavenly verity, and sets not by the continuance of his evil, to heap up
vengeance to himself in the day of wrath? who is he that prepares himself
to watch and keep ward for the coming of Christ in the clouds? Nay, who is
The (...) of the flesh (...) and not subdued.
he that slepeth not soundly in the uncleanness of his own heart? Who is he that
strives in these dangerous days of wickedness, to vanquish and subdue the
loathso^ lusts of his own flesh? Naie, who is he that has not agreedie and an
inordinat^ desire to thrist and hunger after his own Who continues the battle
against the world the flesh and satan under the standerd of Christ Jesus.
filthiness, and none the way to worship God? Who is he that fights like
(...) good soldier, manfully under the (...) captain of our Savior Christ
Jesus, against the world the flesh and the devil? Naie, what is he that
flies (...) like a cowarde from the battle, (...) (...) over the (...),
forsakes not the field, ^efuseth not his redeemer, eleauing to the world,
pampring himself in all kinds of ^ncleannes, yielding himself most wil^nglie
a pray to satan? The which to call (...) our remembrances is a thing most
(...), (alas) is this the glory we give unto our God? (O sinful wretches)
(...) your selves in your (...) wickednesses, against the Lord of (...) power
and majesty? What deserve The pains that Christ has suffered on the cross
for our redemption can not pearce our flintie hearts.
we in this doing, any other than eternal death and destruction of bodies and
souls. O that the painful passion, and the (...) wounds that Christ
suffered on the cross for our ^nnes, cannot pierce our (...) and stony hearts.
(Alas wret^es that we are) do we forget how (...) he has paid the price of
our ^demption? O what shall become of us, that go about to tread she blessed
blood of our Messiah under our miserable ^eete? ^hal not the ^iols of his
wrath, be pou^ed forth upon us or ever we be aware, (...) that unlooked for?
Yes (...). For (...) the Lord, and his judgments are true. Whilst we have
time therefore (...) us convert and turn us wholly to the Lord our God, for he
is merciful and full of compassion and loving kindness. Let us no longer
remain the servant The servants of sin continue their wickedness, the
servants of christ are make and ^umble.
of sin, but do our endeavor with all humility, to serve with fear and
reverence the Lord our God. And then shall we to the comfort of our souls,
in^oy the cheerful light of his glorious countenance, we shall graciously be
delivered from the snares of death, be set free from the captiu^tie of Satan,
and be restored to his favor and grace, who is more ready to hear than we are
to call. More willing to open unto us the rich storehouse of his mercy, then we
are to knock at the gates of his grace with the hammer of an invincible faith.
And more desirous to find us that are lost sheep, then we are to seek after
the sheepeherd of our souls Christ Jesus. For the Lord our God is slow to
wrath, and ready to accept the (...) broken and bruised h^t is (...) sacrifice
acceptable to God.
oblations of our sorrowful ^earts, for a broken heart, and mourning soul is
the sacrifice that pleases God. Neither has ^he Lord pleasure in the death
of a sinner. It is his joy and satan's foil, sorrow, Repentance grounded on
a (...) says is satan's (...) and overthrow.
and overthrow, when we convert from our evil, and bring soorth the fruits
of repentance. For Christ himself has given us this gracious advertisement,
to our exceeding joy, comfort and consolation, saying: there is greater solace
among the Angels in heaven, over one person that heartelie artelie and
earnestly conuerteth from his sin, than there is over ninty and nine just
persons that never did offend. (O happy and blessed sai^ng) Christ calls
sinners to repentance.
He that has ears to hear let them hear, and let him whose consciences is
ouerladen with sin, crave of the gracious caller Christ Jesus, with weeping
eyes, heavy hearts, and groaning souls, that it would please him to continue
this call: Come unto me you that labor, and are heavy ladden, I will
refreshe you, my yoke is easy, and my burden very light. If thy sins be
as red as scarelet, tome unto me, I call thee says Christ, hearken to my
(...), (...) will make thee whiter than snow, what would^ thou have more (...)
my hands, are thy sins innumerable? The compas^on and pity that Christ
extends to the unfeigned (...).
Surmount they in thy sight the ^ands of the seas? despair thou not, for my
mereies excel thy ^ins a thousand fold. Have thou broken the will of my father
and thy God? come unto me, though thy offenses be never su great, I have for
thee fulfilled the law, my righteousness shall be thine, I will heal the sor^s
that satan has made into thy soul through ^inne, and by (...) thou shall be
accepted, where thou wast refused? Have thou spent thy patrimony (...)? Have
thou gone (...) De^y ^eth (...) and deferring of r^pentance br^geth Gods indig^.
whooring after strange gods? Linger not the time, neither put it off from day
to day: I call thee now, sa^e not thou to morrow, but come now thou art
called, though thy sins be grievous, I will ease thee of the burden of thy
wickednesses, that are ready to press the down to the dungeon of hell stre,
yea, I will louingli^ if thou come at my call, lift thee up from the dangers
of the second death, and give thee life and endless^ glory in the kingdom of
heaven. O loving Lord what can thou do more for us? Have thou broken thy
vow in wedlock? Have thou liuedin adultery? Did not I by my grace couple and
wedd^ thee to my self? And have thou made the members of my glorious body,
the members of a shameless strumpet? The (...) of christ Ie^us.
Labor to come unto me by faith, and earnest repentance, I will release thee
from the burden that greenously oppresses thee, and pardon and forgive thoe
all that is past, I will release thee in my death and blood, I will couple thee
to my self with the yoke of my favor, my burden is light, thou may
easily bear it, it shall not be troublesome to thee, come quickly, come, my
grace shall cleanse the corruption of thy conscience, and heal thy leaperous
soul, I will abide in the temple of thy body, and thou shall have thy
dwelling in me. O sweet Christ that thus lovingly call us home to thy
self? Have y^ (...) my name? Have thou delighted in theft? Have thou (...) a
bearer of false witness against the innocent? ^ast thou defeated the widow of
her dowry? Have thou robbed the fatherless of his right? Have thou broken my
Sabbath, which I commanded to be Christ Jesus is the heaven lie (...) and
Phisician of our soul^.
kept holy? O come, come unto me, set a side all dangerous doubts. I will
heal^ all your infirmities, sin shall not harm you, death shall not grieve
you, neither yet shall your adversary satan, nor all the power of hell be
able to prevail against you, for I my self will not fail you, I will be with
you to the end, and in the end. O come unto me, come unto me, there is none
that can help you, or do you any good but my self, no not one, you are
sinful Samaritanes. We are (...) Samaritanes
I see the condission and estate that you remain in. You are fallen into the
hands of hateful thieves. You are wounded with the ^erie darts of the
devil. You are compassed round about with the snares of death. You are bound
fast hand and foot, with the chains of damnation* And there is no remedy left
for you, except I take you in hand. For neither can y^ Priest nor the Leuite
do you any good. I call come unto me? I will cure the (...) ulcers of your
iniquities. I will heal the festred sores of your wickednesses. I will
willingly take The great mercies of Christ set forth ^ comfort and strengthen
our ^bicilities.
away from you the gnawing canker of you corruption, and there shall no evil
happen unto you, for I will deliver you, as adopted sons by grace, a
sacrifice of sweet smelling incense, into the hands of my father, and your
God, with whom you shall after this your transttorie pilgrimage, live in
continual joy, perfect peace, and lasting blessedness. But if we refuse the
calling of our savior, that came lovingly, not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance, we do nothing but desceiue our selves, incur unto
our selves his heavy displeasure, make our selves the servants of sin, the
slaves of death, and the heirs of eternal damnation. God therefore who is the
Lord of time, to whom al times are in subjection in this time tie us to the
time of our caling. For delay brings danger, and danger in time brings
death. Now is the accptable time of repentance, come therefore with a
penitent heart, and a contrite We are called now to coin to Christ put it not of
til to morrow
spirit to Christ, and put it not off till to morrow. Now is grace offered
thee, and all wretched creatures, prostrate thy self before the throne of gods
mercy, and by a lively faith, and earnest repentance, receive it with
reverence, praise, and thankesgi^ing, and since thou now may be released
freely from the Christ g^th about to couple and join unto himself the
faithful (...).
intolerable burden of thy sins, refuse thou not the inestimable grace and
favor of the Lord Jesus, who willingly and gladly goes about to yoke and
couple thee to himself, for the greatness of his mercies shall be a sufficient
bulwark and a strong fortress of defense for thee, to stand safely and
surely against all the assaults of satan. Therefore since thou God the lord
of time will not be tied to thy appointed morrow, come now therefore ^ith
thou art called.
art uncertain of thy time, continue not thy sins till to morrow, for he
that offers thee remission of all thy offenses now, may refuse and forsake
thee to morrow. For the Lord thy God will not be inio^ed to ^ary thy
appointment, therefore come now, repent and amend, ^arken to the courteous call
of (...) redeemer, worship and serve the Lord thy God this day with f^are and
reverence, for thou know not whether thou shall live to ^ee thy prescribed
and appointed morrow. ^f thou die in thy sins and wickednes^es, thou in his
exceeding justice as the s^r ^ant of si^ne, shall be confounded and over thrown.
And is this all? No, for after ^his thy bod^y death, the pains whereof in^re but
a while, the worm of thyn^ (...) conscience shall torment thee, yea, ^hou
shall become subject to the second We (...) consider the ioies of heaven, nor
yet dread (...) torment^s (...) ^ell (...).
^eath, the torments whereof are endless, and shall contine we for ever in the
dun^eon of hell, whereas the fire remains (...), and the flame never go^th
out. Beware therefore that thou con^emne not the rich graces of GOD, ^hen they
are laid forth before thee, for ^o sin wilfully and wittingly against ^he
Lord thy God in hope of his mercies, ^s a thing of all things most odible and
^etested in the eyes of his divine maie^tie. But these things are nothing at
all ^onsidered among us, for generalli^ (...) we be (...) called home to the
sheep^ fold of his abundant grace, y^ We are di^ caled but we have made deaf
our (...) and (...) ^ur ^arts in such sort that woe will not hear nor conceive
the voice of the caller.
have we hardened our hearts, with o^ forefathers, and murmur with the^, (...)
disobedient rebels against the Lord o^ God? We have made deaf our ^res (...)
this end and purpose, that we will n^ there hear the^ sweet and gentle (...)
of us home to himself in his Gospe^ nor yet enter into the deep considerat^
on of his terrible threatenings, and gr^ uous comminations pronounced again^ us
for the exercise of our manifold wi^ kednesses. And is this all? No, we ha^
most (...) blinded our wr^ Neither can g^ds merci^s nor his com^inations drive*
us to amendment of our lives.
ched eyes, with the vale of our own (...) rity, so that we stand sturdie in
our ow^ conceits, rather provoking the Lord o^ God in his justice to hasten our
speedi^ destruction, then otherwise to move hi^ majesty, by earnest repentance
to stret^ out the s^luered septer of his exceeding (...) uour and love toward
us. (O (...) creatures that we are) though we see an^ hear that Christ our
Savior is readi^ at all times to open and stretch forth the arms of his
compassion and pity t^ ^rde us, and to embrace us lovingly, Though Christ be
reddie to (...) us yet we will not come to him.
yet will we not come near him, no we run far off from him, we are so
in^med with the love of this wicked and wretched world: We are earthly
affected: We are erthly minded and not spirituallie affected.
We regard not heavenly felicity: we ^re gross and carnally minded. We are not
^piritually inclined: We are adicted to ^orldly pleasures: We weigh not y^
ioies Wordlie honor is more desired then heavenly glory.
^lestiall: We strive here in this vain and ^ansitory life. for worldly
promosio^: We (...) not, whilst we have time most mi^erable wretches, to be
vessels of honor The treasures of this world are set by before the celestial
treaures of Chistes kingdom.
^ith Christ in the kingdom of heaven, ^ee seek to accumelate, gather and
^eape up unto our selves worldelie ^iches, which are uncertain, and in^re
but a while: We have no care ^t all for the inestimable treasures of ^he
heavenly kingdom. We are well ^leased to walk in the broad way of our
^erdission, but the narrow way that lea^eth to life, is to heard for us to
find. (A ^mentable case) that we will not come ^hen we are called to Christ
Jesus. A grievous thing it is to consider that we will not relent and fall
down (...) (...) thing most dangerous to (...).
fore the Lord our maker. And a thing (...) dangerous it is to consider, that
we (...) there can nor will learn to serve and w^ ship the Lord our God with
(...) and namely in spirit and truth, as (...) has commanded in his law?
(Ala^ The (...) of Adam has polluted our consciences, and the taste of the
forbidden apple (...) still (...) o^ mouths.
what should I say? The guiltines of (...) dam whose children we are has
poll^ ted our consciences. The suggestions (...) the envious serpent sticks
still in o^ hearts. The flatteriss of deceitful (...) our grandmother in Adam,
has vtter^ bewitched our understanding. And (...) taste of the forbidden fruit
remains (...) in our mouths. Thus our contempt (...) virtue is mightily
increased, our d^ ^ll f^re of God is ^anished from our memories.
bedience greatly multiplied, and in m^ ner all fear of God is banished our m^
mories. Who indeuoreth to serve. (...) with innocent Abell? Naie who (...)
cruel Cain couetteth not to hate (...) the Lord, and to bath their hands in
(...) Noah could not reclaim the old world from (...).
blood of the faithful? Would the (...) world be reformed by Noah to conue^
from their s^s and wick^nesses* (...) ^itted against God? no they hardened ^eir
hearts in their iniquities. And does ^ot this new world the like? yes veri^e.
Was the old world utterly destroi^ for the continuance of their evils? and
^ll not this new world perish think^ ^e that surmounts the old world in all
^omination and uncleanness? Yes ^erily* Could the preaching of Lot rouse (...)
the Sodomites, and the Gomorians (...) Gomora de^.
(...) their (...) filthiness? No. No ^ore will our great Cities and Towns (...)
converted by the Patriarks, the Pro^ets, A (...) thow^ of our Cities (...)
them in (...) and except we repent, we also shall perish.
Jesus Christ himself, nor his A^stles. Were the (...) Cities destroted ^om
the heaven with fire and brimstone ^r the contempt of Gods great graces?
thousand thousand of our Cities that ^ound in all kind of evil shall likewise
^rish and be destroyed unless we repent. ^od therefore whilst we have time give
(...) the grace to convert (...), for (...) day of our visitation is at hand,
and ^ot far off. Were the I^wes the pecu^ and chosen people of God? yea vert^
Did they rebel and murmur in the ^ildernesse against him, and do not (...)
Gentiles the like? had the Jews a longging The Jews lusted after quails and
the Gentiles wax (...) ot Manna.
after quails? Were they weary of Manna, and do not the Gentiles greedily
hunger after Pharo his (...) pots? Wax they not weary of the (...) and begin
they not the gentiles to loath (...) everlasting Manna of ye Gospel? Had (...)
The Jews were distroied whilst the me^te was in their mouths and God in his
Justice will destraie the Gentiles that hunger after (...).
Jews their desire? Let the Gentiles take heed by them, that God give them not
oner to follow their own affections? Did not many thousands of them perish
whilst the meat was in their mouths? And shall not he in his justice destroy
and consume us that long after (...), and are weary of the truth? (...) that
the remembrance of these things could take deep root in our hearts. (...)
that these examples and spectakles of (...) These examples are of no force to
terifie our guilty consciences.
justice might suffice to (...) our guilty consciences, and enforce us to cry
out and weep bitterly with the Prophet David, for our manifold sins
committed against We will not go forward with Lot in g^ (...).
against the Lord our God. I would (...) God that which Lot we would go for
(...) in godly zeal, perfect purity, and (...) glenes of heart, but it will
not be. We are We are lookers back with Lots wife to beastly Zodoma.
wilful lookers back with his wife to beastly Zodoma. I would to God that
with Lot we would faithfully credit and believe, that the almighty bath
spoken, and is fully determined in his exceeding justice, to bring to pass:
but With Lots wife we were (...) but in distrusting God we vtterie deceive our
selves.
with Lots wife we are incredulous, we are become turn backs, and begin to
awel in distrust with her, thinking that the majesty of our God is
insufficient, to bring to effect y^ thing which prouidently he has decreed to
bring to pass. But with Lots wife we do altogether disceue our selves, for
heaven and earth shall perish, but the word of the Lord In (...) a most
dangerous* sin.
shall endure for ever. Alas, there is no one thing more abominable under the
Heavens, than is the intertainemente of infidelity and vnbeeliefe. For where
this monstrous evil is redsydent, there is no hope of salnation, no fear of
GOD abiding, nor no kind of goodness to be expected, for Infydelles and
vnbelce^ the LORD God will judge. This infidelity flourished in the heart of
(...) king of Egypt incredulous, and would not listen to the Praphet Moses,
(...) nor tokens nor yet (...) plages could enforce him to let go the lords
people.
proud Pharo, who regarded not the saying of the Prophet Moyies, but hardened
hishart in such condission and estate, that neither the messenger of Gods
signs and tokens were of him esteemed nor regarded, and albeit God sent
sondrie and diverse plagues among the Egiptians to make his power known, yet
would not Pharao let go^ the Lords people: such and so great was the
infidelity and increasing contempt of malicious Pharo. But God the Lord of
hosts heard the groninges of his peculiar people, that were by the cruel
Egyptians diversely afflicted, and with a mighty and out stretched hand he
delivered them from the hands of their enemies and lead them Yet the Lord heard
their gronings delivered them through the red se^, where in Pharo and his host
were ^rowned.
safely through the red^e seas, wherein Pharo and his host perished. Lo here
an especial token of Gods favor shown to his people, whom in mercy he
graciously preserved from danger. And an exceeding note worthy to be
considered of his divine justice, wherein to the comfort of the faithful, he
in the fullness of his dis^pleasure confounds there ennimies. This
in^idelitie, for all the good that the Infidelity flourished in the (...)
people of God, in that they contemned his sta-tutes, and made them a golden
(...), which they worshipped in Horeb.
Lord God had done for his people Israel, crept into the very intrales, and
thoroughly pierced the hearts of them, so that they became wilful contemners of
his statutes, truce breakers of his covenants, forsakers of his laws, and
followers of their own imaginations. For they set up a golden calfe in Horeb,
and worshipped the same as God. This infidelity made bloodthirsty Infidelity
increased mightily in Iezabell, but her reward was shame and confusion.
lezabel to favor and conceive no small delight in the blasphemous priests of
Baall, and to perfecute, afflict, and put to the edge of the sword the Lords
prophets, and those that scared the Lord: but God in his iusti^e rewarded her,
she was thrown from the top of an high tower, brake her neck, and the (...)
did eat her flesh, and lapped up her blood, according to the saying of the
prophet. Thus we see that mighty is the Lord ou^ God, and his judgments A
(...) perished in her infidelity.
are true. This infidelity made A tha^ ^ecome a worshipper of strange gods,
and to ren^unce the living Go^ of Israel, but her end was shame and
confusion. This infidelity made David D^ids distrust in numbering his people.
to distrust in the Lord, and to affie him in his own strength, in that he
numbered his people, but the plague of pestilence took away threescore and
ten thousand of them in three days. This in^delitie made Nabuchadnezer to
erect (...) through (...) set up a golden ^age.
and set up a golden image, to be^ worshipped as God himself of his people:
but Sidrack, Misaell, and Abednego would not consent to fall from the Lord
God of hosts, neither would they give the glory of the Lord their God to a
^lthy idol. Nabuchadnezer herewith not a little displesed, cast them into a
fiery furnace, but the Lord preserved them to their comfort, and the (...)
contempt and infidelity.
confusion of their (...). This infidelity made proud Antiochus to enter into
an horrible contempts o^ GOD and his law, those people he ceased not to vex
and afflicte day and night, but he escaped not (...) free, the Lord GOD had
a care for his Church, preserved his people, the foulde of his inheritance, and
sent his Angel to correct this Tyrant, as he was ryding in his Chariote,
and that in such sort, Antiochu^ plague and ouerthrow^*
that the worms fell forth of his flesh, he being alive. And was this all?
No, the fylthy stench of his infection was such, and so loathsome and vnsa^erie
in the nostrels of his own servants, that they were unable to abide his
presence. A notable example of Gods i^ste Infidelity i^ bl^od thirsty and
mischievous (...) punished.
judgments. This infidelity made blood thirsty Nero, cruel Domisian,
monstrous Heliogabalus, and tyrrannous Tragian, to persecute CHRIST in his
members, to kill his Apostles, to contemn the (...) of his Gospel, to
worship strange and unknown Gods, and and to glory in their own
wickednesses and abominations, but their end was shame and utter confusion*
And I fear me that this monstro^ Infidelity (...) among counterfeit
christians.
sin is not a little favored of us, that profess the glorious name of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for who sees not that we for the most part of
us, are not great ^aggers of the Gospel of our salvation? But where are the
fruits that he expects and requires at our hands? Is it sufficient To
talk of Christ with our carnal lips, and to deny him in our deeds, is a
thing m^st dangerous.
for us think we to talk of Christ with our carnal and fleshly lips, and to
deny him in our deeds? What greater offense can there be committed or done
against the eternal maies^ of God? Is it not a gross kind of infidelity
think we, that posesse^h our (...) A gross kind of infidelity.
consciences, that we not (...) hate to be reformed, but herewithal also, we
s^orne to walk in the ways that the Lord our God has appointed us, and yet
we will be compted christians by name, but infidels in our actions. To talk of
Christ being carnally affected, and not heavenly minded, is a thing of all
*other most dangerous, (...)* acknowledge him to be the Son (...) God in our
words, and not to (...) Usur^ing christians that propha^ the name of Christ,
agree with (...) for he as they do, consessed Christ to be the son of God.
his testimonies, is a thing most devilish, and sathanicall, for the (...) did
the like in the deserts, when he tempted the Lord of life, that John baptized
in Jordan, and then if we be faithless, as I fear me the greatest number of
us are, that remain in this our last time of calling, what differ we from
satan that unrighteous prince of darkness. And is this the way do we co^i^ture
with our selves to please God, when in not regarding the price of our redemtion
accomplished by Gods eternal decree, freely by and through the working of his
^serued grace in the spotles and immaculate lamb? No, we In abusing our (...)
we tr^d his blessed blood under our feet, and there withal we (...) to our
selves vengeance in the day of wrath.
usurp the name of Christ in this doing* we deceive our selves, we tread the
blood of him that has redeemed us under our feet, and to concl^de, we
aggreuate and heap up unto our selves the heavy and intolerable curse and
indignation of the a^ightie, and therwithall unless we convert from the (...)
way of our abominable wickednesses, the destruction of our bodies, and souls
everlastingly. But who is he that will enter into his own conscience, and
examine himself, whither he be Consciences wounded with ^in con^t not comfort
from Christ.
guilty of these causes or not? or who is he that finding his conscience
wounded with the deadly dart of his own transgression, and ouerladen with
sin, will learn to acknowledge his own wickednesses, to humble himself
with David, before the thron of gods mercies, and to say, Lord have mercy
upon me, and according to the multitude of thy manifold mercies blot out all
mine iniquities out of thy presence: verelie in this age there are few or none
that endeavor to bring forth the fruits of repentance, for the confidence that
we have in our The confidence that we have in our selves is a distrust in God.
selves, the great distrust that we have in God, in neglecting his
commandments, the love that we have to this transitory world, the slender care
we have to Christ and his Gospel, the dangerous delight we conceive in our
own force, and contrary, the utter forgetting of gods graces bestowed upon
us, a prove us rather to be the children of An absur^e thing to us but a most
prebable and certain thing to be veri^ed of us.
darkness, then the sons of light. were it not an absurd thing for us to be
called in this our last age, wherein Christ is sencerely preached to be (...)
for our sins, the enemies of Chist and the friends of Belial? who would not
think he had injury being baptized, to be called sath^n? But what redeemed
whom Christ has raunsomed, not with gold nor silver, but with the price of
the heart blood of our redeemer, will at all times ingraue or print into his
remembrance the painful torments that Christ has suffered for the sins of the
whole world? The (...) of Christ is forsaken o^ cowardly christians, who
rather (...) to sin than they (...) to resist satan.
nay rather who flies not from the ensign of his captain Christ Jesus, and
yeldeth not himself a bondslaue to ^in, a servant to satan, and a pray to
eternal damnation, and hell? If God have co^m^ nded us to serve, honor and obey
him, to dedicate and offer up our selves into his holy hands, to depend
wholly, only and solie upon him, to put our whole trust and confidence in him,
and to continue his worship in fear, and reverence? Why do we scorn his We
rather desire to please men then to serve the Lord our God.
commandments? Why yield we not our selves to obedience? Why are we become
men pleasers? Or why go we about of a set purpose to displease our creator,
know we not that we are in his heavenly hands, as the clay is in the hands of
the potter? and will we become vessels of dishonor, in dishonoring him, that of
duty we are bound to obey? Are our hearts so hardened, that we think him
insufficient to punish us, that without ceasing provoke him to displeasure? or
are we become so far Self love makes us to (...).
past fear, that we will not stand in awe of his judgments? Has Lady
selfeloue made us so wilfully affected, that we will stand thus sturdely
against the Lord and his anointed, or has the inordinate desire of our
private gain Private gain has made us to (...) Christ Jesus from our
memories.
in this world of wretchedness, so deeply possessed our hearts, that we
utterly cast Christ Jesus our high and mighty Lord treasurer, and the
unspeakable treasures of his glorious kingdom from our memories, alas if we
will cocke^ our selves in our uncleanness heap up To (...) our selves in our
own conceats, is (...) thing of all things most miserable.
sin upon sin, glory in our uncleanness, and give our consents to work evil
in the sight of the Lord our God. We are not members of Christ, sons of
adoption and grace, but children of the devil forlorn and cast away
bastardes. If we will become wilful wantons, straggling Goats, refuse the good
sheephearde and clean unto the hired servant, shall not satan the wily wolf
devour us both in body and soul? If we will live (...), lift To live securely
in the contempt of Gods justice, heapeth up vengeance in the day of desolation.
up our selves against the Lord, stand stiff in our own securities, and
grow in the contempt of Gods eternal justice, shall not he in his hea^ie
displeasure, with the heavy Axe of his vengeance, cut us down in our sins,
and then after this temporal death, shall not the second death of body and
soul, which shall endure for ever, vex and torment us in the dungion of hell.
Oh that we would record and call these things to our remembrances: O that we
would ponder in our own consciences, how heavy and It is a ^lous thing to
^all into the judgments of God.
dangerous a thing it is to fall into the judgments of the Lord our God. O
that we would diligently consider with our selves that as God is merciful,
loving and amiable, to those that love him As God is merciful to those that do
believe, so is he most terrible to the vn^.
and keep his commandments, so is he just, terrible, and displeasant, to
those that continue their wickednesses. The (...) tree that was barren was
accursed, and think we that are fruitless to be blessed? Can not the good
seed of the Gospel sown in the stoni^ ground of our stintie hearts take no
root at al in us, shall the filthy furrours of our cankred consciences, in stead
of good and perfect grain, bring forth vnsanerie darnell? when the Lord of
the harvest comes for perfect wheat, will we render him chafe? (alack then
most miserable is our condission and estate) for he then that has his fan
in his hand, will purge his flower, gather his wheat into the glorious g^rner
of his grace, but the chafe he will burn with an unquenchable fire. These
things might Occasions whilst we have time, to move us to turn to the Lord
our God.
forewarne us in time, while we have time, to turn to the Lord our God, and
to bring soorth the fruits of repentance. But we generally for the most
part, here and every where rather like beastly Epicures, then godly affected
christians, wallowe in the myrie soil of our uncleanness and putrefaction,
expecting nothing so much as we do our ease, wherein we she we our selves to
be more laisie loyterers, then lovely laborers in the Lords vineyarde. For
let us even We are (...) loiterers and not careful laborers in the Lords
vineyard.
from the highest to the lowest, from the eldest to the yoongest, from the
wisest to the fondest, and from the learned to the vnskilfullest, behold our
selves in our own imperfections in our own impurities, and in our ^lthy
actions, and we shall see that we are not only incloased in the snares of
hell, fettred with the chains of damnation, and cast awaies from Gods favor,
but also therewith all, we have justly deserved the heavy sentence of
condemnation, and that not for a day or year, but everlastingly. To sp^ake
of our abusions, to touch the canker of our corruptions, to uncover the ugly
ulcers of our uncleanness, Tr^h may be blamed and not shamed.
to set abroach the monstrous sores of our sins, and to rip up the blanes and
botches of our iniquities, I should rather displease then content: offend than
delight, and heap up unto me for good will deserved, an undeserved hatred. It
is better to please God than (...).
But may this abashe me? should this hinder me, or daunt me in so good a
quarrel to keep silence, or cause me to hold my peace? no, God forbid, and
Lord let it be far of from me, for if temporal minded men, that hear their
Lords and Masters ill spoken and (...), abused and defamed, will stand up
and defend to the utter most they can, the cause and case of Note this (...).
their superiors. How much more ought the servants of Christ Jesus to stand up
and speak in his cause, whose wor^ is contemned, whose name is profaned, and
whose graces, are over stenderlie regarded. These causes c^nsidered, it
beseems every christian to speak in the defense of so good a captain, as
has done all the good that may be accomplished and brought to effect, for our
vtilities. But are not these things quight cast away from our memories? The
service of Christ is given over for the service of fill thy Mammon.
What are they that have not given over the service of Christ, and are not
become the seruitours of Mammon? Where is not covetousness hatboured? Or who
though he has never so much thinks himself satisfied? verily few or none,
for the love of gold has so blinded our eyes, that we cannot find^ the way
to Christ Jesus. The immoderate desire, the insatiable lust, and the
vnstanchable appetite that we have to gape after worldly rule, Lordly
dignities and promotions carries us away with violence from the service of
God, to the sincke of per^. Thus filthy avarice the canker of all corruption,
causes us to fall from God, to ^istrust in God and to put our confidence
oftentimes in worldly riches, which shall waste and wear away, as the moth
fretteth and consumes a garment. But whereas this greedy moiling desire of
gold, and this filthy longing after our private gain is esteemed, there (...)
fear (...) r^garded.
the fear of GOD is not regarded, compassion is closed up in prison,
neighborly love is banished, hatred flourishes, oppression rules,
arrogancy is advanced, and in fine to conclude, all grace and goodness is
^rodden underfoot. And yet for all this the greediest cormoraunt that is will
be a christian: the vildest ex^ will brag of the Gospel: and the most
monsterous usurer that lives will acknowledge Christ to (...) the son of
God, but all in vain. For to call Christ Lord, Lord, (...) not, neither yet
appertains that kingdom that Christ has purchased with his heart blood, to
such proud prattling Phare^s, but that (...) place of joy and glory belongs
to those that do the will of God, and truly endeavor through the working of
his grace to walk in integricie and newenesse of life. Strange (...) makes
(...) proud persons and the children of (...).
The strange disguisings that at this day we put in practice approves our
selves to be the children of Lucipher, the babes of Beliall, and the very ^re
brandes of hell. New fashions are favored: the Itallian A^ominable abuses
practiced and suffered at this day in England unpunished.
cut is set by: Beauty must have a peacokes tail to keep hit from the sun
burning: men are become effemina^e, manhood is not thought upon: the launche
and the sheilde are nothing esteemed: carpit knights must lull them in their
ladies lappes. O loathsome world wherein iniquity abounds. O wordlinges
that wallowe in all kinds of wickedness fashioning most diuelishly such
ornaments as rather make you unreasonable monsters, then reasonable men, such
roisting and reuelling in your french ruffes, such bumbasting of dublets, that
make you bellies like bumbards. I think was never seen, such curious painting
of crabtree faces, such tavern bushes worn in women's heds, was never before
this frequented, such The maintei^ance of s^e is the decay of virtue, the like
sin never practiced amongst pa^ as are (...) in (...) of bragging christians.
disceit, such falsehoode, such briberie, such polling and pilling, such
swearing and tearing of God for tri^es, such lea^ongring, such inhansing of
rents, such oppression, and extortion, such whooredome and dronkennes, such
wilful perjury, and false witness beareing, such detracting, backbi^ing and
flandering, as remains amon^g christians, I conjecture, nay I am rather ^llie
persuaded was never put in practice among the very infidels and pagans, that
never had any knowledge of God and Christ, but it shall be easier for them then
for us, in the day of ou^ resurrection. At what time the Lord shall come with
power and glory to judge the quick and dead. But such is the cor^uption of
our natures, that the remembrances of these things cannot take any root in
our hearts, re^tance ^epentance is not reg^ded, neither can the terror of Gods
justice drive us to the amendment of our lives.
is deferred from day, to day, neither can the terror of gods justice drive us
to amendment of our lives, nor his manifold mercies cause us to humble our
selves before the Lord. Signs and tokens given us from beauen, to put us in
mind of gods indignation, are taken for trif^es, prodigious monsters brought
forth contrary to nature, in the course of concepti^ cannot awaken us from our
wickednesses, neither think we that the heavens when they threaten us for
(...), do presaidge our destruction. And in these points (...) me how much do
the ^aine glorious gentiles differ from the unbelieving Jews: God be merciful
unto us, and spare us from those plages that we have most justly deserved,
give us grace to convert and turn us wholly from the perilous paths of
perverse impletie, ye we may be saved from vengeance in the day of wrath. But
there be diverse Impedi^ (...). that let and withholds us from hart^ repentance.
lets to withhold us from hearty repentance, the devil, the world, and the
flesh are our enemies, the love of concupiscence, the vain ^lurements of
worldly delectation, and the ^ordinate hunting after worldly treasure, are
dangerous impediments to keep us from hearty contri^on, and sorrowful (...),
for the exercise of wickednesses, the loathsomnes of the Gospel of grace, the
gross and carnal fulness of our corrupte^ humors, that cannot be purged from
the filthiness of the old Adam, nor yet learn to digest the verity, but only
by the invocation of Gods sacred and holy name, and the divine working of his
singular merci^ and grace, are most grievous stops to kep^ us from repentance.
And as a lively faith through the favor of Christ is the ground A fruitful
faith has no being in the children of (...).
of contri^io^, so as neither this faith grounded on Christ his bloodlie death
and passion, nor this compunction or (...) sorrow can have any place in the
(...) of unbelief, which harden their hearts in all mischief and wickedness,
no more can neither of these excelling ^ertues have their ^eing in our carnal
and contemptuous gospellers, which rather make a scorn of Christ Jesus, then
honor him in their hearts. But this in^incible faith g^unded (...) comes not
of our selves, but by grace and faith in Christ Jesus
on the touchstone of truth, and this vnfein^d repentance, through the which by
grace in Christ Jesus, the old man is dead and buried from ^inne, and this
contri^on and hearty sorrow where with all our consciences are touched, not
for de^tes, but freely by gods inestimable lou^ and kindness, comes not of our
selves, but proceeds toward us, from the father of light, and these his
singular graces are pertinent, and belonging to the children of belief, that
are truly regenerate, begotten and borne again to God the Father, not by
water, but in the precious death and bloodshedding of the innocent lamb Christ
Jesus. This faith, and this repentance, (...) pro^table to David, but
discommodious to Saul because he wa^ted faith.
was profitable to the prophet David, when he felt in himself the sorrows of
his heart, and confessed himself to have (...) displeased the majesty of the
Lord God, saying, I will acknowledge mine unrighteousness against my self, O
Lord, and thou forgauest the ungodliness Repentance (...) to Pe er, but nothing
bene^ciall to Judas, for want of fait^ for as Christ had Peter in cure ^or his
(...) sorrow, so satan had Judas in possession ^or ^acke of (...).
of my sins, and as his submission was found acceptablein the sight of the
Lord GOD, so Saul wanting a lively faith and impenitent, what could his
contri^on avail or pro^t him? This faith was s^ setteled in the Apostle Peter,
that when he had denied his Lord and master, Christ Jesus, looking back upon
him, the silly cock became a preacher unto him, and thereupon calling unto his
remembrance the words of his loving Lord, he went forth of the doors and
w^pt bitterly for his trespass, thus his repentance obtained mercy at the
hands of god, and found favor because that he grounded o^ faith. Contrarily
this repentance nothing at all a^ailed Judas, and why? because he was faithles.
Thus as Peter purchased remission by faith and earnest repentance, More
despe^ate Iud^ses in this last age, then (...) Peter's.
so Judas drowned in infidelity, satan poscessing him, most desperately hanged
him self, and did heap unto himself the utter condemnation of body and
soul, and I fear me, that in this our last age we have a far greter number of
desperate ludases, than faithful repentant Peter's, God turn our hearts, and
give us his holy spirit, by the power whereof sin shall cease in us, and we
shall live to Christ Jesus. But if we will with an upright and single (...) The
condissi^n of worldly christians dif ^er from Christ
behold the manners of wicked wordlinges, we shall find them so far dissonant
from Christ as light is from darkness, and yet most shamelessie he that is most
wicked, and Difference in seeking after Christ, The three wise men sought
Christ to worcester ship him, Herod to ^stroy him.
he whose actions are most detested in the sight of the Lord God, will not stick
to say, they are folowers of Christ, and it may be so, that they both follow
and seek after him, but how? not with the three wise men, to serve and
worship him in spirit truth but with bloodthirsty Herod to kill and cruci^e
him afreshe in his members. They mind not with Nichodemus to seek the Lord
Christ by day, nor yet by night to learn of him as his disciples, that which
may benefit them to everlasting life, but they seek and follow after him with
the Nicodem^ ^ought Christ by night to learn of him, the Scribes and Phare^es
to tempt him.
subtle Scribes, the proud Phar^sies, and the deceitful Sa^uces to entrap him
in his talk, and to tempt him with a p^nny, but they are sent away, not
without answer, for Caesar must have that which to him belongs, and God must
have his glory. These usurpers of Christ his holy name, these wicked and
impudent creatures come not to the lamb of God, with The Centurion sought
Christ by faith, for the health of his daughter, but we will not seek him for
the safegarde of our souls that would ^aue us to come unto him.
the believing Centurion, neither will they repose such confidence and trust in
Christ as he did for the r^couery of his daughters health: no they will not
come to him, that like a good and loving Physician would cure their sick
souls, purify their (...) hearts, and cleanse them from all the ^oares of
sinn^, and yet with the Lawier that came to Christ to know y^ way to life, they
can brag they have kept the co^man^ements, and al necessary things for their
^aluation, but with the Lawier they go away ashamed, for these justifying
felow^ of themselves keep back with the lawier, neither will they consent to
sell all that they have, and give it to the poor, no they will follow Christ
in no such order. Judas was a follower of Christ, Judas gave Judas was ^
follower of Christ, but Zacheus followed him by faith, but Iu^ to betraie ^im.
Christ a discembling kiss, but we have many Iudases, but the faith of
Zacheus is forgotten of these counterfeits, they will not s^e Christ in spirit
and truth, but after their own affections, this is the manner of the
maleu^lent, that think themselves searchers after CHRIST, when they being
carnally affected, rather show themselves blind at noone ^aies, then to have
or inioie their perfect sight, for they grope as graceles, for him that they
cannot find. But contrary the little fold, the members of the church militant,
the fair The faithful members o^ the church m^tant seek Christ by fai^ and
they and him to ^he comfort of their con^.
daughter of Sio^, y^ perfect spous of Christ and the faithful lovers of the
gospel, they seek for Christ spiritually, and how, by a fruitful faith and an
earnest repentance, and they find him to the comfort of their consciences, the
joy of their troubled hearts, and to the exceeding comfort of their souls, they
see and find him, y^ both is delighted to dwell with them, and in them, and
they in him, have their being, so that by his especial grace ^ favor they are
puri^ed in the blood of the lamb from all the spots of their sins, and the
deformed wrinckles of their wickednesses, this is the mean of godly
christians that seek and search for Christ, by an immovable faith, and
beartie sorrow for their sins, and they are certain to find him, and why?
because he has promised Christ is in the midst of them that ^re gathered to^
in his holy name.
that when so ever two or three be assembled and gathered together in his name
he will be in the midst of them, and this is the hope of the faithful, this
is the greatest joy that belongs to the children of belief, this is ^he
comfort of each and every constant christian, and yet they can The faithful
do fall into the las^ ^f sin they cannot stand of them selves, but like
prodi^all sons, their cons^ence is touched with the ^nger of gods grace, they
mourn and weep bitterly for their (...).
not stand of themselves, but when they fall into the laspe of sin, they
confess their iniquities, and forthwith they being touched with the finger of
Gods grace, they like prodigal sons that ^aue wandered from the sheepefolds
of the true and very Emanuell, cry out and return to their father again,
for want of whose favor, they being ready to pine, were glad with the swine
that wallowe in the stinking ^ncks of sin, to eat y^ corrupt cods of their
uncleanness, but being as they were under the curse of the law, subverted by
gods eternal justice, to eternal death and damnation, they feeling the
gnawing worm of their own conscience to vex and tormente them, and therewith
all, they beholding the horror of their wickednesses committed against the
Lord their God, they seek to be rid of this hellish slavery, they count
to shake of this heavy and intolerable burden of their iniquities, and to be
released from the bondage of hell, the ^ting of the second death, and the
ceaseles torments of that everlasting fyrie flame, wherein the godles shall be
punished and tormented everlastingly. But how or by what means they trust
not to their own strengthes, The mean and way that the godly and faithful
re^tant use to come unto (...).
they put no confidence in man, they stand not sturdie in their own conceits,
neither yet build they on their own deserts, no they stand not to reason
with the Lord as though they would justify themselves, but they feeling the
misery of their languishing souls, they fly unto the Lord by a lively
faith, they are ashamed of themselves, they are heartelie sorry for their
sins, they weep and cry out bitterly for their iniquities saing, O father
we are not worthy to be called thy children, ^or Their humble (...) is
accepted, and they (...) recea^ed to gods favor and grace.
we have sinned against thee, and are not worthy to be called thy children.
This humble submission of theirs, this hearty sorrow of theirs, is not only
accepted, but the Lord himself appea^ing his fury with the outstretched
arms of his compassion and pity, receives them to his favor, and gives
unto them the fat kidde Christ Jesus, on whom by faith they feed, and have
their fill, to their exceeding io^es, and to the salvation of their souls.
This is the difference betwixt the faithful and the unbelieving. This is an
especial token how and in what kind, the children of An especial note (...)
the children o^ light and the children of darkness.
light are, and may at all times easelie be discearned from the children of
darkness. This is an especial note for us to consider how, and in what manner
the church millitant may easelie be disciphered from Marks to know the church
militant, the true spouse of Christ, from the church malignant, the proud
(...) of (...).
the church malignant, for as the members of the true church of Christ,
continually travel under the cross, and are at warfare, and their fight is
endless against (...), death, hell, the flesh, this wicked world, satan, and
all the powers of hell. So this malignant church, this synagogue of the devil,
this proud painted strumpet of Babylon (...), in all (...), glories in all
uncleanness, loves this world, pearcheth for promotion, and princely dignity,
and that most (...), pampereth it self in fleshly and filthy lust most
shamelesselie, soyleth it self in all notorious It has (...) an old (...),
and long used that (...) has had his church, the devil has had his chi^, but
it may now be said in this age, that whereas Christ has his chapel the
devil has his church.
sins and evils most abhominably, and to conclude, Lucipher the prince of
pride (...) y^ ringleder of this mischievous church, contrary the mihtent
church has learned of her loving (...) Christ Jesus, to be humble, lowly,
meek, gentle, patient, ready to suffer affliction, willing to (...) under the
baner of her head, and to continue constant in time of their trial. The
children of this church are not ashamed of y^ truth of the Gospel. The children
of this church are ready at al times to give a reckoning of their faith before
princes. The children of this church are ready to suffer imprisonment,
reuiling, persecution, and willingly they agree to give their lives for the
testimony of Christ. Contrary the church (...) malignant church (...) self a^
nst God and (...): they (...) are the (...) of (...) church (...) to (...)
stroy the Lords vine* (...), but the Lord vpholdeth their cause (...) the (...).
malignant most arrogantlie lifts it (...) against the Lord, against his
(...), and the true (...) of his blessed name, they resist the Lords army of
his saints, they in their kind as the (...) members of the very devil
himself, do all, and that with one consent toil without ceasing to destroy
the lords vineyard, to batter down the walls of Sion, and to overthrow the
pillars of the Lords house, but he most (...) being the founder and builder of
his church, (...) the same, mainteineth his cause against the ungodly, and
breaks the iawe bones of the malicious a sunder. Thus deals the Lord our
God with his The blood of the (...) that are (...) for the love and truth of
Christ (...) the (...) of the church.
people, and yet sundry and oftentimes he suffers the woolfe to crushe the
tender lambs of his fould, but the blood of the martirs that are persecuted
for the truth of the Gospel, is the seed of his church, which brings forth
such increase, that all the tirants of the world shall never be able, (...)
what (...) they can, to root up, deface, or irradicate his church. That same
God that spoke unto Saul when he had received letters of the high priests, to
persecute his saints at Damasco, speaks unto them that make havoc of the
foulde of his inheritance, and shows them that it shall be as heard for
them as it was (...) Saul to kick against the prick, it is all in vain
therefore for mortal men (...) what condition soever they be to stand As the
(...) cannot ^troule the (...), no more can man that is but (...) clod of
(...), (...) the man of God.
up against the Lord, for he is the Lord of all power, the God of all
wisdom, and as the pot cannot control nor check the potter, no more can man
that is but a clod of claie, and the handie work of his creator resist, nor
withstand that the Lord of hosts has purposed to bring to effect. Satan
(...) forth his ministers to all mischief, (...), persecute an (...) the
godly.
Yet where satan is the ringleader of this disordered (...), and shameless
rabble, he in such sort pricketh them forward, that they (...) no small
felicity and delight, to whet their tuskes, to make sharp their (...), to this
very purpose, that they may spoil and (...) the Lords fould, but he that is
mighty often and sundry times confounds them in the imaginations of their
own (...)! (...) us therefore (...) more that we are (...), for (...) Christ,
the (...) we (...) and (...).
in time of our trial continue constant, let us in time of our affliction,
endeavor to bear the cross with patience, for the sharper that in this life
our torments are or shall be for the testamony of a good conscience, the greater
shall be our glory in time to come in the kingdom of heaven. The more that we
are reviled, ill spoken of, and (...), for our Lord and (...) Christ Jesus, the
more better shall we be accepted and well welcomed, accounted of, blessed, and
received of Christ our savior, to his everlasting kingdom. If therefore we
will be his disciples, we must learn of him to follow his steps, to walk in
holiness and righteousness of (...), to The scholars of (...) must continue
their studies in (...) his truth.
dedicate our selves wholly unto his service, we must like good and skilful
scholars continue our studies in the nourserie of his eternal truth, and
crave of him that through the asistaunce of his holy and blessed spirit, we
may learn to understand the blessed (...) contained in his holy law, and to
walk continually in his sight, as it becomes godly and faithful The (...)
we have to (...) makes (...) of God.
sons, adopted by grace to life everlasting. But as I have said before, so
say I again, the love of this world so (...) in us, that the love we ought
to bear unto Christ is forgotten, the desire we have to (...), and the
continuance of our evils, makes us ^ned of God, and beloved of the dyuell,
whose service we continue, to the great dishonouring of the lamb Christ Jesus,
and to our utter confusion ever lastinglie. Let the auaritious minded (...)
forget his ^lthy auaries, and learn to be contented ^ from sinful impiety,
and the fruits of (...) vnclean^es by the exercise whereof we provoke God to
disple^sure (...) up unto out sel^es eternal condemn and, let us therefore
from the highest to the lowest bring forth the fruits of repentance, and the
Lord out God will be merciful unto us, he will heal out offenses, and
continue his gracious co^tenance unto us his people, and then at y^ last when
we shall give an account of our stewardships we shall (...) before him in
innocence, and be crowned with glory.
with a mean: let the proud man give over his strange disguisings, let
ancient custom in appareling our bodies beat down our masquing robes, let us
not be proud in our conseats, but humble and meek in all our actions. Let the
beastly epicure that glories in excess, forget to make his belly his God. Let
the usurer, that eats and deu^ureth up young gentlemen, and poor artificers
alive, learn with Zacheus, to make restitutio^ of their wrong gotten goods.
Let the whore^onger and adulterer, learn to give over his beastly whoredom,
and filthy fornication: Let the drunkard y^ glories in his corrup^on forget
and give over his unreasonable quaffing. Let y^ greedy landlord endeavor to
forbear the practice of pouling his poor tenant, and to conclude, let us all
ingenerally, from the hiest to the lowest of us, come before y^ Lord our maker,
with humble and contrite hearts. Let us weep and wail, cry out and morn
biterly for our sins, and then the Lord our God in y^ fulness of his mercies will
heal our offenses, cleanse us from our sins, purge us from our iniquities, and
wash us from our wickednesses in y^ blod of the lamb, yea the Lord our God wll
become unto us a shelter and a shield against all our enemies, yea he will fight
for us against al those that maliciously seek to assail us, he will turn
toward us his gracious countenance, continue our peace, bless our anointed
Debora, our virgin Queen, y^ handmaid of the lord, continue her highness health
to our co^forts, convert or else utterly confound the power of al her enemies,
foreign and domestical, bless our land, spare us from those plagues y^ we have
most righteously deserved, and at the last when it shall plese him to call us
unto an account and reckoning of our bailiweekes and stewardships before his
tribunal thron, we shall stand before him in innocence and holiness of life,
and here him pronounce to our endless comforts this hapie sentence. Come you
blessed of my father, enter into y^ kingdom prepared for you, from the
beginning of the world. To the which most gracious God and loving father
mercifully conduct us, for thy son Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost the spirit of all truth, unity and concord, three person, and one
eternal and everliving God, be rendered all laud, glory, honor, praise power
and dominion for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

