THE Life and Death of Sir Phillip Sidney, late Lord governor of FLVSHING: His
funerals Solemnized in Paul's Church where he lies interred; with the whole
order of the mournful show, as they marched through the city of London, on
Thursday the 16 of February, 1587.

AT LONDON. Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-barre near
unto Sommerset-house. 1587

To the right Honorable Lord Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex, Vicount Hereford,
John Philip his faithful well willer, wishes increase of honor in this life,
and in the world to come life everlasting.
RIght honorable, when I considered with my self these no less the^ dangerous
days, I purposed with deliberation to have written some thing that might have
tended to your better liking, but in the mean season the time to the great
grief of all those that fear God, love his glorious Gospel (without faining)
rendered the fruits of loyalty to her excellent majesty, and are careful
lovers of their native country, presented before me a pitiful spectacle, the
view whereof as it was lamentable, so thought I not to ouerslip it without the
remembrance of his deserved fame, which, dispite of death, shall live for
ever, albeit his want in Court, Town and country, be bewailed of Prince,
nobility, Gentlemen, rich and poor. This Phoenix sweet Sidney was the flower
of courtesy, who in his life time gave a perfect light in his conversation to
lead men to virtue, the fruits whereof so glistered in the eyes of mortal
creatures, that by his example they might both learn to fear God, to glory in
sincerity, to abound in loyalty, and to become careful lovers of their native
country. This even this most worthy Knight passing his pilgrimage in this
terrestrial vale of too manifold miseries, so behaved himself that for the
exercise of perfect piety, he was honored and highly esteemed of all men, to
the poor he was merciful, to the learned liberal, to Suitors a great comfort,
to the fatherless favorable, to the widows, helpful, and to say the
truth, his hand, his heart, and purs^e, was always ready to support the
distressed, with goodmen he was delighted, and with them always ever
conuersaunt, and as he himself had scaled Pernassus and sat with Citheria
amongst the Muses, so gloried he in wisdom and the lovers of the same with the
perverse, the froward and malicious such as were contemners of truth enemies
of her majesty's most royal person, and conspiring Catalins against their
native country, who can say that sweet Sidney was ever touched with one spot
of disloyalty: nay, who can not say, but that he carried in his secreat bosom
a heart undefiled, a clear conscience, and a mind garnished with innocence.
But alas this bright burning lamp is extinguished by death who has robed the
prince of as loyal a subject as ever lived, disinherited the noble peers of a
faithful friend, and spoiled the commons of a careful comforter, whose loss
both Prince, peers and subjects woefully bewail. But is Sidney dead, no he
lives, his virtues in this life have made a conquest of death, and in the
world to come his faith has obtained him the glorious presence of Jesus
Christ in the kingdom of heaven. And to put you out of doubt, his ^^^tues so
revive him from the grave, that he in truth speaks unto you, whose voice if
you will vouchsafe to hear, not only you (right honorable but all other noble
estates, Gentlemen and others shall understand that Sir Philip Sidney, to his
ever enduring glory has made a conquest of death by fame in this life, and is
inthronized before God with his sacred saints in the kingdom of heaven. Thus
craving pardon at your Lordships hands for my ouerboldnes, the time commands
me to cease, since that the truth triumphantly approaches to accompany this
worthy knight, whose plea, she most willingly maintains. Thus with my hearty
prayers to the almighty for your Lordships health I conclude, beseeching him in
this life to defend you from all peril and danger, yea most happy victory in
this life over all the enemies of God and her royal majesty, and in the world
to come, crown your head with honor and glory in his celestial kingdom.

Your Honors most humble and faithful welwiller John Philip.

The Life, Death, and Funerals, of Sir Philip Sidney knight.
YOu noble Brutes bedeckt with rich renown,
That in this world have wordly wealth at will:
Muse not at me, though death have cut me down,
For from my grave, I speak unto you still.
UUhilst life I had, I never meant you ill,
Then think on me that close am coucht in clay,
And know I live, though death wrought my decay.
I need not I, record my blood, ne birth,
For why? to you my parentage is known:
My mould was clay, my substance was but earth,
And now the earth enioyes again her own,
My race is run, my days are overthrown.
Yet Lordings l^st, your patience here I crave,
Hear Sydneis plea, discussed from his grave.
The fear of God, I fixed before my face,
His precepts pure, to learn I did delight.
The fruits of faith in me possessed place,
My glory was to do the thing was right,
In wisdoms bower I my pauilion pight.
And lying here, though death my foil did frame,
To conquer death I spotless kept my name.
Triumphant truth had place within my breast,
Her happy heasts, I harbored in my heart,
Her paths to tread, my feet were ever pressed,
And in the truth I played my pilgrims part,
And truth in time, according my desert,
From time to time rewarded me worth praise,
But time in truth did finishe up my days.
Where I might help, to harm I never meant
where I might hurt, to help I had a care.
Each ill with good, to guard I was content,
Of rash revenge, for wrongs I did beware.
To maintain peace my mind I did prepare,
Where discord dwelt, her tents I sought to shun.
The world can tell, if this I have not done.
First God I sought in spirit and truth to serve,
On him alone my hope and trust was set.
From his sweet word I never sought to swerve,
But thence by faith, food for my soul I fette.
what Christ had done I never would forget,
My hope and trust was in his death and blood.
For none but he I knew could do me good.
Buy paths to pace I never gave consent,
The Syrene songs could no time me disceaue.
To rest on Christ my faith was ever bent,
And unto him I constantly did cleave.
Of his sweet word, none could my soul bereave,
The light I loved, and Christ the shining sun
So cleerd mine eyes, that darkness I did shun.
The shepherd sweet that brake the bread of life,
I could discern by truths true Trumpets sound.
The servant strange that bred debate and strife,
My consience came, I knew, by craft to wound.
But wolves are often in silie lambs skins found,
And I their wiles could through my Christ discrie.
That from the fould I causde the wolue to fly.
Thus as to God obedient I was seen,
whose sacred truth was settled in my breast.
A spotless heart I rendered to my Queen,
whose honor I for to uphold was pressed.
The fruits of faith in me were aie expressed,
Her joy was mine, her grief my deadly woe,
what Sidney says, the world will speak I know.
An earnest love I to my country had,
The Commons weal I planted in my mind.
The noble peers were of my company glad,
No breathe of troath in me could any find.
To virtues heasts my heart was aie inclinde,
But in the world my dated days are done.
My time is spent, mine hower-glasse is run.
Yet whilst I lived (aie me) my heart was woe,
To see some raunge as wretchles minded mates,
Seeking by slights to work the overthrow,
Of sincere truth, still kindling up debates,
Like frantic friends, foreseeing not their fates:
That hedlong run, without regard at all,
By breach of truth to shame to make them thrall.
I saw how some of Manna made too slight,
Preferring chafe before the finest wheat,
Striving amain for to ecclips the light,
And in the mist to feed on grosser meat,
Against the Lord their malice waxed great.
But he his Church, and glory will maintain,
Mauger the rage of cruel cursed Cain.
In cestuous Rome, that cage of birds unclean,
Her shriking Owls has into England sent
The subjects hearts, from their good Queen to gleane,
Seducing souls, to use that they invent,
The beast of Rome, to gape for blood is bent,
whose merchant men incenst with ceasles ire,
Against God and Prince made some unkind conspire.
All this I saw, which made me sob and wail,
To see the crew of Dathan to increase,
No grief to this, that faith in men should fail,
who strive to change by blood our days of peace,
Be thankful then and stand with sin at strife,
So shall your God redubble thrice your joy,
and graciously defend you from annoy.
He for her sake has garnisht you with peace,
Your virgin Queen is careful for your nead,
Her studies set your welfare to increase,
Then like good subjects loyally do deal,
and as her love to you she does reueile.
with love requight her loving heart again,
And pray with you her grace may long remain.
My Countrie-men ingraft my words in mind,
For wonders great for ye the Lord has wrought,
Be thankful then his favor you do find.
For as by him Daniell from den was brought,
So he for you that of no comfort thought,
Gave unto you to free ye from distress,
Your royal Queen to multiply your bless.
Twenty nine years you have her grace possessed,
Your sovereign Queen, a mother mild to you.
A careful nursse that helps all such oppressed,
As unto her for princely comfort low,
To God and Prince remember then your vow,
Live subject like and then take this from me,
Redoubled thrice her happy days shall be.
And you that carpe with Catiline for spoil,
And would convert your quiet peace to war,
Have some remorce unto your native soil,
Let not the Pope procure you thus to jar.
Have care to Christ and know you christians are,
Its he, and none but he that must you save,
Mark well my words, though that I sleep in grave,
In marshall feats I settled my delight,
The stately steed I did bestride with joy.
At tilt and turney often I tried my might,
In these exployts I never felt annoy.
My worthy friends in arms did often employ,
Themselves with me to break the shiuering spear,
But now my want they wail with many a tear.
My spoused wife my Lady and my love,
whilst life I had did know my tender heart.
But God that rules the rolling skies above,
Did think it meet we should again depart.
His will is done, death is my dew desert,
She wants her make, I fro my dear am gone.
She lives behind her lover true to morn.
In Flaunders I against the spanish rout,
that spit their spite against my God and Prince,
that seek by force like tyraunts bold and stout,
those towns and forts that fear God, to convince,
on barbed stead as one for their defense,
incountred often, amidst the troop of those,
repaying them with many bloody blows.
The Canons crack, my courage could not quail,
like Mars his knight I rusht amidst the throng,
and to the flight unto my great avail,
I drove them often and laid the proudst along,
my steed was slain the musketeers among,
when I my self received my fatal wound,
yet horst again from them conuaied round.
My grief was great yet was my glory more,
that I escapt the field from out the hands,
the English camp with tears did me deplore,
but life we see in fortunes balance stands,
death forces not possessions goods nor lands,
the rich and poor to him are all alike,
when God commands, he spares not to strike.
The chiefest hope I had was in sweet Christ,
to him I fled, as to my dearest friend,
and as in truth I labored to persist,
so in the truth I made my faithful end,
My leave I took of every loving friend,
I told them plain my dying day drew near,
and that I had no long abiding here.
My worldly goods I wisely did dispose,
and to the world that was the worlds I left,
The noble Earl of Lester.
Mine uncles heart was wrapped with heaps of woes,
to see me thus a flowring youth bereaft,
Care clad my friends, their hearts a sunder cleft,
my servants minds were over whelmd with grief,
but none but Christ was found my comfort chief.
My brother dear to God I did commend,
Desiring him the Lord of hosts to fear,
and as I live, so to his latter end,
I gave him charge the tongue of truth to bear,
to Sy^^^ mates I wish him give no ear,
But as I had been loyal to my Queen.
So had I hope his faith should flourish green.
My loving wife my Lady and my dear,
with all my heart I had for aye adue,
Earl of war wicke and his Countess.
and thus I said, O Warwike noble peer,
thy Nephew now thy face shall never view,
God bless my Lord and Countess his most true
I leave you hear, from you I go my way,
I die to world yet hope to live for aye.
And now adue to Pembrakes noble Earl,
to Countess thine my sister kind farewell,
I leave you all Christ his precious pearl,
with whom my faith persuades me to dwell,
By faith in him, I vanquish death and hell,
these die in me though death do cut me down,
For Christ I know with life my head will crown.
My Deuorax, my dear, my joy, my friend,
of Essex Earl ten thousand times adue, Earl of Essex.

to God with heart I humbly thee commend,
hoping in heaven thee face to face to view.
Mourn not for me, though death my life subdue,
I live to die, and die to live in deed,
my life was lent, and death has cut life's thread.
But yet I know my peers will think on me,
my guileles ghost shall never them forget,
their good wills shall for aye remembered be,
that to the grave my corpse with honor fet,
as in my life they love on Sidney set,
so from my grave I give them thanks again,
that to the earth to bring me take the pain.
First to the poor I clad in weeds of woe, 32. mourners, poor men
representing the nnmber of his years.

whose blubred eyes did show their inward grief,
the yeomens looks their heavy cheer did show,
and of their care I was their causer chief,
the gentles all languisht without relief,
they left their silks to think upon my wrack,
and wailfull wise were clothed all in black.
The drum and fife rang forth my wailfull knell,
a woeful martch the knights and Captains past,
the ensigns wrapped fore told all was not well,
to see my days by birefull death defast,
my standarde brave far out of order plast,
traild on the ground, in grievous doleful wise,
Made rich and poor, with plains to pearce the skies.
My barbed steeves appointed for the field,
Whereon I erst encountered with my foe,
Contrary kind enforced were to yield,
And for my want a course of care did shoe,
My warlike lance, of me beloved so,
in pieces burst, and all to shiuers torn,
Gave all estates occasion meet to mourn.
Before my corpse, six Harholdes passed on,
The first my spurs with pensive tackes did bear.
The second he my want for to bemourne,
Supported sure the gaunlits I did wear,
The third my sword and shield upright did rear,
The fourth in hand my crest and colors had,
The fifth and six, with vissardes wan and sad,
My coat of arms did bear in equal wise,
Next came my corpse, by worthy Chieftaines borne,
whose joys were sact, the tears fell from their eyes,
their mazed minds with care were ell forlorn,
the standers by for Sidneis want did mourn,
their tender hearts, did grieve that I was gone,
Throughout the streets, no sign of mirth was shown.
Earl of Leaster, Huntington and Essex.
Next to my corpse to weep my sudden fall,
My brother dear in weeds of woe was dight,
On horseback then my piers to sorrow thrall,
with watered eyes bewaild a marshall Knight,
L. VVillowbie
And after them in order rode aright,
My loving Lords with care and grief oppressed,
L. North.
And every where to mourn my foes were pressed.
Then mounted well next them in open show,
Of flaunders did, the courteous states succeed, The estates of Flaunders

their grief was great, their stomachs fraught with woe,
th^^ did my want, of woe a well spring breed.
But as of Prince and piers I was beloved indeed.
So London left me not forgotten quight
But gave to me the thing that was my right.
For next the states in gowns of violet fair
Lord Mayor did with Senators most grave L. Mayor of Lon 24. Ald. with M.VV.
Fleetwood

On horseback make to mourn me their repair,
But God has that that he unto me gave,
though I be dead, my Christ my soul will save,
He is and was the pillar of my trust,
I know at last that rise again I must.
Next these my friends in order passed on,
The gentle crew of Grocers comely clad.
These, these my friends, their loving friend did moan, The worshipful company
of the Grocers richly attired with their Livery hoodes on their shoulders.

they for their friend to mourn occasion had,
Next these the drumbs and fifes with sounds right sad,
My passing bell and knell with care did ring,
Thus to the grave with dole they did me bring
After whose sound a careful Chieftaine past,
Who brought with him a band of marshall wights
All which with woe did to my Burial have,
As men amazed bereft of their delights.
Not wotting how in war to show their mights,
Their muskets borne so out of order clean,
As though they knew not what the war did mean.
Then after them the armed pikemen hie,
Trayling the pikes along upon the ground,
The sight whereof made many a weeping eye,
the soldiers joys care crossed with grief to wound,
Thus mourn theie (...) moment (...)
Even thus and (...) Mi^^^ies I was brought,
To Saint Paul's Church where I my rest (...)
Next after these, the Holde^^s martched on,
In weeds of woe to testify their grief,
their heavy cheer was seen, my death they moan
But all in vain, tears gave me no relief.
God was my guide, Christ was my helper chief,
to whom for aid and comfort sweet I fled.
with whom I thee, though I to world be dead,
Then as before, the Pikemen came again,
Yielding their looks of anguish grief and smart,
their Ensigns val^e, bad them all mirth refrain,
And on they past as men clean out of heart.
then came the shot, who played their pensive part,
No peace was hand, to render any clap,
Thus sorrowed they with tears my great mishap.
But when in clay, my corpse was cloasly shrinde,
A vale of shot rang out my fatal knell.
then every man cast sorrow from his mind,
the Pikes were vauncst, the Holbertes borne right well,
And marshially then bad they me fare well.
the drumbs and fifes then sounded were aloft,
And on they marched in order as they often.
Thus from my grave I bid you all adieu.
Your Sidneis w^^^es remember rich and poor,
Though dead, my life does daily call to you.
Think ye how death knockes daily at life's door,
Provide your lamps of oil prepare you s^o^e,
My tale is told, and I my race have run,
My body earth, my soul the heavens has won.
Virtutis Laus actio.

