A GOLDEN TREATISE OF MENTAIL PRAYER COMPOSED BY YE. BL: FA: PETER DE ALCANTARA
FRANCISCAN FRIAR

AT BRVXELLES By the Widow of Hubert Antony Called Velpius, Ano 1632



Verus seruus Dei F. PETRVS DE ALCANTARA Hisp. Ordinis Minor. de Obserua. S. P.
Franc. Discal. sundor. Proulis. S. Joseph. a qua plures alia dimanarunt, ac P.
Spiritualis B. M. Teresia de Jesus.



A GOLDEN TREATISE OF MENTAL PRAYER, With diverse spiritual rules and
directions, no less profitable then necessary for all sorts of people.

First composed by the venerable and blessed Father, FR. PETER DE ALCANTARA, of
the Seraphicall Order of S. Francis. Beatified the 18. of April. 1622.

Translated into English by G. VV.

To which is prefixed a breife relation of the life, and death of the same
Father written by G. VV. of the same Order and observance.

AT BRVXELLES, By the Widow of HVBERT ANTONE, called Velpius, sworn Printer
of the Court, at the sign of the golden Eagle by the Palace. 1632.

Permissu Superiorum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVELY VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY ELIANOR POWES, etc.
All prosperity in this world, and everlasting glory in the world to come.
MADAM,
Although the greatness of your blood does challenge much respect, yet I know
by experience, that your LADYSHIP thinks virtue to be only and true
nobility; and that to be Gods servant, you esteem it your greatest glory.
This therefore virtuous and religious disposition of yours, being the only
loadstone that draws my affection to love, and honor you, has emboldened
me to present unto your LADYSHIPS veivve, this little treatise of mental
prayer, with the life of the Author, which long since, and alvvayes from
the first time I took it in hand, I intended to shrovvde under the wings of
your protection, but being hindered by some occasions, vvherin holy obedience
has employed me; I could never compass my desires till now. I now therefore
send it to your LADYSHIP desiringe you to accept of it, not for my deserts,
which indeed have been none to claim such a favor, but for the dignity of
the matter of which it treats (though I am afraied made much worse by my
unskillful pen) as also for the sanctity of the Author who made it, and your
LADYSHIP will increase my many obligations toward you, and alvvayes oblige
me to rest and remain.

MADAM, Your honors poor beadsman, GILES VVILLOVGHBY.

A BREIFE RELATION OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE BLESSED FATHER FR. PETER DE
ALCANTARA, FRANCISCAN FRIAR. Written by G. VV. of the same Order and
observance.
THE PROLOGVE.
MIsericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo. Psalm. 88.
I will singe the mercies of our Lord for ever, says that Kingly Prophet
DAVID: And not without cause: for so great and unspeakable, are the
mercie-workes of the almighty, which out of the bowels of his infinite
goodness, he has showed to mankind from the first instant of his creation,
that the toungues of men and Angels are never able to express them.

How wonderful was this benefit; that creatinge man after his own Genesis 1.26.
image and likeness, Magister sent. lib. 2. did. 20.
he would have made him partaker of eternal felicity, and vested with his
original justice, without Gabriel. lib. 2. did. 19. quaest. vnica, art. 2.
death or any passage by misery would have associated him with the company of
Angels, if he had not, by his own default, violated the laws of his
creator? notwithstanding this act of malice, the divine clemency would not
suffer the work of his powerful hands, so to perish: but he according to
the diversity of times, Scotus lib. 4. did. 1. qu. 7. n 2.
always ordained opportune remedies, to reduce wanderinge man to the right way
of his own salvation. Now manifestinge his divine pleasure by the means of
Angels: now sendinge the Patriarchs replenished with his heavenly grace, who
by their good example, might stir them up to piety: then sendinge the
Prophets illuminated with his holy spirit, not only to preach the present
benefits exhibited to mankind, but also to foretell the future incarnation of
the Son of God, with the mystery of his death and passion, by means of
which man should be loosed from the power of Satan, and eased of the heavy
load of his transgressions.

Thus far has that impenetrable abyss of the divine clemency, sweetly
disposed all things, requisite for the sauinge of the soul of man. But if we
will extend our thoughts a little further, and call to mind the great
benefits, still heaped upon man, after the ascension of our blessed Savior, we
shall find them innumerable. Who is not astonished at the vocation of
mankind, that the Apostolical trumpet of a few men, soundinge to humane
ears, the Evangelical truth, through the wholl world, should rouse up
(Religiosi) Ecclesiae pars selectior, and sapientior; siquidem ij sapientiores
ha le^ li sunt, qua^ reliquu^ mortalium vulgus, qui seipsos a mundi co^sortio
segre garunt, vt v^ta^ suam Deo consecrarunt Nazianz ora in laude^ Basi lij
souls making the^ Beati illi certe, ac ter beati, vt qui Dei amore fia
grarunt, atque ob eius amore^ omnia pro nibilo duxeru^t, siquide^ lacr^mas
profuderunt dieque ac nocte in luctu versati sunt, vt aeternam consolationem
adip^scere^tur: carues su^^ fame and siti, and vigilijs confe^eru^t, vt illic
paradisi diliciae, and gaudia ill^s ex iperent. Damascen. in hist. B. Iosaph^t.
happy and thrice happy to forsake all worldly vanities? to betake themselves
to a state of perfection; to sell all they have and give to the poor: to live
in perpetual chastity, and simple obedience: to spend their days in rigorous
penance, watchinge, fasting and prayer, and finally to renounce all the
seeminge pleasures (for Consolati^ mu^di vilis, and ad nibilu^ vtilis, and quod
magis metue^dum est, verae and salubris consolationis impedimentu^. D Ber. in
servir. Natiu sic se habe^t vniuersa sub sole, vt nihil sic in eis vere
iucundu^, omnis siquidem laboris remedium, alterius laboris initi^^ est. Idem
in se^m de primordijs and medijs nouiss. Vide plura apud Hieron. Platu^ de bono
staet. relig. l. 3. cap. 1.
true there are none) which the flatteringe world could afford unto the^.

These things are daily putt in practice by many, who profess the gospel of
Christ. For where Catholic Religion flourishes, we see diverse Monasteries
of men and women, filled with religious souls, who consecrate themselves a
perpetual sacrifice to the almighty.

How many religious do we see honored with Preistly function, (an office
requiringe more then humane Quo non oportet esse p^riorem tali fruente^
sacrificio? quo solari radio non splendidiorem manu^ carnem hanc diuidentem? os
quod igni spiritali repletur, lingua^ quae tremendo nimis sanguine rubescit.
Sic D* Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Mat. And Pope Gelasius writing to Elpidius Bishop,
does excellently set down the great purity required to Preistly function
saying: Sacrosancta Religio quae Catholicam continet disciplinam, tantam sibi
reuerentiam vendicat, vt ad eam quilibet nisi pura conscientia, non aude at
peruenire: nam quomodo ad diuini mysterij consecrationem caelestis spiritus
innocatus adueniat, si sacerdos and qui eam adesse de precetur criminosis
plenus actionibus reprobetur? 1. q. 1 c. SACROSANCTA. Although a wicked Priest
does consecrate and administer the Sacraments truly, yet he sins
greiuiously in co^secratinge, and administratinge vnvvorthily, Sacrificia
impiorum eis ipsi soberunt qui offerunt impie. 1. q. 1. c. PER ISAIAM. necesse
est, vt esse munda studeaet manus, quae diluere sordes c^rat: ne tacta quaeque
deterius inquinet, si sordida ipsa stercoris lutum tenet. Greg. inregefto. l.
1. Epist. 24. and ponitur 1. qu 1 cap. NECESSE EST.
purity and a burden scarcely to be supported by Angels shoulders) executinge
their charge with great integretie of mind, careful of their own, and
zealous of the sauinge of their neighbors souls, who by their holy doctrine
and exemplare lives, preach to the Christian world a reformation: who spare
noe pains or tedious trauells, to propagate the faith of JESUS CHRIST, to
heathens and infidells; who courageously labor in God almighties vineyard,
exposinge their lives for the name of JESUS. Indies both east and west are
vvitnesses of their zealous and heroic spirits, there they sealed the truth of
the gospel with the effusion of their sacred blood. Yea what acts memorable
in the church of God are there, vvherin Hieron. Platus de beno status relig. l.
2. c. 30.
these men have not had a very great stroke. And finally they so well employ,
and multiply those talentes, which the great commander of heaven and earth,
has bestovved upon them here, that assuredly they may expect an eternal
revvard in the Kingedome of heaven hereafter.

But that which is more admirable, to see a multitude of the weaker sex, to
abandon all worldly pleasures: they who in the world might have swoome in
bravery, and have bad all things at their own command; to enclose themselves
in a retired Cloister, there to spend their days in penance, and to consecrate
the very flower of their springinge youth, a sweet smellinge sacrifice to their
celestial spouse CHRIST JESUS. These truly are those that Nuptiae reple^t terr
a^^ virginitas parad^sum. D. Hieron.
fill and beautify the garden of paradise with lillies of purity: these are
the Flos est ille Ecclesiastici germinis, decus atque ornamentu^ gratiae
spiritualis, laeta, indolis, laudis and honoris, opus integrum atque
incorruptum Dei imago respondens, ad sanctimoniam Dn^i, illustrior portio
gregis Christi, gaudet per ipsas, atque in illis largiter floret S. Matris
Ecclesiae gloriosa faecunditas, quantoque plus gloriosa Virginitas numero suo
addit, tanto plus gaudium matris augescit. Cypr de babit. virg. l 4 c. 24
flowers of our holy mother the Catholic Church, which make her glorious and
fruitful. These are they, that make that happy change, amoments fadinge
pleasure, for an immortal crown of glory.

Thus we see perpetual rivers streaminge from the fountain of God almighties
mercy. But let us descend a little further into his abundant charity, and
take notice of his fatherly providence, that in process of declininge times,
when the blood of our redeemer, has oftentimes begun to wax cold in the hearts
of men, he would not suffer it altogether to be extinguished, but according to
variety of times, never ceased to repair his church by the ministry of some
elected servants, whom he sent into this world as second Apostles, who by their
example, and doctrine might draw men out of the mire of their sins, renew
the fervor of our blessed Saviors passion, and reduce collapsed discipline to
her former rigor. Many has he sent for this end, and amongst many this
blessed Saint, S. PETER DE ALCANTARA, a man from his very cradle consecrated to
Evangelical perfection; he was a faithful labourer in our Lords vineyard,
with great fidelity performinge his commanded task, as it will plainly
appear by that which follows in his life.

CHAP. 1. OF THE BIRTH AND EDVCATION, OF BLESSED ALCANTARA, And of his
enteringe into Religion.
THIS blessed Saint was borne at Ciuitas Hispaniae militia ordinis
Alcantarensis clara. Iste ordo prout constat expriuil, illi concess^ an. Dn^i
1174. fuit institutus a Dn^o Gomesio Hernande^ tempore ^erdin^^li 2. Regis, and
approbatus ab Alex. 3. ^^^io 3. and Inno^. 4. ^o^^. qq. Reg. to 1. qu. 4. art.
4*
Norba Caesarea, vulgarly called ALCANTARA, in the year of our Lord 1499. in
the reign of Pope ALEXANDER the sixth, and FERDINANDO Catholic King of
Spain. His Father was called BACHILIER GARAVITO, and his Mother MARIA VILLELA
DE SENABRIA, both of good quality, but especially honored for their virtues.

They brought up their young Son in the fear of God, and sowed in him the
seeds of virtue; they put him to school where, as he profited in learning,
so his obedience toward his parents did likewise increase. Although he was a
child, yet he withdrewe himself from the common sportes of children, and
sorted himself amongst men, whom he saw inclined to devotion. In these his
tender years he addicted himself, to the works of mercy: he applied
himself seriously to learn the Christian doctrine: he often visited churches,
and holy places, he frequented the Sacraments, and continually employed
himself in good works: all which did abundantly presage his future
sanctity, but more confirmed it, by that which followed immediately, for he
was skarce sixtene years of age, when, before he knew, he began to loath the
world, and when the young sparks of his virtues began to break into a flame
of devotion. He opened the doors of his soul to the insirations of the holy
Ghost: and as he excelled his fellow students in science, so he knew that
all Quid profu^rit ea quae age^da sunt scire ei, qui ea ad opus non perd^^it.
D. Chrysostom. h^. 13. ^d Romans
science, was ignorance without the right knowledge of God. Therefore from that
time forward he applied his mind to heavenly wisdom, and busied himself
chiefly to know what should be most acceptable to his sacred Majesty.

About that time, there was a famous and reformed monastery of FRANCISCANS in
the province of S. GABRIEL, three miles from VALENTIA, whether he addressed
himself, there to bring his good desires to a joyful periode. But as he went
alonge toward this place, he came to a great river, called Tiartar, which
without boat, was impossible to be passed over. He seeinge this unexpected
bar, to stop his happy journey, looked about, hopinge to espy some waterman,
who might carry him over, but when he could see none, to give him any
assistance: he cast his eyes to heaven, and with great anxietie lamented this
unhappy hindrance. Behold! upon the sudden (as he himself related) Marianus
in eius vita cap. 1.
he was miraculously tra^sported on the other side of the river, without any
notable motion, that he could perceive.

This miracle was not unlike to that, when the river of Iordane stood still for
the Children of ISRAEL to pass; or when S. PETER walked upon the waves of the
sea: and indeed, it was no small beginning of God almighties many favors,
exhibited to this blessed Saint.

This obstacle being removed, he passed the other part of his way, (the holy
Ghost being his guide) without any difficulty, and at length arrived to his
desired harbor, this solitary monastery, situated amongst great rocks, which
they commonly call Los Manxeredes, where he came to the Fathers, and asked the
habit of S. FRANCIS of them, who did grant it to him with as much charity, as
he begged it with humility.

But when this blessed Saint considered his poor habitation, sequestered from
the company of men, and abstracted from all worldly tumoultes. And when he
saw himself vested in his penitential weed, we may well immagine with what
meditatio^s he spurred himself forward in God almighties service. He spoke to
his own soul these or the like words, behold, thou have now accomplished
thy desire, thou art now atriued to the land of promise, and climed up to the
Haec terr^ mont^o sa, and in sublimi sita quantum a delicijs saeculi vacat
tanto maiores habet delicias spiritus. D Hier. l. ^. Epistolarum. Epist. 8. ad
E^^^^^^.
highest mountain of God almighties favor to mortal man in this vale of
misery (that is) the sacred state of a religious life, where, by how much more
thou art sequestered from the pleasures of the flattering world, the more thou
enioyest the fredome of thy spirit. Thou art now come to the house of God, in
which it is better for the to be an abject then to dwell in the courts of
Princes; all occasions of offendinge thy creator are now taken a way, thy
soul is now sure not to be defiled with the pitch of evil conversation. Thy
company now are Quo nomine appellem escio, homines coelestes an Angelos
terrestres degentes in terris, sed conuersationem habentes in coelis. D.
Bernard. sermon. ad fratres de monte Dei.
terrestrial Angels, who though they live on earth, yet they have their
conversation in heaven, all whose actions incite thee to nothing else but to
aspire unto perfection. Thou find here no snares to entangle thee in worldly
vanities, no flatterers to applaud thee when thou do offend, or any thing
else to with draw thy affection from the Cross of CHRIST. Thy beloved spouse
has brought thee now into this holy desert, to recreat thy soul with his
heavenly consolatio^s Anima a corporeis cupiditatibus libera in aula mentis
possit diuinae vacare sapientiae, vbi omn strepitu terrenarum silente curarum,
in meditationibus sanctis, and in delieijs laetetur aeternis. S. Leo in ser: 8.
de ieiunio 10. mensis, and eleem
here abstracted from all wordly tumoults, it may atte^d only to divine
wisdom and the noise of all temporal cares, being hist and silent, it may
be wholly employed in sacred contemplation, and ravished with eternal
pleasures. God almighty has now wafted thee over this troublesome sea, and
placed thee here, in the quiet harbor of thy salvation, in which state in
respect of thy former, thou art far more sure to In Religione homo viuit
purius, cadit rarius, surgit velocius, incedit cautius, quies cit securius,
irroratur crebrius, purgatur citius, morit^r confide^tius, maneratur copiosius.
Idem. Hom. simile est regnu^ aelorum, homini negotiatori.
fall seldomer, rise sooner, stand more securely, live more sweetly, and dye
more confidently. Go too, I say, why stand thou still? why came thou
hither? Consider thy course habit, and see what penance it exacteth? Look upon
the place, and reflect what spirit it teaches thee? be courageous and make no
delay, thy death is certain, and thy hour uncertain, the judge is at hand, S
Fr* verba exhort. ad fraties.
Alas! the pleasure of this world is short, but the punishment for it
perpetual. A little sufferinge here and infinite glory hereafter. Thus this
new soldiar of CHRIST spent his time, in holy discourses, sometimes of God
almighties majesty, sometimes of his own misery: although his precedent
conversation to Religion was a mirror of perfection, yet he stood not still
in that grace, he had already gotten, but continually aspired to higher, in
which he far excelled his fellow nouices. Two virtues were chiefly eminent in
him: simplicity and purity. He likewise had a perfect oblivion of all wordly
things. He greedily desired, and willingly accepted of the inferior, and
basest employmentes of the monastery. Neither did he esteem it a dishonor to
him to cast himself at the feet of the Friars, but was most willinge to serve
every one at their beck. In this his first year he laid such grounds of
humility, that in his wholl life after he was a rare example, and pattern of
this virtue. Neither when he was promoted to superiority, did he leave of his
humble exercises. Thus goinge from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, his
good example was a burninge lamp to give others light, to immitate his
virtues, that the wholl monastery began every day more and more to flourish
in regulare observance, and in the opinion of the world, to get a great name of
sanctity.

CHAP. II. Of his natural gifts, and of his prudence, and mortification of his
eyes.
HE was an elected vessel, beautified with all the jewel of virtues, and as
his mind was replenished with supernatural gifts, so his body wanted not its
natural grace^. He was of a spare body, but comely, he had a grave and modest
look, his eyes were sparklinge, tokens of the fire of divine love, which was
in his soul invisible to the eye. There was not ore member in that man, which
was not subordinate to the rule of reason. His speech was meek and humble, his
coruersation Angelical. He had an excelent natural wit, joined with a hap
memory: he had likewise a singular good judgment (as appeared in his
government:) he was courageous in goinge through with business which did tendito
God Almighties honor and the good of religion: he was grateful to all,
giuinge to every one their due respect: he was dexterous in his actions,
modest in correctinge: and a peace maker, reconcilinge those who upon any
occasion, had been at iarrs. In his sermons he was hott but mouinge: in
hearing of confessions he was a helper, a counsailer, and a comforter: in his
ordinary speech he was not fawninge, nor bitinge, and his conversation without
any pertinacie: and to conclude all in a few words: he was a man of an other
world, of whom we may justly say as Antou^^e Posseuinus in sa^ro apparatu de
scriptoribus Eccles. tom. 1. de D. Bonaneus.
A LEXANDER HALENSIS said of S. BONAVENTVRE. That he was a man, in whom Adam
seemed not to have sinned. He was a reformer, Prelate, Master, and pattern of
perfection, of the Seraphicall Order of our holy Father S. FRANCIS, who through
so many Provinces, and remote Kingedomes, illustrated this sacred institution;
as an other Apostle preordained by God Almighty for this happy end.

CHAP. III. Of his religious simplicity, and mortification of his eyes.
BUT to descend to particulars, wherein his religious simplicity was
manifested. He was so absorped in God almighty, that he minded nothing of
exterior things. When he was a young brother keepinge the keys of the
pauntrie, for the space of six months, there was in the pauntrie grapes and
pomgranades, which lay so palpably, that none could choose but see the^, but he
for that space neither saw, nor smelt, much less touched them: being asked
why he did not give them unto the brothers, he humbly answered, that he knew
of none that were there. An other time, living four years in an other
cloister, he never took notice of a great tree which stood in the midst of
the court, which was obuious to every ones eye. Being a year in an other
place, and asked what his cell was made of, he answered, he knew not whether it
was of stone, or brick, or vvood. And a chapel which he frequented above
others, yet he knevve neither situation, form, or any ornament which did
belong thereunto. He was wont to say to blessed THERESIA his ghostly child,
that he knevve never a brother in his monastery, but only by his speech.
Moreover he was so mortified in his eyes, that where soever he was, he
knevve no difference in places, no distance of cells, and finally he was a
dead man to all exterior things. Neither was this mortification any
stupiditie of nature, or want of senses, but his continual busyinge his
thoughts upon God almighty, a more noble, and higher object. Who could but
think this chaste child of S. FRANCIS to have made a covenant with his eyes,
not to behold a virgin? and well he might be styled that son of a dove,
whose eyes were vvashed with the milk of innocence. He kept such a
continual guard over his eyes, that he never knevve any woman by her face.
There was a certain noble matron famous for her virtue, who was wont at
PLACENTIA, some times to visit the holy Father, for his spiritual counsel
she meetinge him at ABVLA, saluted him, and expressed to him the difficulties
of her state, he modestly denied, that he ever savve the woman. If ever he
opened his eyes, it was in the quire, though he had so good a memory, that he
knevve most part of the office without book. Being Superior he did
particularly correct this imperfection with severity. Knovvinge, nothing to
be more prejudicial to the soul, then to set open those windows, at
which, does enter the greater part of sin, that does defile the heart of man.

CHAP. IV. With what austeritie and mortification the holy Father lived.
BECAUSE for the most part this holy Father lived in solitary conuentes, most
remote from vvorldly tumoults, or rather heremitages, all his rigourous
penance, could not be taken notice of by any. Neuertheless we will set
down some, which he could not hide from those, with whom he conuersed.

He did vvare for seven years together a hair shirt full of hard knotts, S.
THERESIA affirms that he wore it twenty years.

Besides plates of Iron, and other things vvhervvith he tyranized ever his
tender flesh. His disciplines were so frequent and bloody, that he seemed
rather the trunk of a tree then a human body. He would never cover his
head although it rayned never so fast, or the sun shined never so hott. His
diet was so slender, and mean, that in his youth, and old age he did eat
nothing but brown bread, and the most mustie crusts that he could find. If
sometimes he recreated himself with a few boiled herbs, he would not be so
delicious as to eat them with oil. Being superior he caused as many beans
and pease to be boiled at once, as should serve the convent for seven days
together, which austeritie his subjects most willingly embraced, being glad in
some measure to immitate their chief. But he seasoned his own portion with
ashes, or some ungrateful liquour, least his palate should take pleasure in
his meat.

Mother THERESIA has heard his companions say, that some times he lived eight
days together without any meat or drink, especially when with more violence,
he addicted himself to devotion. For he suffered in his prayers frequent
raptes and ecstasies, of which (says she) I am witness. He never dra^ke wine
but water, though for the infirmity of his stomach it was prescribed to him by
the Physician: but he constantly refused it saying that nothing was so
repugnant to holy poverty, and abstinence, as flesh and wine, the one being
an enemy to chastity, the other to contemplation, both which, as long as he
lived, by Gods grace he would enjoy. I will set down for the satisfaction of
the devout reader the words of ever blessed THERESIA, the glory and
foundresse of the discalsed Carmelites, to whom he was some times ghostly
Father, of whom she confesses to have received much spiritual comfort; whose
authority, by reason of her renouned sanctity, and living at the same time
with him, is without controull. Her words be these. Ex vita B. Theresia cap.
27.
God almighty bereaved us of a man of admirable example, when he took out of
this life, Father PETER OF ALCANTARA, the world it seems could endure no
longer so great perfection, they say that our health is not so good, that now
those times be past, this holy man was of this time, he was fatt in spirit,
as those of other ages, he had also the world under his feet, for though we
do not go barefoote, nor do such austere penance as he did, there are many
things (as I have said else were) to tread down the world with all. And
our Lord teaches them, when he sees such a mind, as he gave in great
measure to this holy man, which I speak of, to continue 47. years together
in such austere penance, as all know. I will declare some part of it, for I
know that it is all true. He told it to me and to an other, from whom he
concealed little, and the cause why he told it me, was the great love which
he bare me, and which our Lord gave him to defend me, and encourage me, in
the time of so great necessity, as that was, which I have spoken of, and
will declare further; it seems to me, that he told me, that he had slept no
more but an hour and half betwixt day and night for the space of 40.
years, and that this was the greatest difficulty he fovvnd in his penance at
the beginning, to overcome his sleep, and for this cause he did alvvayes.
Either kneel or stand, and when he slept it was sitttinge leaninge his head
against a little piece of vvood, which he had driven into the wall, he could
not lie down though he would, for his cell as is known, was no longer
then four foot and an half, in all these years he never did put on his
capuce, how great sunshine or rain soever it was, neither had he any thing
on his feet, nor other garment, but his habit of course cloth, without any
other thing next his skin, and this as straight as could be endured, and a
short cloak of the same upon it, he told me that when it was very cold he did
putt it of, and opened the door and little vvindovve of his cell, that
afterward when he did putt his cloak on again, and shutt his door, he might
give some contentment and recreat his body, which before was frozen with
cold: He did very ordinarily eat but once in three days; and he asked me at
what I maruailed, for it was very possible, for one that accustomed himself
to it. His poverty was extreme, and likewise his mortification in his youth,
etc. With all his sanctity he was very affable, though he used not many
words, if he were not spoken too, for then he was very pleasinge, having
a good understanding. And a little after. His end was like his life
preachinge and admonishinge his Friars. When he savve death dravve nighe, he
said the Psalm: Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi; and kneelinge down
departed. Since our Lord has let me enjoy him more then in his life, giuinge
me advise and counsel in many things I have seen him many times in
exceedinge great glory; the first time he appeared unto me, he said: O happy
penance which did merit such a reward! and many other things. A year before
he died, he appeared to me being absent, and I knevve that he should dye, and
I sent him word being some leagues from hence. When he gave up the ghost, he
appeared to me and said, that he went to rest, I believed it not, I told some
of it, and eight days after the nevves came that he was dead, or rather began
to live for ever. Behold here his austeritie ends with so great glory, he
seemed to comfort me more now, then when he was in this world. Our Lord
told me once, that nothing should be asked in his name, which he would not
hear. I have seen many things fulfilled which I have desired him to ask of
our Lord; he be blessed for ever. Amen. And in the 30. Chapter of her life she
says as flolloweth: Our Lord vouchsafed to remedy a great part of my trouble,
and for that time the vvholl, by bringinge to this place the blessed Father
PETER OF ALCANTARA, of whom I have already made mention, and spoken
something of his penance, for amongst other things, I was certified, that
for 20. years he had worn a cilice of plate continually. He is the author
of certain little books of prayer, which are now much used in the spanish
tongue, for as one, that has exercised it well he vvrote very profitably,
giuinge most excellent rules to those, who addict themselves to prayer. He
observed the first rule of S. FRANCIS with all rigor, and other things
which I have related before. Thus she. And so much shall suffice to speak of,
but part of his rigourous penance, it was his fervent zeal, and love of God,
not strength of body, which made this crabbed way of penance easy to his
heroic spirit: whose example may (though not in so great a measure as he did)
justly move us, to shake of that old and self-love excuse of ours, in saying,
our bodies are weak, when alas! our wills are frozen, and so nice, that we
are afraied to expose our carcass but to a poor trial, the heathen SENECA
will check our indeuotion, who says: Non quia difficilia quaedam sunt, ideo
non audemus, sed quia non audemus, ideo difficilia.
Not because certain things are hard, therefore we dare not do them, but
because we dare not do them, therefore they are hard.

CHAP. V. Of his great purity, and humility.
THE man of God increasinge in his rigorous penance, did not only mortify in
part, but wholly subdued his passions, and made his senses subordinate to the
rule of reason, he suffered nothing to enter into his soul, which might
separate, or in the least kind withdraw his affection from his beloved
spouse, for (as much as was possible for pilgrim man) he enjoyed the spirit of
God; golden peace and divine consolation satt upon his wings of contemplation,
and where others make their bodies masters, he made his a slave unto his
spirit. Hence it came to pass, that many of both sex, drawn with the fragra^t
odor of his virtues, flocked to him, as to an other Apostle, to whose
counsels and admonitions they obeyed, as to a divine oracle.

Upon a time the count ORAPSANE a devout nobleman, came to visit him. And
fallinge into discourse, how much God almighty was moved with the sins of the
world, out of his zeal breaks into these speeches. O Father! what do you
think? what will be come of this wicked world? do you think the divine
justice, can contain it self any longer from revenge? behold how virtue is
oppressed, and sin triumphs? how wilfully do we hoarde up anger against the
day of anger? to which the man of God modestly answered and said, noble Sir.
do not afflict your self, a remedy will easily be found to cure this disease,
the point of the difficulty consists only in you and me, for the general
perdition of mankind, flows from this fountain, that all and every one
dissemblinge or cloakinge their own sins, accuse the wholl, when the wholl can
not be said to sin at all, but particular persons in the wholl. Wherefore men
cry out against the wickedness of the word, that all are naught, and none
that do good, when if they would but look into their own particular, they
should find matter enough of sorrow, and to move them selves to do penance
for their own faults: but now because they blame the wholl, they neglect
their own particulares, and justify themselves with a sottish presumption.
Therefore, noble Sir, let your Lordship, and I mend one a piece, and then a
great part of the world will be amended, we shall appease the angery judge, and
repair a great part of the ruin of mankind by our good example.

When CHARLES the fifth recollected himself in a certain monastery of the
HIERONYMITES, understanding of the sanctity and integrety of this holy
Father, he sent for him, with an intent to make him his ghostly Father. But he
humbly refusinge so great an honor, alleged some reasons, why he thought this
employment not to be fittinge for him. At which denial the Emperor being a
little moved, with anger, said, we charge you, Father, that you would take
care of our soul. He seeinge this sudden alteration of CAESAR, fell down at
the feet of his majesty, and earnestly desired him, to differ the business
to what day or hour he would please to appoint, that in the mean time he
might commend it to God almighty; which the Emperor granted, then he took
his leave of the Emperor, and said, this renouned CAESAR, shall be a sign unto
you, that it is not according to God almighties will, which you have desired,
if I do not return at the appointed time. Then passinge to his former
solitude, as he went, he complained with many sighs and groans, to God
almighty, fearinge by the diuises of Sattan, to be drawn from the embrasinges
of his beloved spouse CHRIST JESUS. He sent up his ferua^t prayers to the
almighty throne, and said these like words: Lord, I have not therefore left
the world, and betaken my self to this holy desert, that now at length my name
should be renowned in a Princes court, and live in honor, that am a poor
FRANCISCAN FRIAR. Why should my ears be troubled with the flatteringes of
courtiers, who came to speak my fault in religion? I confess that this office
may be exercised without sin, but whether it be expedient for my soul, sweet
JESUS, tell me? and when he entered into his cell. Lord, I beseech thee pull me
not from hence, whether thy omnipotent hand has brought me. Here I am safe,
here I am rich; because I enjoy thee who alone can satiate my soul. Alas!
without thee what is the wholl empire? and with thee this poor cell, is a
Kingdom of content. Here let me live: Here let me die. Lord let it please thee
what I wish for, because all is thine, what soever I desire. If thou grantest
me my petition, let this be a sign unto me, that CAESAR molesteth me no more.
So risinge, as being heard, did appear no more before him. Neither did the
Emperor ever solicit him after.

The same request did the illustrious Princess IOHANNA, sister to PHILLIP the
second, Catholic King of Spain, make unto this holy Father, whom he
likewise denied after the same manner. Thus whilst he fled honors, he was
most honored of all, and reverenced of every one.

And what candide synceritie he used, in contemninge proferred honors, men of
no small quality observed, that those who honored him, he would no more
regard their speech then a simple idiot, and would labor to divert them from
that, to some other discourse. He had rather be called a sinner then a holy
man, and he himself would (but without scandal) lay open to the world his
imperfections, under which, his virtues and graces were cloaked. But God the
searcher of secrets, by how much he did strive to hide them, the more he made
his fame to shine in the world, to the astonishment of all. For he was a man
whom God had chosen according to his own heart, by whose industry, and
from whose spiritual loins did spring, many great servants of JESUS
CHRIST, and many renowned martyrs of our holy Order.

CHAP. VI. Of his feruant prayers and raptures, and of his spirit of prophecy.
GOD almighty was always present with him, and he with God. His soul was
like a fyerie furnace, made hott with the fuel of the cross of CHRIST. It was
not in his own power, to contain himself, but what thing soever he either
saw, or heard, which might delight his beloved JESUS, though it were but a
far of, his heart-stringes would begin to tremble, and his vital spirits
leave him, and frequently fall into ecstasy. He was accoustomed for a wholl
hour together, to say his prayers with his arms stretched out in manner of a
cross, sightinge and weepinge, till at last he would be besides himself,
elevated from the ground, and united only to his God. He was oftentimes in this
manner rapt, when he was in the quire at mattins. But his devotion was much
more augme^ted at the altar, when he celebrated the dreadful sacrifice, then
would rivers of tears gush in abundance from his venerable eyes, that would
move the most stony and obdurate heart of any of the standers by, unto
compunction. After mass he would withdraw himself into his cell, where he
has been often heard to have had greuious conflicts with devils: who
oftentimes appearinge in a visible shape, would follow him up and down with a
terrible fury.

In talkinge of God almighty, his soul would be presently inebriated with
divine sweetness, and ascendinge by degrees from one word to an other, as, what
was God incarnated for me? was God made man for me? was God vested with humane
flesh for me? and the like. He would forthwith break into exclamations, and
hurryinge himself into his cell, would for the space of above three hours
together, loose the use of his senses. Marianut in vita B. Alcant. cap. 10.
One day, a brother, that was newely made Priest, practisinge in the garden to
singe mass, when he heard him singe these words of S. JOHN'S gospel. (Et
Verbum caro factum est.) He was elevated into the air two cubits high, and
flewe through four doors with the violence of this motion, at length settinge
himself upon his knees, before the blessed Sacrament for a long space
together remained in ecstasy.

This therefore was ordinary to the friend of God, that when he heard any
thing of the humanity of our blessed Savior, or any devout word of the holy
Scripture, it would cause him raptures. Neither could he help them, though he
did strive much against them, especially in the presence of others, but his
heart would become like meltinge wax in the midst of his bovvells. He was
often in saying the Crucifix, moved with such compassion that his arms a
cross would be rapt, with little clouds glitteringe about his head.

He would some times prophecy, to some the loss of honors, to others sudden
death, to other purgatory. Which would fall out the very day and hour he
told them.

The first time he saw S. THERESIA he told her what contradictions and
afflictions she suffered from her ghostly Fathers, and other spiritual
persons, who would needs persuade her, that she was seduced. And moreover, that
she was to suffer much more, in the same kind. He like wife forteold what
should be success in the Indies.

CHAP. VII. Of his patience.
HE traced the steeps of our blessed Savior, and all his glorious Saints, Quis
Sanctorum sine patientiae coronatus? solus in deliciis Solomon fuit, and ideo
fortaesse corruit. Din. Hieron.
all which did never merit their crowns without carryinge of the cross of
CHRIST.

He was an other patient JOB, in sufferinge the temptations and afflictions,
the infirmity of man is subject unto, he was in a particulare manner loade^
with the heavy burden of them, notwithstanding his feruant spirit,
patiently supported, and victoriously triumphed over all his difficulties
manger all the force of Satan. His frequent combats, his persecutions, his
sickness, his long and tedious trauells, the difficulties he did undergo in
erectinge his province, would take up too much time to relate. He was so
greedy of sufferinge, that he esteemed himself happy, to bare afflictions
for the name of JESUS, saying, that there was no way so sure and easy to
attain unto perfection, as the carryinge of the cross of CHRIST. He would
therefore beg of God almighty that he might never be without some
affliction. Thus did our courageous champion trample upon all his enemies.
Psalm. 90.
He kicked the Aspe and Basiliske, he vvalked upon the Lion and the Draggon,
vvhilest he vanguished all his foes, not so much by resistinge, as by
sufferinge.

CHAP. VIII. Of his charity toward his neighbor.
HIs charity toward his neibour was unspeakable, for this cause he often
visited hospitalls to serve the sick, assistinge them both spiritually and
corporally, and oftentimes miraculously restoringe them to their former health.
After he had made an end of his devotions, the residue of his time he spent, in
comfortinge the afflicted, in cherishing the feable, and finally in any thing
he could immagine, might comfort his neighbors, either corporally or
spiritually, so that innumerable people of all conditions, and sexes
continually flocked unto him for his charitable assistance.

CHAP. IX. Of his poverty.
HE was a rigid obseruer of holy poverty, which in immitation of his patron
S. Franciscus non solum paupertatis commodis libentissime fruebatur, sed etiam
it a honorabat and colebat, quasi rem eximiam and cui nulla humana dignitas
posset co^parari* Itaque vt D. Bonau. scribit, eam in omni sermon modo Matre^,
modo Sponsa^, modo Dominam appellabat, saepe etia^ Reginam, propterea quod in
rege regum eiusque geuitrice, adeo insigniter effulsisset. Hieron: Platus de
bono stat. relig. lib. 2. cap. 3.
S. FRANCIS, he not only loved, but honored so far that he was wont to call
it the Evangelical pearl, vvhervvith he enriched his nevve erected province,
in that luster as the observance was in the infancy of our Seraphicall Order,
from which time, and by whose example, most provinces through the Christian
world have excelled in this particulare point, as much as in their former
splendor. He permitted his brethren to have nothing in their cells but of
mere necessity, and to the preachers he permitted them no more but two or
three books, with the Bible and a crucifix.

He was upon a time asked by S. THERESIA vvhither or no she should found her
Monasteries with rentes and yearly revenues, to which diverse persons of
quality had advised her. He ansvvered, that it was an injury to God the
author of Evangelical counsels, to ask the advice of men touching the
observance of them, or to doubt vvhither or no they were obseruable. And with
all encouraged her to be constant in that feruant desire, she had begun in
embracinge holy poverty. To whose counsel she willingly obeyed. And after
our Lord appeared to her in prayer, and declared, that it was his will that
her Monasteries should be founded in holy poverty. His letter to her I think
it not amissse to set down at large, which follovveth.

A letter of the blessed Father FR. PETER DE ALCANTARA, to the holy Mother
THERESA OF JESUS, who demanded his counsel, whither she should found her
Monasteries with rents or no.
THE holy Ghost give you his grace and love, etc. I received yours, delivered
me by DON GONZALES D'ARANDA. And am amazed, consideringe your zeal, and
piety: in committinge to the direction of learned lawyers, that which is no
vvayes their profession, or belonginge unto them: you should do well to take
their advice concerning the decidinge of a process or of suits in law, and
te^porall affairs, but in that which concerns perfection of life, we ought
to treat only with those who practice the same. For such as the conscience
of every one is, such are his exercises and works. Concerning the
Evangelical counsels, may I demand vvhither they be obseruable or not? For
that the cou^sells of God cannot be but good, neither can the observance thereof
seem difficult, unless to those, who govern themselves according to humane
prudence, having less confidence in God then they ought. For he, who has
given the counsel, will consequently give force and means to accomplish the
same. And if your zeal and fervor dravve you to embrace the counsels of
CHRIST JESUS, observe them with the greatest integrity, and perfection that
possible you can: seeinge they were equally given to both sexes. It can not be,
but the same meritt and reward will be rendered unto you, as to others that
have truly observed them. And if there be seen any want or necessity in the
Monasteries of poor Religious Women, it is because they are poor against
their wills, and not through fault of their vow of poverty, or followinge of
the Evangelical counsels. For I accoumpt not much of their simple poverty,
but of their patient sufferance of the same for the love of God. But I more
esteem of that poverty which is desired, procured, and embraced for the same
love. And if I should think or otherwise determinatly believe, I should not
hold my self a good Catholic. I believe in this, and in all other things
taught by our blessed Savior, and that his counsels are good and profitable,
as proceedinge from God, and though they oblige not to sin, they bind
neuertheless that man to be more perfect that follows the^, then if he had
not undertaken them at all. I hold them poor in spirit, which are poor in
will, as our Savior has said, and my self proved; how be it I believe more
from God the^ of mine own experience, that those, who by the grace of God, are
with all their hearts poor, lead a life most happy as confidinge and hoping
in him alone. His divine Majesty give you light to understand this truth, and
to practice the same. Believe not those that shall tell you the contrary, for
want of light and understanding, or for not having tasted, how sweet our Lord
is to those, that fear and love him, renouncinge for his sake all unnecessary
things of this world, for they are enemies of the Cross of CHRIST, not
beleeuinge the glory which acco^panieth the same. I also pray our Lord to give
you this light, that you be not wantinge in the belief of this truth, so much
manifested. And that you take not counsel, but of the followers of CHRIST
JESUS. Although others think it sufficient if they observe the things they
are bound unto, yet they have not always greater virtue and perfection by
their work. And though the counsel be good, yet that of our blessed Savior
is much better. Who knows what he counsels and gives grace to accomplish
the same: and in the end reward to those who hope in him and not in rents and
goods of the earth.

From Auila this 14. of April 1562.
CHAP. X. Of his confidence in God almighties providence.
HIs admirable confidence in God almighties providence, did accompany his
rigid and Eua^gelicall poverty, and it oftentimes miraculously appeared both
at home and abroad.

Marianus in eius vita. cap. 6.
He lived some times in the convent of Sancta Maria de Rosario, which is
situated in a woody place, by the river Tentairis, six Italian miles remote
from any company, at all times it was hard to come unto by reason Ea est
itineris ad eum ob loci solitudinem, atque viaru^ anfractus difficultas, vt vix
accolis atque assuetis pateat. Gousaga 3. part Chro^. ord. S. Franc. in prou.
sancti losepbi.
the way is very steep and crooked, neuertheless it was a place of great
devotion, whether the inahbitants of the country did much resort; but now by
reason of a great snow, the like was not seen in the memory of man; the
Monastery was so environed on every side, that the Friars could not go out to
get their victuals, neither could any come to them to bring provision. They
cried to heaven to the Father of the poor, that being destitute of all humane
aid, he only out of his infinite mercy would be pleased not to forsake them.
The holy Father desired them to go into the church, and settinge themselves
upon their knees, before the blessed Sacrament, to pray to God that he would
put a remedy to their hard affliction. He with great confidence animated his
Brethren, saying: Be courageous, Brethren, God almighty will not be long,
he will come without delay. He had no sooner uttered these words, but an other
most violent storm of snow fell so fast, that frustrated their hopes of all
humane assistance. But he that contains not his anger long, did not delay to
comfort his afflicted childeren. Behold! a little space after the storm was
over, the porter heard the bell of the gate of the convent to ringe, he went to
open the door, but espied no body, he returned back again, thinking it to be
the wind, that had stirred the bell, or that his fancy seemed to hear the
noise when he heard it not; checkinge himself with foolishnes, that he could
immagine, that it was possible for any to come to the conue^t in so deep a
snow.

Whilst he was thus discoursinge with himself, it range again so hard that
all heard it, notwithstanding it was a great wind. Then retourninge again to
the gate, and openinge it, he found a basket filled full of new white bread,
he looked about to see if he could espy any body, but no creature appeared, for
it was a deep snow, where the footinge of any person could not but appear.
He left the basket, and with joy ran back into the convent, to carry the good
news unto the Friars; who would not believe, until the holy Father,
commanded all the Brothers, to go in manner of processio^, to see what God
almighty had done for his servants: When they came, they found all true, as
the porter had related to the^. But their benefactour did no where visibly
appear. They carried the basked in, and after thankesgiuinge refreshed
themselves, with the bread which the Father of heaven had miraculously bestowed
upon them. Upon which they lived many days, until the extremity of the
season, was past and that they could go out to beg alms according to their
custom.

An other time trauilinge in the extremity of the heat of summer, Mari^^^^
ibidem cap. 7.
upon the mountain vulgarly called Siera Morena, he, with his companion grew
so faint, for want of some thing, to quench their thirst, that they were ready
to sink under the burden of their tedious iourny. He said unto his companion:
Brother, let us betake our selves to prayer the only remedy, to incline the
God of mercy to take compassion upon our misery. Whilst they were upon their
knees at their prayers, from a thicket came runninge out a mad bull, who made
toward them amain, they seeing themselves in this great danger of their
lives, betook themselves to flight, but the bull persued them over hedge and
ditch, hard at their heels, till at last he forced them to a place, where was
a fountain of water, when they came in sight of that, the bull forgettinge his
former fury, stood still like an innocent lamb, he breathed himself a while,
and went an other way. But they admiringe this great miracle of the omnipotent,
that sends his willd beasts to teach the poor, refreshed themselves and went
on their iourny with alacrity, their souls more comforted with this unexpected
benefit of God almighties providence, then their bodies strengthened with the
water which they drunk for their sustenance.

Marianus ibidem.
Having occation to go from De las Lucuas to Del Pico: as he was in his
journey it began to snow, which fell so fast that it was not possible for him
to go forward or backward, so that he was enforced to remain the wholl night
in that extremity of cold and snow. But the fervor of his devotion, wherewith
he implored the divine assistance, caused him to pass over the night without
tediousnes. But that which was more admirable. Behold! in the morninge when it
was day, one might see, that the snow did not so much as touch or wett him,
but it congeled over his head in a miraculouse manner like a canopie, and of
each side too wales of snow frozen in a curious manner, defended him from the
injury of the weather, as though he had been shutt in a beautiful chamber.

These few miracles I have set down collect out of many, which God almighty
has been pleased to work by the means of his glorious servant. Miracula^
voco quicquid ar duu^ aut insolitum supra spe^ ve^ facultate^ mirantis apparet,
quaedam admiratione^ fac^unt, quaedam gratiam magnam beneuolentia^que
concilia^t Aug. de vtil. cred. prope finem If thou should object with
Calvin in praefat. instit. that the miracles of our Saints in the Catholic
Church, are partly fained, partly diabolical. I answer, that the same thing
the Pharisees objected to our blessed Savior, that he cast out devils in
Beelzebub the prince of the devils. More over it is most deuilish to blemish
the integrity of the ancient Fathers and Saints, with such an impudent and
foul aspersion, as those who vvrote the lives of other Saints, as Nycenus of
Taumaturgus, S. Athenasius and S. Hierom, of S. Anthony, Seuerus of S.
Martine, S. Gregory of S. Benet, S. Bernard of S. Malachias, S. Bonauenture of
S. Francis. Whose authority if we should deny no faith or credit is to be
given to any history in the world. Which absurdity none, but men out of
their vvitts, or blinded with malice, will admit S. Augustine confirms
what I say. His words be these: An dicet aliquis ista falsa esse miracula,
nec fuisse facta sed mendaciter scripta, quisquis hoc dicit, si de his rebus
negat, omnino vllis literis esse credendu^, potest etia^ dicere nec Deos vllos
curare mortalia. De ciuit. Dei l. 10. c. 18. Quaeda^ fact a non nisi a
proteruientibus negari possunt, vt sunt miracula facta a Syluestro cora^
Constantino tam in curatione leprae eius, qua^ in disputatione eius contra
Iudaeos: quae facta tanqua^ celeberima mundu^ non latuerant. Scot. in prol. q.
2 (...) 11.
As testimonies, not only of many singular prerogatives of graces exhibited to
this holy Father in his own particular. But also that we admiringe these
strange and unaccustomed manner of God almighties proceedinges with this
blessed man, the truth whereof being confirmed by many approved authors. May
be incited to immitate his virtues whom God has honowred with the grace of
workinge miracles.

CHAP. XI. Of his knowledge in holy Scripture, and of his preachinge.
HE was so well versed in the holy Scripture, that for the most part, he could
repeat it without book, and in explicatinge it, he was so clear, and with
all so mouinge that one might judge his learning, to be rather supernaturally
infused in prayer, then naturally gotten, by the ordinary means of study o
quam vele^^ est ser^^^ sapientiae, and vbi Deus Magister est, quam cito
discitur quod docetur. B. L to ser 1. de Pe (...).
for he quickly learned what he was taught seeinge he had the holy Ghost for
his master. He wrote some spiritual works, wherein he had a special gift of
God almighty, both to direct those who tend unto perfection, in their iourny
toward heaven, as also to inflame their wills to aspire to that eternal
good. In this particulare science, he was chiefly eminent and wrote profitable
and learned tracts of this matter.

He had such a rare gift in preaching: so inuectiue against sin, and withal
so comfortable, to those who were pullinge their feet out of the snare of
vices, that God almighty was pleased to work by his means, many wonderful
effects in the souls of his auditory.

In the city of Abula there was a young gentleman, that was given unto, and as
it were buried in all the sportes and vanities of this wicked world. But
especially in the vild and pernicious love of wanton women. Cominge in his
pomp upon a festival day of that place, by chance met the holy Father, who
when he understood of his corriualls the quality and sanctity of him, went
toward him with others to salute him with great respect, and withal begged
his prayers, but God knows, with what intention, for he still obstinately
remained in his filthy desires. But the holy Father in his sermon touched the
soar of his soul unto the quick (yet not reuealinge any person) in so much,
that the holy Ghost did so work with him, that this prodigal child
understanding the Father was to go away from that place, the next day, made
have, to get pen and ink to write his sins, the next day comes to the
Father, and saluteth him, giuinge him a long The young man out of humility
manifested his sins to the holy Father out of the Sacrament of confession.
scroule of his sinful life, and desires him for the love of God, that he
would vouchsafe to pray for him, that God would have mercy upon his soul, and
that he would not punish him for ever according unto his deserts. The holy
Father received his paper, and promised that he would pray for him. So each
departed their way. But he had scarce turned his back, but the Father
earnestly begged of God almighty his conversion, of which he was presently
sensible: for before he came home, the spirit of God did so inflame him, that
he abiured his former conversation, and loathed the pleasures, that before he
loved so much, and being returned to his house, flunge off his brave
clothes, toare his chain from his neck, and vested himself in mean and
country clothes, without any shame appearinge so to all the world, all
admiringe the sudden change of the right hand of the highest; and as
afterward he lived well, perseueringe to the end, so he dyed happily; he
dispersed his patrimony, amongst the poor, and built many monasteries and
hospitalls, as testimonies of his conversion.

He had such efficacy in his preachinge, that many common Women, drawn with
the sweetness of his spirit, changed their sordid and base manner of living
into holy and pious conversation. Others as well of the nobility, as amongst
the meaner sort of people, renouncing all pleasures for the love of JESUS,
shrouded themselves in cloisters, where they might be secure from the contagion
of worldly vanities. And many consecratinge their virginity to their
celestial spouse, like lillies amongst thorns, perseuered in the open world
amidst the dangers thereof, with immovable constancy.

CHAP. XII. Of his religious zeal and of his death.
THE Reverend esteem of his virtues increased so much, even in his own
Cloister, that there many times (enjoined by obedience) performing the office
of Guardian with great integrety, was at length by the suffrages of all the
Fathers, elected twice Provincial of the province of S. GABRIEL, where he mad
a happy and notable reformation. But after his three years expired, he
betook himself again to his poor heremitage, where he fatted his soul with
sacred contemplation, perseueringe in readinge the ancient Fathers, watchinges,
fastinges, and regulare discipline. But the more he hid himself in these
obscure places, the more the fame of his learning and sainctitie did shine
abroad. And in testimony that God almighty would not have this resplenda^t
light, to be put under a bushel, but to be set upon a candlestick, to give
light to others, to follow his glorious footsteppes, and to the end, that he
might not only enrich his own soul with the treasures of virtue, but also
instruct others, both by his doctrine and examble, to aspire to heaven, the sea
Apostolic did vouchsafe to honor him with a commission, by virtue of which,
he should erect, and found a new province under the title of S. JOSEPH. Which
before his death, he was so happy to see, not only multiplied in number of
conuentes, and religious men (by his great labor and travail) but also to be
perfectly established in regulare observance, and true monastical discipline.

At last, the number of his meritts being complete, his just master, whom he
had served so long with great fidelity, was pleased to call him, to reward
his labors with an eternal crown of glory, and to reap in joy what he had
sowed in tears. He fell sick in the Convent of S. ANDREW DE MONTE ARENO,
where God almighty vouchsafed to let him know the hour of his death. And
before his departure he called his brethren, exhortinge them to perseverance
in that happy course, which they had undertaken for the love of God, and the
sauinge of their own souls. He the^ received upon his knees with abundance
of tears the sacred Viaticum with singular devotion, and a little after, his
infirmity increasinge, he received also the Sacrament of extreme Unction. The
blessed Virgin and S. JOHN (to whom all his life time he was very much
devout) appeared to him, and gave him assurance of his salvation. Which
euer-comfortable news, he no sooner understood, but his heart was ravished
with joy, and his mouth filled with gladness, and out of that abundance of
content breaks out into these words of the Prophet DAVID: Psalm. 112.
Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi: in domum Domini ibimus: I have
rejoiced in those things that are said unto me: we will go into the house of
our Lord. In fine the happy hour being come, he yealded his blessed soul
into the hands of his maker, and by the passage of a temporal death,
travailed to an eternal life the 18. of October, upon the feast of S. LVKE
1562. the 63. year of his age, and the 47. of his entrance into holy Religion.
His body after his death became more beutifull, shininge with great claritie,
and sendinge fourth sweet odours. The people from all parts flocked to behold
this sacred spectacle, and greedy after so rich a prey, clipped pieces of his
habit, which they conserved as holy relics. His body was no sooner in the
grave, but his sepulcher began to be renouned with many Cum puerulus Aethiops
inutilis penitus atque contractus ad illius sepulcra^ ab eius herae vxore
quondam Martini de Friars ac praefati oppidi Arrenarum accolae, adductus esset
eius meritis Deo opt. max. id oper ^^te integrae sospitati restitu^tur. Et
Leonora Gonsalua eiusdem oppidi inquilina a paralisi qua grauissime laborabat
ad eius quoque sepulcrum liberatur. Franc. Gonzaga 3. part Chron. ordinis
Seraphici: Vide plura apud Ioannem de sancta Maria in vita B. Aleant. c. 30.
miracles which for breuity sake I omit to speak of because I would not be
too tedious to the devout reader.

In eius vita cap. 27.
His soul was no sooner out of his body, but presently he appeared to S.
TERESIA, to bring unto her the joyful tidinges of his receiuinge into heaven.
Many times after he appeared to her, and once amongst the rest he said unto
her: O HAPPY PENANCE THAT Opera nostra no^ habent bonitate^ meritoria^ gloriae
ex sua natura, neca nobis sed a Deo. For our works are to be takenin, a
toofeld respect. 1. As they are in there proper nature and dignity. 2. As they
have Gods promise and acceptance. If we consider them in the first sense, so
they do not merit, salvation: if in the second, they do. This I say, to
answer the objection of ignorant protestants, who might take occasion to
carpe at this word (deserved) and who likvvise think that we so dignifie
our works that thereby we think to merit heaven, abstractinge from the
merits of our blessed Saviors passion when it is certain, our doctrine is,
that the chiefest reason of merit is founded in Gods promise, not man's work,
and our works, so to merit, and to be ennobled, chiefly by virtue of there
principal agent our blessed Saviors passion. Conradus Klingius de locis com
l. 1. c 35. Stapelton. controuers. l. 10. c. 12. Bellarm. l. 1. de iustificat.
c. 21. and l. 5. c. 11 cum comuni Doctorum.
DESERVED SVCH A GLORIOUS RECOMPENSE! If the conversion of sinners, and of
greuious sinners, be so pleasinge to almighty God, that the Angels of heaven
do rejoice at it according to S. Bernard Supernas beatorum mansiones attingit
poenitentiae odor (ita vt test ipsa ver^tate) magnum gaudium sit i^ter Angelos
Dei super ^^o pec^^atore poenitentiam agente: g^^dete p^^^itentes, p^sillanimes
conforta^ini: v^bis dico qu^s nuper con^ersos de saeculo, and a vijs vestris
prauis recedentes, excepit mox amaritudo animi poenitentis. Ac velut recentium
adhuc vulnerum dol or nimius excruciat ac perturbat. Securae manus vestrae
distillant myrrhae amaritudinem in salubrem hanc vncti^nem, quia cor contrit
um, and humiliatum Deus non despiciet. D. Bernard. super Cantica sermon. 10. I
say if such a conversion be so pleasinge to God, how glorious may we judge
this holy Fathers penance to be, who from his cradle to his grave, lived
innocently and austerly? so that we may justly say of him as the Church of S.
John, Antra desertiteneris sub annis, ciuium turmas fugiens potisti, (...) leui
saltem maculare vitam, famine posses.
Happy indeed was his penance, that changed sorrows into pleasures:
mourninge into mirth: tears into joys, and a momentarie cross into an
eternal crown. The same blessed THERESIA (as we have said before) affirmed,
that she received more comfort, and consolation from him after his death, then
in time of his life. And that his soul flewe immediately to heaven, without
any passage by purgatory. All these things being well examined, and
verified, by persons, without all exception, worthy of creddit, his holiness,
for the glory of God, honor of the Saint, and benefit of the faithful,
vouchsafed to pronounce him beatified: to the end, that as he had a perfect
fruition of glory, in the Church triumphant, so he should want no praise or
reverence, in the Church militant. He was beatified the 18. of April 1622. and
his office is celebrated in the Conuentes of his order the 19. of October.

FINIS. BENEDICTVS DEVS.
BEATIFICATIO B. P. DE ALCANTARA. Gregorius Papa X V. ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
IN Sede Principis Apostolorum nullis licet nostris suffragantibus meritis a
Domino constituti, pijs fidelium votis, quibus virtutum Dominus in seruis suis
honorificatur, licenter annuimus, eaque fauoribus proseguimur oppart uuis. Cum
itaque instantibus non solum clarae memoriae Philippo III. and charissimo in
Christo filio nostro Pbilippo IV. Hispaniarum Regibus Catholicis, sed etiam
fere omnibus Hispaniae regnis, venerabiles fratres nostri S.R.E. Cardinales
sacris ritibus praeposiii, de mandato nostro causam serui Dei Petri de
Alcantara, Ordinis Min strictioris obseruantiae Discalceatorum nuncupatorum, ac
Prouinciae S. Iosephi eiusdem Ordinis Fundator^, iuxta seriem trium causarum
Palatij Apostolici Auditorum ad effectum canonizationis examinauerint, ac
multis desuper babitis sessionibus, referente dilecto filio nostro Marco
Antonio, tituli S. Eusebij Presbytero Cardinale Gozzadino nuncupato, plenissime
constare de validitate processuum, fama san titatis, fide, puritate,
caeterisque virtutibus non in genere solum, sed etiam in specie, reliquiarum ac
sepulchri veneratione, plurimisque tandem miraculis pronunciauerint,
censuerintque posse nos quandocunque voluerimus, eundem Dei seruum, iuxta
Catholicae Ecclesiae ritum, Sanctum, atque in caelis regnantem declarare,
omnibusque fidelibus solemni canonizatione propouere venerandu^. Praedictus
vero Philippus IV. Rex, and dilecti filij Minister Ceneralis, and Fratres
Ordinis praedicti nobis humiliter supplicari fecerint, vt donec ad
canonizationem dicti Petri deueniatur, idem Petrus Beatus nuncupari ac de eo
tanqnam de Confessore ^o^ Pontifice Missam ac officium vt infra celebrari and
recitari respective possint, indulgere de benignitate Apostolica dignaremur.
Nos supplication ibus huinsmodi incliuati de eorundem Cardinali^^^ consilio, vt
idem Dei seruus Petrus de Alcantara in poster^^^ Beatus nuncupari atque de eo
tanquam de Confessore non Pontifice die 19. October. qua ipsius obitus memoria
celebrabitur vbique terrarum ab vniuersa religione Minorum obseruantium
vtriusque sexus respective Missam celebrari atque officium recitari possint. In
oppido vero de Alcantara illius duecesis vbi natus atque in altero de Arenas
Abulensis diaecesis vbi corpus eiusdem requiescere accepimus, omnibus tam
regularibus quam secularibus Clericis subritu tamen semiduplici idem omnino
liceat. Ac demum in Prouincia praedicta S. Iosephi, cuius author extitit, ab
ipsis dicti Ordinis Discalceatorum fratribus, etiam cum oct^^^^ veluti de
Patrono, officium pariter ac Missa iuxta Breuiarij ac Missalis Romani Rubricas
cele braripossint, Apostolica auctoritaete tenore praesentiam perpetuo
concedimus and indulgemus. No^ obstantibus constitutionibus and ordinationibus
Apostolicis, caeterisque contrarijs qui buscunque. Volumus autem vt
praesenti^^^ transumptis etiam impressis manu alicuius Notarij Publici
subscriptis, and sigllo personae indiguitate Ecclesiastica constitutae munitis
eade^ prorsus fides adhibeatur quae praesentibus adhiberetur si forent exhibiti
velostensae.

Datum Romae apud S. Petr^^^ subannulo Piscatoris die 18. Aprilis 1622.
Pontificatus nost^^ anno secundo.
Copia vera desumpta ex tomo 4. Bullarij Laertij Cherubini impresso Romae an.
1631.

FACVLTAS SVPERIORIS.
LIbrum vere pium Meditationum B. PETRI DE ALCANTARA, Ordinis Fratr. Min. in
linguam Anglicanam a religioso Patre Fr. Aegidio VViloughby, eiusdem Ordinis
Prouinciae nostrae Angl. filio, fideliter translatum, per omnia concordantem
exemplari Latino inuenerunt R R. P P. Theologi, quibus a nobis commissa fuit
eiusdem examinatio, ideoque praelo dignum censui, ad instructionem populi
Christiani, qui in tot controuersijs fidei, his pijs maiorum nostrorum
exercitijs pene destituitur. Habet insuper adiunctam vitam ipsius B. PETRI e
varijs authoribus a praedicto Patre Aegidio collectam, de qua idem sit
iudicium. Dat. in nostra residentia Londini 1. Aprilis 1632.

Fr. IOANNES GENINGES, Minister Prouincialis.

APPROBATIO.
MEditationes hae B. PETRI DE ALCANTARA, in linguam Anglicana^ a Religioso
Patre Fr. Aegidio Willoughby, Ordinis Minoru^ S. FRANCISCI translatae, vti and
vita dicti B. Patris ab eodem auctore ex probatis auctoribus collecta, lucem
videre meretur. Actum hac 10. Aprilis 1632.

HENRICUS CALENVS, S. Theol. Licent. Archipr. Brux. Librorum Censor.

ERRATA.
Page Line. Faults. Corrected. 5 3 teaceth teaches. 11 2 iuspirations
inspirations. 15 17 heart art. 30 7 tumpett trumpett. 30 24 at housand a
thousand. 32 6 theatninges threatninges 32 30 incuruimine incuruemini. 43 17
vvortly worthy. 49 11 cribaret cribraret. 80 20 meditatig meditatinge. 81 9
any my. 81 11 crucifieth crucify. 85 10 transgression transgressions. 131 21
the then. 134 20 medition meditation. 135 15 discouse discourse. 137 19 tutret
turret. 141 6 often felt often is felt. 150 25 ractes acts.

A GOLDEN TREATISE, OF MENTAL PRAYER.
Composed by the Reverend and holy Father FR. PETER DE ALCANTARA, of the
Seraphicall Order of S. Francis.
CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter we will briefly set down the fruit of prayer and
meditation, that men considering the benefit of them, may be incited with a
prompte and more willing mind to frequent these holy exercises.

It is most certain, that the malice of our own hearts, is the principal
cause that hinders us from attaining to our beatitude and everlasting
happiness, because it makes us slovve to godly actions, dull to virtuous
exercises, and suggesteth a greater difficulty in them then there is, which if
it were not, a man might walk without any molestation in the way of virtue,
and at length without labor attain to his desired end. Hence it is, Romans 7.
that the Apostle says: I delight in the law of God acording to the inward
man: but I see another law in my members repugnant to the law of my mind,
and captiuateinge me in the law of sin.

The efficacy of devotion.
This therefore is the prime root and cause of all our miseries, against which
there is no remedy more convenient. and efficacious, then devotion, which
acording to S. THOMAS, is nothing else, but a certain promptitude and
facilitye of the mind to do well. It does exclude from our mind this tedious
difficulty, and makes us with alacritye apply our selfs to virtuous acts.
Therefore not without cause we may term it spiritual food, recreatiue and
heavenly deawe, a pleasant instinct and supernatural affection of the holy
Ghost, which does so roborate and transform the hearts of men, that it does
begett in them a new gust and fealing of spiritual things, and on the contrary
a tedious loathing of worldly vanities.

Daily experience manifests this particular unto us. For we see the souls
of those who arise from profound and devout prayer, to be Strengthened with
admirable resolutions, adorned with new graces, and replenished with firm
purposes of amendment of life, and frequenting pious exercises, they burn with
an ardent desire of serving and loving him with their wholl heart, whom in
their prayer they found the God of all goodness and benignitye, desiring to
suffer any grieuious and burdensome cross whatsoever it be, yea to sheadd
their blood for his sake. To conclude, prayer is a bath, an open place, a bed
of pleasure, wherein the soul recreateth and refreshes her self.

By what means devotion is gotten.
If you ask me, what be the chiefest means to attain unto this heroical
virtue of devotion. I answer with the same Doctor, that it is gotten by
serious meditation and contemplation of heavenly things. For the ruminating
of these in the soul, with a more attentive and profound consideration, does
begett in the will that disposition which we call devotion, which effectually
rouzeth and pricketh a man forward to every good work. For this cause the
exercise of prayer and meditation was frequent and familiar to men of sanctity,
as judging it the easiest means to compass devotion, which although it be but
one only simple virtue, yet it disposes and makes us fit for all others, and
as it were with spurs pricketh us forward to the performance of every good
work.

I call S. BONAVENTVRE to witness what I say: Bonau. in the Med. of the life
of Christ cap. 73.
his words are these. The inestimable virtue of prayer is able to obtain all
good, and remove all hurtful things. If thou will patiently endure adversity;
be a man of prayer: If thou will overcome tribulation and temptations, be a
man of prayer: If thou will tra^ple upon thy perverse inclinatio^s; be a man
of prayer: If thou will know the deceiptes of Satan, and avoid the^; be a
man of prayer. If thou will live joyfully in the work of God, and trace the
way of labor and affliction; be a man of prayer. If thou will exercise thy
self in a spiritual course, and not walk acording to the desires of the
flesh; be a man of prayer. If thou will put to flight thy vain and trifling
fancies; be a man of prayer. If thou will fatt thy soul with holy thoughts,
good desires, fervor, and devotion; be a man of prayer. If thou will
establish thy heart with a manly Spirit, and constant purpose in the service of
God; be a man of prayer. To conclude, if thou will root out vice, and be
endued with virtues; be a man of prayer. In it is received the Unction of the
holy Ghost, which teaceth all things. Also if thou will clime up to the top
of contemplation, and enjoy the sweet embracinges of thy beloved spouse; be a
man of prayer. For by the exercise of prayer, we come to that contemplation
and taste of heavenly things. Thou see, of what great power and virtue,
prayer is. For the Confirmation of all which, omitting the Testimony of holy
Scriptures, let this be an evident proof unto the, that by daily experience,
we hear and see illiterate and simple persons, to have attained the foresaid
and greater things by the virtue of prayer. Thus S. BONAVENTVRE.

I beceech you, can there be found a richer treasure or a more fertile field
desired? Hear an other Doctor no less for Religion and sanctitye, who upon
the same matter says: By prayer the soul is cleansed from sin, replenished
with charity, confirmed in faith, roborated in, and refreshed in Spirit. Prayer
estabilisheth the inward man, pacifieth the heart, knows the truth,
conquereth temptations, expels sorrow, renews the senses, stirs up
languishing virtue, puts to flight tepidity, and skoureth the rust of vices.
In prayer the quick sparkles of celestial desires are incessantly sent forth
from the burning coals of divine love. The privileges of prayer are rare, the
prerogatives admirable. Prayer vnlocketh the gates of Heaven, manifests
divine secrets and always finds free access to the ears of God. I will
add no more, for those things which have already been said, abundantly
express the fruits of this holy exercise.

CHAP. II. Of the matter of prayer.
HAVINGE taken notice of the vtility of prayer and meditation, we will now
declare the matter about which meditation is to be conversant: for seeing it
is ordained to this end, that the soul of him that meditateth, may be excited
to the fear and love of God, and the keeping of his commandments: the
matter of meditation ought to be such, as does next dispose to this end and
scope. And although every creature, and the whole Scripture it self be able
to minister this matter unto us, yet speaking generally, the mysteries of our
holy faith, contained in the Creed, are most efficacious and profitable to
attain unto this end. For these on the one side, co^taine God Almighties
benefittes, the later judgment, the pains of hell, and the glory of
Paradise; all which, like sharp pricks do spur us on to the love and fear
of God: On the other side, they comprehend the life and Passion of our Lord
and Savior, which is the spring and fountain of all our good. These two
things contained in the Apostolical Creed, for the most part yeilde matter of
meditation, and therefore I think prayer and meditation ought chiefly to be
conversant about the^, although every one in particular may have certain
points, which may more specially inflame and excite the soul to the love and
fear of God.

Being therefore persuaded with this reason, that I might the better conduct
young beginners, and untrained soldiars into this way of mental prayer, and
that I might give unto them altogether prepared, and (as it were to little
children) forechowed matter of meditation, I have selected two kinds of
meditatio^s, almost taken out of the mysteries of our faith, the one serving
for the morning, the other for the evening: that as the body is commonly fedd
with two meals; so the soul may be strenthened and nourished with two
spiritual refections, by the meditation and consideration of heavenly things.
Some of these are of the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
others of the mysteries of our faith, as I said before; But those who can not
have the opportunity, to meditate twice a day, after this manner, they may use
them, to wit; they may take to their consideration the 7. former Meditations in
the one week, and the latter in an other week; or they may chiefly insist
upon those of the life and Passion of our Savior: although the other be not to
be neglected, especially in the beginning of a souls conversion, to whom they
are proper, when the fear of God, contrition and horror of sin, is chiefly
to be regarded and sought after.

Here follow the 7. former Meditations.
A Meditation for Monday.
THis day thou shall call to memory thy sins, and shall exercise thy self in
the knowledge of thy self, that on the one side, thou may truly ponder the
greatness of thy offenses, and on the other side, thou may look into thy
baseness, and thy own nothing, and acknowledge that all the good which thou
have, is from God. This consideration will get thee submission of mind, and
true humility the mother of all virtues.

First therefore weigh with thy self, the multitude of the sins of thy former
life, and namely those sins which thou have committed when as yet thou were
not illuminated with the divine splendor to know God Almighty rightly. These
if thou do examine with exquisite diligence, thou will find to be so many
in number, that they will exceed the hairs of thy head: for in this time thou
leadest the life of a heathen, ignorant of the divine power, and as it were
without any knowledge of his sacred Deity.

Then consider how thou have behaved thy self about the ten commaundeme^ts
and the 7. deadly sins, and thou will find, that there is no precept of
Almighty God, which thou have not violated, nor any mortal sin, into which
thou have not fallen, either in thought, word, or deed. After that, call to
mind God Almighties benefittes, which he has bestowed upon thee in the whole
course of thy former life, and see whether thou can give a good account of
them or no.

Tell me I pray the, how thou have consumed the days of thy infancy, thy
youth and the flower of thy manly age? how have thou employed thy 5. exterior
senses, and inward faculties of thy soul, given unto thee by God, only to be
busied about his holy service, and the contemplation of heavenly things, what
have thou turned thine eyes unto, but to behold vanities? what have thine
cares listened after but lies and tales? what has thy tongue uttered but
mnrmuringes, and blasphemous speeches? what has thy taste and feeling been
delighted in, but wanton pleasures? how have thou used the remedy of the holy
Sacraments, given unto thee, as a singular gift? what thanksgiving have thou
restored for so many benefittes which he has heaped upon thee? what alacrity
have thou used to satisfy his holy iuspirations? how have thou spent thy
health of body and natural forces? how have thou dispensed thy goods of
fortune? what good use have thou made of the commodity, and proferred occasions
to live well? what care have thou had of thy neighbors welfare? what works of
mercy, or of bountye, have thou done unto them? what will thou answer in that
terrible day of judgment, when thou must render a severe account of all
these things! o withered tree destinated to eternal flames, except thou do
penance! what excuse will thou then frame, when thou must give an account of
every year, of every month, of every week, of every day, of every moment?

Thirdly consider, those sins, which thou have every day committed, after God
Almighty has illuminated and opened the eyes of thy soul to meditate upon
heavenly things: and thou shall find that the old Adam has yet borne a great
sway in thy actions, and that sinful root to have procreated in the, many and
perverse habits.

Diligently ponder, how ungrateful thou have been to God Almighty, how
unmindful of his benefits, how contrary thou have behaved thy self against
his holy inspirations, how slothful and remiss in his divine service: in
which thou scarce have ever used due alacrity and diligence, or such purity of
intention as it is requisite, nay have thou not served God for worldly
respects and commodity?

Enter into consideration how rigid thou art to thy neighbor, and how
indulgent to thy self? how thou love thy own will, how thou adhearest to
thy sensuality, how chary of thy honor, and of every thing that belongs unto
thee. Weigh well with thy self, how every day thou growest more arrogant, more
ambitious, more vain, more prone to anger, more desperately bent to malice,
more prone to delights and pleasures, more mutable, more unconstant, more
propense to carnal sins, and a greater lover of earthly vanities. Consider
thy inconsta^cy in good, thy indiscretion in words, imprudence in deeds, in
heigh and difficult matters pusillanimity sometimes, and often audacious
temerity.

In the fourth place, after thou have taken notice of the number and order of
thy sins, pause upon them a while in thy mind, and weigh every one in the
balance of due consideration, that thou may perceive with what misery thou
art on every side environed. Which that thou may the better do; consider
these three circumstances in the sins of thy former life. First a against whom
thou have sinned. 2. Why thou have sinned. 3. How thou have sinned. Which if
thou do diligently penetrate, thou will find that thou have offended God,
whose majesty and goodness is immense, who has obliged man unto him with so
many benefits, as there are sands in the sea, or drops of water in the Ocean.

Why have thou sinned, or what violent occasion has enforced thee to any
crime? a little momentary pride: a foul representation of pleasure; some small
commoditye placed in thy sight, and oftentimes, no occation at all, but evil
custom, and mere contempt of God.

But alas how have thou sinned? with such facility, with such notable audacity,
with so little fear and conscience, yea with such security and pleasure, as
though thou hadest to do with no other then a wooden God, who regards not
these sublunary things, neither understands or sees any thing, what is done
upon the face of the earth. Is this the honor due unto his supreme majesty? is
this a remuneration of his benefittes? do thou with such services requite
his whippinges, his buffettinges, and precious blood sheadd upon the Cross for
thy sake? o wicked wretch that have offended so great a majesty, more
miserable, that for so slight a cause, and most deplorable, that thou art not
sensible of thy utter Ruin; that after sin thou fear not damnation, and
so neglectest to do penance.

Moreover it is very profitable, to insist a while upon this consideration, and
that thou esteem thy self nothing, and certainly persuade thy self that thou
have nothing of thy self but sin; all other things to be the gistes of God
Almighties bounty. For it is most evident, that all our good, both of grace
and nature does flow from him: for he is the Author of the grace of
predestination (which is the fountain and original of all others) of the
grace of our vocation, of concomitant and perseuering grace, and of the grace
of everlasting life. What have thou then, that thou can boast of, but sin?
only this nothing thou can attribute to thy self, all other things belong to
God: Whence thou marest clearly and manifestly perceive what he is, and what
thou art, and hence comecture, what diffidence thou ought to have in thy
self, and what confidence in God; to love him, and to glorify thy self in
him, and not in thy self, but so far as his grace does freely operate in thee.

These things being digested with atte^tiue meditation, as much as thou can,
urge thy self, to a contempt of thy self: imagine that thou art like an
empty reed shaken with every blast of wind, without gravity, without virtue,
without constancy, without stabilytie, and finally without any thing. Think
thy self to be a Lazarus four days dead, a stinking and abominable
carcass, swarming with vermin, so filthy that passers by are forced to stop
their nostrels, least they smell such a nastye savor. Believe me, thou heart
more abominable, before God and his holy Saints. Think thy self unworthy
to lift up thine eyes to Heaven; to tread upon the earth, or that the
creatures should serve thee; yea not worthy to eat bread or breath in the air.
Cast thy self with the sinful woman in the Ghospel, at our Blessed Saviors
feet: presenting thy self unto him with a co^fused and blushing countenance,
no otherwise the^ the woman taken in adultery before her husband, and with
inward sorrow, and true compunction, beg pardon of thy sins: that for his
infinite mercy and goodness, he would vouchsafe to receive thee again into his
favor, and that thou may dwell in his house for ever.

A Meditation for Tvvesdaye.
THis day thou shall meditate upon the miseries of the life of man, out of
which consideration, thou will take notice of worldly vanities, and learn how
much the glory of them ought to be despised, seeing they are built upon so
weak a foundation, as our fading life, whose miseries, because they be
innumerable, thou shall take but seven of the principal for thy Meditation.

First therefore consider the shortness of the life of man, being restrained
within the limittes of threescore and ten or fourscore years, whatsoever the
overplus be, it is but labor and sorrow, as the Prophet speaks: Out of this
time, if thou do subtract thy infancy, which time thou liuedst rather the
life of a beast, then a man; the time that thou spendest in sleep, for then
thou art deprived of the use of reason, which only distinguishes man from
other creatures, and thou will find thy life to be far shorter then ever
thou did imagine. This time if thou do compare with the eternity of the
world to come, thou will find it to be less, then a moment. Conjecture then
the foolish madness of the lovers of this world, who that they might enjoy one
only momentary pleasure of this transitory life, do not fear to expose them
selfs to the loss of eternitye.

Then take to thy consideration the uncertainty of this life (which is a second
miferie) for not only it is most short, but the brevity it self is most
uncertain and doubtful. For who is there, that attaineth to the age of three
or four score? how many are extinguished at their very entrane into the
world? how many perish in the flowere of their youth? You know not says
CHRIST, when your Lord is to come: whether in the first watch or 2. or 3. or in
the cock crowing. Which that thou may the better understand, call to mind
especially thy domesticke friends, and other men placed in dignity and
authority, whom inexorable death has at diverse ages (some younger, some older)
suddenly taken out of this world, irritating their vain and
longe-life-promiseing hopes.

Ponder 4. the inconstancy and mutability of this present life, never
continuing in one state. The disposition of the body often changes, not
always enjoying health, but subject to frequent diseases: but if thou reflect
upon the mind, thou shall see that like the troubled Ocean it is tossed up and
down with the boisterous winds of her untamed passions, inordinate appetites,
fluctuatinge cogitations, which upon every occasion do disturb her quiet.
Consider lastly, the instability of the goods of fortune (as they term them)
to how many chances they are obnoxious, never suffering the temporal
substance to stand still in one stay, thereby to make men happy and prosperous;
but like a wheel is turned up side-downe, without any intermission. Consider
also the continual motion of our life, never restinge night nor day, but goes
forward without ceasinge, and every day more and more wastes it self, so that
it may not unfitly be compared to a candle; which by little and little
consumes it self, and when it gives the clearest light, the sooner it
approaches unto its end, also to a flower, which springs up in the morninge,
at noone fades, and at night wholly withers away. Which God Almighty
speakinge by the Prophet ISAIE, of this mutation, excellently shaddoweth in
these words: Omnis caro faenum, and omnis gloria eius quasi flos agri. All
flesh is hay, and all the glory of it is like a flower of the field.

Which words S. HIEROME expoundinge says, if one does rightly consider the
fraylty of the flesh, and that we grow and decrease according to the moments
of hours, never remaininge in one state, and that the very thing we now
speak, do, or write, passes a way as part of our life, he will not doubt to
confess that all flesh is hay, and the glory thereof as a flower, or the
green meadows. He that is now an infant will by and by be a little child,
then presently a young man, growinge to wards his decreped age, through
uncertain seasons, and before he has contented him self in youth, fealeth
old age to come upon him. The beutifull woman which did draw after her wholl
troops of galla^ts in her youth, her face is now fourrowed with deformed
wrincles, and she that before was a pleasure, is now ugly to behold.

Consider 5. how deceiptfull this life is, Hieron. l. 11 Com. in Isa. cap. 40.
(which is the worst condition of all deludinge the lovers of the world with a
miserable blindness) for we think it amiable, when in it self it is ugly: we
think it sweet, when it is full of gall and bitterness: when it is
circumscribed with in the shortest limits, we think it long. When it is full
of misery, we think it so happy, that there is no danger, no hazard that me^
will not expose themselves unto, for the conservation of it, yea with the loss
of eternal glory, when they do not fear to comitt those sins which make
them unworthy of so great felicity.

Consider sixthly, that besides the brevity, and other forementioned
conditions, that small time wherein we live, is subject to innumerable miseries
both spiritual and corporal. That it may well be called a torrent of tears,
and oceane of infinite molestations. S. HIEROME reports how XERXES that
potent king, who over turned mountains, and made bridges over the seas, when
from a high place, he beheald that infinite multitude of men, and his
innumerable army, he wept, to think that not one of those men there present,
should be alive after a hundred years. And presently addinge, o that we could
but ascend unto such a turret, to behold the wholl earth under our feet, then
would I manifest unto thee, the ruins of the world, nation risinge against
nation, and kingedome against kingdom, foam tormented, others slain, some
drowned, others led into captivity. Here marryinge, here mourninge, some
borne, others dyinge, some aboundinge in wealth, others beggige. And not only
the mighty army of XERXES but all the men of the world, in a short space to be
turned to dust and ashes.

Take notice a little, of the labors and infirmities of the body, the
cogitations and passions of the mind: the diverse dangers in every, state and
all seasons threatninge the ruin of man: and thou will every day, more clearly
understand the miseries of this life, that when thou see, what is to be hoped
for in this world, thou may with a noble courrage contemn it.

The last of all these miseries, is death, both in respect of soul or body, a
thing most terrible: for in this moment the body is disrobed of all the
things, in this world. And the soul in this point receives the joyful or
fearful sentence of eternity.

These things well considered, thou will be instructed how short and miserable
the glory of this world is, and how it ought to be hated and despised of thee.

A Meditation for VVeddensday.
THis day thou shall meditate on death: the consideration of which is very
profitable to attain unto true wisdom, to beat down sin; and to excite
men timely to cast up their accounts which they are to make in the latter day.

Consider first the uncertainty of that hour vvherin death is to seize upon
thee, thou know not the day, nor the place, nor the state vvher in it shall
find thee: only thou beleeuest that thou must die, for other things thou art
wholy ignorant of; except that it oftentimes sets upon a man when he
little dreameth of it, and thinks it to be furthest of.

Consider secondly, that greiuious separation, which shall be at the point of
death, not only from every thing of this present life, vvherin thou tookest
content, but also betwixt the soul and body, whose society was most an
ancient, most louinge and dear. If a man takes it greiuiously to be banished,
to be thrust out of his native Soil, and to be deprived of that air vvherin
he first breathed, although he should carry all others, his dearest things
with him, how far more bitterly would he take that general exile, vvherin
he must be vveaned from all vvorldly things, his house, his means, his
father, his mother, his children, his friends, uncertain whether he him self
must go. Then shall he be deprived of the light and the commerce of all humane
creatures?

If the ox when he is disioyned from his fellow with whom he was wont
in the same yoke to be coupled, with bellovvinge does express his sorrovve,
what sobbs, what sights vvilt thou fetch, when thou shall perceive thy self
to be violently pulled from these thy confederats.

Consider also that anxiety vvhervvith the mind of the dyinge is tormented,
when abstracted from al corporal business, he only thinks what shall become
of his body, and what shall betyde his soul, how his body must be cast
seven foot into the earth, to be eaten of worms; and what will become of
his soul, where it is to remain, he is altogether uncertain: which
cogitation does surely much trouble the mind of him that dies, when he
certainly knovveth there is heaven or hell to be expected, and he at equal
distance from them both, neither can he tell which of these two contraries
will fall to his share.

An other no less affliction follows, that presently he must give a strict
account of all his forpassed life, to the eternal judge, which men of great
sanctity were wont to fear, whhen ARSENIVS in the last point of life, was seen
of his disciples to weep and tremble, they asked him why he feared death he
answered. Simon Metaph in vita eius to. 4. apud Surium.
Reuer a filioli, metus hic quo me videtis affici nunquam omnino a me recessit
ex quo factus sum Monachus. Indeed my children the fear wherewith ye see me
now afflicted, has never quite left me from the time I was first made a Monk.

Then all the sins of a man's former life come rushinge into his memory,
representinge themselves unto him, as it were in battle array, to destroy him,
but especially his greiuious sins wherein he took greatest delight, are
continually present to his fancy, which do so torment him that they drive him
into a dangerous despair of his salvation: and the remembrance of those
pleasures, which before were grateful, are now most bitter unto him. That the
wise man says true: Proverb. 23.
Ne intunaris vinum quando flauescit cum splenduerit in vitro color eius
ingreditur blande, and in nouissimo mordebit vt coluber, and sicut regulus
venena diffundet: Behold not wine when it waxes yelowe, when the color thereof
shall shine in the glass: it goes in pleasantly, but in the end, it will bite
like a snake and as a basiliske it spreads abroad his poisons.

Such a poisoned cup the enemy of mankind presents to the lovers of the
world to drink. Such is the liquour of the outward gilded cup of Babylon.

Wicked man saying himself environed with so many accusers, begins then to
fear the success of his latter judgment, and to bewail himself with bitter
outcries, o miserable and unhappy man that have lived thus long in darkness,
and vvalked in the footstepps of iniquity, what shall now become of me? if
S. PAVLE says such as a man sows, Gal. 6.
such he shall reap. I that have sowed nothing else but the works of the
flesh, what should I expect but corruption?

If S. JOHN says, that no unclean thing shall enter into that heavenly
city, which is paued with burnished gold, what part shall I have therein,
that am defiled with all kind of luxury.

Then follow the Sacraments of the Church, Confession, Communion, extreme
Unction, which are the last helps of our holy Mother the Catholic Church, to
succor his dyinge soul.

From all these foresaid circumstances, thou may gather with what anxietie,
a wicked man is oppressed at the hour of his departure. Then he will wish that
he had led a better life, and what great austeritie he would use, if longer
time might be permitted to him. Then would he vehemently implore the divine
assistance, but the greatness of his infirmity, and the panges of death
approachinge will not suffer him, which will be so great that he shall scarce
be able to turn his thoughts upon God.

Behold after these, the Symtomes of this last infirmity forru^ners of death,
and harbengers of thy last end, which certainly in themselves are horrible, and
to the beholders terrible. The stomach swells, the speech fails, the feet
begin to die, the knees wax cold, the nostrells fall, the eyes sinck, the
face waxes pale, the tongue can no longer perform its office, finally the
striuinge of the soul goinge out of the body, disturbeth all the senses, and
leaves them wholly without vigor.

But who is able to express the anguish of the soul, which is far greater
for then it is in a mighty agony, both in regard of the doubtful event of
her salvation: and of the strict accoumpt she is presently to make of the deeds
of her wholl life: as also because she naturally loves the body, she can not
be separated from it but with great affliction, especially knowinge not what
shall become of her.

Having well contemplated the soul departinge the body, thou must yet make
two iournies more: one in accompaninge the body to the grave, the other in
followinge the soul to the decidinge of her cause. And thou shall see the
event of both. Mark therefore, the dead carcas how they prepare a windinge
sheet for it. What expedition they use to carry it out of the house. Consider
the solemnity and rites where with it is carried to the grave. How the bells
ringe, and every one inquire of the dead. The office of the church also, the
prayers of the standers by, the doleful tune of the church, while the body is
carried to the grave and buried. The tears of friends and kindred, and all
those ceremonies which are wont to be performed about the dead.

Leauinge the body under the earth, accompany the soul passinge to a new and
unknown region, where she expects the sentence of the eternal judge.
Immagine with thy self that thou art present at this tribunal, and the wholl
court of heaven, waitinge with deep silence, and great attention the event and
sentence of this judgment, here must be given a strict account of all
receiuinges and disbursmentes. I say account, of thy life, of thy goods, of thy
family, of the divine inspirations, of the means and occasions to live well,
and finally of the blood of JESUS CHRIST, and the use of his Sacraments, and
according as his account is, so the sentence shall be pronounced.

A Meditation for Thursday.
THis day thou shall meditate upon the latter judgment, to the end that thou
may stir up in thy soul, two principal effects, which every Christian
soul ought to have, to wit, the fear of God and hatred of sin.

Place therefore first before thine eyes, how terrible that day will be, wherein
all the litigious causes of the sons of Adam shall be decided, and a final end
put to the processes of our wholl life, and what shall be ordained of those for
all eternity, shall be publicly pronounced to the veiwe of the wholl world.

This day comprehends in it, all the days of all ages, past, present; and to
come. And exacteth a severe account of all the actions of all men, powringe out
all the fury upon men, heaped up together from forepassed ages; because then
the torrent of God Almighties vengeance, shall ouerflowe beyond its limits,
rushinge with a greater violence, by how much more it was the longer detained,
and at once shall ouerwhelme all Iniquity from the creation of the world.

Consider secondly the dreadful signs which shall go before this day. For
our Savior says: Luc. 21.
Erunt signa in sole and luna and stellis. And all creatures of heaven and
earth shall tremble, understanding their ruin to be at hand. Men also, as
our Savior says, worn and withered a way perceiuinge the horrible raginge of
the sea: and they themselves scarce a hears breadth distant from death.
Seeinge also the mighty risinges, and inundations of the water; and by these
coniecturinge the calamities and misery, these prodigious signs threate^ to
the world: will be amazed with such a horror, that they will be without life,
without voice, without color, or human shape: they will be dead before they
die, dreadinge their damnation before the sentence be pronounced, immagininge
the future pain, by their present distemper. Then every one out of exceedinge
fear, will be so solicitous of himself, that he will nothing regard others
whosoever they be, parents, or husbands, or wifs, or friends or companions.

Imagine thirdly, the universal deluge of fire, which shall go before this
judgment: that dreadful noise of the tumpett, which one of the Archangels
shall blow; wherewith all the people of the wholl world shall be sommoned
together, in one place making their appearance before the judgment seat: and
last of all that dreadful Majesty; the supreme judge of the quick and dead,
shall assume to him self upon this tribunal.

Fourthly consider what exact account shall be required of every one; Holy JOB
says: Vere scio quod ita est quod non iustificetur bomo compositus Deo. Si
voluerit contendere cum eo, non poterit respondere vnum pro mill. Indeed I
know it is so, and that man cannot be justified compared with God if he will
contend with him he cannot answer him one for at housand. What then shall
become of man when God shall begin to handle him according to rigor of his
justice? when he shall speak to his conscience inwardly?

O wicked and perverse man, what have thou seen in me, that out of the height
of impiety, despisinge me, thou should join with my enemies? I have created
thee according to mine own Image and likeness; I have illuminated thee with
the light of faith: I have seasoned thee in the Christian faith from thy
infancy: I have redeemed thee with my own blood; for thy sake I have fasted,
watched, prayed, undergone tedious iournies, sweat blood, and endured many
more miseries in the course of my life; for the love of thee, I have suffered
persecutions, injuries, blasphemies, and the very Cross it self. This Cross
is my witness, these nails are my witnesses, these wounds are my witnesses,
which thou see imprinted in my hands and feet; to conclude heaven and earth
that did behold my passion are my witnesses. How I have drawn thy soul. How
I have redeemed thee with the ransom of my precious blood.

How have thou esteemed this precious margarite, bought by me with an
inestimable price. O generation of vipers, why have thou chosen to serve my
enemy with a great deal of pain, and neglected thy duty toward me thy
creator and redeemer which thou might have performed with a great deal of
pleasure. I have called thee and thou would not answer to my vocation: I
have knocked at the door of thy heart; and thou have refused me entrance. I
have stretched my arms upon the Cross, and thou have not regarded me, thou
despisedst my counsels, promises and theatninges. Pronounce therefore o ye
Angels, the sentence and be judges betwixt me and my vine. Numquid amplius
aliquid facere potui vineae meae quod non feci? Isai. 5.
What could I do any thing more to my vine that I have not done?

What will the reprobate and scoffers at divine mysteries answer? they that
have hished at virtue, derided simplicity, and observed better the laws of
the world then of God? they that have stopped their ears at the voice of God?
they who have contemned his divine inspirations? they who have been rebellious
against his comandements, and ingreatefull for his benefitts? What will those
libertins say, who lettinge themselves loose to all vices, have lived as if
there were no God at all, or that he did not regard the things that are done
below? What will those say, who have followed their commodities, gust and
pleasure for a law. Quid facietis in die visitationis and calamitatis de long
venientis? ad cuius confugietis auxilium? and vbi derelinquetis gloriam vestram
vt non incuruimine sub vinculo and cum interfectis cadatis. What will ye do
in the day of visitation and of calamity cominge from far? to whose help will
ye flee, and where will yea leave your glory, that ye be not bowed under the
bond, and fall with the slain.

Fifthly consider, that terrible sentence, which after judgment, the supreme
judge pronounces against the wicked, which he will thunder out with such a
dreadful noise, that at the sound thereof the ears of the standers by will
ringe, as the Prophet ESAIAS says: Labia eius repleta sunt indignatione, and
lingua eius quasi ignis deuorans. Esa. 30.
His lips are filled with indignation, and his tongue as a deuouringe fire.
For what flames can be so ardent as those words: Discedite a me maledicti in
ignem aeternum, qui paratus est Diabolo and Angelis eius. Go from me o yea
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Diuill and his Angels. Every
word of which sentence is full of bitter torment. For who is able to comprehend
what this separation is, what curse, what fire, what society, and finally what
eternity to which the wicked are adjudged by force of this sentence?

A Meditation for Friday.
THis day thou shall meditate upon the torments of hell, that duly ponderinge
them, thou may have a more awe of God Almighty, and a greater hatred of
sin. D. Bonau. in Fas. cap. 3.
S. BONAVENTVRE teaches that these torments are to be considered according to
certain similitudes set down by holy men, concerning this matter. Wherefore
it will not be beside our purpose (as the same Doctor in the same place says)
to imagine hell, a horrible confused CHAOS, a lake under the earth, a deep
fyery dungeon, or as a spacious city, dark and terrible, burninge with
obscure and fearful fire; filled with waylinges, howlinges, weepinge for the
inexplicable pains.

In this miserable and unhappy place are two kinds of torments, poena sensus,
and poena damni, the punishment of sense, and the punishment of loss of God
Almighty.

Consider that there is no outward, or inward sense of the damned, which is not
afflicted with a proper torment; for as the damned in all their members and
senses have offended God, vsinge them as instruments and weapons whereby,
neglectinge the Society and law of God, they served sin. So the divine
justice has ordained, that every sense according to their desert, should be
tormented with a proper punishment, the wanton and lascivious eyes, shall be
tortured, with the hydious aspect of diuils. The ears which were open tolyes,
detractions, and other impurities; shall ringe with unwonted clamours,
outcries and blasphemies. The noses which were delighted with sweet odours,
shall be poysned with an intolerable stinck. The taste which was glutted with
dainty fare, shall be tormented with intolerable hunger and thirst. The tongue
which uttered detractions and murmuringes, shall drink the gall of dragons.
The wanton which gave consent to their brutish desires shall be frozen with
extreme cold and as holy JOB says: Job 24.
Ab aquis niuium transibit ad colorem nimium: From the waters of snow they
shall pass to the extremity of heat.

The interior senses also shall not want their torments, the imagination
shall be tormented with the apprehension of present pains, the memory with the
calling to mind of fore-passed pleasures, the understanding with the fear
of future greifs, the will with an ineredible hatred and raginge toward God.

There as S. GREGORY says shall be, In illa Euangil. vbi erit fletus and
stridor dentium.
intolerable cold unquenchable fire, a never dyinge worm, a stinch which none
is able to endure, horred darkness, greuious whippinges, vizards of diuils,
confusion of sinners, and desperation of al good. Tell me I pray thee could
thou endure on little moment the least part of al these torments? surely it
would be very greuious, if not intolerable for thee. What the^ will it be to
suffer this wholl inundation of evils, at one time in all thy members and
senses, external, and internal, not one or a thousand nights, but for all
eternity? What sense, what tongue, what mind of man is able to conceive or
express these things?

Neither are these the greatest torments the damned suffer. There remains yet
a more greuious, which the divines do call the punishment of loss, which
consists in the perpetual privation of the beatificall vision of God and his
Saints, and of all that glorious and blessed Society. For that is the
greatest torment, that depriueth man of the most excellent good. Seeinge
therefore that God is that effectual and cheifest good of all goods, to be
deprived of him, must needs be the greatest of all evils.

These are the general torments of the damned; besides these, there are other
particular torments, wherewith every one according to their sins are
afflicted. The proud, the envious, the covetous, the luxurious, and other
vicious have their peculiar torments; the measure of pain there, shall be
proportionable to their pleasure here, confusion there proportionable to their
glory and presumption here: poverty and want, to plenty, hunger and thirst, to
gluttony and to former delights.

To all these aforesaid torments, eternity is yet to be added, which is as it
were the seal and key of all the rest; for if at length, they should have an
end, they were some way tolerable. That which is restrained to a certain time
can not be so insufferable, but this punishment is everlasting, without
solace, without relaxation, without diminution; where remains no hope of an
end of their torments, or tormentours, or themselves that suffer them, but is,
as it were a perpetual and irreuocable banish me^t, never to be recalled,
which is a thing of importance to be noted. That the mind may be stirred up
thereby, to that sauinge fear and love of God.

From this eternity of torments proceeds that great hatred wherewith they are
ince^sed against God. Hence proceed those horrible blasphemies and curses which
with their impure mouths they rail at God, saying. Cursed be God which has
created us, and has condemned us to an everlasting death, which does so
oppress and torments us that notwithstanding never kills. Cursed be his
power, which does so greuiously afflict us. Cursed be his wisdom that has
laid open all our wickedness. Cursed be his justice that has exacted eternal
punishment for temporal sins. Cursed be his Cross which has not benefited
us. Cursed be his blood that was shed, seeinge it requires revenge against us.
Cursed be the Mother of God, who although she be pious and propitious to all,
yet notwithstanding has showed herself to us cruel and unmerciful. Cursed
be all the Saints of God raigninge with CHRIST, and reioyceinge at our
miseries.

These are the hymns, this is that harsh melody, which the damned do
continually iarr, railinge at the almighty with detested blasphemies for all
eternity.

A Meditation for Saturday.
THis day thou shall meditate upon the glory of the Saints of God, which may
more eagerly inflame thy soul, to contemn the vanities of this world, and
aspire to that eternal felicity.

To the end thou may get a better knowledge and gust of this inestimable
glory. Consider these five things. First the excellency of the place. Secondly
the joy of that society. Thirdly the vision of God. Forthly the glory of their
bodies. Fifthly the complete perfection of all abundant good.

In the excellency of the place, take notice of the admirable and wonderful
spaciousnes of it; in approved authors thou read, that the least of the
fixed stars of heaven, is bigger then the wholl earth, and some of them do
exceed the earth two or three hundred times in bigness. Then cast up thine cies
to heaven and consider the innumerable multitude of them in the firmament, and
thou shall see a great deal of void space, where many more may be placed, how
can thou then but be astonished at the greatness of so rare a fabric?

Then consider the beutie of that place, which no tongue is able to express,
for if God Almighty in this place of banishment and vale of misery, has made
many things of admirable and comely hue: of what great beuty, and how much
odorned do thou think that place to be: which God would have to be the
ordinary seat of his glory: the Palace of his Majesty: the mansion of the
elect, and the Paradise of all pleasure?

After the beuty of the place, consider the Nobility of the Inhabitants, whose
number, sanctity, riches, and glory, are far beyound our imagination. S. JOHN
says the multitude are so great that they are innumerable. S. DIONYSIVS
affirms that the multitude of Angels do far exceed the number of sublunary
creatures. Whom S. THOMAS followinge thinks, that as the heavens by many
degrees exceed the bigness of the earth, being but as it were a point of them:
so proportionably the glorious Spirits, therein contained, do surpass all
earthly things. What can be thought more admirable? assuredly this well
pondered would make a man loose himself in the abyss of God Almighties
goodness.

Yea without comparison every one of these blessed Spirits is far more
beutifull to the eye then all this visible world. O what would it be to
contemplate the incomprehensible number of so rare and glorious Spirits? and to
understand their several offices and perfections? how the Angels bring
messages? how the Archangels Minister? how the Principalities triumph? how the
Powers rejoice? how the Dominations bare sway? how the Virtues shine? how the
Thrones do glitter? how the Cherubins do illuminate? how the Seraphins do
burn with love? and finally how all with one unanimous consent do praise
Almighty God.

If the conversation and fellowship of good men be so delightful, what
pleasure will it be, to be assotiated to so great a multitude of Saints? to be
conversant with the Apostles? to talk with the Prophets? to discourse with
Martyrs? and to enjoy the blessed familiarity of all the elect? O but what will
it be to enjoy his presence whom the morninge stars do magnify? whose
beutie the sun and moon admire? before whom the holy Angels and all the
celestial Spirits do prostrate themselves. That sumum bonum, that infinite
good, which in it self comprehends all good whatsoever, o what content will
the heart of man feale to behold him, who is one and all. Who although he be
most simple without composition, yet contains in himself the perfections of
all things created. What can the heart of man desire greater?

If it were so much to see and hear King SOLOMON, that the Queen of SABA
cominge from far remote parts, moved with his great wisdom, should say:
Beati viri tui and beati serui tui, 3. Reg. 10.
hi qui stant coram te semper and audiunt sapientiam tuam: Happy are thy men
and happy are thy servants, those who stand before thee always and hear thy
wisdom. What would it be to behold that true SOLOMON? that eternal
wisdom? that immense majesty? that inestimable beutie? that infinite
goodness? and which is more to enjoy him for all eternity?

This is the essential and truest glory of the Saints: this is the last end
and center of all our wishes. Consider more-ouer the glory of their bodies,
which shall be beutified with these four gifts, subtilitie, agilitie,
impassibilitie and claritie. Which will be so great, that every one of the
elect (as our blessed Savior says) shall glitter like the sun in the kingdom
of his father.

If one only sun does so rejoice and illuminate this universe. What do thou
think, so many brighter suns will do which shall there shine?

What should I speak of other joys which there shall be? health without
infirmity: liberty without violence: beutie without deformity: immortality
without corruption: abundance without want: rest without trouble: security
without fear: riches without poverty: joy without sorrow: honor without
contradiction. There as S. AUGUSTINE says, D. Aug. l. 22. de ciuit. Dei cap.
30.
shall be true glory when every one shall be commended without error or flattery.
True honor shall be denied to none that is wortly of it, and it shall be given to
none unworthy, neither shall any unworthy attempt it, there, where none shall be
permitted but the worthy. There shall be true peace, where they shall suffer no
contradiction from themselves or others: the reward of virtue shall be he which
gave virtue. And he has promised to give himself. Then which, better or
greater nothing can be. For what other thing is it that he spoke by the
Prophet: Ero illorum Deus, and ipsi erunt mihi plebs: Leui. 26.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. If I do not who is it that
can satiate their souls? I will be that good which can possibly be desired of
man. Their life, their peace, their honor. For so is that understood which the
Apostle speaks: 1. Cor. 18.
Vt sit Deus in omnibus. That God be in all. He shall be the end of all our
desires, which shall be contemplated without end, shall be loved without
tediousnes, shall be praised without ceasinge.

The place of the saints, if thou do behold the spaciousnes of it, it shall be
most ample, if the beutie, most delicious, if the splendor, most exceeding
bright. There shall be admirable delightful society, no vicissitude oftimes, the
day shall not succeed the night, nor the night the day, but all time shall be
there a like. There shall be one perpetual spring, which the holy Ghost, with a
wonderful temper shall always make green and flourishing, there shall all
celebrate everlasting holy days, reioyeing with unspeakable gladness, there
shall all sound their instruments of music and singe praises to him, by whose
power they live and reign for all eternity.

O celestial city, secure habitation, palace flowinge with all delights,
people without murmuring, quiet Citizans, men without poverty. O that I may at
length enjoy thee. O that the days of my banishment were ended. When will
that joyful day come? When shall I go out of this mortallity? When shall I
come and appear before thy face o God.

A Meditation for Sunday.
THis day thou shall spend, in recogitating God Almighty his benefitts, that
thou may be grateful to him for the same, and thy heart inflamed with the
love of him, that has heaped so many favors upon thee. Which seeing they
be innumerable, thou shall take four of the chiefest to thy consideration,
which are the benefitts of thy Creation, Preservation, Redemption, and
Vocation, besides particular benefitts specially bestowed upon thee.

Touching the benefitt of thy creation, examine diligently what thou were
before, what God has given thee when thou hadest no precedent meritts. Behold
thy comely body well composed of its members and senses: Look upon thy noble
soul, beutified with these excellent faculties, the understanding, will, and
memory.

Remember that when he gave thee thy soul, he gave thee all things, seeing
there is no perfection in any creature, which is not found more excellent in
the soul of man. Hence it manifestly follows, that when God bestowed this
great benefitt upon thee, he with it bestowed what else soever thou have.

Concerning the benefitt of thy conservation and preservation, consider that
all thy being depends upon the divine providence and disposure, without which
thou can not move a foot, or subsist the least moment of time. More-ouer for
thy use he has created the wholl universal world, and all things therein
contained; the earth, the sea, birds, fishes, beasts, plants, nay the very
Angels themselves he has ordained to do thee service. Consider thy health,
the strength of limes, and thy very life it self, which thou enioyest, to be
the great benefitts of God Almighty, who, by daily nourishment and other
temporal helps, co^serueth all these in their proper vigor. Observe the
miseries and tribulatio^s unto which other mortal men are subject; into which,
as others thou had easily fallen, had not the divine goodness protected thee

In the benefitt of thy Redemption: consider the abundant good both in
quantity and quality, which he has purchased to thee by it.

Then call to mind the bitterness of his torments, which he suffered in soul
and body to ease thee; and that the acknowledgme^t of these favors may take a
greater impression in thee, in the mystery of his passion take notice of these
four things. First, who it is that suffers, secondly what he suffered,
thirdly for whom he suffered, fourthly why he suffered.

He that suffered, was God, what he suffered, wear the most greuious torments,
and such that never any mortal man did endure the like.

For whom? for most ungrateful creatures, cursed and worthy of hell fire.

Why? not for any comoditie or profitt of his own, or that we had merited so
much by our precedent meritts. But only moved to it by his infinite love and
bounty toward us.

Co^cerninge the benefit of thy vocation, consider the grace he gave thee,
when he infused into thee, the Christian faith, by the receiving of Baptism
and other Sacraments: when he did enrolle thee in the book of his eternity,
amongst faithful souls. If after thy first vocation, when by sin thou
hadest lost the innocence of baptism, he has drawn thee again out of the
mire of thy own corruption, restored thee to grace and brought thee back
again into the way of thy own salutation: What thanks giuinge ought thou
to render unto him, for so great a benefit? How great was his mercy to thee,
that with longanimitie he expected so many years? that he permitted thee to
spend thy days in so great impuritie of wickedness? that he has often visited
thee with good and holy inspirations? that he did not cut of the thread of thy
perverse life, as he served others in the same place? To conclude, that he
called thee with such efficacious grace, that he restored thee from death to
life, and opened thine eyes to contemplate his clear light? How great was his
cleme^cie toward thee, that he supported thee with his grace, not to return
back again to thy former sins. But to overcome the enemies of mankind, and
constantly to persevere in a virtuous course.

These are the common benefits. Besides these, there are many secret ons known
to none but those that receive them, and others, which indeed are not clearly
known unto themselves, but only to him that bestowed them. How often for thy
pride, arrogancy, ingratitude and sloth have thou deserved to be left of God
as many for lesser causes have been? Yet not withstandinge he would not? How
often has God with his singular providence, exempted thee from evil, removed
occasions of offending, broken the snare that the enemy had laid for thy
perdition; has frustrated his expectation, and would not permit that his
counsels and machinations should prevail against thee? how often has he
done to us as he did to S. PETER in the Gospel: Ecce Satanas expetiuit vos,
Luc. 22.
vt cribaret sicut triticum. Ego autem rogaui pro te, vt non deficiat fides
tua: Behold Sattan has required to have you for to sift as wheat but I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. And who can know these secret
benefits but God alone? benefits, which be palpable are easy to be seen, but
those which be private consistinge in the vvorkinge of good or preuentinge of
ill the mind of man can not perfectly comprehend. Wherefore it is meet and
convenient to reason, that we should render immortal thanks to God, for all
these benefits and confess ingenuously, that we have received more, the^ we
are able to restore, and that our obligations toward him, are so great, that
with any goods of ours we shall never live to requite them, when we cannot
so much as number or comprehend them in our understanding.

CHAP. III. Of the time, and fruit of these Meditations.
BEHOVLD (Christian Reader) thou have seven former meditations, accomodated to
every day of the week, not so, that it is an offense to meditate upon an other
matter; when as when said before, whatsoever inflameth the heart, to the love
and fear of God, and to the keepinge of his comandements, may profitably be
assumed for matter of meditation. We therefore out of so great a number have
selected these, both, for that they contain the chiefest mysteries of our
faith, and that in them is force and efficacy, to rouse up our souls to the
love and fear of God: as also to set before nouices, which have need of a
guide, prepared and as it were fore-chewed matter, least they confusedly wander
up and down in this spacious field, without any certainty, now meditatig upon
one thing and presently upon an other.

More-ouer these meditatio^s, as we have said elsewhere, The former
meditations to whom they properly belong.
suit best with those which do begine to turn to God Almighty from their
wicked courses. For these had need, to be helped by the consideration of these
things, to the detestation and horror of sin, the fear of God, the
contempt of the world, which are as it were the first steps to the amendment of
our former perverse life, therefore it is good that they should sometime insist
in them, that they may have the better foundation for other ensuing virtues.

OF SEVEN OTHER MEDITATIONS OF THE PASSION OF OUR LORD, And the manner how it
ought to be meditated upon.
CHAP. IV.
HERE follow seven other Meditations of the Passion of CHRIST, his
Resurrection and Ascension into heaven, to which others of his holy life may
well be added.

Six things chiefly to be
But we must note, that in the Passion of our blessed Savior, six things
chiefly are to be meditated upon. First, the bitterness of his sorrow,
considered in the passion of Christ.
that we may compassionate with him. Secondly, the greatness of our sins,
which were the cause of his torments, that we may abhor them. Thirdly, the
greatness of the benefit, that we may be grateful for it. Fourthly, the
excellency of the divine charity and bounty therein manifested, that we may
love him more fervently. Fifthly, the conueniencie of the mystery, that we may
be drawn to admiration of it. Lastly, the multiplicitie of virtues of our
blessed Savior which did shine in this stupendous mystery, that we may
partly immitate and partly admire them; wherefore in the midst of these
meditations let us some time compassionate with our blessed Savior in the
extremity of his sorrows, extreme indeed, both by reason of the tenderness of
his body, as also for the great affection he bore unto our souls. He did
suffer them without any manner of consolation, as we shall speak herafter in
its proper place. Sometimes let us stir up in our selves compunction for our
sins, which were the cause of these his so great sufferinges. Sometimes let
us kindle in our souls an ardent affection, considering his great affection
toward us, which upon the Cross he declared and manifested to the whole
world. And the benefit which he bestowed upon us in his passion, because he
bought us with the inestimable price of his precious blood, of which only we
reap the fruit and commodity. Sometimes let us ruminate upon the
conueniencie of the manner, his eternal wisdom would he pleased to choose, to
cure our miseries, to satisfy for our sins, to relieve our necessities, to
make us partakers of his glory, to repress our pride, to induce us to the love
and joyful sufferinge of poverty, injuries, austeritie, and all comendable
laborious exercices. More-ouer it will not be besides the matter, to look into
the admirable examples which did principally shine in the life and passion of
our sweet Savior, his meeknes, patience, obedience, mercy, poverty,
charity, humility, bounty, modesty, and other his rare virtues, which in
all his actions did glitter like stars in the firmament. And chiefly to this
end, let us meditate upon these things, that as near as we can, we may
imitate them. Let us shake of sloth, and eleuate our souls, that as much as in
our power lies with the help of his holy grace we may trace his sacred
footsteps. This is the best and most profitable method of meditatinge upon
our Blessed Saviors passion, that is to say, that ther-by we be drawn to
imitation, and so to be wholly transformed into our Blessed Savior, that each
one may say with the Apostle: Viuo autem iam non ego, vi uit vero in me
Christus: And now I live but not I, but CHRIST in me. More-ouer in meditating
our Blessed Saviors passion, we must set him before the eyes of our souls,
imageninge that we see, as present the panges of his heavy sufferinges; and we
must not only insist upon the bare history of his passion, but we must
consider other circumstances, namely these four, first, who it is that
suffers, secondly, for whom, thirdly, how, fourthly, why. First, he that
suffers is God, omnipotent, infinite, immense. For whom? the most
ungrateful creature in the world, and less regardinge his benefits. How? with
most profound humility, charity, bounty, meeknes, mercy, patience,
modesty, etc. Why? not for his own commodity, nor our merits; but for his
immense piety, mercy, goodness and love toward us.

Last of all, let us not only contemplate his outward, but his inward
torments, for much more may be considered in the soul then in the body of
CHRIST, both for the more sensible feelinge of his passion there, as also for
diverse other considerations therein.

Thus having set down this short preface let us proceed to the handlinge of
the mysteries themselves of our blessed Saviors passion.

Seven other Meditations.
A Meditation for Monday.
THis day after thou have seigned thy self with the sign of the Cross, thou
shall meditate upon the washinge of the disciples feet, and institution of the
blessed Sacrament.

Consider, o my soul, at this supper sweet JESUS himself to be present,
contemplate that inestimable example of humility, which he there proposed unto
thee for imitation; when risinge from the table, where he sat with his
disciples, he would be pleased to wash their feet: O sweet JESUS, what is it
that thou do? O sweet JESUS, why does thy mighty Majesty thus diminish it
self? O my soul, what would thou have thought to see God tumblinge at the
feet of men, and prostrate before IVDAS? O barbarous and cruel man, could not
so great humility molifie thy heart? was not so great bounty and sweetness
able to penetrate thy entrals, and to reclaim thee from thy intended
mischeife? can it be that thou determinest to sell this meek lamb for so
small a price? nay if it be so, how could thou yet endure to behold so rare
an example? I wonder it did not wound thy guilty soul with compunction for
thy greuious crime? O delicate hands, how could you touch so filthy, sordide,
and with sin contaminated feet? O pure and unspotted hands, how could you
endure to wash those feet, that were fouled with goinge and cominge to make a
sale of your precious blood? O thrice happy Apostles, did you not tremble and
stand amazed at the sight of so great humility? What do thou do PETER?
can thou permit the Lord of Majesty to wash thy feet? S. PETER wholly
astonished with the admiration of this spectacle, when he saw our blessed
Savior fallinge down at his feet, cried out: Domine tu mihi lauas pedes?
Lord do thou wash my feet? what, art not thou the Son of the euer-liuinge
God? art not thou the creator of the whole world, the beutie of heaven, the
Paradise of Angels, redeemer of mankind, splendor of thy Fathers glory, most
deep fountain of the eternal wisdom? and do thou wash my feet? how
comes it to pass, that thou Lord of so great majesty and glory should
thus debase thy self to so vile a service?

The^ consider, how he washed all his disciples feet one by one, and after
washinge, wiped them with a linen cloth wherewith he was girded, open the eyes
of thy mind to behold in these mysteries a representation of our redemption.
This linen cloth so wiped their feet, that all the dirt which was upon their
feet did stick on the linen cloth: not without mystery.

For what more foul then man conceived in sin? What more pure the^ CHRIST
conceived by the operation of the holy Ghost? Dilectus meus candidus and
rubicundus electus ex milibus: Cant. 5.
My beloved says the spouse in the canticles is white and rudly chosen of
thousands. Yet not withstandinge most pure, most beutifull CHRIST took unto
himself all the spots of our souls: from which that he might cle^se us (as
you may see him upon the Cross) he would be pleased to defile himself with
the filth of our impuritie. Consider lastly with what words our Blessed Savior
closed up this humble action: Exemplum dedi vobis us quemadmodum ego feci
vobis, ita and vos faciati^. I have given you an example that as I have done to
you, you may do the like. Which words do not only pertain to this present
action, and example of humility: but likewise to all the actions of CHRIST
through-out his wholl life, which is a most absolute and perfect rule for us
to square our actions by, especially of humility, which is here to life
represented unto us.

Of the institution of the blessed Sacrament.
HE that desires to comprehend any thing of this noble mystery, must
certainly think, that no tongue is able to express that immense love, and
ardent affection vvhervvith our blessed Savior was inflamed toward his holy
Church and all faithful souls, in institutinge this stupendous mystery. The
causes why Christ instituted this Sacrament.
For when this bridgrome determined to depart out of this mortal life, and to
leave the Church his beloved spouse; least this is departure should be any
occasion to her of forgettinge her redeemer; he gave her this Sacrament vvherin
he himself is present, as a pledge and memorial of his perpetual love.

The second
Then saying he was to be long absent; least his spouse should remain
solitary alone, he, for her consolation, would leave himself for her
companion in this holy Sacrament.

The third.
When our blessed Savior was to suffer death for the redemption of his spouse,
to enrich her with his most precious blood, and to purge her from sins: least
she should be defrauded of so great a treasure, he would give her a key in this
Sacrament whereby she might at her pleasure enjoy these riches: for as S.
CHRYSOSTOM says, we must think as often as we come to this Sacrament we put
our mouth to the bleedinge side of CHRIST, and from thence drink his most
precious blood whose merits we participate.

The fourth
More-ouer this celestial bridgrome, did desire to be tenderly beloved of his
spouse, and for this cause would leave her this mystical meat, consecrated
with most efficatious words, and therein so great virtue, that whosoever
receives it worthily shall presently be struck with the darts of love.

The fifth.
He would likewise bestow upon his spouse some sure pledge thereby to make her
secure of the certain succession of future glory, that in hope of so great a
good, he might temper the laborious difficulty and make the tedious bitterness
of this present life, to be more tolerable, wherefore that the spouse might
certainly believe, that she shall at length attain to these unspeakable goods,
he has given her for a pawn, this inestimable treasure, which is as much
vvorth as that which is expected hereafter, that she should not doubt but that
God will give her himself in glory where he lives in spirit, that would
be pleased to give her himself in this vale of tears, where he lives in
flesh.

The sixth.
He would more-ouer when he dyed make his last will and testament, vvherin he
left to his spouse a singular manna to cure all her infirmities, a gift then
which, nothing can be more sovereign, nothing more precious, seeing the
deity it self is therein contained.

The seventh.
Lastly, he desired to feed our souls with some heavenly food, saying they
need no less nourishment that they might live spiritually, then the body
needs corporal sustinence that she might live corporally. Wherefore this
spiritual physician when he had diligently examined and felt the pulse of our
fragilitie, instituted this holy Sacrament which he exhibited unto us under the
species or form of bread, that he might declare what effect it should work in
us, that is to say, that it is as necessary for our souls, as bread for the
body.

A Meditation for Tvvesday.
THis day thou shall meditate of the prayer CHRIST made in the garden, the
method thereof, and the contumelies he suffered in the house of ANNAS.

Consider therefore, how CHRIST our Lord, after the consummation of his
mystical body with his disciples, before he entered into the tragedy of his
passion, went to make his prayer upon the mount Oliuet, whereby he would
instruct us, that in all adversities and tribulations of this present life, we
fly to prayer, as to a holy anchore; the power of which is so great, that it
either beats back the forces of tribulations, or (which is of greater
excellency) ministers sufficient strength to endure them, with a constant and
willinge mind.

He took for companions in his iourny (...) of his disciples, whom he loved
above the rest, S. PETER, S. JAMES, and S. JOHN. Which as they were
eie-wittnesses of his transfiguration, so likewise they should be present in his
agony, to behold him for the love of man now transformed into a far more
different shape; then he was, when he manifested himself unto them, in a
glorious and glitteringe form.

That also he might open unto them, his inward grief, to be much greater then
appeared outwardly. He says unto them: Tristis est anima mea vsque ad mortem.
Sustinete hic and vigilate mecum: My soul is heavy unto death. Stay here and
vvatch with me. O words full of compassion! Then departinge from his
disciples a stones cast, with great submission and reverence he prayed his
Father: Pater si fieri potest transeat a me Calix iste, verumtamen non mea
voluntas sed tua fiat: Father if it be possible let this Chalice pass from me,
but not my will, but thine be done. Which prayer when he had repeated thrice,
he fell into such an agony, that he sweat drops of blood, trickling down
the earth, from his precious body.

Consider that, partly the foreseeinge of the most unspeakable torments that
ever any mortal man suffered, prepared for his most tender body: partly the
distinct representatio^ of the sins of the whole world, for the expiatinge of
which he was now to suffer death upon the Cross: partly the remembrance of
the ingratitude of many, which would not esteem, or reap any profit from this
great benefitt, strock such a deep impression into his soul, that it filled
it with sad and incredible anxiety, so troubled his senses and tender flesh,
that all the elements of his body beeinge weakened, the opened pores on every
side swett out drops of blood. If the flesh, which properly suffered not this
anguish, but only through a simple immagination, was thus afflicted, what did
his soul feale; to whom properly these sorrows did appertain?

His prayer being ended, that counterfeit friend of CHRIST Judas the traitor,
came atte^ded with a hellish boand; he I say which renounced his apostleship,
to be head and Captain of a troop of hellhounds, behold in the forefront of
that wicked multitude, impudently cominge to his master whom before he had
sold, betraying him with a kiss of peace and freindship.

In that hour said JESUS to the company, which came to apprehend him: You
have come out as to a thief to apprehend me with swords and staves? I satt
every day with you teachinge in the temple, and you laid not hold on me. But
this is your hour and the power of darkness.

This mystery is worthy of admiration, for what thing can be more admirable
and stupendous, then to see the only begotten Son of God, not only in the
form of sinful man, but in the shape of a condemned man: Haec est hor a
vestra, and potestas tenebrarum: This is your hour and the power of darkness.
From which words, is gathered that this innocent lamb, was left to the
diabolical cruelty of the princes of darkness, who by their vice-gerentes and
ministers powered all the malice and mischeife they were able to conceive
against him. Consider, how much for thy sake the supreme Majesty of God is
humbled, to endure all the extremity of torments that ever any suffered in
this present life, not to die for his own faults but for thy sins, but he did
undergo this of his own accord, to free thee from the power of Sattan.

He had skarce spoken these words, when that wholl rabble of hunger-starued
wolves, gapinge after their prey, rushed upon this meek and innocent lamb,
halinge, tearinge and afflictinge him with as much cruelty as ever they could.
O barbarous and inhumane proceedinges? o cruel and savage blows, contumelious
violences, wherewith they tormented him? they insulted after a horred manner no
otherwise, the^ conquerers return laden with spoils after they have put to
flight their enemies, or hunters when they have caught their prey. The hands
which a little before were exercised in workinge miracles, they were now bound
with ropes so cruelly, that they rased the skin, and besmeared them with blood.
Thus they led him through the public streets of Jerusalem, followinge him
with contumelies and blows: behold him in this journey goinge alone, left by
all his disciples, compassed with a multitude of his enemies, forced to make
such have, that he was wholly out of breath, his color changed, his face
blushinge, and his wholl body weakened and wearied by reason of the
intolerable present difficulty.

Although our blessed Savior was barbarously and most cruelly handled by that
blood-suckinge multitude: yet never the less thou might have seen in his
countenance a pleasant sweetness, in his eyes a comely gravity, in his manners
a divine grace, which all the torments of the wholl world could not so much as
diminish in the least degree.

After this go with our blessed Savior into the house of ANNAS the high
Priest, that there thou may take notice what favor he reaped for his mild
answer, when ANNAS examined him of his, and his disciples doctrine: which was,
that one of the Officers gave him a cruel blow upon his cheek saying: Sic
respondes Pontifici? Do thou answer the high Priest so? to him CHRIST
replied: Si male locutus sum, testimonium perhibe de malo: Joan. 18.
si autem been, quid me caedis? If I have spoken evil bring testimony of it,
but if well, why do thou beat me?

Behold, o my soul, not only the mild answer, but the print of the Officers
hand in his tender cheek, his countenance notwithstanding quiet and amiable,
not a vvhitt moved at the shame of so great an effront, because he inwardly
thought so low and humbly of himself, that he had turned the other side
without delay, if the rascald had desired it.

A Meditation for VVeddensday.
THis day thou shall consider, how CHRIST our Lord was offered up to CAYPHAS
the high Priest: what torments he endured there all that night: how. S. PETER
denied him: and last of all how cruelly he was scourged.

Consider first of all, how he was led from the house of ANNAS to CAYPHAS his
house, it is worth thy pains to follow him thither. For there thou shall see
the mighty sun of justice ecclypsed: there thou shall behold, the divine face
upon which the Angels themselves delight to gaze, to be deformed with the
filthy spittinges of the Jews. For our blessed Savior standinge in the
midst of them, was coniured by the high Priest in the name of his Father, to
speak out, what he was. He answered as beseeming himself: but they who were
unworthy of such an answer, blinded with the splendor of this great light,
like mad dogs rushed upon him, vometing up the bitter gaul of their wholl
malice against him.

They began whole troops of them to (...) him, to beat and kick him, they
spit upon his divine face, and threw the very snot of their filthy noses upon
it. Others hood-winked his eyes with a dirty linen cloth, smiteinge him upon
the cheek, and would in mokerie have him prophecy who it was that struck him.
O admirable and vn-heard of patience, and humility of the only begotten Son
of God. O the face which the Angels of heaven do contemplate with incredible
joy, besmeared with their sordid and filthy spittinges.

Men, when they spit, commonly turn themselves to some foul place, some what
remote from the sight of others. In this palace was there no place found more
contemptible therein to cast their spit and filthy dryuell, then the sacred face
of CHRIST JESUS? O man that art but dust and ashes, can thou choose but be
stirred up to humility, and contempt of thy self at so rare an example?

Consider more-ouer, what torments our blessed Savior suffered all that
night, how the Officers that kept him, that sleep should not close his eyes,
afflicted him, derided the supreme Majesty of God, and loaded him with many
injurious contumelies.

Waighe with thy self, my soul, that now thy spouse is made the white and
mark, receiving upon him self all the darts of injurious contumelies that the
mischeiuous Jews could shute at him. O cruel night, o unquiet night, in which
thou blessed JESUS could rest no more by reason of anguish and affliction,
then others who took pleasure to torment the. The night was ordained for the
rest of all creatures, that the members and senses wearied with the labor of
the day before, might then take some repose. But the wicked Soldiers that kept
thee, spent it in tormentinge of thy senses, they did bind thy body, vexedthy
soul, fettered thy hands and feet with manicles, buffeted thy cheeks, spit
upon thy face, blinded thine eyes, so that all thy senses when they should have
been refreshed were afflicted.

O! how far did these mattins differ from those, which at the same time the
blessed Angels did singe in heaven? they cried holy, holy: and the Jews cried
he is guilty of death, crucify, crucify him. O angelical spirits which
understood both cries, what could you imagine or think when you saw the
inhumane cruelty wherewith he was handled in earth, whom in heaven you adored
with so great submission and reverence? did you not wonder to see him suffer
all these extreme torments for to expiate the sins of those, who inflicted
them upon him? who has ever heard of such immense charity, that for this
reason one should suffer death, to heal the grief and cure the wounds of his
murderers?

The fall of S. PETER, that great pillar, did not a little increase the
anxietie of this tedious night; that he, whom he enteirely loved amongst the
rest whom he chose to be present at his glorious transfiguration, to whom he
committed the primacie of his holy Church, whom he ordained to be head and
Prince of the Apostles, that he I say, should before his face, and in his
presence deny him, not once but thrice, addinge blasphemies and oaths, that
he knew not the man. Tell me PETER, did this man seem to thee so ungodly and
wicked, that in future times thou did fear, it would be a disgrace unto
thee to confess him now? did thou not consider that thou did first
pronounce the sentence of condemnation against him, before he was adjudged by
the high Priests, when thou did not esteem him so much as worthy of thy
acknowledgment? could thou do a greater injury to CHRIST JESUS?

But CHRIST sorrowful for this great fault of S. PETER turned himself, and
cast his eyes upon him, that with his gracious countenance he might reduce this
wandering sheep into the sheepfold of his mercies. O admirable aspect, secret
indeed, but full of signification, which S. PETER knew right well, and well
understood of what force and efficacy it was. The trovvinge of the cock had
little auailed to his compunction and conversion, had not the countenance of
CHRIST our Savior been adjoined. Whose eyes did speak and work that
stupendous change, the certainty of which, not only the flowing tears of
S. PETER, but of our blessed Savior himself did sufficiently testify.

After all these injuries consider, what CHRIST did suffer, when he was
bound to be scourged at the pillar, for the judge when he savve, that be could
not pacify the fury of those infernal monsters, he thought good to advise
the^, to bear him with rods and vvhippes. Whereby his vvholl body might be
torn, hopinge that way to molifie their obstinate and obdurate hearts: that
when they savve him so torn and mangeled, they would cease further to desire
his cruel death.

Enter now my soul in spirit, into the house of PILATE, and have tears in
readiness, for thou vvilt have need of them, if thou shall diligently consider,
what was done there.

Behold how inhumanely these abject and infamous roagues spoiled our blessed
Savior of his garments. Mark the humility of CHRIST, how he suffered
himself to be stripped, not so much as opening his mouth, nor vtteringe any
word against their injurious behavior. See his sacred body bound to the
pillar with many ropes, in such a fassion that on every side they might have
rome to torture him.

Consider, how our Lord of Angels stood alone in the midst of his cruel
enemies, without any Advocates or Procuratours that would defend his cause,
yea altogether without any one man, who at leastvvise a far of, would so
much as co^passionate the bitterness of his torments. Do thou not hear the
noise of rods and vvhippes wherewith they loaded, teared and rent the delicate
flesh of JESUS, addinge stroke upon stroke, and vvound to vvound? do thou
not see his vvholl body in one short moment of time, with the vehemence and
often iteratinge the blows, to be covered as it were with one ulcer, his skin
to be drawn from the flesh, and blood from his vvholl body, from the crown
of his head to the soles of his feet, to flow down upon the earth?
especially, is it not dreadful for thee to behold the place betwixt the
shoulders, whereupon almost the vvholl force of all the blows did light?

Consider how CHRIST the Savior of the world, after that extreme cruelty of
his tormentours, went up and down the Palace all torn and cut, seekinge
and gathering up his garments, not findinge one amongst those inhumane
rascals, that would show unto him the least act of humanity, in vvashinge or
refreshing his wounds, or lend their hand to help him to putt on his clothes.
All these things are worthy of our diligent consideration, that thereby we
might stir up our souls to due compassion of his miseries.

A Meditation for Thursday.
THis day thou shall meditate, how CHRIST was crowned with thorns, his
presentation before all the people, his condemnation, his bringinge out to the
place of execution, and last of all his caryinge of his Cross.

The Spouse in the Canticles invited us to the consideration of these
torments, when she said: Cant. 3.
Egredimini filiae Sion and videte Regem SALOMONEM in Diademate, quo coronauit
eum Matter sua in die desponsationis eius, and in die laetitiae cordis eius: Go
forth yea daughters of Sion and see King SOLOMON in the Diadem vvhervvith his
Mother has crowned him, in the day of his despousinge, and in the day of the
joy of his heart.

What do thou do? what do thou think my soul? my tongue why art thou
sile^t? O sweet Savior when I open mine eyes, and behold this sorrowful
spectacle, my heart is re^t with grief. What, Lord, were not thy former
torments, immine^t death, and abounda^ce of thy blood already shed, sufficient
for the rede^ptio^ of mankind? but thou must yet be crowned with sharp
thorns?

My soul that thou May the better understand this sadd spectacle, set
before thine eyes our blessed Savior, in his former beutie before he suffered
these torments? Then behold him on the contrary in this miserable state. If
in the first, thou do rightly veiwe him, thou shall see him more beutifull
then the sun. In his eyes a comely gravity, in his speech a gracious facillity:
in his actions singular modesty: in the gesture of his wholl body profound
humility, joined with reverent Majesty.

Then after thou have satiated thy soul with pleasure, in behoulding this rare
piece of admirable perfection, then turn thine eyes again, and look upon
him, as he is in this present miserable state. Ridiculously clothed in purple,
bearinge in his hand a reed for a Kingely Scepter, and upon his head a Crown
of sharp thorns, in stead of a regal Diadem, his eyes were dimmed, his
face pall and wan, fouled and covered with the filthy spittles of the Jews:
behold him within, and without: his heart consumed with grief: his body torn
with wou^des and blows, forsaken of his disciples, hastened to undergo death
of his enemies, mocked of the Soldiars: despised of the high Priests: rejected
as a wicked King arrogantly assuming this title: unjustly accused, and
destitute of all humane aid.

Do not consider these things as done and past many years since, but imagine
with thy self, that at this present they be in actinge before thy face; nor as
an other man's sorrows, but as thine own afflictions, set thy self in his
place and conjecture what torments thou should suffer, if thy head were
boared to the skull and thy brain-pan pierced with sharp thorns? But what do
I say thorns, when thou can skearce endure the prick of a small needle? how
great then was the pain, his tender head suffered, with this new and
vn-heard-of torment.

The Coronatio^ of our blessed Savior, with many mockes and scorns being
ended the judge produced him before the people, saying: Ecce homo: Behold the
man. If yea thirst after the death of the man, behold him scarce a hears
breadth dista^t from it, yea he is brought to that pass, that he deserves
rather commiseration, then your envy, if yea fear that he will make himself a
King, behold he is so deformed, that he scarce reteineth the shape of a man:
do yea fear any violence from these hands that are so straightly manicled?
do yea dread any harm from a man that is cast into such a miserable and
dejected state, whose body is so ma^geled and weakened?

Consider, o my soul, in what state thy Savior was, when the very judge
himself, did think with this aspect, would move his bloody enemies to
compassion: from which we may gather, what a miserable thing it is, to see
a Christian of such an obdurate heart, which can or will not condole the
passions of our Savior, when they were such, that the very judge did think
them sufficient, to molifie the malice of his enemies. But PILATE seeinge with
thees exceedinge torments, he could no way temper or asvvage their fury,
went into his Palace satt in the judgment seat to pronounce the deffinitiue
sentence against CHRIST. Now the Cross was prepared at the door and the
fatal standard which thretned ruin to our blessed Savior, was now in a
readiness.

The sentence being pronounced with the addition of more torments, they
loaded his vvearied shoulders with a heavy Cross, to carry to the place of
his execution.

But our meek Lord, not only not rejected it, but out of that immense charity
toward us, vvhervvith he suffered for our sins, obediently and willingly
embraced it.

Now the innocent ISAAC with his weak shoulders, supported the intolerable
burden of the Cross to the place of sacrifice. The simple people and devout
women, followed him weepinge. For who was able to contain tears, to see the
Lord and King of Angels goinge thus on foot, with the extremity of torments,
his knees quiueriuge, his body stoopinge, his eyes blinded, his face besmeared
with blood, his head crowned with thorns, and his ears deafened with the
noise of droomes and trumpetts?

Leave a while, o my soul, this horred spectacle, and with wateringe eyes,
with sobbes, and sigthes go to the blessed Virgin, and say to her. Lady of
Angels, Queen of heaven, Gate of Paradise, Advocate of the world, Sanctuary of
sinners, Health of the just, Joy of the Saints, Mistress of virtue, Mirror
of purity, Symboll of chastity, Pattern of patience, and Rule of all
perfection. O me miserable and unfortunate, what have I seen with the eyes of
faith? How could I live to behold so inhumane usage, interrupting sighs will
not permit me scarce to speak, how I left thy only begotten Son, loade^
with a mighty Cross, to which he was presently to be nailed, and carryinge
it to the place of execution.

What heart, what mind, what soul, is able to comprehend the dolor, the
blessed Virgin MARIE then did suffer? her heart fainted, and a dead sweat
with extreme anguish possessed her wholl body, and presently she had given up
the ghost, had not the divine dispensation reserved her, till better times, for
her greater merit, and more abundant reward.

The blessed Virgin, with speed follows the steps of her beloved Son, that
ardent desire wherewith she was inflamed to see him, added vigor to her, of
which sorrow had bereaved her: she heard a far of the noise of arms, the
concourse of people, and the sound of trumpets, on every side publishing the
passion of CHRIST, after that she saw the glitteringe of lances and
holbeards: in the way she found his footsteps sprincked with drops of blood, by
which without any guide or leader she might easily find the way. Approachinge to
her Son, she lifted up her eyes swelled with tears, to behold him, whom
she esteemed dearer then her own soul.

O what strife was there in the soul of this blessed Virgin, betwixt fear
and love? she did vehemently desire to see her Son, but on the other side she
durst not cast her eyes upon him in this lamentable and afflicted state. At
length when she drew nearer, these two celestial lights beheld eatch other,
their eyes pierced eatch others soul, but grief enforced their tongues to
silence, notwithstanding their hearts did mutually discourse, and the Son
unto the Mother said: Sweet Mother, why come thou hither any love, my dove?
thy sorrow renews my miseries, and my torments crucifieth thy soul?
return, return again into thy house. This defiled company of thieves and
murderers beseems not thy virginal purity. These and the like words they
inwardly uttered; all the way until they came to the place of execution.

A Meditation for Friday.
THis day thou shall meditate upon the mystery of the Cross, and the seven
words which CHRIST spoke upon it: Rouse up my soul and duly ponder this
great mystery of the Cross, which brought fourth the fruit of satisfaction,
to expiate that great loss, which all mankind suffered by a tree.

Consider how, before our blessed Savior came to the Mount of Caluarie (to
make his death more ignominious) his cruel tormenters stripped him of all his
clothes, except his coat, which was without seame, behold how patiently
this meek lamb suffers his garments to be taken from him, not so much as
openinge his mouth or speakinge one word against their barbarous dealinge. He
permitted these things willingly, but with a great strain to modesty. He was
stripped naked that we might receive a better garment, to cover the nakedness of
our sins, then that of ADAM the first parent of all mankind, made of the leaves
of fig trees to cover the nakedness of his body.

Some Doctors think that the crown of thorns was taken of, to pull with
more facillitie his unseamed garment over his ears and after to be fastened on
again, which could not be without a vehement pain, the sharp thorns did a
fresh wound his sacred head with unspeakable torment. And surely this is not
unlike, seeing in the wholl time of his passion they spared him in nothing;
but the bitterest torments they could devise, they heaped upon him, especially
when the Evangelist says, they did to him whatsoever they would. This coat
did so cleave to the wounds of his sacred body, by reason of the congealed
blood, that when the barbarous hangemen drew it of with exceeding violence,
they renewed again the wounds of JESUS, they pulled of with it many particles
of flesh, so that the wholl body of CHRIST, in every part fleyed and bloody,
from the head to the foot seemed to be but one entire and continuate wound.

Weigh well with thy self (my soul) the immense goodness and mercy of God,
manifested in these torments, behold he that spreads the heavens with
clouds, vesteth the green and pleasant feilds with flowers, and he that
liberally bestows clothinge upon every creature, behold him I say stark
naked. Consider what cold, this precious body, being wounded, suffered, when
they had not only spoiled him of his garments, but his very skin was not
enteire, neither were his wounds bound up, but exposed to the injury of the
air.

If S. PETER, being well clothed could not overcome the cold of the fore-passed
night: What cold do thou think this delicate body suffered being in every
place wounded and all naked?

Then consider how CHRIST was fastened to the Cross, and what torment he
suffered, when the sharp nails pierced the most sensible parts of his tender
body; Weigh with thy self that the blessed Virgin, which beheld these things
with her eyes, and hearing, the frequent blows of the mallet, which they
iterated in driuinge the nails into the hands and feet of her Son, was not
insensible, but the heart of the Mother was pierced with the hands and feet
of the Son.

When CHRIST was made fast upon the Cross, presently they lifted it up, and
put it into a hole there before prepared, behold how these wicked torterours of
innocent JESUS pricked forward with their own malice, let the heavy Cross
fall into the hole with such a violence, that it so much strained his body
hanginge only by the nails, and rent wider the wounds of his hands and feet.

Sweet Savior ca^ there befound a heart so hard and steely, which is not
molified at such a spectacle, when the very stones did cleave in sunder, as
sensible of thy cruel torments?

O Lord, the dolours of death compassed thee round about, the storms and waves
of the raginge sea enuirouned thee on every side. The waters entered into thy
soul, thou did descend to the deep abyss, where thou could find no
footinge. When thy heavenly Father did forsake thee, Lord, what could thou
expect thine enemies would do? they cried out against thee, and thy friends
did wound thy heart, thy soul was sad and heavy, neither was there any that
would comfort thee.

Lord, from these unheard of torments, and abounda^t satisfaction which thou
have made for my sins, I cannot but acknowledge with all humility the
greiuiousnes of my heinous transgression, which were the occasions of all thy
miseries. I see thee my King and God fastened upon a wodden Cross, with two
iron nails; thy precious and tender flesh to be stretched without any manner
of respite. If thou would a little ease thy self upon thy feet, the weight
of thy wholl body enlarges their wou^des: if thou would leave the burden
to thy hands, the weight of it does likewise rend their wounds; thy sacred
head could find no rest because thou hadest no other pillowe the^ the sharp
crown of thorns.

O virgin Mother how willingly would thou have embraced him in thine
arms, thero^ to ease and rest himself a little. But the arms of the Cross
would not permit the, upon which, if he would repose the sharp thorns struck
deeper into his head: the troubles of the Son were much augmented by the
presence of the Mother; which no less crucified his soul then the Jews his
body to the Cross.

O svveet IESV, in one day thou did carry a double cross, the one upon thy
body, the other in thy soul, the one of passion, the other of compassion, the
one pierced thy body with nails of iron, the other thy soul with nails of
sorrovve. What tongue is able to express, what thou did suffer to see the
anguish of thy Dear Mother? whose soul thou did certainly know to be
crucified together with thee? when thou did behold her heavy heart,
pierced with the svvord of sorrovve: when with bloody eyes thou did look
upon her beutifull face, pale and won: and did hear the sightes of her
dyinge soul, lamentinge that she could not dye. What did thou suffer to see
pure fountains of tears gushinge from her eyes, and to hear her pitiful
complaints she made in sorrovvinge for thy sufferinges.

The^ consider the seaue^ words which CHRIST spoke upon the Cross, to his
heavenly Father, saying: Pater ignosce illis quia nesciunt quid faciunt:
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. To the Thief: This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise; To his Mother: Woman behold thy Son. To
the people he said: I thirst. And to God again: My God, my God, why have thou
far saken me. Consummatum est: It is consummate. In to thy hands I command my
spirit.

Ruminate, my soul, with what exceedinge charity, he made intercession to
his heavenly Father, for his enemies and persecutours. With what piety and
mercy he received the penitent Thief into his favor. With what affection he
committed his Mother to the protection of his beloved disciple: with what
ardour he testified himself vehemently to thirst after the salvation of
mankind. With what clamor he thundered out his prayer, expressinge to the
divine Majesty the greiuiousnes of his tribulations. How perfectly he
fulfilled the obedience, enjoined to hime by his heavenly Father. And lastly
how he yealded his soul into his blessed hands.

Every one of which words do afford us a great deal of matter for our
instruction. In the first, we are taught, to love our enemies: in the second,
mercy toward sinners: in the 3. piety toward our parents: in the fourth,
to thirst after our neighbors salvation: in the fifth, when we are oppressed
with tribulations, and seeminge as it were to be left of God, to fly to prayer:
in the sixth, the virtue of obedience and perseverance: in the seventh,
perfect resignation into the hands of God, which is the sum of all perfection.

A Meditation for Saturday.
THis day thou shall meditate upon the pearcinge of our blessed Saviors side
with a spear: the taking down of CHRIST from the Cross: the lamentations of
the women: and other things which did occurr about his burial.

First take notice, how that CHRIST, after he gave up the ghost upon the
Cross, his enemies much rejoiced at his death. But yet there was not an end of
their insatiate cruelty, but still their encreasinge malice raged against him
being dead. They divided and cast lotts for his garments, and with a spear
pierced his precious side.

O barbarous caitifes! o adamantine hearts! did you think those torments he
suffered before his death were not sufficient, that you would not vouchsafe to
spare him being dead? what madness did possess your souls? lift up your eyes
and behold his dead face, his eyes sunck, his hanginge head, and his wholl body
being wan and pale. Although your hearts be harder then adamant, yet let this
pitiful aspect molifie them.

Behold the centurian stroock a lance into his sacred side with such
violence, that the very Cross did tremble, out of whose side did gush
abundance of blood and water, for the redemption of all mankind. O river of
paradise ru^ninge forth to water the wholl earth! O precious wound which rather
the love thou did bare to us sinful men, then the enemies weapon did
inflict! O gate of heaven, window of paradise, place of rest, tower of
fortitude, sanctuary of the just, neast of doves, tomb of pilgrims,
flourishinge bed of the spouse! Hail sacred wou^d, which pearcest devout
hearts, hail rose of incredible beauty, hail precious stone of inestimable
valor, hail door, through which, lies open a free passage to the heart of
CHRIST, an argument of his love, and pledge of eternal felicity.

Consider that in the eueninge, JOSEPH and NICODEMVS came with ladders to loose
and take down the body of our Savior: but the blessed Virgin after all these
torments, perceiuinge her Son to be taken from the Cross, and disposed for
the grave, she took him when he was let down, in her arms, humbly
beseechinge that holy company, that they would suffer her to come near his
body, and to bestow her last kiss and embracinges upon him, which upon the
Cross she could not do. Which they would not, nor could deny. For if her
friends had deprived her of him dead, which her enemies did her of him living,
they had redoubled the anguish of her soul.

When she saw her Son in this case, what grief, what dolours can we
immagine she then did suffer? Angels of peace come and lament with this blessed
Virgin, lament heaven, lament stars, lament all creatures of the world. She
embraced the mangeled body of her beloved Son, she hugged him in her arms
(for love administered this strength) she thrust her face amongst the thorns to
come to kiss his mouth, vvherby she vvounded her face with the sharp pricks
which she vvashed with flovvinge tears;

O svveet Mother, is this thy beloved Son? is this he whom thou did
conceive with great glory, and bring fourth with great joy? is this that
bright mirror in which thou were wont to see thy self? all that were
present did likewise mourn, the other MARY'S, which were there mourned, the
noblemen lamented, heaven and earth with all creatures mourned with the
blessed Virgin.

That holy Evangelist lamented, who often embracinge the body of his dear
Master, said: O my good Lord and Master, who shall hereafter teach and instruct
me? with whom now shall I consult in doubtful occasions? upon whose lapp
shall I now rest my self? who shall now reveal unto me celestial secrets?
what sudden change is this? yeasterday I rested upon thy sacred breast, where
thou did communicate to me the joys and glory of everlasting life, and now
in recompense of that benefit I embrace thee dead in my arms? is this that
countenance which I beheld glorious and transfigurated upon the mount of
Thabor? is this that face which I saw brighter and more glitteringe then the
sun?

And that blessed sinner S. MARY MAGDALEN lamented, who often kissinge the
feet of her Savior, said: O the true light of mine eyes, the only remedy and
solace of my soul. If I sin again, who shall hereafter receive me into
favor? who shall defend me from the calu^nies of the Pharisees? O how altered
are these feet from those I washed with my tears? O beloved of my heart, why
do I not dye with thee? O life of my soul, how can I say, I love thee, when I
living, see thee dead before me?

Thus this blessed company did mourn, and lament, wateringe with abundant
tears the body of JESUS. The sepulcher being ready they spiced his holy body
with sweet spices, they wrapped it up in a fine linen cloth, bound his head
with a handkercher, laid it upon a beer, carried it to the place of burial
and put it into a new monument.

The monument was covered with a stone, and the face of MARIE obscured with a
cloud of sorrow. When there again she bad her Son adue, she then began to
be more and more sensible of her solitude. For then she savve her self, to be
deprived of the greatest good. But her heart remained buried with her treasure
in the grave.

A Meditation for Sunday.
THis day thou shall consider and meditate of the descent of CHRIST to lymbus
Patrum: his resurrection: diverse apparitions to the blessed Virgin MARIE; S.
MARIE MAGDALENE, and his other disciples: and last of all his glorious
ascension into heaven.

Take notice therefore of the incredible joy, the Fathers, which were detained
in lymbus, felt at there cominge of the redeem who came to free them from the
dark prison, vvherin they were shutt for many thousand years. What praises,
what giuinge of thanks did they render to him, who had brought them to the
long desired haven of their salvation? they which return from the east
Indies, are wont to say, that they think all their forepassed labors well
bestovved, only for that joy they find, the first day of their arrival into
their country. If the banishment of a year or two, and the tediousnes of a
little trouble some iourny, can breed such joy in men, what will the absence
of three or four thousand years do from that pleasant and celestial
country. What joy therefore do we think, those holy Fathers had, when they
took possession of it?

Then consider the excessive joy of the blessed Virgin, when she saw her
Son risen from death, when it is most certain, and undoubted, that she felt
the greatest sorrow and affliction at his ignominious death and passion that
could be, her joy must needs excel the rest, in his triumpha^t resurrection.
How great do thou think was her content and pleasure to see her Son,
whom she greuiously lamented before his death, living, glorious, and attended
with a joyful troop of holy Patriarchs, whom he brought a long with him?
What said she? what did she? with what kisses did she salute him? with what
affection did she embrace him? what pleasant rivers of tears distilled from
her eyes? how earnestly did she desire to follow her Son, had it been
permitted to her?

More-ouer take notice, of the joy of the holy MARY'S, particularly of her
which stood weepinge, at the Sepulcre of CHRIST, then, when she saw him whom
her soul loved: without doubt she cast her self at his feet, when she beheld
him living, whom she sought amongst the dead.

After his Mother, he therefore appeared to her, who loved him most ardently,
and, above others, sought him most diligently and perseuerantly, to instruct us
that when we look for God, we must seek him with tears and diligence.

Consider that after this, he appeared to his disciples going unto Emans, in
the habit of a Pilgrim; behold, how courteously he joined himself a
companion to them: how familiarly he conuersed with them: how handsomely
he dissembled his person: and after, with what affection he manifested
himself unto them, and last of all how he left their tounges and lips
filled with the delightful discourse of his Majesty. Let thy discourse and
talk, be like these disciples, as they travailed in the way, of the love and
passion of our blessed Savior; and I dare be bold to say, that he will not
deny unto thee his sacred presence.

In the mystery of our blessed Saviors ascension, first consider that he
deferred it for forty days, that in the mean time often appearinge to his
disciples, he might instruct them, and with them discourse of the kingdom of
heaven. For he would not forsake them by ascendinge into heaven, before he had
disposed their minds to ascend with him spiritually.

Hence we may note, that those are often deprived of the corporal presence of
CHRIST, and of sensible devotion, who with the wings of contemplation fly
up to heaven and fear no danger. Wherein the divine providence, vvhervvith it
curbeth and governs the elect, does wonderfully manifest it self, how it
stre^gthneth the vveake, exercises the strong, gives milk to little ones,
prepares stronger meat for great ones, comfort some, afflicts others, and
to conclude accomodates himself to all according to their several degrees in
their spiritual profitt. Wherefore he that is roborated by divine comfort,
ought therefore not to presume of him self, seeinge this sensible consolation,
is but the meat for infirm ones, and a great sign of weakness: nor he that is
exercised by affliction, ought therefore to be dejected, seeinge temptation is
for the most part, a testimony of a valiant mind.

CHRIST ascended up to heaven, in the presence of his disciples, that they
might be vvittnesses of this mystery, of which they were eie-beholders, none
can give better testimony of God almighties deeds, then he which has learned
them by experience: wherefore he that would certainly know, how good, how
sweet, and merciful he is toward his, and what is the force and efficacy of
his divine grace, love, providence, and spiritual consolatio^s: let him ask
those, which indeed have had experience of them, for they and only they, will
give him the best instructions and satisfaction.

More-ouer CHRIST would ascend, his disciples lookinge upon him, that they
might prosecute him with their eyes and spirit, that they might have a cordial
fealinge of his departure: that in his absence, they might fear to remain
alone, and that they might the better dispose themselves to receive his holy
grace. The Prophet HELISEVS, 4. Reg. 2.
when HELIAS was to be taken and separated from him, desired that he would give
him his spirit, HELIAS made answer: Rem quidem difficilem postulasti,
attamensi videris me, quando tollar ate, erit tibi quod petisti; Si autem non
videris, non erit. Thou have asked a hard thing: never the less if thou see me
when I shall be taken from thee, thou shall have what thou have asked: but if
thou see me not, thou shall not have it.

In like manner they shall be heirs of the spirit of CHRIST, whom love does
cause to mourn, for his departure: to whom his absence does seem greuious,
who earnestly whilst they live in this banishment, desire his holy presence.
Such a Saint was he that said: thou art gone my comfortour, without any care
of me, at thy departure thou did bless thine, and I saw it not; the Angels
promised, that thou should return again, and I heard them not. Who is
able to express or understand the solitude, trouble, cries and tears of the
blessed Virgin, of his beloved disciple, S. MARIE MAGDALEN, and the other
Apostles: when they saw CHRIST to be pulled from them, who together with him
carried up their affectionate hearts? and yet notwithstanding it is said of
them, that they returned with great joy into Jerusalem: the same love and
affection which made them bewail the visible loss of their beloved Lord and
Master, did likewise cause that they congratulated eatch other; much reioycinge
at his glory, for it is the nature of true love, not so much to seek the
comoditie of it self, as the honor and comodity of the person that is beloved.

Last of all to close up this meditation, it is left to us to consider, with
what glory, with what joy, this noble conqueror was brought into that heavenly
city: what solemnities were then instituted in the glorious Paradise, how
magnificently was he entertained by those celestial citizens? what a
delightful spectacle was it, to see men accompanied with Angels, to go in
procession, and to set upon those seats, which for many thousand years, were
vacant. But a most rauishinge joy it was, to behold, the sacred humanity of
CHRIST JESUS, far transcending al others, to set at the right hand of his
eternal Father.

All these things are worthy of thy attentive consideration, that thou may
learn, that the labors thou do undergo for the love of God, are not spent
in vain, therefore he that humbled himself under all creatures, it was
requisite that he should be exalted above all; that the lovers of true glory
may trace this path, they must expect if they desire to be above all, that
first they be subject to all, even their inferiors.

CHAP. V. Of six things necessary to prayer.
THESE are the exercises and meditations (Christian Reader) wherewith every day
thou May feed thy soul, which if thou do rightly use, thou will never
want matter, to buesy thy mind devoutly. But thou must note, Six parts
necessary for meditation.
that meditation, if it be well performed, ought to consist of six parts. Some
of which go before, others follow mental prayer.

First before we apply our selves to meditation, Preparation.
it is necessary, that our mind and soul be diligently prepared to this holy
exercice. As the stringes of an instrument, except they be beforehand well
tuned, will never make a pleasant melody.

After preparation ought to follow the readinge of some holy mystery, Reading.
according to the distribution of days in the week, which in young
beginners is cheifely necessary until with continual use and custom, matter
of meditation offers it self unto their memories. Then insist upon the
matter to be meditated upon. Meditation. Giuinge of thanks. Oblation.
To meditation we must join devout and sincere giuinge of thanks to God for
all his benefits: then a general oblation of all the life of CHRIST, for
recompense of any benefit, and our own works to the honor and glory of God.
Last of all, petition, Petition.
which is cheifely called prayer, wherein we desire all things necessary for
our own salvation, of our neighbors, and the good of the wholl Church.

These six parts are required to mental prayer, which besides other
commodities they minister abundant matter of meditation, seeing they set be
fore us diverse sorts of meats, that if one will not relish our spiritual
taste, we may fall upon an other: if we be deficient in one; in an other we may
employ our minds, and kindle our devotion.

But in every meditation, neither all these parts nor order is always
necessary: although, as I said before, to young beginners, it is. That they
should have a certain method, according to which they are to guide them
selves, wherefore in that which has, or shall be said, my intention is not to
set down a general rule, or immutable perpetual laws, the violatinge of
which should be a fault, but my meaning is, to introduce, and bring in young
beginners and nouices into the right way, and method of meditation: which when
they are once in use, experience, but especially the holy Ghost will better
inform them.

CHAP. VI. Of the preparation necessary to prayer.
IT will not be besides our purpose to handle all these parts severally, we
will therefore first begin with preparation which we did put first.

He therefore which goes about to meditate, after he has placed his body after
a decent manner, either kneelinge, or standinge, or composinge himself in
manner of a Cross, or prostratinge himself upon the ground, or sittinge, if
infirmity or necessity does so require, let him first sign himself with
the sign of the Cross, then let him recollect the dispersed powers of his
soul, especially the imagination, and sequester it from all temporal and
transitory things. Let him eleuate his understanding to God, consideringe
his divine presence, with that due reverence and attention as is requisite, and
let him imagine God Almighty himself to be present in his soul, as in
very deed he is.

If it be the morninge meditation, after a general act of contritio^, for his
sins, let him make to God a general confession: if in the eueninge let him
examine his conscience, concerning all his thoughts, words, and works, of
that day: of the forgetfulness of God Almighty his benefits, and of the sins
of his former life, humbly prostratinge himself in the sight of the divine
Majesty in whose presence, he now is after a particular manner, saying the
words of the Patriarch ABRAHAM: Loquar ad Dominum meum, Genesis 18.
cum sim puluis and cinis: Shall I speak to my Lord, seeinge I am but dust and
ashes. And singinge this Psalm. To thee have I lifted up mine eyes, 122.
which dvvellest in the heavens. Behold as the eyes of servants, are on the
hands of their masters. As the eyes of the handmaide on the hands of her
mistress: so are our eyes unto our Lord God until he have mercy on us. Have
mercy on us, o Lord, have mercy on us: Glory be to the Father, etc.

And because we are not able of our selves to think any good, Cor. 2.
but all our sufficiency is from God, and because none can say Lord JESUS,
that is to say, call upon the name of JESUS, without the holy Ghost, to thee
therefore, o holy Ghost, do I turn my self, with tears imploringe thy
assistance: Come holy Ghost send fourth from heaven the glitteringe beams of
thy true light: Come Father of the poor, come giver of rewards, come light
of our hearts, svveet comforter, svveet guest of the soul, svveet
refreshinge, rest in labor, temperature in heat, in mourninge a grateful
solace, o blessed light, replenish the hearts of the faithful. Then follows
the prayer. Deus qui corda fideliu^, etc. These being said, he shall pray to
God to bestow upon him his divine grace, to assist at this holy exercise, with
that attentio^* due recollection, fear and reverence, beseeminge so great a
Majesty, humbly beseechinge him, so to pass over this time of holy prayer,
that he may return from thence fortified with new fervor, to execute
whatsoever shall belong to his holy service, for prayer which bears not this
fruit, is lukewarm, imperfect and of no moment before God.

CHAP. VII. Of Readinge.
AFTER a due preparation, follows readinge of those things which are to be
meditated upon. Which must not be too hasty but mature, serious and quiet, to
which the understanding must not only be attentive, to understand those
things which are red: but also, and cheifely the will: that those things
which are understood may give a spiritual gust and fealinge. When he falls
upon any place, which much moves his affection, let him there pause a while,
that in his heart it may cause a greater impressio^. He must also beware not to
spend too much time in readinge thereby to hinder meditation, it being a more
fruitful exercise, for-asmuch as things attentively considered pearce more
inwardly, and produce greater effects. If peradventure some time it happens
the mind so to be dispersed, What to do vvhe the mind is distracted.
that it cannot settle it self to prayer, then it is better to insist a while
longer in readinge, or to join readinge to meditation, or after the readinge
of one point to pause upon that a while, then after the same manner to proceed
to the others. Although the understanding tied to certain words which are
red, cannot so freely be carried into diverse affections, as when it is free
from this bond.

In putting out of unprofitable thoughts violence is to be vseds
It is oftentimes very profitable for a man to use some violence to himself, to
expel his vain and triflinge fancies after the example of the Patriarch
JACOB, manfully to wrestle against them, perseueringe unto the end, after which
fight, the victory being obtained, God does for the most part, give greater
devotion, or more pure contemplation, or some other supernatural gift, which
he never denies, to those who faithfully fight in his cause.

CHAP. VIII. Of Meditation.
AFTER readinge follows meditation. Which is some times of such things as
can be represented to our immaginatio^: as the life and passion of our blessed
Savior: the latter judgment, hell, and the Kingedome of heaven. Sometimes of
such things as are subject rather to the understanding, then immagination, as
the consideration of God Almighties benefits, his bounty, clemency and other
perfections which are in God.

These meditations are called, the one intellectual, the other immaginarie.
Both which in these exercises are to be used after a different manner, as
occasion requires. When the meditation is immaginarie, so that the thing
meditated upon, has, or ever had, any actual existance or being, we must so
frame and represent it to our fancy, as though we were present in the same
place, and savve with our eyes those things, which there were done. This
representation will make the consideration of these things, more viuacious,
and cause a greater impression in our souls. For if our immaginatio^ can
comprehend wholl cities and countries, with less difficulty, can it
comprehend one mystery. This helps much to the recollection of the mind:
this will retain the same busied in it self, as a be in the hyue, where she
works and disposes all things diligently. But in these things a moderation
must be used, for to run with a violent immagination to Jerusalem, to frame to
the fancy those things which are to be meditated there, does oftentimes hurt
the head. Wherefore it is good to abstain from immoderate immaginations, least
nature oppressed with too violent apprehensions, becomes infirm and weak.

CHAP. IX. Of giuinge of thanks.
AFTER meditation follows giuinge of thanks, the occasion of which must be
taken from the matter meditated upon; for example if the meditation be of the
passion of our Savior, we must give thanks unto him that, he has redeemed us
from so great torments. If of sins: that, with longanimity he has expected
us to do penance. If of the miseries of this life: that he has preserved us
from the greatest part of them. If of death: that hitherto he has defended us
from the perils of sudden death, and has favorably granted us time of
penance. If of the glory of Paradise; that he has created us to that end, that
after the storms and troubles of this present life, we should enjoy eternal
felicity, after this manner, we are to proceed in other meditations.

To these benefits, we may join the others which we handled before, to wit,
the benefits of our creation, conservation, redemption and vocation. As much as
in us lies, let us give him thanks that he has created us after his own
image and likeness, that he has given us a memory to remember him, an
understanding to know him, and a will to love him. That he has committed us to
the custody of Angels, that by the help of our Angel Guardian, he has
exempted us from many dangers, preserved us from many mortal sins, defended
us from death and malice of the devil, while we were in this case (which was
no less, then to free us from everlasting death, to which by sin we were
obnoxious.) That he would vouchsafe to assume our nature upon him, and for our
sakes suffer a most ignominious death. That we were borne of Christian
parents; that we were regenerated by Baptism: that in this present life he
has promised grace, and unspeakable glory in the world to come: that he has
adopted us for his Sons: that in the Sacrament of confirmation, he has
fortified us with strong weapons to fight against the world, the flesh, and
the devil; that he has given himself to us in the Sacrament of the altar:
that he has left unto us the Sacrament of penance, to recover that grace which
was lost by mortal sin. That he has visited us daily with good and holy
inspirations: that he has given us grace to persevere in holy and pious
exercises.

After the same method we must proceed in accountinge other God Almighties
benefits, as well general as particular, and for all public or private,
manifest or secret, give him thanks: and we must inuit all creatures
celestial and terrestiall to bare us company in this holy exercise: singinge
the song of the three children: Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino: Dau^ 3.
laudate and superexaltate eum in saecula, etc. And the Psalm: Psalm. 102.
Benedic anima mea Domino: and omnia que intra me sunt, nomini sancto eius!
Benedic anima mea Domino: and noli obliuisci omnes retributiones eius. Qui
propitiatur omnibus iniquitatibus tuis: qui sanat omnes infirmitates tuas. Qui
redimit de interitu vitam tuam: qui coronat te in misericordia and
miserationibus. My soul bless thou our Lord: and all things, that are with
in me, his holy name. My soul bless thou our Lord: and forget not all his
retributions. Who is propitious to all thine iniquities: who heals all thine
infirmities. Who redeemeth thy life from deadly falling: who crowns thee in
mercy and commiserations.

CHAP. X. Of Oblation.
CORDIAL thanks being given to God, presently the heart breaks naturally
into that affection, which the Kingly Prophet DAVID felt in himself when he
said: Psalm. 11^.
Quid retribuam Domino: pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? What shall I render to
our Lord: for all things that he has rendered to me? Which desire we shall in
some sort satisfy, if we offer to God whatsoever we have. First therefore we
must offer to God our selves, for his perpetual servants, wholly resigninge
our selves to his holy will, howsoever he shall please to dispose of us. We
must likewise direct, all our thoughts, words and works, whatsoever we shall
do or suffer, to the supreme honor and glory of his sacred Name. Then we
must offer to God the Father, all the merits of his only begotten Son, all
the labors and sorrows he did undergo in this miserable world, to fulfill
the will of his heavenly Father, beginning from his nativity, and hard
manger, to his contumelious crucifyinge and giuinge up the ghost: for as much
as these are all the goods and means, whereof in the new Testament, he has
left us heirs; wherefore, as that is no less our own, which is given us
freely, then that we get with our industry: so the meritts of CHRIST, which he
has freely bestowed upon us, are no less our own, then if we had got them
with our sweat and labor.

Hence every man may offer this sacred oblation, as the first, numbringe one by
one all the labors and virtues of the life of CHRIST, his obedience, patience,
humility, charity, and his other virtues, seeinge these are the most
excellent of all oblations, that we can offer to God.

CHAP. XI. Of Petition.
THIS noble oblation being well performed, we may securely and confide^tly
proceed to the askinge of any gifts and graces. First therefore God Almighty is
to be prayed unto, with inflamed charity and ardent Zeal of his divine
honor, for the conversion of all nations, that all people may be illuminated
with the knowledge of him, praysinge and adoringe him as the only true and
living God. To this end from the bottom of our hearts we may utter the
words of the Kingely Prophet: Confiteantur tibi populi Deus: confiteantur tibi
populiomnes: Psalm. 66.
Let people, o God, confess to thee: let all people confess to thee.

Then we must pray to God for the Prelates of the Church, the supreme Pastor,
Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates, that he would be pleased
so to govern and illuminate them with the light of his heavenly grace, that
they may be able to bring all men to the knowledge and obedience of their
creator.

We must also pray to God for Kings and Princes (as S. PAVLE admonishes) and
for all men placed in dignity, that by their diligent care, their subjects may
live a quiet life, well instructed with honest manners, for this is grateful
to God, that wills all should be saved, and come to the knowledge of his
truth.

Then for all the members of his mystical body, for the just that he would be
pleased to conserve them in their sanctity. For sinners, to convert them, from
their wicked courses, to the amendment of their lives. For the dead, that he
would free them from the expiatinge torments wherein they are detained, and
bring them to their eternal rest.

We must pray to God, for the poor infirm captives, band-slaues or others in
whatsoever tribulation, that for the merits of his Dear Son, he would
vouchsafe to help, and free them from all their miseries.

After we have prayed for the good of our neighbors, let us at length entreat
for our own necessities, which discretion will teach every one in particular
(if he be not altogether ignorant of himself) what they are. But that we may
set down a method for beginners, we will lead them into this path way. First
therefore we must pray to God, that for the merits and passion of his only
begotten Son; he would pardon our sins, give us grace to avoid them, and to
expiate them with good works worthy of penance; but especially to implore for
help and assistance against those evil inclinations and vices to which we are
most propence, layinge open to our heavenly physician all the wounds of our
diseased souls, that with the ointment of holy grace, he would heal them.

Then let us ask, for the most excellent virtues wherein the wholl perfection
of a Christian man consists, for example, faith, hope, charity, fear,
humility, patience, obedience, fortitude in adversity, poverty of spirit,
contempt of the world, true discretion, purity of intention, and others like
to these, which are placed in the supreme top of a spiritual buildinge. Faith
is the prime root and foundation of a Christian: hope is a staff to defend us
from all tribulations of this present life: charity the end of all perfection:
fear of God, the beginning of true wisdom: humility is the Basis and
groundwork of all virtues: patience is the strongest armor against the fury
of our enemies: obedience is the most grateful oblation to God, wherein man
offers himself for a sacrifice, discretion is the eye of the soul,
fortitude the hand thereof, wherewith it brings all her works unto perfection:
purity of intention directs all her actions unto God. We must after pray for
other virtues, which may help us forward in the way of perfection: as, sobriety
in meat and drink, moderation of the tongue, custody of the senses, modesty
and composition of the outward man, sweetness in giuinge good example to our
neighbors, rigor and severity toward our selves, and the like.

Last of all we must conclude this petition, with a fervent imploringe of the
divine love, and here to pause a while, so that the chiefest part of time be
spent in an earnest desiringe of this grace and favor, seeinge in the divine
love all our felicity does consist, to that end this prayer followinge will
not be unprofitable.

A prayer for the obteininge of divine love.
GRant I beseech thee, o Lord, that I may love thee with all my soul, with all
my heart, with all my strength, o my only hope, my perfect glory, my refuge
and solace. O my dearest of all freindes, sweet spouse, flowrishinge spouse,
sweeter then any honey. Delight of my heart, life of my soul, joy of my spirit.
O bright day of eternity, clear light of my bowels, paradise of my heart,
original of all my good, o my chiefest strength, prepare, o Lord in my soul a
delicious bed, that according to thy promise, there thou may dwell, and
make thy mansion. Mortify in me whatsoever is displeasinge to thee, and make
me a man according to thine own heart. Pearce the marrowe of my soul. Wound
my heart with the darts of dear affection, and inebriate me with the wine of
love.

When shall I perfectly please thee in all things? when shall I cast from me
all things contrary to thee? when shall I be wholly thine? when shall I leave
to be mine own? when shall nothing live in me, but what is thine? when shall
I embrace thee with ardent affection? when will thou inflame, and consume me
with the flames of love? when will thou pearce and replenish me on every side,
with thy sweetness? when will thou lay open and manifest to my poverty, that
precious Kingedome which is within me, that is to say, thy sacred self with
all thy riches? when will thou unite me perfectly unto thee? when will thou
transform and swallowe me up wholly in thee, that from thee I may never
depart? when will thou remove from me all obstacles, which hinder me that am
not one spirit with thee. O beloved of my soul! O delight of my heart! Look
down upon me and hear me, not for my own merits, but out of thy infinite
goodness: instruct, illuminate, direct, and help me in all, and through all,
that I neither speak or do any thing, but that which I shall know to be
grateful before thy sight.

O my God, my love, my joy, my pleasure, my fortress and my life! why do
thou not help the poor and needy, imploringe thy assistance? thou which
fillest heaven and earth, why do thou suffer my heart to be empty? thou
which cloathest the flowers and lilies of the feildes with beauty: thou which
nourishest the birds of the air: thou which susteinest the least creature of
the earth: why art thou unmindful of me, that forgets all things for the
love of thee. O immense goodness! I had knowledge of thee too late, that I loved
thee no sooner. O new and ancient beauty! O miserable was my state when I
lived without thy love! O wretched was my condition, when I knew thee not! o
intolerable blindness of my heart when I savv thee not! I sought thee far
abrood, vvhe^thou were within me. Yet at length, though late, I have found
thee, let not thy mercy suffer me, o Lord, that ever I forsake or leave thee
again.

And because to have eyes to see thee is one of the cheifest things that
pleases thee, Lord, give me the eyes of a solitary turtle, to contemplate
thee, give me chaste eyes full of modesty: humble and amorous: sanctified and
vveepinge: attent and discreet eyes which may understand and perform thy
will. Lord give me grace to behold thee with such eyes, as thou may look
upon me again, as thou did upon PETER, when he denied thee, and did
move him to bitter compunction for his sins. Look upon me as thou did upon
the prodigal child, when thou did runn to embrace and kiss him: Or as
upon the Publican, not daring to lift up his eyes to heaven. Behold me with
those eyes that thou did inuit MARIE MAGDALENE to penance, and to vvash thy
feet with tears. Or with those eyes vvhervvith the Spouse in the Canticles
incited thee to her love when thou say dest: Cant. 4.
Quam pulchra es amica mea, quam pulchra es! oculi tui columbarum! How
beautiful art thou my love, how beautiful art thou! thine eyes as it were
of doves.

That my aspect be pleasinge, and that the beauty of my soul be grateful
unto thee, do thou I beseech thee bestow the gift of virtues and graces upon
me, to deck and trim my self, whereby I may live to glorify thy holy name for
ever and ever.

O merciful and holy Trinity! Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one only true
God, teach, direct and help me in all. O Father omnipotent, I beseech thee by
the greatness of thy immense power, to confirm and strengthen my memory in
thee only, and to replenish it with holy and pious cogitations. O Son most
wise, illuminate my small understanding with thy eternal wisdom, to
know thy everlasting truth, and my own misery. O holy Ghost love of the
Father and the Son, with thy incomprehensible goodness make my will
conformable to thy divine pleasure, inflame it with such a fire of thy holy
love, that no waters which rise from the turbulent fear of evil suggestions,
may be able to extinguish it. O holy Trinity and one God, I would to God I
could do nothing else but praise and love thee, and as much as all thy holy
Saints. I would to God I had the love of all creatures in me alone, I would
with a willinge mind tra^sferrand turn it to the love of thee, although this
were nothing, in respect of what thou deseruest. Only thou thy self, can
worthily love and praise thy self. Because none else besides thee, is able to
understand thy incomprehensible goodness, and therefore the just poise of love
resideth only in thy sacred breast.

O blessed Virgin Marie, Mother of God, Queen of heaven, Lady of the world,
Mansion of the holy Ghost, Lilly of purity, Rose of patience, Paradise of
pleasure, Mirror of chastity, Vessel of innocence, intercede for me miserable
banished wretch, and bestow upon me a portion of thy abundant charity.

O all yea Saints of God, and yea angelical Spirits, which burn with a
vehement affection of your Creator, especially yea Seraphins, who inflame both
heaven and earth with love, do not forsake my miserable soul, but purify it
as you did the lips of ESAIAS from all vice and uncleanness, and set it on fire
with the flames of your ardent love, that I may love and seek our Lord God,
restinge and remaininge in him for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XII. Certain documentes to be observed about Meditation.
HITHERTO we have only set down plentiful matter for meditation, which for
the present is very necessary, because the greatest part of men, either
neglect or disdain this exercise, because they want sufficient matter to
consider upon; now we will briefly handle those things which pertain to the
form and method of meditation, of which, though the holy Ghost be the
principal master, neuer-the-lesse experience teaches us, that certain
docume^tes are likewise necessary, because the way to heaven is cragged and
full of difficulties, wherefore there is need of a guide, without which, many
have gone astray a long time from the right path, or at leastwise, have not
attained to their desired end, so soon as they expected.

The first Document.
THe first Docume^t therefore is, that we do not so adheare to those things,
which above we have digested into several points, and times, as that we
should think it a fault, to fall upon other things, wherein the mind may
reap more abundant fruit, for seeing devotion is the end of all those
exercises, that which comes nearest to this scope, is always to be accounted
best. Which ought not lightly upon every occasion to be done, but with a clear
and manifest profit.

The second Document.
WE must be wary of too many speculations in this exercise, and use rather
efficatious affections of the will, then curious discourses of the
understanding: wherefore they go not in the right way that meditate of divine
mysteries, as though they were to preach them to the people in a sermon: which
is rather to dissipate, then recollect the spirit. And to wander abrood, the^
to be busied in their own home. Therefore he that will meditate with fruit to
his soul, must come to it, like an humble simple creature, bringinge rather a
will disposed to taste these holy mysteries profitably, then acrimony of
understanding to discuss them learnedly. For this is proper to those who give
themselves to studdies, not to those who consecrate themselves unto devotion.

The third Document.
IN the precedent Document we declared, how the understanding is to be
moderated and subjected to the will, now we will prefix some limits to the
will, out of which she cannot straggle without a fault. That therefore she be
not too immoderate in her exercise, we must know, that devotion is never to be
expressed with the violence of our arms, as some do think, who with
constrained sorrow do wringe out tears and commiseration, while they
consider the torments of CHRIST JESUS: for this does rather dry the heart,
the^ make it capable of divine visitations (as CASSIANVS does excellently
teach) more-ouer this extraordinary force, does often hurt the body, and by
reason of the burden, which this violence brings with it, the mind is left
so nauseous that it fears to return again to these exercises: when
experience teaches, that it is the cause of so much trouble, he therefore that
will fruitfully meditate upon the passion of CHRIST, let him not be too anxious
for sensible co^miseration, but let it suffice, that he exhibiteth himself
present to his sufferinges, beholdinge them with a simple and quiet eye, and
consideringe them with a tender compassiue heart, rather disposed to entertain
that affection which God almighties mercy shall suggest, then that which shall be
wrong out with violence. Which when he has done, let him not be solicitous
nor sorrowful, what other things God does deny or will not give.

The fourth Document.
HEnce we may gather what attentio^, is to be observed in prayer, wherefore the
heart must not be languishinge, remiss or dejected; but quick, attentive and
elevated to heavenly things. And as it is necessary to come to God with such
attention, elevation of the mind, and abstraction from sensible things; so it
is no less necessary to temper sweetly this attention, that it be neither
hurtful to bodily health, nor impediment to extinguish devotion. For when any
be so intensiue to the matter they meditate upon, without any respect to their
infirm nature, do oftentimes so dull their brains, that they be unapt for
other exercises. On the contrary, there are some, to avoid this danger are so
remiss and lasy in their attentio^, that easily they suffer their minds to be
distracted with other idle thoughts

These two extremes, that they may be both avoided, such moderation is
necessary, that the head be not weakened with too violent attention, nor the
thoughts permitted carelessly to wander out of supine negligence, in which
thing, we must immitate a good rider upon an vntovvard horse, which neither
holds him in too hard, nor loses the raines upon his neck, but guides him
equally, that he gives not back, nor goes forvvard too speedily. So we must
strive in meditation that attention be moderate, diligently resistinge evil
thoughts, but not violent with anxietie.

We must note also, that, these things we here speak of attention, are
chiefly to be taken heed of in the beginning of meditation: for it often
happens, that, those which are too violent in the beginning, do founder in
the midst of meditation. As trauailers making too much speed in their
settinge forth, are tired in the midst of their iourny.

The fifth Document.
AMongst all documentes this is chiefly to be observed, that when in meditation
we cannot presently perceive that sweetness of devotion we expect, not therefore
to wax pusillanimous, or leave of from the exercise begun, but patiently with
longanimity expect the cominge of our lord: seeinge it beseems the excellency
of the divine Majesty: the vility and baseness of man's condition, the
importance of the business we have in hand, to stay a while before the gates of
his sacred palace: If he comes presently after a little expectation, with
many thanks let us with gratitude entertain this undeserved favor: If he
makes longer delays, let us humble our selves before him, and confess that
we do not deserve this grace: If he vouchsafes not to come at all, let us
bare it patienthy with a quiet mind, and content our selves, that we have
offered our selves, with all we have unto him for a grateful sacrifice: that
we have denied our own proper wills, resigninge the^ unto his Power: that we
have crucified all our inordinate appetites: that we have fought against our
passions and vices. And finally that we have performed whatsoever was in our
power to be done. And although we have not worshipped him with sensible
devotion. Yet let it suffice us, if that we have worshipped him inspirit and
truth, as he requires.

Last of all, let us persuade our selves, that this is the most dangerous and
chiefest to be feared rock of this present navigations, and place, where in the
true and faithful servants of God are tried, and distinguished from
infidells, from which if we shall depart in safety, in all others, we shall
have a prosperous success.

The sixth Document.
THis document not much differs from the former, which not withstandinge is
equally necessary, and this it is, that the servant of god must not content
himself, that he has felt a little sensible gust from meditation; as many
do, when they have shed a little dry tear, or felt a little molifyinge of the
heart, that they have attained to the scope and end of this exercise.

But they are far deceived, for even as to make the earth fruitful one little
shewer which alaieth the dust, is not sufficient, but it must have a great
deal of rain thoroughly soke into the roots of the plants, before it can
give any hopes of a fruitful year: so the abundance of celestial waters,
are necessary to our souls for to make them bring fourth the fruit of good
works. Wherefore we are not with out cause admonished by spiritual men, that
we should spend as much time as possible we can in this holy exercise, and it
is better to insist some long time together, then by fitts. For when the time
is short, it will be almost all consumed, in quietinge the immagination, and
recollecting the heart. and it often happens, that whilst we should reap the
fruit of our former trouble, meditation is quite broke of.

Concerning the prefixed time for meditation, it seems to me, what soever is
less the two hours, or an hour and half, is to little for this exercise,
because almost one hour is spent in tuninge the instrument of our souls,
repressinge idle and unprofitable thoughts, and recollectinge the mind from
temporal things: and some time also is necessary to spend in reapinge the
fruit of our prayer in the latter end.

Although I cannot deny, but after some pious action the mind is better
disposed for meditation: for as dried wood quickly burns, so the mind that is
well disposed, is sooner kindled with this celestial fire.

The morninge also is the best time for meditation, because the mind is then
most free from fancies, and therefore can with better facillitie apply it self
to this holy exercise. But who by reason of the multiplicity of outward
affairs, cannot spend so much time, yet at leastwise let them, with the poor
widdowe in the gospel, offerr up to god the small mite of their sincere
affection. And no doubt but he who provides for all creatures according to
their several necessities, will graciously accept it, if their culpable
negligence does not deserve the contrary.

The seventh Document.
THE seventh document is, that he that is visited with divine consolations in,
or, out of prayer, ought to have a special care to spend that time; above
other, with fruit unto his soul, for whilst this prosperous gale does blow,
he will go further in his iourny toward heaven in one hour, then other
wise, he has, or shall do in many days. So did the holy Father S. FRANCIS
do of whom S. BONAVENTVRE writes that he had such a solicitous care of divine
visitations, that whenever upon the way he was recreated with them, he would
either go before, or stay behind his companion a while, until he had digested
this divine morsel sent unto him from heaven. They which are negligent and
carlesse to answer divine visitations, are commonly chastised with this
punishment from God, that when they seek, they will hardly find them.

The eighth Document.
THE last Document and of greatest moment is, in this exercise of prayer we
must join meditation to contemplation, seeinge one is, as it were a ladder
unto the other: wherefore it is the part of meditation, with diligent attention
to consider and ponderate celestial things, first one, then an other, that at
last some pious affection may be stirred up in the soul, like him that with a
steel strikes fire out of a flint: but it is the property of contemplation
which follows meditation, to enjoy this kindled fire, that is to say, to
embrace that affection, which with much labor he has sought and found, in
deep silence and tranquillity of spirit, not with many discourses and
speculations of the understanding, but with a pure simple relation and eye to
verity, hence a certain doctor says, that medition does discouse with
labor and small profit, but contemplation without any trouble, and with much
fruit: the one does seek, and the other finds: the one does chewe, and the
other eats the meat: the one does reason and consider, the other
contemplateth those things ^he loves and tastes, and in fine the one is the
means, the other is the end: the one is the way and motion, the other the
term of the way and end of the action. From these things which we have said,
that rule or axiom is very frequent amongst spiritual Masters, which few of
their scholars do rightly understand. That is, fine adepto media omnia
cessare. The end being atteined unto, all means do cease. For example, the
mariner rests when he has arrived to his desired haven. So he that meditates,
when by the means of meditation he shall come to the rest and sweet gust of
contemplation, ought to leave the eragged way of reasoninge and discouse,
contentinge him self, with the memory of god almighty alone, whom he may
behold as present to his soul, and quietly enjoy that sweet affection, which
he shall vouchsafe to bestow upon him, whether it be of love, admiration, joy,
or the like, and the reason is, because the end of this business consists
rather in love, and affection of the will, then in speculations of the
understanding. When therefore the will has captiuated the one, and atteined to
the other affection: all reasoninge and speculations of the understanding are
to be left: that the soul may bend all her forces to it, without a confused
wanderinge to the actions of the other powers. Therefore a certain doctor
gives this counsel to those who perceive the^ selves to be inflamed with the
fire of divine love, that they should quite abolish all other thoughts and
speculations, though never so sublime and subtle, not that they are evil, but
because for the present they hinder a greater good. And this is no other, then
after we have come to the end, to leave meditation for the love of
contemplation.

Which we may do (to speak particularly of this matter) in the end of every
exercise (that is to say) after the petition of divine love, as above said: and
that for too reasons, first because it is supposed that the labor of the
finished exercise has produced some fruit of devotion toward God almighty,
as the wiseman says, melius est finis orationis, quam principium. Better is
the end of prayer, then the beginning. Secondly it is expedient, that, after
labor in prayer, the understanding rest a while, and recreate it self in the
arms of contemplation.

Here let every one resist what soever immaginations shall present them selves
unto his mind, let him still his understanding, let him fasten his memory
strongly upon god, consideringe that he is placed in his holy presence. But let
him not adheare to any particular contemplation of God, but only content
himself with that knowledge, which faith has ministered unto him: and to this
let him add his will and affection, seeinge this is only that which embraces
God, and in which the wholl fruit of meditation consists. The weak
understanding is little able to conceive, or comprehend any thing of God, but
the will can love him very much.

Let him therefore rouse up himself from te^porall things, and let him
recollect himself with in himself (that is to say) to the center of his
soul, where is the lively image of god, here let him harken attentively as
though he heard God almighty speakinge from a high tutret, or as though he
held him fast being present in his soul: or as though there were no other
persons in the world, besides God and himself.

Nay I say more, let him quite forget him self, and those things which he
does: for as one of the ancient holy Fathers says, prayer is then every way
complete, when he that prays does not consider that he is before God in
prayer. And this is to be done not only in the end of the exercise, but in the
midst and in every part of meditation. For as often at this spiritual
sleep shall sweetly oppress any one (that is to say) when the understanding
is drowned as it were in a sleep, (but the will watchinge) let him quietly
enjoy this delicate meat as long as it shall last.

But when it is digested, let him return again to meditation, in which we
must behave our selves like a gardener, who, when he wattereth a bed of his
garden, after he has once sprincled it with water expects a while, until it
be drunk in, then sprincleth again, that at last it may thoroughly wett the
earth, That it may become more fruitful. But what the soul cast into this
heavenly sleep, and illuminated with the splendor of this eternal light,
does enjoy! what sacietie, what charity, what internal peace! no tongue is
able to express: this is that peace which exceeds all understanding, this
is that felicity, a greater then which cannot be immagined in this vale of
misery: there are many so inflamed with this fire of divine love, that their
interiours, at the very memory of this blessed name without any meditation at
all before, do rest in joy.

These need no more consideration or discourses, to love god, then a mother
needs motives to love her child, or the bride her husband. Others there are so
absorped in God, not only in prayer, but also in outward business, that they
wholly forget the^ selves, and all creatures for the love of him. neither are
these effects of divine love to be admired, seeinge worldly love causes often
times greater matters in the minds of men, that it makes them madd. What shall
we attribute less efficacy to grace then unto nature and sin? When therefore
the soul shall feale this operation of divine love, in what part of prayer
soever it happens, let him never refuse it, although he spend all the time of
this exercise in it without any manner of consideration at all of that point,
he purposed to meditate upon (except he be specially obliged unto it.) For as
saint AUGUSTINE says vocal prayer ought to be left, if it hurts devotion,
so meditation ought to be differred if it hurts contemplation. But as it is
necessary to leave meditation for this affection, and to ascend from the
lesser to the greater: so often times this contemplation is to be left for
meditation, when it is so vehement, that the corporal health, receives some
damage thereby. This oftentimes happens to those who taken with the pleasure
of this divine sweetness, give them selves too indiscreetly to these exercises,
and use them too immoderately, to whom (as a certain Doctor says) this
will be the best remedy, that they desist from contemplatio^, tourninge their
minds to some other good affection, as of compassion in meditatinge of the
sufferinges of our Savior. Or about the sins and miseries of this world, to
exonerate the heart, diuertinge it from that too much intension.

THE SECOND PART. OF DEVOTION AND OF THOSE THINGS WHICH THEREUNTO BELONG.
CHAP. I. What is devotion.
AMONGST all the troublsome difficulties, to which they who frequent the
exercises of prayer and meditation, are subject, none is greater, then that
which they suffer from the defect of devotion, which often felt in prayer.
Devotion makes all things easy.
For if they have this, nothing is more sweet, nothing more pleasant,
nothing more easy, then to insist to prayer and meditation. But if that be
wantinge, nothing more hard, nothing more difficult, nothing more
burdensome then to pray. Wherefore seeing we have already spoken of prayer,
meditation, and the method to perform it. Now it will not be besides our
purpose to treat of those things which partly promote, and partly hinder and
extinguish devotion in the mind of man. As also to lay open the temptations
which are obuious to those who frequent these pious exercises, and last of all
to annex some certain documentes, which may not a little avail to the well
performance of this business. We will therefore begin from the definition of
devotion: that it may manifestly appear what a precious margarite it is, for
which we war.

Devotion, as S. THOMAS says, is a virtue which makes a man prompt and
ready to every virtuous deed, and stirringe him up to do well. which
definition evidently shows the necessity and utility of this virtue, as
conteininge more in it, then any man can immagine.

For the better understanding of this, we must know, that the chiefest
impediment that hinders us from leadinge a virtuous life, is the corruption
of humane nature, proceedinge from sin, which bringes with it a vehement
inclination to vice, and a great difficulty to do well; this make the way
of virtue cragged and troublesome, although in it self considered, nothing in
this world, is so svveet, so lovely, so beautiful.

The divine wisdom has ordained the help of devotion, as a most conveninient
remedy to overcome this difficulty: for as the north wind dissipateth
clouds, and makes a clear skey, so true devotion expels from the mind, the
tediousnes of this way, and makes us with alacrity prompt to pious actions.
This virtue does so far forth obtain the name of virtue, that likewise it a
special gift of the holy ghost; a heavenly dew, an assistance obtained by
prayer, whose property is to remove all difficulties happeninge in prayer and
meditation: to expel tepiditie: to minister alacrity in the divine service,
to instruct the understanding: to roborate the will: to kindle in our hearts
heavenly love: to extinguish the flames of unlawful desires: to ingendre a
hatred and loathinge of sin and all transitory things: and last of all to
him that possesses it, to infuse a new fervor, a new spirit, a new mind,
and new desires to do well. For as SAMPSON as long as he had his hair, did
exceed all men in strength: but when that was cut he was as weak as others.
So the soul of every Christian recreated with the help of devotion, is
strong and valiant. But when it is deprived of it, it becomes infirm and
weak.

But above all the praises, which can be heaped upon this virtue, this is the
chiefest, that although it be but one only virtue, yet it is a prick and motive
to all: they therefore that desire, to walk in a virtuous way must get this for
a spurr, for without it, he will never be able to rule his rebellious flesh.

Hence it manifestly appears, in what the true essence of devotion does
consist, not in tenderness of heart, or abundance of consolations wherewith they
which meditate are often recreated except a prompt alacrity of the mind to do
well be thereunto adjoined: In what devotion consists.
especially seeinge it some times happens, the one to be found without the
other, God almighty so disposinge for the trial of his servants. Though I
can not deny. But that these consolations do often proceed from devotion and
promptitude of the mind to do well, and on the contrary, that true devotion
is not a little augmented by the same consolations and spiritual gusts. And
therefore the servants of God may lawfully desire and ask the^, not for the
delight they bring with them, but because they do greatly increase devotion
which makes us with alacrity to apply our selves to virtuous actions, which
the Kingly Prophet testifies of himself saying: Viam mandatorum tuorum
cucurri, cum dilatasti cor meum: I have run the ways of thy commandementes
when thou have enlarged my heart, that is, when thou have recreated me with the
sweetness of thy consolations which are the cause of this my readiness.

Now let us treat of the means, whereby this virtue is to be atteined unto,
which will bring no small profit with it, for seeinge it is the spurr to all
other virtues, to set down the means, whereby it is to be obtained, is no
other thing then to presribe the means to get all other virtues.

CHAP. II. Nine means or helps vvherby this virtue of devotion may be
atteined unto, with the least difficulty.
Continuance of exercise helps devotion.
THE things which promote devotion are many, of which we will handle a few.

First, it helps much devotion: if those exercises be undertaken with a
generous resolution, ready to undergo what difficulty soever shall occurr, for
the obteininge of this precious margarite. For it is certain, that nothing is
excellent which is not difficult, of which kind is devotion, especially in
beginninges.

Custody of the hear.
Secondly, a diligent custody of the heart from every vain and unprofitable
cogitation, from affections, strange love, and turbulent motions, does much
promote devotion. For it is evident, that every one of these, is no little
hindrance, seeinge this virtue chiefly requires a quiet heart, free from all
inordinate affection, and so well composed as the stringes of a well tuned
instrument.

Custody of the senses.
Thirdly, custody of the senses: especially the eyes, tongue, and ears,
seeinge by these the heart is much distracted. For those things which enter in
through the eyes and ears, do strain the mind with diverse imaginatio^s, and
co^seque^tly disturb and trouble the peace and tranquillity of the soul.
Wherefore one not without cause said, that he that meditateth must be deaf,
blind, and dumb. For by how much less he wa^dereth abroad, with greater
recollection, will he rejoice at home.

Forthly, Solitude.
solitude helps devotion much, for it does not only remove the occasions of
sin, and take away the causes which chiefly disturb the heart and senses, but
it makes a solitary man, to rouse up himself from temporal things, to be
present to himself and converse incessantly with God. To which the opportunity
of the place does admonish, which admits no other society.

Readinge of spiritual books.
Fifthly, the readinge of spiritual books does not a little nourish devotion,
because it administreth matter of consideration, abstracteth the mind from all
things created, stirs up devotion, and causes that a man does sooner
adheare to the consideration of those things, which in readinge offered him a
more pleasant taste, that, that wherewith the heart abounds may oftener occurr
to his memory.

Coutinuall memory of God.
Sixthly, continual memory of God almighty, and daily immagination of his
sacred presence, that always thou art in his sight, with a frequent use of
aspirations which S. AUGUSTINE calls iaculatorie prayers. For these do gaurd
the palace of the mind, conseruinge devotion in her fervor: that a man is
always willinge to pious actions, and ready to holy prayer: this document is
one of the principal instruments of a spiritual life, and the only remedy
for those, who have neither time nor place with opportunity, to insist to
longer prayer and meditation, and they which do thus bestow their labor to
frequent aspirations, will in a short time profit much.

Seauenthly, Perseverance.
perseverance in good exercises, that so times and places be duly observed,
especially morninge and eueninge, as fittest times for prayer.

Corporal austerities.
Eighthly, corporal abstinence and austerities do much help devotion: fasting
from meat: a frugall table: a hard bed: hair cloth: discipline, and the like.
As they originally proceed from devotion of the mind: so they do not a little
cherish, conserve and nourish the root from whence they spring, which is
devotion.

Works of mercy.
Lastly, works of mercy are a great spurr unto devotion, because they increase
the confidence we have to appear before God, and to be presented before his
sacred Majesty: they do acco^panie our prayers: and finally they merit that
they be sooner heard of God, especially seeinge they proceed from a merciful
heart.

CHAP. III. Nine impedementes of devotion.
AS there be nine things which do promote devotion, so likewise there be nine
impedimentes that do hinder the same.

Venial sins.
The first impediment of devotion is, sins not only mortal, but also venial,
for these although they do not quite abolish charity, yet at leastwise they
diminish the fervor of it, and consequently make us less apt unto devotion.
Wherefore with all diligence they are to be avoided, not only for the evil they
bring with them, but also for the good which they hinder.

Remorse of conscience.
Secondly, remorse of conscience proceedinge from sins, when it is in extremes
because it does disquiete the mind, weakeneth the head, and makes a man
unfit for ractes of virtue.

Anxiety of heart.
Thirdly, anxietie of heart and inordinate sadness, for with these, the delight
of a good conscience and spiritual joy of the inward mind, can hardly suit
and agree.

Fourthly, too many cares which do disquiete the mind, Cares of the mind.
like the Egiptian prefects who did oppress the children of ISRAEL with too
immoderate labors: nor will ever suffer them to take that spiritual repose,
which they should have often had in prayer. Yea at that time above others they
disturb the mind, endeauoringe to seduce her from her spiritual exercise.

Fifthly, Affairs.
a multitude of affairs, which take up our whole time, suffocates the spirit,
scarce leauinge for a man a moment to employ in God almighty his service.

Delights of the senses.
Sixthly, delights and pleasures of the senses, for these make spiritual
exercises unsavory, and a man unworthy to be recreated with heavenly
consolations, for as saint BERNARD says, he is not worthy of the visitations
of the holy ghost that seeks after worldly solace.

Inordinate delight in eatinge and drinkinge.
Seaue^thly inordinate delighte in eatinge and drinkinge: especially long and
sumpteous suppers, which make a man unapt to spiritual exercises. For when the
body is oppressed with too much meat, the spirit cannot so freely eleuate it
self to God.

Curiosity of the senses.
Eighthly curiosity of the senses and understanding, as to see sightes and
hear new rumors, because these do spend precious time, disturb and
ouerthrough the tranquillity of the mind distractinge it with many
impertinences, which can be no small hinderance to devotion.

Intermission of exercises.
Lastly, an intermission of our wonted exercises, except when they are not
omitted or differred for a pious cause or just necessity. For the spirit of
devotion is delicate: which when it is gone it hardly retourneth again, at
least with great difficulty. For as trees and plants must be watered in due
season otherwise they wither away and perish: so devotion, except it be watered
with the waters of holy meditation, does easily vanish.

These things we have set down briefly, that they may be the better
remembered, use and experience of them will afford a longer explication.

CHAP. IV. Of the common temptations which for the most part assault those,
who give themselves to meditations: as also of the remedies against them.
NOw let us see with what temptations they which frequent, the exercise of
prayer and meditation are molested: that we may provide convenient remedies for
them. Which be these.

1. The want of spiritual consolations. 2. A multitude of unprofitable
thoughts. 3. Thoughts of infidelity and blasphemy. 4. Fancies in the night.
5. Sleepiness and drowsinesse. 6. Diffidence of goinge forward. 7. Too much
presumption of their own sanctity. 8. Inordinate desire of learning. 9. And
indiscreet zeal.

These are the common temptations which do trouble those which would lead a
virtuous life.

Of the first temptation, and the remedy thereof.
What to do in the time of dryness of spirit.
TO him that wants spiritual co^solations, this is the remedy, that therefore
he omitteth not his customarie exercises of prayer, although they seem
unsavory and of no fruit, but let him set him self in the presence of God,
cominge before him as guilty of many greeuious sins, let him search diligently,
the corners of his own conscience, and consider whether or no through his own
default, he has lost this grace, if so, let him beseech God almighty to pardon
him for this sin, admiringe the inestimable riches of his divine patience in
toleratinge us so long.

By this means he will reap no small fruit from his aridity of spirit,
taking from thence occasion of profounder humility when he considers his
own malice and perverseness in heapinge up of sin, or of more ardent affection
when he sees God almighties goodness in pardoninge the same. And although he
enjoys no pleasure at all in his exercises, let him not therefore abstain
from the continuation of them, for it is not always necessary, that it should
be sweet and sauoury to the present taste, which will be hereafter profitable.
There-vvardof those who in the time of dryness of spirit, do not leave of
there wonted exercises.
Especially when it is often seen by experience that those who constantly
persevere in their intended exercises, not giuinge over in the time of this
aridity, but continue them with what care and diligence possibly they are able,
that these I say, depart from this table recreated with many heavenly
consolations, and much spiritual joy, saying they find nothing to be omitted
on their parts. It is but a small matter to protract prayer for a long space
when it flows with consolations, but when these are taken away, not to
desist, is an admirable act of virtue: for in this humility shines, patience
is eminent, and true perseverance in good works, is manifested.

But it is necessary in the time, of aridity, to have a greater care of
himself, watchinge over himself with greater diligence, to discuss his
conscience more sincerely, and to observe all his words and actions more
accurately. For then when alacrity and spiritual joy (which is the principal
oar of this navigations) is absent, with greater vigilance the defect of grace
is to be supplied.

When thou find thy self to be in this state, thou ought to think, as
S. BERNARD admonishes, that the sentinells which did watch thee, are a sleep,
that the walls that did defend thee, are broken down, and therefore the only
hope of safeguard to consist in arms, when all is gone which did otherwise
protect thee, safety is to be sought with an armed hand. O what deserved glory
follows such a soul, which wins the triumphant laurel after such a
manner, she fights a combat with the enemy without either sword or buckler,
is valient without help, who although she be alone susteineth the wholl
battle, with as much courage, as though she were compassed round about with
troops of auxiliatorie forces.

This is the chiefest proof, whereby the syncerity, and goodness of the freindes
of God is known, whereby the true are severed from false servants.

A remedy for the second temptation.
What to do when we have unprofitable thoughts.
AGainst the temptation of importune and unprofitable cogitations which are
wont to vex those that pray, and disquiet them with no small molestation, this
is the remedy. To resist them manfully, provided always, that resistance be
not joined with too much violence and anxietie of spirit. Seeinge this work
depends not so much of our strength, as God almighties grace and profound
humility. Wherefore when any one is besett with these temptations, let him
confidently turn himself to God without any scruple or anxietie of mind,
(seeinge this is no fault or at least a very small one) with great submission
and devotion of heart, saying, behold Lord, behold what I am? what other
thing can be looked for from this ordure but such filthy savors? What other
fruit can be expected from this earth which thou did curse in the
beginning of the world, but thorns and thistles? What good ca^ it bring
forth, except thou lord do purge it from all corruption? this being said,
let him return to continue his meditations with patience expectinge the
visitation of our lord, who is never wantinge to the humble of spirit. If yet
the tumoult of these troublesome fancies does not cease, neuertheless let him
still resist constantly, repellinge the force of them to the uttermost of his
power. From this perseuerant battle (believe me) he will reap more gain and
merit, then if he had enjoyed the greatest consolations in his meditation.

A remedy for the third temptation.
TO overcome the temptation of blasphomous thoughts, we must know as there is
no temptation so troublesome to a pious mind. So likewise there is none less
dangerous. Temptations of thoughts of blasphemy ought to be contemned.
Therefore the best remedy is to contemn them. For seeinge sin consists
not in sense, but delight of those things we think of. But in these there is
no pleasure, but rather tortour. Therefore they may chalinge the name of
punishment rather then of sin. And the more vexatio^ is in them, the further
of we are from consentinge unto any sin, therefore it is best not to fear,
but contemn them: seeinge fear makes them more strong and violent.

A remedy for the fourth temptation.
A Against the temptations of infidelity, he who is vexed with such
cogitations, on the one side let him consider the imbecilitie of man's
condition, on the other sid the greatness of the divine power, to whom nothing
is imposible: those things which God has commanded let him always bare in
mind; for others let him never busy himself in searchinge curiously the works
of supreme majesty, In considering Gods works good heel ought to be taken.
seeing the least of them do far transcend humane capacity. Wherefore he that
desires to enter in to this sainctuary of Gods works, let him enter with
profound humility and reverence, endued with the eyes of a simple dove, not of
a subtle serpent: and let him bare the mind of a meek disciple, and not of a
temerarious judge, let him put on the shape of a child for such our lord makes
partakers of his divine secrets, let him not mind to search or know the
causes of Gods works, let him shutt the eyes of natural reason, and open the
eyes of faith. For these are the hands wherewith Gods works ought to be
handled. Humane understanding is able to comprehend the works of men, but
not of God, seeinge they are not capable of so much light.

This temptation seeinge it is one of the greatest, which does assault men, and
brings none, or small delight with it, is to be cured with the remedy of the
precedent temptation. That is, to make slight of it, for it cannot stain the
soul with any great blemish, because where the will is contrary there is no
danger of any sin.

A remedy for the fifth temptation.
THere are some who are troubled with many fears and fancies when they go to
pray in solitary places, remote from the company of men, against which
temptation, there is no more efficatious remedy then for a man to arm
himself with a curragious mind, perseueringe in his exercise, Fear is
overcome with fightinge not with flyinge.
for this fear is overcome with fightinge, not with flyinge: moreover let him
consider, that the devil nor any other thing what soever else can hurt us,
except God permitts. Let him also consider, that we are compassed about with a
custody of Angels, which do guard us, as well in, as out of prayer, they
assist us carryinge up our prayers to heaven, they help us to bring to
nothing the devises of our crafty enemy, and to confound all his mischeiuous
plottes.

A remedy for the sixth temptation.
TO overcome sleep, wherewith some, that meditate are often molested: we must
consider, that sometime it proceeds from mere necessity, and then it is not
to be denied the body what is its due, Drovvsines in prayer arriseth from a
threfold cause.
least it hinders what is our right. Some times it proceeds out of
infirmity, then he must take heed not to vex himself too much, seeinge
herein is no sin at all: but moderately as much as strength suffers,
resistinge it: now vsinge some industry, then some small violence, that prayer
does not altogether perish, without which, nothing in this life ca^ be had
secure, but when it comes out of sloth, or from the devil, then there is no
better remedy then to abstain from wine, and not to use water in abundance,
but as much as quenches his thirst, to pray upon his knees, or after some
other painful gesture of the body, let him use discipline or other corporal
austerity to drive sleep from his eyes. To conclude, the remedy of this, and
all others is, instantly to implore his assistance, who is ready to give it to
all, so they ask it fervently and constantly.

A remedy for the seventh temptation.
A Against the temptations of diffide^ce and presumption, seeinge they in them
selves be contrary, it is requisite to apply diverse remedies. Against
diffidence: let him consider, that we do not rest upon our own merits, Man
ought chiefly to rely upon Gods grace not his own merits.
but upon God almighties grace, who is so much the more willinge to assist man,
by how much the more he is diffident of his own forces, placinge a firm hope
in the goodness of God, to whom nothing is impossible: the remedy for
presumption is, to consider, that the most evident and certain argument is,
that a man is yet furthest from true sanctity, when he thinks himself to be
nearest.

More-ouer let him look upon himself in the lives of saints, who now reign
with CHRIST, or live yet in this mortal life, as in a lookiinge glass, to
which of these he does compare himself, he will see, that he is no more then a
dwarf in respect of a grant, which consideration will not a little suppress
his pride.

A remedy for the eighth temptation.
The divine vvisdome does infinitely exceed humane prudence.
AGainst the inordinate desire of study and learning: it is good to consider
how far virtue exceeds science: and how much the knowledge of God excels
humane wisdom. Hence a man may learn how necessary it is to bestow more
labor upon one, then upon the other. More-ouer the world has all the
excellence that can be desired, but cannot avoid this misery, that it must end
with life. What then more miserable then to seek after that with so much
labor, and expense which so quickly perishes? If all things in the world
could be known, they are but as nothing, and therefore it is much better to
exercise our selves in the love of God, the fruit whereof remains for ever,
and in whom we see and know, all things. Last of all, in the day of
judgment, we shall not be asked what we have read, but what we have done, not
how eloquently we have spoken, but how well we have lived.

A remedy for the ninth temptation.
THe chiefest remedy against indiscreet zeal of helpinge others, is, so to
atte^de to the good of our neighbors, The salvation of our neibour is so to be
regarded that we do not neglect our own souls.
that we hurt not our selves: and so to have a care of the consciences of
others, that we neglect not our own, but in assistinge the^ it is good to
reserve so much time, as is sufficient to conserve the heart in devotion and
recollection. And this is, as S. PAVLE says: Ambulare in spiritu: to walk in
spirit, that is to say that a man be more in God then in himself. Seeinge
therefore that the prime root of all our good upon this depends, we must
strive, that our prayer be so profounde and long, as may conserve the soul in
devotion, which every short meditation is not able to do, but devout and
long.

CHAP. V. Other certain admonitions necessary for spiritual persons.
THE thing that affords greatest difficulty in this spiritual journey, is,
to know how to come to God, and to converse with him familiarly. Let therefore
none dare to enter into this way without a good guide, and well instructed with
necessary admonitions and documentes, of which we will set down a few,
according to our wounted brevity.

The first is, whereby we are taught what end we must aim at in these our
spiritual exercises. We must therefore know that since to communicate with God
almighty of it self is most delightful, having no bitterness mixed with it,
as the wise man testifies: hence it comes to pass that many allured with the
pleasure of this admirable and unused sweetness (which is greater then can be
comprehended) come to God and frequent these spiritual actions, The error and
abuse of some.
as readinge, prayer, meditation, use of the Sacrament, for the great content
and delight they take in them, so that for the principal end wherewith they are
moved, is this admirable sweetness which they vehemently desire. This is a great
error and many are plunged in it, for seeinge to love and seek God should be
the chiefest end of all our actions, these love and seek themselves, that is
to say, their own gust and sensible delight, rather then God, which was the
scope of the contemplative Philosophy of the gentills. Especially as a
certain Doctor says, that this is a kind of avarice, luxury, and
spiritual gluttony, no less pernicious then carnal. From this error
springs an other branch. (To wit) that many judge themselves, and others
according to the ebbinge, and flovvinge of consolations, so far that they are
persuaded, that a man is more, or less perfect by how much more or less, he
is visited with divine consolatio^s. This is a great mistake.

What should be the end of spiritual exercises.
Against both these temptations this general doctrine is a remedy: that every
one must know that the scope of all these exercises, and the chief end of a
spiritual life, is the obseruinge of Gods commandments, and a perfect
fullfillinge of his divine will: to this it is necessary that our own will
be mortified, that the will of God may the better live and reign in us.
Seeinge both these are directly contrary the one to the other. But this noble
victory seeing it cannot be obtained without special favor and allurementes
of God, therefore we ought to frequent the exercise of prayer, the better by it
(and indeed the only means) to obtain this grace, and to bring this serious
business of our souls perfection to a good and desired end. With this intention
we may confidently desire of God internal consolations, as we have said
before. This did the Prophet DAVID when he said: Read mihi Domine laetitiam
salutaris tui, and spiritu priucipali confirma me: Give me, o Lord, the joy of
thy salvation, and confirm me with thy principal spirit.

Hence it is manifest, what end every one ought to prefix to himself in these
exercises, and how they should esteem and measure their own and others
profitt: not according to the multitude of flowinge consolations. But
according to those things they have constantly suffered for God, partly in
fulfillinge his divine pleasure, partly in renouncinge their own proper wills.

And that this ought to be the end of all our prayer and readinge it appears
by that one Psalm of the Prophet DAVID which begins: Beati immaculati in
via, qui ambulant in lege Domini: Blested are the immaculate in the way, which
walk in the law of our Lord. Which is the longest Psalm in the Psalter,
notwithstanding there is not one verse in it, in which there is not mention of
the law of God, and keepinge his commandments. Which the holy Ghost has so
ordained, that me^ may learn to direct all prayer, and readinge to this end
and scope. From which they that do decline, do cast themselves into the
secret snares of the enemy, who with his subtle craft persuades them that,
that is some great matter which indeed is nothing, and for this cause men most
exercised in spiritual matters do affirm, the only touchstone of true virtue
to be, not that sensible delight which is found in prayer: but patience in
affliction, abnegation of ones own self, a sincere and enteire fullfillinge
of the divine will, and finally in a diligent obseruinge of God almighties
laws and commandments, though I must confess that prayer it self, and the
frequent consolatio^s that are found therein, do not a little conduce and help
to the better effectinge of these things fore mentioned.

They which are desirous to know how much progress they have made in the way
of God, The signs by which we may contecture how much we have profited in
the way of perfection.
let them examine how much they have increased in interior and exterior
humility: how willingly they have put up injuries, with what mind they have
borne with others infirmities: how they have compationated the imperfections of
their neighbors: what confidence they have had in God in the tedious time of
tribulation: how they have bridled their tongues: how they have kept their
heart: how they have mortified their flesh with all unlawful delights, and
made it subject to the spirit. With what moderation they have behaved them
selves in prosperity and adversity; With what gravity and discretion they
have governed all their actions: and above all how dead they have been to the
world, with all its pleasures, honors, and dignities: and accordingly as they
have profited in these virtues let them measure their perfection, and not
according to the consolations wherewith God has visited them, wherefore let
every one be sure to bear one hand and the chiefest over himself in
mortification, the other in prayer, seeinge the one can not be atteined unto
without the other.

The second Admonition.
AS it is not lawful to desire consolations and spiritual comforts, to that
end, that in them we should set up our rest, but only as they assist us in our
spiritual progress, much less is it lawful to wish for visions, revelations
and the like, which to those who are not well grounded in humility, may be a
great cause of their utter ruin, neither is there any reason to fear, that
those who refuse or reject the^ should be disobedient to God, because when it
shall please God to reveal any thing, he will do it after such a fashion,
that he to whom such things shall be revealed, shall be so certain of them,
that he will have no reason either to fear or doubt, though he should himself
never so much strive against them.

The third Admonition.
WE must have a special care, not to speak to others, those sensible
consolations, which God almighty has been pleased to recreate us with all.
Except it be to our spiritual directour. Hence it is that, that mellifluous
Doctor was wont to advise every one to have these words written in great
letters in his chamber: MY SECRET TO MY SELF: MY SECRET TO MY SELF.

The fovvrth Admonition.
We must always remain in humility.
Moreover we must always take good heed to deal with God, with much humility
and reverence, never to esteem our selves so high in his favor, as we neglect
to cast down our eyes upon our own baseness, and to shroud our wings in the
presence of so great a majesty, as holy S. AUGUSTINE was wont to do, of whom
it is written, that he had learned to rejoice before God with fear and
tremblinge.

The fifth Admonition.
WE have heretofore counseled the servant of God, that he co^secrateth some
certain time of the day to recollectio^. But now besides the ordinary course,
we say, that he must some times sequester himself from all business, and
emploime^ts, as much as is possible, and give himself wholly over to devotion,
the better to fatt his soul with the abundance of spiritual dainties,
recoueringe his daily losses, and gettinge new force to go forward in his
spiritual iourny. blessed Saviors side not amiss to do at all times, yet
more specially, upon the principal feasts of the year: in the time of
temptation: after a long iourny: after troublesome business, which gave matter
of much distraction, that then we exclude from our souls all exterior
things, and call our selves back again to the point from whence we did
digress.

The sixth Admonition.
THere be many which be not discreet in their spiritual exercises, when they
enjoy heavenly consolations, and it oftentimes falls out, that this
prosperity does expose them to manifest peril, for when God almighty
shewreth down, more abundantly this celestial dew, upon their souls, they
are so ravished with the sweetness of it, that they addict themselves without
measure to this only exercise: to this end they prolonge the time of prayer,
macerate themselves with watchinge and other corporal austerities, so that
nature it self at length is constrained to sink under the burden of such
indiscreet mortification. Hence it comes to pass, that many abhor
spiritual exercises, and some are not only made by this means unfit for
corporal, but also dull for spiritual labors of prayer and meditation.
Wherefore in all these, there is great need of discretion, especially in the
beginning, when spiritual consolations be more fervent, and commonly when
discretion is least. For we must so order our diet that we do not faint in the
midst of our iourny. On the contrary there be some so slothful and
undevout, that under the color of discretion, immoderatly make much of
themselves, refusinge the least labor, or trouble. This although it be
dangerous to all, but especially to beginners. For as S. BERNARD says, it is
impossible that he should persevere long in a spiritual course, who is
discreet at first. That when he is a nouice esteems himself wise, and when
he is young governs himself like an old man. Neither can I easily judge
which of these, be more dangerous. Except, as THOMAS A KEMPIS says, the first
is more incurable, for whilst the body is strong and sound, there may be
hopes to cure tepiditie: but when it is once weakened through indiscretion, it
scarce ever can be brought to its former fervor.

The seventh Admonition.
THere is yet an other danger, more pernicious then the former, which is, that
some having experience of this inestimable virtue of prayer, that all the
fruit of a spiritual life does depend upon it. Hence they persuade
themselves, that in it all is contained. And that only, that virtue does
suffice for our salvation, which makes them to neglect other virtues, which are
likewise the foundations and proppes which do uphold a spiritual buildinge,
which being taken away the wholl fabric falls to ruin; wherefore they that
seek after this one only virtue with such indiscreet auiditie, the more they
labor the less fuite they reap. But the servant of God that expects merit
and comfort in the way of perfection must not fix his eyes so much upon one
only virtue, although it be never so rare and excellent, but generally attend
to all, as one stringe upon an instrument makes no music, except we strike
the rest: so one virtue cannot make a spiritual harmony in our souls, if the
other be wantinge, not unlike a clock, which if there be but a fault in one
whele, the others will stand. So it is in a spiritual clock, if one virtue be
deficient.

The eighth Document.
THese things which we have hitherto said, which do help to devotion. Are so
to be taken as preparatories, wherewith a man does dispose himself to God
almighty his grace, and behave himself manfully in his holy service, with
this caution, that we should not put our confidence in them, but in God.

This I say because, there are some which labor to reduce all rules into art,
thinkinge that they have atteined to the perfection of that exercise, if they
observe exactly the rules thereof. But they which put good principalls into
practice, will quicky atteine unto their desired end, which doing, they care
not to reduce grace into art, nor to attribute that to humane rules, which is
the gift of God. Hence we say that it is not necessary to follow these
rules, and documentes as dependinge of art, but as instruments of grace.
Because a man will learn thus to know, that the principal means, which
one ought to seek after, is profound humility, with the consideration of our
own baseness, and a great confidence in God almighties mercy. To the end that
we may come to the knowledge of the one and the other, let us power out
tears without intermission, and continually pray, that as we expect at the
gate of humility, so we may obtain by it, all our desires, and persevere in
humble thankesgiuinge to the divine bounty, without any trust to our own
works or any thing that is ours.

AD HONOREM DEI.
FINIS.
THE TABLE.
OF the fruit of prayer and meditation. Fol. 1. Of the matter of prayer. Fol.
6. A Meditation for Monday, of sins. Fol. 9. A Meditation for Tvvesdaye, of
the miseries of the life man. Fol. 16. A Meditation for VVeddensday, of death.
Fol. 22. A Meditation for Thursday, of the latter judgment. Fol. 28. A
Meditation for Friday, of the torments of hell. Fol. 34. A Meditation for
Saturday, of the joys of heaven. Fol. 39. A Meditation for Sunday, of God
almighties benefits. Fol. 45. Of the time, and fruit of thees Meditations.
Fol. 50. Of seven other Meditations, of the passion of our blessed Savior.
Fol. 52. A Meditation for Monday, of the vvashinge of the disciples feet, and
of the institution of the blessed Sacrament. Fol. 56. A Meditation for
Tvvesday, of the prayer in the garden, and the contumelies he suffered in the
house of Annas. Fol. 62. A Meditation for VVeddensday, how Christ was
offered up to Cayphas; of S. Peter's denial: and of his scourginge. Fol. 68. A
Meditation for Thursday, of his crovvninge with thorns, his presentation
before the people, his condemnation, his bringinge to the place of execution:
and the caryinge of his Cross. Fol. 75. A Meditation for Friday, upon the
mystery of the Cross, and the seven words which Christ spoke upon it.
Fol. 81. A Meditation for Saturday, of the pearcinge of our blessed Saviors
fide with a spear, his taking down from the Cross: the lamentation of the
Women: and other things about his burial. Fol. 88. A Meditation for Sunday,
of the descent of Christ to Lymbus Patrum: his resurrection, apparitions, and
glorious ascension. Fol. 93. Of six things necessary to prayer. Fol. 100. Of
Preparation. Fol. 103. Of Readinge. Fol. 106. Of Meditation. Fol. 108. Of
thanks giuinge. Fol. 110. Of Oblation. Fol. 113. Of Petition. Fol. 115. A
prayer for the obteininge of divine love. Fol. 118. Of certain documentes to
be observed about Meditation. Fol. 124. The first. Fol. 125. The second. Fol.
125. The third. Fol. 126. The fourth. Fol. 127. The fifth. Fol. 129. The sixth.
Fol. 130. The seventh. Fol. 133. The eighth. Fol. 134. THe second Part, of
devotion and of those things which thereunto belong. 141. Of nine helps
vvherby the virtue of devotion may be atteined unto with the least
difficulty. 1. Continual exercise. 2. Custody of the heart. 3. Custody of
the senses. 4. Solitude. 5. Readinge of spiritual books. 6. Continual
memory of God. 7. Perseverance. 8. Corporal austeritie. 9. Works of mercy.
Fol. 146.147.148.149. Of nine impedimentes of devotion. 1. Venial sins. 2.
Remorse of conscience. 3. Anxitie of heart. 4. Cares of the mind. 5. A
multitude of affairs. 6. Delight of the senses. 7. Inordinate delight in
eatinge and drinkinge. 8. Curiosity of the senses. 9. Intermission of
exercises. Fol. 150.151.152. Of the common temptations that do assault devout
persons, and of the remedies against them. Fol. 153. A remedy against the
first which is drives of spirit. Fol. 154. Against unprofitable thoughts.
Fol. 156. Against thoughts of blasphemy and infidelity. Fol. 158. Against
inordinate fear. Fol. 160. Against drovvsines. Fol. 161. Against diffidence
and presumption. Fol. 162. Against inordinate desire of learning. Fol. 163.
Against indiscreet zeal of helpinge others. Fol. 164. Of other admonitions
necessary for spiritual persons. Fol. 165.
Et sequentibus vsque ad finem.

FINIS.

