THE PRAISE OF the GOVT, Or, The GOVTS Apology. A Paradox, both pleasant and
profitable. Written first in the Latin tongue, by that famous and noble
Gentleman Bilibaldus Pirckheimerus Councellor unto two Emperors, Maximilian
the first, and Charles the fifth: And now Englished by William Est, Master of
Arts.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci, Lectorem delectando, pariterque
monendo. Hor. de art. Poet.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the green Dragon. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir BERNARD GRENVILE, Knight, my very good Patron,
saving health in CHRIST JESUS. (*)
Right Worshipful,
THe flourishing Almond tree, Eccl. 12. ver. 3. 5.
having displayed her silver colors on my temples, and brought forth her
argent blossoms; the strong men bowing themselves, and the Grasshopper
beginning to be a burden: (as that mirror of Wisdom aenigmatically
describes old age) might (perhaps) plead a supersedeas for me, to say with the
Poet: -- Solue senescentem mature sanus equum. Her.

Thy horse with age and toil oppressed,
Let loose betime, to take some rest.


This has enforced me to retire my self a little, and to think upon some
convenient recreation, whereby my drooping spirits being refreshed, I might be
able with the more alacrity to undergo the burden of these grave studies,
which my function incessantly requires. In the interim this little book
chancing into my hands, I perused it; and finding it to contain matter of
pleasure and profit, I thought it a fit subject for my exercise, to employ
these tempora succisma, and sublecundaria (which I could spare or steal from
my grauer studies) in the translating of it into the English tongue, taking
more delight in these ludicris literatijs, then in any other recreations what
soever, which might yield unto me less profit or content. It was first penned
and published in the Latin tongue, by that famous and learned Noble man,
Bilibaldus Pirckheimerus, sometime Councellor unto two mighty Emperors,
Maximilian the first, and Charles the fifth, and by them employed in diverse
weighty affairs of the Empire, among foreign Princes, which he managed with
great wisdom and credit. He was for the space of many years pestered with
the force of Dame Podagras fury, and repented that he was deluded, or rather
befooled by foolish Physicians, (to use his own words in his Epistle) Quod
stultus ego a stultis persuasus medicis, etc. That as a fool persuaded by
foolish Physicians, I abstained in vain for the space of 7. years from the
use of all wines, and that in my often travails and Ambassages, when I was
constrained to follow my Sovereign Lord Caesar Maximilian, and sometimes
through these Countries where the waters were corrupt and contagious: sed
tandem resipui; but at last I became more wise, and found more ease, etc. What
I have done in the translation, he that will compare the Latin Copy with
this, may easily perceive: what was superfluous, I have pruned: what was vitio
Impressoris, defective, I have supplied: some things, as little pertinent, I
have changed for other more agreeable for these times, etc.

If any curious carping Critic (as that malicious Rufus) shall object, that
such a subject beseems not my gravity: let such know, that I herein follow
the example of great learned men: of which, one has written in the praise of
Tyranny, another of Baldness, another of the Fever, Dulce est errare
authoribus illis.
and that famous Clarke Erasmus, of the praise of foolishness, and showed
therein great accutenesse of wit, and not the least of their learning.

You see here, that men of eminent gifts in all kind of literature, have
thought it no disparagement, Ineptiendo non inconcinne nugari, and to have
linked pleasure and profit together: for,

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci.

For my part, Horat.
as a Translator I have but taught Dame Podagra to speak English, and do send
her abroad in a new suite out of her worky days clothes, to apologize for her
self: Humbly submitting both my self and my labors to your Worships censure
and good liking, which to me shall be instar omnium, as the judgment of all
men.

Oro, clementi aspicias munuscula vultu
Quae lusi nuper, postponens seria ludis.
And so I commit your Worship to the Almighties protection, incessantly
beseeching him (from my very heart) ever to defend and free you from the force
of Podagras disease.

Your Worships in all dutiful observance, to command, William Est.

THE PRAISE OF THE GOVT, Or, The GOVTS Apology.
I Am not ignorant (most reverend and upright Judges) how difficult a thing it
is, Podagra begins her Apology.
and full of hatred to root an opinion out of men's minds, being once
conceived, and now of long time inueterate, especially of the Incondite, rude
and unlearned vulgar, which are not so much led by reason, as carried by a
certain violence and impetuous rage (which the Greeks aptly call (...),) to
judge of things. No marvel then, if wanting discretion, without difference,
rashly they give sentence: For how can there proceed any right judgment, when
Folly captiuates Wisdom, Rashness rules Reason, Impotencie of mind cashires
counsel? Wherefore I greatly rejoice, that now at length time is offered, and
liberty granted me, to answer and refell the slanders and objections of the
frantic vulgar sort, mine enemies, that (to my grief) I hear not my self
always traduced, and be never permitted freely to speak for my self.

Though it not only touches me, but as I suppose, it concerns you also (O
ye Judges) that none, upon abare accusation only, Si accusasse sufficiat, quis
innocens esse poterit?
without hearing should be convicted and perish; For, if it be sufficient for
every varlet to accuse, what good man then can be innocent, and uncondemned?
Not without cause therefore your serene aspect, a sign of clemency and
mildness, and this frequent and renowned assembly does so recreate and cheer
up my spirits, that I cast out of my mind all suspicion of fear or partiality.
For, why should I fear, seeing my cause is to be heard before you, whose
Wisdom, whose Integrity, whose Innocence is such, that I ought not only, not
to suspect; but also, to hope for at your hands, whatsoever shall be just,
honest and right, and shall be thought worthy of your estimation, wisdom and
credit?

But before I begin to lay open my cause, I shall crave so much favor at your
hands (most clement Judges) that with good leave and attention you will be
pleased to hear me to the end, permit me to keep mine own order of speaking,
and suspend your sentence until I come to the Epilogue and conclusion of my
speech. Again, if you have conceived any displeasure, hatred, or indignation
against me, that ye put it off, lay it aside, cast it away, and have respect
not so much to the calumnies of my adversaries, or mine own person, as to the
equity of my cause. Truth cannot finally be suppressed.
And that ye will not be offended, if my speech shall raze out, reason
enfeeble, truth vanquish whatsoever sinister opinion, malicious censure, and
false cauillation they shall forge against me. Truth, for a time may be
oppressed, (God so disposing for our punishment, or trial) but finally
suppressed it cannot be. Truth is stronger then all falsehood: it is temporis
filia, the daughter of time, and will at length prevail. Truth is simplex et
nuda, sed efficax et magna, simple and naked, but powerful and strong:
splendet cum obscuratur, vincit cum opprimitur: it shines when it is darkened,
and overcomes when it is oppressed. Aug. ad Christin.
It was well said of that Father, that Truth has a double effect, it is dulcis
and amara, sweet and bitter; quando dulcis est, parcit: quando amara, curat:
when it is sweet, it spares: when it is bitter, it cures. Arist.
And as wisely Aristotle: Eos qui errant, ad pauca respicere: They that do
err, have an insight, but into few things; but that we be not deceived,
every circumstance which concerns any matter, is diligently to be looked
into and considered: which if it be, I doubt not but truth shall be of more
validity with you, then the malice, envy and taunts of all men. For, I trust
plainly to unfold, that all the blame, and evils, how many and how great
soever, which light upon my adversaries, are not so much to be ascribed unto
me; as to their own licenciousnesse, and vices. Secondly, That these evils
(if they be evils) are not so grievous, but far more tolerable, then either
they will or imagine. And thirdly, that I am the cause of much good, and do
bring many and great commodities unto men.

Be you not therefore (O Judges) be you not (I say) perturbed in mind, or
carried away with passions; but quietly as you have begun, hear me, I pray
you, with patience. For, if I prove not plainly what I have promised, it lies
in your power to condemn me: so shall you acquit your selves of all
partiality and blame; and for my part, if I be convicted, I will contentedly
undergo whatsoever punishment you shall inflict upon me. But, if I make good
all that I have spoken, I desire, that you will not so much respect me, as be
mindful of your place and office, that I may receive such upright sentence, as
the equity of my cause by law and right requires.

But before I address my self to dissolve my adversaries objections, I think
it fit to answer first to evil report and rumor of the people.

For, Ob.
if thou be good (will my enemies say) and the cause of so much good unto men,
what then is the cause that all men so egerly hate, Sol.
detest and abhor thee? For, though Fame does very often; yet is it not wont
always to err, especially being so inueterate, and every where so frequent
in the world.

And, I again would ask these jolly fellows, mine accusers, Why do Children
hate their Schoolmasters, though never so wise and learned? Why do wicked
men contemn good Laws? Is it not because the Schoolmasters labors to
furnish the minds of his Scholars with good Arts, and discipline; that they
may hereafter become the better men? And Laws are a bridle to curb the
insolency of badde men, to restrain them within the limits of their duty,
that they dare not commit what villainy they would. Epict.
Epictetus was wont to say: Aegrisernator est medieus, iniuriam passi lex. The
Physicion is a preserver of the sick, and the refuge for the wronged, is the
Law: Except the Laws (as Anacharsis once said) may be compared to the Spiders
web, Anacharsis.
which catch and ensnare only the little weak flies, when the great Drones
and strong ones, break the net and escape: a thing much to be lamented. But to
return from whence I have digressed: it follows not that the Schoolmasters
should be evil, because he is hated of Children, neither that the Laws
should be blamed and rejected; because they are abhord of lewd Luskes, and
vain Varlets, even the worst kind of men; but, we must hold that children
want judgment, and do censure of Discipline and good Institution, as they
whose Palate is corrupt, and infected with a fever, are wont to do of their
meat and drink: and vicious men polluted with all filthiness, wish that there
were no Laws, that there might be no hinderance to withold them from
running boldly in their execrable and desperate courses. He is not therefore
to be reputed evil, which of a multitude; but he that is justly, and that of
good men condemned: neither is he presently to be counted a good man, who by
many voices is extolled, but he that deserves praise from the mouth of honest
and wise men. And the witness of Conscience is more comfortable then the
vulgar breath; but herein I rest satisfied with this saying of the Reverend
Seneca: De remed. fortuiterum.
Male de me loquuntur, sed mal^; mouerer si de me Marcus Cato, si Lalius
sapiens, si duo Scipienes ista loquerentur: nunc malis displicere, laudari est.
They speak evil of me, but they are evil men: if Marcus Cato, Wise Lalius,
the two Scipt^^s, should speak this of me, I should be moved; but to be
dispraised of the wicked, is a praise to a man.

For seeing the number of wicked men does every where exceed, none, by their
judgment shall be good; for they will commend none, but such as are like
themselves; but so far off should wise men be, from accounting the judgment of
the insulse vulgar sort, to be of any moment, that in their estimate, they
should be of the best men, of whom the multitude speak worst, and traduce
most: as contrariwise, they the vilest men, and of basest esteem, for the most
part, whom popular applause extolleth to the clouds; as the wise Plato rightly
judged: Whosoever pleases every humor is worthy suspicion; yea, though he makes a
fair show of Virtue.

Let mine adversaries therefore cease to object unto me these frantic rumors,
and rather blame themselves, which are the cause of such pain and torments to
themselves, as worthily they suffer; For, they so live, nay, they so drink,
they so plunge themselves in riot, and wallow in deliciousness, that they
draw, compel, and hasten me to come into their company, and to dwell with
them even against my will. For, seldom come I of mine own accord; but most
commonly by constraint, as enforced, I attend upon them. If then, I were the
plague of mankind, (as they would have it) I should not afflict certain men,
but all without difference: but so far am I from hurting all men, that I
willingly decline from many; for I take no pleasure in those hard, rough,
rusticke, agresticke kind of people, which never are at rest, but always
exercise their body with hard labors, Genio indulgere.
are ever moyling and toyling, which seldom or never give themselves to
pleasure, which endure hunger, which are content with a slender diet, the Water
often quenches their thirst, have bad clothing, and worse lodging, Whom the
Gout flies from.
fare hard, and lie hard, and can renounce all pleasures of the flesh: I hate,
I fly from such.

But, With whom the Gout loves to dwell.
these my gallant accusers (forsooth) which spend both day and night in riot,
whose bodies with Idleness are corrupted, which abhor labor as the
pestilence, which eneruate, yea, euirate themselves with Venus, which search
Land and Sea for dainty Viands, which stir up gluttony with all kind of
sawces, which measure the manner of their drinking, not by necessity, but by
libidinie, which lie on Down beds, and not only go proudly; but monstrously
apparelled, The Gouts Diet.
which feed upon Oysters, Ecles, and slimie-fish, love Goose, Gosling, and
Fennish-fowle, fresh Beef, and moorish Birds, and wash their throats lustily
with bowls of Claret wine, drink healths in half pots, and whole pots, till
they have drunk themselves out of health, out of wealth, out of wit, and grace
too; forgetting that Vna salus sanis, nullam potare salutem: He that in health
would long remain,
From drinking healths he must abstain.
Which flow in all delights, which man's wickedness can devise, Si tarde cupis
esse senex, vta^s oportet vel modico medice, vel medico medice. Supta cibus tan
quam, laedit medicina salutem: At suptus prodest vt modicina cibus.
whereby they enfeeble both body and mind, and many times (though I be very
delicate) provoke me even to loath their riot; yet, those men are wont to lay
upon me all the blame: forgetting their own lives are most corrupt,
contaminated with filthy vices, which is the cause of all evil to themselves:
and when they err in the whole course of their life, yet (for sooth) they
cease not to accuse, and traduce me, but as justly as if a man should fall into
the fire, or cast himself head long into the water, and yet should curse the
fire, and accuse the water as cause of the danger, which he procured to
himself: but this is the common courtesy of the world, to shake all blame
from themselves, and cast it upon others, that by accusing others, they might
vindicate unto themselves an opinion of goodness, when they are the occasion
of all mischief. According to the Poet: -- Hominum quoque mos est, Mantuanus.

Que nos cunque premunt, alieno imponere tergo.
What us oppress, and heau packes
We love to lay on others backs.


And here just occasion^ is offered me, Virtue the foundation of friendship.
to exclaim against the slippery love and friendship of the world; For, who
would suspect the love of these men, which all their life long, call for me,
inuit me; yea, by their misgouernment enforce me to dwell with them, as if
they could not live without me? But indeed, in men, in whom is laid no
foundation of Virtue, is no expectation of faith and honesty.

And one of the things (says a Wiseman) that men think they have, Gueuarra.
when they have them not, is many friends; yea, one faithful friend: for, by my
experience; if thou will believe me, I know not any thing wherein thou may
sooner be deceived. And that which one friend does for another in these days,
Of true friendship.
is either to excuse, or hide himself, when there is need of him, being more
ready to lend him his Conscience, then his money. And he that will compare the
number that profess friendship unto him, with them that have performed the
part of true friends; for one faithful, he shall discover an hundred
dissemblers. Friendship, was wont to extend Vsque A true saying.
adaras, as far as the Altars; but now Vsque ad crumenas, even to the purse
and no farther. What is more common in every man's mouth, then friendship, and
what more rare, and less in use? They make a formal show of ciuility, but
what they perform is plain diuillitie. They will dissemble cunningly, promise
liberally, and perform niggardly, give all, and depart with nothing. I am all
yours (say they) except body and goods. Surely such is the love of my
Podagricall friends, so full of contraieties, and oppositions, that it may be
called an intricate riddle, which needs some Delio natatore (as it is in the
Proverb) to dissolve it. PHILOMISOPHILIAS EICON.
As, What is that which at once, loves and hates; flies and pursues;
threatens and entreats; Difficilis, facilis, incundus, accr^bus es idem.
is angry and yet pittieth; would for sake, and yet will not; and in the same
thing, rejoices and sorroweth? The answer is, it is Love: a right portraiture
of my loving friends: and therefore one well advises to make, if we may, all men
our well-willers, but good men our friends.

And Plutarch warns men to take heed how they seek for a swarm of friends,
Mart. lib. 12.
lest they fall into a Waspes-nest of enemies.

Verily, I crave not (O ye Judges) that you should only credit my words; look
(I pray you) into the constitution of their bodies, their face, skin, color,
aspect, and going: and if ye find not all these to witness their extreme riot,
I will endure willingly any punishment; these seem to be rather Crassiani,
then Christiani. Yet far be it from me, that I should censure thus sharply
all Plethoricke, and gross bodies; for I know it to be natural unto many,
which notwithstanding keep themselves within the bounds of Sobriety, and hate
all excess. There are also many Students which use a Sedentarie life, which
are so far from surfeiting, that their slender Commons will scarce hold body
and soul together, and in whose Colleges a hungry man may as soon break his
neck, as his fast; yet sometime I visit them also, because they refuse all
exercise, and will not learn this lesson, Ne quid nimis, but by ouercooling
their feet, and congealing their blood, prepare for me a resting place.

I am wont also to touch some, which through ouer-violent exercise, dilate too
much the vital pores, extenuate the blood and humors, distemper the Liver,
causing Podagricall matter to fall down, which begin my habit within them. I
therefore am not so hurtful, but they themselves inescate and allure me with
their delicacies, retain me against my will to come unto them; they, I say
pervert all things, and then convert all the fault upon me. I am present, they
wish me away: I am absent, with their vices they call me again: in sickness
they seek health in health they make sickness. Their own health they
neglect, and cease not to require it of me: they are male factors to
themselves, and would have me be their benefactor: they will live dissolutely,
and curse me maliciously.

Consider therefore, (O ye Judges) what they deserve, whose life reproves
them, whose form of body bewraieth, whom inueterate custom reprehendeth. They
never think, that they ought to eat and drink, that they may live, and not
live to eat and drink; they never consider that only Lurcones and Gulligu^s,
are my enemies; for, who I pray you, so bitterly inueigh against me, but only
Luxurious men? Who accuse me of cruelty, but only Luxurious men? Who cry out
to have me condemned without answer, but only Luxurious men? This being so,
(O Judges) how dare my adversaries to mutter against me? How dare they appear
in your presence? How dare they to crave punishment to be inflicted upon me,
being Innocent? But they will say, I am their bitter and torturing enemy; What
then? In seeking to be revenged on their enemy, will they prove themselves to
be most rancorous and malicious? Verily; if I be so odious in their sight, that
they think I deserve no pardon, why then contend they with all their power to
draw me unto them? Why then do they not so frame their lives, that I may
neither have will, nor power to come near them? For; if they would bridle
their licencious lusts, and not so want only plunge themselves in pleasure, if
then, they did not prove me more mild and gentle unto them, I were worthily to
be blamed; but it is hard for him to be abstinent, which knows nothing but
to follow riot, and hardly will he prove frugall, which al his life long has
been accustomed to carowsing and quaffing. Let them suffer therefore what they
will not avoid, and so let them have their health as they delight to live; If
so greedily they pursue vain pleasures, let them be content to suffer pain,
the inseparable companion of pleasure.

The ancient Romans to teach this, Macrob. lib. 1. de so^^. Scipionis.
invented this Fiction; they fained two goddesses, the one called Volupia, the
goddess of pleasure, the other called Angeronia, the goddess of anguish and
pain, Miscentur tristia letis, et mala sunt vicina bonis.
names fitted to their natures: and the Priests of Angeronia did serve at the
Altar of Volupia, to signify, that in this life, pleasure and sorrow are mixed
together: and the Image of Angeronia (anguish and pain) was always set upon
the Altar of Volupia (pleasure) to teach that sorrow is a companion to
pleasure, Plato in Phaedone.
and pleasure to sorrow. And when Jupiter (says Plato) could not reconcile
pleasure and pain, yet he bound them together with an adamantine chain, that
though they did ever disagree, yet they should be constrained to dwell
together. Ambrose.
S. Ambrose has this prosopopaeia of pleasure: Pleasures Proclamation.
He shall be the chiefest with me, who is the vvorst of all, he shall be
mine, which is not his own, he that is most wicked, shall be most welcome to
me, I have in my hand the golden Babylonish cup, which inebriateth the whole
earth.

You see now, they greatly err, which in the gulf of pleasure, seek for
health: as contrariwise, wise men in time of health, labor to prevent sickness,
quench pleasure, suppress their inordinate appetites, which are the cause of
many disastrous diseases to the body: but these men, when for many years, by
all means they allure, intise, and provoke me to come unto them, and with so
many delights, can scarce make me obsequious unto them, yet they strive to lay
all the fault upon me, when they are the very cause of their own misery. What
marvel then if I take worthy revenge upon them, and for injuries received,
handle them more sharply then I would? And yet I could name many, which through
in ordinate living, being pinched with poverty, have against their wills
abstained from delicious meats, and drinks, and thereby have recovered their
pristine health: which could not be, if themselves, and not I, were not the
hatchers of their own vvoe. And for my part, seeing I give place unto labor,
and dare not once touch sobriety; who sees not my innocence, and the iniquity
of mine accusers? And for mine own person and deformed form, which they say,
resembles barrell-bellied Bacchus, and my gate, like haloing Vulcane, I am so
far off from blushing, that I rather glory therein. She is indidifferent to all.
For whatsoever, and howsoever I am, I know my self to be indifferent, and
without parciality to all. I arrest Kings, Princes, rich and poor, noble and
ignoble; yea the Popes themselves cannot escape my power: there is no respect
of persons with me; except I be constrained to be a ghest rather, with nice
and effeminate men, then with sober and abstinent persons, not only because by
their flattering enticements they solicit me; but because with strong ropes
they draw me unto them.

But here some will object, Ob:
that I do not only infest these riotous Gully-guts, but oftentimes such as
are very sober and temperant, are afflicted with my disease.

I answer, Ans.
If it be so, yet is it very seldom, and therefore not to be drawn to a
general rule. What if they take this grief from their Parents as an
hereditarie evil? What marvel then, if their Progenitors be sickly, that
they procreate an Offspring like unto themselves? You know it is a maxim in
Nature: Simile generari a simili: Every creature begets his like: How then
can they charge me with that which is incident by Nature, or diffused into the
children by the Parents default? Seeing they will not affirm, that their noble
descent and splendour of their riches are derived from me, let them leave also
to reproach me with another vice: and if they repute the nobleness and riches
of their Ancestors to be a credit unto them, let them not disdain to succeed
them also in their hereditary Maladies; but if they would level their lives by
the line of modesty, they should find me far more gentle, then either the
deserts of their Parents, or perverseness of Nature requires.

Galen, Hier. in epist.
or the learned interpreter of Galen (says Hierom) writes, that they, quorum
vita and ars sagina est, whose whole life and skill is to cramme their bodies,
can neither live long nor be healthy.

Wisely did Aristotle warn, Aristotle.
that we should behold pleasures non venientes, sed abeuntes, that is, not as
fawningly they come unto us, but as they depart from us: for as they come, they
flatter and smile upon us, with a false show of goodness, but departing, they
leave behind the sharp sting of repentance and sorrow. Like Syrenes they
appear with a fair face, but draw after them a horrible tail of a Serpent:
For, alas, who is able to number the iliades of miseries, which the short
pleasure, of tasting the forbidden fruit, has brought upon the world?

But now, A preservative against the Gout.
out of the abundance of my good nature, I will prescribe unto mine accusers a
preservative against my self (though my Clients have not deserved the least
kindness at my hands) out of mine approved Recipes, as by many years practice
I have tried to be of great force, to prevent my Gouty habit; which is this:
Take of Platoes breake-fast one dram; Pythagoras abstained from eating of
flesh. Plato was very moderate and frugall. Codius a poor man, whose fare and
lodging was mean. Abstemius, one that abstaineth from wine.
of Pythagoras dinner two ounces; of Abstemius supper as much as thou will, and
quietly take thy rest in Codrus Cabine, and use upon this (daily) good active
exercise of thy body; and then a straw for Dame Podagra, and her disease.

Si salutem cupis, aut pauper sis oportet, aut vt pauper viuas.
Petrac. de remed. If thou desire health, be a poor man, or live as a poor
man.
Now to the second thing which I promised to prove: Men have little reason to
accuse me of cruelty, for I am not so bitter and austere to my people (my
impatient Patients) as to give them no remission and ease of their pain, as
many other diseases are wont to be; which continually, without intermission,
torment and afflict wretched men, as the Phthiriasis, Phthiriasis, the lousy
disease. Mentagra, a pocke or fretting scabbe.
the Mentagra, the Leprosy, and a number such like diseases which are
rebellious, and refuse all cure, and never forsake a man but with his life: but
I am sometimes quiet, I give over, and grant a long pause and rest to my
subjects; like a good Husbandman, who is wont to unyoke is wearied Oxen, and
permits them to be refreshed with rest and good pasture.

Again, I am so gracious unto them, knowing them (for the most part) to be of
an haughty and proud heart, and to stand much upon their Generositie, I
satisfy their humor so far, that I become an Heraldesse unto them, and do
blaze their arms fitted to their nature, and permit them Oneris causa (honoris
I would say, we Feminines be bad Grammarians) to make ostentation openly of
their ancient family and descent, which they ever carry in their faces: and
this is the cause that you should see their foreheads decked with painted
pustulls, their noses adorned with precious pyropes, upon their cheeks they
bear curious wrought Carbuncles, and such like Escochions, that you may know
that their birth is not base and obscure.

Besides, I am not so hurtful as some affirm; as it plainly appears by
this: That no man is much grieved, when he hears his friend to be taken with
the Gout, but is rather merry; he comes unto him, laugheth, iesteth, he
presents him with some pretty gifts, sits by him, talks pleasantly, and
as it were congratulateth with him, as do also his kind neighbors, which
come daily to visit him; which surely they would never do, if I were so
dangerous, troublesome and hurtful, as they pretend; for there is no man, when
he hears his friend to be affected with any incurable Malady, that will
laugh, sport and jest, but rather weep and be sad: for how can he be a friend,
that laugheth at the misery of a friend? and if men laugh at me, they plainly
show, that they think me ont to be the plague of humane kind.

Again, mark (I beseech you) my gentle and loving proceedings with my
subjects: Note.
first, before I afflict them, I warn them, by touching a little their great
toe; telling plainly: If they refrain not from contrary meats, keep not a
good diet, but inuit me by their intemperancy, I will pinch them to the
quick, and (like Proteus) alter my form and name: I will possess the whole
foot only, and then my name is Podagra; If they will take no warning, but
wallow in their riot, I will then proceed farther, strike harder, and come up
to knee, and then I will be called, Genugra: if they still give a deaf ear,
and not leave to provoke me, I will be the Sciatica in their hippes, then the
Chyragra in their hands; and lastly, I will whip them indeed, and be PANTA
PERI PANTON, and possess their whole body so, that they shall have little joy
to sing the Epicures song: Viuite Lurcones, Comedones, viuite ventres.
Ye Spend-thrifts, Tospots, Belli-gods, live ye, be lusty.


This being so, Membrifragus Bacchus cum membrifraga Cytheraea, progenerant
natam membrifragam Podagram.
how can men justly accuse me, which so lovingly warn them, and bid them
beware, for he that is well warned, is half armed? Again, when I begin
(being so often called upon) to infest any body; you shall see the whole company
of his friends flocking unto him, not to trouble him with distastefull cauills,
but to recreate his mind with pleasant discourses, and as congerrones
lepidissimi, spend the day in mirth, In Graec. Epigram.
which would never be, if I, the causer of this pleasure, were away.

By this which I have said it is manifest, that there is no man of so obtuse
and dull conceit, but plainly sees that mine enemies do not only unjustly
accuse me, but also show themselves to be the bruers of their own bane, and if
there be any fault in me, it is far less then they think or would have it.

But now for my kind slave M. The covetous wretch.
Muck-worme (that I may not pass him over without a name) the covetous
Caitife, that Churl, I mean, that cunning Chemist, that has the skill to
convert every thing into gold, who has studied all his life the black Art, to
conjure coin by all means into the circle of his purse; he will not hear the
complaints of the poor, for he is deaf to the cries of his own belly, he
wrinkleth his own skin, and contracts his own corpse, that he may keep me
out; he has long stolen from many, and now he is become a plain Rob-thiefe,
and steals from himself.

Now, because this slave keeps his coin to look on only, and not to use,
puts the best metal in his coffer, and the worst meat into his mouth, so
crosses pride (which holds the dearest things the best) that he counts
nothing good for his stomach, but what is cheapest, and that he may not
diminish his stock, Nil praeter betas duraque rupa vorat.
to save charges, denies wholesome alime^ts to his own body; and feeds on
gross flesh, watrish herbs and roots, Alciat.
fusty, musty, mixed, mity, moldy meats: all his exercise is to sit in his
Counting House, and to look upon his Nouerints; or in the chimney corner
poring in an Almanacke to presage a dearth, and in a plentiful year would
even hang himself, with sorrow, were it not for charges to buy an halter, and
is already the devils Lacky; I will also make him my slave, for his liver being
by such diet corrupted, his blood putrified, infinite crudities increased, I
will prepare a seat in his sinews for me to fit, I will minister justice in
his ioints, and send him speedily to his black master Pluto, to dwell in
Acheron for ever; but enough of this: I have long abused your patience with
unpleasant discourse, now to make amends, I will proceed to a more pleasing
subject, and speak of the commodities and profit, which I am wont to cause
unto men: only I shall request you (o ye Judges) as hitherto ye have done, to
give an attentive care to what I shall say. I deny not, that to many I seem
very troublesome and grievous; but if they would rightly consider, they should
verily find many good things, which by my means they enjoy, which, were it
not through my benefit, they should want. The commodities of the Gout.
How many (I pray you) for my sake are honored, to whom no man else would give
the way? for as soon as they see me a companion with any, every man gives
place, lest they should throng or hurt me; yea though they be far my betters
both by age and condition. Many ride stately in Coaches, or are carried on
horseback, which were it not for me, might go on foot. I am willed
oftentimes, even before Kings and great States to sit when all other do stand:
yea many times when I join my self with Noble men (for commonly I never
depart from such) Princes themselves cause their servants to bring me a stool,
or chair, when otherwise I might stand long enough. Consider (o Judges)
whether these things be not of high esteem and request with all men? which all
men desire, which all men seek for?

And not only at meetings, but at feasts also I am honored before others: for
commonly I am placed in the highest room, and though the table be furnished
with variety of dishes; yet because all meats are not agreeable to me, and
likewise that it be not offensive to my disease, one dainty dish or other is
provided only for me of purpose; and all others holding their peace, I only am
permitted, and willed to call for whatsoever I think fittest and convenient
for my infirmity; and is not this (I pray you) a great honor?

But happily some froward cauiller may here reply: This is done not for honor
sake, but in regard of their misery. I answer, that men are wont to respect
not so much, why a thing is done, as the good that comes thereby; and it is
sufficient to me, that I am permitted to do that, which is not granted to
another, and this I repute a great honor: a poor man considers not so much
why, or from whence he receives a benefit, as he is glad in the present
fruition thereof.

And why speak I of poor men? Do we not daily see rich and great men to
possess whole Fields, Manors, Lordships, and yet little regard whether by
right or wrong, so they may have and enjoy them? And I doubt not but there are
many poor men that would think themselves happy, if they might exchange
their poverty for this calamity, He speaks according to their manners in
Germany.
and be freed from labor, and suffer no want. And what, I pray you, is more
delicate then those rich men, with whom I dwell? what more neat then their
furniture? what more elegant then their houses? If thou come to visit them,
thou shall find their lodgings, not to lie sluttish, rude and filthy, as other
men's, but all things are clean, bright and finely trimmed, and decked like the
Tauernes at a Fair, or as the Temples upon high festival days; so that thou
shall find many which had rather be sick with such abundance, then be in
health with extreme poverty.

Beside, their visiting friends present them with whatsoever excellent and
elegant thing the whole City affords, which may either delight the eyes,
please the taste, or recreate the care: there shall ye see things curiously
wrought; thither are brought of rathe and first fruits, and what nouelty soever
the season of the year can produce: there is to be seen whatsoever is strange
and delectable among men; there are not wanting such as carry rumors, and
news, and with pleasant tales recreate the mind, and mitigate grief; yea,
the affairs of Emperors, Kings, States, Countries, either of peace or war,
are related, descanted upon, censured, decided among themselves; one tells
what is done among the Indians, another, among the Italians, another
discourses of France, Spain, Germany, etc. Of all these things, by my means,
men have intelligence, though (perhaps) they are ignorant what is done in their
own houses; Torqueo. podigra.
and thus whiles I detain men with my business, I oftentimes preserve them
from great dangers. R. Nescis sencctutis mo^em? incomitata non venit; magnam
saepe morbo^um aciem ducit.
For, as long as a man is afflicted with the Gout, they will neither commit
themselves to the raging Seas, nor expose themselves in hunting, to the fury
of wild Beasts, they will not quarrel, fight, or commit murder, they need
not fear the breaking of their head, through the fall of a stone from an
house; Petrace. de remed. vtausque for. lib. 2. dial. 84.
sed extra teli iactum, but safe from all danger, securely hear the
misfortunes of others spoken of.

Again, do I not free men from the managing of state affairs, and from the
most troublesome business of the Court and of Princes, which without my favor
would perplex them with perpetual cares, and sorrows? And yet, in the mean
time, I am not wanting and careless (you must think) in my domestical
business; but like a good husband, I strenuously cry upon my company; I
counsel, yea and compel them to apply their work, look unto their charge
for the increasing of my wealth; which I may the more easily do, the less I
am hindered by walking abroad. For, though sometime my feet deny their office,
yet it follows not, that they should be altogether unprofitable to my
Cellars, Storehouses, and questuary Arts; but the more impotent they are to
walk from home, the more apt a great deal are they to my domestical gains:
the masters eye, they say, makes his horse fat: and I by sitting in my chair,
or going upon 3. legs about the house, with a Snayles pace, do get more
wealth, and acquire more riches, then I possibly could by running about, Haec
his bina, canes, and aues, serui, atque caballi.
hawking, hunting, gaming, riding, company-keeping, and vain pleasures: and
thus you see in my bands men wex more wealthy, then if they enjoyed their full
liberty, Dicuntur dominos saepe vorare suos.
so beneficial I am to my servants, in making them rich.

These (o Judges) are things not to be contemned: Hounds, hawks and horse,
servants and whores, often turn their masters out of doors.
but you shall hear far greater; for whiles I am thus occupied about things
pertaining to the body, I do not in the mean time neglect the mind, but have
a special care for the culture and adorning thereof. You are not ignorant,
that learning, and the knowledge of good Arts, are to be preferred before all
riches and honors: for look how much difference there is between a stock and a
man, so much a learned wise man excels an unlearned Dolt. But I am a most
excellent Teacher of Arts, and I could name many, which through my benefit,
have attained to great learning and knowledge of the tongues: for while they
have nothing else to do, they addict themselves to good litterature, and that
they might not suffer their time vainly to slip away, they daily contend to
become more learned: but what speak I of ordinary learning? am not I most
expert in instituting my servants in the liberal Sciences, and in all circular
knowledge of the globe? especially in that most pleasant and skillful Art of
Music, Music.
by whose harmony, sweet Symmetricall measures and modulations, I expel cares,
and wonderfully with my admirable tones of Music delight the ears.

I also teach them the Art of Rethorike; Rhethoricke.
for I am not ignorant thereof, as far as is requisite for us Females to know:
for as soon as a man in taken with the Gout, I presently furnish him with
matter of excuse out of the very bowels of Rethorike, for they are ashamed to
confess my disease: one says, that he wrung his foot with a strait boot;
another, that he hurt his toe against a stone; another says, with a slide he
has wrested his ankle; another, that he took a fall: and very ingenious they
are to frame excuses to conceal their grief, and blind men's eyes very
craftily, and not only perswasiuely after the manner of Rethoricians, but also
like Logicians, subtly reasoning and disputing, with many arguments, and al
to shake off the imputation of my disease, which they are ashamed (forsooth) to
acknowledge; yea, and confirm it by oath too, if you will not believe them, so
hatesome is my name unto them. But to omit these inferior sciences, do not I
also furnish with knowledge of the celestial Orbs? Astrology.
as Astrology, a most ancient and divine Art, the praises whereof, if I would,
yet I am not able to unfold, an Art so excellent, that the ancients ascribe the
invention thereof to their supposed gods, and was in old time in such account,
that none but Kings and wise men were thought worthy of the knowledge thereof.

This Art I teach my servants, and so infuse it into their bodies, Arithmeticke.
that even the Art of numeration, or Tables, they perfectly understand it: not
that they are ignorant in Arithmeticke, which I teach them, when (as I said)
they are so much given to pecuniarie matters, that being holden in my bonds,
they are more auaricious then when they were free.

But mark now (I pray you) a miracle, which wonderfully commends my force
and industry: to understand the motions and change of the heavens, they need no
Tables, Globes, Astronomicall instruments, or figures; for before there happen
any conjunction, eclipse, any alteration of weather, the change, full, quarters
of the Moon, or any dire aspect of the Planets, I cause them to know it, not
so much in mind, as in very deed to feel the effects thereof in their bodies.

And that, not only in the great and splendent lights, they are so perfect, but
also in the errant stars; so that the infaust aspects, either of cold Saturn,
or raging Mars, or when they obliquely behold each other; Horoscope is a
diligent marking of the time of the birth of a child.
or when the Horoscope it self, or the Moon the gouernesse of man's life, shall
be infected with their disastrous influences, all this cannot be hidden from
them. There are none that can more exactly and certainly foretell of storms,
rain, hail, snow, tempests, or any alteration of weather then my servants
can, for they always carry a Calendar in their bones; yea, they presage this
two or three days before it come: and may they not (I pray you) through this
presaging of times and seasons attain unto ripe wisdom, which consists in
these three things?

Corrige praeteritum, rege presens, cerne futurum^.
What Is past, amend, use praesent well,
Presage the future to foretell.
Are not these great things (o ye Judges) and full of admiration? yet is it
also no less prayse-worthy, that I teach my Podagricall servants, Physike.
the excellent Art of Physike, then which, scarce any thing more singular, for
the preservation of mankind, is given of God: This I inculcate and beat into
their heads, even against their wills. So that many times they understand the
virtue of herbs, flowers, plants, seeds, roots, trees, gummes, leaves,
mineralls, more exactly then the Physicions themselves: besides, their
knowledge in the blood of beasts, their skins, milk, galls, fat, bones,
nerves, and urine, etc. I instruct them to discern what is cold and what is
hot, what is dry and what is moist, what is stipticke and what is repulsiue,
what is aperitiue, attractiue, instauratiue, and solutiue, what in virtue is of
the first degree, what of the second, what of the third: and this I teach them
not only to know, but also to practice, in making pultisses, cataplasmes,
baths, repercussiues etc. as in all other things, so in this, I make my servant
excel not only in Theoricke, but also in the Practick: no marvel then if by
my means they know the histories of all Nations, and read the fables of all
Poets, and (which is a note of a generous mind) when others make a gain of
their profession, I teach all this freely, without any hire at all. And when
other Emperickes prove practices, by killing a number, my experience is safe
and secure: hence came this saying; Nouo medico nouo opus est sepulcreto, a new
Physician had need of a new Churchyard; A pretty tale.
and therefore Nicocles affirmed, that such Physicians were the happiest of all
men, and why? Quontam successus eorum sol videt, errores autem tellus operiret,
because the sun sees their good successes, but their errors are hid in the
ground, The Kings Evil, or Yellow Iaundise, which through the ouerflow^ng of
the gall, makes the skin look yellow like gold.
that is, in the grave: yet are they so insolent and proud, that a stranger
upon a time coming into a City, and seeing a Physician ietting in golden
chains, and rich clothing, asked what Noble man that was? it was answered,
that he was no Noble man; but a Physician. He replied, o God, what an honest
Physician is this, which takes from other bodies the Kings Evil, and puts
it on his own body! Hippocrates.
But if my servants would follow Hippocrates counsel: Cibus, potus, somnus,
venus, sint omnia moderata; Meat, drink, sleep, venus, let all be with
moderation, perhaps they would little need my physike or theirs.

These things being so: ye understand, as I think, (O upright Judges) what
great benefits I bestow upon mine accusers, and also how ungratefully, yea,
more then barbarously they requite my kindness; but what they have been long
devising to object against that which I have said, I know well enough: to wit,
that all these things are not to be reputed as benefits, but rather as marks
of extreme misery, and that I am the bane and mischief of mankind, rather
then a fautrixe or benefactrixe: A description of beauty.
for first, for the beauty of the face, which is wont to chain all men in the
linkes of the love thereof, which consists (as we Females best know how to
describe it) in a large, square, well extended, and clear front, eyebrows
well ranged, thin and subtle, the eye well divided, cheerful, sparkling;
as for the color, I leave it doubtful: the nose lean, the mouth little, the
lips corraline, the chinne short and dimpled, the cheeks somewhat rising, and
in the middle a pleasant lovely gelasin, Gelasin, is a little dint, which in
laughte, appears in the cheeks, counted lovely.
the ears round and well compact, the whole countenance with a lively tincture
of white and vermilion red, facies roseo niueoque color mista placet, this
(say they) I change and mar, and exhaust the blood, weaken the strength, take
away sleep, dim the sight, diminish alacrity, abandon joy, sport and
laughter, incurue the joints, fingers, toes, and infeeble the whole body, and
stain and obscure the fresh color: but in this long and idle frivolous
objection, they show themselves to be sick in mind; and therefore judge
rather by this passion, then discern by reason: these doltish men know not,
that they attribute unto me much more praise then disgrace among wise men, by
this their accusation; for while I weaken the body, I cure the Soul; while I
afflict the flesh, I strengthen the Spirit; while I purge out what is earthly,
I bring in what is heavenly; while I diminish what is temporary, I confer
what is eternal.

No man is ignorant, that the body is the polluting prison of the Soul, the
Soul cannot flourish except the body fade and diminish; for this gross lump
of the flesh is an impediment unto the Soul, that it cannot mount aloft in the
contemplation of heavenly things, it lays a thousand lets, and casts as it
were dark clouds, whereby the sharpness of the mind is obfuscate and
blinded, that it cannot see nor follow the truth; and with how many cares and
anxieties are men pierced, in procuring the things pertaining to this mortal
body, and use of this frail life? I speak not of superfluous things, but of
things very necessary, though (as the Poet says:) -- minimis rebus contenta
quiescit
Natnra, in vitium si non dilapsa repugnat.
Man's nature with a little thing contented does remain,
Except it headlong fallen to vice, it does repugne again.


And what is above necessaries, may be called the sicknesses or maladies of the
mind, as pleasures, opinions, fears, perturbations, desires, love, hatred,
etc. which seldom or never permits the mind to be at rest, like the
violent force of fire, which causes the water always to boil up till it be
removed. For what (I pray you) stirs up wars, brawles, murders,
seditions, rapines, injuries; but the flesh and the desire of having which is
never satisfied? For we see now a days money is able to atchiue all things.
And all this the love of this frail body compels us to do, which is the
cause, that while we pamper up the body our thoughts are far estranged from
any care taking of the Soul, and our minds distracted from providing for the
life to come; for our senses are like unto violent horses, which without the
reins of reason run away violently with the chariot, but the soul like a
waggoner holds the bridle; and therefore as horses without a guide, so the
flesh without reason and rule of the mind runs hastily to its own ruin:
what a slavery is it then to serve our own appetite? I remember a lesson which
I learned long ago of a learned Preacher: D. B.
That in choosing a Master every man will shun three sorts of men; his enemy,
his fellow, his servant. He that serves the Devil, serves his greatest
enemy; he serves his fellow, who serves the lust of the flesh; he serves his
servant, who serves the world; it is a base service to serve the world, for
that is to become a slave to our servant: it is an uncertain service to serve
the flesh, for it is so frail, weak and sickly, that he may look every day
to be turned out of doors, and which is worst of all, it is least contented
when it is most served; but to serve the devil, is the vnthriftiest service of
all, for the wages he pays, is eternal death.

Wherefore, wise men are wont to sequester themselves as far as they may,
from the commerce of the body and worldly affairs, to the end, that the mind
may the more freely be lifted up to the contemplation of heavenly things; and
the more a man is auerted from the body, the more he is converted to heavenly
meditations, he abstaineth from fleshly desires, he subdueth his pleasures, he
little esteems honors riches, nobility, fame, and whatsoever the world
holds most precious: he fears not ignominy, poverty, affliction, nor
death it self, and all things which are contrary to the flesh, that he most
desires. And wise men are wont to measure their life not by the number of
years, but by the time they have lived well.

I have read of one Similus, who having spent the greatest part of his life, A
History.
in the troublesome employments of the weal public, and being now old,
retired himself into a Farm he had in the Country, and gave himself to
prayer and contemplation; and when he dyed, commanded this Epitaph to be set
upon his Tomb:

Hic iacet Similus, cuius at as multorum a^^orum fuit, ipse duntaxat septem
annos vixerit.

Here lies Similus, whose age was of many years, but he lived only seven.

But whosoever serves his bodily senses, besides that he must needs depart from
the path of virtue, he shall never obtain what he desires: for being deceived
with the false shows of goodness, he loses the substance for to catch the
shadow, and as the body took beginning from the earth, so the soul had her
original from heaven, as one says not unfitly: Immortal soul, from heaven
God gave,
But body frail, from earth we have.


The body as a servant should be subjected unto the command of the soul; the
one is heavenly and immortal, the other common to us with the brute beasts.
Nothing therefore is more excellent then the soul, nothing more divine, it as
far excels the body, as the master does his servant, as the living does
the dead; and as the body makes earthy things its full scope and mark whereat
it only aymeth, so the mind erecteth it self to heavenly things, as to the
proper end for which it was created. Ye see here (O Judges) how much more
noble the Soul is then the body.

But now will I address my self, The prrfite it causes to body and soul.
to show what a passing excultrix and adorner I am of the mind, and how much I
garnish the celestial Soul, whiles I extinguish the vices of the body;
albeit I do not always hurt the body, but am wont commonly to profit it
also: for I attenuate superfluous fatness, I dry up humors which redound
through intemperance, and consume them, lest they should increase to a huge
greatness, and bring no small danger to the whole body. Again, as Physicians
affirm, I also prolong the life: for except I did depell and drive down to the
feet and ioints that noxious and pernicious matter, it would doubtless assault
the brain, heart, liver, and stomach, and soon extinguish the vital spirits:
But to omit those things which pertain to the body, let us proceed to men's
vices and infirmities, which I above others am very expert to cure; so that in
this Art I yield to none, whether Philosopher or Divine: for I am not only an
impediment and curb to my servants, that they run not headlong in
wickedness, but also the vices which through custom are become inueterate, I
extirpate and expel, and cause that they shall not sin unpunished and
scot-free, which if I did not, they would never desist from their wickedness,
but still add sin unto sin, evil unto evil, til sin forsake them.

Now first for this Monster pride, Pride.
which is puppis ac prora, the very head and tail of all evil, I must a
little insist upon this as I learned of a Preacher.

Gregory (says he) makes 4. kinds of proud men: 1. The arrogant proud. Mor.
lib. 23. cap. 27.
2. The presumptuous proud. 3. The boasting proud. 4. The despising proud
person. The first attributes every good thing in himself, to himself, and
not unto God. The second will confess God to be the giver of all graces, but
upon their own merit. The third boast of their virtues, which indeed they
have not. The fourth affects a kind of singularity and purity, in that he
has, or supposes to have: Vitia catera in peccatis superbia, etiam in
benefactis timenda, when other sins dye, secret pride gets strength in us, ex
remedijs generat morbos, even virtue is the matter of this vice; Aquin. par. 1.
quaest. 63. Art. 2.
though all sins are in the devil secundum reatum, in respect of the guilt,
yet only pride and envy is in him secundum effectum, according to the effect,
he is guilty of all sin, for he tempts to all sins, but pride is his own
proper sin, Bern de Passio.
his beloved Paragon; his Rimnon, says Bernard, his Character, Dom. cap. 19.
says another, it was the first sin, and it shall be the last; for as other
sins decrease, secret pride does increase: pride is like Coloquintida, which
spoileth the whole pot of pottage. Why then art thou proud, o dust and ashes,
whose conception is sin, Ecc. 10.
whose life is misery, whose end is rottenness and corruption? Initium vitae
coecitas, and obliui^ possidet, progressum labor, dolor exitum, error omnia; et
diu viuendo portant funera sua. Petrarch.
Childhood is but foolish sottishnes, youth but a precipitate heat, manhood
labor and carking carfulness, old age but a bundle of diseases, and all the
rest error, and the end, extreme pain: Oh then what a folly is pride?

Si tibi copia, si sapientia, formaque detur,
Sola superbia destruit omnia si committetur:
If thou have abundance, with wisdoms redundance,
and beauties fair grace,
Yet Pride all disgraceth, all goodness debaseth,
and Virtues deface.
But I make pride and ambition strike their sails, and cool their courage,
when my force teaches them how less then nothing man's arrogancy is, how
vain is beauty, how weak the strength of body, how fluid our humors, how
fleeting our wealth, Nobility a nest of nothings, humane glory but a gust of
wind; I cause them to remember that they are but mortals, whom pride persuaded
to be Gods equals. En^ie.
Again, while I teach the myriades of man's miseries, I quench envy, emulation,
detraction, and the impertinent care of unnecessary things. For how can men be
curious in other men's matters, when they have more then enough to do with
their own? I take away malice and cauils, so that my servants devise no
cunning, crafty circumuentions of their neighbors, a thing too common (but
with none but Atheists) in these days. They stir up no strife, brawlings,
contention among others, which have enough and more then enough to do with
their own griefs. And as for hatred and envy, my servants are so far from
this vile passion, that they neither envy, nor are envied of others, (for
misery is no object for envy) and they deserve rather comfort and pity.

These (o Judges) are matters of no small moment, but you shall hear greater.
Three things hurtful to the Gout.
There are three things which are most infest enemies unto my vassalls, though
they daily receive them, but unto me they are very profitable: Gluttony, Venery
and Anger. But I respect not so much mine own profit, as the health of my
servants: I warn them diligently to beware of these enemies, and if I find
that they contemn my warnings, I take revenge upon them for their contempt,
and make them for their own case, hereafter be more wary how they set light of
my precepts. Gluttony.
And as often as by devouring, they too much ingurge their guts, and
superfluously gully down wine, I am presently with them as a sharp revenger, I
plague them according to their deserts, and counsel them henceforward not so
lightly to esteem my hests: yet am not I so agresticke and stern, that I
should deny moderate use of meats, or altogether forbid Bacchus his liquor,
but through my benefit they many times feed more delicately, Venu^.
and are wont to drink more freely; especially, when they celebrate their
solemnities with salacious Nymphs. But I deter them from too much addicting
themselves to the servile service of that rude master Bacchus, and from being
enthralled with the allurements of wanton Venus; so that my servants dare very
seldom or never commit adulteries, or whoredoms, I keep them from
uncleanness, and preserve maid and wise from their pollutions: but if they be
unruly, I so gripe them, that they shall repent of their exorbitant causes, and
loath the Femall sex: what greater benefit can their best friends confer upon
them, then to deliver them from so many evils, Anger.
and exempt them from so many perils, as are wont to follow Cupid that blind
beardlesse boy, and Venus a mother worthy such a son? And now for anger, what
should I say? It is a vice full of fury and madness, which is wont to send hot
and sharp choleric humors into their ioints, which shall incessantly prick
and torment them; but none know better to cure this malady then my self; they
dare not for their life fall into these passions, lest I presently torment
them, according to their deseruings, and make even their bones to crack.

Moreover, as I expurge the flesh infected with infinite vices, so I adorn the
mind and beautify it with many virtues, I suffer it not to be pressed down,
but do eleuate it from earth to heaven, and stir it up to prayer and
contemplation.

I think it cannot be unknown unto you, how the greatest part of men are
inclined, that if fortune always should favor them, if their sweet should
never be seasoned with sour; if the world should ever smile upon them, they
would always fix their minds upon earthly things, they would regard nothing
but back and belly, and like swine wallow in the puddle of their pleasures:
but the afflictions which I lay upon them may be likened unto the tree, called
Rhamnus, whose root, leaves and branches, though (as Physicions say) they be
exceeding bitter, yet are they very medicinable; for the seed thereof purges
the body of all gross humors, and the juice thereof cleereth the sight. So
afflictions, Aug in Psalm.
though to flesh and blood they seem austere and bitter, yet are they very
healthful to the Soul, they purge out the noisome humor of sin, clear the
eyes of the mind which prosperity blinds, that we may truly know our
selves, see our own corruption, and become henceforward more wary how we
offend our loving God, and fly unto him in all our miseries; the scourge of
affliction, awaketh the drowsy, humbles the proud, purges the penitent, and
crowns the innocent.

But I fear I have too much offended your patience with my tedious prolixitie:
I will therefore conclude with setting down certain particulars, to prove
what a precious panacea and all-saluing plaster I am for the curing of all
spiritual infirmities of the soul: and first for Self-love, the pernicious
daughter of Pride, the fountain of much evil, the Lerna malorum, the Sentina
and pack of all mischief in the world. Now for the abating of this vice; what
remedy better then afflictions, which I lay upon the flesh? I cause men thereby
to know themselves, that in their best estate they are but a dung-hil covered
with snow, subject to pain, aches, sores, rottenness and corruption, we were
all taken out and fashioned of the same lump of clay, of the same piece of
earth as the poorest and basest whom we so despise; and so I teach men to
esteem of others as of themselves, seeing we are all made of the same
substance, all subject to the same infirmities, and all hastening to the same
end to become meat for worms. Why then art thou proud, O earth and ashes,
seeing that in thy most flourishing prime, thou art but filthy slime, a pack of
diseases, a sack of infirmities, a Storehouse of miseries, thy body but
compact of clay, thy head but a pan of earth, thy whole life besieged with a
huge army of diseases, and every one both threatening to arrest thee, and able
to kill thee? Thus with my disease I stoop the proudest, and make self-love
to quail.

And for the Viper Envy that miserable fretting slave, a wretch ever sad and
pensive; Anacharsis.
for besides his own griefs, he ever tormenteth himself at another man's
felicity: Senec.
I say of him, as Seneca did once; I could wish that the eyes of the envious
were so opened, that in every town they might behold all that be in
prosperity, that their torments might be increased; for as the ioies of others
do increase, so the sorrows of the envious do multiply: we can no way more
vex the envious man, then by applying our selves to virtue: for he has so
many torme^tors to scourge him, as his neighbor has virtues to commend him.
The poison of envy is far worse then the poison of Serpents; for their poison
hurts others, but not themselves: but the poison of the envious hurts
themselves but not others. Moreover, the envious man imagines another man's
good greater than it is, thereby to increase his own sorrow and misery.

To this purpose I remember a pretty tale; Note a pretty tale.
that certain Physicions meeting together, there grew a question among them
concerning the chiefest medicine for the eyes: one said fennel, another
eyebright, another green glass, etc. Nay (says another merrily) it is envy;
for that makes other men's goods to seem greater then they are, and confirmed
it by this saying of the Poet: Fertilior seges est alieno, OVID.
semper in agro,
Vicinumque pecus grandius vber habet.
The neighbors fields are evermore
with corn much better spedde,
Their flocks in milk more plentiful,
how ever they be fed.


There is a Fable, but it has a good Moral, of the envious man and the
covetous man, they both went together into Jupiters Temple to pray: Note.
Jupiter granted their petitions upon this condition, that whatsoever the one
did crave, the other should have the same doubled; the envious man asked many
things, and had them, but the other always had them doubled; the envious man
seeing this, was grieved, and prayed that he might lose one eye, and then
reioiced that his fellow had lost both his. See here what a ciabolicall sin
envy is, which cares not to hurt it self to do a greater damage unto
another.

But when I come to grapple with this Caytife, I will so perplexe him, and make
him so wretched, that no man shall envy him, nor himself have little lust to
envy others. I tell him that he is most his own enemy; for the man whom he
enuieth, may depart from him, but he can never depart from himself:
whithersoeuer he goes, he carries his enemy still in his bosom, his
adversary in his heart, his own destruction within himself, and thus I seek
to cure this malady.

And for Covetousness, Covetousness.
I am like the clubbe of Hercules to beat it down: when pains and incessant
torments enforce the covetous worldling to confess, and meditate with
himself, that riches are fickle, that the lives of the possessors are brittle,
that transitory riches are but run-awayes, they will either run from us as
they did from Job, or we shall be taken from them, (as the Preacher said) of
the covetous worldly minded; Luc. 12. 20.
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. Abuc. 2. 3.
The covetous man is like hell in the enlarging of his desires, Basil in hom.
to contain all; more greedy (says Basil) then the very fire which goes out
when the matter fails: but Covetousness is never quenched, whose desire
burns as well when he has matter, as when he has none, He always goes
with a three-toothed flesh-hooke; the one is called Petax, which desires all;
the other, Rapax, which catches at all; the third, Tenax, which holds fast
all. Now when the Gout gripeth him, I teach him to meditate thus with himself:
O, what pleasure can I take in riches which I have so greedily scraped
together? I see they can yield me no ease at all, no, not so much as free me
from a fit of fever: I now take no more pleasure in them, Qui cupit aut metuit,
etc.
they no more delight me, then as the Poet says: -- Lippum pictae tabulae,
Horat.
vt fomenta podagraxs,
Auriculas Cytherae, collecta sorde dolentes.
Who couets, or who lives in fear, his goods do him delight,
As much as blind man pleasure takes in pictures finely dight;
Or one that is deaf does take delight in Musikes silver sound;
Or as the Gout in foments, when the grief does most abourd.


What joy take I now in my stately houses, which I have built by theft? in my
large fields which I have gotten by deceit? my cursed sacrilege, in devouring
Christ's patrimony, which will be like the Eagles feather, to consume all that
I shall leave to my heir? in my revenues, for which I have damned mine own
soul? In my gold and silver, which I have heaped together with the sweat, yea
with the blood of the poor? what comfort take I in my life it self which I
have so unprofitably spent, when I made my heaps my heaven, my gold my god, my
lands my life? I see now I have chosen dross for gold, rust for silver, loss
for gain, shame for honor, toil for rest, hell for heaven. I see now, all
worldly cares are frustrate, and fruitless; I will therefore aspire to heavenly
treasure, which is eternal, which no rust can corrupt, no moth fret, no
thieves steal; in regard whereof all other things are but dung and dross. I
will now fix my desires upon the life to come, where there shall be no
sickness to afflict me, no malady to torment me, no griping griefs to
assault me. Thus, where there is any spark of Gods Spirit, I teach men
seriously to meditate; Happy, and thrice happy they, which have the grace thus
to suppress their inordinate desires of riches.

The ambitious man in his swelling humor, Ambition.
which by all means seeks to aspire unto dignities and honor, who had
rather be vulpeculae caput, quam cauda leonis, the head of a fox, then the
tail of a lion, as the Proverb is: when I visit him, I cause him soon to
strike his lofty sails, I humble him, and enforce his haughty heart to stoop,
I make him to know that he is like a Carbuncle, which is the name of a precious
stone, and of a swelling sore or tumor: he has together glittering glory,
and wounding woe, he lives inter malleum and incudem, betwixt the hammer and
the Anuile, Duplici laborat inuidia, inuidetur ei, and inuidet ipse Senec. in
Epist. 85.
between hope and fear: I tell him that honor is not in honorato, sed in
honorante, not in him which is honored, but in the mutable breath of the
vulgar people: he is sick of a twofold envy, he enuieth others, and others
envy him. I cause him with Moses, to choose rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, then to enjoy the honors of Pharaohs Court: I make him
consider, that weeping and gnashing of teeth is the reward of the proud, and
the requital of the honors which the wicked have in this life; I cause him
seriously to say with himself: O why should I be so foolish as to suffer my
self to be carried away with the vanities of pleasures, riches and honors,
seeing I find no contentation in them? I enforce him when he groneth of the
Gout, to cry out: Vanity of vanities, all is but vanity; and thus though I
afflict the body, I lift up the Soul, to the contemplation of heavenly things.

Now to my dear darlings, Loose, licentious liucis.
those loose, lewd, licentious, lecherous, luskish Libertines of the carnal
Crew, my filthy slaves, a word or two: I can style them with no better titles,
because they always solicit, trouble, allure, and vex me with their
importunate calls, and with their riotous living, even enforce me to come unto
them: The Pockes.
therefore I am seldom absent in mine own person, or else I send my sister,
the Lady Lues of Naples, to enfrenchise her self into their bones, a far
worse ghest then my self: and betwixt us two they are so tormented, scourged
and consumed, that our abundant humors, do quickly put them out of their
wanton humor, or else with fear, pain, and weakness utterly disable them.
Yet have I an especial regard of their Souls, for I cause them to consider,
that this sin shall never escape Gods revenging hand, that they are no better
then carnal Epicures, wholly sold over to iniquity, that they are like
Stallions ever neighing after their neighbors wives, 2. Pet. 2. 22.
rather swine then men, whose delight is altogether to wallow in the puddle of
filthiness, that they are like the Centaures, and Minotaures, whose upper
parts resemble men, but in the lower parts they are very horses and bulls. I
labor to bring them to true mortification of the flesh, as of whoredom,
adultery, gluttony, drunkenness, revenge etc. For what pleasure can the
adulterer take in his fleshly lust, if he would but consider, Incipit a risu,
curis coalcscit amaris, Desin^t in lacrymis improbus iste furor. Mant.
that his evil life does not only (as Gods just plague) fill him full of
incurable diseases, but also makes him subject to the eternal curse, to
remain in perpetual torments, that his adultery is a separation from Christ,
and that the bed of his pleasures shall in the end be the cabine of his
tears, at the day of his death? This sin begins with mirth, is continued
with cares, and ends in torment. Wanton pleasures begin in lust, proceed with
shame, and end (for the most part) with pockes and contagion. These pleasures
(as I heard our Preacher say) are a deep pit, Prou. 22. 17.
and none, but with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall into it. And so by this
meditation I labor to bring them to repentance, that their souls may be saved
in the day of the Lord.

As for my little Lullabies, The vanity of beauty.
Mistress Wag-tayle, the Wanton, and her fellows, whose flourishing fresh figure
makes proud (for fastus inest pulchris) when the rose and the lilly strive in
their face for preeminence, whose Coraline lips, cheerry cheeks, vermillion
dye, lovely eye, golden hair, etc. and other endowments of Nature they have
abused, to draw the loose Libertines to the gaze, and to catch them in the
snare: I will also plague these for the abuse of Gods gifts, in making them
nets of the devil to ensnare unstable souls. I tax not all, who are adorned
with the grace of beauty (for I know many of them sober, chaste, and modest)
but such as love not to be too heavy, and are somewhat * Catholic;
Universal or common.
whose wanton life has diffused many contagious humors, through their whole
body, and yet have a desire to seem fairer in the eyes of vain men, with a
deceitful foppery and painting, then with spiritual beauty of virtues, to
shine before God and his Angels: whether their beauty consists in
cleerenesse of skin, which is called Pulchritude, or in neatness of body,
which is called Form; I know how to abate their pride: if they were as fair
as Nereus, Nereus.
I will soon make them as deformed as Thersites, their fair hue I make pale
and wanne, Thersites.
when their bodies are replenished with evil (...), which will breed (...)
their bodies swellings, tumors, ulcers, gouts, lepries, etc. the reward of a
wicked life, and so I will enforce them to confess with wise Solomon, Favor
is deceitful, and beauty is but vanity.

Another most excellent lesson I teach my Clients, Friendship.
and that is, how to make choice of a true friend, a thing in these days most
profitable; I tell them, and make them feel, that they are no faithful
friends, which draw us to prodigality, riot, drunkenness, as are our
pot-companions, carousers, health-drinkers, etc. whereby the Soul is polluted,
the body defiled, crudities engendered, and I with my disease constrained to
scourge them, and bring them to ruin: but they are to be reputed out true
friends, which counsel us to sobriety, temperance, moderation in eating and
drinking, chastity, and such like, whereby health is preserved, nature
rectified, strength maintained, my malady expelled, and life prolonged. And
here I remember a wise instruction delivered by our Pastor, for we talkatiue
Femails have not the worst memory; ( Oportet mendacem esse memorem.) There is
(says he) a counterfeit friend, a time-seruing friend, a false-hearted friend.

The counterfeit friend goes always masked, in his Aue, All-haile, God bless
you, but in his heart he has, Cave, Take heed of me, I will cut thy throat:
such ever give poison in a golden pill, he is totus viscosus, all lime, Read
Ecc. 6 ver. 7, 8, 9, etc.
his words are lime, his gestures lime, his countenance lime, and all to catch
thee as the Fowler does the bird, his words are complementall, but his heart
deuiseth thy downe-fall: all his plots are for his own profit, and glosings
for his own gain, he rises by thy fall, and gets by thy loss; a man
cannot be too circumspect and heedfully wary of such: Try and trust, for there
are many lurking holes in man's heart.

The time-seruing friend is like the Cuckoe, or the Swallow, will take pleasure
in thee, and warm himself at the sunshine of thy fortunes; Nullus ad amissas
ibit amicus opes.
but in the winter of adversity, he will not know thee: no longer a friend,
then on the winning side.

-- Scire volunt secreta domus, Inuenal.
atque inde timeri.
Thy secret dealings they would know,
That they may keep thee still in awe.
By secret policy, and Machiuilian trains, seeking to effect that which they
cannot by honest means, nor violent courses; a Herod within, and a John
without; a wicked Politician in a Ruff of the Precisian set. T. A.
Shallow honesty, is better then the quicksands of subtlety, and plain
dealing is a good plain song, Palling.
as one accutely says; this counsel of the Poet in this case is not to be
despised: Let no man know thy secret deeds, thy friend have always so,
While friendship last, that thou foresee, he once may be thy foe.
Take heed of such friends, and be not hasty to entertain friendship with
any: and so much for this.

Now if any will object, Ob.
that all other diseases can effect these things which I have spoken of, as
well as I or better: That I deny, Ans.
and utterly deny: For other diseases do quickly, some suddenly, suppress
life, or do so afflict them that they have scarce any leisure to think on
their Souls health but it is far otherwise with me, for I know how to extend
my force, and when need requires, in convenient time to remit it again and
give them ease, which other diseases seldom do.

Albeit (O Judges) I could allege much more for my self, yet will I now make
an end, when I have showed by the example of great men, that my society is
neither shameful, nor wretched. It is the part of Heroical and Noble minds,
indifferently to suffer prosperity and adversity, and to make a virtue of
inevitable necessity. And to let pass many Potentates of the Earth: that
Trojan Monarch, Priamus, admitted me into his golden Palace; Peleus,
Bellerophon, and Oedipus, did not exclude me; Plisthenes, Prothesilus, and
prudent Ulysses, received me courteously; and happily (which some may wonder at)
Achilles himself, though swift of foot, could not avoid my power. Let the
Grecians fable as much as they will, That he was displeased for the taking
away of his Paragon; it was I that kept him from the battle; I, (I ywis) was
that Brises, which made him contemn the entreatie of the Grecians. Would not
now any wise man choose rather to suffer some hardness, with those famous Noble
Personages, then with vile, base, and abject persons, to wallow in Swinish
pleasures? and rather labor to adorn his mind with Virtue, then like brute
Beasts, to become a slave to the belly, and corruptible flesh?

Mala quae cum multis patimur, leuiora videntur;
The griefs that we with many bear, the better may sustain.
Ye have heard (O Noble Judges) my just Apology: now it remains, that I
beseech you to weigh all things in the balance of Equity, and then by your
upright sentence free me from these malicious calumniations and false
accusations, which my wicked enemies lade me with, when themselves are most in
fault, and inflict upon them deserved punishment for their licentious and
filthy living: so shall Truth be honored, your selves for Justice commended,
and my Accusers reformed, and my self bound incessantly to pray unto the
Almighty, that your Honors be never touched with my disease.

FINIS.

