PARAPHRASE UPON THE SEVEN PENTENTIALL PSALMS OF THE KINGLY PROPHET.

Translated out of Italian By I. H.

Qui eminant in lachrymis in exulta^ metent.



M. DC. XXXV.

TO THE RIGHT HON.BLE FRANCIS BROWN VISCOUNT MONTAGVE OF COWDREY.
RIGHT HO.BLE
TAKE serious notice of this rare Copunct. Here true Contrition is deciphered
in its practice, to the life. See this afflicted with ^arpe anguishes. and most
direful agon^e S^e this ouercast with darkness, as tr^passes, and in such
plight, as ^u horror, now (...) of comfort to the height.

Read him again^, For here appears he, and most assuredly, through the
benignity, sweet grace, and boundelesse mercy of The Almighty, a Man
glorified, a Man (though formerly a greiuous sinner) sanctified.

Attentively then observe, the curious Theorie, which from him a Pattern may
be well extracted: For it rightly teaches what; and of whom is to be craved
aught, and earnestly besought; and when so it; and how; then what is true
felicity; then solid rules as to conservation of such possessed dignity.

The Penitentialls of the Kingly Prophet, as they are found by him penned, are
by diverse judged to be parcel difficult, nay each of them abstruse, and
hidden. To other some, they make show indeed, of being ^oo succinct. Verily
therein I do not mer^ile much at the vulgar^ since that in the so sublime
mysteries are delivered, and with such brevity. Therefore for the better
satisfying, and enlightening them to their end: They are here by Paraphrase
laid open both perspicuouslie, and at large: which primarily was compiled, and
divulged in the Italian tongue, by a Florentine as well literate, as elegant. I
lately (to my power) have made it English. The learned kind of Commentators,
often give light unto their Authors. Too frequently do Translators eclipse
diversely, the genuine meanings of what they wrote. For the most part at least,
they are deficie^t in the rendering them, with a curious manner of expression,
and eake luster.

I cannot but mise-giue: that I much fail therein. Reallie I misdoubt: that I
am too far out, not nigh alas, the grace, and purity of his style so
worthy. Nay that the ^me appearing unto m^ne, will clearly show ^y
weakness. And yet truly it admits ^ot aught of strange to me: since I
well perceive; that low are my talents: then no^ less that the task is hard,
for any one, though of what soever rare endowments, to give an Author his
embellishments. But I will hope that in the version of this Treatise into our
own speech, I have rendered its true sense. For the rest; I assume confidence
in your Honors connivence, at my defects in cloquence: since well its Known to
me, and many more, that your right Noble, and sublime spirit, does cheifely
valiew what in real substance, nay, little, cares it for aught of shadow,
which solely does conferr, to an attraction of some sort of Readers to
attention.

And emboldned thus; humbly I ^ffer up This Piece unto your Honors charitable
intention, to our Nation. By this, many ^ay proo^e enabled diverslie to
perfection: who lik^ly will from hence with much faciliti^ understand the
matter in hand, an its consequence: and hereby discern th means, and manner
how properly, they may breathe out sighs of inward compunction, and send forth
words from sincere devotion, to their inexpressible releifes; as even thence to
the winning of De^ine grace; thence to the obteyning of pardon of their
several delicts; yea and then^e even to the complete acquisition of
Beatifique vision.

Sir, I rest Your Honors devoted servant. JOHN HAWKINS.

THE PREFACE.
GENTLE READER,
TAke in good part my counsel ingenuouslie herein tendered unto thee; convert
it to thy use. Contemplate on the subject following, and that leriouslie.
Indeed, it cannot likely be: but that in so doing thou freely vendicate thy
self, of time it is losle: For verily; there is to be read the doleful
lamentations, and noe lesle; there is shown through even most curious
shadows, then conspicuous lights, the heart its comforts of the Kingly
Prophet. Thou may well apprehend, if there unto thou lend thine ear: that
it, though written, may be taken, foreue^ a Figure, an Emblem, yea rather, a
more lively Image as well of deep grief, as also marvelous relief. Behold
a true Compunct deciphered there. What more? and such an one, as on whom thence
shined Devine inspirations: which by him sweetly received, made him an
evected, with that high dignity, of a Registered, in the book of sanctity.

Qui seminant in lachrymis ^in exultatione metent



Printed at Paris

THE MEANING OF THE EMBLEM
SEE griefe's true model, In this horrid Cave
Is Israel's Prince, as living in his grave.
Behold his Harp that speaks his vvoe: Those streams
Not from the Sun, but immateriall beams.
The craggs and pearly drops that from them rise,
Seem to vye groans with him, tears with hi^ eyes.
His royal ensign scattre'd on the flore,
Seem forfeite to his Liege Lord; His no more.
Herby we learn sin's nature: Hence we know
Her stings are true her joys but joys in shovv:
Bereft of joy by sin, by tears suppli'de,
He gaine's true joy, which pleasing sin deniede.
THE courteous Reader, upon notice that the Printer of this Treatise
understood no English, will easily pardon what errors he finds against
orthograph^e, the ioyninge of two words together, or dis - ioyninge the same
word into two, etc. Wherefore I only desire without puttinge according to
common course a table of Errata's, that he will please to understand in the 36.
page and fifth line, the words not through the works of contrition, formally.

HAEc expositio septem Psalmorum poenitentialium, ex Italico in Anglic^num
sermonem conuersa, pia and catholica est, nihil habe^s fidei, aut bonis moribus
aduersum. Datum Duaci 26. Septembris 1635.

Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Doct. and Regius, ordinariusque, ac primarius
Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri Praepositus, Duacensis Vniuersitatis
Cancellarius, and Librorum censor.

THE PROLOGVE OF THE FIRST PSALM.
LOVE taking his stand in the eyes of Bersabe, to give laws to gentle and
flexible spirits transformed himself, in a glaunce cruelly piteous, and making
through-passe to King David, first casting a mist before his eyes, then after
breathed into him poison, and in a seeming sweet touch of his senses, had
access, yea ingresse to his very bones, and there dispersed his fire. No
sooner perceived be the effect, namely that these were altogether inflamed, but
that by a liquid poison, he entered into the whole body of his heart, and there
fixed himself, not without his souls affright. For he bowed to this image,
which in its first presenting it is object, made impression in his breast. Hence
the mind of this so great a man, was become slauishly enthrald, and an adorer
of a new picture of beauty; so surprised was he, that forgetting all true
iudgme^t^ ab! w^ to these kingdoms whose Kings want it) entangled with desire
and love; neither reguarding the Mai^sty of God almighty, nor his own state,
under pretext of scnding Vrias the Hittite, husband of this his Idol to secure
victory, gave him up a prey to the enemies sword; that he being made away, he
migh become husband to the others w^fe, whom he loved more then God or
himself; and such his desire obtained, that lascivious bed enjoyed (by whose
like the world's conceived notable offense, and heart-burning has often
turned Empires and Kingdoms) Nathan the Prophet deeply weighed his
enormities, yet compass^onating him, in plain terms, laid before his
understanding, his injustice, asvvell in murder, as also in adultery, contrary
to his Maker's commands. The good old man astonished with the punishments
which Heaven prepared for his sin, felt asvvell from his soul, heart, as
also his senses, his desire, his fire, and his over vveaning delight, to for
sake him, to depart, to vanish, even as heat from the limbs, and the heart,
in the encounter of ought which makes it shake for fear, yea miserably
tremble; sovvas he taken on the sudden, so lively and sprightly was his
apprehension, that he forth with rent from his head, and body his crown, and
royal purple garment, flung his scepter on the ground, made an exchange of the
great height and pride of his dignity, for an humble p^nitency, covering again
his even naked body with sackeloth; the hair of his head, and venerable beard
negligently disordered, the one and other white in honor of his age, thinking
with himself that he was a sinner, not a King, he seemed in his countenance
even penitence it self.

He took to him his Harp, which instrument evermore offered up his
lamentations, sent from his heart, to the happy blessing of his soul. Moreover
he retired himself into an obscure place under ground, as it were a prison of
his sin. No sooner entered he, but his thoughts were further affrighted by
the darkness of the cave: He notvvithstanding neglecting these horrors,
without any delay, took deeply, yea and to heart, how he ought to do to
appease his God; he humbly kneeled, took his instrument, aptely placing it to
his breast, rarely composing his countenance, and erecting it to Heaven (the
sorrovvfull sound of his sighs acquieted) touching the strings, and most
tenderly, with a svveet fervor, delivered to God these follovving words.

THE FIRST PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
Domine, ne in furore. Psalm 6.
LORD, since thou give leave to me to pronounce thy name, and that my tongue
may call thee my Lord; my heart hence taking an happy conjecture, favors my
hope, that it is penite^cy, has in thy clemency and mercy, where with thou
do comfort those who are truly sad for their offenses against thee. Hence
I am emboldened, with my voice and tears, in such manner to conjure thee, by
thy goodness, that thou please not (although thou art incensed against me for my
sins) to chastise me in thine anger. O God I fear thee, and repent me from
the bottom of my heart that I have not feared thee, and am fully resolved to
fear thee truly; hence behold me not with that wrathful aspect, with which
thou lookedst on humane kind, when as the pride of their wickedness thought not
only to equalize, but to tra^lce^d thy mercy: for which cause thy then present
will and command did scatter the clouds through the ai^e, and did break the
prisons of the winds, laid open the cataracts or sluices of the heaven, took
days light away, confounded all by whales, and shook it by thunder and
lightning, trees crashing by storms, human kind rooted out, with all living
creatures overthrown, beaten down.

Thou did not only drown the face of the Earth, but the brow of the Alps,
and tops of the mountains in like manner: Hence tookest thou away the foul
soil, vvherevvith the common and general vice had sullied, and defiled all
the parts of the universe, the most abominable offspring of the people
destroyed, thou did in such sort purify it, as I desire by means of my
penitency to cleanse, yea purify my soul: lo as behold me not with the
countenance vvherevvith thou lookedst on the rebels, in that time when Noah,
and the rest were saved in the A^ke: but reflect on me be mindful of me, as
thou were of him, whom thy divine favor, and singular benignity saved from
the dreadful deluge, and clear my mind, too too much busied with fantasies,
and those yea such most vain, even as sometimes thou clearedst the heavens
troubled by clouds, which lay overthwart before the lamp of the world: and
let it please thee to secure me from the punishment, which is even ready to be
inflicted on my sin: the reflecting on which moves in me a quiuering, not
unlike to a twigge in ye water. Let it suffice that I confess my errors, my
greiueous offenses, the fear which I apprehend of thine anger at the day of
Judgment; at which time the tears and sighs of the culpable, of the wicked,
shall have no more place in thy mercy, nor vvilt thou in their behalf be
further for them, as now benignely thou art, and thou will be for ever and
ever, our good, and pious Lord.

Lord even for fear, meditating on thy judgment, which possesses me, yea
even all my spirits, keep back, retain altogether thy word in that dire^ull
day. Vouchsafe not only, not to chastise me, but also not too severely inflict
on me punihment, conformable to the tenor of thy just ire, provoked by our
greiueous faults; which although thou pardonest us whilst thou correctest us
for our offenses, make me yet not withstanding tremble. For the correctio^s of
the sin of makinde, are co^flicts, banishme^ts, plagues, stripes, hunger,
wa^ts, bondage, dishonor, hostility, loss of children, and stings of
conscience.

Pacify thine ire good Lord, with which my greiueous trespasses have
inflamed thee, for the good that I am ready to work; and by thy pity have
mercy on me, for that I, alas! am sick. My very heart is wounded by that
selfsame arrow, which the bow of fear of damnation has shot at it: my
soul bewailing languisheth, for that my infirm body gives it an inckling,
yea as it were a notable sign of estrangeing it self from it, not ought
reguarding the state of my disgrace which thee. My senses are not sensible, my
taste has no taste, mine eyes see not, my sense of feeling does not apprehe^d
it is object, my smelling does not distinguish odors, nay smell at all, my
hearing hears not, my infirmity is such, as that it is not content with the
help of plants, nor the force of charms: Earthly physiek cannot be a salve to
my sores, in it there is no validity to cure my such heavy suffrances, for thou
only can cure them, and if thou composest not remedies for my maladies, I
cannot recover my health, hence lament I, and with the tears which even come
from my hearts veins, I beseech thee my Lord, that thou deigne to heal me
fully and completely. My senses and my soul, vvhi^h are in their hot, and cold
fitts, promooued by the force and desire which I have of my not having power,
and of my willingness, to be reco^cilled to thee, are full of vain, empty, idle
fantasies, do dote like one who is besides himself, become such by the great
affliction, occasioned by his fever, in so much as he is one while hot not
unlike to fire, another while cold as ice; and the same heat which dries, yea
parcheth his lips, is found in me, who only desire to drink of the fountain
of thy mercy, which does more comfort him who drinks thereof, then does water
prejudice the sick, Alas! my good Lord, grant unto me that I may moisten my
mouth from thy grace and goodness, for that elsewhere is not health for me. I
doubt Lord lest I heap offense on offenses, by my importunity, being unworthy
to crave thy mercy: but my sin which pierces me quite though, in such sort
that it has seated it self in my bones, and marrow, makes me ouerbold, and
indeed as it were impatient: my bones troubled, notably disquieted, yea wasted
through my insupportable grief, are unknit, their sinnewes are untied: but
peradventure the danger is more greiueous the^ the sickness, for that I being
composed of flesh, and sensible of it is suffering, do fear lest I prove not
valiant in the combat, in which if I fail my eternal loss of soul might
follow: and undoubtedly I shall yield to the force of it is assaults, if so be
thou defend me not under the buckler of thy mercy.

Lord, my soul is beyond measure troubled so many and such like are the
temptations which asseige it. It has for a receptacle, yea and castle, weak
human flesh: the hostile arms of wordly vanities have conspired, and used
stratagems against it, and the senses which reanswere to their flatteries,
corrupted by stately, and most magnificent sights, by hearing the harmony of
flattery, and selfepraise, by sweet and most odoriferous smellings, by tasting
the delicacie of meats, and by feeling sensibly voluptuousnes, endeavor to
render it a prey to the pleasure of the world: Hence the miserable soul flies
for refuge to, and under the shade of the hope, which it has in thee, even as
a child under the skirt of his mothers garment: The Heart so much fears not
the cruel and mortal bitings of dogs, who is even then ready to be sharply
nipt, as my soul fears my adversaries who inveigle it. Since so it is with
me, support it with thy mercy, if not I shall fail, yea even fall into my
irrecouerable and utter destruction; and though it were so, that I cannot at
present merit so far, that thou grant me my petition, how long will thou
please to defer thy such gracious aspect, with which thou do fill with
joy, and blisle the Angels. Thou moouest the Heavens, assignest bounds to the
Elements, give motion to the Planets, make the Sun to shine, give light
to the Moon, and brightness to the Stars! Alas! yea and alas! o Lord, take in
thy attentive consideration, the misery into which the not having known (as I
might have done through thee) to bridle my proud will, has brought me to, I
say, and the not having hitherto reflected on my self knowingly, who being
composed of earth, must necessarily return again to my mother earth, and
hence restored to my flesh and bones, for my greater confusion, must appear
before thy Judgment, in the presence of all such, who have been, who are, and
who (as yet not in being shall hereafter be. Grant unto me Lord that I may
imagine, but not see that thou forgettest me, for by means of such imagination
I shall learn to put thee in mind of my exigents, my great wants, extreme
necessities, as well by fasting as prayer: in seeing here of I might not
unlikely despair of pardon and mercy, which they find, who though they have
disobayed thee, yet chastise themselves with the scourge, working to amendment
of life.

Look again on my soul, my Lord, with the self same benign countenance
with which thou favorably do behold him, who by long penitence is more
worthy then am I poor wretch, and consider it to have more shame, and
confusion, in it is trangresse of thy commandments, then in it is fear of
eternal banishment and utter loss, which attend's it for it is foul sins.
My hearts quelling heaviness would be singularly cheered, if so be that thou
would with thy favorable aspect appease the contestation afflicting it,
which presents to my Fantasy, to my mind, thoughts raised from the
day-booke of my sins; Surely I shall henceforth be more solicitous to serve
thee then heretofore I have been, as having been slow, careless, and
altogether dully sottish. O my Lord, if without all fear and trembling I might
call upon thee, would thou not vouchsafe an answer to me? at least should
my days prove long, which thou lendest me to live, I should truly hope that
sack cloth, tears, sorrow, watching, fasting would obtain, yea vvinneso
much in my behalf, that thy grace would shower on me, in such manner that I
should be received no otherwile then as they are, who through their truly
humbling themselves have returned into thy grace, their peace so made. My
sins indeed deserve any whatsoever pain may be invented, yea but it would
not be convenient, it, alas, would be my utter undoing that thy benignity
should retard it self, be slow, ought remiss to show it self unto me, and
that with plentiful mercy on my greiuous offenses: which I deny not, I hide
not, but if sin were not, thy cleme^cy would not appear what it is; admit
that there is no clemency, by which way should sinners acknowledge their good
God in his mercy? Even now Lord give quiet to the soul, which with an adue^se
eye of enemity troubledly gazeth on the body, not without just cause of
offense, for that through it is inordinate appetites, the soul is eu^n
condemned to the everlasting punishments of Hell; and as for my body which
daily, nightly, incessantly is gnawne and worn by its consciences affliction,
soon will fall, soon become ashes, if thou be not to it, it is sustentacle,
it is strength, it is full vigor, alas! my my soul dying in such state, will
go to a place which I have horror to name, yea to think of.

But if I die my Lord, not being among the dead who can call thee to mind, how
shall I make mention of thee? how shall I call on thy name? on whose name
never any called in vain, unprofitably; and most true it is, that there is no
comfort so fully consoling the heart, so restoratiue to it, as is the hearing
voiced the harmonious sound thereof. Thy name appeaseth the afflictedst
vexations, greifes, and adds increase of joy, yea even to those who were
before in state of comfort: Hence let me not peri^h until I write of the great
virtue, the swetnes, the joy, the power, the health which is in it: Let the
world hear and understand by my words, with what confident security, with
what grace, and with what abundant felicity, he lives, who has it alv
vaies in his mouth.

Alas! yet what shall I say of my state, I shall dye the death, I shall make
my passage to Hell, and goeing thither, it being not allowed but otherwise
decreed, that any there being love thee, for that thou vvilt not be beloved of
such, how shall I publish and praise thy infinite goodness to them there
abiding? which who so should attempt to define or circumscribe, he should
seem to prescribe an end to infinity.

How shall I being lost, voice forth thy mercy? which through thy goodness
do please not only to help and ease, but to advance, to prefer with
great dignity him who has been refractorie, yea a hundred years, for the
contrition of one moment offered up.

And how can I Lord deliver unto the world as a perpetual memorial, the
benefits conferred by thee, if so I go from thee banished, exiled, utterly
forsaken?

Co^serue my life o Lord that I may publish thy benefits, whereof my being is a
part, which thou have given me according to thy similitude, thy likeness, thy
heating of my prayers, long and quiet life, the love of my neighbors, patience
in adversity, temperance and moderation in prosperity, modesty in daughters,
virtue and courage in sons, peace and concord, increase of goodness, renown
of charitable works and hope of Paradise.

What have been my endeauours, my great labors to deplore my state, to weep
on it bitterly, this my body which I carry about with me well knows, which
not withstanding a thousand promises it has made me, to be continent, to
contain it self within the limitts of thy law to all purposes, has not, yea
in any one, been answerable to it is word. This earne^ly by me sued unto,
delivered unto me with great asseuerations, that in the midst of the spring,
it would leave the soft feathers of it is nice couch to confess by fervent
prayers it is foul offenses: but no sooner had it put forth the foot out of
bed, but it retired it self to it is warm place, so was it given over to
slothe, neither by allurements of the benefits which hence would redound from
thee, nor for the threats of the injuries, which by so slugging id did to thee,
could I at all thence move it, nay rather it remained in such drowsines, as if
neither death nor Hell, had any relation to it. It came to dinner, and supper:
I forbad it wine and meat, it cast such a look on me, as does a sick man on
him who takes from him that which (though with prejudice of his health)
infinitely pleases him. Strange and harsh seemed it unto it, to be dispoiled
of it is golden, and purple garment, alas! to be clothed in rude rough cloth,
I not giving attention to the reprehension that by disrobing my self, my
royal dignity has checked me with (which for that it observed it self to be
adored by men, emblodned it self in competencie with that of thy eternal
Majesty) have taught it to valiew at naught it is delights, and these very eyes
which were wo^t to look cheerfullic, so made lively by laughter, so soon^ as
they apprehended their objects of delight, have relinquished that their lively
spirit, yea now ouerflow with tears in this obscure place, for having done,
if not so much as they owe, so much at leastvvise as they can. My palace is
this tomb, this hollow dark place; the place of my rest, is this earth. My
meat, the anguish of Compunction; and drinking my tears, I will extinguish
my appetit's greedines, and the hard earth shall mortify the tenderness of my
bones; and if ever I shall lay down these my limbs on my bed, I will so vvash
it with the rain from mine eyes, that being such in it is luke warm moisture,
it may not give time to sleep, to destroy, and poison me by rest; hence my
dreams will not ensnare me, enueigle me under their deluding maskes, but such
like visions, whereby I might be shevven revvard, in thy propitious and serene
aspect, which they deserve according to thy stating it, who call themselves
in, into themselves, to overcome themselves.

Lord not for fear of thy fury wherewith thou chastisest and inflectest
punishments, but of thine anger, wherewith thou correctest, and admonishest
mine eyes even through weeping have lost their sight, as the day it is light by
night's obscurity, and my eyelids are so so^e, as if I were buried in a ^er,
and my heart seems to re^d in sund r, and my sou'e to be torn; mean space I
(whilst I take notice of my miseries) breath forth sighs, and some p^slages I
have in deep quelling thoughts hereon, thate mine enim es still persevere
against me, those of my al^ke years remain bad, even as ^hey we^e, they open
their hearts to me, I am reallie a^ hamed of my wh^te hairs, that they have
seduced me, and vvithdravvn me from thee, even as the good are enticed from
goodness by the wicked; and now having found out new snares against my
repentance, evermore assemble themselves and make it their discourse, in what
manner I am to finish my days, taking me yet to be in hold of lasciuiousnes as
are they, and I am really troubled at their whisperings, which they buzzein in
mine ears. One of them presents to mine eyes, the rare image of her whose
comely graces, and beauty, on me have heaped more then many sins, another
tell^th me of her harmonious speech, how sweet it was; which now so
bitterly re^oundeth in mine ears a third shows me the Trophies and spoils
which my armies necessarly will inuest me with; one promises my head a
double Diade^, another my right hand a new scepter: there is not vva^ting who
will incircle and adorn my neck with a chain of infinitevaliew; likewise who
places before me a golden throne, most magnifice^t palaces sumptuous
pauements, and other Kingly po^pes: in such manner each one of then use all
art, all subtilties to entrap me, to besott me with vain glory. I that make
a fence impenetrable by their hooks, and eschew the baits of their guiles,
their frauds, by the floods of tears gushing from mine eyes, stopping mine
ears to these Sirens of the world, hope to suppress them, to confound the^ in
the greatest height and fury of their assaults, and I likewise hope to be free
from their netts, which with much craft and most vvily ambushes they have
pitched: yet not by mine own guifte, mine own skill, but through the grace
and care that thy bounty has of him who by the scourges of penitency has
broken his sins wilfulnes and obstinacies, which I hold in my hands by
means of these, to disincumber my self of the deceipts of mine adversaries.
And forasmuch as I am become gray-haired continuing in sin; that I mav
recover my months and years spent in vain, I will do like a Traveller
who observing that he went out of his way in the evening, recouereth his way
the next day at noone, by the solicitude of one hour. And while I touch my
faults with the torture of a contrite heart, I find, I know not what, that
aduanceth and promooueth the repentance that does me good, and represseth the
sins which endamage me. But now I see them all confounded as it seems to me
that they attempt to forsake and leave me, so troublesome, and hideous seems
my prayer unto them.

Get ye gonne far from me, ye wicked flattering enticers, awoide ye,
vanish ye out of my sight, ye vvretched counselors, your incitements, your
instigations, have no place in me, move me not ought, for that God has
propitiouslie heard the voice of my vvailings, my deeply sorrovvfull
mournings, take ye notice that his grace is povvred on me, whence my spirits
sensibly possess fully enjoy a new comfort. I find my self now above the
earth, and earthly vanities, and am become all spirit, and my soul repriued
yea ransomed from all fear, into which calamity, it is sin brought it, now
being all cheerful, seems not ought unlike to one, who is cleerlie got of
from danger, into which he was even as it were falling. Now I find a full
and most complete recovery, in so much as I begin to breath, as one who is
arrived to what he long hoped for, my ^erie bones which not long since
languished, are comforted, nor is my flesh infirm and feeble as it was, nor
do I give any attention to wickedlie enticing memorialls; now all
displeases me, which before pleased me, I am not (as now it is with me)
puffed up with ambition, nor am I through the blandishement of flattery
banished from thee my Lord.

From my Lord who has heard my prayer I speak with which I have dispersed
and discharged my se^fe of that torment, which my misled life had prepared for
me, and I have not only appeased both his present displeasure, as also his
further wrath by my prayers, but I have fully extinguished them; and the force
of my prayers and acclamations endighted and sent from my soul, delivered by
the tongue of my heart, have moved my Lord to pardon fully in an instant all
the misdemeanors and wrongs which in the course of so many years, without
once reflecting on my well being or my utter loss, I have done against him.
And his goodness shall defend me with the weapons of his mercy, the sense
ouercom^ by that reason, which so often it has carried on it is triumphant
chariot, is now with confusion, amazed, and I hope, more I say that
undoubtedly it will come to pass, that our Lord will make it servant, yea
slave to my penitencie.

At this instant without any further delay, let the whole crew, and
fraudulent swarm of them be ashamed, and let them feel in themselves a
confusion, and folding up again the ensigns, which as vanquishers of my
liberty they displayed in the principal place of my forefront, let them be
converted and blush at their run course of life, and let them not further glory
therein: For the goodness of my Lord does well require and deserve, that they
lend their ears of understanding to him, that they return to him, and when
as the frailty of these such, does sting them, when it importuneth them, and
when it urges them, let them arm themselves with patience and reflect on it,
nor let them give themselves over to their vain pleasures, let them glory to
become disdeigners of politenes, ouer-nicenes of their scarlet, of their
treasure, of their armies, of their Cities, and of their Crowns: for that all
the happiness that we seem to contemplate on earth, is a certain kind of an
incomprehensible miserie^ and all florid beauty of the world may well be
compared to the flowers of a meadow, which fade, yea dye whilst they are the^
sprouting forth, in their growing. Again the world is a cup of Gold
curiously adorned and enriched by jewels of great estimation, whole sight
does allure. And in such sort by it is splendour are mine enemies surprised, that
the miserable wretches are not cautelous take no notice of a Serpent which
therein is cou^hed, which therein lurketh, which with the fire of his eyes
enflameth desires, and with his vvin^s mounteth them on high toward heaven,
and then poisoning them by his breath, rejoices to see them destroy d^n ^he
bottomless pit of Hell. And therefore you the attendants on vice, reconcile
your selves, as I have done, lay aside your deceipts and snares, follow the
tracts of my way: nor be disanimated if the ways be rough, and craggie by
which (...) lead you: when so you shall arrive to that your iourneys end, you
will forget your wearisomnes, which is of no long continuance, but short, and
you shall exchange it for eternal rest.

The end of the first Psalm.
THE SECOND PROLOGVE.
Whosoever has seen a sick man immediately after he has made truce, and an
atonement with the heat and cold (compagnions and symptoms of his disease)
and in like manner when his pains has altogether left him, with which he
languished, yea was even tired out, contemplateth David the most just, through
the benefit of his prayers: the moisture which he povvred from his eyes
staunched, he as one marueilously comforted made a period to his complaints;
and laying aside his harp for a while, the horror of his sin did no more
terrify, affright, lessen aught the hope which he had in the mercy of his
Lord; which with threats, was wont to appall him before, he resolve d to be
vvaile with abundant tears greiueous offenses: And now the place of his
penitency, seemed the house of devotion; The Pastor of the Jews gazing wistly
on his eyes, those his eyes bedewed, nay overflowed with tears, valiewed him
worthy of reverence and honor, esteeming him to deserve the same honor, which
holy things are worthy of, are crowned with. But as soon as he had taken
breath, and taken unto him more Spirit, more viuacity, more courage, being now
free; with a sigh from the bottom of his heart, opening his lips, and with
the harmorny of the strings, his voice cleared, taking it is height, it is
compass, curiously applying himself to various motions of his fingers upon
the hollovv vvood, in such manner he earnestly delivered this which follows.

THE SECOND PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
Beati quorum remiss sunt. Psalm 32.
OBLESSED they whose iniquities God pardons, leaving the unpunished, not
through the works of contrition, nor other acts hence arising, as austerities,
and denying themselves, although without the^, our finnes acquire not
remission, but through the benefit of his grace, whose goodness takes
merciful notice of a tender mollified heart, and by means of his compunction
inclines to hide his sins under the skirts of his mercy. Really are they
blessed who well observe that God does not punish them for their faults, for
they knowing their desert, through their conceived fear of not falling into
the wrath of our Lord, with bridles undiscovered by any: retain, keep
themselves from wickedness, which covertly they formerlie did put in practice
with dishonest and effrene concupiscences; whence the wrath, the disdeigne
which God prepares against the like, appears not, and hence the defects, the
greiueous sins, which produce not in others ill examples, remain
unpunished, sheltred; for such like sinners make themselves cautelous by having
sinned: and with a penitent heart are not seen in the troops of the wicked.
Wicked sinners are they, who not only in their ill effects and other course
of life offed, but do also sin in vaunting that they sin not at all, yea
even in sinning, that they have not sinned. And such like iniquities, which
displease the Majesty of God, even to the very shadow of an ill affect, and
perverse will, are punished and discovered in the light of each one, asvvell by
the scourge of their loss, as also by the confusion of their shame. From
whence they are torn and transfixed, as enemies of that well living, by the
labors wherein one overcomes and discardeth vice; which who entertaineth
is not happy.

Happy is the man on whom God imputes not the delight of sin, rather looks
on him as one cleansed from the filth of the world having severed himself a
loofe from sin (even as a serpent who lately has cast his old skin:) and
with his clear sight, such as it not dimmed by any misty foggs cast before
it, takes most singular content to behold his spitit, his mind, the state of
his soul, which glittering bright lights, yea and stationeth it self, as
does a purelie white dove, who having set in order, and fully pruned her
feathers by the rivers side, comfort her self through joy, clapping her
wings, that she has bathed, purified her self: and taking exact notice
hereof in good earnest, and fully fervent in his duty, takes singular pleasure
to see the ways he walks in, and of his approach to his God, directing his
stepps in a better way, as light in night's obscurity directs one.

For that hitherto I have been too too sile^t not confessing my sin, I
through my self am hurt, and I seem not unlike to him who ashamed to show
his wounds, finds himself for is not disclosing them, to be in the state of
perishing irrecouerably, who would have seen recovery, perfect health by
his laying open his grief. Alas! what shall I say my Lord? Such is my state,
that my bones are grown aged in weakness, have long been seized on by
infirmityes; nor can human assistance avail, to an inueterate miserable
sickness: The undoubted salve for my recovery is the oil of thy mercy: which
can lenifie, yea cure the fierces and cruelty thereof, allodged in the maine
pillars of my body, which boyleth with a dangerous, permanent, and lurking
heat, which imperceptiblie consumes it. And whilst it suffers, I have
never ceased to call out, and that aloud, with the voice of a stout man, whom
future loss shakes not, affrighteth not; notvvithstanding my sins against
thee, my lascivious carriage vvherevvith hatherto I have offended thee, not
only with all my senses, buth with all my heart: and herein appear I not
onelike to chickens, who no sooner taught to open their bills, to nourish
themselves, to flutter with extension of their wings, newly come from their
nest; but that ever after they leave to take notice of the bird (the hen that
bred them) who taught them the use of meat and wing. Lord, I say that I have
with great earnestnes diuulged to the world my worth, my merit, but not alas my
faults against Heaven, it seeming unto my depraved judgment (I being a King)
that I might not only give way and consent to sin, but that thou should
in my greatest offenses, give way to me, reguard had to my kingly rank, not to
my ill and sensual courses contrary to thine Honor: which have been so much
masters of me, that now I may truly say, that for these many years I have
bee^ bo^dma^ to sensuality. Nor would it ever have come to pass that I
should have taken notice of my misery, if thou had not caused me to read
the book, the great volume, wherein my trespasses of all which I must give
account to the, are registered.

Moreover for that thou have night and day laid thy heavy hand on me, willing
that I feel of many and those diverse kinds of miseries, vnhappinesses, where
with my mind which has alvvaies led a life with much disquiet, and has been
conturbed with the storms of perplexed thoughts, is become languide, even very
weary, through the stings of conscience, which even to the midst of my heart,
and even to the inward cabinet of my soul, have made their through-passe. I
have clearlie made known my defects, and have them readily to show at a beck.
Behold these my greiueous defects, my enormities, but so as it be without thy
wrath whereof I am certain, for that the tears of mine eyes have extinguished
the fire of thy just disdeigne. And when all is said that can be, am not I the
work of thy hands? am not I like unto thy likeness? and if it appear to thee,
that I know not how to afflict my self, so much as my duty ought, teach me I
beseech ^hee the way to punish my self, in such sort that in thy sight and
the worlds, my faults may be satisfied by my sufferings, not inflicted by thee,
but willingly elected by me.

I have discoured unto thee all the sins which heretofore I hid from the: I,
and the fear which I had in hiding them, whilst I do discover them unto
thee, is converted into hope to have remission of them: and con^iding in thee,
I am like to him who making known his sore gazeth vvistlie on his Phisician,
and looking on him passes of the fear he apprehende^h of the violence of his
probe, with the hope of his cure: and I rejoice exceedingly, that I abhor
the sins, wherewith I was so much taken heretofore, even as sick men loath
meat; And I am ashamed now of that, whereof I was formerlie proud; for that
hence my soul, was evidentlie exposed to the danger of it is perdition: and
blessed be that instant wherein I was first compunct, and sorrovvfull for my
sins; and I acknowledge that it proceeded from thy goodness, who seeing us
even lost through our disordinate life, with the plenty of thy bounty do
inspire into us, what thy will would we should do; and let it please thee
that the content I take in denying my self may ever be with me, and may fully
take me up with delight, for if so that I take such lively, and real pleasure
in the sorrow of my penitency, as I have had in the iocundizing mirth of my
sins, my blessings notvnlikely will participate those of the glorious
Angels, so shall I be completely happy, in that I have not hidden my
injustice, my wretchedness from thee: and when so that I shall be received in the
arms of thy mercy, as are those who beat down their own sins, I shall see
after the tears of my amendment moved through my penite^cy, a happy good
exchang with my fore-runne v^ces.

But Lord, who^e imagination can arrive to the thousandth part of thy bounty,
and of thy mercy, which is not comprised, but within it self? Love above all
love, inexpressible fulness, and height of all love, thou art truly sweet, for
a^loone as I thought to have recourse to thee, and to confess against my self
all my sins, willing tho choose to me austeritie, rather then thy scourge, I
only addressed my self unto thee with my humble prayers for mercy, for that
thou more willingly do pardon the^ punish, thou have received me into thy
grace, with that fervent charity, with which the father receives into favor
his humbled son who himself abstaineth not even from tears, in tenderness of
heart, hearing his sonne's well expressed promises of amendment, of not
farther transgressing, and of not straying out of the bounds of obedience. And
alas! my heart (the memory of whose impieties thou have most mercifully laid
aside) is even waste with the desire it has to consume it self in the
fervor of thy holy name, and it pants always, it is so inflamed by benefit
received from thee, and it self, it self only accuses, saying, such was
my will, so was I lulled asleep, even so did I.

And yet what shall I say of this my impiety, which with obstinate
ingratirude I did put in practice against thee my Lord; mine was very
fortunate. For this cause every devout person shall pray whilst time is
granted oportunely. But who is he that could require further, or could crave
more of thee, all just, all worthy through his merits, to the obtaining from
thee what favor soever? since that the wretchedness of my heart, masked, soyled
a while since with the wicked conceits which have seduced it from thy
knowledge, has great need that they who are near thee, thy beloved who have
interest, priuiledg of moving thee to pardon whom soever they interceede for,
offer up their prayers for me, for me who hitherto as mine own enemy, have
not weighed my state, nor have had will to pray for my self.

Howbeit I am comforted in the joy I take of having through my amendme^t
mollified my stubbornes, although not speedily, at least not so late that thou
for this vvilt not pardon me, and that thou can not receive me, as thy wont
is to take into thy favor and grace, those penitents who repent in time: from
hence follows it, that they who shall prove slow to repent, and to pour
forth floods of tears from their eyes, having not demurred ought to entertain
sin, shall not approach thee: for that thou vvilt not further hear their
lamentations, thou will not take notice of their fastings, not regarding
farther their too late compunction, wilt give them to understand in what
manner God can be moved to wrath with men, who vvilfully will profess
though their disloyalty, and perfidiousnes that he commiserateth not those
their prayers, those their tears which the lingering and not entering into
themselves, and warily bethinking themselves of timely amendment causes their
acts either from their eyes or voice in vain, of no force to them, yea even
too late.

But thou who solely art my refuge, and the end and full scope of my hopes,
and my only comfort in tribulation, which hitherto has compassed me about,
held me fast, and bound me in such sort, even as the Fear of death seizes on
one, who sees himself arrived to the uttermost point of his exe^ution: make
me now at length all cheerful with the incomprehensible joy which makes
it is pass through the breast ouerflovvn, overcome with comfort, issuing from
their hearts and souls who unexpectedly, yea and without all hope are freed
from bonds and fetters, from prison, from tortures, which their enemies have
long time inflicted on them, who perlever to deride, to scorn them, the
snares and priso^s of their adversaries being broken, even as mine enemies
deride my vvell-being, my lafety, in my having made my recourse to thee, who
solely can in a moment not only free me from them, but acquit me and save me
from danger of their strong assaults, which they have made with the
blandishment of vain delights, on my wavering and fond desire which makes
even bitter all those svveets which it gave me to drink of in the cup of
voluptuousnes. Me think's ever more I see, t^y admirable countenance, wi^h
favorable motion to cast a glimp^e on me the storms of Heaven, of Earth, and
of the Sea appeased, to light, and leate it self on me; and so placing it
self it seems unto me that I hear delivered from thee to me, and with such
more then most harmonious accents, which not destroying me, yet overcome me
with delight: I will give thee such like understanding, as I give to those
who are good, who deserve to understand how immense, and what is the renovvn
which he gains in my glory, who learneth first, who prefe^reth the
pleasing of me, before my displeasure. Lord yet not vvithstanding I see a way
shevved me by thy goodness, which I am to observe, to follow, and to trace to
thee, hence is it that mine eyes always look on thine, as Pilots on the two
stars, which in the passing the dangers of Seas, are their guides. Ovvhat
repose will that be, vvherevvith I shall be made happy so soon as I shall have
vvalked the way which thou will direct me in as a Pilgrim, who lost the way,
which leads each one to the place where thou keep, where thou live.
Alas! a while since my footing was in a wood, a desert, where they stray who
love the world more then God: and I had lost my self in the world's labyrinth,
had I not converted my self to my Lord, from my him craning in^uctions by what
path, by what valley I should walk; now in thy service, and to my singular
benefit, I walk in those ways taught me by thee; always thanking, always
piaising thee: otherwise I should be unjust to him, who giving me my being in
the world, has made me distinct from brute beasts, and having made me man,
has placed me in a far higher degree then are any of them, and I having been
hitherto scarce sensible hereof, yet has he given to me such lenght of life,
and so much illumination, that I hope in regard of the repentance of my former
sins, and for the punishment I will inflict on my self hereafter, that I
shall come to be enrolled in the list of his servants.

Be ye like the ackowledgers of the benefits received from the bountiful
hands of God, and for this form which we have answerable to his similitude,
let us give all thanks, endeavoring, to the height and full extent of our
power, not to resemble in ought the horse, or the mule, in who^ is no distinct
perceiuance, no understanding; and for that through the defect of their
natures, they are unthankful, rather (I should say) return no voluntary
service, no pro^pt and ready will, and duty, for benefits rece^ued; it is
before expedient, yea most necessary to tie them up, to courb them vv^h rough
^naffle, with headstall and reins, to the end that they bite not, and that
they kick not, that they hurt not their masters, who v^uallv punish their resty
tricks with rough and smarty cudgellings: thus handled they are restrained and
courbed, in despite of their ill condition, alvvell of heels as of bi^ings,
even as we are, who ^ffend our Lord, by our maledictions, our tra^sgressions,
and by our per^dious stubbornes, yea stony hardness of heart, as^oone as he
smites us with crosses with fears, with d^structions, with deep
Melancholies, and with being more unfortunate from day to day, from ill state
to worse, making our treasures of no benefit, no profit to us, nor our ran^ks,
our servants, our delights, as also the glory of them, who are the proud
favorers of the world, not without the great offense to Heaven.

Even as the Stars, the sands of the Sea, and the leaves, are without the
compass of number, so are the punishments innumerable to sinners. In the tread
of a foot, in the moving of a hand, in the very straining to expectorate from
the lungs ought, in sleep, in meat, in walking, in standing still, the^e is
danger ready at hand to encounter with for any one to stumble at; who so
fails in punishing himself, and the affliction, the mortifying the body, and
the so^row, yea languishing of heart, and the earnest attention of the mind,
foreteller of it is ill, never cease to molest him who lives in sin. But
they who confide in our Lord, whose bountiful goodness is a spring ever
flourishing, ever floridly green to the leauy branches of our hopes, are
environed, fully endowed, plentifully enlarged, by his mercy and gracious
benefits, and his benignities are alvvaies vvatchfull, tenderly solicitous on
their necessities, their urgent and pressing wants: and whether they sleep or
wake, yet does his favor accompany them, to their conservation, be it
whatsoever they do, the benignity of our Lord is clearly shown on them, who
conserueth them in tra^quilitie, in peace, in ouerflowing most-abundant he^rts
comfort, they being such who keep themselves in the love of God, who is the
only comfort, the only free distributer of the hearts consolation of those,
who vnderualiew, yea vilify all vainelie esteemed happiness in comparison of
his service.

Rejoice ye in our Lord, let your hearts consolation add luster, make serene
and cheerful your countenance. O to ye do I add^esse my speech, who
evermore walk in the right way, in the well directed path, and with upright
heart, look on those heavenly lights, those his eyes: and live without
furious o^trages, without envy, and without fraudulency, whose life is
prolonged by him, who is infinitely pleased with such perfections of the good
and the virtuous, and no less is appaied and rejoices at the just punishment
of the wicked. And ye each one of true and sincere heart, glory in that ye
are just, and that you fear our Lord more then correction, yea death it self,
for the sweat, the intensiue pains, of your service tendered to God, is of more
worth, then the quiet possession, and full enjoying of all the free
Monarchical Kingdoms, and Empires of the Universe. But I pray what comfort,
what hearts delightful rapture may that be said to be, wherewith they are
possessed, nay therein dissolved, and seasoned, yea wholy ferme^ted with: who
to obey the soul, to serve it, to give it it is satisfaction, alvvayes and
incessantly displease, yea totally, and evermore abridge the body's
inclination and will? It cannot be esteemed a little while, for the revvard
which weldoing has from God cannot be measured by the capacity of humane
imagination, and evermore when we exalt our spirits with joy, with which
our heart abu^deth, so soon as it is purified, and graciously looked on by
God's illumination, we do not only participate of the joy of the heavenly
troops, of the heavenly Army, but of that very self ^ame in expressible joy,
which is in the countenance of our Lo^d whilst he beholds the sons of men
tru^y fervent to their procuring, and vvinning of grace.

The end of the Second Psalm.
THE THIRD PROLOGVE.
NO sooner had David harmoniously and with great fervor breathed forth the
above writ words, but that for a time he imposed deep silence to his voice,
and in this his holy suppresson of his speech his silence seemed as if it
enterchanged discourse with the dungeon, or grott, wherein he was enclosed
and namely of the peace which he had made with God, and he even as a bondsman,
who perceives in the eyes of him, to whom he is slave the forgiveness of his
fault, wherein he transgressed formerly; he povvred forth some tears,
which ouerflovving joy, through the merit of his penitency swetely extracted
from his heart. Here might you with astonishment behold a strange spectacle,
for he seemed in one posture, in one situation, as well with his hands
devoutly lifted up to Heaven, as also his eyes; the figure, the statue of an
old man (to whom nothing more could be added to delineate reverence and fulness
of honor) cut in stone, which by art is made seem to breath, and weep,
expressing most intensiue grief. In the mean time while he was in this
rapture; a ray of the su^ne which never goes down penetrated the Cave, and
with such a splendour enlightened it, that it made the place delightfully
cheerful, even as April does it is spring, and fair vveather the air: and
glimpsing on the strings of his Harp, which he bad placed to his breast, made
them send forth irradiations, glistering beams, in like manner as does pure
gold, exquisitely burnish't, by whose splendour the light begets light, and
his eyes stricken with the lamp, his soul hence felt comfort, yea as we may
say, it was oueriored, for that his Royal heart in an exta^y, rapt infulnes of
piety, devotion, and f^uent zeal, was now more inflam^d with the love of God,
then was he erst with the fond and wretched love of Bersabe Hence fully possessed
with a certain hope of his safety, settling his right knee upon the ground, his
left foot on the (...), his boay inclining to the left side, his inst^ument
well tuned (even as it often happens with one who delight^th, and pleases
himself with diverse a c^rds) he meditateth in the mean while, and wistly
l^oketh o^ the record of his memory to find what he would sing, which at
the present he has forgott; clearing his voice, remembering himself again,
lowly sang thus.

THE THIRD PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
Domine, ne in furore. Psalm 37.
OH! alas! as I have besought thee, and even as with all humble petition, I
do now again, earnestly crave of thee, that thou rebuke me not in th^ne
anger, which evermore is eternal damnation to the wicked, for it will import
Hellvnto them Ah! far be it otherwise with thee, that thy mercy look on
my tears, my plaintes, my hearts deep grief, with alike disdain, with
which the self same mercy will look on them with scorn and derision, who
gave not food to thy hunger, nor water to thy thirst, nor clothes to thy
unclothed nakedness, nor visited thee sick, nor lodged thee a stranger, thee a
Pilgrim; nor releiued thee a prisoner, nor gave any comfort to thee comfortles,
and afflicted. But let all thine anger convert it self into thy mercy; what
say I? I firmly ackowledg that thou were alvvaies, that thou now art, and
ever wilt be, merciful; and that which they give to thee as attributes of
anger, is no other then a punctual and an exact justice in all respects
prescribed, fore-determined, so destined by the infinity of thy goodness, for
their punishments who first dye, and then repent. My Lord I ought to have
satisfied thy servants hunger with food, with drink their thirst; I should
have supplied their wants, releiued their suffera^ces, asvvell in cold, in
vveakenesses, in want of repose, in imprisonings, as also in all their
adversities and tribulations, and reflecting that I have not done herein my
duty, I find my self even to the quie^ vvonnded by the compunction of my
penitency, and by the fear that I have deeply conceived, to be swallowed up,
into the whirle poole of the bottomless pit of Hell; and since such is my
hearts grief for my transgressions, accept me a penitent, let my complaints,
and my distressed lamentable moan makings, make me worthy of pardon; and let
it never come to pass, that I feel what is that anger which our sins in
offending thee, operate in thee. Hence thou punishest us with thy scourges, for
that we do not chastise our selves, with our own inflictions, in such sort
as I correct my self even now, who am not unlike to such a bondmon, to such a
slave whose trangressions have disquieted his masters mind, yea far aversed
it from him, who being in such state, in such disgrace, redoubling as well with
humble sorrow, as also his solicitously attentive service, with all earnestnes
commands, yea even forcibly compels himself to work in such sort that
he may procure to himself a self forgetfulness of his passed offenses through
the goodness of his even the^ painful solicitous and faithful service, by
which he strives to win in him hope of himself to prove a singular good
servant in time ensueing.

For that thy darts, for that thy disdeignes, and thy affrights, which
terrify, which amate one as lightning (for these have the rays, the
sprightly beams, of fire, of sword, of sickness, of dearth, of hearts-greife,
of death) have deeply struck me; I have raised my self through their scourges,
from the miserable sinck of sin, even as a horse plunged in a durty heavy
bogge, is by the sharp incitements of spurs released and fully acquitted
thereof: And knowing that the calamities thou inflictest on man kind, is for
that thou would it should learn, to forsake sin, to return to better, to
live well. I am fully resolved that the seeming shadowed beauty of pleasure,
(which dureth much less, is more momentary then is the continuance of a
gentle and spetious flower) (a rose it self) shall not dep^iue me the winning
the possession of that eternal blessing, that eternal real good, which he
enjoys everlastingly, who takes the course, and hence well apprehends the
way, yea fears and loves God, whose mercy is of so great extent, as even
the sinner could wish it to be. Hence the hope that reuiueth me, deeply
meditating on thee my Lord, does take vigor, and hops (though I am burdened
with sin,) to acquire through means of contrition, eternal beatitude,
which all those souls attain to, which fervently desire to be invested
therevvith: and I confess thy darts, thy thunderbolts, sensible warnings to me
have been the means to stir me up to contrition: and that thou have pleased
to lay thy hands on me, as the good Surgeon does on the sick, I am beyond
measure comforted; for I have the same need which has a body whose vvounds
have not been for three days continuance opened, the emplaisters of the first
day as yet there remaining.

Alas! in what state am I, there is not the least portion of health in my
body, and for that, it remains only in thee to cure me, I am bold to have
recourse to thy goodness, and from thee do I only expect my health, which
will so consolate me, as day is made happy by the Sun: and to declare my self
yet farther, my infirmities are not to be enstyled nauseousnes, or loathing of
food, they are not fevers, are not pain of spleen, but in sum there is not
in me any health, I am all over distempered, yea sick to the death. How so? Ah!
sin which even breketh my heart, has even thus deprived me, brought me unto
this state; and through the fear which my considerations of thine anger
draws on me, I la^guish no otherwise then a man whom human remedies cannot
avail, and for that my bones are (...), which are sustentacles to my body,
even as are the mighty columns, the great pillars to Theaters (ah! poor
wretch that I am) so far is it that I am at quiet, that even as yet y fear,
that I am not reconciled to thee, I am afraid to fall into the pit of Hell,
through my transgressions, the unspeakable monstruslie-he adlong peruersenes of
which does even call on themselves thy justice, thine anger, thine implac^ble
wrath.

For that all mine iniquities, and all the occurrents, the causes, which have
induced me to transgress thy laws, are on my head, alvvaies threatening to
hurt it, and utterly to spoil it, I am reduced to such an exigent, as that I
cannot lift up my dejected face to Heaven, and by how much the more I
endeavor to lift it up, by so much more does it incline downward: and those
things are wrought by my sins, which euenly heavy on my head, as if thy
were an immovable lumpy weight, in so much as I yield, and bovv under the
burden, even as a bovv drawn by a strong arm; and for that there is no
weight, which equalizeth the heaviness of sin, to which gold and lead must
in weight give place, in me there is left no health, nor strength: for under
the heap of my heavy sins, my faculties and my strength is even spent with
weary somnes, even as a Pilgrim through the long way and roughnes of his
journey, is enfeebled, worn out, and in such sort vveake through the
tediousnes of his travail.

The scarres which on my living body are found, testimonies of the wounds
which sin inflicted on me, relics of my foul offenses are putrified a
new, even as ulcers to soon skinned, and hence it comes, for that my
contrition, my truly hearts deep sorrow, which I make my buckler against
it is blows, has not bin able so to defend me, as that I do not fear that my
vvounds will be opened again, which through voluptuousnes I drew upon me: and
that which does greiue me more, and which with more inwa^d sorrovv does
contristate me, is that their corruption is so putrified, so extremely rotten,
that none but good and patie^t men can endure me: But alas! for my offense to
Heaven, my Lord is hidden from me. Ah! the corruption of this my soul, does
move his displeasure, which he gave me unspotted, nor do I wretch accuse my
frailty, nor any oc^asion whatsoever presented to me, but I lay justly all my
ouerweening indiscretion and folly, which has given it self over to be led
by the snares of the world; yea even to making it self a prisoner of sin,
whose flatteries, whose allureme^ts, do entice me in such manner, that I am
not aware of the danger that the putrefactio^ which breaks forth of my
vvounds do dravve on me, which my vain ^ottishnes, mixed with madness, has
opened again with late trespasses.

In the opening of my searres I have clearlie discerned the milerie into which
my not ser^eing God has brought me, the pr^de of my mind (raised on the
vvings of worldly felicity, vvordlie delight, in so much as I seemed to be
full possessor, full Lord of all worldly contents is now come down,
stoopeth, is become lovvlv humble, even as trees branches sprouting out boldly
heauen-ward, are wrought down, are made lower, when the Shepherd will be^d
them dovvnevvard; and I being become even crooked under the weight of the
pleasures of my loss, will leave to stoop under the heavy burden of
hearts-greife, for my salvation, even to my lives end, and the deep conceived
melancholy which I took to my self of my trespass (whence all the day I
vvalked in such a manner heavily sad, with much unquietness, as does he
who is afflicted, yea torn to piece with the stings of conscience, which are
more fierce, more cruelly sharp, then are the torments of the strapado, of
the gallovves and scourges) for that it was the motion, the instigation to make
me remember my self, let it be unto me converted, turned into fulness of joy:
for I am determined to arm my reason with the tears of penitencie, and I am
sure that it will overcome with them the pride of sense, which more fears
the shadovv of correction, then does the brave Coursier the rod.

But since that my loins are fraught with illusions, for that my soul is
environed with reflections upon the vanities, of vanities, where with it is
possessed, in which it is so much ouervveeningly enthraled, I may well say
that I enjoy no health, that I am vveake and feeble in^eede: that in my limbs
there is no sou^dnes: the faculties of my senses are clean lost, my hands,
mine eyes, mine ears, my mouth, and my nose, are deprived of their due
operations: briefly all the faculties which God has given me, as gifts of
his bounty, I find corrupted, to have lost their validity; and to the end
that I should know him only, and my health only, from which I shall
always be farther and farther of, for that I have been estranged from my Lord
(until that I framed my self to lay open my sins in song with tears) if I
do not mortify my self in the afflictions of penitency.

I have afflicted my self, and humbled my self exceedingly, with tears sent
from the bottom of my heart, for that reflecting on thee, I evidently savv
mine offenses, the knowledge of which has turned my felicities, into miseries,
and has made humble my pride, and has mollified the hardness of my heart, and
by the ways of truth, and sincerity, has purified all my senses which
were co^upted, never resting but in the mansions of goodness, nor want I ought
but the fortitude and constancy, which comes from thee and from thy
largess, together with that ve^ue, which thou give for guide to all the^
who earnestly crave it of thee; as now do I, with all my faculties, which
abandon occasions, and grounds, and all leading subjects to sin, vverefore
let not thy aid be vvanting to me, or in ought remiss. I know surely, most
undoubtedly, that thou art more clement then I am unjust, and no less know I,
that thou vvilt be more commiserable to me, then I have been wretchedly cruel
against thee; and blessed were David if he could frame his petitions, crave his
pardon, proportionable to the extent of what thou can grant, can forgive:
and thrice happy shall I be if so that I be patie^t in the bewailing my sin,
ansvvereably to thy longanimitie and patient suffering of me a greiueous sinner.

O my gracious good Lord, before thee, apparent to thee, (who through the
foggie mistie darkness see that which to any other eye is impossible to be
seen; and who^e eyes through-passe the inmost Cabinets of hearts, as the Sun
penetrateth pure crystal) all my desire is tra^sferred; which not having
other voice then it, which is even overflowed with tears, cannot duly, and
as it ought express all my trespasses, all that I would it should And
therefore it is hence dispatched as a messenger from me to the sight and throne
of thy Majesty, car^ying with it engraven in the blank of my heart, what my
prayers cannot deliver, so is it that my disabilitie by words to perform so
much, as from my soul I desire the self same words not vocally breathed
forth, remain insculpt in it, through the true fervor of my contrition, ah!
look on my vvillingnes, which has taken it is seat in my heart, and thou
shall clee^ly read the purpose, the resolution, it is mind has made, to
enroll it self under thy banners, to be thy soldier, to fight thy fight,
with a more then most determinate will never to disobey thy discipline
(glorious Leader) never to sin against thee. Ah! poor wretch that I am! my
eyes weep, yet distill they such small drops, that they are not sufficient to
extinguish the fire which my ardent desire is taken with of craving, yea
impetrating of thee mercy: and to account my tears of weight enough to
ouerpoise my sins in scale of justice, my new faults would weigh down,
transcend my amendment, so far, as greater is the omnipotent power of God,
the^ the (alas!) weak strength, weak power of terrestrial Kings: but it
suffices me that I am penitent, and the^ my Lord behold with what will, with
what true and zealous resignation my heart is all overflowed, (as was the
world in it is deluge) by invisible tears which are evident to thee, who
know when it weepeth, when it is aggreiued, and when it rejoices, more
valuing one tea^e, and the least sadness of it, then a thousand from the eyes.

My heart whose tears have appaied thee (as one who is good, is satisfied by
the candid and sincere meaning of any one) is troubled, co^tristated, for that
the faculties and the strength, columns, pillars of my soul, have abandoned
me, have utterly forsaken me, and I am miserably shaken with fear of my
destruction, and utter loss, since that I find, I am deprived of such
sustentacles, such maine supporters. Ah! hereon speak who will sensibly
deliver their minds, who I say will, who is he and who would not fear to
be deprived of such like associates, such companions? Fottitude, and the
virtue, and faculties of the mind, are the weapons wherewith the fallaces, the
enticements, and snares of the world are overcome and brought to naught;
herewith the adversaries of all good (I mean by adversaries, the Devil, and
his fiends) are trodden under foot, and were it not that my soul even assured
it self, and were confident in our Lord, I should be a thousand times more
heavy, sad, lumpish, then is the Pilgrim in the very midst of a vvood, where
no path appears; but I take courage and full vigor, for my soul is come to
another state, then erst it was, it is even over ioyed for that my eyes obey
me now, no vanities take them up, their light is estranged from voluptuousnes,
in so much as now, happily it is with me, I see not, or at least take no
notice of the poisoned baits, masked with delicate and well tasted Manna,
which formerly allured me, possessed me by mine eyes; the rays of others
beauties do not now astonish, do not now as unproportionable objects dim my
sight, which might well be termed, the nets and entangling birdlime of
souls: I take no pleasure but in my sorrovv, and my God, for I take no notice,
I take no delight in the lively green of the boughs of trees, nor in the
flowers of the meadows, nor of the pleasant current of a clear fair river, I
as little reguard the luster of gold, or sparkling gleau^ces, glitterings of
ge^mes, rare jevvells: nor does the sight, the ouer-glorious splendour of
solemnities touch me ought, I gaze not on the worlds carriage, be it never so
miniard, so in times liking, in fashion howsoever, for that my contrition for
my sin, and the many anxieties in the way of vvinning grace and pardon
through penitencie, have so fully entertained my eyes with the veil of
repentance, that I am to them happily blind.

Whilst my soul, my gracious Lord, does rise against sense, does master it,
that so it is, I take and receive it from thy light, and by thy rays, thy
irradiations, thy beams my Lord, hereby I rise again, I am releiued even as a
flower (hanging it is head by nights cold drooping; and farther so stated by the
heaviness of the dew, at the sunn's shining on it) is succored, raised up, held
up, by thy providence, by thy virtue, in such manner do thy commands sound in
my tongue, such force have they on me, and allies to my loss, to my great
vvrong have applied their ill endeauours against me, yea and to hurt me
notably they have do^ne their uttermost; but these following words of thine
do I interpret and deliver with the spirit of prophecy which thou have
endowed me with, for I seem to see even now the troops of thy favorites,
of those on whom thou have even accumulated, and plentifully heaped graces and
most abou^dant benefits, armed with svvord, and fire to assail thee
unthankfully, returning for thy most pious, tender, and most just helps
assistances, graces, rare works naught but pure ingratitude, nor seem they
moved otherwise to reguard thee, to appear before thee, but to interpose a
veil of their ignorance, to the alseing eyes of thy truth, which shall
appear, shall spring forth, rise again in the punishments, prosecution of
their iniquities; even as the Hydra's heads cut of, appear: and the same
truth is made a lookin-glosse of men to contemplate. Woe! yea all woe! to
those transgressors who in God shall see, contemplate, behold clearly the full
expression and lively image of their harshnes, their cruelty, and of the
perfidiousnes of their hearts; and blessed is he that ever he had being who
shall see in the truly representing glass, the faithful loyalty of his
belief and confidence in our Lord.

Yet farther continues Gods word by my voices delivery, and he has deigned
that myeares, hear ^hesou^ds of his accents prompting me as follows. They
who were nigh have eslonged themselves, are gonne far from me, and with
all speed possibly, even as a stone from a sling, is flung far from him who
flingeth it, hence shevving unto me, what the world is, that they were not my
friends, although they kindled the lamps and burnt incense, upon the holy
altar; their hearts are not true, sound, and fervently zealous, they are not
where they are; as evidently appears, as may be clearly demonstrated: for
that their speech seems to honor me, but with an ill meaning, ofsuch like
friends as they are, whose hearts fly from me, as smoke from the vvinde, and to
make appear their farther wretchedness, their greater perfidiousnes, whilst I
taught the^ what is truth, they fully endeavored by docttines of men, to
empouerish and weaken the understandings of men, to deprave them utterly, to
overthrow them, to make good their false assertions, and to pervert them who
sincerely desired to understand my meaning, that is to say, my true
intentions, as flocks of sheep, and herds of beasts do seek for water and
grass.

But my glorious good Lord, by what deserts of mine comes it to pass that I
am allotted to speak with thy tongue, which makes me continue in
prophetizing. And they who endeavored to find ill in me, with more
solicitude, then does vveariesomnes seek rest; have against me spoken their
idle fancies from their invented chimeraes, windy, empty vanities, most false
things not with unlike rancour, but with the same which wicked and most
vvretched men use to speak: and all day long humming like bees, rivers, and
the vvindes, and scandalizing my goodness, endeavoring to pervert others with
dislike of my sincere truth, meditated with strange imaginary ways, a
throusand var^ties of deceipts against my innocence, and with sharp
reprehensions, and with m^ligne accusations, molesting me daily and nightlie,
they more then most earne^lie endeavored to find a fault in my bounty, in my
goodness; and even as the wicked and perverse, they called my prayers
blasphemies, my examples malices, and my miracles witchcrafts.

But I like a deaf man, who hears not the noise of other pratles, or
brawles, heard not the shrill iangling prate of the envious, who most
injuriously, most unjustly spoke despightfully of me, who all zealous in
their behalfes desired to make them know the truth and no otherwise, then if
so that I had bee^ borne without a tongue from my nativity, or otherwise
dumb, I was silent, I was still: notvvithstanding I heard their false
testimonies asseuered by oaths: and surpassing with my humility their pride
under the shovver of lies which tempestuouslie powered on my head, even as a
te^pestuous shower of hail, and rain, falls impetuously on the ^yles on the
top of an house, I seemedlike a gentle meek la^be, who with head inclined
without bleating, suffers himself to be shorn by the shepherd, who
whilst he fleeceth him, threatening him to take away his life also, for that
the poor beast understands not the noise, the horror of his danger, of his
state and being, he is not affrighted a jott, as I am not terrified, and for
that I may not hear the conspiracy of calumniatio^, that my enemies devise
against me, I will stop my ears as does the serpent against enchantments.

Thou yet my Lord speak again further: and say. And I am like to a man
who hears nothing which can (entering his ares) pass to his heart: for it
is the manner of the just, not to give audience, not so much as to hear the
unjust speak, who vugratefully oppose them selves against the great favors,
singular graces, which were given them: and I am as it were a serva^t, who
not willing to transgress the commandments of his Master, although he is
tormented by the perverse malice of his competitors, his envyers, has not in
his mouth those words, which the innocence of them who are causleslie
injured, is wont to frame: and somevvhat strange is it, that I suffer the
malice and the ignorance of others, I not hearing the ^hatterings of the
crovves, nor thee creaking noise of the crickets, which burst fo^th in their
nights never ceasing molestation.

O goodness of God thou art great indeed, and thou art truly benign, for thou
by thine own sufferings, teach us to overcome the c^osses and
disquietnesses inflicted on us by the wicked, and to acquire thy grace by
means of patience: and to give us example, thou gave way for calumnyes, to
ouerrunne thy just, pure, and unspotted head: and sure I am that thou for
farther demonstration of thy constant prudence, desiredst, that the number of
thy accusers, who with false inventions, with lying testimonies, did molest
thee, diversely afflict thee before the tribunals, in which seats were
placed vvretched Judges, might be multiplied; wherefore I hear that thou
comandest me to speak in thy name, in thy person, as follows; I care not
false swarm, false route for your wicked persecutions. Hence have I hoped in
the merits which my sufferances have prepared for me, which will prove to
the benefit, to the health of souls, which would perish if I dye not. But for
that I sensibly perceive that thy grace is wanting in me, which has thus
far made me speak with thy tongue, with thy voice. I recommence, I return
again most humbly to my devotions, which thou my Lord and my God vvilt hear
with attention and favor.

For I have besought thee with such an heart, which thou well know,
which thou cleerlie see, not requiring, not craving ought else then fortitude
against enemies, now I call again with all the organs, instruments of the
voice of my soul, I humbly and earnestly, suppliantlie, crave again: that
thou vouchsafe that those who cruelly biting me, stand over me, no otherwise
then do vultures over the harmless innocent beasts, may not scorn and
de^ide me seeing me as an edifice without sustentacles, columns, or supporters,
headlonglie falling into the hideous dark sepulcher ofsinne, but let it be so,
that they greiue and frett themselves, to see my joy, my good state, under the
shadow of thy bounty; gnawing one another, through the sharp bitings of their
perfididiousnes, loosing themselves in their wretchedness, whilst the wicked
condemn me with that earnestnes, with which the good pronounce safety to
me. Incredible is the malice of the wicked, for that at each least motion of
my foot, at each stray which I vvalking make, scarce obsoruing the going out
of my right way, they have delivered such obloquies in my prejudice, which
(wicked as they are) by them should not have been spoken, nay even against them
who had obstinate vvil, never to return to thy ways: But I am content, I am
appaied, that I am converted, that, I am turned to thee, ready to satisfy for
my sins, to banish sin, yea to tread it under foot, through fear which I
am well taken with, of thee my glorious good Lord.

For that I am prepared for punishment even as a beast ready at the altar for
sacrifice, thy afflictions, thy scourges, are not to me at all heavy, yea
rather I may well say I receive them in the bosom of my past life, as
fruits', and effects of it is patience. And were it not that the grief which I
have, for having offended thee in my disordered error, from thy ways, and in
my wickedness had not laid open the leaf where in thy book it is registered, I
would enforce my self with serious attention, with all my power to lay it
open before thee, with more bevvailings, moaning, as from my hearty sorrow,
and then should flow from mine eyes showers of tears: but since that all what
I am is in thy sight, I only say, that since I have acknowledged the manner
of my trespasses, I have not, nevertheless borne patiently thy corrections, but
yet I have chastised my self, without any regard or compassion of my self,
with compunction so far as I could, clothed with human body; as is well
known unto thee; nothing seemed to strike me more, to displease me more, then
that my enemies should triumph over me, seeing me buried in the depth of my
utter ruin.

Let my adversaries be assured that I will confess mine iniquities, and that
I will tenderly and carefully think of my transgr^ssions, the sorrow of
which is humbly prostrated before thee; let them rather be assured that after
my acknowledgment of them, I shall so meditate of my self, as that I shall be
so sollicitous of them, and of my zealous duty to my Lord, that the
hearts-greife that I shall take deeply to my self for the^, shall be so
intensiue, that my heart having broken and passed over all it is stubborn
hardness, shall be so enabled with the clemency of thy mercy, that the
painful inflictio^s on my sins, shall prove no other then the suffering the
pain I shall have of my not being able to grieve so much as I would; and
through the merit of so fervent, so vigourous, so profound a heart-quilling
grief, and yet without which there is no access to thy kingdom; I hope to
ascend by those such steps by which the feate of the stars is arrived to,
heaven come to; for that my complaints, my moanings, my extreme afflictions,
my showring tears, which I will te^pe^uously through the anguish of my greiued
soul power forth both day and night incessantly, shall be my scourges, my
Purgatory, my Hell.

But alas! mine inimies live, they are established, remain stout, and
pertinacious, no otherwise then is pride against humility, and there are more
risen up, even as Ants in corn and flies in milk, who wickedly hate me: and
yet I am not hence shaken at all, troubled ought thereat. For I, whilst they
become perverse and mischeiuous, will win thy justice, with me doleful
tears, whence the wicked, and those who care more for the terrestrial
world, then for Heaven, (not as yet destroyed according to their sins
wretchedness) shall fall into the extremity of misery, in whose arms they so
much rejoice, as little infants in the bosoms of their mothers, for they know
not the fourd, the passage that they come from, that tender, preserve, and
sollicitouslie keep the vvings of their souls, from the entanglings of it is
birdlime, in which ensnaring labyrinths confounded is he for ever, who
acnovvledgeth no other God then vvordlie pleasures: hence reallie is it that
such an one may most undoubtedly be called miserable: for that hope does
blaze, nay tvvinckle any ray, beam of it is safety on him, even so much as he
is punished by the self fame his sin, as are the envious by their self same
rancour, their self same envy. But I my good and gracious Lord, will never
staunch my eyes weepings, nor will ever impose stilnes or silence to this my
tongue, nor ever will take to me a minute of repose from my grief, and heavy
heart's throbbs, until that even here where I breath forth and that
earnestly, my lamentations, thy mercy show some sign at least, that thou have
pardoned me.

All they who unjustly return evil for good (who are most l^ke to the
keepers, the watchers of bees, who when so that they have had from them
tribute of honey, and vaxe, they chasse them from their hiues, their houses,
with fire and smoke) have torn me in the sight of the people, with the
tallones of their wickedness; and for that I follovved not the ways, which
their crooked steeps had made, they would praise the semblance of my just
works with the spittings of iniquity, in public as^euering, baselie
esteeming my fear of God, and provoking me to show my dislike of the stings of
their fal^nesses; their ways I decline, bending my body, and fixing mine
eyes, on the ground, my head downward, and altogether contracted with in my
self bearing with the stings which sometimes have notably hurt me, with the
s^lfe-same patience, where with wisemen suffer the boldness and want of wit of
fools; it sufficing me to be justified in the judgment of our Lord, upon which
pillar does all my hope rest, for I am most assured, that he will alwais be
such, and the same to me.

Abandon me not my Lord, my God, who am without thee as is a horse without a
courbe, yea even without a bridle, a ship without a rudder: and as that moved
by the fiercenes of his nature, is wont to be resty, to run away with his
rider; and this made ouer-swif^ly glideing through the impetuous winds, often
abutteth, strikes against the rocks: Even so I provoked, enforced, by the
perfidiousnes, and vexation which my persecutors impose on me, shall likely
fall head ong into my precipice, be broken in pieces, and utterly ruined, if
thou hide thy face, subtract but thy favorable assistance from me, with the
twinkling of whose eye-brow, thou gouernest the governors and the celestial
and terrestrial regiments. O Lord for pittie-sake deigne to be my Leader who
am blind, and vouchsafe, not to separate thy self from me, who beseech thee,
by the tears, and the deep sighs which my sorrow powers forth, and frames
for no other cause, but to separate my self from sin, which has brought me
to such misery that I am unworthy to lo^ke thee in the face, whose splendour
o^lie is consolation to the distressed, afflicted as am I.

Incline then to help me, as charity does assist the needy, and the mothers
milk the child's hunger. Have reguard my Lord to my health to my safety, for
it is all in thee only, who art my way, my truth, and my life, and
likewise of all those who apprehend the way of conseruing themselves from
the snares of sin, as from sword, and fire: and although they sin they know
with more affect to lament their defects, the^ can the good soul rejoice in
their perfections. I beseech thee with my heart even come up to this my
tongue, which delivers what it dictateth, in such sort, that it is not in
thee to deny, that pity, that mercy, never denied by thee to any, who
craves it in such sort as do I. For otherwise I should be a prey to the
fraudulencies of my enemies, greedy of my loss, yea of my utter destruction,
were it not that I had reacknowledged my self, were it not for the hope which
I have had in thy infinite goodness.

The end of the third Psalm.
THE FOVRTH PROLOGVE.
AS SOON as David ended his third song, he seemd not unlike a Pilgrim, who
calculating within himself, measuring in his mind, and silently cast ng up
the length of the way he is to walk, and having overcome a great part thereof
already, reposeth himself under the shade to whose cool^es, the pleasant
gently whisking wind invited him, there somewhat taking his breath, which the
toil of painful travail had partly bereft him of. And as a Pilgrim's mind
is all bent, all taken up, meditating on the journey which he is to make; so
was he all converted to God, his thoughts were only entertained, and
intensiuely on God, and nevertheless playing or rather carelessly dallying with
the strings, moving his fingers here and there on them, without any whit
reflecting on their sound, which he hearing, yet well might I say, heard not;
resting his chin on his breast, the hottest and bitterest tears that ever
issued, eued rained, or were ever povvred forth, from the eyes of any one that
never so deeply greiued; he let fall. One might take notice so far of his
distilling, his melting in tears, as of wa^ me water in a large basin, which
receives the blood of a vein opened may be taken notice of as water all over
bloody: and to this his plentifully pouring forth of tears, were
interchangably mingled some sighs deeply fetched; so greiuous, that if the fall
of such floods of tears, and the sound of such sighs had been heard by any man
breathing, he would even have sworn, that in the Cauerne or grott there was a
windy rain, a sharp and bitter tempest: and vndo^edly if the winds could
have had ingresse they would have made fly, would have scattered, and made
known, the complaints delivered by his eyes, his tongue, and his breast, and
carrying them to the ears of all the people of Israel, each one of the would
have made all have to comfort their poor King; who (some gross and heavy
tears svvallovved up, blubbering, yexing, throbbing) in an instant turned his
eyes as a man affrighted, extremely possessed with fear and terror of vvbat
came then to his mind, what then was presented as object to his fantasy,
or rather impressed, and it seeming to him that the horrible and obscure shadow
of his transgressions, would hastily, and most violently snatch him away;
he with feruency equivalent to his conceived misery, cried out aloud, in an
high strain singing thus.

THE FOVRTH PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
M^serere mei Deus s^cundum. Psalm 50.
HAVE mercy on me God, not according to the propo^tion of my little, my poor,
my alas! poor, my feeble merit, yea alas! I may say even my scarce no desert,
either through my fasts, or prayers, or vvearing sack cloth, signs though of
denying my lelfe, or for my bitter tears, but according to that thy great
mercy, vvherevvith thou do surpasle in height of magnificencie, (and in
what not?) Heavens beautiful vault, the brave seeming comely boult of the
mountains, the sea's arms, the earth's bosom, the bottomless deepes, and
the measure and extent of the universe: insomuch with thee, let trespasses be,
whatsoever possibly they may be, they are less then a little point in the
midst of a circle of great capacity, of marvailous compass: even poison
which in it self engenders sin, sometimes makes it swell in such manner
that it though moving thee to disdain, boldly lifts it self up in such
sort, that it seems it would aspire to the top of the height of that thy
mercy. But for that I am sure that thy mercy overcomes the severity of thy
justice, I find not my sin's so desperate which heretofore feared to come too
late to find pardon, for thou vvillest that a contrite heart say only, I
have sinned. And so much only said from a contrite heart, thou endovvest them
with such plenty of thy grace, that their hearts, yea and their very souls
joint ie bewail, bitterly bemoane themselves, for the injuries that their
hardness, their such peruersenes, wrought to their miserable preiud^e, and to
their unspeakable grief against thee; my hardness my perverseness, differs not
a whit, from what is spoken of, wherewith hitherto I have offended thee; ah!
but alas! whatsoever poor wretch I am, I seek to hide me under the brave
ample shrovvding-vvings of thy merciful indulgencie and pity, by it is
goodness I beseech thee most humbly that thou succor me.

O Lord help me, and according to the multitude, the infinite reach, large
extent of thy mercy, thy commiserations, which are more then are the flakes
of the snow, then are the drops of the rain, blott out, cancel mine
iniquities, my crimes, which although justly acknowledged to be infinite, yet
they arrive not to the number of thy pitties, of thy commiserations; by which
thou sauest trespassers. And the bridles, the restraints vvherevvith fasting
courbeth gluttony, wherewith chastity curbeth luxury, humility checketh
and restrains pride, charity coueteousnes, and true goodnature, well
disposed humanity envy; and the spurs, the lively stirrers up awaken and
chase away sloth and lazines, are the gifts, which these compassions do
give, which thou have on distressed misery and ignorant errors which daily
are done in thy sight: thy clemency mercifully shines with more favorable
and cheerful aspect on him, who after transgression reasumeth himself, then
on any one, who has never t^espassed: and there is nothing to be far^her
herein delivered, for true it is that there a^e more acts of virtue, as more
resignanations to thy will, more earnest endeauours, and more merit it
amendment after sin, then is there for such to have abstained from sin; and
the fear which a man is sensible of whilst he is contristated, deeply sad,
extremely afflicted for his sin^e; his such like heart's deep compunction is
more availeable, then the securie of him, whosoever he be, of Paradise,
rejoicing in his not having trespassed: And for that, o Lord, my merciful God,
I would tender such a sorrovv, as might be answerable to my greiuous
offenses, and that I know all to be in vain, of no validity, without the
favor of thy grace; I the same conjure thee, call thee to accounte on that
ground, that tenent of the joy known, that thou have of the moanes, lamentions,
and hearts-gri^fes of sinners, that thou cleanse me in the font, and
euer-flovving-cleere spring of thy infinite mercy.

Wash me, and vvash me again clean, which the water of that merciful spring
in all, and all fully wholesome, full of grace; full of health, whose least
channells, whose least veins bedew, besprinckle the heads of the just, with
grace and health. Let the earnest petitio^s of me a poor distressed man, so
far take place with thee my Lord, my God, that I may bathe my self, wash my
self, cleanse my self in water of such quality which is good against
rustines, and mire which my sin's and imperfections have wrought and
contracted on me, even as drops of rain, of a sweet gentle shower powered from
Heaven do please, marvailously comfort, yea confer to the better being of a
bird, after it has suffered the Sunn's heat. Here is the full state of what
I humbly crave, that thou wash and cleanse me from sins; for the blotts,
blurres, stains, they have made on me, are foul and filthy to abomination,
and whilst they are seen on this my flesh, my soul (that abhotreth the^, as
those things which prompt unto it the danger of it is health) can never enjoy
the tranquillity, the entire peace, which they enjoy, who serve thee with a
pure and clean heart. But be it so that thou vvash me, and cleanse mo often,
my soul each hour be coming more pure, more unspotted, white, hence, will
receive that comfort, which will the limbs of one even now releiued, and
released from an infirmity, in washing himself in a bath of costly and
odoriferous spices.

For that lastly I have opened the eyes of my mind, closing those of my body,
I know that my sin (which I cast behind me and was careless of, having
taken the world's delights for my counsel, for my directions) is alvvaies
against my self; and whatsoever at any time has fallen out against me, has
bee^ drawn on me for my trespasses: hence I to keep of it is heavy burden
from me, to make it stand far of, and to secure my self of it, have made me
a buckler, a defense framed of the fear I have of thee, my Lord: and the
perfidious, and wicked, never cease to molest me with shrewd and importunate
snares: but because I am well advised how to carry myself against them I am
able, assisted by thee, held up by thee, to keep my self from being ought
deceived by them, and keep my soul from their frauds, their foul deceipts;
and with the hope that I conceive, and understand more in God, then in my
tears, I shall make them fly far from my face, as I desire to fly far from
it; the which sweet and fair though it seem, is both sharp and brutish,
most horridlie ugly. But thou yet Lord see with what gestures, and in what
manner, they (they wicked) flatter me, and endeavor to make me such as they
are, by their diverse ways of drawing me to be alike to them, laughing at my
tears, and showing at the self same cave, where I praise, give laud, and
glory to thee, the palace where thy despisers keep in, incessantly
vil^fying, scorning the patience of my pen^tencie; whilst I crush, even burst
my knees on the earth, they lie at ease and pleasure on their downy coutches; I
who neither see them, now hear them as erst I was wont, my thoughts
entertained by my fantasy far otherwise the^ to give attention to them,
strengthening my self with gifts of thy virtue, hope with my spirit to
transcend as far my body, as the body does surmounte, command, and ouer^ule
the spirit, for being oppresied, burdened by it, I was in immine^t danger,
there was little, alas! wanting that it had not made me fall under thine anger,
thy heavy wrath.

But here behold the prophetical spirit, which enters into me again, I am
hereof truly sensible, I perfectly know it Lord, yea even as the eyes of a
dim sight, yea of a man almost blind sensibly distinguishes the
appearance, and disappearance of light and therefore I acknowledge and perceive
that I have sinned against thee, in thy sight; but the ill which I have done
in thy presence, shall maintain, make good, yea justify thy word, which thou
have so often sent forth, spoken by the tongues of thy Prophets, in which thou
did lay open, all the sublime subjects, the hidden, the profound, and
unsearchable mysteries of thy truth; hence thy Son, all taken up, all
enamored, with love to humane kind, descending of my lineall stock, will come
to suffer, cleansing, yea purelie purifying by his death, the foul spotts
which Adam contracted on it. And in the same instant, that thou shall be
arraigned, yea adiuged, thou shall overcome thy persecutors, being vvretched
against thee, in so much as that they astonished, and altogether possessed
with admiration, with a clear, loud, and high strained voice shall deliver,
this is the Son of God indeed. And therefore my Lord pardon me, who come to
thee, my only refuge, in such manner let thy forgiveness be, as thy Son in
his preaching, teaching, shall state, shall ordain. Alas! my good and gracious
Lord, pardon me my transgressions for that (so long as my heart is pro^pt, and
most ready to repent, and my tongue lively quick and nimble to pray to the,
and my eyes well disposed, altogether bent to pour forth tears) I am not in
state ever to want faith, in my well apprehended confidence of thy mercy.

Not to cover, not to excuse my trespasses and crimes o Lord, but to
demonstrate to what exigent I am reduced, what need I have of thy mercy, I
say that I am conceived in iniquity: whence it consequently follovveth that
thy justice truly forget not my sins of frailty, which are in numerable,
as also those of my Ancestors, and howbeit in carnal delight, wherein each
one is conceived, is no damnation, yet from the same proceeds our hereditarie
stray, our error, even such from the first of men for which we are punished
with co^porall death, and by reason of the worlds growing worse and worse,
there and worse, there would also follovv us that of the soul; if thou had
not prescribed by foredecree the coming of him, which by thy grace I have
spoken of before. But what miracle or wonder is there in a sinners
transgression, being borne in sin? my mother conceived me in sin, hence
sinned I, before I was borne, and coming into the worlds light, sin
accompanied me, which is multiplied on me, as my hours, days, months, and
years, in such sort, that the hairs of this my beard, and the hairs of this
my head, and tresses of it, are very few, compared with the number of my
sins, and to attempt to disburthen my selse without the assistance, and
favor of thy grace, is for one man's strength, one man's force, to make
mountains even, to lay mountains flat, to root, to grubbe up the vvoods, and
make the Seas d^y. Behold for that thou have alvvaies loved truth and justice,
yet have not thou made me know that no sin, and that no desert is ever
without its punishment, or without it is reward from thee; but by thy making me
return to the understanding of my self, which is sound very difficult, in a
man invested with humane flesh, thou have declared to me the unknown, obscure,
and the altogether hidden things, and the misteryes of thy wisdom: and
deigning to enroll me among the Prophets, I have foretold and will Prophecy,
that which cannot be otherwise, that which cannot fail to be so, and what
sometimes takes not effect, by the means of grace granted by God, to the
desert of repentance. Truly my Lord the apprehension, the understanding I
have of the state of thy juslice, has made me lament, weep on, and for my
sins, which transgression I do bewail, and will ince^antlie, yet so long as
I may have leave and license so do: and this my holy resolution has made me,
and further will make me worthy of thy mercy, and of thy wisdom, and hence
issues, arises, springs that constancy for which I always besought thee,
only to be enabled in the perseverance of thy service and in abstaining from
Sin.

Therefore that I may keep, my self from all that which moves, and with
great temptations inciteth a man to forget thee, thou shall cast all over me
hysope, the meanest of herbs, to the end that I through example of it is
meanness, and virtuous lowlines, may correct by such a pattern, my pride: or
give me it to drink, as does the ^hisitia^ in form of potion, who knows
that the infirmity is inward, I shall be purged, released of any defect
whatsoever shall be found about my heart: and after thou shall have purged away
my such inward infirmities, with the juice expressed by the press of thy pious
hands, and gathered from the same herb growing and nourished in the garden of
thy mercy; thou shall wash me outwardly with the water which leaping, casts
forth, twinckleth, and gurgleth, in the fountain and everlasting spring of thy
mercy; hence shall I be cleansed of any whatsoever least deformity, which my
conscience might have contracted on me, through the fervor of my repentance,
which do^ne I shall in whitenes surpass, far exceed, and excel the snow,
which flaketh on the top on the bosom, and foot of a mountain, which is not
forciblie carried by any vvinde: and so cleansed, purified, in wardlie expurged
and washed, I will appear in thy presence, as a soul even now come from
Heaven, and taking beams, irradiations, from the lamp of thy grace, as a man
who though over joy keeps no mean, is become even now not himself, I will
open my mouth, and with al fervor, thank thee, and praise thee with my
voice, and with the full strain of my hearts true affect.

I who ruminating on my loss, my destruction am become humble in that pride,
and sad in that joy, in which (to my great prejudice) I was vnhapie, when as
heretofore I was both proud and merry, in so much as I shall never be happy,
never merry (as it seemed to me I was in times past) until thou cheerest me
up with that favor, that superabundant grace, which may from thee proceed to
the assuring me of my safety, of my salvation. O then, and not before my
humbled bones will exult, will take comfort, will express their great joy,
then truly, reallie, all the spirits, all the faculties of my soul, shall be
rejoiced, with a true, and most unfeigned gladness, lessened, yea formerlie
depressed though the fault of sin, by means whereof the sustentacles, the
maine columns of my life, are afflicted, perplexed, enfeebled, even as the
stemmes of the flovver de-luces by wind and rain: and only for that the
power of sense weakeneth the mind, and the power coming from the mind,
represseth the sense, and subdueth the body, hence is it that virtue, overcome
by vice of sense, can only be sustained, can only and solely be releiued
through the help of thy grace: which no sooner comes to any body, but that
the soul maistereth the body in all his reasons, auersions and fullest powers:
so that pronu^ce, as well joy to me, as also sprightly and fully possessing
comfort, and exceeding gladness by the tongue of that thy grace, thy mercy,
without which each repentance is of no effect, is altogether in vain, were
it not for that little comfort, which the tears of my penitencie affords me;
which were it turned into despair, will be to my utter loss, yea both
death and Hell to me.

Look not on my sins, hide not thy face from me, for my humbled bones are
rejovced, have taken comfort, and since that hysope having been used in my
behalf, has had the effect of a wholesome medicine to me, and that I am
vvashed, yea cleansed with the waters of thy grace; grant I humbly beseech
thee my Lord that so it be. For thy presence whilst it looks on a sinner,
judges his sins, his greiuous tra^sgressions, and adiudging them, likewise
inflicteth on them condign punishment: Hence be it that thou take no farther
notice of them, for if thou do not mark them, thou vvilt never call them to
thy memory, nor record at all their iniquities; which are so greiuous
whensoever they are laid open and displaied before thy sight, that though thy
mercy have forgiven the^, thy justice might punish them. O yield my Lord so
much unto me though a miserably distressed wretch that thou not only not
look on my transgressions, but look not at all on them, turn aside thy eyes
from my perverse will: and doing me such like favor, such indulgence; my
trespasses, all which are registered before thee, may become cancelled: Hence
they will be no more seen, hence not adjudged, hence not punished: and I have
not a wavering but a confident hope, that thou will entirely, and most
compleatlie fulfill these my ardent desires, for that I have changed my self,
I am transformed, for that I now am become, a new man, another man: nor am more
he, who has so much sinned, alas no! far otherwise is it now with me, my
being other then formerly I was, my being better is through the ptiuiledge,
the prerogative of thy grace, which has so inexpressible a quality and
force, that no sooner has it inclined it self, even sprinkled it self on
any who crave it humbly, but that it so rectifieth him, yea in such ways,
in such inclinations, as that he hence becomes a man of good will, a man
who desires nothing more then to take up thy commands, to observe them, to
honor and love thee, yea for thy goodness, as a contrite does.

Lord now, yea even now, newly create me, make unto me even now a clean
heart, and propitiouslie grant that I may make my self such an one, that I may
become through the means of sorrow for my transgressions such an one that
standing by thee I may seem like to a little boy by his father side, who
laughing and vveping is full of devises in his mi^nardizing tricks and
daliances, which purity, and innocentie moves in him. And for so much as thou
know my heart, which cannot be said to be clean (respect had to the old
sin) notwithstanding through thy grace, do thou please to let it be so, that
it be enobled, made worthy to be the place of abiding yea even the lodge of thy
grace, and the organ or instrument of thy profound secrets, and root of those
branches, from whence must spring the fruit of universal redemption of
mankind. Form, shape, make in me a new heart, such an one as is clean, most
candide, in manner of such of theirs who never transgressed against thee, for
I am now another manner of man, then erst I was for so much as concerns my
particular; he who is a sinner he who is laden with sin, is no companion
for me, I desire to have no conversation with him, he is not fit for me to
converse with. Ah! since so it is, most expedient it is, that the hand of thy
mercy alone, do not only create in me a new, and clean heart, but that
also with the selfsame act, thou do newly make in me a spirit, a soul just,
upright, and clearlie purelie good, which void and free from the
enthralments, the miserable subjection and slavery of sense, may be enabled,
become hence fully, and completely endovved with gifts, with undoubted
abilities, to preach; to teach forth to the people of the world what, and of
what condition, of what rare nature, is thy grace, thy bounty, and thy
mercy.

Oh! alas! my Lord, even as thou art pleased to digne me, through thy singular
favor, to hide thy face from my transgressions; disdeigne not also, yea
voutchsafe graciously, not to chase me from thy aspect, from the glorious
sight of thee, let thy animaduersion, thy taking notice fall more attentively
on my good will, my good-meanings, my zealous desires, then on my wicked
transgressions; and for the fault of my sin, bereave me not, deprive me not,
of that thy blessed presence, thy blessed aspect, from the lights of whose
irradiations, even showers of inexpressible consolation, are powered on the
lust, thy saints; let me not be a cast of an abandoned of God, let not thy
holy spirit be taken from me, which through thy goodness thou have enlarged me
with, have freely given me; which is that remorse of conscience which makes
me lament and bitterly weep for my sins, and that perce^uance I have
knowing how to confess them interceding for my self through thy great mercy.
But be it so, thou do not give me leave to see thy countenance, shutting thy
ears, in so much as that thou hear not my voice I shall be reduced into such an
estate, that I shall prove to have no remorse of conscience, nor ought of
knowledge, which has made me have recourse to thee; hence should I become the
miserablest of men, alas! a prey of desperation, the case altered, changing
holy spirit into a perverse, wicked, and reprobate spirit. So that my Lord
take tender care of me, for my case is full of danger. Turn thy gracious
benignity toward me, my Lord, grant unto me that I may affixe mine eyes, on
those thine eyes, rare la^pes, even as the Eagle looks on the Sun, and let
me contemplate in thee, that thy countenance, thy blessed vision, my safety.

Give unto me again the joy of my being saved, which through sin I had lost.
Be it so that thou do not graciously give it me again; I am more then
assured that I shall never recover it. When thou shall through thy bounty have
given it me, make good, make safe, confirm in me that principal spirit, that
is, that spirit which is now full entertainer in me, of me, which wholy and
fully possesses me overcomes me; for thou well know that in us are
two incitements, two spurs, one of sense, the other of reason, which are
the good and ill spirits, and within us they continually contest, fight it
out for the prey of the soul. Conserve in me therefore that good which may
well guide me, and be a certain, and most perfect directorie to my
vvell-being and giving it strength and virtue, grant unto it that it may
remain constantly victor of it is adversary, and I through the security of
my safety, and through the grnce I am enlarged with of this my good spirit,
which will be as an effect of my thankfulness, I will teach to the unjust, to
the wicked, the means by which the favor of God's mercy is acquired, is
vudoubtedlie vvonne.

I will instruct wretched transgressors in thy Law, (not men of upright heart,
who have no need of my teaching, my directions) the fordes of thy holy and
most sacred vvayes; in which each one who takes for guide the lamp of the
just, may be assured, vvalking on, perseuering, to arrive to thy glorious
palace. And I will labor with earnestnes, with such ardent fervor, that
even impious and most ungodly men, who fear not thee, are not affrighted,
and are not shaken, at thine anger, thy wrath, and thy fury; shall be
converted, shall return to thee, become other, new men: and thy being come to
such pass, so reclaimed, speedily they will be favorably heard, for in thy
presence is seen I know not how to call it, human wit cannot atriue to
express it, that, which teaches one to know ones self, and to call, crave
humbly beseech thee for mercy, on the effect whereof, the issue whereof,
does the safety of each one depend and hence be it that thou conserve in me
that spirit which I have spoken of, which frequentl^e repeat to thy goodness,
and by the means thereof I will cease farther to vvepe for my sins, to
bewail them any more, and I will make an end of all my lamentations, and
become thy friend, hence will follovv, will succeed a doctrine and
wisdom, a fulness of knowledge, which will show score out, evidently
demonstrate the ways, the paths, yea the trackes, the foot steps, of thee
our good and glorious Lord to all future ages.

Yet again my Lord, whilst favorably thou lende^t thine ear to these my
prayers, my most humble petitions, free me, acquitt me, o my ever good and
gracious Lord, from the wicked, lewd, cruel, and ab^ominable villainy of
murder, which ministers deserued^ie occasion of thy disgrace toward me:
and therefore free me my Lord from it, for being that I am appointed to preach,
to declare to the Universe, to the whole world, thy mercy, by which
heretics shall be converted, and the perverse wicked also, it is necessary that
thou pardon me, giu^ng me full remission of all my trespasses: and so doing
and giving pardon to me so heinous a transgressor of thy laws, through this
one example of me who have sinned, to the swing, to the full extent, of what
man can miserably arrive to, each sinner allured, all possessed of desire, and
of hope to save himself, will have speedy recourse to thee, to crave, to
humbly beseech thee, of thy such grace and mercy, even as I have done, even
as I have called on thee my Lord, and God of my salvation, whose innate
connaturall goodness, and bounty (when so that thou shall have freed me from
the guilt of my carnalitie, as also from the blood of one, when as, ah! wretch
that I was through my effrene, disordinate, and restie unbridled appetite, I
immersed, drowned my self in murder) my tongue expeditelie with all promptnes,
shall exalt and show forth thy name, preach thy justice. Hence should I be well
known to sinners, ^ho recalling themselves into them^elues, who converted, will
deplore, and miserably lament their trespasses, even as I do mine.

Lord, since that I am invested, seated in the place, in the degree, in the
rank of the good, through the bounty of that thy bounty, and not through the
merits of ought good I have done, and being so changed, as that from a wicked
and vvretched man, I am become a new man, a just man, even raised through thy
grace; thou the self same benign Lord, shall open my lips, by thy holy
spirit, infusing into the^ gifts of speech, even such which may be best
agreeable to thy will, expedient, yea necessary: thou having so enabled the^,
given unto them such power, such faculty, I shall no sooner be hereof
advertised, but that my mouth shall breath forth hymns, shall exalt, and
magnify thy praise. For that one^ie and indeed is true and entire laud, which
is sent fo^th to thee our Lord, our God, others are vain, deceiptfull and
mere shadows, howbeit the praises which thou deseruest, are incomprehensible,
and cannot be taken up, be reached unto by human capacity, by human
understanding, for that thou art the moouer, and Author of all gifts, all
virtues, and of all graces which we know; hence is it that in all my
composements of P^almes, and singing them I have alvvaies given attributes to
thee, of glory, and praise: and the glory and praise which deservedly and
duly I have given the, have bee^ the hosts, oblations and sacrifices upon
the elevated parts of thy Temple, and upon thy Altars.

Praise and glory by tongue and heart I have sacrificed to thee my Lord, and
would thou have had other sacrifice, truly, reallie, I would have offered
up other; but I see in spirit most evidently, and am satisfied fully, that
thou vvilt not be appeased, pleased, like of holoca^sts, and the time will
come that thou shall dislike, be displeased at such sacrifice; for that they
are ceremonies which outvvardlie make a show; and otherwise is it with
thee, for the minds good intent^o^s are received, entertained, and grateful
to thee: and therefore would thou that Abraham should sacrifice his pure
heart, his simply good and sincere intentions, and not his son; howbeit the
sacrifice of the old law, was no other then a mere figure of that sacrifice
that the Son of God will make and offer up to his Father in redemption of
human kind: But if thou art not pleased, art auersed from the sacrifices made
of beasts, the^ shall not there be any offered but unto thee? and how then
shall we appease thee? when thou shall be even ready to inflict on us
scourges for our trespasses, when they are even miserably falling on us,
shall then thy mercy be in vain, of which we can take no benefit at all?
and shall we no way penetrate so far, inuestigate, find out how, by what
means possibly, to acquire it? if so thou please that sacrifice be our means
by which we may arrive to it, fully attain it, gain it acquire it.

Look here, observe well, for that I do foretell with the spirit of
prophecy, what ought to be the sacrifices now spoken of: the sacrifice
pleasing, accepted of, grateful to God, is a spirit a soul contribulated, a
troubled and afflicted heart, not unlike to a beast brought to be sacrificed,
which is killed on the Altar which bleateth, belovveth, and kicketh strugleth
in his fall, which is wrought by the sharp, violent instrument of knife, and
fire, suffering in the same manner as will thy most blessed Son: and hence
is it that the lamentions, the heavy tears of an heart contribulated, much
greiued, ruminating seriously on it is offenses, in mean while praising our
good Lord, demands, craves his grace, is accepted by him in place, in lievv
of a beast, victimed, offered up in sacrifice. The simple, pure, clean,
sincere, and sanctlie mind, is always ready, through it is love to suffer
martyrdom, death, and that sacrifice which God wills: such a readiness of a
sincere mind, and purelie taken, fully enamored with true repentance, not
farther overwhelmed in wickedness, is that host, that sacrifice which does
reconcile man with God: from a contrite and an humble heart God will never
look of, or despiset; but will not reguard oxen, sheep, and lambs offered
unto him without zeal, and without the tears and sorrovv of the heart. And
assure as any thing can be true foretold, infalliblie it will come to pass,
that the Messiah to come shall say with a loud voice, shall give notice to the
universe, to all the world: Bulls, and beasts I have at times received as
sacrifices to me offered, but the hearts and minds, their pure and sincere
meanings, not alvvaies: then my Lord since that I sacrifice my heart, and my
mind, enritch me with thy mercy.

Through thy infinite goodness, be bountiful, gracious and merciful to Sion,
which such name have I given to the contemplation and speculation of them,
who though their desire of truth will obtain, will arrive to the knowledge
of thy Son. Alas! my Lord let it be so, I humbly crave at thy merciful
hands, that the walls of Jerusalem, may be built, which I conceive as a show
of peace, and union which ought to be with human kind in human kind, to the
praising, honoring, and adoring thee only. Stay not, delaie not to perform
this thy benignity heretofore within thy self resolved of, fully decreed:
and send thy Son, by whom, on whom this our new Church must be instructed,
taught, built, and grounded: and in such manner building, raising the vvalls of
Jerusalem, there will be built, raised in their souls, the excellency, the
virtue of thy sapience, thy wisdom which will improve them so much enl^ghte^
them, will so build and frame in themselves that such understanding which
gives the perceiuance, the clear light, and even the very vision of eternal
peace, without which their souls would perish together with their bodies,
as well through the general ingratitude, as also by reason of the sin of the
first father, whose faults would have proved Hell and damnation to all human
kind, were it that with thee, thy bounteous decree, merciful benignity, had
not otherwise stated a supply, a redress, to this inexpressably woeful
misery, through the hands of that thy selfsame clemency, and of thy proper
bounty; who art more inclinable to show benignity to Sion, then that of the
raising of the walls of Jerusalem, which I crave not, who am all tears, all
penicencie, and all scourge of repentance, to confirm and assure my self in
the grace of my Lord and God, who when he shall have sent his Son to the
world, will verify with his truth my words.

When so thy son shall descend into the world, thou vvilt accept the
sacrifice of justice, for it will be justly expedient, and it shall be offered
up unto thee, in memory of his passion, and of his death. I say that thou
vvilt accept holocausts, sacrifices laid on the Altar and oblations: gifts by
which means God is acknowledged rendering him glory, apparantlie, most
evidently, not without the singular, and inexpressible joy of hears comfort,
which oftentimes made all cheerful, does visiblie appear in the sight of
it is sacrifice. Lord, then vvorthilie calves shall be laid on thine Altar, for
that they who then shall sacrifice to thee, may become illuminated by thy
truth; hence thou shall receive from them, not only victimes, beasts killed
for sacrifice, oblations, and holocausts, but likewise the sacrifice of a
sincere heart, the entire love of a pure soul, and the holocaust that the
light, yea fire of charity, and true zeal of faith, together with the other
perfect and holy virtues will offer up to thee: and all those external
demonstrations those outward works will be received from thy goodness in sign of
those inte^nall, and true ones of the mind and heart. These will be the
sacrifices and presents, wherevvith thou shall be honored, and where with thy
Majest^e shall be glorified, and appeased, and here I end for that thy sprit does
not dictate, or prompt me with more which hitherto has caused me to speak.

The end of the fourth Psalm.
THE FIFTH PROLOGVE.
AFTER that the Prophet had earnesily importuned, yea even conjured the great
mercy of God to take compassion of him, to have ^ercy on his trespasses, he
was yet on his knees, moved not place, and fearing that he ^ght yet again see
the image of his sin which gave sign of punishment, even poin^ed at the
place thereof, Hell: he durst not ^ift up his head, his countenance to heaven,
which he contemplated more with hidden, ^hen he did with open eyes; and
standing without any motion, h^e recited, recorded (with his heart to God, his
lips moving not ^t all) the forevvritten, fore delivered Psalm; and who living
had seen him, and observed his posture, in that venerable gesture, would not
only have beheld a sinner truly penitent, but he might likewise have learned,
how one ought sincerely to repent, being burdened with sin: and for that it
seemed to him, that he was unworthy of pardon, in such sort his thoughts on his
trespasses did greeueously oppress him, that he bewailed, piteously groned,
sighed and sobbed deeply. Imagine the inexpressible grief, for no otherwise was
it, then as if he had heard a c^rtaine voice deliver unto him that God
almighty had ranged him among the reprobate, that he had altogether abandoned
him and had utterly forsaken him, in so much as that he was for all eternity
deprived of his grace: and whilst thus he was astonished, confounded yea
meruailously abstracted from himself he measured with the arm of his
pha^tasy, of his deep thoughts the largenes, the extent of the body of his
trespasses; his diligent inquisition finding them immesurable, insomuch as he
could not by any means give accounte of the immensity thereof, at once he
shook and trembled all over, and in that shaking and trembling he seemed to
be a si^kman, now being taken with quiuering shakings and the rigorous pangs of
death: and much fearing that his scattered and weak prayers, through want of
words and manner of their delivery, had no audience from God, preparing his
sorrovvfull and deeply aggreiued heart, yea making it redouble it is contrition
touching again the strings, now newly reviving, and quickening his voice,
clearing his pipes, which had already moved to commiseration of his case, the
seat of his penitency, humbly uttered.

THE FIFTH PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
Domine exaudi orationem meam. Psalm 101.
FAVORABL^ hear my prayer (...) my Lord, my gracious Lord; in which thou sees
the contrition of (...) heart contribulated, contristated, aggreiued to the
height, the full extent and uttermost period of a sad, ah! (...) sad soul, for
it is having sinned against thee. Alas! let it be so that my lamentations, my
moanes, my doleful cries, may come to thee in such their state: nor let for
thy goodne^ sake, that distance of place be an obstacle to them, nor let winds
transfer them, or violently carry them away; let there not be any
impediment which may have power to interpose it self between thine ears, and
my voice; any thing which may disuiate, turn another way thy hearing from my
(oh!) such lamentations: rather receive the prayers I send forth to thee,
con^ormable to the nature of thy mercy, and observe me, look on me how it is,
for I pray more with my heart, the^ call I loudly out with my tongue. For I
right well know that who turns himself to God with sincere, with unfeigned
intention, fulfilleth, accomplisheth his prayer, before the words are uttered:
thy goodness, not expecting that the words appear before thee. So that let the
clouds be dispersed which through this air, have made the foggs of the pride
of my transgressions, and let my cry through-passe up thither, where thou
abidest, that I may with it testimony, give thee assurance of my mind most
attentively, seriously, and with fulness of spirit, contrite.

Oh! my Lord, hide not thy face from me, as those Ma^sters hide their faces
from their servants, who trespass against them, who for that they take
themselves to be injured, by such their transgressions, do not only deny
their countenance which they humbly crave, but also deny the hearing of them
speak, and to give them leave to ask for pardon, for mercy, therefore do
they so, to the end that they may learn to correct themselves, of their
neglects of duty, even as I have learned who deservedly should have
inflicted on me my self only, for my not fearing of thy chastisements all
the scourges wherewith God punishes the infinite coute of the wicked. But
though so it be, though I deserve such inflictions, do not hide thy self from
me: rather at what time soever I am oppressed, incline thine ear to me, not
ansvverablie to my peruersenes, but according to what becomes thy mercy, in
such sort that in the tribulations, extreme afflictions which my soul shall
feel through repentance, and in these, which my body shall suffer in
penitencie; hear thou with a frie^dlie ear, and if so doing thou commiserate
not, thou be not moved to merciful pity on my prayers, which my misery
will desiuer, will send, will make known to thee, I am then eue^ content to
stand to my misery, to abide in this miserable state. But if thou hear me,
for that thou art pity it self, I am then free from fetters, from bonds, in
which sin made accounte to hold me for ever.

Though the great the ardent desire I have to be free from the snares, the
entanglements of sin, I revnfold my self to thee, and beseech thee again my
Lord that in what day soever I shall inuoke thee, call earnestly on thee,
thou hear me favorably, and that speedily, I say that thou please to grant
unto me thy grace, at what time soever the light of well knovving of well
discerning, distinguishing, shall be with me, my eyes being freed, disincombred
of obscurities, obfuscations, which even at noone day, the vain vvindes, the
puffes of vain glory, do blast, do blow on them.

And for that my days fail, vanish as smoke, not producing, not bringing
forth in my seasons, in my harnests any thing but fruit of damnation, I might
well doubt to find peace and atonement with thee; but still ^auring
confidence in my penitent sufferance, and my contrition, one whereof argues
my outward sorrovv, the other gives credit and testimony of my inward hearts
grief, my compunction of soul I doubt not, I fear not ought: For the
strength of thy great mercy does secure me. But it greineth me very much that
pride has converted them into such smcke, into which their thanklesnes, their
careles^es, even aiming to have will to raise themselves to Heaven are turned,
returning their puff of vanity into that nothing at all, into which are
dissolved mists, foggs, and clouds, the winds adversaries, enemies of their
condensitie, of their grossnes, sharply blowing. And my days being that is
my vain works, my vain deeds, in which I spent my time, deficient, ill
pas^ed over, vnvvorthily consumed, my bones inflamed by the fire of vvordlie
pleasure, are become no otherwise then a thing quite burnt: for that the soul
retired, altogether recol^ected into it self, has bereft them of that
nourishment; hence they remained in continual heat: and in their last burning
hear, not unlikely had they offended, and notably hurt the faculties and the
virtues of the soul, had not ^eturnd to thee my Lord, who helpest the poor,
the beggars, supplye^ them, make the strong feeble, and exaltest and raisest
up the humble.

My heart has been smitten and is dried in me not unlike hay, and hence
falls on me all this, for that I have forgotten through my vvretched
carelesnes to eat my bread. The true bread of our life, are the commandments
of the Law, the works of mercy and other pious offices, which are
spiritual food on which the soul is fed, to the end it perish not, it is
utter loss and death follovv not, which hence comes and hence only, for
that it eats not of this food, for other nourishes not, but poysoneth. But
I who timely have reflected on my self, and in time make my recourse to thee
confessing to have fallen greiviously, to have offended mortall^e, for not
having accustomed my self, for not having used and made election of such
forde, yet despair I not of my safety, of my salvation: But rather like a man
who has druncke poison, whose heat extremely burns his heart, and all
his bovve^ls, his entrails, and suddenly having recourse to help, has put
himself, into the hands, and skill of a learned, expert, and prudent
Physician, by whose presence he finde^h himself to be alleviated, eased
(though the hope he has) of the greatest part of his sufferance, of his
g^iefe: I requiring, humbly craving assistance, cure, help of thee, find
promised unto me through my p^nitencie, and through thy commi^eration, thy
mercy, the health, the safety, which I seek for my soul, which recomforted,
newly rejoiced, in the compunction, the deep grief of it is heart.

Through the continual and incessant voice of my plaints, my greiuous
lamentations, my bones are in such manner so clung to my flesh, that I seem to
be a body hunger-starued, co^sumeth for want of food, in which is shutt up a
spirit so weak, so ouertyred with faintness, that with much difficulty can
it send forth so much vital breath, that may show that it lives, and to this
state am I reduced, to this pass am I come, for that I have not nourished my
soul with thy food, hence is it that my bones are destroyed, my strength
gonne, and (the forces, the virtue of my soul, each day more and more
consuming through my faults, my trespasses) I am reduced to such an estate,
that I am as it were a man who lying on the earth, can hardly be thought
either to be alive or dead: and through thus such like weakness, I have so
little breath, so little strength, in me, that I fere I cannot open my mouth to
comfort me with the bread of health which the hope gives me which my tears
have in thee, I say those tears which my heart powers forth to make thee
fo^get my transgressions.

I am become like a Pelican say thou by my tongue, and I apprehe^d it, I
understand it right well; for that in enlightening me, and giving me grace, that
I may conceive it, thou do througlie purify my spirit, do give light and
force to such a tenor, to such being, to such an height, that I return,
reassume to speak in thy name, in thy person, and hence thus do I speak; I
am like a Pelican; I will open my breast with the bill of my merciful will,
and in the sollitude of the world (which well may be so termed, for that in
it, respect had to thee, relation to thee weighed, each one is dead) with my
blood will I resuscitate, raise again Nations, the Gentiles, as does the
Pelcan, his young ones, who dead reassume life in the blood of the bird, which
has brought them forth: but even as the Ovvle in his place of abiding, in his
perching place, sees nothing but darkness, so I in the world shall see no
other but obscurity, heavy, gloomy darkness of sin, fogg^s, mists of pride,
and smokes of vanity.

Yea yet and again thou speak (my Lord) saying, I avvaked, watched, and am
become like a sollitarie sparovv upon the roof of an house: thy word meaning
that when others shall esteem thee dead, thou will vvatch, thou will awake,
which is as much to say that to our seeming, resuscitating, rising again the
third day, thou shall have seemed to have slept, but in the days that thou
shall sleep, imposing end, making completion of thy miraculous works, which
thy will has decreed to expedite, to finish compleatile, with thy works
thou shall even sweat, take heavy pains for the common good, the common
safety of all the Universe, of all the world, and breaking, rending a sunder
and in pieces, the gates of Hell, with the force of thy pity, thy tender
mercy, binding, banishing, and to everlasting fire condemning our old
adversary, thou shall demonstrate in this such like slumber, in this such like
sleep, that thou were attentive, that thou were alvvaies watchful, that thou
did fully vvatch for the public benefit of thy creatures. And in so doing
thou vv^lt resemble a lovely retired solitary sparrow, who after his flight
from el^vvhere, strangerlike, alone, one only, pitcheth himself, allighteth,
and remains, as in a place of rest, in a house, wherein are many people
allodged. I say that thou having disposed, consummated those affairs which
thou have to do on the earth, thou shall advance thy self, and mou^te to
Heaven, remaining ever after in Paradise with the Angels, and among the souls,
as one only God, and one only Savior of the world: But thou procedest
further in my words.

At all times even they who most especially should remember themselves of the
benefits they have received from my larges from my great bounty, calumniated
me, laid to my charge falslly and maliciously crimes, in such sort as if my
good works were wicked and those who praised me in my presence, speaking ill
of me behind my back, yea tearing me to pieces with their spightfull
malicious tongues, conspired against me as if I were not a Savior, but a
Tyrant of their vvell-being, their safety, their salvation; and it shall be
true, Lord that the unfaithful, and they whose hearts are perfidious, and
blind at the light of thy miracles, taking in ill part thy wonders, which
they cannot infringe, cannot deny (height of the vvorst of damnable vvretches,
then whom none exceed) will come, will arise against thee as vvol^es do
against a simple and most innocent lamb; having no will to take notice, to
remember themselves, to have known the truth of those thy misteryes, in thy
presence, which they praised, they extolled; and far otherwise, far from
that truth, they made a head, they made a congregation, and sect against thy
most just, thy most precious blood, yet shed for them, so that they confess,
and penitentlie acknovvledge that they vvrongfullie injured thy innocence
with their envy, their malicious heart burning, which was invented against
thee, upon those their false grounds, which one day thou vvilt deliver and
express thy self.

For I most humbly did eat ashes, as bread, I mingled my drink with tears,
thanking them heartily, yea further enriching them with my favors, whosoever
made me hott with the fire of charity, and sprinkled and dropped on me these
ashes, and these tears, giving me them to dinner and to supper: The envy and
wickedness of the unjust disquieted me, molested me with the injuries of
reprehension, rebuke, control, it displeasing them that I should re ceiue into
my grace sinners, by reason of the virtue of their repentance. And not only
will they seek in such manner, by such ill offices, to calumniate me to
detract from me, and to forge crimes against me, but they will machinate,
work, prepare death to me innocent, for my, innocence. And as sure as ought
can have infallibility, this shall follovv, shall happen, for that thou say
it; and for the falsenes, the perfidiousnes, and height of disloyalty, of the
minds of Princes of this people; in their knovving that the preaching, letting
be divulged, and declaring thy truth, is the end of destroying wicked
custom, which they will bring in practice to thy Church, to deprive the
poor of their means, under pretext of great devotion, great zeal to
sacrifice their gifts to thee, by charge whereof, their purses emptied, they
shabe open enemies of thy justice, and of thy truth. And for that that will
be, that thou vvillest be, I speak in the person of human kind, who speaks
with the tongue of the first father.

Through thine anger, and thy disdeigne, thy wrath, moved in thee, through my
sin, which I Adam transcending the bounds of obedience, committed, I was
deprived, be^eft of the principallest state of happiness, of felicity, and
beatitude of the blessed yision of all goodness of God: and I was through mine
error, my fault, my sin cast down into ruins from a precipice, I was cast
headlong down to a miserable state through such my lamentable fall. And so is
it that the magnificent advancement, which v^ithout any merit of mine I
received from thy bounty, through fault of my ill and perverse malicious will,
and ingratitude has been my utter and laft overthrow and ruin; but thy
mercy will not, that the punishment of my trangression, of my gre^ueous faults
(if we will not our se^ues, provoking thy displeasure, th^ne anger, by new
trespasses) be the loss of the soul, but only of the body, hence may I
say, that.

My days are declined as the Sun, when it goes down toward the
Evening, and they are become even as shadows. And well delivers he the
truth: For if there had not been transgression in our first farher, our days,
that is as much to say, our lives, who have our descent from him would have
been eternal, and not short, not suddenly past over as a shadovv; whence
the sons of men would not live with that care, and with that fear, which
they inceslantlie have of their graves, and of death; and I David should not
have come under the yoke of time, of years, arid, dry as hay: who before
overcome in grenenes the Emeralds, and if so it were I should not have to
expect the sacrifice of the son of my Lord, nor were I to suffer, to
participate of the punishment of this transgression, through which thou have
not only shortened our life, but we are subject, and liable to the scourge
of penance and sigthe of death.

But thou my Lord shall not fail, nor come to nothing as a shadovv, thou shall
never be lessened, thou shall never be changed, be otherwise then thou art,
rather thou shall be and remain for ever and ever, and even as then thou were
powerful to punish us, so likewise thou shall without end be powerful to
free us, and the memory of thee shall remain from generation, to generation,
in all ages and times: nor shall the Heaven ever be beheld, be gazed on, nor
Sea, nor Earth, but that each one shall vvonder at the power of thy virtue,
and for that thou art that merciful God (the memory of who^ ought to last
together with thy power to all times, and ages) thou will deigne to recover us
again to receive us graciously, being the works of thy hands, into the
bosom of thy mercy, to the end that through all ages, all times, in the
hearts of people sustained and made happy therevvith the memory of thy
goodness, and of thy power, which is infinite, as art thou shall remain, who.

Rising again shall have mercy on Sion, although the trespasses of our first
father, and of us are infinite; When thou shall rise again, I am assured, that
thou vvilt pity, commiserate, and have mercy on Sion, which I figure for
human generation, for human ki^de: and for that at length the time is come to
have mercy thereon, let sinners rejoice, who through the coming of thy Son
into this world, do rise and come forth, from the place of their sepulchers,
through the hand, of the power of thy merits, mercifully co^ferred on them:
Let them rejoice, who will know to suffer the persecution of the wicked.
Give them courage my Lord, and comfort them with the hope of arriving to thy
kingdom, for that thou have laid open to them the gates vvherebie they may
ascend thither, through the virtue of faith, and their endurance, their
sufferance, their patience: and well deserve they to be with thee pertakers
of Paradise, since that Martyrdomes for thy sake are dearly vvellcome to them.

I say Lord, that there will arise many Apostles, and servants of thy son
resuscitated, risen again, to whom the stonnes of mountains shall be more
pleasing, the^ the jewels, then the gemmes of the East: an^ these such
(enamored, altogethe^ taken up, fully possessed, rapt vvit^ Marty^domes, by
which meane^ they may have place in thy grace, they may please thee, win
thee t^ them, despising sword, stones, gallovves, cross, and prisons) will
divulge, will preach the truth, dictated, delivered, appointed to be in the
tongue of the Gospel; and after their passions suffered, and at an end, to
exalt thy name, moved through example, which thou our Lord wilt give them,
praying for their Crucifiers, they shall have compassion of the countries
wherein they suffered: I say that the Martyrs shall be moved to pity, to
sensible commiseratio^ of them who do put the^ to death, do Martyrize them,
praying thee that the authors of their pesecutions, be converted, who although
they are wicked, were yet not vvithstan^ing framed, molded of the same ^arth,
which were they themselves ^amed of by thee.

And for that thou vvilt have an ^mcomprehensible compassion, an ^credible
mercy on human kind, and ^r that thy most just servants shall ^ke delight, and
singular consolation in Martyrdom, which shall be impo^ed on them, inflicted
on them in thy ^eruice, Oh blessed truth to appear, ^o shine in thee with
more sple^dour, and with much more clear light, and countenance, then does
the Sun ^ake show of, when it is even newly ^sen from the Ocean, the maine
^ea, and through the faithful means ^f thy preachers, all Nations shall ^ot
only honor thy name, but ^ey shall tremble at it, and fear it: and all the
kings of the earth, perceiing that their splendour, and geeatnes compared to
thine, are far less then the light of the stars, whilst the beams of the
Sun enlighten the firmament, with their bright resplendent rays (which
imitating thy goodness, with the same bounty, does shine on the wicked as on
the good) shall fear ^hy glory, more then their subjects, their people shall
fear them, under whom they are in obedience, in duty, whom they obey, for
that in it, in that thy truth is seated, the height of justice which
severely does execute justice on all their transgressions, which without
ought fearing thee, have been hainouslie and mortallie committed, in thy sight,
before, or after the knowledge of truth.

For our Lord has built Sion in the pure, and sincere hearts of men chosen,
elected by the holy Ghost thanks for Sion, thanks for this ne^ speculation,
and this new Church there will be laid open a way, an even path, by which with
fewer, readier, shorter steps, Heaven may be arrived to, Paradise acquired:
and that this is true, he will be seen in his glory: He shall evidently be
seen, in that direful, most dreadful day of doom, of universal judgment,
in which will appear as to his glory, how he she wed himself, what he
did, what he suffered to redeem us, it will be then seen, how he dyed for
us, how he dyed that we might ^ue and not dye; it will be also shown, that
if it depend not on our obstinacy, as to his glory, the Devil shall be
overcome, and tied up in his proper chains, for that the mercy of redemption,
ought to extend it self to the saving of us all, and so ought to be and is of
such nature, for that he loves us each one eqnally; and if so that yet not
withstanding the desert of our wicked wretched trespasses transgressions,
greiuous sins, shall condemn us to the pit of Hell, yea even that is
agreeable, and conformable to his glory; for herein shall his power be
demonstrated, cleerlie shown, to all and each one of those who would, that so
far as concern them his blood should be lost, be of no worth, spi^t in
vain, and remaining always in perfidiousnes, in perverseness, in wretchedness,
are never consoled, comforted with lively hope of saving themselves: hence is
it that God does never turn the such eye of his mercy, with which he looks
on them who are humble.

He has respected the prayers of the humble; and so has he done, for that
the irrecouerable cause of loss, is not the burden, the weight, the
greiuousnes, nor the number of sins: but the danger is placed, has his being
and seat, in the hardness of mind, hardness of heart, in that iniquity, that
wretchedness of not being of good will to be converted, and to remain in such
pride, as not to have recourse to God: from hence arises it, that they who
live in such like obstinacy, are necessarily damned, for they lying down,
wallowing in the dreggs, the mire of sin, without ever turning themselves
either with heart, eyes, or works to God, it is all to nothing, it is
impossible to be otherwise, the^ that they dye in Gods disgrace, as perfidious
wretches, and enemies of their own safety, and of their souls. But they who
look not on the weight, the burden, nor on the number of their trespasses,
but rather rectify, and turn aright their minds, to his immense and
inexhaustible mercy, imploring humbly craving pardon of their transgressio^s
committed against him; procure unto themselves, through tears and through
penitent hearts-griefe, that God neither will nor can refuse them, deny them
the grace of his mercy, and be their sins as heavy burthesome, great as
imagination can conceive, as much, and as fully, as far as can be passibly,
he has not only not despi^ed their prayers, though coming from sinners
voices, but not hiding his face from them, has given full hearing, full
audience to them, and favorably he hears them, he inclines his gracious
attentive ear, as he does to the benedictions, and praises, which those who
are perfect in heart, and spirit give to his blessed name. And such bounty of
God shall be known to such an one, who shall be worthy to know it.

These delivered shall be written in another generation, hereafter, for the
Jews, through their most wicked and perfidious pertinacie, obstinacy, shall
know them; as the day is discovered by the Moles, and the Sun by the ovvles;
and the wilfully blind not seeing the lights of the new Testament, shall not
receive the truth preached by the word, the Son, to the justice of the
first, shall God's mercy assist: nor hence can it be otherwise, but that by
the jews he suffer death, whence the knowledge of this new law is taken away
from them. But the Gentiles which shall be certainly thine, faithfully thine,
on whom shall be transferred, translated, turned over, this thy truth, will
praise thee their Lord, receiving each part, each parcel of it, and observing
it, as the laws of divine mercy ought to be observed, which will never
despise the prayers of what sinner soever, who is contrite, and humbled, even
as a people (so far as concerns the light of truth) new he created, who
heretofore were possessed, altogether in belief of false Gods; hence they
will give praise and thanks to thee Lord, for that thou have been to them
bou^tifull of those thy graces, through which thy bounty man is made secure
from death, and from Hell; and all this will come to pass, will be in it is
time; for that God has vouchsafed to look on them.

For our Lord has looked downward from on high, for that he has looked from
Heaven on Earth, ou^ souls are made inahbitants, Citizens of his kingdom; and
this gift has his goodness bestowed on us, vvh^ looking on the world foreseeth
the eternal danger on us the works o^ his hands, and for that he reguardet^
those his works, loves them with that affection, with which God loves him,
who always loved him, moved tenderly to pity, commiseration of human kind,
made his Son man, and dying as man, taking man out of the deepes, has
received him in the bosom of his great mercy. But I fear, I tremble, to
think on what will become of us, if God did not look on us, from his
residence on high; if he did not seriously affixe his eyes on the necessities
of human kind; or if he looked on us with less affection, then he has
heretofore done, woe! yea woe indeed to our souls, nothing but los^e and utter
perdition, for that would have been another grief, and torment, another
inexpressible-lamentable calamity which Hell would have made for them, then
is that which time works, and the bringing to nothing these tresses, this
flesh and bones. But in considering what thou have done from Heaven on Earth,
thou compleatlie finishedst, gave full effect to that which thou thoughtest
on, decreedst on the day in which thou createdst the world; and the miserable
lamentations of human kind (who seemed with loud voices, to call out upon thy
Son to their help) as it were, enforced thee.

The hearing of the pitiful moanes of bondmen, occasioned in thee, caused in
thee, bred in thee the effect, the issue of thy most sublime, and most profound
care, hence thou vouch^afedst to send thy son for our Redemption. O my good
and gracious Lord, it being that all things that ever shall be, are present to
thee, thou did hear the vvaylings, the moanes, the compassionable outcryes
and tears of Limbus, which shovvred like a tempest from their eyes, who
confined in darkness, were favored, assisted by the goodness of their works;
which they had done in their lives time, and deserving pardon for the
trespasses, made by Eve's husband, by Adam, thou determinest, thou decreest,
that they should taste of the fruit of ^hy mercy, as the sons of them who
were dead, likewise have tasted: I mean Christians, whose ancestors dyed
before that atonement v^as made, and fully established between God and man,
who lived in thy disfavor, in thy disgrace, through the sin of him, who
was the first who disobeyed thee; and were it not that thou did humble thy
self, to incarnate thy divinity with thy humanity, neither from Limbus, nor
from Hell, were they to be untied, nor ever were they to be freed,
discharged, no not thy friends, nor the sons of them that have not known
Christ.

Thou shall illuminate with thy grace, the sons of them, who are dead
without thy light* to the end that they declare in Sion, the name of thee our
Lord, and thy praises in Jerusalem, undoubtedly these self same will preach
thy name, to the bene^it, to the safety of souls: for that from fruit of
preaching succeeds praise and to Gods glory the conversion of Nations, and
to Jerusalem and Sion peace, and the speculation, the contemplation shall
bring joy and singular hearts-comfort, (true faith obtained) the true, and most
perspicuous light of truth, by means of the servants, and friends of Christ,
and then shall the world triumph, in it is perfect joy, for that God shall be
accorded, God shall have made atonement with man, in testimony whereof, he
shall forget the disobedience of him that was expelled, banished, from
terrestrial Paradise, for having valued an aple at an higher rate then God's
commandment.

But when so the name of our Lord, shall be preached through all the world,
congregating and gathering together contemplation, speculation, and peace in
one, both kings and people, to the end they may serve God, the Christ a^
Church, into which shall be collected, assembled, the people as also Kings.

Makes this answer to God, who in the way of his goodness, his virtue called
it his spouse, it pleased him to see it held in reverence, much honored by the
selected number of the good. Show me the length of my days, sincel perceive, I
clearlie see my accrease, advancement, and glory, Kings and people coming to
me, for no other end but to serve thee. And so much does it say alvvaies,
beholding it is greatness, as if it had before it all Heretics, all
Antichristians, and all false Apostles, who will come to molest it, to
displease it, to vvrong it, to trespass against it, with the malicious
perverseness of their deuillish doctrines, with the power and might of their
abominablie vvretched vvorckes, and with the deceit of a fained goodness: And
thus earnestly encited, provoked with a sensible fear, converting it self to
thee with all it is fervor possibly, yet again thus proceeds.

Let not thy goodness call me away in the midst of my days: Lord thy days, thy
years, thy time shall out last all generations, and shall transcend all ages;
but I who perceive dangers to be ha^ging over me, which tongues, ill example,
and wretched minds of wicked Christians, will attempt to make me headlonglie
fall into, am in great fear lest I become les^ened, and fail in the midst of
my days, as do the lambs of a flock decrease in number, trhough the rott.
For it seems to me, already to be governed, by the rod of some pastors, much
more greedy, desirous of my blood, and of the blood of my flock, then will
they be, of my firmenes, my strength, my constancy, and their safety, their
salvation hence trembling not without reason, not without great cause, I
humbly crave that thou let not me become less, fail in the fairest bloome
yea flovver of my youth, and remember, reflect hereo^, that I am thine
handmaid, and thy spouse: hence is there no reason that I fail to flourish.
Grant unto me that I may live ever joined to thee (who shall ever be, always
live) at least as long as the world and human generation lasts: and that
shall so be, if so thou from age to age, from nation to nation maintain me in
the hearts, and in the union of kings and people.

Thou Lord in the beginning did make the Earth, and the Heavens are works of
thy hands: and in the labors of such operations, of such works thou
shevvedst thy power, thy glory, and thy eternity; and so did thou to the
end that we might live here below, until that our works might deserve there
above their revvard: so boundles is the love, that thou who art the maket of
all things do bear to us, who setting aside the privilege which we have of
being of thy making, we are eue^ as things of nothing. Thou my Lord God madst
the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, with other Heavenly works of thy
everlasting hands, and all for us, for our souls to speculate on, to look on,
to contemplate, whose souls free in their election, in their choice, are
able, if vvilling, to be accepted of, admitted, and to be received in the
College, in the fellowship of Angels in the order, in the state, and rank of
Archa^gels, in the number of Cherubins, in the quire of Seraphins, and in the
society of all the military troops of Heaven, treading under our feet the
Celestial signs and Planets, which shall have an end, if so it shall please
thee.

They shall perish, but thou shall alvvaies be, thou shall alvvaies remain,
and they shall be consumed, come to nothing like garments. It is true Lord, that
what participateth not in condition, in quality and substance of thy
eternity, shall become fume, shall resolve it self into smoke, shall come
eue^ to nothing: but those things which have measure, have quantity, and
substance from thee, shall remain entire: for that thou only art eternal,
and the Heavens participaters of thy virtue, shall remain, together with all
other things that thy omnipote^cie please remain, as our souls, which thou
createdst, for (if that they through themselves be not deficient) they
eternally dwell with thee. But each other thing shall decline, be worse and
worse, even as daily worn clothes, are become at length through continual
wearing, naught vvorth, altogether worn out, consuming, as do all
terrestrial things. And in this second death wherevvith time, armed with
years, beats down and makes an end of all things, thy power and eternity
is demonstrated, is clearly shevven, which can do what it will, hence if it
please thee, thou vvilt likewise change the Heavens.

So that it please thee, if thou vvilt, thou shall remove the heavens out of
such their now place, and thou shall change them as a garment: for the same
power thou have on the world, thou have on the Heavens: thou have made them and
thou can destroy them, thou can pull them all to pieces, vnioynt them,
remove them from their proper spheres, and in a moment thou can make other
axeltrees, new Poles, and other lights, other Sunn's, other Stars, and other
Moons, and the Heavens with it is lights shall be subject to change, and
increase of number if it so be thy will. But thou art always the same without
being under any other power but thine own selfsame, and thy years will not
fail, for time has nothing to do with them, they are not subjects to time;
hence they shall alvvaies have being, they shall never have end nor though
there pa^e, it imports not how many lusters, how many ages, how many
hundred years; to thee the account, is even of one day, is not diminished, is
not vvanting: for thou art he, who is author of the self same Eternity,
which ought necessarily, must be with thee always in it is proper state, in
it is proper power.

And for that thy pity, commiseration, thy mercy is infinite, answerable to
the affection, to the great love, thou bear unto us; the ofsprings, the
sons of thy servant shall live and inhabit with this thy eternity, and the
generation of them shall ever remain, be conserved for ever; and from hence
thy graces, occasion that thy mercy dilate, extend it self to just men, and
to such persons who will employ all their time and labors in obeying thee,
both fearing thee, and loving thee: from whence the good souls, alvvaies
remaining shall have more felicity the^ the Heavens themselves, which thou
peradventure wilt make a new, but these shall always live with thee, and this
has not only been largess of thy bounty to thy servants, but also to their
childrens children, for ever, if so be by their default they fail not to make
election at all, to live well.

The end of the fifth Psalm.
THE SIXTH PROLOGVE.
AFTER David had uttered the aforesaid prayer, the last sound of his voice, of
his harmonious tunes, made a murmuring, a like to what is heard in the
Heavens, and in the air, when it begins to thunder: and falling of,
breaking of by a seeming stealth by little and little, as it were insensensibly,
no otherwise then does the last enclining, lowly and covert sound, in the
silent murmr of instruments of music, whenas the skillful art of the
Musician leaves to touch them; the penitent King received into his soul an
unusual consolation, an unspeakable comfort, which denoted to him, gave him
so clear understanding, as that he found in himself an infallible, and most
undoubted certainty, that God had opened his ears to his prayers, and received
him by them, with that clemency, wherewith the prayers of his true and
faithful servants find entertaiment. But not withstanding it not seeming
apparently unto him that his penitency was yet arrived to the completion and
period of the remission of his sins, not abstracting a jott, not turning of
his mind a vvhitt, from serious, and most attentive contemplation,
consideration of the mercy of God, he was astonished, and in deep suspense,
re^apitulating in his mind, taking into his thoughts again casting up again
the accounts of his first life, how formerly he had lived, and thinking within
himself, of his good and just enlightening thoughts, which moved him to give
credit, to the wholesome and sound Counsels and threats of Nathan: for from
hence came it that he entombed, enterred alive, enclosed within the horride
darkness of the Cave, deploring his greiuous transgressions with such like
affect and feruency, which God requires at the hands of a siuner; having been
all time taken up with such pleasures which the world willingly gives us; for
that we love it, as we ought to love Heaven; yet reposing some what his right
hand on his beard, and his forefinger ouerth wart his lips, he well knowing,
being most ascertained, that only breathing forth, yea pathetically singing
hymns of his penitency, could set him again in state of well being, in the
grace of God returned to him with his heart, with his face lifted up, with the
countenance of a penitent, with words well and harmoniously delivered
straight vtered these.

THE SIXTH PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
De profundis clamaui ad te. Psalm 129.
FROM the deepes I have called out to thee my Lord; o Lord my Lord favorably
hear my prayers: for now I beseech thee, as I have many times ^arnestly
implored thee, and this my petition, my supplication, my humble prayers, which
I ofter at thy feet, arise from the depth of my heinous transgressions, and
for that they have as it were over cast, over whelmed, yea even buried my
soul in the bottomless pit of Hell, I come to thee, alas! I have recourse to
thee, with a voice rendering forth words, drawn, sent from the bottom of my
heart, and framed in the bottom of this Cave, this dungeon, only to move thy
mercies, pardon unto me, for all the sins I have miserably and vvretchedly
trespassed in, which I have humbly acknowledged from the hour, from the
moment of my reassuming my self, even to this very instant. In such sort that
my prayer may be registered in the book where are recorded the transgressions
forgiven to them who know to sin, and who knew to repent themselves, who
having sinned, yet ran the course to recover themselves by repentance.

Let thy ears be attentive to the voice of my supplica^ions, for there is no
center so discost, so far of, so deep, which controlls thy hearing of them,
who invoke thee, call upon thee for help, for aid from their hearts. The
words my Lord framed by them who have some diffidence, doubt, mistrust in thy
grace, are not blown away by wind, or dissolved into vvinde through the
distance which is from thy height, to our low, and deep places, it is far
otherwise, for thou hear them in such sort, as if they who send them up to
thee were at hand, present: and so being it, that we are in thy sight, in thy
presence, through the infinitenes of thy bounty, although we are most unworthy
to be nigh thee, thou do save us. And therefore good God hear me attentively,
who call on thee with my heart, whilst also I vvaile, I moan, I weep in
this obscure and dark Cave: Hear me with such favorable audience, as thou
did hearken and lend thine ear to Jonas, who from the bottom of the Whales
belly, called on thee his Lord, earnestly, fervently, and with a truly
contrite heart; O then my Lord let me also be heard, favorably hear me, yea
and hear me in such manner, that hearing me thou grant me my requests, my
humble petitions; for o my Lord now it is long sithence that I have with my
prayers invocated thee, called unto thee, with a loud and earnest voice: and
though so it be, that thou art in the height of thy glory, and (...) in the
Center of my sin, let it please thee, deigne that thy ears hear me
co^passionatly, to whose ears it is even harmony to hear their prayer who in
this life pray with their hearts, as is delectably svveet in that other life,
other state and being, the hearing the lauds, the thanks, which the Angels
tune to thee, and melodiouslie send forth, with exalted voices.

But if so that thou shall take stricte notice of iniquities, of trespasses
Lord, o my Lord, who soyled with them, who so burdened, shall be able to
sustain thee; who such can look on thee? not any such undoubtedly will there
be who can support thy justice, if thou do not forget, lay aside the taking
notice of the sins of such: for that there is not any so just, nor so perfect
in this horrible sea of tribulation, who can (if so be it thou do adiuge
him, with the severity, the rigor of thy justice only) sustain, bear the
burden (although he do cover himself, defend himself, under the buckler of
the vert^e of heart and fortitude of mind) of his trespasses, for on the head
of him that transgresses thou do inflict thy terrible punishments, thy
horrible scourges. But for that thou have made thy mercy companion of thy
ju^ice, and for that each of them is infinite, I being not able to have
access, re^ourse to thee, by means of this, make me worthy that I may arrive
to thee by means of the other. Truly there is not any who through his own
deserts, and through his innocence, being in such state of sin, could
susta^ne, undergo thy judgment, if so that on such an one, thou had put in
practice* in execution thy justice only: But because thou know Lord what,
and of what quality, what condition, is human frailty of, thou have ma^e us
know thy mercy, hence are we confident, hence are we appeased, hence rest
we sure in it, thanks be to it through thee.

For with thee is mercy, for thy law have I sustained thee: I say in
demonstration how much, yea and what is the mercy of thy gracious
commiserating goodness, thou shall send down thy Son into the world, whence
I who through thy grace and virtue know this new law, and this new order,
this new disposition of things, whereby each one who will may be saved in
thy decreed mercy, have in sustaining, supporting placed my hopes in thee, and
I am not confounded, I am not in despair, but if thou so were not pleased,
that I know to recount the goodness of thy grace, which thou have given me, as
also that thou vvilt not pardon every one, but yet vvilt send thy Son to dye
for the salvation of sinners, I should not have been this present day to be
confounded and to despair of my self, only thincking on the demerit of my
most greiuious transgressions.

My soul has sustained it self in thy word, my mind has hoped in our
Lord through the stable hope, which I have had in God, my soul is held up,
lifted up, maintained in thy word, which has dictated, which has spoken
that which thou have willed I should speak of, and concerning Christ, who
will not only come to preach his mercy to them, who hope in it, but he
will likewise teach it to him, who after him has Commission, command, and
is bound to make it known in his name as I deliver it clear, who am all
consolated in the hope which I have always had in thy mercy: and it seems
to me that I have done much having sustained on my self the burden of these
my such so great transgressions: but I should not have been able to undergo so
much had not my soul hoped in it is Lord, and had it been bent, employed,
working in so fervent a penitencie, which with thee is of some merit, which
thou so prisest, thanks be to thy goodness; thy grace, which enlargest it
with, to the end it deserve; but I hence forward will yet further bring forth
fruit worthy of penitencie, not only repent me to have been a trespasser, to
have been vvreched.

From the morning watch until night let Israel hope in our Lord: for that God
is fully merciful, and for that he loves us so much from the beginning, to
the end of our life, let the elected people, that is, those who seek for their
health, their safety, their salvation in God, hope in our Lord, who from the
instant that a man is borne, until the instant of his death, is always
merciful; nor supporteth he that the sinner sheed in vain any of the tears
proceeding from his repentance, nor any of the words of his prayers; no, no;
for they are safely laid up in the Eschequer, where are carefully conserved,
surely kept, the treasures heaped up, laid up in store in Heaven, to adorn
with sempiternall, with everlasting magnificence and glory the souls of the
elected. And let not the good only hope, and sinners in God always, and at
all times of their lives, but let them hope, watching evermore on their
safety, their salvation: even as a servant does in the vvatch which his
master has appointed him to, who not for that he began to execute his
charge, but for the having fully discharged, what he was appointed to do, to
the very time that he called him from it, atcheiueth, wins the revvard
prepared, appointed for him.

For that in our Lord is mercy and most copious, most fully abundant
redemption, I have always hoped in him, and I have evermore co^fided, put my
sure and most undoubted trust, in my castigation, in my reclaim, in my
amendment, and in the health, in the salvation which the coming of his Son
shall bring to us. And for that I without all uncertainty know, that I shall
make atonement with him, (notvvithstanding I was masked under the disguise,
the weed of sin, which had so estranged me, that I vndervvent imminent
danger, to have never reassumed my self, never reacknovvledged my self) I
will rejoice in the height, in the depth of my pensivenesie, of my greiuous
heavines, and whilst that I shall endeavor, heartily labor to praise my
Lord, and to render thanks to my Lord always imploring pardon, peace, and
tranquillity, thy ordinances o God, thy decrees will hasten to give happy
dispatch to the safety of Israel, which trustethin thee our Lord, fulfilling,
accomplishing thy truth as I by my voice have delivered.

Let the elect confide in our Lord, and this our merciful and gracious Lord
will redeem Israel, will free Israel from all it is transgressions; and
sending into the world his only begotten Son, all the trespasses, all the
heinous sins of mankind shall be bought out, be redeemed, by his most precious
blood: and through the merit of it, we shall not only reap the fruit, the
great benefit of having our old sins forgiven us, but in like manner all our
offenses which by us hauue been possibly able to be trespassed in, in his
sight, who will alvvaies be indulgent, favorable, clear in aspect, to any
one who shall endeavor to behold with a pure mind, and a fervent will of a
contrite heart, the peaceable mild and rarely favorable cast of his admired and
dreadful countenance; from whose eyebries, rays, beams are cast, are sent
forth of that glory, which his mercy dispenses to any who desires to
glorify himsel^e in him.

The end of the sixth Psalm.
THE SEVENTH PROLOGVE.
IF so be that at any time the petitions, the humble supplications, the most
fervent importuning prayers of his servants were acceptable, pleasing,
grateful to God, then were these of David, who pulled up them by the roots,
from the bottom of his heart, no otherwise then does the wind root out,
grubbe up, from the Earth's deepes, the roots of t^es, which it by the great
force, the vi^ce of it is tepestuous motion, throws down. And well made he
show of it, in him it was e^idently seen, that his prayers had favor able
hearing, and were pleasing to God, for having opened his benign, mercisull,
and most commi^erating ears to his heartiest vvishes, he struck him with such
an inexpressible joy in an instant, spr^g and framed in his heart (he being in
a kind of an exta^ie, not knowing how so) that he seemed a man whose mind
has apprehended some what, such as he cannot express, give a denomination
to, declare what it is, which not with ^anding proceeds so far that it
marvailously takes him, extremely possessed by ^ght of hearts-ioy, yea, and
to ouerjoy (...) such like as are they, who are ascended to the height, to the
complete fulness of Beatitude, which they desired. And in this his sudden
surprise of hearts sala^e, hearts inexpressible comfort, his spirit attentive,
nay fixed on divine ^ontemplations, he savv as it were in a vision the word
of God to come down from Heaven, and to proceed from the mouth of the Angel
incarnating it self in the blessed Virgin, he savv Christ borne, he savv him
adored by the Magj. The three Kings, he savv him dispute in the Temple, he
savv him fly with his Mother into Egypt, he savv him baptized in Iorda^, he
savv him with his Apostles, he saw him h^ale the ^ick, raise the dead, and cast
out Dewills, and traunced, extased in a Prophetical vision, he savv him
anointed by Magdalen, savv him at his last supper vv^h his Disciples, savv him
pray in the garden; savv him betrayed, savv him scourged, savv him crowned with
thorns, savv him adjuged to death, saw him nailed on the Cross; and in seeing
him break the gates of Limbus, he was taken, and fully possessed with that
joy, that vnspeakabls hearts-comfort, which he was to feel a s^oone as Christ
should redeem him out of the darkness together with his ancestors, his
forefathers; and he being sanctified in his merits, he savv him rise again,
and in seeing him ascend to Heaven, and to sit at the right hand of his father,
anew break forth into these words.

THE SEVENTH PSALM OF THE PENITENCY OF DAVID.
Domine exaudi orationem meam, auribus. etc. Psalm 142.
LORD, favorably hear my suppliant petitions, my humble prayer; stitre up thy
self, awake^, be thou moved to look with the gracious eyes of thy mercy on
my heart's sincere repentance, which through the desert of prayers, which is
tendered unto thee, is not unworthy of thy gracious and favorable audience, thy
truth and thy justice well weighed: not according to the truth and justice
of thy Laws, which condemn, and inflict sharp punishments suddenly on
sin, according to the quality, the greatness, the hainousnes of the demerit;
but according to thy truth and justice, with which is joined that thy mercy,
which is absolutely and ^olely in thee, for thou being the author of the Law,
thou only through the height of thy boun^ie can forgive the tra^sgressors,
acquit them of it. There are many valued by thee just, who are accounted by
the judges of the world delinquents: but the contrary seems to be in me, for
by the people I am deemed just, and in thy sight I know my self so burdened
with tresp^sses, that until I perceive thou have forg^en me, acquitted me of
them, I will never dry mine eyes, they shall always vvepe, and I will never
close up my month, I will alvvaies call on thee, and I will never be at
repose of heart, which imploreth it is Lord, that he.

Enter not into Judgment on his servant for to take notice of each fault,
trespas^e on a servant, is not a work worthy of a master, and to take
animaduersion, strict accoun^e of each our trippings, our stumblings, would be
to make us all despair: for if thou weigh the multitude of the fault we
commit, the weight of them would be such, that nothing would be found so
bur^nsome; hence we should be all lost: and therefore, forg^t patcell of our
trespasses, let them not be brought, and laid open before the Tribunal of thy
most just judgment, for that all those who hold themselves just, in the other
life when all human generation shall be judged, thy shall not be justified by
thee.

Enlarge me, be bountiful unto me, and make me worthy of the gu^fts of thy
grace whereof by thy goodness, and thy bounty, every man is made worthy who
offers the pureness, and innocence of his soul, by the means of a contrite
heart, so shall thou our God as it were substitute thy goodness to my
correction, in reguard that it makes for my salvation and thy glory: Nor for
this cause shall thy justice be impaired or lessened, which were it not in so
great a Majesty (so great is the presumption of mankind) that they would
receive as from a firm deed, that the infinite benefits which they received of
thee were due to the^ by obligation: whence it would follow that there were no
way, whereby those that are wicked, might come to amendment of themselves, to
correct themselves, and those who are incorrigible, who never will be good, but
are perverse and refractory (who living have not believed in thee) shall in
nothing be dif^erent from the good, and those who have recovered goodness; for
as much as works are not paid according to deserts: and herein it is necessary
that thy justice fail not, but whilst we are in this life, which is the place
of our race, which we must run over to come to thee, for this cause ought we
each one (the reward being certain and eternal, extending it self, beyond
the bonds of sin) always to determime time, to abtaine the set down price,
which is not allotted to one only, but to all those who shall come the goal,
to the bounds of the race. Let damnation fall on them, who have depised so
great a gain, so great a reward, which thou have published to be run for, and
to be revvarded, though yet for their so small, so slender desert, when the
time comes of each one's receiving r^vvard, they do not only find
themselves farre^ of from receiving ought of valuation, ought of price, ought
of reward: but evidently they perceive that they have ^rayed, yea, that they
are altogether out of their way, and hence so it happens, for that they
pursued less worthy ends, and lesie honorable.

O Lord and my God, the effects, the fruits of sin, have reduced me, have
plunged me in obscurity, in dark places, even as are they who are dead for
time and ages. My sin Lord has seated me in darkness, for there is no
greater obscurity, then that which is interposed betvv^ene the way of good,
and the eye of our perceiuance. Hence strayed we, and lost the light which
directs us, shows us the way, the means to come to our true end. And
certain it is, that a man blinded in the night, the obscurity, the darkness
of sin; parts not yet from day, from light of virtue, and truth, but
having co^tracted custom and habit in the clouds, the mists, and foggs of
vice, he is best and only pleased, with them: and only hates the Son,
the light, which arises from the bosom of virtue and living well; on which
if I had contemplated, my spirit had never proved anxious, full of greiuous
care, and my heart would never have so much, (alas!) for me been troubled,
co^tribulated. Truly if I had opened mine eyes to the light of truth,
^hutting them from the obscurities, the darkenesses of falsenes, of lies:
contribulations, and those anxious, rising and taking ground from fear of
damnation had not moved my spirit to reflect on it self: From whence my
heart, my soul which sees in me nothing else but sin, would not be so
conturbated, so much out of frame, by reason of the contemplation, of the
thought of the misery of it is sins.

I have reflected on other past and former times, and recording them,
remembering my self of them, I have thought of the felicity in which thy
largess, thine infinite bounty stated our first Father: and likewise shall I
weigh how he was punished by thee for the transgression of thy Commandment,
not only that he should dye, but also that living, he should sweat, fear,
be a cold, be hungry, bashful, and should have all other such like passions,
with which each man is borne through sin, drawing on himself such thy
disdeigne. And further meditating on all thy works which give unto us
health, conserve our lives, save our souls, hear favorably our prayers and
make us worthy of thy grace, and ruminating also, on, the day, night, moon,
stars, sun, water, air, fire, Heavens, deepes, mountains, vall^ys,
plains, woods, birds, brute beasts, on the hot, the cold, the temperate
season, the winds, the hail, the snow, the Clouds, rain, and on all that
which is apparent, besides what is under the phantasy, and human imagination:
and knowing that such admirable mysteries are works of thy hands, to the end
only that our soul, (to which thou bear an immense and unspeakable love,
for that it is made to thy likeness) may enioie thy Paradise, and among thy
Angels; in this knowledge I have lamented the infelicitie the ^nhappines into
which my sin has brought me: and each day fearing the sword of thy justice,
which hangs over my head, it was doubtful, that I had not been ruinated,
and utterly ouerthrown in despair; but the sin, the steadfast hope of my
safety, which my desert leads me to, my desert through my most profou^d, my
most deeply conceived grief, which I have for that sin, which first drew
me from thee, teaches me to implore mercy at thy hands.

I have unfolded my hands to thee, and in such manner, and in such carriage, in
such act I have demo^strated, the lowlines of my heart, and the disposition,
the inclination of my mind, and in so doing, I have made appear that I was
unlike to brute beasts, who have their hearts fixed on the earth, without any
spirit or spark of reason: and in such remorse of it is se fe^l have opened the
mouth of it, cra^g of thee, calling unto thee, imploring remission of my
transgressions, and to show unto thee, that I only desire, and nothing so
much as to be returned into thy favor, into thy grace; behold here my Lord,
that even now newly and again, I do beseech thee, with mine arms extended,
and with m^ tongue, and wi^h my lowly humble mind, that thou please to
shower, pour down on me thy grace, and mercy: for my soul is even, yea and
no otherwise then and, dry earth, without water, in thy presence; water me I
say, shower on me, cast on me thy grace, which if so thou do, I shall bring
forth to my salvation most plentifully and abundantly fruit, as does the
earth replenished with it is moisture, when the heavens in it is due season
power on it rain, whence April all jocund, all delightfully pleasant,
takes pleasure, singular content to see it is meadovves, and it is gardens,
which by means of the waters, bring afterward forth roses and flovvers, and
likewise fruits of all kinds.

Hear me favorably, yea and speedily, my Lord, and let fall upon me the
irrigations, the waterings of thy grace, for I am prepared to receive them in
my soul; and that hence only for that the intention of my extreme bad will
is now changed, is not now wretchedlie bent and malign, desire teaches me no
more, she weth me no more to fly into the bosom of vice; it flies its
inticements, even as sense flies reason, and the body the scourge; hence
may thou shovver on me thy divine grace; for I shall receive it in my soul
with that proper and ever seen greedines, that dry and barren land, and the
and, and parched sands, receive, drink up, and bless the showers of rain,
which fall from Heaven in the mid^t of summer; and the fruit, which the land
promises thus enabled, thus notably supplied by the waters which have been
very singular helps, and vvelcome guests to their vvelfare, slaking, yea
satisfying their thirsts, does my penitence promise to thee, Lord, so let it be
that thy grace which I so much call out for, and with a loud voice,
abundantly fall on me, for with earnestnes and fulness of sincerity I crave
it, I implore it.

Hide not thy face from me, deprive me not of thy gracious aspect, although I
am unworthy to co^template it, to be such a favorite of thy benignity; for
if so that I perceive my self to be bereaved thereof, I should then clean
loose my self, I should then be out of my vvitts, I should not know what to
judge aright, even as a Pilot, whom the impetuous, furious and outrageous
vvindes have bereaved of help, and all judgment; and I should become like to
those who go down into the Lakes. Truly Lord, if I should once take
notice that I were banished from thy sight, I should be drowned in
desperation, and so my wickedness, my abomination by which I am insulted on as
the Mariner by tempests, and fearful and terrible waters:, in whose furious
merciles depthes, he is alvvaies, yea, even ready to be svvalloued up. So
that I humbly beseech thee withdravv not, retire not, no way hi^e thy face,
thy gracious aspect from me, in which is seated the hope, the help, and the
beatitude, that blessing, and the inexpressible joy of each one who good is:
to the end that I fall not miserably into the profound deep^ Center,
bottomless pit, horride ^ulfe of despair. I am sure that though my sin,
through it is hainousnes has passed the bounds of any remission, yet is God
inclinable, disposed, ready to pardon me, for that I have learned, yea I know
how to implore him for mercy: farther I am undoubtedly ascertained, that he
will never slake, never defer, put of the forgiving of any, who is not
sluggish to crave, who loytereth not to repent himself: for his clemency
has such power, that it can in one moment, in one instant, cancel the sins
of many long run years.

In this, even now in this present morning, let me know the nobility, dignity,
exce^lencie of thy mercy, and remitting all my greiuous offenses, show unto my
repentance, and to my hearts sorrovv, that it avails any one, to have hoped
in thee, to have put trust in thee: but if so that thou hear me not
favorably, graciously, what example would they pattern by, who think,
resolve to return into thy grace, through means of punishing themselves, for
their former wickedness, girding themselves with sackcloath, so cloated? Pardon
me o my Lord, my God, and retard not, delay not, prorogue not. For besides that
the vveake body is inclined to sin, as fire to burn flax, or whatsoever
that fully dry is, as tinder and the rest, the danger, the (alas) great hazard
of despair, which attempteth to drovvn me in it is lake, is as thou see,
well know yet imminent, hanging yea yet over me, and unhappy for me, if
thou do not direct my feet by the said ways.

Instruct me in the way, dravv its lines for me demonstratiuelie, by which I
am to walk, since I have elevated, lifted up my soul unto thee, my way ought
to be charity, simplicity, sincerity, piety, goodness, truth, poverty and
faith: and when so thou shall have remitted my former transgressions, teach me
from thence forward how, and in what manner I may restrain my self, courbe
my self, keep my self from offending thee, and sustain, be a sustentacle,
strength, and a column to my soul elevated raised up in thy service, not now
at all valuing vain pleasures, which usually entice, entangle yea enthrall
the body, and for so much as it is now fully solicitous, tenderly vigilant in
obeying thee, confirm it, enable it, sprinkle it, yea power out on it, thy
fauonr: that so assisted, yea strengthened, in it is upright and just carriage,
in it is well doing, vice enter not, nay come not nigh it, but that it seeing
it self in hope of its salvation, it be far more contented then it was in
the ouer-weening delights of it is damnation, that it may fly from them, even as
the will to sin has left me, is extinguished in me, fled from me, as also
all the affections which I have borne to the disports of sin, which gave me
up a prey to it is associates, and my enemies, from whose hands free me o Lord.

Discharge me of mine enemies, free me from the^, my Lord my God, for that I
who heretofore estranged my self, alienated my self, went far from thee,
flying from thee until this present, through their allureme^ts I who
conjured, conspired against my safety, my salvation, am now, o now my Lord
altogether returned to thee, and from thee do I expect my joy, my hearts
gladness, and in thee solelie, and only do I hope, confessing my sin, and
my ingratitude; and therefore free from the hands of the wicked, and wretched
adversaries David, thy servant: and when so that thou shall have endovved me
with so much ability, so much fortitude, that I may be able to defend my
self from their assaults, yet farther teach me to do thy will, to
alleternitie, instruct me to obeie thee, to fear thee, to serve thee, for thou
art my Maker and my God. And for that thou have created me, conserve me in the
obedience of thy will, and make me such, that I may withdravv myself from the
society, company of my enemies, who greiue for that I persevere not in
working iniquity conformable to their malign, most malicious, and vvretched
desires, whose perfidiousnes, made me lay ^side yea forget my obligations, my
duty to thee, and as if there were ^ot a ^oule in me, they enticed me to
place all my care in giving ease, in giving pleasure to my body, (which being
of earthly mould, ought to be despised as dust) striving by all means to
procure an eternal habitation for an immortal soul.

Thy good spirit, shall conduct me into the right land: for thy name sake Lord,
thou shall revive me, make me live again, in thy equity in thy justice, thy
vprightnes, since that the perverse spirit, a while since, which had drawn
meto the depths of Hell, is passed of, is gonne, is no more to be found: the
pure and perfect spirit of God shall give unto me, allotte me a place, a degree
in the congregation, in the company of the just, and shall exalt me, advance
me in the regions of the living; and in such manner, through thy bountiful
goodness, not for any upright office of mine, thou shall raise me, make me live
though I be a sinner, which is not to be enstyled other then a proper justice,
annexed with the clemency of the same divinity, and for that eue^ now I am
extinguished, put out, through such desert of my greiuous transgressions,
reduce me into grace, enlighten me with thy grace through thy mercy: and in ^o
doing, it will be even a rendering me that life which sin has bereaved me
of, which so often kills the soul, as often, as it trusting to it, gives it
way, power, and po^ession of it self. And to be vvilling to raise it again,
it is necessary that my contrition employ it self, by means of equity,
vvherevvith thy most benign and clement mind, without preiudicating,
foreiudging, the reasons the grounds of justice do forg^ue us, and return us
again to life.

Thou shall deliver my sonle out of tribulation, anguish, grief, affliction,
and in thy mercy thou shall disperse mine enemies. When so thou shall have
restored me again in state of thy grace, Lord, o my Lord deliver my soul from
those heart-greifes, and from the passions vvher with the sting of conscience
does quell it, subdue it, utterly overthrows it at all hours, at all times;
for there is no heavy burdensome grief, which may be compared in any
proportion, can any ways, yea even seem to arrive to the height of that
inexpressible sorrovv, alas! deeply and inlie conceived, meditating,
ruminating fully of the loss of so inestimable a jewel, of that excellently
sublime, that incomp^ehensible, and perpetual felicity, and for what? for
his demerit, his just desert, contracted on himself, for which they are
punished with the miserable depthes of Hell and damnation. But yet look on
again, Ah! behold here whilst we live in this world, we are reco^soled, we
take courage again, so soon as we do but even so much as reflect on thy
illimited, thy bou^dlesse mercy and goodness, into whose arms my repentance
has cast me, for which, thou shall disperse, cast of from me, and acquit me
of all my transgressions through thy cleme^cie: even as winter shall let fall
and scatter the leaves of trees, and fair weather the waters of the Sea with
it is billows, and so shall I be free from tentations, and from molestations
and vexations, which our common adversary machinateth, and always works
against our soul, his end being to conduct it, to carry it, to eternal
horrid punishment, to Hell.

Strengthen me against all those occurrences, which disturb, disquiet, and
put my soul out of frame, disperse all my enemies who evermore molest me and
afflict me, for I am thy servant: nor am I affrighted or daunted, although the
number of them, who lie in wait to molest and to entrap me is infinite, for
that thy power, thy arm only can with it is least motion, suppress, cast
down, utterly destroy what army soever, what force soever there be. So that
Lord have care and regard of thy servant, defending him, protecting him from
the hostility, that his enemies move against him, who are enemies likewise of
thee Lord. It is the office of a true Lord and Master (so much the rather, if
so he be powerful as thou art) not to suffer any to wrong to injury his
servants, for in protecting them, he salues, he conserueth his own proper
honor. And were it not that I deserve that thou apply thy mercy for other
respect, the desert, the merit in acknowledgment that reallie I am thy servant
might take place: and into this such like servitude, the sin of the first
man, has brought me, who so far as concerns him deserved eternal death,
but thy clemency has done, as does a severe, upright and just father, who
being offended most greiuouslie by his son, abstracting the love of his flesh
and blood, yet pity, commiseration, mercy, gives not way to him to punish
him conformablie to the greatness of his transgressions, but depriving him of
his paternall inheritance, by no means will he give way that he be at all
about him, except only in the nature of servants, who necessarily must
labor for their livings with industry, much pain and sweat, through
continual toil. Whence he who is justly punished through his fathers wrath,
remains in such a mean estare, in such a low condition of life until such
time that mercy (time over coming disdeigne) returns him again through his
favor, into his first well being. Lord I through my old former disobedience,
am become of a free man, a ^laue, and I shall be like to the Son that has
provoked his fathers vvrach against him: hence it is expedient, that I pass my
days, in this state, sweating, laboring to appease thee: until thy Son
come to release me from the yoke of neck and soale, which the servitude, into
which human kind is fallen into, through the first transgression of thy
commandment, has contracted. Then we received again into our first
happiness, thou vvilt not receive us, not account us the^, aliens, strangers,
not slaves or bondmen, but being made by thee Citizens of thy glorious
Kingdom, and Empire of Heaven, thou vvilt receive us through thy grace as
sons of adoption.

The end of the seventh Psalm.
THE EPILOGVE To the Seven Psalms of the penitency of David.
AFTER, that attract^ue love of vvinning heavenly glory, and the terrible fear
of horrid punihment had moved David, in Seven Psalme^ to be wail his
transgressions, the hope of reward, and the comfort of hearts-ioy inwardly
conceived, for the fruits which he was hence to reap, to gain, to win
(thanked be his penitency) he suddenly raised himself from the ground, and
standing bolt upright on his feet, first taking up his harp, and placing it
under his left arm, now armed with courage as (...) man freed, set at full
liberty, he was so strangely enlightened that h^e heard with the ears of his
mind all the Psalms, which he had with tears sung; rehearsed, recorded,
and rarely war^led by the Angels, and being thus seriously attentive to the
harmony of their notes, which were delivered by the Angelical tongues, voiced
with an incomprehensible, and unspeakable swetnes, in an instant he found
himself, eased, discharged of the burden, that his trespasses had laid on
him, and hereby perceiving that God had received him through his mercy into the
bosom of that grace, which h^e so fervently implored, he retired himself,
issued out of the tomb, made hot by his ^ighes, and moist by his tears. No
sooner came he to the light, but that the air it self seemed to clear up,
in the cheerful splendour of his countenance; which though it were pale
through fasting, and obscure, muddy, svvarthy, cloudy through his penitency,
his eyes seeming as it were without motion through his tears; his spirits not
vvithstanding were so purified by having entertained the grace of God (which
made pure his soul, with the selfsame resplende^t light, that the Angels a^
^luminated vvithall) that his face seemed the face of Moses, glistering bright
with that divinity which God had thereon impressed, when as his magnificent,
his most high and mighty majesty, within a Cloud of fire, whose fllames he
composed of the streaming fulgore of the Sun, and of the heat of the stars,
yet vouchsafed not to speak; but gave way, granted that he might behold
those his most sacred and holy shoulders wherewith he holds up the Heavens,
and all the Hemispheares. Now David inflamed with the holy Ghost with which
our Lord had infused him for his repentance, ^eturned to instruct and correct
his people, who moved by the example of their good King, all their endeauours,
their works turned to make themselves perfect in the ^ight of him their God.
But what fortunate ages, what blessed times, would happily fall unto their
shares who so should be crowned with such happiness, as is to live under the
laws of those Princes, who laying aside the height of mind, and the pride of
their Kingdoms, confess the transgressions which they commit to the prejudice
of men, yea, and to the dishonor of God? True^y people would be more blessed
then are they miserable, if so that they who reign, I say not lame^ their
cruelty, injust homicides, and adulteries, with the same fervor of mind which
David did his, but if so that they (no otherwise then if God were not, or
being ha^ no power over their pride) at least would not glory in their
adulteries, in their m^thers, and in their impieties, which da^ they
grei^ously and hainously offend (...) with open de^ng of him who first (...)
last punishes or revvardeth each one.

The end of the Epilogue.

