SERMON, UPON the words of Paul the Apostle unto Timothy, Epist. 1. Chap. 4.
verse. 8.

PREACHED AT LITLEcot, in the Chapel of the Right Honorable, SIR JOHN
POMPHAM, Knight, Lord chief Justice, of England, before his honorable
Lordeshippe, and to the assembly there, the 17. of Iulie, 1597.

By CHARLES PINNER, Minister of the Church of Wotton Basset, in North-Wiltshire.

1. Tim. 6. verse 6. But godliness is great gain, with sufficiency.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard
at the sign of the Bible. 1597.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL, Master JOHN SIMS, of Charde, in the County of Somerset,
grace, and peace from God in Jesus Christ.
SIr, it may be marveiled of some, if not of your self, that I should be thus
familiar, as you see, and cannot but be seen of many. Whom I pray to take this
for my excuse, (which unfeignedly I speak, and from my very heart.) That a
desire, conceived now a good while since, engendered by a report of your godly
friends and mine, is now come unto the birth, by speech with your self: and
this it was; that I wished once to know you, as now in part I do, and shall, I
trust, more fully in time to come. For why should you deprive me of the
farther fruit of that, (and call it I must your godliness by the very name:)
which so tasted in part already, I could not but forth with tell and testify
unto others also, that so great zeal of true Religion has seldom bin planted
in so tender years: and I look to the time of the first report. For the
watering, and grows whereof (as much as my poor pen and pensil can
perform herein) behold again the gain of godliness, presented to your eye;
and yet vnpresented: for what pen, or pensill can deliver her as she is? whom
(as Cicero says of virtue, their virtue, a weak shadow thereof) if with the
eyes of our body we might behold, it would make us to love her, not without
wonder. But we must tarry the time, till we see her, and him together, of whom
S. John says, Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God; Ioh. 1.3.
but yet it appears not what we shall be: howbeit we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. And then, and
there also shall we see this godliness, which we desire: which, till that
appearing, (and now in this age of so great ungodliness, whose spread has
overshadowed so much of this land) so little appears, that she dares not
almost be known by this her name of godliness, for fear of the flouts, which
without fear do flow so fast from the ungodly; of which this is not the least,
when they say to any person, whom they most despise, O you are very godly.
Whose mouths must be stopped, which speak proud things, as Jude says,
having men's persons in admiration, Jude. 16.
because of advantage. And to stop their mouths; or if not that, to open the
mouth of godliness to speak for her self, I say not, how praiseworthy she is,
unto whom al praise is due; but, how profitable unto us: I then preached, and
now have published this little Sermon. Accept it, as you find it; and my self,
by it. The Lord Jesus preserve you, and increase in you the graces of his holy
spirit, Amen. From Wotton Basset the 23. of Iulie. 1597.

Yours in Christ, CHARLES PINNER.

1. Tim. Chap. 4. verse. 8. For bodily exercise profits little: but Godliness
is profitable unto all things; as having the promise of the life present, and
of that that is to come.


OF the wound, and cure of sin; or rather of the death of sin in the soale,
and the life of righteousness by Jesus Christ, His Lordships Chaplain that
day preached of such matter. John. 5.15.
we have heard already. Of the which our Savior says in the 5. of John,
Verily verily I say unto you, the hour shall come and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the son of God: and they that hear it shall live. And
we have heard, and believed, and live in God. Of the course of which life in
godliness, and the blessed benefit of the same, we have now to hear
farther out of this sentence of the Apostle: which depending on the former, as
a reason of his exhortation there unto Godliness, contains doctrine, and
admonition: Doctrine, for the whole Church; as admonition likewise for the
same: but, properly for Timothy; a man, and a minister, young in years, but
grave and austere in manners, very much, if not too much: having always
before his eyes that duty, which this our Apostle himself otherwise embraced,
1. Cor. 9.27.
where he says, I beat down my body, and bring into subjection, least by
any means when I have preached unto others, I my self should be rejected.
Yet missing the rule, of too much superstition, or too little descretion, in
going too far, (as Nimium, and Parum, Too much, and too little, are still in our
way for every godly duty:) the Apostle calls him back, as else where by
special admonishment to look unto his stomach; so here by these general
words, Bodily exercise profits little: and less in deed he means, then
Timothy took it. Wherein to bleare his eyes a little, who stared to much on it,
he sets before him another object, so much more great and excellent, that,
because it swalloweth up the first, we also will stay our selves in the
consideration of this, in these words, but godliness is profitable unto all
things, as having the promise of the life present, and of that that is to
come. Wherein we have two points, a doctrine, and the same assured by a
reason to us: the doctrine, in these words, Godliness is profitable unto all
things: the Reason, in these, as having the promise of the life present, and
of that that is to come.

Of the which we may note, first, how the Apostle speaks, which is,
abstractive, as they say, in the Abstract, and not in the concrets;
schoole-rearmes, but of easy understanding; the one, noting the quality alone
and by it self considered; the other, the subject, or person with the
quality, or in whom is that quality. And this no doubt also but the Apostle
means, namely, that the godly person has the promise; and yet he both not
so speak, but says, that Godliness has the promise: and why? because the
godly person, for his godliness, and not else; but godliness, for it self;
it being such a thing, and so like unto God himself, that he cannot but
bless it, even now in this life present, and especially in that that is to
come; and thereof has made and given his promise to us, that we not only
should have it, and take it, when it comes; but also should hope and wait
for it; even when we have it not. From whence arises the truth of this
sentence or proposition, that Godliness is profitable unto all things, as
that which gives us al things either in present possession, or expectation.

Many dispute many things; and many desires, and purposes have we: but in
nothing our minds more corrupt and destitute of the truth, then in this, if
without, or beside godliness, we count any thing to be gain or profit. Whose
minds notwithstanding are so corrupt, and so destitute of the truth, that any
thing (almost) we account gain and profit without godliness: or at the least
all the godliness we have or do besire, is gain and profit. For if other
gain we have, we have godliness enough, though we have none in deed; and yet
have as much, as we desire. Men of this making altogether this out Apostle
painteth out in the 6. Chap. of this Epist. the 5. and 6. verses; whom he
says to be men of corrupt minds, 1. Tim. 6.5.6.
and destitute of the truth, which think gain to be godliness. What is that?
in wit, this: their godliness, or all the godliness they care for, is gain,
according to their corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; embracing any
in the world, as good and profitable, and letting godliness alone: of which the
pass not a pin, and care nothing of it, as nothing worth, if so they may
attain their other desires. And that this is the meaning, it is plain, in
that the Apostle contradicts it in these words following, but, says he,
Godliness is great gain. Not only gain, but great gain, and if we will have
that expounded too, the Apostle says in our Text, that Godnes is profitable
unto all things.

Wherefore we need go no further for weapons, to slay the madness of Atheism,
that is, ungodliness it self, which sets godliness at naught, and teaches
men to mock at it, as a thing of nothing: and a thousand things we desire as
good and profitable; but godliness with thousands is good for nothing. And
Religion, though it self honorable, yet if, as it has the nature, so the
name of goodlines (even as this is her name also; for what is religion, but
godliness; and what is godliness, but religion?) yet, in this other name of hers
we cannot abide her; and religion in the name of godliness, is a derision.
For I tell you, he has a fine wit, and hitteth his neighbor home, as he
thinks, which can hang the lip, and say, O you are very godly, O tempora, o
mores, o times o manners, says he, who saw the discipline of the city of Rome
so weak, that one Catelin, a seditious rakehel, could sit, and be seen in the
Senate amongst them. And we must swallow our grief and say nothing, to see the
Church of God defiled with thousands of those, and sitting almost in the
Senate, and chiefest rooms amongst us, who not only secretly undermine, but
even bid open battle (almost) unto the name of godliness: these being, I
fear, the times, of which Peter by a special remembrance unto the faithful,
foretold, saying, 2. Pet. 3.3.4
This first understand, that there shall come in the last days mockers,
walking after their own lusts, and saying, when is the promise of his coming?
such, as even stowted the Lord, and grieved the godly, and gave complainte
before unto the Prophet Malachie in the 3. Chapter: Your words have been
stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye say, Mal. 3.13.14.15.
what have we spoken against thee? ye have said, it is in vain to serve God;
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment, and that we walked
humbly before the Lord of hosts. Yea now we count the proud blessed: even
they that work wickedness are set up; and they that tempt God, yea they are
delivered. And they had even wearied the Lord herewith, as the Prophet
complains in the former Chapter, Mal. 2.17.
Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, says he, yet ye say, wherein
have we wearied him? in that ye say, every one that does evil, is good in the
sight of the Lord, and he delights in them: or, where is the God of
judgment? and these have even wearied the Lord, and us; as many, as at this
time embrace godliness: and yet they say, wherein have we wearied you? in that
ye say, and say lowdly, and lewdly, with the greatest skorne, we are foolish
and busy fellows.

But the vomit of these men is loathsome, and we will leave it: and for the
praise, and price of godliness, will come to the proof of that, which the
Apostle has said of it, as we have heard, namely, that Godliness is profitable
unto all things. And this proof is contained in the words next following,
implying a reason of the former speech or sentence in these words, as having
the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. And this reason
is strong from a sufficient division of all things. For all things are
contained in this life present, and in that that is to come. And therefore
godliness must needs be profitable unto al things, since nothing, neither here,
nor hereafter can be wished, which it bringes not with it. For though the
Apostle only says, it has the promise of this life, and that life, he
means, as also he speaks in the 17 of the Acts, Life and breath, Acts
17.25.
and all things; and as the Philosopher speaks, all things ad been beateque
vivendum, to live well and blessedly. For life else were nothing, if we
should want those things that pertain to blessedness. And though some may
think that the Apostle comes short of the matter, and speaks not home
enough, saying, that godliness has the promise, and not the thing; yet this is
al one in deed, considering who is the promiser, God that cannot lie, Tit. 1.^.
as other where he says. And because we cannot have al our happiness at once,
but some is here in this life present, and more hereafter in the life to come;
for assurance of the whole we have his promise, which is always as good as
performaunce it self. For whosoever, says the son of Siracke, trusted in
the Lord, and was confounded? Eccle. 2.11.
O then, who is wise, and will be rich, and honorable, and have true strength,
and beauty, and health, and peace, and blessedness with God? even the man, that
is godly; which walks with God, yea and talks with him: as it is said of
Henoch, Genesis 5.22. and 6.9. and 17.1.
Noah, and Abraham, that they were just and upright men in their time, and
walked with God. Even as this is the end of our deliverance, that we, Luke
1.74.75.
as Zacherie says, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might
serve him without fear, in holiness, and righteousness before him, or in his
sight, all the days of our life: that we should walk, and talk with God;
and having our delighte in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
should meditate therein day and night; that we should love, fear, and honor
him in all our ways, and so want nothing, which we would and should have,
either in this life present, or in that that is to come.

But here grows a question: what it means then, that even ungodliness it
self has, or seems to have our portion, at least in the things of this life
present: of which David in the seue^teenth Psalm speaking, makes his prayer,
thus, Psalm. 17.13.14.
Up Lord, says he, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the
wicked with thy sword: from men by thine hand O Lord, from men of the world,
who have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with thine
hid treasures: their children have enough, and leave the rest of their
substance for their children. Where he speaks, as he means, of the wicked,
namely, that they have their portion in this life, and no where else; and that
they have already, as much as they shall have, in this life present: for in the
life to come they have no portion. Answerably unto that that Christ also warned
those good almes-men, forsooth, in the 6. of Matthew, which trumpetted the
thing for the praise of men, Therefore, says he, when thou give thine
alms, thou shall not make a trumpet to be blown before thee, as the hypocrites
do in the Synagogues, and in the streets to be praised of men. Verily I say
unto you, they have their reward. That is, they have already that they desired,
to wit, the praise of men; and this is all they shall have: for besides this
verily they shall have nothing. And what then shall it profit the ungodly that
they were wise, and rich, and honorable, and had peace, and prosperity in
this life, when this life is gone, and their portion ended, and nothing
remains for the life to come? the bitterness of which estate answered his
doubt, who in beholding the prosperity of the wicked, had almost denied
providence, till at the last, in acknowledgement of that which here is taught,
Claud.
he says, Tolluntur in altum, vt lapsu graviore ruant, They are lifted up
aloft, to have the greater fall. As David, to express his greatest misery,
says, He takes me up, and casts me down again. Psalm. 102.
Even as that we lift up to cast down, we dash all in pieces. And the beggars
woe is nothing to the Prince his want. But, as he says, Sen. Theb.
In servitutem cadere de regno grave est. Of king to become a caitife, that
cuts the heart.

Yea, but the wicked and ungodly of the world have wealth and welfare: and
while they have it, will some say, they are well and happy. But this their
happiness, what ever they have, in spite of all the wicked we deny, for first it
should be known how they have any thing. Not by promise: for that pertains
unto godliness, by testimony of our Text, which says significantlie, that
godliness has the promise, and not ungodliness. How them? without promise. O
miserable thieves and robbers, which have an heap of goods so ill gotten.
Psalm. 24. v. 1.
For the earth is the Lords, and he has promised the same unto the godly, and
again, Math. 5.5.
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. And every creature
of God is good, 1. Tim. 4.5.
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. For it is
sanctified, says the Apostle, by the word of God, and prayer. But who gives
thanks, and who so receaueth the good creatures of God, as good and lawful;
and ^ome are they sanctified by the ordinance and will of God, but to those, as
before he says, which believe, and know the truth, that is, the godly. For
all the ungodly of the world are yet in their pollution, and are deprived of
all the creatures of the earth; polluting to themselves every good creature of
God, in the abuse, live in the very use of them* and polluting themselves* I
say not now, because stricto iure, as they say, by direct law, they have no
right in them. So Naboths vinyard was good: 1. King. 21. Levit. 25.23. and Number.
36.9. and seq. and 1. King. 21.
and Ahab had it. But, because he was not of the tribe, besides the intrusion,
the forgerie, perjury, and murder committed, he defiled himself in the
unlawful use of it. And this is the case of all the ungodly: who, because
they are not of his tribe, who has the right of inheritance in all these
things, besides the manifold abuses they put them unto after, they even defile
themselves in the having of them. And so, not this, and that, as in the former
division of the legal pollutio^, which taught us that out right in all things
through our attainder was so taken away, that by touching; almost, and taking
we defiled our selves in them: but even the breath of their bodies, their life
it self, and all things are defiled to them? because, to speak the same thing
again, as light is come into the world, and men love darkness, root the
light: Joan. 3 19.
so liberty is come into the world, and men love bondage, more then it: and the
grace of adoption, whereby we become sons ( and if sons, says the Apostle
from a ground of their law; for in the Civell law of the Romans all the sons
succeeded together; then heirs, and heirs annexed with Jesus Christ;) is
refused of the ungodly and unbelievers: who if they have no part in Christ,
Heb. 1.2.
who is the heir of al things, as the Apostle teaches to the Hebrews; how
would they have right in any thing, and not still remain as children, and
heirs of the first Adam, cast out of Paradise with his children, the very
blessing of the earth this day being turned into a curse unto them, even
because they have no part in the second Adam. Wherefore, let all the ungodly
of the world here learn to look west unto their theevish hands, and care how
to have their hearts purified by faith, Act. 15.9. 2. Tim. 3.12.
and to live godly in Jesus Christ; that so they may be heirs of the promise;
and that, in the rich ungodly especially it may be seen for a wounder to the
world how the camel creapeth through the needles eye, and that which is
impossible with men, Psalm. 22.30.
is yet possible with God, the prophecy of Davis in 22. Psalm being
fulfilled in them. All the fat of the earth, and those that are filled with
earthly felicity, shall eat, as being nourished in the Church, verse. 28.
and shall bow themselves. As before he says, All the ends of the earth shall
remember themselves and be turned unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the
nations shall worship before him.

Which lowly submission unto Jesus Christ, and to the septer of his word in
the kingdom of his Church, if once we might see in the great ungodly of the
world, Lord, how many sins also would so be cut of, which daily are
committed in the good things of God, through the manifold abuse of them unto
sin and wickedness. And if we see it not, as to seldom in deed is seen, so
many sins remain of this sort also, that better for them it were if beggars
they had been borne, and so had continued to their lives end, then to answer
this account before the great Judge; the riches also of whose bountifulnes and
patience they have abused, not knowing, Romans 2 4.5.6.
as the Apostle says, that the bountifulnes of God leads them to repentance:
but they after their hardness, and heart that cannot repent, heap unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and declaration of the just
judgment of God, who shall reward every man according to his works: open, or
secret; to himself, or others. And therefore then, and there also shall be
revealed touching their title of possession, how it fails with God, which
holds with men: which is a secret to the world, and to worldly man's hearts,
but known unto Gods; Romans 2.16.
who shall judge, as Paul says, the secrets of me^ by Jesus Christ according
to my gospel. And therefore the good natured man also, and of greater
ingenuitie, cannot escape with all his colors of natural honesty and virtue,
amiable in it self, and before the world, Mark. 10.21.
but despised of God, because it wants godliness. According as our Savior
says in the sixteenth of Luke, namely, Luke 15.16.
that that, which is lofty before men, is abomination in the sight of God.
And to say the very truth, why should God esteem them, or any thing in them,
who never esteemed him, but them selves, in all their lives? for look we into
these men with godly wisdom, and whither shall we see al their desires,
purposes counsels, and endeavors directed, but unto themselves; and to their
own pleasures, praise, and profit, or to the profit of men like unto
themselves. against whom, and whose works, the former sentence of Christ is
as good, as against the prayers and alms of painted hypocrites. Mat. 6.5.
Verily I say unto you they have their reward: to wit, in this world, and with
men; and they are fowlie deceaved if they look for more. Wherefore to conclude
this point, if the wicked and ungodly, being empty and having nothing, have no
promise or hope of any things or having all things of the world, have with God
no lawful tenure and occupation of the same; and farther, corrupting themselves
in the great abuse of them have a heavier judgment in time to come, the best
of the ungodly not here excepted: what matterreth it what they have, and what
they are here for a while in this world, since at the last they loose all, and
themselves by a fearful destruction; and nothing in the end is found gain,
but godliness, which is profitable unto all things, and at all times, as
having the promise of this life present, and of that that is to come.

But here we must stay a little, at the least to examine this, how the promise
holds with the godly for the things of of this life: for of the things of the
life to come there is no question: the Apostle himself in the 15. of the first
to the Corinthians using these words, 1. Cor. 25.29.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of al me^ the most
miserable. Where albeit he gathers a most sound conclusion for his present
purpose, the handling of which I now omit, yet thus much he says withal by
way of comparison between the godly and the ungodly, that we in this life are
more miserable then they. And if we look upon the afflictions themselves in
their own nature, and number, and see no more, I grant it too. And because the
Saints themselves are weak-sighted herein, and tender upon the sense of present
sorrows, no chastising for the present, Heb. 12.11.
as says the Apostle, seeming joyous, but grievous; they speak sometimes in
their have they know not what; as if they were miserable, Psalm. 31.23. and
psalm. 116.11.
and others blessed; and they will reason this matter with God about the
truth of his promise. So Jeremy, but with leave, and very modestly, in the
12, O Lord, says he, Ier. 12.1.
if I dispute with thee, thou art righteous: yet let me talk with thee of thy
judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? why are al they in
wealth that rebelliously tra^sgresse? and Abacuk in the first Chapter, Abac.
ca. 1.
speaking unto God, cannot tell how to set these together, namely, the purity of
Gods nature, the prosperity of transgressors, and the misery of the righteous.
Thou art, says he; of pure eyes, and can not see evil: thou can not
behold wickedness. Wherefore do thou look upon the transgressors, verse. 13.
and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous then he? and Job, and David, two excellent personages, but much
afflicted, were more impatient; and Job, even terrified, in the 21: Even when I
remember, says he, I am afraid, and fear takes hold on my flesh. Wherefore
do the wicked live, and wax old, and grow in wealth? Job. 21.6, and seq.
their seed is established in their sight with them, and their generation
before their eyes: Their houses are peaceable without fear and the rod of God
is not upon them. And so forth with a long and tedious narration unto himself
of the great prosperity of the wicked. And David pathetically and abruptly, as
newly delivered out of this temptation, begins his Psalm thus, Yet God is
good to Israel, even unto such as are of a clean heart. Verily as for me my
feet were almost gone; Psalm. 73.
my treadings had well nigh slipped: and why? I was grieved at the wicked; I did
see all the ungodly in such prosperity. For there are not knots unto their
death: but they are lusty and strong. They are not in toil as other folk,
neither are they plagued like other men. And then setting out more at large
both their impiety and prosperity, as things not so agreeable in his
judgment, at the last he uses this Acclamation, verse. 12.
Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world, and these have riches
in possession. And then he shows how weak he was, and how ill at the first
he took this matter. verse. 13.
And I said, says this good man, then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed my hands in innocence. All the day long have I been punished, and
chastened every morning. And so clear is this thing, the godly, which have the
promise, sometime, and for the most part in such adversity; and the ungodly,
which have no promise, in such prosperity, that hereby they even insult over
God, and his children, as in the 15. verse, Ecce generationem filiorum tuorum:
Behold the generation of thy children: as if they should say, who need care
much to be of the number, and their case no better. And yet still, my brethren,
we hold fast this truth, which here is taught us, namely, that godliness
has the promise, not only of the life that is to come, but of this life
present also. And the performance is good.

But every promise is kept, as it is made. And though this promise here is
meant unto the godly, yet the same in precise terms is made unto godliness,
as at the first was noted. That so the godly might be taught to assure them
selves of the truth hereof, only with Quatenus, and clause of restraint, and
no otherwise, to wit, thus, so far as the are godly; because the godly do
want of their godliness. And as Paul says of knowledge, which is a part of
godliness, our knowledge is in part: 1. Cor. 13.12.
so much more is it true of the whole, that our godliness is in part: and it
were a dangerous dream to think otherwise. Wherefore we accuse not the
purietie and sincerity, but the perfection of godliness: and the most godly we
say again do want of then godliness. So far therefore as we are godly, and
do keep with God, so far he keeps with us, but when we break with him, as
too often we do, this alters the case with us, but yet not with God. For then
he takes the rod in hand, which otherwise should lie long enough, but for very
need: and, so that godliness might go with all, his delighte is in the
prosperity of his servants. Oh, says he, in the 48. of Esaie, Oh that thou
hadest harkened to my commandments: Isa. 48.18.
then had thy prosperity been as the flood, and thy righteousness as the waves
of the sea. That is, they should have followed one upon the other, as one wave
of the sea follows an other, and gone alonge together as companions
inseparable. And in the fourskore and first Psalm, Oh that my people had
harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways: I would soon have
humbled their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries: the haters
of the Lord should have been subject unto him: but their time (to wit, time
of the prosperitye of his people) this their time should have endured for ever.
And God would have fed them with the fat of wheat; and with honey out of the
rock would I have satisfied thee. But if we harken not unto God, and walk
not in his ways, what then (...) then thus, and it is inchided in the
condition of the promise unto David, and all the faithful, in the fourskore
and ninth Psalm, thus, But if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments; if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments:
dementes. I will visit their offenses with the rod, and their sin with
scourges. Nevertheless my lovinge kindness will I not utterly take from him:
not suffer my truth to fail. So that even he, which also punishes our
ungodliness, is true in his promise, and his loving kindness remains still,
with it, shall I say? yea, in it. Here is a mystery: and yet no mystery unto
the godly; which feel and find their ungodliness so to be chastened by the
hand of God, with such a fatherly good will and care of them, that he
turns them hereby from their ungodliness, to stand fast in the covenant; and
all that furthereth this intent is therefore blessed. Blessed is the sickness,
blessed are the sores, blessed are the wounds of such a friend, Prove. 27.6.
yea, better then the kisses of an enemy. This I take it is the meaning of
that league and Covenant in the second of Hosea, And in that day, says the
Lord, will I make a Covenant for them, Hos. 2.18.
with the wild beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that that
creeps upon the earth: and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the
battle out of the earth, and will make them to sleep safely. Not that there
shall not be annoyances to these confederates in heaven, and in earth, above,
and below, and round about them; nor that the sword shall not be whet, and bow
bent, and the battle set against them in all the earth; for who in the earth
more afflicced then we? but, that the intent of the enemy shall be defeated,
and these instruments of mischief, prepared for their hurt, shall be found in
the end to do them good. O Ashur, the rod of my wrath, says the Lord by the
Prophet, and the staff in their hands is mine indignation. Isa. 10.5.6.7.
I will send him to a dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge,
against the people of my wrath, to take the spoil, and to take the pray, and
to tread them under feet, as the mire in the street. But he thinks not so:
but he imagines to destroy and to cut of not a few nations. The purpose of
the Lord, and his work was, by the rod of the Assirians in justice, and
judgment, to punish the sins of Jerusalem and Judah for their amendment: as
Jeremy says, Let thine own wicked. correct thee, Ierem. 2.19.
and thy turninges back reprove thee; know therefore, and behold that it is an
evil thing and bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God and that my
fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts. But the bent of the
Assirian was barely to destroy, and to set up his great name by mighty
destructions. Thus the enemies shall whet their sword, and bend their bow, and
make ready the battle for our destruction; they shall kill, and lead
captive, and devide the spoils; and yet no harm done: for the Prophecy of
Esaias shall be fulfilled, Isa. 11.9.
They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all the mountain of my holiness. The
reason, For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
that cover the sea. This plentiful knowledge does keep all safe. Which Paul
also ascribes to our love of God; who cannot but love him, after that we have
known him, and his love toward us; according as he has chosen us before,
and called us with an holy calling, ^. Tim. 1.9.
to know, love, and honor him in all true holiness. Wherefore in the 8. to the
Romans most comfortablie and most plainly to this purpose he says, Also we
know that all things work together for the best unto the^ that love God, Romans
8.28.
even to them that are called of purpose. Where doubtless the Apostle means
not so chiefelie of the things which properly are good, as of those, which
might be hurtful, if the purpose of men, and the nature of the things should
be respected. But such is the work of godliness, or rather of God for the
godly, whom he has loved, and called according to purpose; and they know him,
and love him, and serve him in holiness; that for their sakes according to the
warking, as the Apostle says, Philip. 3.21.
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself; and to comaund the
light to shine out of darkness, 2. Cor. 4.6.
he also subdueth unto himself, and his, the nature of these evil things,
and turns them unto their good, so bringing light out of darkness, joy out of
grief, grace out of sin, deliverance out of destruction, and life out of death
it self: that the true cause of our rejoicing may so appear, as Paul in the
third of the first to the Corinthians shows, 1. Cor. 3.21.22.
Therefore says he; let no man rejoice in men: for all things are yours:
whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world: or life or death;
whether they be things present, or things to come, all are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Wherefore, my dear brethren, let us be Christ's,
as Christ is Gods; that is, Christians in deed, as in name we are, and all
things are ours, to serve us, Psalm. 91.13.
and to minister unto our good, and nothing shall hurt us: we shall walk, as
he says, upon the lion and aspe, the young lion and the dragon shall he
tread under feet; and this miracle in a sort shall still be seen and felt of
us, of which out savior says, They shall take away serpents, Mark. 16.19.
and if they shall drink of any deadly thing, if shall not hurt the^. And such
reioicing has godliness. And why the^ should we fear a flout, to be called
godly of the ungodly, beggars brats, and no better, wc have nothing, or ye
promise of nothing: neither in this life, nor in the life to come.

And yet least here they may stand at a bay with us, and say again that we
have nothing; as many of us, yea most of us, have less in the things of this
life; yet this is not true, that we have nothing, and few of the godly, not
Lazarus himself, but has some thing, according to the truth of this which
the Apostle teatheth us, that Godliness has the promise of this life also. For
if he have nothing else, yet he has life it self, and the same more
perfectly, then any of the ungodly in the world. For every thing may be said
to be had, according to the use, and perfection of the use. For if I hold a
treasure in my hand, which is fast sealed to me in a bag, I may rather be
said to handle it, then to have it. Or, if I be in an house, without any
comfortable use of that house, in which I am; it may better be said to have
me, then I it. And so likewise according to the perfection and excellency of
each use, every thing may be said to be more, or less perfectly had of us. So
Lazarus, with his trumbes and rags, because he had a godly life, and a
comfortable life with God, and a sweet expectation of the life to come, he was
more alive, then the rich, with his robes, deprived of all true comfort in all
his life. And I know not how; yes, it is the blessing of God, which can
multiply in use a little, and so make it much, much better, and so and in this
sense, much bigger, then the far and large portion of the wicked. And in this
sense I doubt not but David says in the 37 Psalm, Better is a little, Psalm.
37.16.
which each righteous (...) deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of al
their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken against him. I add,
and his: for he, and his must go together. And therefore let us also, my
brethren, as ioine-workers with God, for the glory of God, and honor of
godliness, speak against them, and do against them, every man, as he can do
most: that all the ungodly of the earth like dross may be consumed, Psalm. 119.
verse. 119.
the godly in Jesus Christ increased and comforted, Religion maintained, and
God above al glorified. To whom be glory, dominion, and majesty both now, and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...)




