Physic for the Soul, very necessary to be used in the Agony of death,
and in those extreme, and most perilous seasons, as well for those, which are
in good health, as those, which are endewed with bodily sickness.

Translated out of Latin into English, by H. Thorn.

Quid prodest homini, si vniuersum mun(...) tur, animae autem suae detrimentum
pa(...) MATH. 16. What shall it man avail, if all the world, he gain.
And after that of his own soul, he do the loss sustain?
Perused, and allowed, according to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON, by Henry Denham.

blazon or coat of arms Physic for the Soul, very necessary to be used in the
Agony of death, and in these extreme and most perilous seasons, as well for
those that are in good health, as those, which are endued with bodily
sickness. Translated out of Latin, into ^^^lishe, by H. Thorn.
DIseases troubling our bodies, and corporal death, shak^ our minds with
ho^rible fear, (...) much that of^ (...) we tremb^^ (...) the recy^^ ^cion of
them. Man's nature (...) had leauer not to be at all (...) cannot but wax
pale, (...) when these sicknesses do ap^ (...) deed, no calamity can b^
(...) more cruel, none more horrible, none more houge, then the sickness of
the soul, and the death and destruction thereof. Every man abhors, every man
detesteth and escheweth by Sea and land, punishments, pitiful labors,
diseases, and this bodily death. But we ought much more to endeavor our selves,
to avoid and leave off the occasions of those euilles, that is to wit, sin
and wicked^^sse, and that we ought to dread the heavy (...) of God, which we
provoke against (...) ^ers and manifold offenses.

(...) ^our bodily health is ympaired, we straigh^ ways post unto the
Phisitio^, here we spare for no charges, we less esteem all things then the
safegarde of our life, we procure medicines and remedies at a great price,
(...) the intent, that this our earthen vessel (...) ^otsheard, might be
again repaired, (...) ^^thin short space after notwithstan^ (...) ^die to
break. Why do we not (...) ^die and carfulness, desire, and (...) ^ies
against the diseases, and (...) Soul, being far more (...) ^ore perilous?
For what (...) ^an take, if he did abound (...) ^s of the whole world, and
did live a thousand years togithers, a^^ ioyed continual and most exquisite
pleasu^^ of this life, and were not encumbered wi^ any trouble of sickness, or
other calamiti^ But yet in the mean while, his soul (...) infected with the
deadlye gilt and poys^ sin, and oppressed with the cruel tir^ of Satan, God
was displeased at him (...) he most certainly knew, that after the (...) of
this life, he should suffer eternal de^ and damnation both of body and
soul? Therefore Christ said: Watch. For ye know neither the day, nor yet the
hour, in the wi^^ the son of man shall come. And le^ (...) should follow
light, frivolous, (...) things, the good and most profitable no ^ded, he
shows us a most compendi^ ^taine, and sure way, to aspire unto tr^^ (...)
city, where as he says: Seek ye (...) kingdom of heaven, and the righteou^
(...) thereof, and all these things shall be ^stred unto you. The cares of
living, and (...) establishing of our wealth, and other (...) yea, many times
foolish, bruckle, (...) ^ting, which nothing prevail us, b^ (...) ^ten ye
occasions of very greeuou^ (...) and most wicked offenses, (...) (...) us
night and day.

But in the seeking and getting of heavenly ^^ches, what thing is more flow
the^ we are? ^^hat more negligent? what more vnadui^^^^? what more foolish?
What blindness or ^^^^nesse, I pray you, ought more to be fea^ (...) Whilst
we live in good health, scarce (...) ^uch as one little thought at any time
(...) ^meth in our minds of the life to come, (...) of that our temporal
death. But when (...) we lie down and are sick, death now (as (...) were)
knocking at our doors, when we should stand up in the front and fight, then
(...) ^ast we begin to think of the taking (...) ^r weapons against Satan,
and of (...) ^endment of our life. These things (...) ^ufficient argument to
prove, that we (...) ^dued with a slender and weak faith, (...) ^at we are
little exercised in the christi^ (...) ^arfare. God be merciful unto us.

^ut truly every age is meet to amend, ^^d no repentance comes to late, so
that it (...) ^ne before the end of this life. Yet I (...) ^ll and earnestly
give admonishment, (...) ^^an do linger and defer the doing (...) ^e, until
this last and most bit^^ (...) ^or even they which are strong and in good
health all their life (...) have prepared and furnished the^^e against this
hour of departing, they (...) and with much ado, scarcely defend ^selues,
from the deceiptes, guiles, (...) and invasion of that most passing (...)
subtle enemy: what shall be d^^^^ those, which being void of al fear of
(...) knowing not how to repent, have li^^^^ filthy, and dissolute, and
naughty life, (...) I beseech you shall they fight, how shall the resist?

Now therefore, seeing that there is a gr^^^ multitude and abundance of people
eue^^ where, and seeing that the Ministers of (...) Gospel are not near at
hand in all pla^^ neither are able to perform their dilige^^ or office
always, and unto all men, we of good and godly mind, willing to profit a
men, have written this way and forme^ comforting, instructing, and admonishin^
the sick, collected out of the word of God (...) their commodity and profit
especially, which are yet ignorant, and not instructed suffi^^ently in the
Sentences of holy Scripture (...) such occasions, that they hearing those thing
read unto them, may thereof conceive tru^^ (...) ^^solation or comfort, least
they (...) ^alse hearted, should despair and pe^^ ^in the bitter Agony of
death.

(...) is chiefly necessary for the Sick, (...) ^de the pains of the body,
and (...) temptations, wherewith he is pestered.
MAn therefore lying on bed by vehemency of sickness, and being in danger
of death, is assailed and overwhelmed with diverse and grievous temptations,
against (...) which he must contend and strive. And (...) of all, this is a
most bitter temptation, (...) ^hen the most horrible Image of death bee^^g (as
it were) before our eyes, we think ^at we must forsake and leave the most
de^^ctable and pleasant light of this life, and ^^ll our dear kinsfolks and
friends. Finally that we must here forgo all our pleasant (...) well-beloved
things. And anon, our sins ^^mmitted against the will and commaun^^ment of
God, do present themselves unto (...) us, rushing in with a great violence,
are clearly renewed, and wax raw again, and they seem to be many more in
number, and more grievous, then ever they did before, so that they maruellously
torment, vex, and trouble our conscience. Here death, Gods judgment, Hell,
damnation, fear, and trembling, like an host gathered together, torment our
old man, with most violent and troublous storms of very great dolors and
terrors, and does assault and shake our hearts with most vehement ingines of
sorrows and heaviness. There will be great danger in those Agonies and
troubles of the mind, if our heart be not established with a sure and
constant faith, least we now being weakened and wearied with the multitude and
greatness of temptations, do despair. For those things, which come in our
minds when we are sick, seem to be most horrible and grievous, and for none
other cause, then that our faith is very little and does waver, neither yet
is so strong, that trusting unto the word of God, is able to apprehende that
unmeasurable and ineastimable treasure and riches of God the son, that is to
wit, the remission of sins through Christ, the resurrection of the flesh,
that most pleasant and exoptable fellowship of all the elect, and the life
everlasting, and that all these things are given us freely in Christ, and for
Christ.

We ought daily to exercise our selves in these Articles of our faith, and to
faste^ them in us diligently, pondering and weighing them in our minds. Also
we should oftentimes come unto the Sacrament, Synaxis.
or the Table of the Lords supper. But we must first diligently try, fashion,
and prepare our selves. For we ought especially to beware of this, that we
meddle not with the most royal Sacrament Eucharist, or of thanksgiving, with
unwashed minds, and spotted consciences.

It is truly a shameful matter, and much to be lamented, that this many
years this Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, has been
supersticiously administered, and of some other it has been handled
irreverently, and little according to the worthiness thereof, in so much that
of some Heretics it has been utterly contemned and despised. The present
punishments and afflictions do sufficiently declare unto us, how haynously
they offended therein, whereof S. Paul foretold unto the Corinthians. 1. Corin.
11.


This Sacrament surely is a great and marvelous pledge of his especial love
and singular mercy toward us, which he would have to be testified and declared
unto us, in that his last Supper, how that he adioyneth us unto him, as his
mystical members, that we may know and understand, that we are beloved,
regarded, and preserved of him. Thus do godly minds determine, that Christ
is effectual in us. I would to God we would learn to consider in our minds,
the worthynesse of this so royal a gift, that we might be therefore
thankful, and when we advance and lift up our faith, we might then also have
a reverent fear, and think how detestable an offense and ingratitude is, and
what horrible punishments will ensue the prophanatio^, or unholy using of this
so worthy a mystery. And it is not to be thought, those most grievous
threatenings, which Saint Paul makes mention off, to be vain, and of none
effect. For God is always true. And I suppose assuredly, that the greatest
part of those public euilles, which have been in our days, are to be
imputed unto the disorderly, and gross using of that most holy pledge. Let us
therefore oftentimes prepare our selves, to come unto the Communion Table, with
fervent desire of virtue and holiness, that our minds being refreshed and
comforted with that heavenly food of the soul, faith and charity may be
daily increased and strengthened in us.

The Articles of our Faith, are diligently to be considered of the Sick.
We ought also furthermore to remember, and always have in our minds, all
the Articles of our Catholic Faith. But four especially are diligently to be
considered, and to be poured into us, by often repiticion, in the Agonies and
troubles of death, that is to say, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness
of sins through the blood of Christ, the rising again of the flesh, and
the eternal life.

Wherefore sicknesses ar sent unto us from God.
THen as death is ye punishment of sin: Even so diseases are many times sent
unto us from God, for our sins, the which thing is manifest by many
testimonies of Scripture, as in Joan. 5. Psalm. 88. Deuteronomy. 28. 2. Reg. 24. We
are also often afflicted, that our faith thereby might be tried. For then
surely a man may see, how much we love God, how much we trust in him, when we
are afflicted, and oppressed with some grievous cross. Then here above all
things see, that thou repent unfeignedly, turning thy whole heart, mind, and
senses unto God, that thou may confess and bewail thy sins before him.
For sin is the only cause, why we deserve the most just wrath, and heavy
plague of God. Joan. 20.
And thou shall gather out of Saint John his Gospel, the most abundant
comfort, off absolution or remission of sins, which Christ has instituted
and left unto his universal Church. This unmeasurable treasure, is opened and
offered unto thee dailye. Christ says, receive ye the holy Ghost, Math. 18.
whose sins soever ye forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose sins
soever ye retain, they are retained. Now when we have desired and obtained
forgiveness of our misdeedes, without all question to the contrary, the pain
and grief or affliction also being on us, either will cease and leave us,
either will redownd unto the salvation of the sick body, according to the
passing good will and pleasure of almighty God. For thou must be thoroughly
persuaded, that thou nothing doubt herein, but that the pain or cross
(although it seem unto the flesh a very heavy yoke and burden) is a mere
fatherly rod and correction, whereby God does withhold, and call back thee,
his child, from committing of sin, entising and alluring thee unto him. God
verily loves us with a fervent zeal, he willingly tendereth our salvation,
and works all things unto this end and purpose, that he may correct us, and
bring us unto good. For look whom he loves, him does he correct, him does he
chasten and afflict in this world, least after this life, he should be
tormented with the everlasting pain of unquenchable fire. And waver not, but
persuade thy self most certainly, that God is thy most loving Father, and
much desirous of thee, howsoever he seem to be angry with thee. This is not
the wrath of a Tiraunt, and an executioner, but of a father inteerely loving
us, which would not that we should be lost, and cast away: but that we being
corrected should amend, and obtain salvation. This is a most certain truth,
if so be that we, whose faith is so weak, can believe it. First of all
therefore, ask thou forgiveness and remission of all thy sins, but through
Christ, and with a very repentant heart, that thou may well accord with
God, that thou may find him pacified and merciful unto thee. After this
done, thou may also beseech him to deliver thee from the affliction, which
troubles thee. So does Ecclesiasticus teach us, whereas he says: Eccle. 38.
My son despise not thy self, in thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord,
and he shall heal thee. And so does the Psalmist pray. Remember not (O Lord)
our old iniquities, let thy mercies speedily prevent us, Psalm. 79.
help us O God our Savior. Convert us O thou Lord God of power, show us thy
loving countinance, and we shall be safe, how long will thou be angry?

First he desires forgiveness of his sins, that he might be justified by
the grace of god. Next he entreats against ye wrath of God, And when thou
prayest for the deliverance and easement of the cross, which oppresses thee,
thou shall always put to this addition: Thy most blessed and holy will be
done. For we cannot better see unto our selves, then ca^ our most faithful
Father, of his endless power, wisdom, and infinite goodness, which never
turns his eyes from us, but with all diligence takes care of us, which
knows the number of the hears of our heads, Math. 10.
which does quicken, comfort, cherishe, cover, nourish, preserve, and defend
all things, which helps and provides for all men, much more, and far
better, then any creatures can be able, yea, to wish for.

There be three things, which torment us most grievously, and cruelly, and do
trouble our minds in the Agony of death, that is to wit, Sin, Death, Hell,
or Damnation.
Sin
WHen those Sins come in our minds (we lying sick) wherein we have
wickedly and noughtily passed over our lives, whereby we have very grievously
offended both God, and our neighbor: we are stricken with great fear and
sorrow, even as S. Paul says unto the Romans: Indignation and wrath, Romans
2.
tribulation, and anguishe shall come upon the soul, of every man that does
evil.

Death.
ADam, our flesh, dies very vnwyllingly. Wherefore when death approaches
near, man's heart is altoo shaken with great dolors and heaviness, which no
tongue is able to express. For our fearful affection, and our natural man,
dreadeth miserably, least yt when he is once dead and buried under the earth,
he shall never return again and live, but supposes that he is undone for
ever.

Hell fire, and Damnation.
WHen those things come (as it were) before our eyes, then man fears, least
he be utterly cast away from the presence of God, and sees none other thing
in himself, but everlasting death. We have need therefore of a good courage
in this case, and of a strong and valiant heart, that there appear in us, no
point of cowardnesse, and desperation.

A Prayer for the same.
O Most merciful God, and most loving Father, I beseech thee aid us, and
grant that we, which be yet in good health and safety, may learn to fear
and dread thee, may love and embrace thy holy word, and that we may set thee
before us, as a scope and mark whereunto we may direct all our doings, and that
we being always mindful of the most bitter agony of death, may so prepare
and arm our selves, that we may order all our deeds to thy glory, as do the
godly, which fear thee, and that we may in the end obtain everlasting life.
Amen.

What is to be done, when Sin does vex, and stir our consciences.
Think with thy self, that the son of GOD came down from heaven into the
lowest parts, and was made man, he took upon him thy sins, and the sins
of the whole world, he willingly dyed on the cross for them, and made full
satisfaction for them all, suffering for thy sake most grievous pains. The
most precious blood of Christ was shed for thy salvation, and thou art
partaker of his death, if so be that thou constantly believe on Christ, that he
died as well for thee, as for Peter and Paul. And thou ought not to doubt
any thing at all, but that he dyed as effectuallye for thee, as for Paul.
Thou art baptized through the death of Christ. This thing ought to comfort
thee, this thing ought to lift up, and strengthen thy mind. For seeing that
thou art baptized through the death of Christ: his death shall aid and save
thee, through his death thou shall not die in thy sins, but through his death
thou shall undoubtedly obtain forgiveness of them all, and in the end
through Christ his death thou shall rise again unto a new, and everlasting
life. For baptism is a sure token, Babtisme
pledge, and sign of Gods grace and favor, wherein thou art reconciled unto
God, yt thou may have a joyous and quiet conscience through him, Math. 26.
Mark. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
for the forgiveness of thy sins by Christ his resurrection. And he
certeinlye speaks unto thee in the institution of his last supper, where as
he professes, and testifies, that his blood was shed for the remission of
sins.

Now therefore although thou have not lived an upright, and pure life, in each
respect, yet, Romans 10.
there is no cause why thou should despair, but speedily call upon the name
of of the lord, without ceassing, and thou shall be safe. And thus begin thou
to say: O most merciful GOD, A prayer.
O father of all compassion, father of our lord Jesus Christ, be merciful
unto me a sinner, have compassion on me a poor wretch, and make haste to
help me, for that most bitter, yea most precious passion, and death of Jesus
Christ, thy only begotten son, and our only redeemer, and savior. Enter not
into judgment with thy servant oh lord, Psalm. 143.
deal not with me according to my deserts, neither reward me according to
mine iniquities, but receive me for thine infinite, and endless goodness, and
mercies sake. I a wretch, and seely creature, am in thine hand, power, and
danger, oh most mighty, and merciful God, oh most loving father, cast me
not away utterly refused in misery. I am thine, whatsoever I am. No man can
comfort me, no man can help me besides thee only. Thou art the true
propulsour, and driuer away of all mischief from men. Thou art the most sure,
and ready help, aid, succor, and defense. Thou art the most strong tower.
Thou art O God our hope, Psalm. 46. Psalm. 31.
and strength, thou art a very present help in trouble. In thee O Lord do I
put my trust, let me not be confounded, let me never be ashamed, my hope
being in vain, but deliver me in thy righteousness. Bow down thine ear to
me, make haste to deliver me. And be thou my strong rock, and house of
defense, that thou may save me. Thou art my strong rock, and my castle.
Thou art my lord, my portion is in thine hands. Lighten thy face upon thy
servant, and save me O lord in thy mercy.

Further, thou, that art sick, must be chiefly admonished of this point, that
thou think not what sins thou have committed, but rather have before thine
eyes to co^template, and look on, the image of Christ, his most wholesome, and
precious death. Fasten it surely in thy mind, and thoroughly persuade thy self,
Esaias. 53. Math. 8.
that thou art not now oppressed with thy sins for Christ, and that they are
all laid upon his shoulders, which taking them upon him, has made
satisfaction and redemption for us, Pet. 32. Romans 4.
so that he will never impute them unto us, but will freely forgive them all,
even as we say in the articles of our faith: I believe the remission of sins.

The testimonies of scripture for the remission of sins through Christ, must
be diligently repeated unto the sick, whereof, I have here under recited some,
that they may be in a readynesse.
Behold the Lamb of God, Joan. 1.
which takes away ye sins of the world.

We are not redeemed with bryckle things, 1. Petr. 1.
as with corruptible silver, and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ,
as of a lamb undefiled and without spot. Let these things enter into the
bottom of thine heart, let these things lift thee up, and give thee comfort.
There is no cause why thou should doubt of the forgiveness of sins, if
thou constantly profess the name of Christ, and trustest in his mercy, he
will also take away thy sins. If so be that thou nothing stick, nor stacker,
but undoubtedly beleeuest this, now thou art become the son of God, there is
no cause why thou should waver, there is nothing that thou should fear.
Hearken unto the testimonies of scripture, but so hearken unto them, that thou
may surely print them in thy mind.

Joan. 3.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that none, that
believe in him, should perish, but should have everlasting life. He that
believes on him, shall not be condemned.

Math. 9.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance.

Math. 11.
Come unto me all ye, that labor, and are laden, and I will refresh you. He
calls all men unto him, he refuses no man, he casts no man in the teeth.
Thou art also comprehended in this word, All. Call upon his mercy, and he
will comfort thee.

Romans 5.
God sets out his love, that he has to us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then now, seeing that we are justified
in his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through him. God the father, which
earnestly loves thee, would yt this gospel full of comfort, should be also
declared unto thee. For Christ was sent unto thee, and he also died for thee,
believe only, and commend thy self unto Christ, thy preserver, and defender.

If, when we were enemies, Romans 5.
we were reconciled unto God, by ye death of his son: much more, seeing we
are reconciled, we shall be preserved by his life.

Christ is made to us wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.
and also righteousness, and sanctifying, and redemption.

Here, dearly beloved brother, take a good heart, although thou be never so
great an offender, yet there is no matter, why thou should despeire, but
confess, and acknowledge thy self before Christ, to be a sinner. Call upon
his mercy, and desire pardon of him, ask forgiveness of thy sins, and
believe that Christ is thy only savior, thy health, and justification, and
ever will be, Romans 4.
he will both cover, and also abolishe all thy sins, that thou shall neither
fear peril nor damage for them.

God has made him to be sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.
which knew no sin, yt we, by his means, should be that righteousness,
which before God is allowed.

Gala. 1.
Christ gave himself for our sins, to deliver us from this present evil
world, through the will of God our father.

Ephe. 1.
By Christ we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace.

1. Timo. 1.
Christ Jesus came into the world, to save sinners.

Have thou a confidence in these words, and give good credit unto them, and
thou shall be justified, and saved, as well as saint Paul.

1. Timo. 2.
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all men.

Constantly believe this, and without all question to the contrary, thou art
one of that number which shall be saved.

Hebr. 10.
We are sanctified by the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all.

Thou hear Christ also speaking unto thee, in his last supper, feeding thee
with his body, and giving himself unto thee spiritually, that thou might
drink his blood, unto everlasting life. Luc. 22.
Where as he says:

Take eat this is my body, Math. 26. Mark. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
which is given for you. This do in the remembrance of me. And likewise when
he had supped, he took the cup saying: This cup is the new testament in my
blood, which is shed for you, for the forgiveness of sins. Do this as
often as ye shall drink it, in the remembrance of me.

Think thou, dearly beloved, that those words were spoken unto thee, fasten
them in the bottom of thine heart. For when he speaks generally unto al men,
Mark. 13.
he speaks to thee also. All things which Christ suffered, shall do thee
good, they shall redownde unto thine advantage, and salvation, they shall
profit thee, as much as they shall the dear saints of God.

Christ himself bare our sins in his body, on the tree. 1. Petr. 2.


Christ has once suffered for sins, 1. Petr. 3.
the just for the unjust, for to bring us to God.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1. Joan. 1.


If any man sin, 1. Joan. 2.
we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ, which is righteous. He it
is that abteyned grace for our sins.

Thou may take more fewer or less sentences of scripture, for this purpose,
even as thou shall perceive the sick to be affected.

The words, which thou have now heard, are not the words of man, but of the
holy Ghost, which plainly testify, that God the father, which would not the
death of a sinner, Ezech. 18.
but that he might be converted and live, for that his fervent love, which he
bears toward thee, has eased, and released thee, from the burden of thy
sins, and has laid them on the shoulders of his dearly beloved son,
Esaias. 53.
which has so borne and suffered them all in his body: that they shall never be
thy condemnation. For if so be that thou believe in Christ, God reputeth, and
accepts the death of his son, in the stead of a full and sufficient
repentance, satisfaction, and absolution for all thy sins. Seeing therefore,
thy sins laid upon Christ, could not deteyne, or keep him in death, and
condemn him: ransom is truly paid for them, and they are all freely forgiven
thee. Believe this, and thou shall live eternally. Christ himself suffered for
thy sins, Romans 4. 1. Joan. 2.
and died for them. But he rose again, and the sins of all faithful
believers, are by his death acquitted, purged, and cleansed, so that the straight
justice, severe judgment of God, is abundantly satisfied through Christ. Now
therefore Christ is become thine, and all others which believe, with all his
benefits, with his death, with his resurrection, with his assension into
heaven, with his life, with his merits, and with his glory. Wherefore satan
has no power over thee at all, he can not hurt thee, Romans 8.
seeing that thou art justified through Christ, seeing that thou art delivered
from all thy sins, seeing that thou art become the child of GOD. God is thy
father, earnestly loving thee for Chiist his sake, which has reconciled, and
made a tonement for thee. Wherefore be thou of good courage, and rejoice thou
in the lord. For seeing that thou art in the hands of almighty God, thy good
and most faithful father, thou art in safety, and out of al danger. For thou
art enclosed and compassed about, with the custody of God, and guard of
angels. Christ is altogether become thine, he covers, and takes away all
thy sins, Joan. 10.
by his innocence and righteousness. No man can by violence pluck thee out of
the hands of thy heavenly father. Thou have now the victory, when thou have
suffered, and passed over this corporal cross, and affliction, the which
being truly compared with eternal life, shall appear very easy, 2. Cor. 4.
Heb. 6. Ephe. 1.
momentanie, and but of a short time. Christ was in the like agony, yea, in a
far more bitter, and more horrible. He is gone before thee, he is thine head,
to whom you must needs become like, and die unto sin, and must lay aside this
life, spotted, and embrued with wickedness, that thou may after live, the
true life for ever, with thy master Christ. Let not thy sins, trouble thee.
There is no cause, why thy conscience should be tormented, seeing that thy
sins are now done away and abolished. Thou have overcome, and have cast under
foot, that malignant spirit, which goes about to work the destruction of
our souls. God now has compassion on thee, he cares for thee, he does
defend, and keep thee, all the fellowship of saints, and angels do regard
thee. And even as Christ can not be damned, so likewise thou can not be
damned, if so be that, thou believe on him, with the full confidence of thine
whole heart.

If sin, death, and hell, can nothing hurt thy lord, and master Christ,
neither can they hurt thee, for thou art mistically graffed into Christ by
faith, and Christ is effectual in thee, therefore thou can never be damned.
If so be that, thou thy self should bear thy sins, and make a tonement
for them, thou would by no means be able to sustain and bear so great, and
heavy a burden, they would be far to weighty for thee, they would
devour thee, as one drowned into the bottom of hell.

But Christ being perfect God, and perfect man, did offer himself up of his
own accord for thee, he did put himself in thy room, discharging and paying
all things for thee, as it is written in the Psalm: Psalm. 69.
I paid them the things, I never took. Truly thou did commit sin
against thy self, but Christ purged them, and made satisfaction for thee, and
planted thee in liberty, if so be that thou believe this Gospel.

Although all the sins of ye whole world, were laid upon thee only, yet, God
has grace and mercy sufficient for them, and more then sufficient. God has
promised thee his grace, and blessing in Christ, and the same is ratified,
certain, full absolute, and perfect in Christ thy lord, and master. Thou
must needs be saved, if so be that thou faste^ thine eyes upon Christ.
Hypostasis.
For Christ is the natural son of God in divine substance, verity it self,
and touching his humanity, he is our flesh, and blood. Who will be more sure,
and certain, then this Christ, to give and perform the promise of grace,
which is himself the verity of his promise, and loves us unfeignedly, in
so much that, he had leefer dye, then to disappoint us in any part of his
promise. Wherefore if thou believe in Christ, thou art now made partaker of his
heavenly blessing, thou art now eased of the burden of thy sins, now thou
art the eire of God, and the fellow eire with Christ for ever. Math. 24.
For heaven and earth shall pass, but the word of the lord endures for
ever. Therefore believe and strengthen thy mind with good hope, and doubt not,
but GOD is cheifest and almighty, yea, even for thee, he became man for thy
salvation, he was also borne for thy sake, he dyed on the cross, he rose from
the dead, for thy sake, and ascended into heaven, he offered up, and performed
all things, which were promised unto us. For all the promises of God, 2. Cor. 1.
by Christ are yea: and are by him. Amen. Wherefore desire of God, to have his
mercy, and then look for none other thing at his hand, but mere grace, and
mercy, and the same for Christ, and through Christ. For without him truly
there is no consolation, no health, no hope, no help, or succor. In this only
Christ, is all comfort, all aid, and stay, and to be brief, all the means
of our salvation. In him is all grace and mercy, much more infinite, and
greater, more high, plentiful, and abundant, then any man can either
comprehend, or wyshe for. God vouchsafe to grant us a sure, and constant faith.

After this manner, thou shall comfort the sick body, either with longer, or
shorter communication, as the matter shall require. And I admonish thee, dear
brother in the lord, that thou withdraw thy mind, with as great endeavor, and
study, as thou may, from the horrible contemplation of sin, and death,
and bend all thy thoughts upon Christ only, fasten the eyes of thy mind upon
him, clean unto him with all thine heart, and as it were drink him into thee,
call upon him with full trust of mind, and commit thy self wholly unto him.
For thou shall find none other thing in this Christ, than excellent
innocence, righteousness, life, and salvation, all the which, being deryued
from Christ into thee, are now become thine, if so be that thou will
acknowledge him to be thy redeemer, and author of thy salvation. Wherefore I
warn thee, and do oftentimes beat it into thee by repetition, and that for
good cause, that thou renew not, or call to mind the remembrance of thy
sins, nor torment thy self by waying the multitude, and greatness of them.
When thy sins are banished far off from thee, set Christ crucified only
before thine eyes, fasten him in thine heart, let thy whole mind, and senses be
surely set on him, clean fast unto him with all thine heart, never to be
pulled away. By this means thou shall withstand, and prevail against the
gates of hell, be they never so cruel, be they never so horrible, and
terrible. Call to mind with how great humanity, and clemency, with what
gentleness? and benignity Christ in the Evangelical history, Math. 9.
has received, and used all sinners, which truly repenting, have asked
forgiveness, and besought his aid, and mercy. And thou shall find Marie of
Magdalene, Luc. 8. Luc. 23. Luc. 19.
thou shall find the thief hanged on his right hand, thou shall find the
publicane, Zachaeus, and many others, whom he received with marvelous
kindness, and pronounced them free from all their sins, were they never so
grievous. For Christ is very grace it self, mercy, aid, consolation, life,
joy, and salvation to all them which desire those things of him, and do put
their trust, and confidence in him. God, which is verity, and cannot lie, has
promised al these things for Christ his sake unto us. He therefore will never
deceive us, beguile us, nor forsake us.

Furthermore, it will come into thy mind also, when thou art in danger of
death, if you have hurted, or endammaged thy neighbor by any means, as if thou
either have stolen, or taken away any thing from him, or if thou have
slaundered him. Here thou shall do even the same thing, which Christ did,
hanging upon the Cross, Luc. 23.
thou shall pray for all thine enemies, and shall forgive them, from the
bottom of thine heart, all the wrongs they have done unto thee. If any thing of
thine be stolen from thee, thou shall not violently require it again. If thou
have taken away any other man's good, restore it again if thou may, or
provide, that it may be restored again, neither shall thou keep any thing
privy, but shall confess it unto God, and ask forgiveness of the same, and
be sorry that thou have so offended. If so be that thou be not able for thy
poverty to repaie the thing thou have wrongfully taken, it shall be
sufficient, if thou forgive others, which have done either wrong, or violence
to thee in body, or goods, or have taken away thy good name. If (I say) thou
forgive them with all thine heart, there is no cause, why thou should be
careful. Be of good comfort, and doubt not, but God will forgive thee, the
wrongs which thou have done unto others. Truly he can not but release his
sins, which forgiueth his neighbor. For he himself has taught us this
order, and way of recompensing, Math. 6.
and loosing. If ye shall forgive other men there trespasses, your heavenly
father shall also forgive you.

Whether the sick may lawfully seek the physicians help, and use physic, or
no.
THe sick body shall neither despise ye physician his help, nor have it in
admiration. Let his chief hope be steadfastly fastined upon God, which as he
alone did put the soul into the body: So he only takes it away, when it
pleases him. Sometime notwithstanding, the physician is to be sent for, least
we should seem to tempt God. For seeing medicines of themselves neither can
restore health, nor cause diseases, yet, notwithstanding, when they are
ministered of a natural wise physician, well exercised in reasonable rules,
they are wholesome, and worthily called the hands of God, as Herophilus
witnesses, the which thing also holy scripture testifies. For it is written:
Honor the physician. Eccle. 38.
For the most highest has created him, for necessities sake. The most highest
has created medicine out of the earth, and the prowdest man will not abhor
it. Tellers of destinies, inchauntours, wicked coniurers, and deceyuers, which
pretend to cure the sick with false prayers, and orisons, are to be driven
away, and eschued, as the pestilence. For witches are the hands of the
devil, and not of almighty God, by whose word, and power, all things ought
to be governed.

What is to be done, when death brings terror, and fear upon us.
THou shall think that death is conquered, and utterly destroyed by Christ.
And except Christ having compassion on us, had suffered death for us, ye fear
of death would have troubled us, with great and horrible heaviness, and
intolerable torments of mind. But death being overcome, and destroyed by
Christ, the souls of them, which trust in him, can not dye and perish, but
they go straight ways unto Christ, after their departing out of this body. As
the thief being in extremity heard it said unto him: Luc. 23.
This day thou shall be with me in paradise. The body in the mean season
rests in sure hope, to rise again in the last day, unto that most blessed
immortal life, with great glory, magnificence, and honor, as renewed, and
clarified, that it may live together with the soul, for ever with Christ, and
all his elect, amongst whom we shall find many, which were either our
friends, or kinsfolks here in this world. The death of godly me^ is called a
sleep.
Therefore holy Scripture calls the death of godly men, a sleep. For ye
very same our brickle, frail, weak, mortal, and corruptible body, shall be
raised up in the last day, as a man stirred out of his sleep, and forthwith,
death extinct, and abolished, it shall appear incorruptible, glorious,
beautiful, sound, helthfull, immortal, whole, pure, perfect, and spiritual,
as it is written unto the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 15. Psalm. 116.
And hereof the psalmist says: Right dear in the sight of the lord, is the
death of his saints.

Waighe those things diligently in thy mind, dearly beloved, that thou may
not be seduced with ye wicked world, which supposes us utterly to dye, the
body together with the soul to decay, and perish, and that no part of us
shall remain, after the departing out of this life. But they are far out of
the way, and greatly deceived therein. Our body is not so vile, and so little
regarded in the sight of God, but great honor, glory, and salvation, is
prepared and appointed for it. For the very same body, which we carry about
with us, and the same, which lies upon the bed afflicted, and tormented, the
very same body (I say) renewed, and glorified, shall live together with the
soul for ever. If so be that we should leese our body and never recover it
again, the death of saints were not precious, and honorable, but vile,
horrible, and most cruel. Wherefore these things considered diligently, thou
shall support, and hold up thy wavering mind, erected by sure hope in the
sentences of holy scripture. Believe them, and doubt nothing at all. For it is
undoubtedly true that I tell thee. As the body of Christ being buried, even
until the third day, rose again the third day unto a new and eternal life,
never to die again: so the bodies of all them, which have slept in Christ,
that is to say, which have believed on Christ, do rest in there graves only
for a time, to rise again in the last day, in sure hope of the most joyful,
and glorious resurrection, into a new and perpetual life, where shall be
neither sin, nor any death, calamity, or any other thing, Apoc. 21.
than righteousness, innocence, life, joy, blissfulness, and salvation world
without end. God, which is of infinite power, and verity it self, has
promised those things. They shall therefore come to pass undoubtedly.
Therefore trust thou steadfastly unto his promises.

Furthermore, the testimonies of scripture for the resurrection of the flesh,
are diligently to be thought upon, and earnestly to be beaten into our minds
by often repeticion. Thus does saint Paul teach us, 1. These. 4.
that we strengthen one another with such communication of the resurrection,
that we might thereby be comforted. There can be none more certain, nor more
plentiful consolations given unto us, than those which we seek out of the
testimonies of holy scripture, for the approbation of the resurrection. We
declare not the words of man but of God, which surely, and mightily will
perform, and bring to pass, all that he has spoken. No man can alter the the
will of God, no man can let, or hinder his purpose, and counsel. His power
cannot be measured, he is true, and faithful, his goodness, and mercy is
endless. Therefore let no man doubt thereof.

The testimonies of scripture, for the resurrection of the dead.
Math. 23.
THe just men shall shine as bright, as the Sun, in the kingdom of there
Father.

Joan. 5.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heereth my words, and believes on
him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into damnation,
but is escaped from death unto life.

Joan. 6.
This is the will of him, that sent me, that every man which sees the son,
and believes on him, have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day.

Joan. 8.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my sayings, he shall never see
death.

Joan. 11.
Christ said yt Lazarus did sleep, which notwithstanding, had yielded up the
ghost, whose dead body was committed unto the grave. But Christ restores the
dead unto life again, and calls those things which be not, as though they
were. Therefore he adds this, saying: I am the resurrection, Romans 4. Joan. 11.
and the life. He that believes on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall
live, and forthwith after those words, he raised up Lazarus, which had layne
four days in his grave, being putryfied, and smelling.

And because we are fearful, and faint-harted by nature in those agonies:
that we may have the better help to believe, that there shall be a
Resurrection, many were restored from death to life, in the days of the
prophets, and the apostles.

Christ raised up from death to life the wydowes. Luc. 7.


He raised up also the master of the Sinagoge his daughter. Iairus was her
father.
Luc. 8.


He restored Lazarus unto life. Joan. 11. Act. 9. Act. 20. 4. Reg. 4.
Peter likewise made Tabytha alive again.

Paul revived Eutychus.

Helyseus the prophet revived his Hosts dead son.

Helias the prophet revoked the woman's child of Sareptha to life again. 3.
Reg. 17.


God also assumed, and took unto him, that two most holy, Gene. 5. 4. Reg. 2.
and mighty men: Enoch, and Elia, rapt alive both body, and soul togithers,
out of this frail, and wretched world, that he might by them give us some
taste, and signification of the true life to come, least we also should
believe, that no part of us remains after this miserable life, according to
the opinion of the heathen gentiles, and Epicures.

Furthermore, the faint hearted sick body, is to be admonished, that he
remember, and think what that greatest, and mighty lord both of life, and
death, Jesus Christ said in saint Luke his gospel: Luc. 8.
Iairus daughter.
Weep not, for the damsel is not dead, but sleeps. Man's reason hard of
belief, not understanding the secret mysteries of God, did laugh these words
to scorn. But Christ making it true, verifying his words, restored the dead
maiden unto life again, as soon as he had spoken the words. The very same
lord Jesus Christ, will receive thy soul, and will preserve it, and in the last
day he will restore thy body unto thy soul again, and will couple them unto
eternal life.

Joan. 5.
The time shall come when al they, which are in there graves, shall hear the
voice of the son of God, and they that have done good, shall come forth unto
the resurrection of life. If so be that the spirit of him, that raised up
Jesus from death dwell in you, even he, that raised up Christ from death, Romans
8.
shall quicken your mortal bodies, because that his spirit dwells in you.
God has raised up the lord Christ, and shall raise us up by his power.
The.xv. 1. Cor. 6.
chapter of the first epistle to the corinthians, is full of most sweet, and
effectual consolations hereof, no gold is to be compared unto them. Saint
Paul in the same chapter, so knitteth, and fasteneth our resurrection unto the
resurrection of Christ, that it may not be pulled, or separated from it, as by
this reason. Christ is risen again from the dead, the which thing is most
certain. Therefore without all doubt, we also shall rise again. For Christ
is our head, Ephe. 4.5. Joan. 12.
and we are his members mystically. This head is not without his members, neither
does he leave, and forsake his members. Where Christ is, Ephe. 5.
there shall we be also. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones. Who can sufficiently declare, according to the worthynesse thereof,
that unmeasurable glory, of inestimable, and unspeakable grace, and mercy,
that God descending from heaven into the lowest parts, did vouchsafe to become
a mortal man, that this frail, and bryckle nature of man, united unto his
divine nature, might be brought unto everlasting life, being made partaker of
the heavenly kingdom, by the infinite, and incomprehensible might, and
efficacy of his divinity, and godhead. If we believe, that so great riches
were bestowed upon us, and that so blessed a life remains for us, how, I
pray you, can we be false hearted, or troubled in mind? The nature of all
faithful people, which have been both before, and also since Christ, and
those which are yet to come, without all question, has put on immortality in
Christ, being perfect God and perfect man. The comfort therefore of Christ his
resurrection, is most plentiful, and effectual, wherewith saint Paul does
strengthen the minds of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 15.
where as he says: Christ is risen from the dead, and is become the first
fruits of them, that sleep. For by a man came death, and by a man came the
resurrection of the dead. For, as by Adam all dye, even so by Christ, shall
all be made alive, and every man in his own order. The first is Christ, than
they that are Christ's. Here saint Paul makes a similitude of natural things,
whereby the resurrection may be the more clearly, and manifestly perceived.
And the similitude is taken of dry seed, which the husbandman casts into
the earth. It dies, and rotteth after a fashion. Yet notwithstanding, that
which is committed unto the earth, does not utterly perish, but it comes
forth of the earth again, fresh, and new, with a pleasant, hansome, joyful
form, and shape. And even so shall our body rise again, not corruptible,
bryckle, frail, feeble as now it is, but fair, clean, beautiful, strong, of
perfect force, and immortal unto everlasting life.

This is the way by this corporal death, unto true, and eternal life, into
our true country. 1. Cor. 15.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, wherein is nothing but
life, and therefore this mortality must put on immortality. Esac. 25. Oseae.
13.
Then shall the saying come to pass, which is written: Death is swalowed up
into the victory, they now which believe in Christ, have overcome sin,
death, and hell. They therefore contemning death, and being strong and bold in
Christ, will say: Hell where is thy victory? Sin is the sting of death, the
law is the strength of sin. But praise be unto God, which has given us the
victory, through our lord Jesus Christ.

We will add also, other sentences of scripture, containing plentiful comfort.
1. Cor. 4.
HE that raised up the lord Jesus Christ from death, shall raise us up also.

Phill. 3.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for a savior, even the
lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile bodies, that they may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is
able to subdue all things unto him.

Colos. 3.
Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, which is
our life, shall show himself, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

I would not, brethren, 1. These. 4.
have you ignorant concerning them which are fallen a sleep, that ye sorrow
not, as other do, which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus Christ dyed,
and rose again: even so they also which sleep by Jesus, will God bring again
with him.

And saint Paul does comfort Tymothe his scholar in the articles of the
resurrection by these words: Remember (says he) that Jesus Christ, being of
the seed of David, rose again from death, 2. Timo 3.2.
according to my gospel. If we are dead with Christ, we shall also live with
him. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him.

Saint Paul says, that Christ, Hebr. 2.
by the grace of GOD, should taste of death for all men. And in the same place
he says also, that Christ was made partaker of our flesh, and blood, that is
to say, he became perfect man, that he might put down through death, him
that had lordship over death, that is to wit, the devil, and that he might
deliver them, whosoever through fear of death, were all there life time in
danger of bondage.

God saved us, 2. Timo. 1.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our deeds, but according
to his own purpose, and grace, which grace was given us through Christ before
the world was, but is now declared openly by the appeering of our savior Jesus
Christ, which has put away death, and has brought life, and immortality to
light.

1. Joan. 3.
We know yt we are translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren.

1. Joan. 4.
In this appeered the love of God to us ward, because that God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him.

Job. 19.
I am sure that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth at
the last day, and that I shall be clothed again with this skin, and see God in
my flesh, yea, I my self shall behold him, not with other, but with the same
eyes.

He that diligently does meditate and think upon these testimonies of
scripture, cannot choose but take much comfort, and great joy thereof. Saint
Paul may be a most evident example thereof unto us, which heartily reioyseth in
his own behalf, that he knows Christ, Phill. 3.
and the power of his resurrection, whereby our death is slain. Now therefore
death is dead unto all them, which believe in Christ, there is nothing now in
death terrible, which is to be dreaded, and feared, besides the only image and
shape thereof. Even as a serpent being killed, keeps notwithstanding that his
old and fearful figure, but has no power in him to do harm, Number. 21.
and even as the live serpents died, when the brazen serpent was looked on,
which Moses set up in the wilderness, by the might of the power of God, and
the Jews could not be infected, with venom of the live serpents: Likewise
also our death his dead and made harmless, and nothing to be feared, if we
look upon and behold the lively death of Christ, with the eyes of our faith.
And to be short, death is like the very image and shadow of death, yea, more
rather she is the beginning, and enteraunce into the true life. Christ, which
is the verity it self, says: Joan. 24. Joan. 8.
If a man keep my words, he shall never see death. How, I pray you, may this
be? I will show you how. A man, that trusts in the mercy of Christ, by the
faith which he has taken out of the gospel, is so incorporated, as I may so
term it, and so united, and coupled unto his lord, and master Christ, which
is the true life, Joan. 14.
that he may not be pulled or separated from him. This body therefore is
sundred, and divided from the soul, in most sure hope of the glorious
resurrection, unto everlasting life. For within short space, the body shall be
restored again unto the soul, that they may both enjoy felicity. And he
that thus believes in Christ, shall not see eternal death of body and soul,
that is to wit, perpetual damnation, which is the true death. The death of
godly men, is a going forth into the company of the elect.
For the death of godly men, is a going forth, and departing out of this
mortal life, into immortality, unto Christ, unto the angels, and unto all
the saints.

What is to be done, when hell, or eternal damnation, coming in our minds,
does fear us.
THe malignant spirit makes man very solicitous, and pensive about his
predestination, putting those cruel, and horrible thoughts of predestination
in his mind. What if thou should not please God? What if he has utterly
cast thee off? How know thou, that thou art one of ye number of them, whom
God has elected, and chosen unto everlasting life? These, and the like
temptations, are most bitter, and do most grievously torment, and vex the
mind. Wherefore, thou must here stand fast on both feet, as the proverb is,
and it is needful, that thou constantly defend thy self in this conflict.
But it thou would obtain the victory in this battle, thou must set upon
him, by this policy, and craft. Forthwith, as soon as these temptations come
unto thee from the Devil, beware thou enter not into disputation with him,
beware thou deal not with him, neither answer him again. But put him off
from thee, chased away with these words, and cogitations. Satan get thee
hence, depart unto thy destruction. For it is written: Math. 4.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Seeing that God has endued me
always with most large, and infinite benefits, according to his fatherly love
toward me, seeing that he has given me this life, and has nourished, and
preserved the same even hitherto, seeing that he has heaped me up, with all
kind of goodness, what madness were it for me, to doubt of his mercy? Seeing
that through baptism he has appointed me into ye number, to be one of the
received flock of the christians, seeing that he has called me unto the
gospel of his grace, wherein he has promised to be my father, why should I
not then look for all goodness at his hands? Why should I not assure my self
of him in all things? Wherefore should not his great good will, and kindness
toward me, always be remembered of me, for my stay, and comfort? What need
many words? It is a most foolish, and perilous thing, to yield our minds,
and study to such cogitations concerning predestination, but forthwith
confound, and prevent thou such cogitations, with others, wherewith god would
have thy mind to be occupied, and prevented, yt is to wit, with those, which
Christ himself has appointed, Joan. 3.
where as he says: He, that believes in Christ, shall not perish, but shall
have everlasting life. 1. Cor. 1.
Hear thou, that he, which believes in Christ, which acknowledges Christ
to be his sanctification, salvation, and justification, cannot be damned, and
that he shall be partaker of eternal life? How many soever thereof do trust
unto the mercy of Christ, without all doubt, they be of the number of them,
which are chosen unto life everlasting, being foreknowne and fore ordained in
Christ, Ephe. 1.
now already written in the book of life. And those which are predestinate
unto eternal life, are made and become, like unto the image of Christ. For
they conceive there faith, for the which they are counted to be just before
God, of none other thing, but of the word of God. They are saved therefore, by
this faith, The just man lives by faith. Gala. 3. Abac. 2. Romans 1. Ephe. 1.
that is to say, by the trust and hope of mercy, freely given us for Christ
his sake. Those things are most certain and true. God can neither be deceived,
nor deceive any man. This is the purpose, and intent of God, our most
bountiful father, and the true lover of mankind. He from the beginning has
so purposed, so foreknowne, so before determined those things. There is no
cause therefore, that thou should be let, or feared with those things,
which that enemy envying our salvation, and pretending the destruction of our
souls, puts in thy mind and lays against thee. See only that thou
believing in Christ, do comfort thy self, in the confidence of his mercy,
and there shall be no peril at all. For if thou fasten thy hope, Joan. 6. Romans
4.
and trust on Christ, Christ is made thine, and thou art Christ's. If he have
redeemed thee, thou can by no means be damned, and perish. For he that
believes on Christ, is drawn unto him by the father, Joan. 10.
and he will have them to be saved by him, and none of them to perish.
Wherefore, see that thou have a good heart, see that thou believe constantly on
Christ, and conceive sure hope of him. How many soever believe on Christ, the
same are predestinate unto everlasting life. We must therefore, fasten our eyes
upon Christ, we must fly unto him. This our only, and true savior, is to be
taken hold on by faith, if we intend to be saved. Here let every man
diligently way, that earnest exhortation of saint Paul, whose words are these:
Let us run with patience unto the battle, that is set before us, Hebr. 12.
looking unto Jesus, the author, and the finisher of our faith, which for the
joy, that was set before him, abode the cross, and despised the shame, and is
set down on the right hand of the throne of God.

Furthermore, Christ for us, and for our sakes suffered all temptations, with
the which, being most grievous, he was vexed, and troubled, the same saint
Paul bearing witness thereof saying: Hebr. 5.
We have not an high priest, which can not have compassion of our infirmities,
but was in all points tempted like as we are, but yet without sin. Let us
therefore, go boldly unto the seat of grace, that we may receive mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. Print those things, dearly beloved, in
thy mind. First, Christ was given unto us for this purpose, that he might
redeem us, reconcile us, and make us partakers of everlasting salvation.
Secondly, that he might be an example unto us, to lead, and pass over a godly
life. Therefore if so be that thou desire to finish thy life well, and
virtuously, see that the death of Christ, being set before thine eyes, thou
end thy life after his example. For Christ is set before us, as a pattern to
be followed of us, in our life, and conversation, in all afflictions, and in our
death. No man lives godly, no man suffers adversity, no man dies well,
except he set before him the life, and death of Christ, and do follow the same.
The death of all godly men, is abolished, and swalowed up in the death of
Christ. Wherefore, thou shall consider, and diligently meditate, what kind of
death he suffered, how he behaved himself in that agonies of all other most
bitter, when he hanging on the cross, was troubled, and pestered with most
grievous temptations. Follow this Christ, as near as thou may, calling for
help at Gods hands.

How christ was tempted on the cross. Mark. 15. Math. 27. Luc. 23.
First, he was tempted with death, when as it was said unto him: He saves
others, but himself he cannot save. As though they should say. Now he is
undone, he must die, and perish for ever, no man shall deliver him, and pluck
him out of our hands. After this manner, that our old, and mortal enemy will
bring the terror of death on thee. But so much the bolder go thou against
him, pluck up thine heart, and strengthen thee in him with a sure hope. Christ
will subdue, and tread under foot, that enemy, and thou also shall overcome
him by Christ. Hold up the shield of faith in Christ. Christ is the lord,
Ephe. 6. 1. Petr. 5.
he is the king of glory, and he is the lord of life, he is not subject to
death, but lives and reigns.

This thy lord, and revenger, will not suffer death to exercise her tirannie
upon thee. He cannot deceive thee, neither can he lie, seeing that he is the
verity it self. Conceive thou this trust, and confidence of him. Assure thy
self, to receive all goodness at his hands, and thou shall live with him for
ever. And for that he would have the grieved with temptations, and to suffer
death of body, it is done only for thy commodity. Thou must therefore leave
and forsake this life, if thou will enjoy everlasting life. So after this life,
thou shall in the end begin to live in deed. Furthermore, this corporal
death, profits thee to this purpose, that when thou have tasted the
bitterness, and sharpness thereof, thou may try, and know, how fervent the
affection of Christ his love was toward thee, what an inestimable benefit
he bestowed upon thee, that he dying for thee, did pay, and make satisfaction
with his body for all thine offenses, death thoroughly extinguished, and
abolished, and the gates of hell thrown down, destroyed, and also broken. For
thou could never any other ways know, and understand the strength, and
power of life in Christ, which has swalowed up our death, thou should not
know the largeness of his benifits neither should thou be able to give so
hearty thanks to Christ, thy lord and redeemer. Wherefore, seeing that Christ
does live, thou also shall live by him, and this same death shall be unto thee a
certain, happy, and wholesome sleep. It shall be also an entrance, and gate
into that true, and most blessed life.

Secondly, Christ was also tempted with sin, when they did revile, and
vpbraide him, as a very wicked man, and guilty of most grievous crime. Math.
27.
If thou be the son of God, come down from the cross. Thou sauest others,
why do thou not save thy self also? What other thing mean these
contumelious words, then that they supposed, and thought, that he deceived the
people by fraud, dole, slight, wiles, noughtie craftiness, and that he was
not in deed the son of God, yea, they judged him rather to be most wicked,
most abominable, and most worthy of reproach. Even likewise satan will tempt
man, being in danger of death, he will present unto him, whatsoever he has
done, and committed against the commandment of God, and will put into his
mind, whole waynlodes, as it were, of sins, the same heaped up, into a great
abundance, that by the outragiousnesse, and greatness of sins, he may bring
man into desperation, which staggereth, and doubts of Gods mercy, and
pardon. And here thou must stand fast, and strongly, and shall enterteine thine
enemy assaulting thee, with these words: I confess that I am a most manifold,
and grievous sinner. But Christ free from all sin, he, that innocent lamb,
in whose mouth was found no guile, 1. Petr. 2.
has suffered cruel death for my sins, he has cleansed them all, be they
never so great, nor never so many, and has made sufficient satisfaction for
them all. Christ his death, is the propitiation for all my sins. 1. Joan. 2.
Christ verily has suffered all my feebleness. He in deed has carried all my
sorrows. He was wounded for mine iniquities. Esaias. 53.
He was smitten for my sins. By his wounds am I healed. He has taken upon
him, al my sins, I now acknowledge none, I thank Christ, which has paid
ransom for them all.

Thirdly, he was also tempted with hell, or eternal damnation, when they
objected against him, saying: He has trusted in the Lord, Math. 27.
let him take him, let him save him, because he will have him, as though they
should say: All his hope in God shall deceive him. God is his adversary, and
abhors him, and will cast him away for ever, as one thrust down into hell.
When the same tempter provoke thee with such like temptations, take heed thou
stand fast. There is no cause why thou should fear, there is no cause, why
thou should tremble. Let the thing, which he offers, and presents unto
thee, nothing move thee at all, be it never so grievous. Put out of thy mind,
and banish away far from thee, as well sin, as death, and hell. They have
no power over thee, if thou fasten thine eyes upon Christ. Take hold on him,
and commend thy self wholly unto him. Christ is thine, and he bestows
himself wholly upon thee. He has redeemed thee from the tirannie of the
devil, and everlasting damnation by an inestimable price. This Christ is thine
innocence, thy life, and thy righteousness. Take heed only that thine heart
be never withdrawn from Christ crucified, by any temptations. If thou cleave
fast unto this Christ, you shall be safe, against all the gates of hell, as one
that is placed upon an high, most sure, and invincible rock, that thou may
cry out with Christ: Psalm. 16.
I have set God always before me. He is on my right hand. Therefore I shall not
fall. Wherefore my heart was glad, and my glory reioysed, my flesh also shall
rest in hope. Thou have showed me the paths of life. In thy presence is the
fullness of joy, and at thy right hand is pleasure for evermore. Thou art
become, through such a faith in Christ, the child of God, the brother, and
fellow eire with Christ, Romans 4. Gal. 4. Romans 3. Gal. 3. Ephe. 2.
and partaker of eternal life. This faith justifies the righteous, that is to
say those, which believe in Christ. For this faith, thou shall be reputed the
blessed child of God, thy heavenly father, and when thou departest hence, thou
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, Math. 25.
prepared for the elect children of GOD, from the beginning of the world.

But if so be that thy faith waver, and be doubtful in temptations, and when
thou do not suffer moderately, and patiently enough ye will of thy heavenly
father, when thy love toward God is somewhat cold, when thy hope is weak,
and slender, and for this cause fear, lest thou should not well accord
with God, or lest he will be offended with thee. Truly, this is a most
grievous, most painful, and hard temptation. But thou shall think in thy
mind, and persuade with thy self, that Christ suffered for thee most
intolerable, Invincible touching mere ma^hood.
and invincible temptations, wherein there appeered no help, comfort, aid, or
defense, any where, wherein God, and the whole world seemed to be his most
cruel, and malycious enemies, when that he cried aloude: My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?

Oh horrible, and most cruel temptation, oh good God, how sharp, how
grievous, how cruel, how bitter was the death, which he suffered for us, that
he might make the way of the cross easy for us. Therefore seeing that Christ
willingly put himself in subjection, and dipped himself in those so horrible,
and intolerable sorrows, and calamities, our most loving heavenly father
wylling the same, out of doubt, he also understands, and knows our
infirmity, out of doubt, he taking compassion on us, will not extreemely deal
with us, but will rather bear with our imbecilitie, and weakness. Does not
he himself calling all men unto him say: Come unto me, Math. 11.
al ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you? what more
plentiful, what greater comfort, I pray you, can be given us? Truly many, and
very grievous things, do molest, and trouble man. For what thing can more
grievously fear, what thing can more cruelly vex, and torment his conscience,
overwhelmed with sin, then when he doubts of the mercy of God, when he
dreadeth least God be his adversary, and will reject him, when he is not able
to conceive this faith of his mercy, and does imagine himself to be cast
away, as a dry member that is cut off? Be present here O Jesus Christ, with
thine aid and help, here we have need of thy comfort, let not this black,
violent, and horrible tempest of troubles overthrow, and drown wretched man.
But there is no cause why we should doubt. Christ is true, he will make his
promises to appear, he will help us, and refreshe us. Therefore, where as thy
faith is not strong enough, where as thy heart is stricken with fear, and
trembling, where as thou feel thy self to doubt of Gods mercy, and have
well near no faith at all: straight ways call upon God, bewail thy misery,
and lack of belief before him, seek for his aid and succor by fervent
prayer, and he will both help and refreshe thee, and by this means thou
shall glorify him. He has taken upon him thus to do, and he will bring it to
pass. But take heed especially thou cease not to call upon God. 1. Cor. 1.
Beseech thou, without all ceassing, the father of all consolation, and
comfort, with sighs coming from the bottom of thine heart, that he turn not
his face from thee. Lay thy weakness upon him, and pour out into his bosom
al other things, which trouble, and torment thee. Cry out with his disciples,
Luc. 17. Math. 9.
O lord increase my faith. Likewise, say thou with the father of the lunatike
child: Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. Make have O lord to help
me, before that I, oppressed with this weight, be drowned. Thy mercy is above
all thy works, O most merciful, O most bounteous father, O lord God of my
salvation, Psalm. 143.
my succor, and refuge, enter not into judgment with thy servant. Christ is
my righteousness, redemption, and innocence, which suffered most bitter, and
cruel death for my sake. Let those things move thee O father of all compassion.
Have mercy on me, for this thy sons sake. Confirm and strengthen mine heart,
by faith in Christ. Comfort me with the consolations of the holy ghost, that I
may enjoy the true joys in Christ for ever.

If thou after this manner laboring, stryuing, and fighting with thine
imbecillitie, and weakness, accusing, and bewayling thine incredulity, and
faint courage, do take hold upon Christ, and stick fast and sure unto him
once taken, desiring, and beseeching his aid with continual and earnest
prayers, yt he will vouchsafe to fulfill all things lacking in thee,
substituting himself in thy room, if (I say) you thus do, then all shall be in
good case, all things shall go well with thee, and there shall be no peril.
For truly these two things, to believe in Christ, and to call for faith by
earnest prayer, do not much differ one from the other. Although thou be weak,
and endued with a feeble mind, let this thing notwithstanding comfort, and
advance thee again, that God has commanded, and wylleth that we should
call upon him, and that he has promised to here beneuolently, Psalm. 45.
and to help us when we call upon him. Furthermore, as nothing is more justly
desired of God, than true faith: even so he heereth no prayer sooner, and more
wyllingly, than that wherein man finding no goodness in himself,
acknowledging his infirmity, his weakness, and misery, accuses his
unbelief, bewayling, and lamenting the same, desiring to have faith with
plenty, and woeful sighs, and earnest prayers. These sighs, these prayers,
this small faith, be it never so little, is in deed a godly, and a bright
sparkle, and the seed of God, which never rises, without the efficacy, and
working of God in us, which speaks of Christ, by the prophet Esaias: Esaias. 42.
A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax, he shall not
quench. Wherefore see that thou believe constantly on Christ, or beseech him at
the least wise with hearty prayers, that thou may believe, bewayling thine
unbelief, before God. If thou do those things, thou shall nothing doubt, but
thou art reckened righteous before God, and to be his child, which not without
consideration, nor in vain, did lay our weakness, Esaias. 53.
and all our sins upon Christ, his only begotten son. Math. 5.
Christ himself says in saint Matthew: Blessed are ye pore in spirit. For
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn. For they shall
receive comfort. Blessed are they which hunger, and thirst after
righteousness. For they shall be filled. These words were spoken unto thee
also, they do well agree, and accord in thee. Thou do mourn, and art
sorry for thy wicked life, it greeueth thee from the bottom of thine heart,
thou do thirst, and hunger after righteousness, have a good hope, and be of
good comfort, and thou shall obtain the things, which thou do desire, and
now thou art reputed just before God through Christ. For that cause, Romans 4.
thou shall commit thy soul into the hand of God the father, after the
example of Christ, and saint Stephan saying these words: Acto. 7.
O most merciful father, I give, and commit into thine hands my spirit, yea,
rather thy spirit, seeing that thou have given it me, joined unto my body for a
season, seeing that it is thine own image, and likeness, Genesis 1. and. 2.
made after thine own similitude, seeing that thine only begotten son did
shed his most precious blood, for ye redemption thereof. O most favorable
father, O God of all mercy, and compassion, I eftsoons commend this my spirit
into thine hands. I am thine, whatsoever I am. Receive thine, I beseech thee,
preserve him, and give him eternal life through our Lord Jesus Christ, thine
only begotten son. Amen.

Of the making of a testament, and confession of sins unto God.
THe testament is to be made of all them, that may lawfully make a will, and
give legacies, when there yet consists and remains perfect mind, and
memory in the body. Least if they prolong that business unto the last moment
of life, they be prevented by death. Therefore, it shall be wisdom for him,
that has lawful heirs, to refer all the care of making his testament unto
them. If so be that he have borrowed money, and be indebted to any man, he shall
openly declare it, and provide for the payment of that he owes. This being
done, let him remove and put from him all them, which trouble him with matters
of this world. Wherein many men do offend, which bring in doubts unto him,
which is now at the point of death, of his testament, and other external
things, and sometimes do compel him to subscribe, and that against his will,
being ready to dye, refusing, and detesting there importunity, which will not
suffer him quietly to die, then the which friends, what thing ca^ be more
vnfreendly?

After this, if the manner, and kind of his disease will suffer him, let him
endeavor rather to cure his soul, than his body, by a short confession unto
God, but simple, and without dissimulation, and let the elders standing by, put
him in remembrance of repentance, grounded upon a sure faith, and devotion,
and let him call for Gods mercy from the bottom of his heart, and purpose, and
entende the amendment of life, if he happen to escape. But if so be that
happily no elder, or counsel giver may be had, let not the sick straight ways
fall into desperation, as some presumptuous people are wont to do for the
lack of a priest, but let him declare his unrighteousness, and open his
conscience unfeignedly unto God himself, which according to his cleme^cie, will
vouchsafe, to accept the desire of the mind, in the stead of the fact, and
will of his peculiar grace, fulfill of himself that, which lacks in the
outward signs of the sacraments of the Lords supper, which he desires to
receive. For through him, the sacraments are made effectual, which after a
fashion are seals of his divine beneuole^ce toward us. The sacraments are
seals of Gods mercy toward us.
But he saves man, when need does require, without these signs, only so
that there be no neglecting, or contempt of the sacrament, but faith, and a
ready good will is thereunto.

Of the sacrament of the lords supper.
LEt the sick body earnestlye desire to have the most royal sacrament of
thanks giving to be brought, Eucharistia.
and ministered unto him, after ye his mind is purged by a true, and a perfect
confession, made unto almighty God, as is aforesaid, and let him especially
beware, that he come not to that banquet, or heavenly table with iniurous
hands, and spotted conscience. For we may not think, that those grievous
threatenings are vain, and of none effect, 1. Cor. 11.
which saint Paul makes mention off. Therefore after that he has examined,
and prepared himself for that purpose, according to his power, and capacity,
let him devoutly record and speak these words.

O lord thou art the wayfaring cottage of our pilgramage, A prayer.
wherewith we are refreshed, and nourished, as long as we host in the deserte
of this world, and run in this course. Bring me therefore, O lord, Psalm.
27.
into the land of the living, into the region of the quick, by the receiving
of this thy body, whereas I may behold thee face to face, in the glory of the
father. When we have thus prayed, let him with a sure faith, receive the
sacrament of Christ his body, in the remembrance of his death, and passion.

And when the communion is ended, if it be perceived, that no skill of physic
may cure his disease, then let the elders pray over the sick body, Joan. 5.
not using any magical prayers, as the heathen were wont to do, but
earnestly calling upon ye name of Jesus Christ, whereunto there is no kind of
inchauntment comparable, or like effectual, and see that he have a confidence
and affiance in your prayers, then will God here you, and preserve him that is
sick, and he shall not only have the health of his body, restored unto him
again, if it so be good, and expedient for him: Bodily sickness do spring out
of the wickedness of the mind.
but if he have happily committed sin, as commonly the sickness of the body
do spring out of the enormyties, and naughtiness of the mind, they shall be
forgiven him, at the prayers of the elders, if that both they, which pray, and
he for whom they do pray, be of a steadfast and constant faith.

The sorrow which many take, more then is requisite for the death of there
parents, and friends, ought to be tempered by the right rule of reason.
IT is the part of an heathen gentile, rather than of a christian man, to give
himself only unto tears, refusing all temperance, and moderation of reason
in sorowing, the which thing is convinced, and manifestlye reproved by this
reason especially, because that they, which are sorowed for, cannot be revoked,
and called back again unto life by weeping, be it never so much, or never so
long continued, and used. Therefore those tears are vain, and of none effect,
bringing no fruit or commodity with them. 2. Reg. 12.
The which thing king David has declared unto us, by an example, worthy of
memory, which fasted, and wept abundantly. As long as the child, borne unto
him of Bersabe was sick, and languished, he gat himself alone, and lay flat
on the ground, praying unto the lord, for the health of the child. But as
soon as he understood by his servants, which whispered togithers, that the
child was dead, he casts off his sad, and mourning garments, and
apparelled himself in fresh array, he washed his face, and when the table was
laid, he did eat cheerfully. Whereat his servants marueyled, and thought,
that when he had understood of his childs death, yt he would the more
afflict himself, which, whilst the child was yet living, did pine himself,
with fasting, and weeping. He said unto his servants, demanding why he did
so. I have fasted, and wept for the infant, while he yet lived. For I said: Who
can tell if the lord peradventure will give me the infant, that he may live?
But now, seeing that he is dead, wherefore should I fast? What, can I call him
again? I shall rather go unto him, then he shall reuerte and come again unto
me. By the which words truly, David wisely declared, that we ought not to
lament, and sorrow for him, which cannot be revoked, and called back again
unto life.

This sermon of saint Cyprian, is already translated into english, by the
famous learned, and worshipful knight, sir Thomas Eliote. Wherefore I did
ommit the same, least happily the proverb should be verified on me: Cornicum
oculos configere, to endeavor to prick out the crows eyes. And saint Cyprian in
his sermond entitled of mortality testifies, that he was often admonished by
divine revelation, wherein God commanded him, that he should openly warn all
men, and should teach them by preaching, that the breathren which depart out
of this world by Gods calling, ought not to be lamented, and that such wayling
is loathsome and hated of God.

Yet notwithstanding, it is meet that we should sometime participate our
tears, coming of a natural zeal of the mind, and the sincere affect of
compassion, but moderated by the right rule of reason, least we should seem to
have an heart as hard as an adamant stone, and to have looued our friend little,
or nothing at al. For Christ our lord, the absolute, and perfect figure of all
virtues, lovingly lamented dead Lazarus. And Marie, and Martha, were highly
commended, for that they lamented their brothers burial. And those freendly
women, Joan. 11.
which diligently stood by Christ, Luc. 23. Math. 27.
when he suffered his passion upon the cross, were therefore worthily praised,
because they wept for him, when he was dead and buried. We read also in the
acts of the apostles, Acto. 7.
of S. Stephan, the first martyr, that godly men provided for him all that
appertained unto the funeral of his burial. Yea, and furthermore,
Ecclesiasticus does admonish us, to weep for the dead, but not immoderately,
or any long time, Eccle. 22.
saying thus: Weep over him that is dead, because the light fails him. Make
but little weeping for the dead, because he is come to rest. Also very many
epistles of the holy father saint Hierome, comforting us upon the death of our
friends, are of great efficacy for the same purpose, whereof I now entreat.
For they persuade by the authority of holy scripture, and strong reasons, that
they ought not immoderately to be lamented, which change their life with
death. As that epistle which he wrote unto Heliodorus, upon the death of
Nepotianus, that, which he wrote unto Paula upon the death of her daughter
Blesilla, and that, which he wrote unto Tyrasius of the death of his daughter,
and the rest of that most reverend father his epistles, touching the like
matter and argument.

A precept containing an exhortation unto all them, which profess the name of
Christ.
I Now humbly desire, Paraenesis.
and heartily beseech you, by the mercy of God, as many as are called by ye
name of Christians, that once in the end, ye forsake your old darkness,
and horrible errors, and return unto better proof of life, and to harken unto
the wholesome received word of God, with great desire of a pure heart, and
devotion, knocking without ceasing, and that ye call upon the father of heaven
through Christ, that he will instruct us, and lighten us with the true knowledge
of Christ, Tit. 2.
that we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present life,
refusing the wickedness, and concupiscence of the world, looking for that
blessed hope, and appeerance of the glory of almighty God, and Jesus Christ
our savior, which gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all our
iniquities, 1. Petr. 2.
and cleanse us to be a peculiar people unto himself, and folowers of good
works.

That word of grace, light, and all comfort, has shyned unto us, by the
exceeding benefit of God. We have very many notable examples in holy
scripture, testifying the abundant goodness, long suffering, and clemency of
God toward us, whereby we may easily perceive, how that he would not have
us to be cast away, EZech. 18.
but that we should be converted and live, how soon his wrath, be it never so
just, waxes cold, how soon be lets pass the punishment, which we
deserve, when we think on the amendment of our life, earnestly repenting. Let
us also, dearly beloved, fly unto God in all our afflictions, being moved
thereunto by these things. Let us desire him with continual prayers, that he
will vouchsafe mercifully to forgive us all our sins, for that his well-beloved
son, Jesus Christ his sake, and that he will vouchsafe to preserve, nourish,
defend, and comfort us, and to be brief, he will vouchsafe to be our present
aid, and succor in all necessities.

2. Reg. 14.
As soon as David, being cast into extreme peril, when there died three score
and ten thousand, within few days, by the fierceness of the pestilence, did
fly unto God, confessing his sins, desiring pardon for them, earnestly
calling upon the mercy of God, and building an altar in the threshing flower
of Arefnath the Iebusite, and offered up burnt sacrifice, and peace offerings,
God took compassion on the land, and the plague ceased from Israel. After
this example call you also upon the grace and mercy of God, confessing your
sins, offering up unto God an acceptable sacrifice of a penitent and contrite
heart, and he will be present with you, and help you, and will never forsake
you.

Likewise God sent the prophet Jonas, Jonas. 3.
and threatened to overthrow, and destroy that most famous, and populous city
Niniue. But as soon as the Ninevites did repent at the preaching of Jonas, GOD
took mercy on them, forgave their offenses, and did withholde his punishment.
Follow their example, and mistrust not ye mercy of God. His arm is not yet
abreuiated, and shortened. He both can, and will help us, so that we call for
his aid, and succor, and will not refuse his grace, when it is offered unto
us. Does he not cry out by S. Paul, Romans 10.
and plainly testifye, that he is rich unto all them that call upon him?

Peroratio.
I Heartily desire you, dearly beloved brethren in the Lord, to take this my
simple tretise in good part, whereby I, a weak member of yours, am desirous to
do you good, being other members in the lord, as far forth as I might,
both for brevity of time, and also the health of my body not being perfect. I
had leeuer comfort you face to face, if it might so be. But seeing it may not
be so, I will somewhat make amends, in showing my ready good will and charity
toward you, by prayer. Wherefore, I beseech Jesus Christ, that true, and
most approved mean, the most plentiful apothecary, that he will vouchsafe to
make this physic for the soul, collected, and atchyued out of his
apothecaries shop, that is to wit, out of the rich storehouse of holy
scripture, to be effectual in your hearts, that true faith may increase in you,
the love both toward God, and your neighbor may be fervent in you, that ye
may be pacient in all troubles and adversity, that ye diligently following
Christ his example, may cleave and stick fast unto him, even to the yielding
up of ye last breath, in sure hope of eternal life through Jesus christ. Amen.

The end of the Book entitled, Physic for the soul.
A form and method, or right order to comfort the sick.
THou must for a surety determine with thy self, O Christian, which art
troubled and grieved with sickness, that thou art not afflicted by hap, or
chance, but by the purpose, and permission of God. Whatsoever disease there
be, calamity, heaviness, or infelicity, which happens unto the godly, it
comes all by the determination, and will of God, Act. 17. Psalm. 99.
which governs all things. For in him we live, move, and have our being. He
made us, and not we our selves. And doubt not, but he sends this sickness,
whatsoever it be, of his good, and fatherly love, not to the intent that he
would thereby destroy thee, but that he might call thee to repentance, and that
he might stir up, and exercise thy faith. Afflictions are the tokens of Gods
favor.
For afflictions are the sure, and undoubted signs, and tokens of Gods great
mercy, and favor toward us. Solomon says: Prouer. 13.
Eccle. 30.
Hebr. 12.
Whom he loves, him does he correct, he scourges every child whom he
receives. Thy most merciful heavenly father, which loves thee earnestly
according to his good purpose, and zeal toward thee, does withholde, brydell,
and mortify thine old man by this sickness, like as it were tied with
chains, that thou may the more gladly, and with the better good will, as it
were fasten thy body upon the cross, as a sacrifyce offered up with Christ.
Therefore this thy disease, wherewith thou art troubled, is a fatherlye
correction sent unto thee, not for that purpose, that thou should be lost,
or cast away, but that thou should be made the better, and be quickened. God
thy father peradventure does see, that thine old Adam waxes intractable,
immoderate, and unruly, and overmuch given to affections, not able to govern,
neither to inhabit, or withhold himself. Therefore he lays this band or
collar upon him, he binds him fast with these fetters, and chains, he
shuts him into this prison, and dungeon, he tyeth him with this clog, that
he may bridel, that he may keep down, and restreiue him, that he do not seduce,
and cast thy most dear, and precious soul into peril. The flesh, and blood
do resist, and are more strong in thee, than the spirit, and here God is
present with thy spirit, and does aid him against the fierce, and unbridled
will, and rebelling flesh, that he may subdue, vanquishe, and bring it in
subjection. If so be that thou should have good, and perfect health of body,
perchance the flesh, as it is prone, and ready unto nothing but evil, had
brought, and seduced thee into many, and grievous sins against GOD, whereby
his wrath stirred up, and provoked against thee, should make a way for thy
soul unto hell, and malediction. Thy heavenly father preventing this damage,
and peril, careful, and provident for thee, and thy salvation, does keep
down, and restrain, as it were with putting on a bridell upon thy flesh, and
leads it away captive, raging, and rebelling against ye spirit by all means
possible, that it be not tumbled into the sinck, and puddle of sin, but that
it be brought under, and become obedient unto the spirit. Seeing that this is
the will of thy most loving father, and seeing that all things shall redownde
unto thy profit and salvation, take very good heed that thou strive not
against the good will of God, and that thou be not contrary to him, but suffer
thou patiently, and pray, that his fatherly will be done, that he use thee at
his pleasure, and that thou will nothing, but that shall seem best unto him,
that al things may be done unto the land, and glory of God, and that thou
may have his grace quietly and moderately to suffer his cross, laid upon
thee. Romans 5.
For patience brings experience, experience brings hope, and hope makes
not ashamed. Here thou have matter, and occasion to learn, and exercise
patience in all afflictions, and troubles. First, thou do learn, that God
afflicts, and punishes thee with a fatherly correction, and that thou
learnest by experience. For except thou should know by proof, and
experience how wholesome a thing it is for man wholly to commit himself unto
GOD, and to be obedient unto his good will, and pleasure. Even as David says,
Psalm. 119.
it is good for me that I have been in trouble, thou were not able to
conceive certain, and sure hope of him, thou should not know his fatherly
love, and good will toward thee, which is hidden in secret, if thou did
not prove it before, by this cross and rod. But when thou have learned it
before by experience, and have now some taste of that matter already, thou
do not faint, and fall into desperation by any afflictions, but thine hope
moreover increases, when thou have oftentimes tired Gods present aid, and
help. And although he sometime for a season, as it were winking at the matter,
do suffer thee to stick fast, and sink into dangerous places, yet at the
length not withstanding he reaches thee his helping hand, he takes thee up
and does preserve thee. He suffers thee sometimes to swim and to be
overwhelmed with waves of this life, but he will not suffer thee to be utterly
drowned. Hereby thou may ascerteine thy self, that he will not forsake thee,
or cast thee away, seeing that he has so often preserved thee, when thou wast
in danger. Therefore by afflictions thou do learn to conceive, and
nourishe sure, and undoubted hope of God, that thou may trust unto him in
most grievous diseases, and punishments, where there appears no succor at
all, being now instructed after what means he delyuereth, and preserves his
servants. Thou have learned that God sends afflictions upon thee, not in his
wrath, but in his fatherly love. The which thing when thou art thorowlye
persuaded, and art taught by experience, thou may patiently look for Gods
aid and succor, and not despair, but constantlye trust, that in the end he
will help thee, although he hide himself, prolonging, and deferring thine
aid, and deliverance never so long. And by this means thou shall perceive and
understand at the last, that disease, or affliction is not sent unto thee for
that purpose, that thou thereby should be destroyed, but that the glory of
God might be manifestly showed, and that all things might turn unto thy
salvation. He that can after this manner commit, and give himself wholly unto
God, believing, and trusting in his promises, shall never die. The which thing
even Christ himself affirming with an oath, least happily we should somewhat
doubt, does say: Verily, verily, if a man keep my word, Joan. 8.
he shall never see death. And in an other place he says: I am the way, ye
verity, and the life. Joan. 14. Joan. 21.
He that believes on me, shall live, although he were dead. And whosoever
lives, and believes on me, shall never dye. See that thou diligently keep
these words of Christ, fastened in the bottom of thine heart, and herewith thou
shall lift up, and strengthen thy wavering mind. He that believes on Christ,
shall not taste of death. He that believes on me (says Christ) has eternal
life, and this is eternal life, John. 17.
that they acknowledge thee, to be true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ. Eternal life begins in this world.
Eternal life first begins in this world. Joan. 14.
For he, that has Christ, has the true life. For Christ is life, and is the
victoritie it self. Therefore he will not deceived us, 2. Corin. 1.
but all the promises of God in him are yea, and are in him. Amen.

And to the end, that thou should nothing doubt, but that God will perform
his word, and make his promise good, he has assured, and bound himself unto
thee, by a certain peculiar league, and sign, put, and added unto thy body.
For he coueted, and desired thy salvation, John. 3.
when he sent his son into the world, to the intent he should offer himself,
unto death for thee. He did foremake, and assure a league of grace through
Christ, that he would freely give thee everlasting life, if thou believe, and
art baptized, that he would never forsake thee, that he will be thy father,
that he will crown thee with grace, and mercy. Baptism is a seal of
salvation.
And thy baptsime is the seal, and token of this league, whereunto his promises
being added, it is requisite, that thou stick fast unto them. For he gave this
singe, that thou should nothing doubt of his covenant, and promised grace.
Thou art baptized into the death of Christ, as saint Paul says, Romans 6.
that his death should be made thine, and that he should make satisfaction in
all things for thee, and thou have put him on in thy baptism, Gala. 3.
that thou should wholly be in him, and he in thee. Therefore baptism is a
league, lifting up, making merry, and quieting thy conscience before god, as
saint Peter bears witness, 1. Pet. 3.
that he will never condemn thee for thy sins. For thou justified by faith,
Romans 5.
art at peace with God. A quiet, calm, and pacified conscience, is the true
peace. The true peace.
And thou have received baptism as a most sure token, and certain seal of
this justification, and remission of sins, that thou should steadfastly
believe, that God will have mercy on thee, that he will preserve and deliver
thee.

Now therefore, seeing that God favors thee, and will be thy father, and will
never forsake thee, and seeing that thou have received an infallible token, and
testimony hereof, commend, and utterly give all the matter, and thy self also
wholly unto him, and be thou obedient unto his good will and pleasure, and thou
must patiently abide, and suffer his hand, whether he will have thee to dye,
or live, so that his own blessed will may be done, unto his own praise, and
glory. Albeit it is not possible, that thou can be damned, if thou
consecrate, and dedicate thy self wholly unto him, surely trusting in his
mercy, promised for Christ his sake. For he has condicioned, that he will be
thy father. And because he is true, when thou do acknowledge him to be thy
father, and do look for, and hope to receive all goodness of him, he
cannot but be thy father, and preserve thee, by what means soever he sharply
uses thee for a little space. Seeing therefore, he has promised to be thy
father, and thou trustest unto his promises: without all question, he takes
earnest care of thee, and all thine. Wherefore thou shall commend unto him, not
only thine own body, but also thy wife and children, thy kinsfolks and
friends, and to be short, all that thou have, and doubt not, but he will be
unto thee, in the stead of a very father, a wife, a true friend, and cosine.
For hitherto he has used thee, as a dispensatour, and steward in those things.
But now seeing that he will have thee to lay aside the function of this office:
he will appoint in thy room an other steward for them, which shall diligently,
and faithfully take care of them. If thou hope for this of him, and look for
it with a full confidence of heart, there is no doubt, but he will do as I have
told thee. Wherefore put out of thy mind all care of them, and commit it unto
God. Be rather careful for thy self, provide for thy soul, and think how to
yield it up unto God.

And seeing that God has freely forgiven thee all thy sins for Christ his
sake, he will require nothing of thee at all for this his great, and
inestimable benefit, but that thou again forgive, from the bottom of thine
heart all them, which have offended thee. And he does promise, Math. 6.
that he will remit all our trespasses, if we forgive other men there misdeedes.
Therefore when thou have so forgiven all offenses unfeignedly, yt thou never
revive them, nor call them unto memory again, pray also for them, which have
done thee harm, according to the doctrine, and example of Christ, and if thou
recover, help them needing thine aid, as much as thou may. If thou have
such a mind void of strife, envy, malice, and wrath, thou have also a sign
and token, that God has forgiven thee thy sins. For faith whereby thine heart
is purified, and cleansed, exercising her self, and bringing forth her fruits,
according to Gods infinite benifits, cannot choose but likewise forgive, and
do good unto her neighbor. This fruit of love, and charity testifies, and
does ascerteine thee, A lively faith, brings forth true fruits.
that thy faith is a true, and a lively faith, seeing that she brings forth
good, and true fruits. 2. Petr. 1.
This is the thing, that saint Peter would have, whereas he bids us to give
the more diligence, to make our calling, and election sure by good works. For
he means that those works are witnesses, and signs, that thou art chosen,
and adopted of God, to be his son, unto the joys of eternal salvation.

But thou shall not hope, dearly beloved, that God will forgive thee thy
sins, Pain cannot merit, the remission of sins.
for the pain and greeuousnesse of thy cross and sickness. Act. 4. Joan. 1.
For there is none other salvation, there is none other recompense for thy
sins, then the only death of Christ. God truly respects none other thing
in this case, he accepts none other thing, but his dearly beloved son.
This is the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. And this
thy sickness and pains cannot make satisfaction unto God so much as for thy
least offense, much less, can it deserve salvation. As S. Paul testifyeth
saying: I suppose that the afflictions of this life, Romans 8.
are not worthy of the glory, which shall be showed upon us. No creature, Peter
says. Act. 4 there is no salvation in any other than in Christ.
neither in heaven, neither in earth, no Angel could mitigate, and pacify
the wrath of GOD the father, then this thy disease and temporal affliction, is
much less able to aswage it. And farther it was requisite, yt he, which should
pacify that wrath, and reconcile god unto man, should be both God and man, as
one ready to plead, and make intercession between God being offended, and man
condemned. Therefore it behooved the son of God to be made man, that he might
appease and satisfy the wrath of his father, and deliver us from it, as ye
prophet witnesses saying: He takes away our infirmities, Esa. 53.
and bears our pains. God has laid our iniquities upon him, I have smitten
him (says god) for the sins of my people. 1. Petr. 2.
And s. Peter faith: By whose stripes we are healed. Thy sins therefore are
forgiven thee for this thy lord Christ his sake, and for none other thing in
all the world. For none afflictions, be they never so bitter, and grievous, can
help us. Christ is our only justification, 1. Cor. 2.
redemption, satisfaction and salvation.

2. Cor. 5.
God has made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we by his means
should be righteous. Wherefore, if thou believe, Joan. 1. Romans 8. Gala. 3. Romans
6.
thou art now becomme the son of God. If thou be the son of God, thou art
also the heir of God, and the fellow heir with Christ. If so be that eternal
life be the inheritance, and gift of God, as saint Paul does call it, thou
can not deserve it by the pains, and grief of thy sickness. But God would
have thee punished with this disease unto this end, and purpose, that thou
should thereby keep down, break, and mortify this thine old man, that at
the length he may cease from committing of sin, 1. Cor. 15.
the end whereof comes only by this corporal death. And for this cause we
must dye, that our souls may depart unto everlasting salvation. For death is
ye gate, Death is the entrance unto eternal life.
and entrance unto eternal life, where, in the end we are delivered from all
calamities, Apoc. 21.
myseries, and wretchedness, from all errors, and deceytes of the devil,
that we shall no more be defiled with the most filthy spots of sin,
neither shall we be seduced into heresies, or errors, neither be cast headlong
into desperation. 1. Cor. 15.
Then there shall be an end of all evils, of all adversities, and
discommodities. Then shall we rest in the lord, and shall obtain life, and
everlasting joys. Death therefore is not to be detested, and abhorred, yea,
rather it is earnestly to be desired, and embraced, seeing that we pass through
it into eternal joys. And that is a most true saying, which saint Paul
speaks: Romans 8.
That all things unto the godly, shall turn unto good. Truly death unto the
world seems to be a thing most odious, most horrible, and cruel, but unto
the believers it is most sweet, pleasant, and acceptable. Although our old
Adam does tremble at her coming, abhors, and escheweth her. Our inward man
notwithstanding is ready, cheerful, quick, and willing to die, seeing that he
understands and knows, that he shall be delivered from al filthiness of
sin, wickedness, vice, and wredchednesse by her, and shall go forth unto
eternal joys.

How those are to be comforted, which lie in the danger of death.
GOD thy good and most loving father, having compassion on thee, dearly
beloved, does call thee out of this most miserable and wretched life, wylling
to translate and bring thee unto himself, into the perpetual joys of the
celestial life. Therefore give and commend thy self and all thine, wholly unto
him, and whatsoever he will have done, will thou the same also. Math. 26. Mark.
14. Luc. 22. Io. 6. Lu. 23
And say, thy will be done O God my father, and not mine. Cry unto Christ as the
thief did, which hanged on the cross: Remember me O lord when thou come
into thy kingdom. Cry with the publican: Luc. 18.
O lord be merciful unto me a wretched sinner. Cry instantly with the woman
of Cana, that heathen gentile: Oh son of David, have mercy on me. Math. 15.
And doubt not, but Christ will hear thee calling unto him, and have
compassion on thee. He will forgive thee thy sins, and thou shall be with him
in paradise. Therefore, take thou hold by this Christ, stick fast unto him,
and see that thou commit thy soul unto him. Cry thou with this Christ
crucified unto GOD, which is father unto you both: In thee, O lord, I put my
trust, Psalm. 31.
let me never be put to confusion, deliver me in thy righteousness. Bow
down thine ear to me, make have to deliver me. Be thou my strong rock, and
house of defense, that thou may save me. Thou art my strong rock, and my
castle, be thou my guide also. Into thy hands I commend my spirit. Cry thou
with David also: O lord thou art my strength, the lord is my stony rock, and
my defense, God is my savior, and my buckler, the horn also of my salvation.
Unto thee, O lord, Psalm. 18. Psalm. 25.
have I lifted up my soul, my God I have put my trust in thee. O let me not be
confounded. Lead me forth in thy truth. For thou art the God of my salvation.
Call to remembrance, O lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness,
which has been ever of old. Oh remember not the offenses of my youth, but
according to thy mercy, think thou upon me O lord, for thy goodness. For thy
names sake O lord be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Turn thee
unto me and have mercy upon me, O bring thou me out of my troubles. Forgive
me all my sins, O keep my soul and deliver me. Let me not be confounded.
For I have put my trust in thee. If thou call for Gods aid, and succor after
this manner, God will help thee in a convenient time, and will say, as it is
written in the psalm: Psalm. 91.
Because he has set his love upon me, I will therefore deliver him, I will set
him up, because he has known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will hear
him, yea, I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and bring him to honor.
Wherefore, O thou christian, here fight a good fight, fight thou valiantly,
stoutely, and constantly, as it becomes a true christian to do.

Beware thou give no ground, nor go backwards, there is no peril. Thou
fightest not here alone. But the king Jesus Christ is thy captain in this
agony. Follow him going before thee in this conflict. This thy captain shall be
thy revenger, and he shall save, and defend thee in this battle from all the^
enimiys of thy soul, from all peril, and from al calamity. He is not a king
as others are, but he is of infinite, and unspeakable power. He has vanquished,
and subdued for thy sake, death, satan, and hell. Esa. 25. Oscae. 13. 1. Cor.
15.
Death is swalowed up into the victory. Christ died for thee. Therefore
eternal death, has no power on thee. Christ descended into hell, that he
might deliver thee from this eternal darkness. Be thou therefore of a valiant,
and stout courage, run into the front of the battle with a bold heart, put
away all fear, here is no danger. There is no cause why thou should fear
the severe, and straight judgment of God. 1. Joan. 2. 1. Timo. 2. 1. Petr. 2.
Romans 5.
Jesus Christ is thy mediator before God. He is thine advocate, and patron.
He is both thy bishop, and priest. He has reconciled thee unto God, and has
restored unto you his fatherly love, which was alienated from thee, for thy
sins sake. God now is now thy father for Christ his sake. Esaias. 63. John. 14.
He takes care of thee. He enteerly loves thee, as his most tender child.
Now seeing that this so mighty a king stands on thy side: who shall be able
to trouble thee? Who shall be able to assault and invade thee? Who, I pray
thee, shall be able to do thee wrong? What danger can there be? Harcken what
saint Paul says: Romans 8.
If God (says he) be on our side, who can be against us? Which has not
spared his own son, but has yielded him up for us all, how can it be, that
he also will not give us all things with him? Who shall go about to lay any
crime against Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Who is he then that can
condemn? It is Christ that died, yea rather, which is raised up again, and is
at the right hand of God, and there makes intercession for us. Who shall
separate us from the love of God? I am thorowlye persuaded, that neither death,
neither life, neither height, neither depth, neither any other creature, can be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in our lord Jesus Christ.
Seeing that therefore, Christ is given thee, with all his riches, with all his
righteousness, innocence, and salvation. Eternal life is given thee also.
Saint Paul testifying the same, unto the Corinthians, says: 1. Corin. 1
That Christ is made of God to us, wisdom, and also righteousness, and
sanctifying, and redemption. Therefore, see that thou have all thy hope, and
confidence placed and fixed upon this Christ, and upon this corner stone. This
stone is a sure, sound, This stone is Christ. 1. Petr. 2. Esaias. 28.
and firm foundation, whereunto thou may lean, and safely commit thy self.
No tempest, be it never so black, and boisterous, no shower, no storms, are
able to throw down, and ouerturne this foundation. Let all thy hope and aid
(I say) be placed, and set on this Christ, cast thy self upon him, stick fast
unto him, let no temptation, or calamity be able to withdraw, and pull thee
from him, although all things seem to happen unto thee very absurdly, and
ouerthwartly. Although flesh, and blood, do interpret it far otherwise,
and reason think it contrary, although the devil does now and then whisper
in thy mind, saying: That thou art undone, that God is highly offended with
thee, that thou have deserved the pain of hell fire, and that thou must be
damned. For faith is a substance, that is to wit, Hebr. 11.
an expectation of things hoped for, Hypostasis.
that is of promises, and (...), that is as much to say, as a sure argument,
and knowledge of things that are not seen. Romans 4. Genesis 15.17.
Thou must believe with that holy Patriarch Abraham in hope, over and above
hope. Thy faith, and hope must resist, and set it self against all those
things, which either blind reason suggesteth, either that (...) our most
subtle, and by all means most crafty enemy, going about to work us deceyt,
and our destruction, does instill and pour into us. Wherefore thou must learn
well the manner and custom of God, which he uses in preserving those that are
his. Look whom he will lift up into heaven, him will he first seem to bring
down unto hell. 1. Reg. 2.
Look whom he entendeth to quicken, him will he first mortify and kill. Upon
whom he minds to show his notable mercy, and favor, he first makes
semblance, triing him, as though he would condemn him. Wherefore when thou
perceyuest none other thing, but present death, when God seems to be
greeuouslye offended with thee, when that thou thynkest that he is gone most
fardest from thee, and that he has utterly forsaken thee, as one refused, and
condemned: then is he most nearest unto thee, ready to defend, and deliver
thee, he then loves thee most especially, then thou art chiefly regarded of
him. For when trouble, and affliction comes upon us, then does he remember
his mercy, according to the prophets saying: Psalm. 30.
For his wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, he will not be angry for
ever. For like as a father pitieth his own children: Psalm. 103.
even so is the lord merciful unto them, that fear him. For he knows whereof
we be made, he remembers that we are but dust. But the merciful goodness of
the lord, endures for ever, and ever. The lord is full of compassion, and
mercy, long suffering, and of great goodness. Wherefore submit, put under,
give, and commend thy self wholly unto Christ, closing thine eyes, and
rejecting the judgment of thy senses, and reason, take it in good part,
howsoever he entreats thee. Thou must not esteem, and consider death, and
horror, or the dolours of death, according to the judgment of thine eyes,
sense, and reason: but according to the word of God. David says: Psalm. 116.
Right dear in the sight of the lord is the death of his saints. Likewise he
says: Blessed are the dead, Apoc. 14 Joan. 8.
which die in the lord. Christ also says: He that believes on me, shall
not taste of death. If any thing therefore come into thy memory, which
attempteth to turn thee away from Christ, and to cast thee into desperation,
put all that out of thy mind, and stick thou fast unto the lively word of
God, meditate, and ponder thereon, print it in thy mind, repeating it now and
then among. For thou can never understand by the consideration, and
sharpness of reason, how it may be done, that by death thou shall pass unto
the true life, how thou yielding up thy ghost may depart here hence, how thy
soul may be preserved, and rest in the lord, even until the last day, and
how also thy body being rotten, consumed, and devoured with worms, may come
forth at the last judgment, with a new, and a beawtifull shape. Reason cannot
comprehend this, faith only can. Therefore, oftentimes think thou upon the
articles of thy belief, diligently consider, and attentively examine every
particular thereof.

After what sort he is to be called upon, which lies at the point of death.
NOw see, dearly beloved in Christ, that thou fight a good fight. See that
thou constantly, and valiantly defend thy self, thoroughly faste^ in thine
heart, the promises of Christ thy redeemer. I am the resurrection, Joan. 11.
and the life, says Christ. He that believes on me, shall live, and shall
never see death. Christ taking upon him the nature of man, subject to the
infirmities of our estate, did offer up himself to be a sacrifice for our
sins, dying upon the altar of the cross. He by his blessed blood, did
purge, and cleanse the sins of all mankind. This Christ will not forsake
thee, he takes a regard of thee. Thou can suffer no injury, or calamity,
seeing that Christ does preserve, and defend thee. 2. Timo. 2. Joan. 10.
The sure foundation of God stands fast having this seal, the lord knows
which are his, my sheep here my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand. My father, which gave them me is greater
then all, and no man is able to take them out of my fathers hand. And I and my
father are one. Wherefore, O dearly beloved in Christ, commend thy soul unto
God thy father, which loves thee singularlye. Cry out with thy brother
Christ, Math. 27. Luc. 27.
hanging on the cross: Into thy hands, O father, I give and commend my
spirit. God the father of all mercy, bring thee unto everlasting life, and
preserve thee unto ye most joyful resurrection of his last judgment. Amen.

The end of the form and method, or right order, to comfort the sick.
A prayer to be said unto God for the sick.
Almighty, everlasting, and most mercicifull God, which art wont amongst thy
sundry disciplines, and manyfolde chastisements, wherewith thou do provoke,
and allure us unto thee, to bridle our flesh with diverse diseases, the
security thereof taken away by perilous sickness, and do both admonish
us of the end of our naughty life past, and also of ymminent death through
pains, which are her fore messengers, and likewise of thy judgment in the
last day, and of the eternal life to come, which shall be reserved for the
good, and godly unto glory, and felicity, but for the evil unto shame and
condemnation of hell fire. Of the which things, flesh being let run at her
own will, has no remembrance. But now we perceive, this seelye man is laid
on his bed, by his impaired health, unto whom is stirred up the feeling of
his sins, and the image of death often flies, as it were before his eyes. We
wretches therefore, which look for the like hour of adversity, acording to
the condition of our nature, do beseech, and desire thee together with him,
that thou practice not righteous judgment with him for his deserts, for our
lord Jesus Christ his sake, which has made satisfaction on the cross, for the
offenses of this sick body, and us all. But rather grant him, as to one
redeemed, grace, and strength of mind, that he may quietly take this thy
fatherly discipline, and visitation, patiently bear it, and that he may suffer
wyllingly with perfect obedience himself, to be subject, and obeysant unto the
good will, and pleasure of thee, his punisher. Succor him in all his
adversities, and be thou unto him a refuge, and a defense against this instant
danger, wherewith he is now in peril, especially of his reveled conscience,
the secret sins of his heart do accuse him unto thee. Therefore set thou
against it for his preservation, the most bitter torments, and voluntary
sacrifice of thy son Christ, which did bear our infirmities, 1. Pet. 2.
and accomplished the pain due unto us, being made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5.
Apoc. 1. Romans 4.
whilst that he died for our sins, which he washed away, with his precious
blood, and rising from the dead for our justification, was made our perfect
redeemer. Let him perceive through faith, ye force of these fruits and
benifites. Let him being oppressed in this misery, feel thine aid, and let
him taste, in this moment of time, some fruit of such benifits, and gifts in
Christ. Bring to pass even now by true faith, that there may be offered unto
him so great a treasure of felicity, that is, I mean the forgiveness of his
sins for Christ his sake, which by the mystery of the preaching of his
word, as is before said, and the use of his sacraments frequented in ye
church, is offered unto him, that he may effectually, and of a suertie receive
it to his comfort, aid, and defense, against the troubles of his conscience,
grievously accusing him, and the subtlety of the devil. And also that the
same faith may be unto him, an armor, wherewith he being defenced may enter
through death into life, ^^^^n he taking hold, may enjoy the same for ever.
Therefore, O heavenly father, we do wholly commit him unto thee, for thou shall
heal him, because he is sick. He is weak, thou shall strengthen him, he
lies a long, thou shall set him up, he acknowledges his spots, and
uncleanness, thou shall wash him, he is wounded, thou shall cure him, he is
fearful, thou shall give him courage. And for because thou know all things,
and can bestow according to thy will, thou shall satisfy him. For he is
greatly grieved with hunger, and thirst after thee. Embrace him. For he
straight way flies unto thee, and make him constant to fulfill thy
commandments. And to be brief, forgive him all things, wherewith he has
provoked thy heavy displeasure against him. Grant him in the stead of death,
life, with thee in glory. But if we shall need him, in thy vineyarde, in this
mortal life, and that he may be imbettred unto the example of Christ, then
preserve him, until that he be increased with more ample benifites. Thy will
notwithstanding, which always is best, be ever fulfilled. Grant all those
things unto us, and this sick body, through Jesus Christ only, thy son our
lord, which is our only redeemer, and helper, and which brought the thief on
ye cross with him into Paradyse, for the example, and great comfort of al
sinners, which lives, and reigns with thee, in the unity of the holy ghost,
one God world without end. Amen.

A prayer to be said unto Christ.
O Lord Jesus, which art the only health of all men living, and the
everlasting life of them, which die in faith, I give, and submit my self wholly
unto thy most blessed will, whether it pleases thee, that this my seely
soul shall tarry any longer in the mansion of this my wretched body to serve
thee, or whether thou will have it to depart out of this world, being assured,
that the thing cannot perish, which is co^mited unto thy mercy. Willingly now I
leave this frail, and sinful flesh, in hope of the resurrection, which shall
restore it unto me again far better than now it is. I beseech thee, that thou will stre^gthen my soul, with thy grace, against all temptations, and that
thou will compass me about, and defend me with the shield of thy mercy,
against all the assaults of satan, wherewith in time past, thou made thy
martyrs invincible against horrible torments, and most cruel deaths. I see,
and confess, that in my self there is no help of salvation, but all my hope,
and confidence is in thine unspeakable goodness. I have no merits, or good
works, which I may allege before thee, of sins, alas, I see a great heap,
but through thy mercy, and righteousness, I shall be reckened in the number of
the just: Thou wast borne for my sake: Thou did suffer both hunger, and
thirst for my sake: Thou did preach, and teach, fast, and pray, for my
sake: Thou did all good works in this life for my sake: Thou gave thy most
precious body unto death upon the cross for my sake. Let all these things
profit me, which thou have freely given me, which have given thy self for
me. Let thy blood wash away the spots of mine offenses. Let thy righteousness
cover, and hide mine unrighteousness. Let thy merits make me acceptable
before the most high Judge. Increase thy grace in me, as peril increases,
least faith should waver in me, least my hope should stacker, least my
charity should ware cold, least human weakness should be overcome, by the
terror of death. But after that death possesses my bodilye eyes, yet let not
the eyes of my mind be turned away from thee. And when death has taken away
the use of my tongue, yet let my heart instantly cry, and say unto thee: Psalm. 3^
Into thy hands I commend my spirit (O lord) to whom be all honor, and
glory, world without end. Amen.

A Sermon of patience, of the consummation of this world, of the second coming
of the lord, the everlasting joys of the righteous, the pains of the wicked,
and of other things, written by saint John Chrysostom, patriarch at
Constantinople. John Theophylus, being the expositour thereof, out of Greek
into Latin, and translated out of Latin^ into English, by H. Thorn.
THe life of godly men, is very notable, and bright. And by what means should
it shine, but through patience? Therefore embrace patience, Patience is the
mother of Fortitude. Psalm. 27.
as the mother of Fortitude. For the Psalmist gives us admonishment saying:
Tarry thou the lords leisure, and keep his ways. And saint Paul, to the end
thou should possess this virtue says: Romans 5.
Affliction works patience, which if thou exercise, thou shall find hope,
the fountain of all goodness. For hope makes not ashamed. Be thou therefore
subject and obedient unto the lord, Psalm. 37. 1. Petr. 2. Iaco. 4.
and pray unto him, and thou shall thereby find that thing, which is not to be
contemned: that is to wit, he will give thee all thine hearts desire. Who is
more happy than he, which has in possession the beneuolent ears of so mighty
a king? Who wishes not to have the judges ears open unto him, and at his
commandment. 1. Cor. 3.
Thou (deerly beloved) art the workman and laborer of virtue. Christ has hired
thee into his vineyarde. Math. 20. Gala. 6.
Whiles thou have yet time, do good works. Harken what saint Paul says:
Look what a man sows, even the same shall he reap. Sow in the spirit, and
thou shall reap eternal life. Gala. 6.
For he that sows in his body, reapeth corruption of his body. And hear
what another counsel giver says: Sow righteousness for your selves, and you
shall gather the fruit of righteousness. Let it not loathe thee to take pains.
There is an hope of harvest, and fruit time. For where conflictes are, there
are rewards. Where there are contentions, there are honors. 1. Timo. 4
Where battle is, there is a crown also. Have thou a regard hereunto, and
arm thy self unto patience. Let him always sound in thine ears, which
cries with the saints: Be of good courage, that thine heart may be
comforted, abide the lords leisure, Psalm. 27.
use and exercise thy field. This life is thy field, take unto thee a good
tool, I mean the old and the new instrument. Hedge thy ferme, with the brembles
of doctrine, prayer, and fasting. If thou have such a hedge, the beast (I say
the devil) can not enter in. Toil thy soul as a good vineyard. And even as
the keepers of vineyards, do clap with their hands, cry with their voice,
and with such like noises, do keep off the wayt layers: So cry thou out also
with prayers, sing with the melodye of psalms, and thou shall put to flight that
fox and wicked beast, as who says the devil. Of the which fox the scripture
makes mention, saying: Take ye the foxes. etc. Cant. 5.
Always watch thine enemy, if he shoot at thine heart, with unlawful
concupiscence. If he sling into thy soul, filthye cogitations, Ephe. 6. 1.
Tessa. 5.
put forth the shield of faith, turn about the helmet of hope, take up the
sword of the spirit, that is the word of God. And thou being thus armed, shall
be able to defend thine enemy, and see that thou he not faint hearted in the
conflict, 1. Petr. 5. 2. Cor. 2.
but in all things be sober, and well advised, and say thus with thy self. We be
not ignorant of his subtilties. Phil. 4.
Rejoice always, as it is written: Let your softness be known unto all men.
Let the fear of God shine in thine heart, that thou become not a fugitive
soldier, that thou be not a fearful, and sluggish labourer, least thou happily
leese thy crown. This life is short. But the sentence of gods judgment, is
permanent, and endless. Thou considering this, may boldlye tell thine heart,
and say with the holy prophet: Be strong, Psalm. 27.
and tarry thou the lords leisure, and he shall comfort thine heart. Follow David
his example, 1. Reg. 17.
and slay thine enemy by the casting of one stone. The angels stand by thee,
beholding thy life. 1. Cor. 4.
For s. Paul says: We are become a gasing stock unto the world, both unto
angels, and unto men. If they perceive that thou have the upper hand, they will
rejoice in thy well doing. But if you be subdued, they will sorowfully depart,
not being able to look on thee, and in the contrary part, the devils will
scorn thee. Therefore take up the fear of God in the stead of a sword. For the
fear of God is like a two edged sword, cutting off all evil concupiscence,
and desiers. And also have thou always in mind the last day, The last day.
when the heavens set on fire shall be dissolved. For the burning elements shall
melt. The earth, and all that is thereon made, Math. 24. Luc. 21. Joel. 2.
EZech. 32. Esaias. 13. Joel. 3. Psalm. 97. 1. Tes. 5. 2. Petr. 3.
shall be brent, when ye stars shall fall down, as leaves, and the sun, and
moon shall be darkened, and shall not give their light, when the son of God
shall be seen, and shall come down from heaven unto the earth, and the powers
of heaven shall be moved, when the angels shall run hither, and thither, the
sound of trumpets shall be hard, fire shall burn before him, and he wandering
about shall purge all the world with fire, and in his circuit there shall be a
mighty tempest. There shall be such earthquakes, Psalm. 50.
and lightnings, as never shall be the like, nor have been even unto this day,
in so much that the very powers of heaven, shall be taken with great trembling.
2. Petr. 3.
What manner of men, dearly beloved in Christ, then ought we to be, at that
time? What fear, and what horror, will there then come on us? Think with thy
self, how the Israelites in the wilderness, were not able to abide the
dimnesse and darkness of the air, and the voice of God speaking out of the
middle of the fire, Exodus 20.
but willed that he should no more speak unto them, for they were not able to
abide him, when he did hyde the greatest part of his majesty, although he
came down not offended with them, nor spoke he unto them wrathfully.

Therefore consider this, if they were not able to abide his coming, which
comforted them, when that neither the burning heavens were dissolved, neither
the earth, and that is in it, was burnte, when that neither they which sound
the Trumpet did blow, as that trumpet shall be sounded, which shall raise up al
them, that have slept from the beginning of the world, neither any other of the
terrible things to come, did then happen: how shall we do when he shall come
down with intolerable wrath, The second coming of the lord. Psalm. 50.
and furye, and shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and shall call the
earth. Even from the East, unto the Weast, and from all the costs of the
earth, that he may discern, and know his people, and give to every man,
according unto his deserts, what men (alas) behooves us to be, when that we
shall stand stripped and naked, ready to be brought forth unto the judgment
seat? Where then shall that painted color, and the force and strength of the
flesh become? then where shall that deceitful and unprofitable beauty, the
pleasantness of man's voice, impudent and shameless babbling become? Where then
is the trimming, and decking up with clothes, and the delight and pleasure, of
most foul and filthy sin? Where then are they which drink wine with pyping
and singing, and have no regard or respect unto the works of GOD? where then
is the contempt, and despising of them, which now live without fear. Then
where is delicasie and nysitie. For all those things shall pass away, and
shall be dissolved as the corrupt air? Look for this matter. Sapi. 5.
Where then is the greedy desire of money and riches, and unmercifulness, her
continual companion? Where then is pride, which disdaineth all men, and
thinks her self to be somewhat? Where then is the vain and unprofitable
glory of man, the great might and tirannie? Where then is the king, the
prince, the captain? Where then are the puffed up magistrates, contemning
God, in comparison of their own riches? When they shall perceive, that this
saying must be spoken of them: They maruailed, they are moved, they are
troubled, fear is come upon them: Oscae. 13. Iere. 50. Psalm. 48. 1. Cor. 1.
there shall be sorrows, as of a woman travailing with child, they shall be
consumed with a vehement spirit. Where then shall be come the wisdom of the
wise, with all there new inventions? Woe be unto them. They are moved, they
are troubled, as a dronken man, and all there wisdom is swalowed up. 1.
Corin. 1. 2. Petr. 3.
Where then is the worldly wise, the scribe, and the treasurer, of this vain
world. Way, and consider, dearly beloved, what manner of men, we ought to be,
when yt we must yield an account of all, that we have ^^ne, as well small, as
great things. For until that we according to just judgment, fully make
satisfaction: what shall our estate, and condition be in that hour, and how
careful shall we be, that we may obtain favor, in the sight of God? Math.
25.
And what joy shall we have, which shall be placed on the right hand of God?
How then shall we feel our selves, when that all the saints of God shall
greet us? Abraham shall salute thee, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Noe, Job,
David, and all the holy prophets, apostles, and martirs, and all good men,
which have pleased God, in the life of there flesh. And how many shall thou
there hear, whose life thou shall have in admiration, whom thou would even
now wyllingly see? They will there come unto thee, rejoicing at thy salvation.
After what sort shall we then be affected? How inestimable shall that joy be,
when the gladsome king shall say unto them, which stand on his right hand:
Math. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father, and take to your inheritance, the kingdom,
which was prepared for you, from the beginning of the world? Then shall thou
receive a most decent kingdom, Sapi. 5.
and crown of beauty at the lords hand, and after that shall reign with
Christ. Then shall thou inherit al these eternal things, 2. Timo. 4.
which God has ordained for them, that love him. Then shall thou ever
afterward be without dread, and heaviness. Ponder, and consider, what it is to
reign with Christ in heaven. For as I have told thee, thou shall receive a
diadem, at the hand of the lord, and shall ever after reign with Christ.
Think with thy self, what a thing it is, to behold the face of God, for
ever, what a brightness has it? For then there shall be no sun to give the
day light, Esaias. 60.
as Esaias says, and the rising of the Moon, shall not lighten the night:
Apoc. 21. Esaias. 64. 1. Cor. 2.
But the lord God shall be thine eternal light, and thy glory. Behold what
joys are laid up in store for them, ye fear the lord, and keep his
commandments?

The perdition of the wicked.
Consider again also, the perdition of sinners, when they shall be brought
forth, unto the terrible judgment seat of God, with how great confusion then
shall they be taken before the just judge? having not one word to answer,
how shall they be ashamed, Psalm. 2.
when the lord shall speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure: Math. 25.
saying, depart from me ye wicked into eternal fire, which is prepared for the
devil, and his Angels. Alas what misery, and affliction shall there spirit
suffer, when that all men shall cry out aloude, saying: Let the sinners be
turned into hell, Psalm. 9.
and all nations which forget God. What time will they howl out, wayling and
lamenting, when they shall be carried away, that they may be cruelly
tormented, world without end? what place (alas) is that, where is wayling and
gnashing of teeth, called hell, the which satan himself abhors, what is
that (Gehenna) fire unquenchable, Esaias. 66. Marc. 9. Math. 22.
what is that worm venomous, and never ceasing? how grievous are those
vtwarde darkness, always continuing, what are the ministers appointed for
torments, which lacking mercy, and without compassion reprove and punish?
Then they that are tormented, will grievously cry unto the lord, Pro. 1.
and he will not here them. Then shall they understand, that all things, which
they had in this life are vain, and transitory, Read for this Ecclesiastes.
and such things as they supposed here to be pleasant, to be found more bitter
than gall, and poison. Then where is the pleasure of the flesh, so termed
falsely? To fear God is true pleasure. Psalm. 63.
For there is none other pleasure, but to fear the lord. This is the
pleasure, this replenisheth the soul, as it were with marrow, and fatness.
Then shall they be in desperation of themselves, and of the works, which they
have done, then shall they confess and say, that the judgment of God is
true, and righteous, saying: did we not here of this, and yet would we not be
converted from our wicked deeds? But then they shall nothing prevail. Alas yt
ever I was borne, which am compassed about with sins innumerable, above the
number of the sands. I have sinned, but I turn away from them, as from many
iron chains. For my hope is, that I shall not see my sins above in heaven.
Unto whom then shall I fly, but unto thee, Oh merciful God, unto thee I say,
which forgettest, and art not mindful of injuries? Psalm. 51.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according unto the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my
wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge my faults, and my
sin is ever before me. Against thee only have I sinned. I fly unto thee,
for thy great mercy and goodness sake. I have provoked thee, and yet I run
unto thee, for thy mere placabilitie. I have rejected thee, and now I come
unto thee, for thy great goodness, and kindness sake. And I heartily beseech
thee to turn away thy face from my sins, and blot out al mine offenses. Make
a cleene heart in me, O god, and renew a right spirit within me, for thy names
sake only. For I have nothing, yt I may present unto thee, not so much as one
good work, not a pure heart, 1. Cor. 4.
but I trusting in thy mercies do wholly commit my self unto them, yt thou may
stir up in me a prick of conscience, yt I may not lightly fall again into
sin, but yt I may from this time forth, serve, and please thee, Luc. 1.
in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. For thine is the
kingdom, and the power for ever.

I beseech thee therefore, dearly beloved, which hopest to obtain the
forgiveness of thy sins, that thou endeavor thy self to be found in peace,
cleene, and without spot. If any evil thought come in thy mind, take up this
swoorde, that is to wit, The fear of God is a sword.
be mindful of the fear of God, and thou shall cut off all the power of the
enemy. And take the holy scripture in the stead of a trumpet. For as the
trumpet gathers the soldiers together: even so ye holy scripture crying unto
us, does gather together our thoughts, in ye fear of ye lord. For our thoughts
are even like soldiers, which wage war against ye kings enemies. And
again, even as the trumpet sounding in the time of war, stirs up ye
courage of the young men, battailing against their enemies: likewise the holy
scriptures, do raise up thy promptness to virtue, and do make thee valiant
against affections. Therefore enforce thy self, as much as in thee lies,
oftentimes to apploye the scriptures, that they may gather together thy
cogitations, which the enemy has scattred abroad, by his wicked subtilty,
ministering unto thee noughty appetites and concupiscence, or oftentimes also
bringing adversity, or sometimes giving prosperity, making thee careless. For
he woorketh these things by his deceit and guile, that he may separate man
from God. For oftentimes it happens, that when we can not overcome and subdue
one, by concupiscence, then after he offers unto him other temptations,
thereby to blind his mind, that he may after find it, an apt ground, to plant
in it such things, as pleases him, and in the end, begins to minister such
thoughts unto men, that they will say with an oath: At what time I do good, I
have unfortunate days. Romans 3.
Let us therefore do evil that thereof may come good. Then if a man be not
well advised, he will swallow him up as hell alive. If so be that he cannot
thus overcome him, then will he offer unto him felicity, and security of life,
and craftily extolleth him, bringing in deceit: an effect of all other most
grievous, and troublous, which is, that he may make him proud, and without
fear. This draws the mind into the bo^^^e of pleasures. This causes the
mouth to speak blasphemy against heaven. Psalm. 73.
For it is written: They have set, and bestowed their mouth against heaven.
This makes man to be ignorant of God, and not to understand his own
infirmity, neither to think upon the day of death, and judgment. For this
truly is the way of all wickedness. He that reioyseth to walk in this way,
that is to wit, of prosperity, and cockering, shall in the end come into the
storehouse of death. This is the way whereof the lord said: Wide, and broad
is the way, Math. 7.
which leads unto destruction. Behold thou have heard, wherefore the enemy
endeuoreth sometime to bring us prosperity, sometime adversity. For as he
proves the mind of man, which struggeleth, and strives against him, to be
affected: even so by his malignitie, does he furnishe his host against him.
Therefore be sober, and wary, and always give thy self unto reading, that
thou may learn, how it behooves thee, to eschew the snares of that enemy,
and to take hold on everlasting life. For the reading of holy scripture, makes
the wandering mind to stand fast, and gives her the knowledge of God.

God is known out of the scriptures. Read for this matter the second epistle
to Timothi. The holy ghost speaks in the Scriptures.
Thou hear how that he, which with an unfeigned heart ymployeth ye holy
scriptures, receives the knowledge of God. Nelect not therefore thy self, but
ymploy reading, and prayer, that thy mind may be lightened, that thou may be
made perfect, and honest in all things, wanting in no point. Let others boast
of the freendship of honorable men, princes, and kings. But rejoice thou before
the angels of God, speaking unto him, and to the holy ghost, by the sacred
scriptures. Math. 10.
For the holy ghost is he, that speaks by them. 2. Petr. 1.
Do thy diligence therefore constantly to be occupied in holy scripture, and
prayers. For look how often thou art conversant with God by them: so often is
thy body and soul sanctified. Then take this for certeintie, that when thou
happenest to read the scriptures, thou art sanctified. Therefore do thy good
will, oftentimes to employ them. Although thy hands be occupied: yet may
thou pray in thy mind. For blessed Anne, God is to be prayed unto with the
mind. 1. Reg. 1.
Samuel the prophet his mother, prayed, and moved but her lips only, yet
her prayers entered into ye ears of the God of Sabbath, and she obtained ye
thing she desired. Therefore although (...) hands be otherwise busied, yet
pray thou, at the least wise with thy mind. For God hears even the silent.
If thou have no skill to read, He that cannot read, or understands not what
he reads, must resort unto some wise man.
yet resort where thou may hear, and take profit thereof. For it is
written: Sirach. 6.
If thou see a wise man, go thou unto him early in the morning, and let thy
foot tread the path unto his gate. For this counsel is not only good for
them, that cannot read, but also for them that can. For many there be, which
read, and know not what they read. Take heed therefore, that thou do not
little regard, the 2. Cor. 6.
grace bestowed on thee by ye free gift of Christ: but be thou careful to
seek, how thou may please the lord, that thou may procure, and get unto
thee, the blissfulness of his saints. For it is written: Blessed are they,
Psalm. 119.
which keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart. See that the
enemy let thee not, that when thou would read, he make thee slothful, and
put other business in thy head, which shall pull thee away, saying: First
finishe thou these small affairs, and so shall thou read without trouble of
mind. For how often sends he in those things, that may encourage thee unto
handie labor: And he obiecteth such matters, that he may ye sooner withhold
thee from reading, being the greater profit. For as much as, the devil
perceiving man to be disposed to read, sets against him by these, and other
like occasions, seeking if he may by any means possible, let him: yet co^^ent
thou not unto him, but be even as the Heart, Psalm. 42.
which thirsts, and desires to come unto ye water springs, that is to say,
unto the holy scriptures, that thou may drink out of them such things, as
are meet and profitable for thee, as for example. When it is given thee to
know any sentence, let it not escape thee, but powder upon it in thy mind,
write in thine heart, and thou shall keep it, never able to be rased out of
thy memory. For it is written: I will think upon thy righteousness. Psalm.
119.
And again: I have hid thy words within my heart, that I should not sin
against thee. And in an other place: Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his
way? Even by ruling himself after thy word. For who is he, that is mindful
of the word of the lord, and amendeth not his ways? Is not he always a
reprobate, and a cast away caytife, which remembereth nothing, but rather
forgets that, which he once knew? Truly, God says unto such an one. Psalm.
50.
Wherefore talkest thou of my righteousness, and take my testimony in thy
mouth? Whereupon he commands that thing to be taken from him, which he
seems to have. Math. 25.
And what was there commanded to be taken from him, which he seemed to have?
Faith. For he calls himself a christian, Tit. 1.
but denies it in his deeds, and he is worse than an infidel. And therefore
he commands the holy ghost to be taken from him, which he received in the
day of his redemption, and that he seemed to have also. And such a man shall
become like unto a wine vessel, through the which the wine is spilte and lost,
and they that see him know it not, supposing him to he full, but when wine
should be drawn out of him, then he appears unto all men to be empty.
Therefore even so, such a man shall appear empty in the day of judgment,
and his deeds shall be manifest unto all the world. And such are they, which
will say unto the king in that day: Math. 7.
Lord have not we prophesied in thy name? and have done many great things in
thy name? And the king will answer, and say unto them: Verily I say unto
you, I know you not. Thou see, dearly beloved, that such a man has nothing
at all. Be thou therefore mindful of the word of God, and amend thy life.
Beware thou suffer not the birds to descend, and devour the seed of the
son of God. For he himself said, that the seed is the word which ye have
heard. Math. 13.
Therefore hide thou the seed in the sorrows of thy land, that is to wit,
hide the word in the middell of thine heart, that thou may bring forth some
fruit unto the lord in fear. And when thou read, read diligently, and
boldly, and handle each line, moderatly considering thereof. Endeavor not to
read over many leaves, but if any obscure sense happen unto thee, let it not
grieve thee to pervse the verse twice or thrice, until thou understand the
meaning, and force thereof. Furthermore, when thou preparest thy self to sit
down, and read, or to hear an other: first pray unto God saying thus:
Scripture is attenttyfely to be read with prayer. Psalm. 119.
O lord Jesus Christ, open mine eyes, and the ears of my heart, that they may
hear thy words, and understand them, and may, O lord, fulfill thy will, hide
not thy commandments from me, because I am a stranger on the earth, but
open, and discover mine eyes, and I will consider the marvelous things of thy
law. For in thee, Oh my God, have I trusted, that thou should lighten mine
heart. Also I beseech thee so pray unto God always, that he will illuminate
thy mind, and open unto thee the effect, and force of his word. For many have
erred, Romans 1.
counted themselves wise, they became fools, not understanding what was
written, and falling into blasphemies, have therein perished. Therefore, if thou
in reading find any thing hard to be understood, take heed the enemy teach
thee not to say within thy self, it is not so, as this word expresses (for
how should it be so?) and such like. But if thou believe God, believe his word
also, and say unto the enemy: Come behind me satan. For I know thee not. The
word of God is a pure word, as tried silver, cleansed, Psalm. 11.
and purged from the earth seven fold, and in it, is no perverse matter,
other else haulting, as the proverb is, but all things therein seem good in
the wise man's sight, and are righteous before them, that find knowledge, and I
truly am a fool, and know not the scriptures, but well understand, they are
spiritually written. For the apostle says: Romans 7.
that the law is spiritual. Then look up toward heaven, saying these
words: Lord I believe thy word, and do not gain say it, but I trust in the
word of thy holy spirit. Preserve me therefore, O lord, that I may find
favor in thy sight. For I seek none other thing, but only to be saved. Oh
merciful father, that I may obtain thy grace, and favor. For thine is the
kingdom, and mercy for ever, and ever. Amen.

Peroratio.
I Beseech you therefore brethren, dearly beloved in the lord, that ye
endeavor your selves to have these things daily in memory, I mean, faith,
hope, charity, and humility, that they may be sealed up by prayers unto God,
and meditations of holy scriptures. For if you have those things, and do
abound in them, they will not leave you empty, and barren touching the
knowledge of Jesus Christ. For the (...) man, which has not those things, but
neglects his own salvation, is blind, groping the way with his hand, 2.
Petr. 1.
forgetting that he is cleansed from his old sins, and it shall happen unto
him, as it is said in the true proverb: 2. Petr. 2.
The dog is returned again unto his domite, and the washed swine unto his
dur^ie puddle. They therefore, 2. Petr. 2.
that have escaped the pollutions of the world, as it is written, and have
renounced them in there baptism, and are come unto the knowledge of our lord
Jesus Christ, and are afterward again entangled with them, there end shall
be worse, than there beginning. For it had been better for them, not to have
known the way of truth, then when they have known it, to return back
again unto the things, which were forsaken. Let us therefore, being the dear
and faithful servants of God, and his christian chosen soldiers,
diligently, and earnestly take up the foresaid armor in our hearts, and not
have them in mind by an outward show, that we battayling well, and treading
down all the power of the enemy, Ephe. 5. Collos. 3.
may be delivered from the curse to come upon the children of unbelief, and
that we may find grace, Hebr. 4.
and mercy in that horrible day, before the just judge, Romans 1.
which will reward every man, according to his deeds, to whom, with the
almighty father, and the holy spirit, belongs honor, and glory, now, and
for ever, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table.
Physic for the soul, very necessary to be used in the agony of death, and
in these extreme and most perilous seasons. etc. folio. 1. Faith is chiefly
necessary for the sick, to abide the pains of the body, and the temptations,
wherewith he is pestered. folio. 3. The articles of our faith are diligently to
be considered of the sick. folio. 5 Wherefore sicknesses are sent unto us from
God. folio. 5 There be three things, which torment us most grievously, and
cruelly, and do trouble our minds in the agony of death, that is to wit,
sin, death, hell, or damnation. folio. 8 A prayer for the same. folio. 8 What
is to be done, when sin does vex, and stir our consciences. folio. 9 The
testimonies of scripture for the remission of sins through Christ, must be
diligently repeated unto the sick. etc. folio. 11 Whether the sick may lawfully
seek the physicians help, and use physic, or no. folio. 18 What is to be
done, when death brings terror, and fear upon us. folio. 18 The testimonies
of scripture, for the resurrection of the dead. folio. 20 We will add also,
other sentences of scripture, containing plentiful comfort. folio. 23 What is
to be done, when hell, or eternal damnation, coming in our minds, does fear
us. folio. 25 Of the making of a testament, and confession of sins unto God.
folio. 34 Of the sacrament of the lords supper. folio. 35 The sorrow, which many
take, more then is requisite; for the death of their parents, and friends,
ought to be tempered by the right rule of reason. folio. 37 A precept
containing an exhortation unto al them, which profess the name of Christ.
folio. 39 Peroratio. folio. 40 A form, and method, or right order to comfort
the sick. folio. 41
(...)
