THE ACADEMY OF Complements.

VVherin Ladies Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers may accommodate their
Courtly Practice with most Curious Ceremonies, Complementall, Amorous, High
expressions, and forms of speaking, or writing.

A Work perused and most exactly perfected by the Author with Additions of
witty Amorous Poems.

And a TABLE expounding the hard ENGLISH words.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for H. Mosley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Princes Arms, in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

To the Ladies and GENTLEVVOMEN of ENGLAND.
I^ Custom did not enforce a Complement of Dedication; yet this Book would
desire to insinuat into the affection of Ladies and Gentlewomen; since it can
arive at no greater perfection of happiness than your favor, which it most
earnestly desires. Let other works covet their Patrons and Maecenasses, to
derive from them a golden sprinkling of their bounty; whilst this shall
express an ingenuity beyond such vulgarintents, and in a brave and free manner
sacrifice it self to your acceptance and service; desiring only that you would
grace it with the influence of your propitious smiles, which carry in them a
secret power, not only to cherish and advance the object whereon they reflect,
but also to endeare it into others opinions, and make it precious in their
estimations. Jn requital of this your favor, it shall be always ready to
furnish you with the best expressions of choice complementall language, for
though by nature and custom, you can deliver your minds in a smooth and
graceful manner; yet from hence, without study, or praemeditation, you may
command necessary Ceremonies. Besides, your Ladyshippe's Chambermaids and
waiting-Gentlewomen are to be pitied; who having by their good carriage
compassed Suitors, are often constrained to blush, in ignorance, for want of
Complements, wherewith to answer them. Let therefore this one instance, instead
of more which might be inserted, persuade your intelligible, generous
dispositions to receive this Book once more as your devoted servant, and to
honor it with your favor; which I shall esteem as an exaltation to the
supremest sublunary felicity, and the highest terrestrial happiness.

THE AVTHORS PREFACE TO the READER.
THere is no question but eloquence is a principal part in a well qualified
man, for to see a subtle and a quick wit foiled in this which is the only
quality that is eminent and adornes a man as useful in all occasions, it were
to be in extremes, another Prometheus, who made a statue fair in appearance,
but without motion; which could not be animated without Celestial fire: it is
eloquence which adornes our discourse, gives a grace and life to our actions,
opens us the gates and doors to the best company, and puts us in such esteem
as well borne spirits ought to arrive to; without this we resemble walking
rocks, all our actions being dull and heavy, our words without effect, our
conceits without fruits, and our lives disgusted with those, with whom we
ordinarily associate our selves: to this purpose in this little volume feast
thy fancy with variety of most eloquent expressions and forms of delivering
thy mind to all, from the King to persons of the most inferior rank or
quality, for in this second edition, Let me tell thee that thou have a Cabinet
wherein the richest Jewels of our Language are locked up, first thou have choice
and select complements set thee down in a form which upon an occasion offered
thou may imitate or with a little alteration make use of, thou have in the
next place variety of subjects with expressions to the height of eloquence
penned to quicken thy mind upon the like objects presented to thy view or
fancy, thou have witty disputes, amorous discourses, with an addition of most
excellent Love Poems, complementall and most sweetly harmonious fitted to the
tastes of Cupids guests, Thou have exquisite Letters, such as contain the
Quintessence of that sweetness our English tongue affords us at this day as it
is now refined, then thou have dedications, superscription fitted to thy own
desires for thy use upon any sudden occasion, Lastly thou have a table of the
hard English words with their expositions, in sum both eloquence and love
with their secrets and mysteries are made naked and manifestly revealed to the
weakest Judgment; all these benefits are heaped upon thee by one who is
zealous for the honor of our Language, by one who bewailes those weak essays
that have been made by others to this purpose, and with grief viewed the
former hasty and surreptitious edition of this book, which now is purged and
perfited to the booke-sellers own content: read it therefore with discretion
and deliberative consideration, and endeavor to attain to the quality of such
worth that thou may learn from it to cure thy dumbenes, to discourse
confidently with thy friends, and assuredly to tender thy wit and service to
those thou shall have occasion to acknowledge, especially in the Court, where
neatenesse and curiosities of all sorts, and principally of speech is to a
syllable exactly studied: I will resolve thee good Reader but a doubt or two
and detain thee no longer from thy pleasure; first thou see not the name of
the Author, if thou knew the gravity of his person thou might well have
him excused, next for thy country objection that downright dealing is best, I
answer thou may sometimes be too plain in the way of thy preferment; if thou
namest the word dissimulation, thou errest, the whole heaven: this work
relishes in respect of the subject more of courtesy, unless thou abuse it by
craft: accept it then as every way beneficial to thee, and take my wish with
thee, that thou may enjoy as much pleasure in the perusing of it, as I had to
pen it. Adieu.

YOURS Philomusus.

THE ACADEMY of Complements. OR, PEARLS OF ELOQVENCE.
SIr, Your conceptions are so strong, that they transcend my ordinary
imaginations.

Sir, You honor me, as if you did erect me a thousand Statues.

Sir, You are above Fortune, which must stoop to your honors.

Sir, Your deserts draw admiration from your very enemies.

Sir, I shall ever as really as at this hour, remain your creature.

You honor me so far, that I imagine my self to be some other thing, then
I have been.

I do repute my self happy, to be valued by a person, who is able to give a
true estimate of me.

Sir, Your judgment does amaze vulgar wits, since in you alone all those
perfections are found, can be sought for on earth.

Lady, Your form does so ravish beholders, that you seem a heavenly creature
in a mortal carcass.

Blemish not your mind with such detestable qualities least the stains of
voluptuousness do besmeare the excellencies of your proportion.

Sir, If you proceed to be so profuse of your treasures, mines of gold will not
maintain your prodigal expenses.

Good Sir give me leave to fear least some sinister storms of fortune stiff
the early bloomings of my felicities.

Sir, The toyish conceits of your youth ^re unfit for the testie cogitations of
my age.

Sir, There is a confused Chaos of contrary ^onceits that wherles in my
brains, and I ^m lost in such an endless Labyrinth that neither choice nor
chance can draw me ^ut of.

Give me leave Sir, to gain that from your experience, that otherwise all the
treasures of the earth cannot purchase.

Sir, Should you continue to be thus ex^essive in your actions, the whole world
would take notice of you, as the mirror of an ^mmoderate life.

Be not so inconstant in your affections, ^east in the conclusion you prove
like the Marigold, to open at the sunshine of prosperity, and to shut at the
least appearance of the clouds of adversity.

Leave me Sir, whilst I learn to despise such Gnathoes and to shake off such
flattering curres with the flagge of my defiance.

Theseus fair one did never more triumph at his deliverance from the perilous
Labyrinth then I from the pernicious bondage of such cruel beauty.

Fortune and fate place thee in the Palaces of their earthly felicities.

So rarely accomplished that it was hard to know whether virtue or beauty held
supremacy in so rare a structure.

Sir, being incensed by your singular commendations, I am persuaded to her only
to commit the chiefest treasures of my life and fortunes.

Pardon my rudeness fair creature, since neither love nor fortune delights
nor cares for them that are dastards.

Madam, You are the Saint to whose shrine I daily offer up my scalding sighs.

For your Beauty mistress I may name you Venus, for your comeliness Pallas,
for your port and honor Juno.

If I want an Apology fair creature, Let love and necessity plead for me since
they are tied within no bounds.

Madam you are an object beautified with the richest gifts of nature, polisht
with more then terrene perfections.

It Is you alone fair one that have made a breach into the Bull-warke of my
breast, where like a gorgeous goddess you command all my powers.

Fear not Sir, Love and fortune favors those that are bold.

Sir, To grant you this one position is to admit of innumerable absurdities.

Madam, It is the perfection of your exquisite person, Majesticke features, and
rare beauty that kindles my desires.

Mistress, Deceive me not, least while I ^hinke to embrace you for Juno, I
catch a cloud.

Madam, Take heed of using Cupid so ^rabidly, for though he forgive and forget,
Venus is a woman and will seek revenge.

Sir, It is impossible that her heavenly beauty should be eclipsed with cruelty.

Madam, Though I have fought never so valiantly under the flagge of affections,
yet except you crown my endeavors with a voluntary yielding I can never
prevail.

Mistress, If you take me for frantic blame love, which as it comes from you
as the cause so it consumes without reason.

Who can degenerate, fairest of women, or dare to entertain base thoughts,
when he views so glorious an object?

Sir, I am desirous to be suspicious of those felicities, I fear, I shall not
long enjoy.

I am out of love with my self, that I may admire your virtues.

The charms of Magicians are frivolous to me, in respect of the power of your
presence.

I cannot look upon your face, but I am persuaded to resign my self up to
you, as a wreath of victory.

That which blacks the Moors, and burns Libya, has not so powerful a luster,
as the beams of your beauty.

Half the Court is engaged to your expressions, and those whom you besiege
with your language, must needs acknowledge you for victorious.

Mistress, Your breath is as sweet, as if you fed only on Pinkes and perfumes.

Sir, I cannot degenerate so far from mine own happiness, as to forget you,
to whose desires alone the events of all things are suitable.

Let me beg of you to take notice of those advantages are bestowed upon you,
above the rest of men.

Sir, If in your imagination, I am worthy to be esteemed of, it must be by your
wisdom only, which can set a value upon my defects.

Sir, Your favor is the foundation of all my fortunes.

Sir, It is your presence only can dissipate the clouds of my blackest
melancholy.

Sir, In the midst of all my felicities, I shall have need of you to make me
happy; for without you, I shall ever esteem my self absolutely miserable.

Sir, I will rather put my reputation to the adventure, then refuse to act any
thing you shall command me.

Sir, I have ever reflected on you, as on an extraordinary person, and have
ever passionately remained yours.

Sir, I am so taken with you, that I am even sick at the relation of your
indisposition.

Sir, I shall not be backward in the expression of your merits, since they do
so exact an acknowledgement of all.

Sir, You shall never be able to accuse this Tenent as erroneous, since I have
never falsified my self to you, but have ever thought my self perfectly
happy, to be reputed yours.

Be careful fair one, least being lead captive by security your mind float in
the surging Seas of idle conceits, whilst the puff of voluptuous pleasures and
the stifling storms of unbridled fancy with raging blasts make a shipwreck of
your beauty.

Sir, I will endeavor hereafter to encounter your graces courtesies with an
unwearied constancy in the ways of virtue.

Sir, I shall endeavor to countervail such pains with a princely Liberality.

Sir, The trumpet of your royal fame has moved us who are but subjects of
your generous liberality with all humility to entertain such noble and
heroicke favors cast upon us poor creatures most unworthy of such benefits.

Madam, There is no object can allure my wavering eyes as your Venus-like
beauty.

Madam, The force of your beauty has overpowered the weakness of my fancy
since the exquisite perfections of your virtues are characterd in my breast.

Madam, Were you as wise as Minerva or as gorgeous as Juno, yet the accounts of
your beauty being cast up, the gains of his affection might be put in the eyes
of your Lover.

Coy one what happiness insued the chastity of Penelope, nay rather what
miseries pursued not the virtues of a Lucretia? how wretched are they then that
deal with Venus or Diana, since love is a fatal care, hate a final calamity?

Blame me not fair one, though my fixed fancies once abused turn to a fury.

By those smiles of your beauty your creature that before was plunged in a
perplexity, is now placed in the height of earthly felicities.

Mistress, Pardon my rudeness for troubling thus rashly your musing meditations.

Certainly Madam, if the gods as Poets say, made beauty, they skipt beyond
their skill, since they framed it of greater force then they themselves were
able to resist.

Fair one, let the showers of your mercy mitigate the fires of my fancy.

Cruel one, if love be only remedied by love, if fancy by mutual affection,
give me leave at least to appeal to your grace and favor, and at the bar of
your beauty suffer your servant to lift up his hands in an expectation of
mercy, though his life by your rigor be sentenced to death.

Fairest it is impossibility to persuade me to break that league I made with
my fancies.

Sir, I am a mortal foe to affection, and now to vow my service to Venus is
unpossible, since I have already addicted my self to Diana.

Sir, Whosoever reads the records of the faithless protestations of men,
their perjured promises and fained loves, cannot but view a poor Ariadne
abused, a Medea mocked, and a Dido deceived.

Fair one, your beauty and virtue either by fate or fortune is too deeply
shrined in my heart.

Be pleased at last fair beauty, to accept me for your slave and servant, and
to admit me into your favor, as that I may freely enjoy the sight of your
sweet face, and feed my fancy in the contemplation of your perfections.

Fairest, if my deep desires merit no better deserts, then have I no other
choice but to dye desperately or to live miserably.

Madam, There is a civil assault within me, by which I feel a certain
restraint of my own liberty and affections.

It is impossible fairest of women, for any one to view your features, and not
to be setterd with the power of your virtuous qualities.

Mistress, I feel such an alienation of my senses, such a metamorphosis of my
mind; that it is unpossible for me to become any other then a servile slave
to fancy.

How can I fear to enter a Parley with Cupids fairest creature, since there is
such hopes left of victory by the happy presage of your auspicious smiles at
the beginning of our loves conflict?

Sir, If I may continue to share in your favors, there shall not any under the
Canopie of Heaven be more proud of their good fortunes then my self, who
really am your most affectionate servant.

Sir, It is for the good of the world that you enjoy your vigorous health,
since you are ordained for the service of Kings, and the conduct of people.

Sir, I will reserve to speak of virtue, till your great works come to light.

Sir, That which others call virtue, is the natural habitude of your worthy
person.

Suppose not I use the Court language, when I assure you I am more than any man
living, Sir, Your most humble servant,

Sir, When I forget to confess my self yours, you may justly suppose I suffer
a perpetual silence, since whilst I have a tongue, I protest my self to be
your affectionate servant.

Sir, I will make use of all occasions, to testify how passionately I am yours.

Sir, There is no other thing remaining for me, save the only glory of
humility and obedience.

I should show my self insensible of rarities were I not amazed, with the
curiosity of your beauty.

Sir, Your heroical qualities shine forth in you, as bright as day.

Madam, They that do undervalue the comeliness of your person, dare rob
Nature, and bereave Lilies of their beauty, or the Crystal of his clearness.

Sir, The virtues of our forefathers are to be esteemed as vices in comparison
of yours.

Extremities are in other things reproveable, in this laudable, since they
force me to confess my self yours.

Sir, You are never so excellent a Poet, as when you speak of me, since you
have Art to invent new Fables.

Sir, Those fine words, and quaint discourses, with which your Ladies are
delighted, issue from their mouths, as a pure and innocent breath perfumed
with kisses.

Sir, You go through all employments with as good fortune as noble
resolutions; neither can there be any thing above your spirit, since all
things stoop to do you honor.

Who can distill sleep into the eyes of lovers, whose cares break forth with
the morning light?

Love, Art thou but a vain name and no essential thing, that have thus left
thy professed servant when he has most need of thy reviving presence?

Reason, What art thou which can foresee, but not prevent torment, but not
succor; stupifie much rather than rectify my mind and soul?

What is music to me, but a doleful voice accompanied with the various
discord of my sighs?

O Love, Will thou now at last offer me physic which art my only poison, or
will thou do me service, which long since have brought me into eternal
slavery?

How long shall my languishing sickness wait upon the triumphs of my passions?

At last o fair one, cast the eyes of thy resplendent presence on thy abject
creature, that by the brightness of those rays his baseness may be turned into
a most high, and through thy affections, a most happy preferment, for being
thus disconsolate by the frowns of thy rigor; how soon may thou raze down
that temple which at first was built by the refulgent smiles of thy beauty?

From whence can these necessities proceed, that love has laid upon me; most
incomparable? Lady, are they by your commandment,, or is it by a power from
your excellency, that Cupid has such a command over mortals; of a certain it
is from you, whose fair aspect accompanied with so imperious a majesty,
vanquisheth me by him so far to resign the happiness of my former liberty, as
that I must now confess my self to be your slave, if you think me unworthy
of the name of your prisoner.

Cruel one, how long can I make an ostentation of my felicity, when the
conclusion even the last scene of my Tragedy with horror presents it self to
thine eyes? can death and dissimulation meet at that instant, when I leave the
world, and my dying protestations with thee, that for thee alone I forsook
this earth; to be more kindly used there where I shall certainly be eased of
these sorrows? if there be a Leander, a Pyramus, or a society of abused Lovers.

If thou art fair, is it to present thee cruel? If thou can command
affections, will thou therefore Captivate them? to be beautiful, and yet
terrible, are things incompetible, things that implie contradiction, yet even
against the Laws of nature, thou destroyest nature, and where thou may
raise thee structures to thy perpetual honors, thou ruin'st them.

Most certain it is fair creature, thy love may make me to sacrifice my life
at thy feet, and I may punish that body, which could so unjustly wound my once
free and serene mind: but alas wherein can thou glory? not in thy beauty, for
that will veil it self at so black an Act; not in my ruins, for they will
pursue thee with some direful revenge: blush then thou fair one, since to be
coy is to be cruel, to be cruel, is to alter the property of what thou yet
art, beautiful.

Fairest, be no longer so great an enemy to my desires as to imprison them in
silence.

I cannot express the least disobedience to your commands, but rather hope my
past displeasures may deserve pity, if not my future services a reward.

Ponder my merits in the balance of your mercy, that the unworthiness of my
deserts by the fair sufferance of your goodness may procure your gracious
respects in my behalf.

It is a sin to suspect such virtue which glories to arm it self against
all deceits.

Fair one, you have a wit which delights not to judge it self, and a beauty
that glories to condemn others; reconcile your beauty to your wit, that the
use of the one may restrain the abuse of the other, whilst we your servants
live to admire your perfections, and you your self survive to perfect your
virtues.

Fair one, what unremoveable suitor ecclipses your affection from shining on
your devoted and most constant servant?

Perfection of my desires, with one determinate answer bless me with
happiness, or silence my long continued suit.

That my desires to enjoy you are more then to live, proceeds from the effects
of my affection, the efficient cause being your excessive beauty.

Madam, The eyes of a ravished Lover cannot but have virtues aid so ready in
himself as always to bewail the loss of a virtuous constancy in others,
since such a loss by his own affections is ever placed in the very face of
his memory.

By the memory of our forepast affection, by the oaths of our yet continued
love, by whatsoever is virtuous credit me.

Can you Sir wear a Marses heart in a Cupids body, since the eyes of all
spectators judge you fitter for the pleasures of the Court then the tents of
war?

In him it seems Nature was not mistaken, since whatsoever was in mankind, was
in him to the uttermost.

Sir, It is a degree above humanity and therefore requires the admiration of
your friends that your wit should so far out-goe your age.

It is not strange o thou cruelst of women, that those eyes of thine should
strike him with terror, who stands unmoved with the sight of the most horrible
countenances of Death.

Sir, I am most infinitely bound to you for this so rare and noble a courtesy.

It is you, and none but you which I am bound to love, and therefore though I
am presented with a likeness of your beauty, yet likeness of another, cannot
make the same essence of your person, much less can dissolve your
commandments of my service.

The very image of your countenance and outward expressions of your behavior
are suitable to the virtuous resolutions of your mind.

Fairest, grant me this happiness to have my poor affections raised to a
Lordship over your thoughts.

Violence of love leads me into this discourse, in which I am not so
unfortunate as full of desires to be more happy.

Armies of objections rise up against my accepted opinion.

Sir, Though I were to pass through all the splendors of the world to meet
with you, my pen could not reach you.

Sir, Nature in you has laid deep foundations in respect of your qualities
both of mind and body, in both which she has made no promise of any
mediocrity, by the distribution of which rare perfections she has rendered you
lovely to the world and fit for the service of the greatest Monarchs.

Sir, Your imagination, when you speak in such high terms, cannot but move
me to believe great improbabilities.

Sir, How happy should I account my self, were the Characters of your Virtues
imprinted in my breast?

Sir, No imaginary jealousies shall divert me from mine inclination to that
goodness, to which I have always had an extraordinary propension, by your
Royal example.

Sir, I have an interest in your prosperity so far, that I will not complain
of Fortune, so you have an occasion to commend her.

Worthy Sir, You know your self too well, to suspect me of flattery.

Virtue and Eloquence are bestowed upon you, to make you be amongst men as
immortal.

Sir, I could not have the ambition to suppose that there could be any room
left, for you to entertain a man, of so many imperfections as my self.

The contemplation of your virtues amaze me.

Sir, I find in you, whatsoever may give a reputation to the Courts of Princes.

Sir, I am reserved for your sake, that nothing might be wanting to your glory.

Sir, You are the man whom the necessities of the States requires.

Opportunities would wax old, should I neglect this present to serve you.

All spirits will prove favorable to you, since you have convinced them by
your merits.

Your generous disposition has permitted me a longer audience, then your
affairs could well permit.

Worthy Sir, Reflect upon your crrature, with the bright beams of your
generous disposition.

I cannot allot more moderate limits to my ambition, or wish my self a greater
happiness, then to do you service.

Your heroicke acts succeeding Historians shall crown with Laurels.

Sir, For your sake I will pass beyond the Ice of my natural air, and
undergo the infelicity of cruel fortune.

Sir, There is no happiness on earth, but is included in your self, or in
what concerns you.

Sir, Your goodness does bereave me of a voice to express your virtues.

Sir, You cannot blame me, though I hate ingratitude, since even beasts are
capable of acknowledgement.

Sir, If you withdraw from me your presence, you overthrow all the honor you
have hitherto acquired for me.

Sir, I shall fall sick, for want of a capacity to digest your favors.

Sir, Whatsoever you undertake, permit nothing to your spirit, which may wound
your reputation.

Sir, Of all men I dare free you from this crime, of violating the chastity of
language.

Sir, I owe too much honor, to the memory of our forepast acquaintance, to
displease you.

Sir, For your sake, at the same time I both enjoy pleasure, and endure pain.

Sir, I must beg of you hereafter to have a greater care of my modesty, since
you enforce me, either to loose it, or not to believe you.

Sir, The whole Court is sensible of suffering your name to fall to the ground.

Sir, I am so far from hiding my own defects, that I acknowledge there is none
so imperfect as my self; neither can any man arive to perfection, except he be
adorned with those abilities, whereof I am utterly ignorant.

Sir, I have neither power nor ability left me, but only to express, I am
yours.

Sir, You have anticipated me of all Rhetoric, either of being complementall,
or returning you commendations for your worthy favors.

Sir, Instead of requital, of those vows you offer me, I am put to a stand,
what to answer you.

Mistress, I desire to pass my life in the pleasing dreams of your perfections.

Your Courtly voice is like an Oracle, either to approve, or to condemn me.

Sir, I am none of those, who slight the benefits are showred upon them.

Sir, I cannot light upon that accent, wherewith I might authorize my own
follies.

Sir, All my thoughts are your real inspirations.

Sir, I have no servile dependency but upon your conceptions.

Sir, In matters of Eloquence you seek out singularities, hitherto unknown to
any.

From the first minute of my acquaintance, I made haste, as I shall ever, to
acknowledge my self, your most humble servant.

Sir, I entertain these passions, to the end that you may appease me.

Madam, If you still persevere to dote thus on your beauty: the time will come,
when your face will scare you, more than a judge does a fellon.

Sir, I have quitted all complacency, and there is no means shall make me
silent.

Fairest, There is no part of the world so remote, whither my curiosity, in
your search shall not carry me.

Lady, The moral of my affection, is to instruct you to make use of your
youth, and to gather Nosegaies, before the Roses wither: for be confident,
when you have no further attractions, than an eloquent tongue no man will seek
for them in the furrows of your face, and you shall only be left, to bewail
the ruins of your beauty.

Sir, Suffer your self to be convinced by reason, since you cannot resist the
same, but to your disadvantage.

Sir, You must excuse me, since I know not in what manner to suffer so wounding
a displeasure.

Sir, All the water in the Sea can never purify me from this offense.

Lady, You have no more beauty, then will serve to excuse you from being
extremely ugly.

Sir, If you grant me this favor, you shall elevate me to a more sovereign
fortune, then the State of Kings.

Sir, It were as great a crime to be ignorant of the diversions that attend
you; as not to be acquainted with the great affluence of noble company, daily
repairing to visit you.

Mistress, In my most solitary walks it shall be my ambition, to presume only
to revolve you in my most secret cogitations.

Sir, In you alone I must commend the commencements of all virtue.

Sir, In all shapes, and under the most dreadful aspects that can appear, I
am yours.

Sir, To return you complements for such excellent favors, were to undervalue
their worth; since my language is too poor, and unable to lend me wherewith
to pay you.

Sir, I fear I shall be indebted to you all my life, for the favors I have
received of you.

Sir, It is the height of my deserts, to be passionately, as I am, your most
faithful servant.

Sir, My passions cannot so far transport me, but that I shall remain, as I
have ever been, yours.

Sir, I intend not to commence any real war against you; for I acknowledge
my choler to be artificial, which I am ready to lay down at your pleasure.

Fair Creature, Painters and Stage Players are not guilty of those murders,
which the darts of your eyes do most cruelly commit.

Sir, I am not so curious as to condemn the whole multitude, which have lost
themselves in the admiration of your virtues.

Sir, I will dilate my self no farther in my expressions; least I dishonor
your goodness, with my profane praises.

Sir, Mine eloquence will come too late, since there is no precept in all
humane wisdom, which has not presented it self to your view.

Sir, The consolation I have, next to the assurance I have of my innocence, is
the liberty I enjoy, to profess my self, yours.

The principal object of my intentions, has ever bin the glory of your name.

Sir, I do profess my self yours, with all those protestations, which are
able to make truth appear inviolable.

Sir, I prostrate all my presumption at your feet.

Sir, I can no longer conceal my thoughts; since you have an interest, both in
me and them.

Sir, I never gave you a visit, which cured me not of some passion.

Sir, How often with your golden eloquence, have you taken me out of my self?

Sir, You alone can conduct me to the highest pitch of accidental perfection.

Sir, The beams of your eminent virtues, have discovered to me mine own
imperfections.

Sir, Instead of all those high expressions, you have bestowed upon me, I must
only answer you, that I am your humble servant.

S^r, There can be no acknowledgement that I can make, can be answerable to
the obligations I owe to your honor.

Sir, You mistake my disposition, if you suppose I affect praises, with the
like intemperance, as I do perfumes.

Sir, Should I forfeit such occasions, my friendship would never appear, but
remain as a Recluse.

Sir, The World would end, and Nature prove unperfit, if there were not such
men to maintain her honors.

Continue to express your self what you are, that your virtue may be its own
catastrophe.

Fairest, My thoughts are not so often here, as where you are.

The Physicians have not so far exhausted me, but that there are some drops
of blood left, to bestow in part of your Honors service.

Madam, Put on those rays of your beauty, that it may budde again with the
next Roses.

Sir, I confess I was never more astonished, then to find such an equipage of
sorrow about you.

Sir, You are adorned with all the excellent qualities, that Art and Nature can
bestow, for the commanding of men.

Sir, There is not one part of your body, whereof another is not master.

Sir, It is not in my power to dispose of one single hair, since I am all
yours.

Madam, You draw the eyes of all to admire you, since you are as a fair
prospect, adorned with all pleasures, to allure the beholders.

You are the Cabinet, in which Nature has locked all her miracles.

Sir, Though I receive injuries from you, it shall be my humility, not to take
notice of them.

Sir, I would visit those parts of the world, which avarice it self has not
yet found out, rather then loose your society.

Sir, It is impossible for me to conceal my sensibilities.

Sir, What violence soever I offer to my anger, I can no longer contain it.

Sir, You do so heap your favors on me, that you will not so much as suffer
me to seem miserable.

Sir, Your innocent actions carry their warrant with them.

Sir, You do not so much express your wit, as your Tyranny, in inflicting
such torments on me.

Sir, Be not confident; least he whom you have so often injured, do at last
grow weary of his sufferings.

Sir, You are the man, with whom alone I desire to pass the most pleasant
hours of my life.

Sir, If you pretend excuses for so poor a trifle, know, I am no longer your
affectionat servant.

Sir, I shall hold mine eloquence as pernicious, as the perfections of a
Courtizan, should it prove any cause of your quarrels.

Sir, You usurp a more absolute authority over wits, then is lawful, or
reasonable.

Sir, You smell too much of your Musk and Amber, to express your self
serious in the weight of affairs.

Sir, My conceptions are popular, and to be intelligible among women.

Sir, Your conceits are too far fetched, and they transcend the subject, on
which you bestow them.

Fairest, Let me ravish a kiss from your hand.

Sir, My affections spring not from the diseases and distempers of my soul;
since my inclinations to serve you, have their original from immortal Reason.

M stris, You have a power to infuse love and fidelity into the hearts of
Barbarians.

Sir, You cannot bestow your favors amiss, on him who has searched the
secrets of Nature, and the depth of Philosophy, that he might not appear to
be ungrateful.

Sir, You must give me leave to admire your judgment, which appears to be
far more excellent, then your fortunes.

Sir, Let me not seem to incur a crime, since I am forced to extol your
generous liberality.

Sir, You vary your shape, and change your perfumes, according to the diversity
of seasons.

Let it please you, out of your nobleness, to afford me to be your Graces most
obedient and faithful servant.

Sir, You have all those excellent qualities, that are necessary in a Prince.

Sir, I measure the necessities, and fatalities of this world, by your
contentments, or discomforts.

Sir, In this exigence of my fortunes, I am forced to admire your virtues;
since you still set so high a value on your creature, who is lost to all men,
but to your self.

Sir, Your goodness is as unlimitable, as the desire I have to serve you.

Sir, In you are comprehended all the riches, that Nature bestows on her most
glorious creatures.

Sir, I speak this seriously, with my best sense; you may reduce me to any
form.

All, who have either eyes or spirits, must place them on so deserving an
object.

Fairest, Cast one glance of pity on me, least you deprive me of all conceits
of mercy, with the terrible aspect of your eyes; which are to me the
Ambassadors of life, or death.

Sir, You are the emblem of terror, and you furious looks are able to
consume a Woman.

Sir, Lift me not so high with your favors, least you do but fit me for a
precipice, and I behold my descent with a greater terror.

Fairest, Let not your heavenly beauty, seated in it is royal Majesty, draw
forth the sword of disdain, to the ruin of your creature.

Fairest Creature, Since I am the pattern of all ill fortunes, by the force of
your affection free me from all the miseries that oppress me.

Sir, You hit mine inclinations since to recompense such virtues, were a work
most worthy of all generous spirits.

Sir, Your refusal of the title of eloquent, proves your modesty to be most
unjust; since your tongue long since did bereave you of all excuses.

Sir, I dare not enter the lists with you, in respect of your elegancies of
speech; for when I would become most persuasive in my language, I appear most
barbarous in my expressions.

Sir, All your Rhetorical arguments are out like blew flowers amongst the
Corn; which though they may seem pleasant to the eye, prove most unwholesome
to the body.

Sir, I shall always acknowledge the most artificial language, to be like a
Gentlewoman adorned with Rubies and Diamonds, which glister upon her garments,
whilst she her self wants the eyes of her body, and of her mind.

Fair One, can I pervert the powers of the planets or resist the force of the
Stars? you may then conclude, I can repel these affections.

I am yours Sir, and will be yours in despite of fates and fortune.

Madam, Your excellent qualities and exquisite virtues have so assaulted the
fort of my fancy, that I must of necessity resign my self up to you as a
trophie of your victories.

Mistress, Since Cupid does so fitly favor the causes of his clients, Let us
not let slip so happy an opportunity.

Madam, If the wishes of a poor mortal may be heard above, I question not but
heaven with felicities will crown your royal deserts.

Madam, Though I have not hitherto by dutiful services made manifest the
loyalty of my heart, yet since I first framed in my fancy as in a mirror, the
shape of your surpassing beauty; with all humility, I have cast my self and
fortunes at your royal feet.

Fairest, There is none upon earth does with a more loving duty reverence your
person and virtues then I do

Madam, In consideration of my poor fortunes, let my affection appear so much
the more excusable, since I so far esteem of your divine beauty and
exquisite virtue as I would think my self most unworthy, though I were Prince
of the world, to possess your heavenly perfections, In respect of any of my
own native honors.

Sir, I have learnt to know that it is the religion of lovers to swear and
forswear.

Madam, The parching heat of Summer makes the cool shades more pleasant, and
the frowns of lovers make their smiles more delightful and cheerful.

Mistress, I must never hope so entirely to love as by my affections to requite
your loyalty.

Sir, She which builds her fancy upon fading subjects, ties her honor to the
unconstant wheel of fortune.

Fairest, As a pledge of my protestations thou shall have both my heart and
hand to be thine in dust and ashes.

Sir, You have a heart as large as the Sea, which contains in it a capacity of
all the ornaments that use to dignifie Princes.

Strive not Sir, to bereave me of the reputation, of my honor, least those
that shall succeed me hereafter, read my infamy upon my Tomb.

Madam, The beams of your sunne-like beauty with their lively luster and
sparkling flames dazzle the eyes of your amazed lover.

Madam, In the shady darkness of this Arbor, you seem like a heaven enameled
with an infinite number of Stars.

Having disposed so many affections to do you service, fear it not fairest,
your servant must of necessity visit you.

Fair one, whilst mortals enjoy your heavenly beauty, the luster of your
resplendent eyes shall as the day light serve them for the dispatch of their
affairs.

Sir, I cannot be insensible of your miseries, since the web of our destinies
has passed us both through the like misfortunes.

Sir, I am real and use not to entertain my friends with dreams and
illusions.

Sir, This your inhumane usage of your creature shall never seem strange to me
since the most fervent affections of the world oftentimes degenerate into the
vehementest enmities.

Sir, We equally share of one another discontents and dissolve our hearts
together as one would melt one piece of wax into another.

Fairest, Those eminent qualities which nature as a dowry has bestowed upon
you, like flowers spread themselves forth by the rays of your bright beauty,
causing those courtships services and admirations which so sweetly adorn you.

Mistress, Ladies of honor to express the sincerity of their affections have
breathed forth their lives on the Tombs of their deceased lovers.

Madam, If I am consumed by the fires of Cupid, blame me not, since your eyes
enkindled the flames of my affections.

Madam, Exercise not the extremity of your rigor upon him that suffers such
miseries under the title and quality of an offenders.

Know fair creature that a bright day may at last inlighten my innocence, when
revengefull lovers shall search into my ashes to find our truth there buried.

Sir, These glorious progressions of your virtue will at last mount you to the
highest pitch of admiration.

Madam, Shut not up these eyes from the light of your beauty, least they be
perpetually opend to tears.

Madam, It is unpossible you should ever draw to you a reputation of honor
signed with the effusion of my blood.

Madam, There are those will deplore my ashes and strew some silly flowers on
the place impressed with the prints of your punishments.

Fair one, when my soul shall be separated from my body, it shall every where
wait on your purified spirit as the shadow of it.

Madam, If you should please to condemn me to darkness by the eclipsing of
the divine light of your beauty, yet I despair not; but that at last from the
sphere of your splendors due to my merits, you will vouchsafe the rays of your
clemency to inlighten the duskie nights of my miseries and misfortunes.

Fair one, though death may separate our lives, yet love shall unite our
ashes, and we shall preserve the immortality of our affections by the
immortality of our souls.

Madam, Seated thus on your fair pavilion, you appear like resplendent day in
the attires of a Majesty absolutely royal.

Madam, Your goodly stature, well proportioned body, the bright color of your
face, the lively port and grave carriage of your person; all of these speak
you to be a regal branch, sprung from some royal stem.

Fair one, your hair negligently discheveld and careless atire, grace forth
your beauty, which shines forth in the midst of so many obstacles as the sun in
a winters day.

Fair creature, cast not those eyes down, neither color your face with those
modest blushes, since it would appear most admirable, that your virtues should
find fetters in a place where they may expect crowns.

Sir, I desire to end my days on the theater of Kings in their glorious
services.

Madam, Heaven has created me such an one, as you see full of good will,
though of slender fortunes and means.

Sir, We have continually lived together as one soul, divided into two bodies,
since our amities have taken root in a mutual temperature and correspondency
of humors, and have maintained in us a continued familiarity which neither
death nor hell shall have power to separate.

Fairest, Our breasts shall be ever interchangably transparent.

Fair one, dissimulation or contradiction cannot approach the sincerity of
our loves.

Fairest, Let me embrace you with the opennesse of my heart and the profusion
of my love, that our souls may evaporate themselves into affection.

Sir, Your favors create me again, and give me a new being.

Sir, I shall never pretend any right to any honor in the world, but only to
obey your commands.

Mistress, The grace of speech dwells on your fair lips.

Sir, Hereafter ages shall take Palms and Lillies to Crown the relikes of
your honored ashes.

Fairest, These eyes of mine, are but emblemes of tears mixed with love.

Madam, Spread not that Cipresse veil ore your face, least you benight your
beauty and darken the bright rays of your own curiosities.

Madam, Your beauty is a divinity left on earth to be known and beloved of
mortals.

THE ACADEMY of Complements. Choice and fair Flowers, Selected out of the
Garden of Eloquence, to adorn our language with variety of expressions, upon
several occasions.
Upon his Absence.
I Shall no longer esteem my self absent from you, whilst I hold any room in
your heart and memory.

Let not my remotenes change your purposes, more than it shakes the resolution
I have made, to live, yours.

Protestations of Love.
IT is as unpossible for me not to love you; as it is for the Sun to forget
his ordinary course.

So am I ravished with your beauty, that it will prove harder for me to forget
you, then it would prove difficult to resolve for death: and know for a
certain, that I shall still be rather content and disposed to consent to the
hatred of my self, then to the love of any other object but you.

Your fight may be forbidden me, and you may hinder me from speaking to you,
but not to have the effigies of your divine beauty imprinted in my heart: and
not to love and serve you, it is a thing not only out of your power, but mine
also; for I am to you, as an accident, so inseparable, that you cannot be
without me.

Upon her beauty.
I Should have thought I had too much failed in my duty, had I not guided it to
so much beauty; for the favor of your affections, is the sacrifice of my life.

Vanquished by your beauty, I have yielded up the arms of my liberty and
freedom, under your obedience.

Nothing shall take from my heart, but death it self, the fair Image of your
divine beauty.

In admiration of her goodness.
IT is your goodness that has supplied my small merit; which could not have
durst to promise me the favors you afford me.

On her leaving him.
LOvers in despite of absence, loose not the remembrance of their Loves: they
are as the Flowers; which, though trod on, do resume their luster at the Suns
approach.

To forsake me, when your company is dearest to me, is no sign of true
friendship, which parts not at death it self, since love remains for ever.

Take pity on all those bloody sorrows, which the apprehension of your
absence makes me already so miserably to feel.

To accuse in a Letter.
IT is better to love with severity, then to deceive with sweetness.

I would forbear to write to you in this manner, were it not, that the
affection I bear you, does force, and by its authority, draw all these words
from my heart, and mouth.

Mistress, The Bees are not hated for their stings, no more should you hate me
for the sharpness of my circumstances.

We must not praise our selves, for being better than the worst; but rather
blame our selves, for being worse than the best; since then I fail in my
merits, give me leave to mourn for my imperfections.

Farewels.
I Must depart from you, yet shall not mine obedience be deprived of your
service.

Adieu fair Sun of my life, I leave you for this present; but be always
assured, that my mind, and my desires, shall never depart from your service.

Dear Love, I know not which way to begin to bid you farewell, nor how to
finish this discourse, which once silenced, admits of our disconsolate absence.

Woe is me, must I needs wander away from all my felicities at once, loosing
with the happiness of your sight, the most perfect object of my beatitude?

Farewell, Madam, be always fortunate, whilst I shall languish unhappy, though
most constant.

Expressions of affections.
YOu can never do so much for me, but that the affection wherewith I adore
you, and the faith I have imposed in you, will prove far greater.

Mistress, You are the first, to whom my affectionate heart has been offered;
and shall (if you please) be the last, that shall have the possession of it.

Do but let me once discover my affections to you, and then command me to
perpetual silence, if you please.

You are the eye of mine eyes, and thought of my thoughts, the perfection of my
defaults, the life of my love, the scope and end of all my desires and hopes.

Bear well in mind mine affection, that though I be removed from your fair
eyes, I may not be so from your favors.

The Lovers expression of constancy.
I Shall in loving you, manifest such an affectionate stability, and
stedfastnes, that my loyalty shall think it self beholding to my love.

My constancy may easily show you, that it has as good an heart to dye for
you, as it had a mind and desire to live and love you.

Earth shall sooner dispossess Heaven of his place, then that any one shall
boast of loving more constantly than I.

I shall make it appear to after times, that I am the man, who for your sake
has made himself the invincible rock of steadfastness: for I shall still hug
my constancy, and never let it stir from me, till my last gasp.

Upon her affability and Courtesy.
IT is your courtesy that lends me the favor, which Heaven and Nature had
denied me.

It is out of your generous disposition you wish me well, as it is of duty that
I honor you.

Upon a lovers fear.
LOvers live always in more fear then hope, and will sooner conceive of their
sorrows, then credit their joys.

The fear I have, least my slender merit should take away your good mind to
wish me well, does in a sort make all those joys imperfect, which this sweet
thought of mine, made me to judge so full and entire.

On his Desires.
FAirest, Be but as desirous of my content as I am of your service.

My desires make me as careful to please you, as I am bound by duty, and
compelled by inclination to serve you.

I wish, Heaven that gave me the boldness of desire, had likewise graced me
with desert.

To give or present.
THis I dedicate, consecrate, and offer up unto you, with the same heart,
wherewith I vowed you my service.

I had rather present you with some small thing, and so be reputed ignorant,
then ungrateful.

Regard more the affection, then the merit of the work; and so accept it, not
as a thing of merit, but as a testimony of my good will.

On effects of their Love.
YOu shall know one day in effect, what you now have but in imagination.

One day you will come to know the conclusion of the irreproachable testimonies
of my true, and faithful promises.

Upon her eloquence.
YOur eloquence is able to steal the soul out of ones heart, and carry it
whither it would go.

One is no more able to overcome you with good words, then with good actions.

The eloquence of your sweet words stop my mouth, and bind me to perpetual
silence

Excuses.
IN excusing your unjust fear, you seem to accuse my boldness.

I pray you hear my reasons patiently, and judge without passion of my
justifications.

It is for great minds to excuse great faults.

Experience of a Lover.
I Have so much experience of your good will, that it only remains, that you
make trial of my desire of acknowledgement.

I have had such trial of your friend-ship and fidelity, that I hope you will
not fail me in time of need.

Upon her face.
THe wonders of your face, made me your Captive, as soon as I saw you; and
that rare grace of yours, which makes you excel all others, retained me your
prisoner.

Upon his favors.
IF you judge, or deem me worthy to favor you, hold that your merits are much
more than my deserts.

I am ignorant what service might satisfy, for the favors I have received of
you.

I can have no means, dutifully to acknowledge this favorable proof of your
fair condition, and honesty.

Upon his fortunes.
FOrtune strives now to make me pay the interest of those pleasu^^ ^he
formerly lent me.

Dame Fortune is too covetous, and usurious, in taking from me the interests of
my prosperity.

Upon her hatred.
I Do not think (though I should give you occasion to hate me) that your good
nature can wish me an injury, since you are not composed of any thing, but love.

Courtesy dwelt on your forehead, but malice resided in your soul, and lay
concealed in your mind.

On her Inconstancy.
YOu use your friends, as one does flowers, which please not, but when they are
fresh and new.

I perceive that ardent affection which was wont to keep me so alive in your
thoughts, does now no more reign in you.

In praise of Her.
I Could not, without making my self guilty of irreverence, speak otherwise
to you, then in a way of praise.

Madam, To live with you, is to live with all the graces; for Nature has made
you the example of her liberalities.

For her retention of him in her memory.
Do not that wrong to your true love, to let him slide out of your memor,y for
then he must appeal from your judgment, to your goodness.

Keep me alive in your thoughts, as I hold you in the most sensible part of my
soul.

On his Merit.
I Could never do so great a thing, but would be too small for your merits
and my desires.

Your merits drive me to love you, my humor permits it, and my content will
needs have me employ my endeavors to serve you.

The praises you attribute unto me, proceed from your will, and not from any
merit of mine.

The necessity of his Affections.
THe necessity of love is most mighty in the world: for it overcomes all.

There is nothing more insupportable, in a necessitated person, then niceness.

O how happy a thing is that necessity, that enforces us to such good things?

Protestation of his obedience.
I Shall not all the days of my life have a will, which shall not obey yours.

You know the power you have over me, and that I am so much yours, as you can
wish me.

To offer and present service.
ALL the honor and ambition I aspire at, is to see my self employed in your
service.

Your beauty alone is able to witness the affection I bear you.

All that is mine, is no less yours, then are your thoughts and words.

The most favorable gift you can offer me, is your friendship, which I
prefer before all other treasures.

Wishes.
HEaven, which hears the vows of the faithful, bless and content your
desires.

God make you the happiest woman that lives; even as he has made you the
fairest, and most accomplished.

Heaven grant you may be as faithful, as you are dear to me.

Bewailings of a Lover.
I Do so bewail our separation, that nothing can ever touch my soul, like
the grief I endure by it.

The greatest grief I carry along with me, when I part from this place, is, to
see how I am for ever deprived of your fair presence.

To give thanks.
IF I have done you any acceptable service, think it was but the shadow of
what I desire to show you, by real effects.

I take this benefit from you, but as borrowed; I will pay you rent for it.

Though the service I have done you, be but small; yet the desire I have had
to acknowledge the honors I have received from you, are exceeding great.

On the deceits of Love.
YOur fair eyes have too much majesty to serve for baits, or allurements of
a dissembling love.

Do not deceive him, that will outbrave death it self, to insure your life,
and withstand the frowns of fortune to protect your honors.

On his Life.
MY life is a Comedy, and therefore no matter how long it be, so that it be
well acted: Sweetest, if the last Scene be Tragic, your cruelty must be the
Nemesis.

On the luster of her eyes.
YOur eyes flash so much lightning, that like Suns, they dazzle the sight of all
such as dare behold them.

You have so established your Sovereignty over my soul, that the least
twinckle of your eyes, disposes me of the state of my life.

A tender of service to ones Sovereign.
Sir,
IT may appear great boldness in me, altogether unknown unto your Majesty,
to hope that any beam of favor should reflect on my unworthiness, to cherish
my cheerful willingness, though with hazard of my life, to do you any loyal
service:

Yet encouraged by yout royal goodness, that can let fall unequal, yet
sufficient blessings on all, I beseech you to permit me, out of the valley of
humility, to look up unto the sacred hill of your Highness Majesty, and at
the foot thereof, kneeling to offer up my devotions, and my most humble
service; which if you graciously deigne to accept, as I do humbly prostrate
them; I shall account your favor the supremest felicity, whereof I can be
capable in this World, and I shall bless the hour, that gave me opportunity
to present my self and service to your employment, than which, ambition can
have no higher object.

Another.
THat which has been imagined of a golden age, as an Idea of all perfect
happiness, was but a prophecy of your gracious rain, showring down felicity
in such a plenteous manner, that all your Subjects are thereby invited to offer
up unto you sacrifices of thanks and obedience; while I shall account it the
chiefest honor, that my birth and stars could bequeath me, if I may approve my
loyalty, in exposing my life to any danger in your service.

Another.
Sir,
THough I cannot worthily desire, nor deserve your gracious favor; yet it will
show you nearest heaven, and that you resemble the King of Kings, in accepting
my weak and humble devotions, with the tender of my loyal service. Let not
the poorenes of my merit, or the oblation make them contemptible in your sight;
for I have long had an earnest zeal, to express with what integrity I adore
the virtues wherewith you are replenished, far above all flattery: so that
your gracious reign is but the Galaxia, or milkwhite path, through which you
travel in your happy government, and by examples lead your subjects to Heaven.

Another.
Sir, If virtue and loyalty were not to be found in some of ordinary quality, I
should blush and tremble at my own forward desires to do you service. But
since it is a sign of some eminent worth, not to carry poor and narrow
thoughts, but such as may be high as heaven, whereunto that soul is allied,
which dedicates it is service only to God and the King: I therefore ever
accounted it a nobleness of mind, to raise and advance my thoughts, to desire
that I might show my willingness to do you service in some employment,
whereby I might express and approve my self, your faithful humble servant.

A tender of service to the QVEENE.
Madam,
THe same service and obeisance which I offered unto the King, I do now with
as great strength of passion and affection tender unto your Majesty; and as I
am His loyal subject, so to be Your faithful servant, shall be the height of
my glory.

Madam, My service and obeisance is so divided between the King and your
Majesty, that I shall esteem it my highest contentment, and chiefest
advancement, to be accounted your humble servant, which Title will satisfy
all my desires.

Another.
Madam,
There are no words strong enough, to express how much I honor your Royal
perfections, which render you beloved and respected of all the world; while I
make it the chief employment of my life, to attend upon your command; whom to
obey, is perfect happiness.

An humble address to a great Lord.
My Lord,
IN regard of the many favors which your Honor has heaped on me, I am bound,
first to acknowledge my happiness therein, and also to desire that you would
always reckon me in the number of your most obliged servants.

Otherwise.
My Lord,
As it is a great happiness for me to come to your presence, and offer my
devotions to your Excellency, from the Altar of an humble heart: so it will be
an addition unto my felicity, if I may improve this present opportunity, to
make tender of my service.

Otherwise.
My Lord,
It will become me, amongst others, to acknowledge your many excellent virtues,
amongst which your noble clemency and humility are the chiefest, whereof as
others have had experience, so I doubt not, but you will favorably accept the
oblation and tender of my humble service.

Another to some great Lord.
MOst noble Lord, as I hold it for a principal favor in admitting me to kiss
your honors hand, so shall I esteem my self most happy for ever, in that your
honor is pleased to accept me henceforth as ranked in the number and catalogue
of your most humble and obsequious servants.

Another.
My Lord, the rank you hold with the great and singular ornaments of virtues,
in you, do oblige me to offer unto your Lordship all that little is in me, and
to tender unto you upon all occasions, my service in all obsequious humility.

Another.
Most honored Lord, if your excellency will be pleased to permit me to
exercise my mall endeavors of rendering my duty to your honor in expectation
that heaven will favor me so far as to grant me opportunities, whereby I may
make appear in effect the desires I have to perform to you my best service.

To tender ones service.
Cleodos.
Sir,
I Must entreat you to pardon my boldness, in that I, who am a stranger, have
presumed to come to visit you, being invited thereunto by the fame and report
of your noble virtues, which have made me ambitious to desire your
acquaintance, and earnestly desirous, that you would impose on me some command,
whereby I might express my self your humble servant.


Beumont,
Sir,
You have much honored me by your coming, and by your words, as through a
Perspective, J clearly discern the power of your affections, bringing you
hither, where your welcome cannot be equal to my desire, nor your desert.


Cleodos,
Sir,
The occasion of my coming, was for no other respects, but those due unto your
merit, and by an humble address of service, to bring my self acquainted with
you whom I honor, and am ready to serve.


Beumont.
Sir,
You owe me no service, but I am ready to embrace your friendship, evidently
discovered by your kind visitation, which is a favor far above my desert;
but J pray let not our love break off, for want of any mutual respects,
wherein I will strive to equal you, and ever remain in all the ties of love,
your most constant friend.


Cleodos.
Then I shall acknowledge my self most happy in my bold visitation; for to
gain your amity, is to me a chiefest felicity; not only in regard of your
natural worth, flowing from your birth and education; but also your sweet
company and conversation, with which I hope you will hereafter be pleased to
honor me.


Beumont,
Sir,
I dare not acknowledge that which you ascribe unto me, your praises are but
the effects of your love; but if my company, or friendship may be any way
pleasing unto you, command them both, for I will be ready to wait upon you: and
therefore be assured of me, as of one that has devoted himself wholly to your
employment, for your love and kind visitation has gained me to be your true
friend.


To thank a friend for a Courtesy.
Cleodos.
SIR,
I cannot give you thanks enough for your great love, expressed in that
kindness you did me of late; but I hope, though I expect a while, yet at last
I shall snatch opportunity to make requital, and show you how much I abhor
the vice of ingratitude, especially to you, unto whom I am so much obliged.


Beumont,
Sir,
What I did, was even wrung from me by the extraordinary quality of your
merit, engaging me to show my utmost power and cheerful willingness, to
undergo any service that might concern you.


Cleodos.
Sir,
It is your worthiness, that you will not acknowledge your own noble and
virtuous actions.


Beumont,
Sir,
Those words would become me better in acknowledgement of your worth, wherein
you far exceed me; yet in respect of amity, J will not yield, but ever
maintain a constant affection toward you.


Cleodos,
Sir,
I will always retain in memory your good deserts in my behalf, and you
shall know, that you have not sowed your benefits on a barren ground, that will
yield you nothing; for your love shall always reap the fruits of my service.


Beumont,
Sir,
Thereby you will oblige me, for I must acknowledge the number of your benefits
do bind me to serve you; but I never did you any kindness deserving your
acceptance, much less meriting to be remembered by you; yet hereafter I will
extend my power to the uttermost, to show a mind free from ingratitude.


Cleodos.
Sir,
That you have done already, and I doubt not but you will persevere in your
affection; my care is only how I may requite your former courtesies.


Beumont,
Sir,
It is I that am troubled to imagine how I may acquit my self for your former
courtesies; for if you still proceed to be your self in such noble actions
toward me, I must acknowledge my self overcome in the contention of Love.


Cleodos.
Sir,
You shall not need to contend, since the former courtesies you have done me,
do require that I should yield my self to be, your humblest servant.


To entertain a Gentlewoman at your Chamber.
Aim. I Have brought you to a rude Chamber, but I am much beholding to you, for
taking pains to grace me and my lodging; and am only sorry, I shall not give
you such entertainment, as you deserve; let me bid you welcome with a kind
salutation.


Gent. Indeed, Sir, You have an handsome Chamber, fit to entertain one of
greater credit than my self; I hope you will pardon my boldness for
accompanying you thus far; if I did not know you, I should be suspicious of bad
dealing; and some jealous brains would not stick to censure me of too much
familiarity.


Aim. I hope you are confident in me, that my intents are fair and noble, for
J will not offend you with moving any thing that may tend to your disgrace,
since my chiefest desire is to enjoy your company, and to discourse a while
with you; here we have place and opportunity.


Gent. But those are enemies to our Sex, yet I hope, you will be right and
square in all your actions.


Aim. May I never prosper, If I seek any thing but your own contentment; for
if I should make any base motion, you may with a frown command me to silence,
and your displeasure would be to me above all torments.


Gent. I do not fear your honest intent, but these wanton Pictures are
Emblemes of your roving affection; yet one of them I like very well, and would
request it of you, if modesty would permit.


Aim. Alas! these are but shadows wherein the Painter has expressed some skill,
but if you please to make choice of the best of my Chamber, it shall be at your
command.


Gent. I dare not presume so much, and though I should embrace your offer, it
would grieve me, that I could not make you some requital; it does not become
me to be too much beholding, by trespassing on your free bounty.


Aim. Alas! What is it that I can deny you? Pray esteem me at your command,
and you shall favor me, if you make yonder picture worthy of your acceptance.


Gent. I thank you; it may be, I will be so bold to send for it. Now it
remains, that I must thank you for your kind entertainment and banquet, and
so leave you, desiring pardon of my boldness.


Aim. Since you will not be detained, I will wait upon you to your coach, and
acknowledge my self infinitely obliged for your favor, in daigning this kind
visitation.


To present a Ring to a Gentlewoman.
AIM. Pardon me, if I, moved thereunto by the zealous affection which I bear
you, do here express it in the dumb language of a small present, unworthy
your acceptance; yet I pray wear it for my sake, it may draw down your eye to
think on me, who now am wounded by the powerful beams of your beauty.


Gent. Sir, Though it would show a scornful mind in me, not to accept your
love tendered unto me in such a visible manner; yet I am sorry you should be
at so great and needless charges: for wherein can I serve you to make
requital?


Aim. It is you that make this unworthy present precious, for if you deigne to
let it encircle your white finger, it being a Diamond Ring, will sparkle most
in the dark, showing that love, like a clouded Star, shines lightest in the
night of misfortune.


Gent. Well, Sir, I am obliged by courtesy to receive it, and since you please
to confer so rich a gift, on my unworthiness, J will wear it for your sake.


Aim. Then you honor me above my desert; for your acceptance of this sacrifice
of my love, is to me above all rewards. The Ring is inscribed with Amor
circulus, love is a circle without end.


Gent. I must acknowledge your bounty, and my self your servant, in bestowing
on me so rich a gift.


Aim. The sparkling luster thereof, cannot compare with the light beams of
your eyes; but honor me so much to carry it on your finger.


Gent. I promise that, and more, acknowledge my selfe-infinitely beholding to
you.


Aim. Enough is said, concerning so poor a matter: yet in your acceptance of
this trifle, I bless my own happiness.


To woe a coy, scornful Maid.
Aim. LEt not my love be misconstrued for presumption, if I once again strive
to warm your affection, by declaring unto you, how much I honor your
perfections; pray at last be merciful, and do not still reward my love with
cold disdain.


Maid. Sir, I know that men have powerful language, but I am none of those
young ones; you are deceived, if you think that fine musk words can sweeten me
up to betray my self; and for my beauty, I would not have you doat on that:
it suffices me, without commendation.


Aim. Should J not commend what all admire, I were much too blame.


Maid. Sir, Wisemen admire nothing, for if I were beautiful, What is beauty,
but a fading flower, blasted often, with too much breathing on, and cannot grow
safely upon the stalk of virginity, because every one will be reaching forth to
gather it? Pray excuse me if I prevent danger, for love and I are quite fallen
out.


Aim. Let me reconcile you to a good opinion of a chaste Love, there is no
greater happiness than the sacred union of hearts, especially when long and
humble suit conquers disdain, and so J hope perseverance will at last crown
me with your love, and bring you to entertain my desire with a mutual
affection.


Maid. Sir, If you would be more thrifty of your breath, you might spend it to
better purpose, for you may intimate your desires, and make tedious discourses:
but in a word, I shall never love you.


Aim. O say not so, you know not how much misery those few words would bring
upon me, for hope, grounded on your gentle disposition, has hitherto kept me
alive, and makes me walk like a faint shadow, while in my Chamber I am like a
mourner, with a taper by me, watching my own funeral, and I dwell there in a
mist of sighs; and all this is for your sake.


Maid. Well I hope you will not accuse me of your death, pray shake off this
love, and I will then acknowledge your kindness in ceasing to trouble me with
complaints. Learn wisdom, that will cure all distempers.


Aim. Yet while I live, I will attend upon you, and when I am dead, I will
visit you in a dream, and tell you, you were a cruel maid. To conclude, let
one parting kiss seal my pasport to Elysium, and I am gone.


Maid. Well, since you are so resolute, I will strive to give you a better
answer at your next return.


Aim. In confidence of that happiness, I will presume to visit you again, and
live to be your servant.


A jesting discourse with a Maid.
Aim. COme, why will you be an enemy to your self, and let modesty keep you
still in the state of virginity? I came to offer my service to help you of
this trouble.


Maid. You are very kind; but I like my present estate, Maids are happy.


Aim. Alas! poor Ignorance, do thou talk of happiness? I tell thee, until
thou art married, thou art but a Cipher, and of none account.


Maid. o Sir, You are deceived; our hearts, free from the passion of love,
retain a world of happiness, being exempted from any wanton knowledge; for
maids, dying in their present condition, do all go to Heaven.


Aim. You are deceived, their punishment is to lead Apes in Hell; and therefore
to avoyde this, be kind while you may, and accept of a friendly offer.


Maid. What offer?


Aim. Least it should raise a blush upon your cheek, I will whisper it into
your ear, you understand.


Maid. I hear too much, thy infectious words have betrayed a base ignoble
mind.


Aim. Why? I did but tell you a truth, I had thought you had bin more
intelligent, and would not have started at a bold word.


Maid. Nay farewell.


Aim. Pardon me, all I have spoken was to try your temper, and having found
you both wise and witty, I will desire you in a fair manner to grant me your
love, which I only desire; and though I did appear rash and wanton, you shall
find me worthy of your affection.


To contract privately ones self, and tie the knot of Marriage.
Aim. NOw, our Love has arrived to an happy conclusion, the storms raised by
your disdain, being blown over, the union of our affections making a soft and
gentle harmony, which the Soul can only discern; therefore that our new begun
love may never expire, J do here in the sight of heaven and all good Angels,
marry and contract my Soul to yours, and give away my self wholly to be at
your disposing, until the Ceremonies of the Church do confirm my promise.


Maid. With as true an affection I do give over my self into your possession,
and freely bestow on you, my love, which shall never know alteration, but
remain ever firm and constant to you now it is expedient that you obtain my
friends good will, according to your promise; and till then we must remain
only contracted in affection.


Aim. Heaven, I beseech thee bear witness to our private agreement, and may I
never know one day of comfort, when I break my promised vow; let me now
embrace you with the arms of affection, and thus with a kiss seal the
obligation of our Love.


To salute a friend newly arrived from a Journey.
Alex. SIr, When the news of your return had arived to my knowledge, J was
pained with an earnest desire to behold you, and prevent other of your friends,
by the first tender of my service: that as my love toward you does exceed
theirs, in true, perfect sincerity: so it might in place obtain priority, and
show how ambitious I am of your favor.


Aymwell. Sir, You still continue your former nobleness, making it your chief
aim, to exceed others in perfection of mind; otherwise I had intentions to
visit you, but it is your desire and happiness to overcome your friends in
kindness; for which I can but return you thanks, and acknowledge you a
worthy friend.


Alex. Sir, You make too good an interpretation of ^y rash presumption, but it
is held, that friends ^ave but one soul in two bodies; therefore, when J
behold you, I enjoy the other half of my self; besides, after long absence,
your compa^y must needs be more precious; so that I had ^oth Love and Reason
on my side, to persuade ^e to come and visit you.


Aymwell. Sir, I want words to express my mind, ^r to argue a case in love;
but in my opini^n, I ought to have visited you first, in re^ard I am very much
obliged unto you: ^ut to proceed no farther in ceremony, let ^s discourse of
some other affairs. I will ^e bold to enquire, how all our friends do.


Alex. Sir, Some of them have undergone change ^f fortunes, and therein
declared an invincible ^rength of mind; but Heaven be thanked, all that honor
and respect you, are living, and in ^ealth.


Aim. Sir, I am wonderful glad to hear of it, and I shall rejoice exceedingly
when I ^eete any of my old acquaintance; I hope I am not altogether lost unto
their remembrance, they will know me certainly.


Alex. Sir. Travel has not wrought much change in you, but I detain you, I
fear, from your rest.


Aim. Sir, Were I tired with travel, as I am not, yet your company would very
much refresh me.


Alex. Sir, I will crave your pardon at this time, I know to tarry longer,
would be troublesome unto you; but to morrow I will wait on you again.


To entertain a friend, who is come to visit one.
Alex. Sir, I Am most glad to see you, though I have no other entertainment
for you, but a kind welcome.


Aymwell. Sir, I expect no more, I come to enjoy your company, and to be happy
in your society; for in the general, I do find none that can suite my
condition, so well as your self.


Alex. Sir, Take of me what pleases you, I am vowed to your service; and your
loving visitation is an addition to your many other kindnesses.


Aim. Sir. All that I acknowledge, is a will to do you service: but I have
been slow in producing the effects, hereafter I will study to deserve.


Alex. Sir, it is your ingenuous goodness, to decline the acknowledgement of
your own virtue and deserts, far surpassing my merit; for it is I am bound to
be your servant.


Aim. Sir, It is I that am obliged to you, by many strong ties of affection,
from which the service of my life cannot disengage me; but I have trespast
against manners, pray take the chair.


Alex. Sir, Please you to sit first, for it becomes me to wait your leisure.


Aim. Sir, J am provided, but if it may not appear too much boldness, what
was the Adamant, or occasion, that made you thus kind, to visit my lodging?


Alex. Sir, Shall I tell you? I came not to borrow money, or to enforce your
good nature to grant any motion of request; but only to keep our love and amity
fresh, and in perfect strength, by some conference.


Aim. Sir, You have chosen a bad opportunity, my affairs carry me away from my
friends; besides the obligation of my word to a Lady, to attend upon her this
day.


Alex. Sir, I will choose some other time, to attend you.


Aim. Sir. J will attend upon you, if J might know the place, and hour, where
to meet you.


Alex. Sir, I will not put you to that trouble, it will become me rather to
wait on you.


Aim. Sir, Pardon me, I am much obliged to you.


Alex. Sir, I am your servant.


Aim. Sir, I am the servant of your servants, pray remember my respects to all
our friends.


Alex. Sir, I will be yours in that, and all other services.


To woe a fair young Gentlewoman.
Aymwell. PArdon me, I pray, if I presume to speak, what I have hitherto, with
much affliction, hid from your knowledge.

There is a Gentleman that has beheld your outward beauty, and by his
judgment clearly discerned your virtues, the ornament of your mind; these
have produced in him a strange effect, so that in spite of his own Reason, or
disswasion of friends, he is violently compelled to speak truth.


Penelope. Sir, Call you this an affliction? It Is unhappiness to speak, and
hear truth.


Aymwell, Do you hold that opinion? Then I will convince you by your own
argument. For if it be unhappiness to hear truth; then I hope you will pardon
me, if being compelled by the strength of my passion, I do truly tell you,
that J have placed my affection wholly upon you, or as they commonly say, J do
love you.


Pen. Sir, I am sorry that you have made me the object of your love, I know
your birth and person may deserve one of greater account; and therefore I am
amazed at the unexpressed novelty of your motion, not imagining, but your
bosom had been free from any flame: let your wisdom then suppress it, least
your love become fruitless in the event.


Aim. I will not be discouraged by your first answer, for neither are you
beneath me in quality, who am your servant; neither can it appear to you so
strange a matter, that I should be taken with your beauty, which others admire;
though it be my fortune only, to be bolder then the rest, and I hope not
unwelcome.


Penelope. Sir, I would not have you cherish any uncertain hope, nor build any
assured foundation, where you have no ground given: love cannot be compelled,
but must flow from the spring of natural desire; but I find in my self no
inclination to entertain your affection; therefore you must pardon me, if I
deny your suit, which I cannot grant.


Aim. Nothing is impossible to love; for if you would believe that I bear a
noble and constant affection toward you, you would soon overcome this
difficulty, and incline your mind to reward my affection with your favor.


Pen. Sir, I am confident, that your affection is right and perfect, not
seeking, under a fair and colorable pretense, to betray me: yet I cannot
force my self to consent to your motion, I being utterly ignorant in Love
matters; therefore excuse me, till time, and consideration shall enforce me how
to answer your desire.


Aim. I am comforted, that you have not utterly denied my suit; I hope at my
next visitation to receive more comfort; till then, I take my leave, and
presume only to breath my heart upon your hand, or, if you please, your lip,
desiring you to remember me in absence.


When one meets a friend in the Street.
Alex. GOD save you, Sir, You are most happily met. How fare you?


Clor. Sir, I am the better to see you well and lusty, why will you not do me
the honor to visit me at my Chamber?


Alex. Sir, I must confess I have often broken promise therein, but business
would not permit me, otherwise I had long since waited on you.


Clor. Sir, I should rather account my self obliged to wait on you, for I am
bound unto you for many favors; especially, for the last courtesy you did me
in a matter which concerned me much. Will you now do me the kindness to bear
my respects to a Gentlewoman?


Alex. Sir, If she be honest, I am ready to go on your errand. I hope you will
not put me on a disgraceful piece of service.


Clor. Sir, I hope you have no such bad suspicion of me, for she is both a
fair and virtuous Gentlewoman, and has a nimble wet: but I know you can
deliver your mind in an excellent way.


Alex. Sir, It is you, whom Mercury the god of wit has adorned with a gentle
amorous speech; but I will speak in your behalf, in as good and effectual
terms as I can remember.


Clor. Sir, You shall do me then a most perfect favor. Tell her, I am her
ready and willing servant, and that the power of love has given her my heart,
which I will come to fetch, in hope she will give it me back, and till then
keep it warm in her own bosom. But what need I instruct you, who are all
Love and Courtship?


Alex. Sir, I will perform your command, though not in such words, as you
would desire, yet so as my sudden Genius shall prompt me, but I have heard it
said.


That in way of love and glory,
Lovers best tell their own story.
Clor. Sir, Pardon me, J know whom I do entrust with this business, I am
assured of your fidelity, and that you can deliver your mind in a powerful
manner, especially, to Gentlewomen.


Alex. Sir, It must be my love to you that must inspire me: but I promise you,
I will strive to speak my best.

Sir, I am confident in you, and at your return from my Mistress, I will
prepare thanks for this great piece of service, and rest, yours obliged.


Clor. Sir, It is but my duty, I am happy to be employed in any service that
concerns you, suppose this done.


To court a Gentlewoman in the way of Marriage.
Eugenius. Mistress, I doubt not but that you will judge me as rash as bold:
but I beseech your divine beauty which glittereth in your fair eyes, to
excuse my audacity, and to pardon my temeritie, which have emboldened me to
come and present unto you my most humble and most affectionate service.


Calia. Sir, I am very sorry that I have not the honor to know you: and I
mervaile that you will offer service to me, that of all am most unworthy.


Eugenius. Mistress, It is the sweetness of your natural goodness that
causes you to speak in this sort.


Calia. Pardon me Sir, I speak nothing but I know to be most true.


Eugenius. Lady, This singular modesty which I see to the life expressed in
your words, gives me a hope that you will entertain my intentions not as harsh
and disconsonant, but as agreeable and consonant, and that in time I shall
obtain some one of your favors and graces.


Calia. Sir, if there were any graces in me, they were yours: but I have not
any, you can expect none.


Eugenius. Mistress, It is that, which obliges me to a greater estimation of
you, and makes you more amiable, and me more affectionate toward you: so also
J beseech you to believe that my intentions were never otherwise than chaste and
virtuous, and that I never had any other end than honesty. Did you think me to
have framed some design prejudicious to your honors. J had rather loose my
being, than entertain any such thought: so also is it my resolution for ever
to continue your most faithful and obedient servant, as the effects shall make
it evident that the proof thereof shall manifestly appear whenever your
commands shall call upon me.


Calia, I humbly thank you Sir with my best affection; as also for the pains
you have taken for one that no way merits such favors, I being your very
humble servant.


Eugenius. Lady, It is I that am so deeply engaged to you, that I am
disenabled to quit my self of the obligation, and therefore (most fair
Mistress) I beseech and conjure you to make use of my service and me, in
whatsoever you shall judge me capable to serve you. And in the mean time after
a million of recommendations J will be bold to take my leave of you, and will
leave my heart with you as an astage and pledge of my fidelity and constancy.


Calia. Farewell Sir, and I give you humble thanks for this your loving visit.


Eugenius, I hope to see you again and very speedily, where for the present I
must leave you.


Calia. Sir, So far as your intentions shall continue good, and your suits
lawful, you shall always find our doors open, and also to Gentlemen like
your self, who shall not want our best entertainment according to our best
possibility, and in that regard you shall no oftener come then be welcome.


Eugenius. Lady, J do assure you that I now go to elongate my self from my
bright day, and confine my self into an abisse of melancholy darkness: for I
dare be bold to protest unto you, that without you, I enjoy no light of day,
and therefore all the time of this sad absence will be so tedious to me, that
moments will be hours, the hours days, and the days will be ages, unless
it be so that the experience of being in your favor will be my sole
consolation, and with that I will arm my self with a resolute patience.


Calia. You speak strong lines Sir, but it may be you are not so passionate as
your words pretend. Farewell Sir, till our next meeting:


Eugenius. Mistress, you do a wrong to your beauty, and to my love which is
faithful and loyal: but I hope that time will make me appear more largely to
be what I am, and seeing necessity constraines me to retire from you, J will
never retreat from my affection which your fair eyes have darted into my
soul. And so Lady adieu till my next review, which I assure you shall be my
soonest possible.


To present something to a friend.
Alex. SIR, I have always had an earnest desire to make my service visible
unto you, and therefore I am bold to present unto you this Ring; desiring you,
not to value the gift, but the affection of the giver, who does sacrifice this
unto you, from the Altar of an humble heart.


A. Sir, This is an addition to your many other favors, you are mindful of me
above my merit; how shall I make you requital?


A. Sir, Your acceptance thereof is the chief aim of my desires; I would have
you think, that true love uses by dumb signs and tokens to express it self.


A. Sir, Believe me, so rich a gift as this has a most powerful language: if
it had been meaner, it would have sufficed me, who must rest beholding unto
you, till I have opportunity to declare my self farther.


A. Sir, It is your worthiness that makes it appear so worthy: but I know no
gift can be above your merit, nor sufficient to declare in what ties of
observance I am bound unto you: your acceptance gives it more luster and
richness then the Ring does deserve, being but a mean token of my affection.


A. Sir, J beseech you do not extenuate your self, nor it.


A. Sir, This Ring is but the emblem of my service, which since you are
pleased to receive, I must give you many thanks for your acceptance.


A. Sir, It is easy to persuade the receipt of a thing of such value, but I
will merit it as the oblation of my love.


A. Sir, For that I must remain eternally your constant, faithful friend.


A. Sir, I am yours in all respectfull services, to be commanded.


A. Sir, You oblige me too much both in words and deeds, I am all yours.


To entreat a courtesy of a friend.
A. SIr, as necessity has no law, so it has no shame; for, contrary to my
disposition, I must become an importunate Suter unto you.


A. Sir, Name it, it must be something more then I know of, which I can deny
you, who are always modest in your requests.


A. Sir, I fear I shall give you no occasion to report the contrary, I would
desire you to lend me your Horse, to carry away a little treasure by Mooneshine.


A. Sir, I do not well understand you, pray interpret your self, and disguise
not your meaning.


A. Sir, I would desire you to dispense with me, it is a matter that concerns
me near, I am to bear away the Usurers Daughter, and carry her where she
shall remain private, till storms be blown over; pardon me, that I have made
you acquainted with my purpose.


Alex. Sir, J will be ready to assist you, and since your fortune cannot
proceed without my Horses legs, if he were the Muses Pegasus he shall be your
servant, it is but to carry away a piece of live Venison, and that is a mean
trespass; Cupid has enough in his Park.


Aim. Sir, I am glad you are so pleasant, and do so well apprehend my intents.
I was afraid, least my purpose being known, which was manifest in me to
deliver, I should have suffered repulse, and have been blamed by you for my
bold attempt.


Alex. No, Sir, I do account it in you a bravery of mind, that dare aspire to
reach a fortune, and pluck the golden Apples of Hesperides, watch't by the old
Dragon the Usurer: but I would not have you lose time in talk; I will bid the
groom prepare my horse ready for your employment.


A. Sir, The whole service of my life cannot requite your kindness, for since
you have granted this request so willingly, I shall owe my good fortune to your
favorable assistance.


A. Sir, I will pray that your attempt may be prosperous, for I shall rejoice
in your happiness, as much as in mine own; Therefore my good wishes shall be
your good Genius, to wait on you; while my Prayers solicit heaven, for your
happy success.


A. Sir, You have expressed your self a noble friend; and when this business is
past, all the study of my life shall be to show my thankfulness to you.


Alex. Sir, I desire nothing, but that you may thrive in your desires.


A. Sir, Next my intended purpose, my chiefest glory and ambition is, to thrive
in your favor.


Upon his absence.
EVgenius, I protest to you my fairest, that I could never have believed that
the torments of happiness from our loves could have been so miserable; for I
dare swear to thee by those fair eyes the stars of my fortunes, that I
dwelt with impatiency and sorrows till I saw you.


Cos. Is it possible Sir? surely I can hardly believe it.


Eugenius, Mistress I beseech you to believe it if you please, for I assure you
that I could no longer endure nor support the violence and troublesome
tediousnes which I endured in the time of your so long absence, the object of
my good and sole content being removed.


Cael. Sir, It may very well be, for you seem very passionate in your actions.


Eugenius, I protest that it is unpossible for me to take any complacency in
the world, but in that only that flatters my affection, and in the aspect of
your rare form and most excellent Beauty.


Cael. Sir, It pleases you to term it so; content your self in laughing at
me, as you may at one that injoyeth not the least glimpse of beauty in my
self.


Eugenius, Wherein my dearest, should you conceive so of me? J do assure you
with the better part of my soul, that I should be a miserable man, should I
not really speak what my affections suggest as truth: know LADY, that you see
a man that is wholly yours, and desires not to live but for you, and to do you
service: but that which troubles me most is that of necessity I must absent
my self from you upon a very urgent occasion, but I beseech you to believe and
conceive so of me that whither soever J go, I shall carry with me the lively
delineaments of your perfections, and that I shall not live but by the Idea of
your beauty with perfect resolution of obeying you, and therefore my sweetest
adieu for a while, for the present to have me excused that I cannot enjoy the
felicity of your most desired company, but must take my leave so abruptly.


C. Sir, I infinitely thank you, and bid you also adieu, wishing you a safe
return.


A merry Discourse between Rowland and Susan, sitting up late together.
ROw. It is time, Susan, that I should now discover my mind unto you, we have
been long servants together, and ever since my first coming, I have borne you
good will, which I would desire you to accept, and grant me your love.


Susan. For that you must pardon me, for J do not intend to marry, and
therefore let that serve for an excuse, since I would be loath to discourage
you, and say, I cannot love you.


Row. I hope you will not, for since I first beheld you, I have admired your
perfections.


Susan. You know, affection cannot be compelled; therefore I thank you for the
good will which you have hitherto borne me, but as for your love, I cannot
accept of it.


Row. Then I perceive you love some other.


Susan. I desire you to excuse me, I cannot frame my mind to fancy you, though
I know you deserve my betters; but for me to settle affection where I cannot
love, would be an endless misery: the Bryer and Honey-suckle cannot well
agree.


R. Then you compare me to a Bryer, but I will with all humility put up your
disdain, hoping that the continuance of my love shall soften your mind, to
receive me into some degree of favor, for I protest, I love you entirely.


S. The utmost I can do for you in requital of your love, is, to give you
thanks, and counsel to suppress your desire, and not to proceed any farther
in this suit, which at last will become fruitless.


R. I should be sorry then: by this kiss which I presume to take, none has
power over me but your self, I love you all over, and if you would license my
heart to stray about, how happy should I be?


S. Nay, then I perceive your love is but a rash and wanton desire; neither can
I stay with you any longer, least my absence out of my Mistresses Chamber might
breed some suspicion.


R. Stay, I will hold you in the prison of my arms, and if you will get your
freedom, you shall yield me some of your sweetest kisses, which are but
shadows of that substantial happiness which you could afford me.


S. Nay, pray be not rude, nor give me cause to suspect that your love is
dishonest, I had formerly better opinion of you, but now I am jealous of your
good intent.


R. Pardon me, if love have made me offend in some boisterous actions.


S. Come pray let me be gone, I shall be angry if you hinder me.


Row. Well then, I obey your desire, but let me prevail farther with you at
our next meeting.


An Enterchange of Ceremonies at parting with a friend taking a long journey.
SIr, I am very sorry that my affairs do compel me to take my leave of you,
from whom I have received so many benefits, which have bound me in many ties
ever to serve you, neither have I any way left to satisfy my self in
requiting your former kindnesses, but to acknowledge them far above my
requital, and to desire you, that you would both receive the tender of my
humble service, and command me in something, whereby I might express how much
I honor your desert.

Sir, I cannot choose but grieve that you must now be divided from us, by a
tedious journey; yet since he loves himself better than his friend, that will
not yield to any thing for his good, I am content in that regard to loose your
company a while, wishing you both a prosperous journey, and that in your
absence you would remember me, who will always in my daily prayers solicit
heaven for your safe return, desiring to be excused for your poor
entertainment, which perhaps makes you desirous to be gone.

Sir, Pardon me, the entertainment I have found, was far above my desert, for
which I render you a million of thanks. There remains nothing now, but that
you honor me with your commands.

Sir, I entreat you make not so great haste to be gone.

Sir, I could willingly defer my journey, to enjoy your company; but the wind
stands fair for France, therefore let us conclude all Ceremonies.

Sir, Since we must dispense with your departure, I pray do us the courtesy
to revive our drooping minds, with the good tidings of your safe arivall in
France.

Sir, Be assured I cannot be unmindfull of you, nor of my other friends, to
whom I pray you to commend me, since I cannot take my leave of them all in
particular.

Sir, J am glad you will do me the favor to give me any employment in your
absence, I will perform your desire.

Sir, I can but thank you, and for your love in bringing me to my Ship,
which is a trouble, that you would take upon you, though on my part undeserved.

Sir, I am happy to serve you in any thing, God send you a prosperous journey.

Sir, I doubt not but I shall arive in safety, trouble your self no farther,
since I cannot remain with you to requite your kindness.

Sir, Since you will needs have it so, I will bid you, farewell, with all the
affection of a constant friend.

To invite one to dinner.
Alex. PRay let me prevail so much with you, to entreat your company to
dinner.


Clorin. Sir, I humbly thank you for your courtesy, but my business will not
permit; therefore I desire to be excused.


Alex. Nay good, Sir, Let me not be denied, I must confess indeed your cheer
will not be worthy of your stay; but you shall be heartily welcome.


Clorin. Sir, I would willingly obey your desire, but I fear to be too bold.


Alex. Sir, You shall be most welcome; you shall command in my house as in your
own.


Clori. Your offer is so large and courteous, that I must yield to wait on
you, for you have overcome me in ceremony; but you will draw upon your self
much trouble.


Alex. Sir, You will find but course fare, but such as it is, pray esteem
your self most heartily welcome, and in a real manner without complement.


Clori. Sir, Here is much plenty, and you wrong your self to excuse your fare,
whereof there is so great abundance, that unless you would have provided all
the variety that was in Noah's Ark, I know not how it could be mended.


Alex. It is your favor to commend and accept of any thing, but pray excuse
me, once more I desire it: if I had been certain of your honoring my house
with your presence, I would have made better preparation for your
entertainment.


Clori. Sir, I desire you rather to excuse my boldness, in putting you to so
much trouble, you may perceive that I think my self welcome by my liberal
feeding: I am no mincing Bride, whose thoughts of eating are took away with
the conceit of the night following.


Alex. I beseech you spare not, J am glad to see you so pleasant, and to
increase your mirth, I will drink to your health in wine, in hope you will
pledge me.


Clor. Sir, They say there is truth in wine, and if there be truth in wine, I
will find it out, let the health be nere so deep.


Alex. Thank you for doing me this piece of justice: pray see if you can make
a homely Dinner, otherwise J know not how to be excused for inviting you.


Clori. Sir, To decline ceremony, you have most worthily feasted me, and
honored me so much, that I must ever acknowledge your exceeding bounty and
courtesy.


Ceremonies at sitting down at the Table.
Alexander. GEntlemen, Pray take your places, I know not how to direct you. But
first let us wash.


Gentlemen. Pray begin, for it is fit that we should follow you.


Alexander. In this matter, Ceremonies are needless; but you will do nothing
without my example, and therefore I will begin.


Gentlemen. Then in obedience to your desire, we will wash with you.


Alexander. I beseech you Gentlemen, to save me a labor, and take your places.


Gentlemen. Sir, We expect your sitting down, and afterward, we will not
contend much for prioritie of place.


Alexander. Come, M. Getting, you are my old acquaintance, you shall favor me
to sit here by me.


Gentleman. By no means, that is not my place, here is a Gentleman deserves to
be seated there.


Alexander. Sir, I have designed you this place, pray let me rule so far.


Gentleman. Sir, J should be loath to be too troublesome, and yet J would not
presume before my betters.


Alexander. Sir, You are too full of excuse, you may yield to take your due
place, otherwise I should wrong you.


Gentleman. Sir, I beseech you then to excuse me, and account it your fault, if
J transgress the bounds of manners, in assuming a place far above my desert,
and which is of right belonging to these other Gentlemen.


Alexander. We might have spared this ceremony, for the appetite loves good
dainties better than Complements Now pray serve your selves, you are kindly
welcome.


Gentlemen. Sir, We will not put you to any trouble in helping us, we know
that manners will allow us to make a dinner, we come to trespass on you.


The Feasters excuse to his friend, after dinner.
Alex. Sir, I desire you to excuse your mean fare, and slender entertainment,
whereunto I have presumed much to invite you; but I hope our ancient
acquaintance, and your own good nature will procure me a pardon, in that I
have done this only to enjoy your company and society, for your good discourse
is to me a feast, far exceeding any fare that I could provide for you.


Friend, Your real kindness has bin such and so unexpected, that I cannot give
you sufficient thanks for your courtesy and kind entertainment: all that I
can render, is to promise, that I will snatch an opportunity to express my
gratitude.


Alex. You have honored me enough, in your acceptance of my good will. But it
is not good to stir suddenly after dinner. Let Us talk, you are conversant
abroad, what news do you hear?


Friend, Pardon me, Sir, the world runs about me while I stand unmoved, never
marking the motion thereof, and therefore I am altogether ignorant in
Novelties, it may be you hear more.


A. Indeed Sir, I have so many affairs, that I can enquire after none, I
thought you could have given us some good intelligence.


Friend. Sir, I desire you to excuse me, for I hold it a fruitless employment,
but yet to satisfy your request, if I knew any fresh news, that were not yet
in print, J will be bold to tell you somewhat, since you desire it.


A. I will not importune you any farther, but desire your pardon, that I should
impose on you the office of a Taleteller: excuse my intent therein, since what
I desire, was to pass away the time while we sit: but now, if you please, we
will rise.


Friend. Sir, Then I must really thank you, you have made me bold with you, J
will accompany you a while to the fire, and then take my leave.


To offer service to a young Maid.
AIM, Seeing you are alone, I would offer you to attend on you, if you would
accept of my service.


Maid. It is more than J desire, or deserve; and it would appear boldness in
me to accept of a strangers company.

It is not for me to accept all shows and offers of kindness, I can but
thank you for your good will, I am not far distant from my own home.


Aim. Pray let me bear you company, and by the way make me happy in some
discourse, resolve me one question; Were you never in love?


Maid. Though it be no manners to answer one question, with demanding another;
yet I will presume to ask you, If you were never in love?


Aim. Fair one, from thence springs my unhappiness, I am too forward in these
desires, J have beheld many beauties, but you have prevailed more than the
rest, to conquer my affection; and I must acknowledge, that in meeting you, I
have met death, or life.


Maid. Pray speak in plain terms, I am ignorant of your meaning.


Aim. I desire you then to know and believe, that I am already far in love
with you, and I hope you will not scorn my sudden motion, if I should desire
you to reward my love with your favor; and by the way, let me entreat you, to
think that heaven had appointed our strange accidental meeting and gave me
boldness to petition your favor and affection, which I hope you will grant.


Maid. Sir I know not in this case how to give an answer, that may procure your
content, but I desire you importune me no farther, but grant me time to
consider your motion, this is my Fathers house, whither, if please you to come
hereafter, I will study to resolve you, howsoever you shall be welcome.


Aim. But before I lose your presence, which is my chief happiness, let me
tell you, that when you go in, you bear away my heart with you, and I shall
only languish in sorrow, tell I visit you again.


Maid. Pray, Sir, do not hold me longer in discourse, there are many jealous
eyes that do watch an occasion to make me censured for maintaining with you
such unusual familiarity; pray, as you tender my credit, leave me.


A. I must obey, honor me with an ordinary salutation, and I will vanish like
a shadow, that will return again to wait on you, who are the substance of my
life.


To confer with a Widow in an amorous wooing manner.
Aim. I would entreat you (fair Widow) not to discourage me in my first
suit, since your modesty and virtuous carriage in your Husbands life time, has
made me bold to plead for affection; and to cherish a certain hope, that I
shall obtain my desire.


Widow. Sir, I would not have you imagine, that my love to my former Husband
was written on a Table book, the Letters whereof may be soon wiped out
again; no, it was engraved upon my heart, and there does remain to inform
me that I ought not to wrong him with a second marriage.


Aymwell. Nay, Widow, I must acknowledge you have a fair pretense to put me
off, with the remembrance of your said Husband, but will you always punish
your self, and fast from the joys of marriage?


Wid. It is my full resolved purpose, and therefore let not any wanton opinion
concerning me, give you hope of obtaining my love; Alas! Since his departure, I
am dead unto the world, and do but only live, to sigh, when I remember that I
had so good a Husband.


Aim. His goodness is gone with him, but for my part, I will be your living
active servant; come, come, put off grief and false imaginations of honoring
the dead, for if his soul were capable of any knowledge, concerning earthly
matters, it would rejoice to see you happily married, and as he gave you all
contentment in his l fe time, so he would desire that you might be supplied in
the same kind after his death.


Wid. You speak unhappily, but pray be satisfied that I intend not to marry,
yet I respect your good will, and other matters will remain ready to requite
your love.


Aim. For other matters I am satisfied, but your love is the mark whereat I
aim, why should you thus strive to become a virgin again, and forget the
conceit of former pleasures, which are yet fresh in your remembrance; fie, fie,
you do not well to make your self so dull of apprehension, I am come to offer
service in the right kind, and therefore you are very much too blame, to refuse
the tender of my labor.


Widow, You speak mysteries; but I desire if you love me, show it in ceasing
to prosecute your suit; for I must tell you plainly, it will prove fruitless,
and of none effect.


Aymwell, I cannot believe, but that I shall be more fortunately happy to
obtain your favor; words are not always the interpreters of the heart, and I
am confident, for all this, that you love me.


Widow, Persuade your self to it, but I shall never give you cause to think
so, yet I will ever respect you, and be ready to do you any usual courtesy.


Aymwell, Well I thank you that I have so far thrived in my suit; I hope
hereafter to get deeper into your favor.


Wid. Your hope is built upon a false foundation, and had I known your intent,
I would not have held discourse with you so long; I must leave your company.


Aymwell, Let me rather take my leave of you, and seal a kiss upon your lip
until I visit you again, for no mortal Widow shall discourage me, but I will
come again about that business.


To excuse some offense to a Gentlewoman.
AYmwell, I must acknowledge I was somewhat too bold to enforce a kiss from
you, in the presence of other friends; but I pray excuse my passion, and let
your mercy be showed in pardoning, as my folly was in offending.


Pen. Sir, It was so great a trespass, and so directly aimed against my white
fame and reputation, that no repentance can satisfy for a fault of that
nature.


Aim. It cannot exceed the limits of forgiveness, or if your wrath cannot be
otherwise satisfied, enjoyne me some penance, as great as your anger, whereby I
may recover your lost favor, and make it appear, how sorry I am for
committing so rash an offense.


Penelope: Nay, you may enjoy that kiss violently took from me before so
many witnesses; but never any more.


Aim. I must confess it was my rashness, but if you will that I repay it back
again, I will give you interest for that one, and vow unto you, never to
offend your patience in the like kind.


Penelope. Well, since you are so willing to repent, and to show unfeigned
sorrow, I must needs accept them for present satisfaction, desiring you
hereafter to be more careful of my credit, and never again to make so bold an
offer.


Aim. You have charmed me to obedience, since your words are a law, which I
dare not transgress, for I am in all things, your obedient servant.


The Lovers farewell.
Leonora. ALas! Sir, is this the hour then, when the severe rigor of your
absence must eclipse my days of their bright beams? Oh how this sad news
does fire my spirits! and not without reason, since you to whom I had wholly
consecrated my self, will not deigne a merciful eye on my sufferings for your
absence.


Florestan. Mistress, Fear not, but rest assured, that so long as life will
give me leave to enjoy the Suns brightness, never shall any other have power
over me; do me only the favor, that having given you these new assurances of
my fidelity, you will be pleased to render me some real promises of yours.
Besides, I protest to you, Lady, I will never acknowledge any other light then
yours, no more than the Earth does other then the Suns.


Leon. Sir, They are no false promises that I have made you, but true
assurances, drawn from my heart by the force of my passion. And know, that all
things here be neath shall sooner change their natural inclinations, then in
me shall be seen any alteration from the resolution I have made to love you:
heaven it self shall be my witness.


Florestan: If Mistress, you love me thus, let your mind be confident of an
equal troth from me; and should you doubt of my affections, I will give you
my soul for pledge, and my heart for sacrifice, to show you that my words are
unfeigned, I pray you therefore accept of this small gift, not as a thing
worthy of merit, but only as a sufficient testimony of my good will,
fidelity, and faithful love toward you; and being a thing so small and
unworthy of you, it will therefore be the more commendable in you to accept of
it.


Leonora. Sir, I give you infinite thanks, and withal do beseech you also to
receive this in requital, for a remembrance of me, which is of small value,
but be moved to take it in good part from her, who from henceforth, shall not
live but through your sole remembrance.


Flor. Thanks to you, sweetest, the gift truly is pleasing to me, but the giver
much more.


Leoner. But, Sir, Is there, no means to stay you for a little time, that I
might enjoy your presence, which stands me in stead of light and life,
therefore your absence will envelope me with darkness, and bring upon me
(poor soul that I am) a thousand grievous deaths.


Florest. Mistress, I hope, not so, for I am constrained through necessity of
my business to depart hence.


Leon. Oh, I see now too well, that that constancy of yours, which I trusted to
for remedy of my troubled thoughts, is vanished, to give present vent to my
plaints, which you shall receive with my sighs and tears for true and burning
testimonies of the sorrow I have to see my self about to be forsaken by him,
by whom only I breath.


Flor. Mistress, I swear to you, my heart is alike touched with such strokes
for this our parting, that I can hardly breath for grief of it, and do
already see I have lost my eye sight, in the loss of the sight of your
Star-like beauty. For sure I am, that once absent from your luminous aspect,
each pleasure will be to me a subject, of grief and sorrow. However, since ^t
will now be no otherwise, J shall so part with you, as that my will shall never
depart from your service. Therefore farewell, dear Mistress, live still happy
and content whilst I languish, unhappie though constant: let not that my
remoteness alter your mind, no more than it shall shake the resolution I have
long since made to live and die yours; for, for mine own part, I shall not
think my self absent from you, so long as I shall keep a room in your heart
and memory.


Leo. Farewell, Sir, you possess my soul; and I do even leave it in your
power conserving it for a more happy season then this of parting: in the mean
space, have pity on all the bloody griefs which the mere apprehension of
your absence makes me already feel so vehemently, for I think it very strange
to leave him, whose company is dearer to me then my life. But to make an end of
this discourse; I do beseech you, Sir, and even conjure you, by the sweetness of
that love I have borne you, and will all my life long devote to you, for my
cruel fears, to write often to me, during the unhappie time of your absence:
for in reading your Letters, I shall persuade my self that I am not wholly
deprived of you.


F. I vow to you, Mistress, I will give you so many Letters, for confirmation of
my loyalty, and the love I bear you, that you shall have no cause to
distrust. And so J pray God to make you the happiest alive; even as he has
made you the fairest, and most accomplished: and that he also give you the
grace, to conserve me in your most desired favor, that I may be able
continually to witness, how violent my affection is toward you.


L. Heaven grant you may be as faithful to me, as I am to you; and give you as
much quiet and contentment, as you take from me. But what should I say more? I
must cease remembering you of the force and heat of my affection, and entreat
you to pity my martyrdom, and that wheresoever you are, you will be mindful
of me. And so once more, I pray God grant you such prosperities, that your
fortunes may parallel your perfections.


F. Rest assured, sweet Mistress, to be beloved, though not equal to your
merit, to whose height it is impossible my affection can raise it self.


Questions with their answers resolving the doubts of Lovers.
QVest. What is Love?

Answ. It is the receptacle of pensive minds, a passion that binds the spirits.

Quest. What is the greatest recompense a woman can make a man?

Answ. To reveal to him her secrets, and make him Lord over her body.

Quest. How must a man behave himself amongst Ladies?

Answ. He must be bold and hardy.

Quest. Why is Love painted blind?

Answ. Because the actions of love cannot be hid or dissembled.

Quest. Why be the secrets of Love so easily kept?

Answ. For the great sweetness men find in them.

Quest. Who is most secret in the sports of Love?

Answ. Women, since it so nearly touches their modesty.

Quest. What is the meat of perfect Lovers?

Answ. Sighs and tears.

Quest. Why have old men the repulse of young women?

Answ. Because they have not wherewith to ease them of their grief.

Quest. Why do Lovers wax pale?

Answ. From the passions of the mind.

Quest. Why do they picture Cupid with wings?

Answ. Because the desires of Lovers do tend always to high things.

Quest. Why do Lovers write amorous sonnets one to another in Rhyme?

Answ. Because Poetry is the friend of Love.

Quest. Why do women love them most dearly that had their maiden heads?

Answ. Because by the conjunction of the men they gain perfection.

Quest. Wherefore are amorous women more ticklish then others.

Answ. Because their skins are most loose, soft and delicate.

Quest. How comes it to pass that women newly married the first night are so
loath to go to bed, and rise the next day so lusty and joyful.

Answ. It proceeds from the perfection of the man, which they having acquired
to themselves, they then know they are women indeed.

Quest. Why do men kiss the eyes of them they affect?

Answ. Because they were the first beginners of Love.

Quest. Why do many love fervently, yet are not beloved again?

Answ. By reason their complexions cannot agree.

Quest. Why should we not place our loves on those that be so young?

Answ. Because they are so inconstant and evermore curious of new servants.

Quest. How comes it that he that is soon taken with love does soon forget
it.

Answ. He is like one who rides a galop, and by and by, waxes weary.

Quest. Why do men say that Love is a perfect musician?

Answ. Because he tuneth the spirits that before had no agreement.

Quest. What is the greatest pleasure that a true lover can feel?

Ans. To think that he is borne to serve and please his Lady.

Quest. Wherefore be all things more disposed to love in the spring time, then
in any other seasons?

Answ. Because then the humors do move themselves and the blood does wax hot.

Quest. Wherefore are the Angers of Lovers of so little continuance?

Answ. Because they fall out for trifles.

Quest. Wherefore do the Ancients paint Love with flowers in one hand and fish
in another?

Answ. To show that Love is Lord both of Sea and Land.

Quest. Why are men rather Amorous then women?

Answ. Because they are of hotter complexions, and their spirits are more
quick and prompt.

Quest. Wherefore be all the joys of Lovers uncertain?

Answ. Because in Love are diverse casualties, Jealousy, suspicion, anger,
peace, disdain.

Quest. Why is it that secret Love is more burning then that which is
discovered?

Answ. Because in the one a fire does consume but in the other a friend does
give advice to quench the flames.

Quest. Whether is more constant in Love, the man or the woman?

Answ. The man being both of body and spirit more firm.

Quest. Wherefore have Lovers feeble voices?

Answ. Out of the fear they have to displease their Ladies.

Quest. Wherefore is it that a man being touched with Love cannot rid himself
of that passion by any dexterity?

Answ. Because a certain sweet motion does transport him to the thing he
desires, and with a certain admiration winds him into the nets of Love.

Quest. Wherefore are Lovers for the most part ready to weep?

Answ. Because by nature they are sacrefull, suspicious, Jealous and always
troubled.

Quest. Why be women so prone to yield to Love?

Answ. Because nature has endued them with a delicate touch, with complexions
hot and moist, things most requisite for the recreations of Venus.

Complementall and Amorous POEMS.
Encomions on the Beauty of his Mistress.
FAirer then Isacks Lover at the well,
Brighter then inside Barks of new hewn Cedar;
Sweeter then flames of fire perfumed with Mirrhe,
And comelier then The silver Clouds that dance,
On Zephires wings be ore the King of heaven:
It Is she does teach those Torches to burn bright,
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night;
As a rich Jewel in the Ethiopes Ear,
Beauty too rich for use, for Love more dear.
So shows a snowie Dove trooping with Crows,
As this my Mistress, ore her fellows shows.
Since her whole bodies frame has power to have moved,
The chaste Hippolitus her to have loved.
In sum her parts are white as Milk,
As smooth as Ivory, and as soft as Silk.
O who can her perfections tell
In whom alone all graces dwell?
On her Hair.
HEr Hairs reflex with red strakes paints the skies,
Stars fall to fetch fresh Luster from her eyes.
Whilst that those golden threads play with her breath,
Showing life's triumph in the map of death.
On her Locks.
HEr locks being plated like a fleece of wool,
Are full of sweets, as sweet of sweets is full.
On her forehead.
HEr stately front was figured from above.
Majesticke fair well polisht high and pale,
Pure white that dims the Lillies of the Vale.
On her face.
HEr face like Cinthiaes when in full she shines,
And blushing to her Love mates bowres declineth
Such brightness has her Angels face,
Can make a sunshine in a shady place.
On the color of her face.
SVch color has her face, as when the Sun,
In Summer his first rising has begun.
On her eyebrows and Cheeks.
EAch eye-brow hangs like Iris in the skies,
On either Cheek a Rose and Lilly lies.
Another on her eyebrows and breath.
HEr bright Brows drive the sun to clouds beneath,
Sweet morn and evening dew falls from her breath.
On her eye-Liddes.
FOr Arches be two heavenly Liddes,
Whose winkes each bold attempt forbids.
On her eyes.
HEr eyes the contradictors of the night,
Like Marigolds, unsheath their glorious light.
Another on the same.
TWo Ietty sparks where Cupid chastely hides,
His subtle shafts that from his quiver glides.
Piercing the breasts of others yet they be
Unhappy, since themselves they cannot see.
On her smiles.
HEr smiles so sweet and nice,
On earth do make a heavenly Paradise.
On her Cheeks.
HEr Cheeks like ripened Lillyes steeped in Wine,
Or gorgeous Clouds upon the sins decline.
Another on the same.
HEr Cheeks with kindly Claret spread,
Aurora-like new out of bed.
On her Nose and breath.
HEr Eagles Nose is strait of stately frame,
Her breath is sweet perfume of holy flame.
On her Chin.
HEr Cristall chin like to the purest white
Is Loves pavilion, and the boys delight.
On her Ears.
ON these meanders if you gaze,
You soon will tread a Lovers maze.
On her Lips.
HEr lips like Roses over-washt with dew,
Do by her breath their beauties still renew.
On her Lips and Neck.
HEr Lips more red then Corrall stone,
Her Necke's more white then aged swans that moan.
O who those ruddy lips can miss,
Which blessed still themselves do kiss.
On her mouth.
SWeet mouth that sendest a music t^sied breath,
Whose every word darts me a living death.
On her mouth and teeth.
WIthin the compass of this holow sweet,
Those orient ranks of silver Pearls do meet.
On her breath.
SHe breathes forth flowers, she makes the spring,
Perfumes the air and comforts every thing.
On her tongue and words.
HEr words do fall like summer dewes on me,
Her tongue strikes music sweetest harmony.
On her teeth.
HEr lips nere part, but that they show,
Of precious pearl a double row.
On her Speech.
IN all her words such virtues couched be,
The learned thence fetch their philosophy.
On her voice.
A Voice which does the thrushes shrilnesse stain,
And makes declining nature young again.
On her Neck.
HEr Neck is like an Ivory shining Tower,
Or like delight that does it self devour.
On her Shoulders.
THese pearching squares with silver skin,
Do pass the hate spot Ermelin.
On her Arms.
HEr Twin-like arms, that stainelesse pair,
Fit for a Kings embraces are.
On her Hands.
HEre azured veins do use to stray,
With pretty Cupids every way,
Moist pearl warm snow smooth Ivory,
Within these strange compactes do lie.
On her fingers.
LOng small made fit for Orpheus Lute,
Which made the savage tigers mute.
On her actions.
HEr deeds are like great clusters of ripe grapes,
Which load the bunches of the fruitful Vine:
Offering to fall into each mouth that gapes,
And fill the same with store of timely wine.
On her breasts.
HEr breasts those Ivory Globes circled with blew,
Save of their Lord no bearing yoke they knew.
On her Pappes.
HEr pappes are like fair Apples in their prime,
And from those sweets, Love suckes his summer time.
On her good thoughts.
HEr mindful breast perfumes which frankincense,
And sweetest odors every fainting sense.
On her waste and Ribs.
FItly so named since it does waste,
Men's lives until it be embraced:
Her ribs with white all armed be,
Compact with curious symmetrie.
On her skin, and flesh.
HEr lovely skin is white like Curdes new pressed,
And snowie flesh is soft as wool new dressed.
On her Navell.
HEre Love delights the wandering thought,
Whilst that mine eyes astray are brought:
Since Nature here would feign unite,
In curious circles busy sight.
On her belly.
MOst beauteous seal of Virgin wax,
Pity it is still the impression lackes;
This place my sense with joy does fill,
Since it is entitled Cupids hill:
From hence a seemly passage there does flow,
To stranger pleasures that are placed below.
On her womb.
HEr Maiden womb the dwelling house of pleasure,
O blessed is he may search that secret treasure.
On her thighs.
THese are the subjects that do fit,
The Genius of an Ovids wit,
Whose hanches smooth as is the glass,
The Albion cliffes in whiteness pass.
On her knees.
THese knots of joy and gems of Love,
With motion makes all graces move.
On the calves of her legs.
Mark well how fair the flesh does rise,
In her brave calves like crystal skies.
On the small of her legs.
VIew but her Atlas smallest small,
More white then whitest bone of all.
On her feet.
HEr feet so short and slender little round,
On earth a finer pair cannot be found.
The conclusion.
THus every part impartes a grace,
And beauty dwells in every place.
Loves mouth.
MAy is not Loves month, May is full of flowers,
But dropping April, Love is full of showers.
Definition of Love.
LOve is a friend, a fire, a heaven, a hell,
Where pleasure pain and sad repentance dwell.
Love will out.
THe light of hidden fire it self discovers,
And love that is concealed betraies poor Lovers.
The parting of Lovers.
LOvers well wot what grief it is to part,
When twixt two bodies lives but one heart,
And Lovers say the heart has double wrong,
When it is bard the assistance of the tongue.
The Inconstancy of Affections.
LOve well is said to be, a life in death,
That laughs and weeps, and all but in one breath.
The quality of Love.
LOve is a spirit all compact of fire,
Not gross to sink but light, and will aspire,
What Love is,
LOve is a golden bubble full of dreams,
That waking breaks and fills us with extremes.
Lovers delight to be alone.
LOvers best like to see themselves alone,
Or with their loves if needs they must have one.
Vows of Lovers.
WE know not how to love, till love unblind us,
And vows made ignorantly never bind us.
Impossibility of concealing Love.
THe sight of hidden fire it self discovers,
And love that is concealed betrays poor lovers.
On one sick with Love.
When Venus strikes with beauty to the quick,
Few are the cares for such as are Love sick.
The errors of Lovers.
ALL men do err because that men they be,
And men with beauty blinded cannot see.
What Love is.
LOve is a subtle influence,
Whose final force still hangs in suspense.
Love admits of no contrary arguments.
LOve hates all arguments disputing still,
For sense against reason with a senseless will.
What Love is.
LOve is a blinded god, an angry Boy,
A slave to beauties will, a witless toy;
A Ravening bird, a tyrant most unjust,
A private hell, a very Sea of lust.
Another definition of Love.
LOve is a sour delight, a sugared grief,
A breach of reasons Law, a secret Thief,
A living death, an ever dying life,
A Sea of tears, an everlasting strife:
A bait for fools, A scourge of noble wits,
A deadly wound, a shot which ever hits.
The Effects of Love.
THis is the least effect of Cupids dart,
To change the mind by wounding of the heart.
Cruelty of Love.
LOve is not full of mercy as men say,
But deaf and cruel where he means to prey.
The parting of Lovers.
LOve goes to Love as school boys from their books,
But love from love toward School with heavy looks.
A Maxim.
It Is folly by our wisest worldlings proved,
If not to gain by love to be beloved.
The Constancy of Lovers.
ONce learn to love, the lesson is but plain,
And being learnt is never lost again.
The Force of Love.
WEre beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
Yet love breaks through, and picks them all at last.
Of Music and Love.
AS without breath no pipe does move,
No musicke's kindly without Love.
Love finds an opportunity.
WHen Love has knit two hearts in perfect unity,
They seldom fail to find an opportunity.
Offers of Love not to be refused.
OCcasion's winged and ever flies fast,
Coming she smiles, and frowns once being past.
Patience of Lovers.
ONe may endure, for when the pain is past,
Reward though long it stay yet comes at last.
Sorrows of Lovers.
Sighs are the ease calamity affords,
Which serve for speech when sorrow wants words.
Tears of Lovers.
SEld speaks Love but sighs his secret pains,
Tears are his truch men, words do make him tremble,
Yet women's tears fall when they most dissemble.
On frozen affection.
THere where the hearts Atturny once is mute,
The Client breaks, As desperate of his suite.
Of true and false Love.
TRue Love's a Saint, so shall you true Love know,
False Love's a Scithian, yet a Saint in show.
The perseverance of a Lover.
DEsire being Pilot and bright beauties prize,
Who can fear sinking where such treasure lies?
The beginnings of Love.
Fair beauty is the spark of hot desire,
And sparks in time will kindle to a fire,
On Lust.
Lust makes oblivion, beats reason back,
Forgets shames pure blush and honors wrack.
On Virginity.
THe ripest Corn dies if it be not reapt,
Beauty alone is lost too early kept.
A cruel Mistress.
NOthing so ill becomes the fair,
As cruelty which yields unto no prayer.
On Coyness.
A Way-ward beauty does not fancy move,
A frown forbids, a smile engenders Love.
Another.
Fair words and power attractive beauty,
Brings men to wanton in subjective duty.
On Jealousy.
Where Jealousy in basest minds does dwell,
It Is metal Vulcans Cyclops sent from hell.
On pleasures.
SOmething must still be left to cheer our sin,
And give a touch of what should not have bin;
And they that know but pleasures price,
Alls one, a prison or a Paradise.
On Chastity.
THe unstained veil which Innocents adorn,
The ungatherd rose defended with the thorn.
Another on the same.
PEnelope in spending chaste her days,
As worthy as Ulysses was of praise.
On the Court.
THither let Phoebus sons resort,
Where shines their Father but in loves great Court?
On her delaying marriage.
Where hearts be knit what helps if not to enjoy;
Delay breeds doubts, no cunning to be coy.
On Desires.
What can be said that Lovers cannot say?
Desire can make a Doctor in a day.
On Misfortunes.
THe man that still amidst misfortunes stands,
Is sorrows slave and bound in lasting bands.
On fate.
THey fall which trust to fortunes sickle wheel,
But staid by virtue men shall never reele.
On disdain.
IN high disdain Love is a base desire,
And Cupids flames do seem but watery fire.
On the Power of tears.
Tears tie the tongue of an accusers grudge,
And soft the rigor of the sternest Judge.
On Music.
Music can hardly solace humane ears,
When strings are broke, and eyes are filled with tears
On Continued grief.
DRops pierce the flint, not by their force or strength,
But by often falling wears it out at length.
On Marriage.
Maids do take more delight when they prepare.
And think of wives states then when wives they are.
On pleasures and griefs.
PLeasures like posting guests make but small stay,
Where griefs bide long and leave a score to pay.
On Youth.
YOuth learnes to change the course that he has run,
When he perceives and knows what age has done.
On a modest fair one.
BEautie's a beggar, fie it is too bad,
When in it self sufficiency is had,
It was not made to please the wandering eye,
But an attire to adorn sweet modesty:
If modesty and women once do sever,
Farewell our fame, farewell our name for ever.
On his Will.
IT lies not in my power to love or hate,
For will in me is over-ruld by fate.
On the loss of Virginity.
Jewels being lost, we find again, this never,
It Is lost but once, and once lost, lost for ever.
On Women.
LEt Wolves and beasts be cruel in their kinds,
But women meek and have relenting minds.
On coy dames.
HAte and disdain is painted in their eyes,
Deceit and treason in their bosom lies.
Inconstancy of women.
THey melt with words as wax against the sun,
So weak are many women's modesties,
That what sometimes they most would seem to shield,
Another time poor souls unaskt they yield.
Another on the same.
WOmen have tongues of craft and hearts of guile,
They will, they will not, hell is in their smile.
On Lust.
Lust never takes a joy in what is due,
But still leaves known delights to seek out new.
On Virginity.
LIke untuned golden strings fair women are,
Which lying long untoucht will harshly Iar.
Modesty of women.
THough men can cover crimes with their stern looks,
Poor women's faces are their own fault books.
On a woman's tears.
A Woman's tears are falling stars at night,
No sooner seen but quickly out of sight.
A Constant Woman.
COnstant in Love who tryes a woman's mind,
Wealth, beauty, wit, and all in her does find.
Passions of a Woman.
A Woman's passions does the fire resemble,
Never alike, they sin if they dissemble.
On the finding of Beauty.
THe fairest flowers of beauty fades away,
Like the fresh Lilly in the sunshine day.
Another on the same.
Fair flowers that are not gathered in their prime,
Rot and consume themselves in little time.
On the power of Beauty.
THe Libian Lions loose their sternest might,
If of a beauteous face they once get sight.
Women envy one another Beauty.
IT is a common rule, that women never
Love beauty in their Sex, but envy it ever.
On a Beauty cloisterd up.
THings much retaind do make us most desire them,
And beauties seldom seen make us admire them.
On Beauty in mean attire.
IT is decreed that features shall content,
And that true beauty needs no ornament.
On Beauty not enjoyed.
NEver were Cheeks of Roses, locks of Amber,
Ordained to live imprisoned in a Chamber.
Beauties for the Court.
IN vain our friends from this do us dehort,
For beauty will be where is most resort.
Beauties not to be confined.
HEaven made Beauty like her self to view,
Not to be locked up in a smoakie mew.
A Rosy tainted feature is heavens gold,
Which all joy for to touch, all to be behold.
On the excellency and power of Beauty.
BEauty brings fancy to a dainty feast,
And makes a man that else would be a beast.
The effects of Beauty.
BEauty in heaven and earth this grace does win,
It supples rigor, and it lessens sin.
A wooing fit in verse.
HE, Much ado I have god wot,
I would love but thou will not.
She, Reason, Sir, Men are not true,
HE, Why was any false to you,
Sweetest I have loved thee long;
SHE, Yet Sir Love should do no wrong.
HE, Prithee sweet come kiss me then,
SHE, No Sir, Maids must kiss no men.
HE, I the Heavens for witness crave,
SHE, They will shine clear, though you are a knave.
HE, Never loved a truer youth,
SHE, Men do not always speak the truth,
HE By all those vows that Lovers use,
SHE, Thus they protest yet do abuse.
And full often maids are deluded,
When with kisses Love's concluded.
A discourse of Love in verse.
BELL, When will Love be void of fears?

TELL, When Ieaolusie has neither eyes nor cares.

BELL, When is Love most malecontent,

TELL, When Lovers range and bear their bows unbent.

BELL, Tell me when Love is best fed,

TELL, When it has sucked the sweet that ease has bred.

BELL. When is lovers time ill spent,

TELL. When Love does earne yet takes no rene,

BELL. When is time well spent in Love,

TELL. When deeds ensue, and words work Love,

BELL. What calst thou Love, I prithee tell,

TELL. It is a fountain and that well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell.
It is a work on holy day,
It is December matched with May.

BELL. I prithee fair one do not feign.

TELL. It is a sunshine mixed with rain,
It is a toothache or like game:
It is a yea, it is a Nay,
A pretty kind of sporting fray,

BELL. Come, come, I Will hear no more, away.

Another short wooing fit in verse.
I. SWeet soul to whom I vowed am a slave,
Let me the enjoyment of my wishes have.

M. Sweet Sir, Let not a wretch that is so poor,
Expect to hord up treasure for his store.

I. Yet still take heed least thou thy self submit,

M. To one that has his wealth, but wants his wit.

I. Prithee be silent, beauty takes in rent,

M. But folly bought is worse then money spent.

I. Well for this once, I Will take thee as thou art,

M. For richer for poorer agreed, mine own sweet heart.

The fears and resolutions of two Lovers.
D. WHat would thou wish tell me dear lover,

S. How I might but thy thoughts cover.

D. If my firm Love, I were denying,
Tell me with sighs, would thou be dying?

S. Those words in jest to hear thee speaking,
For very grief this heart is breaking.

D. Yet would thou change? I prithee tell me,
In seeing one that did excel me?

S. O no, for how can I aspire,
To more than to my own desire:
This my mishap does chiefly grieve me,
Though I do swear't, you will not believe me.

D. Imagine that thou do not love me,
But some beauty that is above me.

S. To such a thing sweet do not will me,
The naming of the same will kill me.

D. Forgive me fair one, Love has fears,

S. I do forgive, witness these tears.

The wooing of a coy Dame.
R. THe cause my sweet thou do deny,

M. Because thou do not please my eye.

R. Thy reason why to me impart,

M. Thou do offend and grieve my heart.

R. There is no heart so fierce and hard,

M. Nor person of so small regard.

R. The reason, does thy Love control,

M. Thou do torment my very soul.

R. O Remedy my loving smart,

M. I Will keep such danger from my heart.

R. Why do thou thus thy beauty keep?

M. It will destroy it, Sir, to weep.

R. My passions do thou mock at too?

M. Farewell Sir, without more t^ do.

A contention between a Wife, a Widow, and a Maid.
WIfe, If to be borne a maid be such a grace,
So was I borne, and graced by nature too;
But seeking more perfection to embrace,
I did become a Wife, as others do.

WID. And if the Maid and Wife such honor have,
I have bin both, and hold a third degree,
Most maids are wards, and every Wife a slave;
I have my livery su'd, and I am free.

MAID, That is the fault that you have maidens been,
And were not constant to continue so,
The falls of Angels did increase their sin;
In that they did so pure a state forgo.

WIF. Why marriage is an honorable state,

WID. And widdow-hood is a reverend degree;

MAID, But maidenhead that will admit no mate,
Like majesty it self must sacred be.

WIFE, The wife is mistress of her family,

WID. Much more the Widow, for she rules alone:

MAID, But Mistress of my own desires am I:
When you rule others wills, and not your own.

WIFE, Only the Wife enjoyes the virtuous pleasure,

WID. The Widow can abstain from pleasures known,

MAID. But the uncorrupted maid preserves such measure
As being by pleasures would she cares for none.

WIFE, The Wife is as a Diamond richly set,

MAID, The maid unset, does yet more rich appear;

WID. The Widow a Jewel in the Cabinet.
Which though not worn is still esteemed as dear.

WIFE, The wife does Love and is beloved again,

WID. The Widow is awakt out of that dream,

MAID, The maids white mind has never such a stain.
No passion troubles her clear virtues stream,

WID. Then what is a Virgin? but a fruitless bay,

MAID. And what is a Widow? But a roselesse bryer,
And what are wives, but wood-bindes which decay,
Yea stately Oaks, which by themselves aspire.

WID. Wives are as birds in golden cages kept,

WIFE, Yet in those Cages chearefully they sing,

WID. Widows are birds out of those Cages lept,
Whose joyful notes makes all the Forrestring.

MAID. But Maids are birds amidst the Woods secure,
Which never hand could touch nor yet could take,
Nor whistle could deceive, nor bait allure,
But free unto themselves do music make.

WIFE, The Wife is as a Turtle with her mate,

WID. The widow as the widow dove alone,
Whose truth shines most in her forsaken state.

MAID, The maid a Phoenix and is still but one.

WIFE The wife's a soul unto her body tied,

WID. The widow a soul departed into bliss,

MAID. The maid an Angel which was stellified,
And now to as fair a house descended is.

WIFE, Wives are fair houses kept and furnished well,

WID. Widows old Castles void, but full of state.

M. But maids are temples where the gods do dwell.

WIFE, An office well supplied is like a wife,

WID. The widow like a gainefull office void,

MAID, But maids are like contentment in this life.
Which all the world has sought but none enjoyed.

MAID, Go wife to Dunmow, and demand thy hire

WID. Go gentle maid, and lead the apes in hell,

WIFE, Go widow make some younger brother rich.
And then take thought, and dye, and all is well.

WIFE, Alas poor maid, thou have no help nor stay,

WID. Alas poor wife that nothing do possess,

MAID, Alas poor widow, charity does say,
Pity the widow and the father esse.

WIFE, We wives have children, what a joy is this?

WID. Widows have children too, but maids have none,

MAID. No more have Angels, yet they have more bliss.
Then ever yet to mortal earth was known.

WIFE, The wife is like a fair manured field,

WID. The widow once was such, but now does rest,

M. The maid like Paradise undrest until'd,
Bears crops of native virtue in her breast.

W. Who would not dye a wife as Lucrece did,

WID. Or live a widow as Penelope,

MAID. Or be a maid, and so be stellified,
As all the virtues and the graces be.

W. Wives are like Apples served in golden dishes,

WID. Widows good wine which time maks better much.

M. But maids are grapes desired by many wishes.
But that they grow so high as none can touch.

W. I have a daughter equals you my girl.

M. The daughter does excel the mother then,
As pearls are better than the mother of pearl.
Maids lose their value when they match with men.
A maids the perfect'st of created things,
The purest gold that suffers no Allay,
The sweetest flower that on earths bosom springs,
The pearl unbor'd, whose price, no pr ce can pay,
The Christ all glass that will no venom hold,
The mirror where in Angels love to look.
Dianaes bathing fountain clear and cold.
Beauties fresh rose, and virtues living book.

W. Maids cannot judge because they cannot tell,
What comforts and what joves in marriage be.

M. Yes, yes, though blessed Saints in heaven do dwell,
They do the souls in Purgatory see.

W. There never was a wife that like't her lot,

WID. Nor widow but was clad in mourning weeds,

M. Do what you will, marry, or marry not,
both this estate, and that repentance breeds,

A Lover and his Mistress.
LOver, whilst thou did love me, and that neck of thine
More white and soft then Roses silver down,
Did wear a neck lace of no arms but mine;
I envied not the King of Spain his Crown.

MIST. Whilst of thy heart, I was sole Sovereign,
And thou did sing none but my beauties praise;
Which now poor Maid thou do so much disdain,
I envied not the Queen of Englands fame.

LOV. What though I sue to thee again for grace;
And sing thy praises sweeter than before,
If I within my heart imprint thy face,
Will thou love me again, and love me more?

MIST. Thou shall be then again my morning Star,
Though lighter yet then floting Cork thou be;
And then the Irish Sea more angry far:
With thee 'Ile wish to live and die with thee.

A Lovers discourse with his heart.
L. She Is cold, thou hot, how can we then agree,

H. Not nature now, but Love does govern me.

L. What if her heart be hard, She stop her cares,

H I Will sigh aloud, and make it soft with tears

L Why then despair, go pack thee hence away,

H. I live in hope to have a happy day.

A Discourse between a Lover, Death, and Cupid.
L. Come gentle death. D. who calls?

L. ones oppressed,

D. What is thy will?

L. that thou abridge my woe;
By cutting off my life:

D: cease thy request,
I cannot kill thee yet,

L: Alas, Why so?

.D Thou wantst thy heart.

L: Who stole that same away?

D. Love whom thou serv'st,

L: Entreat him if thou may.

L. Come Cupid, come.

C: Who calls me so often,

L. Thy Vassal true whom thou should know by right,

C. What makes thy cry so faint?

L: My vo^ce is soft.
Quite broke and spent, with crying day and night.

C. What then, What Is thy request?

L: that thou restore,
To me my heart and steal the same no more.
And thou O death, when I possess my heart,
Dispatch me then at once.

D: Alas, Why so?

L. By promise thou art bound to end my smart.

D. But if thy heart return, then what is thy woe?

L. That brought from frost, it never will desire,
To rest with me that am more hot then fire.

Upon a scarf presented.
TAke this scarf, bind Cupid hand and foot,
So love must ask you leave before he shoot,
Upon a pair of Sissers presented.
THese Sissers do your house wifery bewray,
You love to work though you are borne to play.
Upon a looking-glass presented.
BLind fortune does not see how fair you be,
But gives a glass that you your self may see.
Upon a Fan presented.
YOu love to see, and yet to be unseene,
Take then this Fan, to be your beauties skreene.
On a plain gold Ring presented,
FOrtune does lend you, hap it well or ill,
This plain gold Ring to wed you to your will.
Upon a pair of Bracelets presented.
LAdy, your hands are fallen into a snare,
For Cupids manacles these Bracelets are.
Complementall and amorous Letters. A Letter to renew affection.
ALthough I am assured I cannot dye,
In your remembrance, yet I fear least I
Am like a picture veiled from the light,
And so can yield no pleasure to the sight.
Letters are Cupids Bellows that do blow,
Lovers affections, until they do grow
Into a flame, these do let Lovers find,
The absent bodies pleasures by the mind.
O let me then within your thoughts revive,
And though we are far distant let us strive:
To meet in soul, Let love convey me to you,
But in a dream, that I may set and woe you.
Till I do meet again by fates direction.
With you the Mistress of my hearts affection.
A Letter to persuade one to be Constant.
COnstant Love and virtue are,
In their qualities alike,
Both in darkest nights shine fair,
Like to stars which shoot and strike,
Through the skies so love will be,
Most known in sad adversity.
Therefore Love, keep still one mind,
Instruct the world how to Love,
Though nature does new changes find,
Like a center never move,
But while misfortunes do turn round;
About thee, be thou constant found.
Love is like a sacred flame,
Which quenched, can hardly be renewed,
But is evermore the same,
Then let constancy be showed,
Virtue sets upon a square,
And constant friends still constant are.
Remember all our oaths and vows,
The bond which I on thy lips sealed,
Heaven no perjury allows.
False hearts shall be at length revealed,
Though place and time our hearts divide,
They in a true Loves knot are tide.
A Letter to a Maid from one that expected no portion.
IT is your beauty fairest, not the wealth,
Your father means to give you but your self,
That I do court, you have a stock of beauty,
Which does exact from me most humble duty.
You have a smiling eye, whose every beam,
Excels the glistring sands of Tagus stream.
You have a moist smooth tempting cherry lip,
From whence great love himself may nectar sip,
Such a fresh color in your Cheek is spread,
That Roses blush for anger and look dead,
To see themselves excelled, white Lillies grow,
High colored, to think nature should bestow
Such beauties on you, with which to compare,
Floraes bright lustres but eclipsed are.
Since thy fair cheeks are but by them set forth,
This pale that blushing at thy admired worth.
A brow so high, so fair, thence day does break,
When you do wake, and when you please to speak,
The spheres stand still listening to hear,
Thy voices harmony so sweet, so clear,
That they do mend, their tunes thereby,
To bear with thee a Sympathy.
Let wretched misers then their treasures lock,
Within their chests, I love thee in thy smock.
Nay were thou wrapped but in a linen blanket,
Thy naked self could all my senses banquet.
Which to confirm, let but thy love be mine,
Here Is heart and hand to witness, I am thine.
A Letter to excuse the not visiting a friend at ones departure out of Town.
MY business does ascribe this forced neglect,
Of visit, not to want of due respect.
But to the violence of my affairs,
That do transport me hence to meet with cares.
And make me most unfortunate to be,
Deprived of your happy company.
But in my absence think I do remain,
Your servant till I do return again.
Yours, I. G.

To a Sweet heart far absent in the Country.
THe Country now is happier then the City,
Enjoying thy sweet face which is so pretty,
That Hobnai^e fellows staring do gaze on thee,
As if thou were some new come dietie.
Me thinks I see thee look beneath a hat,
Most sweet and lovely, and thou ask what,
In market is the price of this and that,
Then tripping home thou steppest ore each style,
Which makes my fancy in conceit to smile,
O style think I; thou were in happy case,
If thou had my eyes or I had thy place,
Then coming home putst off thy clothes again,
And make thy bed most happy to contain,
Thy pretty limbs and then I wish to be,
Your bedfellow to bear you Company,
Farewell my dearest sweet heart, loveliest Less,
That do in features, Ladies far surpass.
A Complementall Letter sent to a Lady.
MAdam since that you are both great and good,
More noble by your virtues then your blood,
Whose titles only are the badge and seal
Of the souls worth, which actions best reveal.
Pardon the high ambition of my love,
That scorning meaner objects, or to move
In an inferior Orb, below that Sphere,
Where fair resplendent Venus shines clear.
Does thus advance, and raise it self to find
Beauty and virtue both in one conjoined,
And since that my affection stands thus fair,
Built on a noble ground and on the square
Of virtue, this alone implies, I am
No dunghill borne, but a true Gentleman,
For never can a narrow mind possessed,
With the opinion that low thoughts are best,
And easy in obtaining, hope to mount,
His love to any object of account.
Man does not frame his own mind, nor compose,
Those soft affections which from beauty flows.
Love has no golden arrow but the beams,
Shot from your eyes, the which the fond boy means
To shoot at Rovers, and since it chanst that I,
stood in the wav, whilst that his shafts did fly,
Sweet Lady look upon my wounded heart,
For Ladies heretofore by physickes art,
Did heal those pilgrims whom religion drew,
To take great Iourneys, holy Saints to view;
This superstition made the world a baby,
But I am confident in you fair Lady:
That you can hear my prayers, and also cure,
The wound of love, whose torture I endure.
Then since that you can hear my just complaint,
I Will be a pilgrim to no other Saint.
A Letter to a Gentlewoman on a Sigh.
FAirest you desire to know
Why I so often sigh, Hi, Ho,
It is not to cool loves fire,
Every sigh does raise it higher,
Nor is it to blow my flame,
Thereby to increase my pain,
But to show the reason better,
In my sigh mark every letter.
The first H. stands for your hard heart,
The I, stands for your eye my smart.
The other H. my heart does show,
The O, the vowell is your no.
Thus your hard heart and beauteous eye,
And no, which does my suit deny,
Are the cause why I do break
My heart with sighs which only speak
In a language known to me,
Thus interpreted to be.
And now you know the reason why,
I do so often Hi, Ho, cry.
A Letter to excuse the abrupt taking of a kiss.
IF that I did offend and do amiss,
In forcing from you a constrained kiss;
Pardon my Love, that thus did think to plead,
And in behalf of me to intercede.
Which if it has offended, at the bar
Of mercy kisses to be pardoned are.
Fairest with others, let your creature sue,
Entreat and beg, that you would mercy show,
And whilst my kisses beg, happy were I,
If I might but so rich a beggar dye.
A Letter to request a Courtesy.
THe knowledge of your virtue makes me bold,
Upon your favor, and thus to enfold
My own desires, in hope you will be free,
In granting of an honest courtesy.
Since a request which is made to a friend,
Should have a just aim at a noble end.
Such is my suit, for I should blush to own
A thought which being to my friend made known,
Should move his anger, therefore let me find
A true expression of your generous mind
Adding this courtesy to many more,
Till back again, I can the like restore.
A Letter to a beautiful Gentlewoman, that was resolved to live and dye a Maid.
ARe you so young, so handsome and so pretty.
And yet resolve to dye a maid? it is pity,
Nature did give you beauty not to show,
Unto the world, but that you might bestow,
It on some others, and raise up your like,
Has Cupid not one arrow left to strike
Your gentle bosom, or else will you dwell,
Within a Nunnery, or a Hermites cell?
And therefore want of natures recreation,
Commit sin, by a wanton speculation?
Look on the Pelican, and Turtle Dove,
They both are mild and chaste, yet both do Love.
Look on the Eglantine and wood bind tree,
Circling the Elm and such a maid should be.
Who should with sweet embraces gently wind,
About her Lover, while he proves as kind.
And does fast hold her in his loving arms,
Whilst true affection both their soft hearts warmes.
Then do not prove an enemy to nature,
But place your Love on me, divinest creature,
That being come into the pleasant fields,
Of Love, may reap the harvest that love yields.
For if to love you live not, you are dead,
Then live and love and loose your maiden head.
A Letter to a Gentlewoman in excuse of long absence.
MY unkind fate deserves blame, not I,
In robbing me of your blessed company,
And thus my thoughts seem to suggest and say,
Write not to me, but come your self away.
O could you fancy by imagination.
The sorrow I sustain in contemplation.
Of my long absence, how I sigh and groan,
And oftentimes do play upon the droane
Of a Tobacco-pipe, to refresh my wits,
When they are in sad discontented fits,
You would then pardon me who now do live,
Forlorn in sorrow, and do sigh, and grieve,
To think on you, whose presence I desire,
And burn the more, the further from the fire,
As flowers in winter hide their drooping head,
And all their glory is quite vanished,
When the bright sun withdraws his warm light,
And leaves the world deprived of his sight,
So I like to a flower upon the stalk,
Wither, whilst I in discontent do walk,
Wanting those beams of comfort which proceed
From your fair eyes, that do both warm and feed,
My cold distressed heart, for how can I
But droope, deprived of your company?
I have no essence now, for I did hold,
My life from you, I gave away and sold
My self unto your service, still to be,
Your constant servant and your votary,
And though I must be absent some few hours,
Yet know dear love, my heart is sealed yours.
A Complementall Letter.
HEaven bless my Love in whose sweet favor,
I desire alone to thrive,
Let fickle minds seek change and waver,
To be constant I will strive,
Yours I am, and have no thought
That can reach beyond my Love,
But down to you it is ^^ickly brought,
From heaven below, to heaven above.
You are my heaven here of content,
Whither my thoughts do aspire,
This life is but a kind of Banishment,
Till I enjoy my hearts desire.
Therefore before my winged soul hence fleet,
Let this one comfort unto you be given,
That in the sphere of love our souls may meet,
And both together take their flight to heaven.
A maids Letter fearing a growing shame.
BLame not a Maid, if she does thus discover,
What she does blush to tell, her faithless Lover.
I know I urge but an unhappy suite,
Who loves the tree when he has got the fruit?
Yet think upon your vows and false temptation,
Let former love move your commiseration,
This paper will not blush, whilst it does tell,
That former pleasures now make sorrows swell.
You have enough undone me, do not be,
For too much kindness cruel unto me.
Think on the story of the Trojan Queen,
In whom my picture may be lively seen.
For when that she had made her self the feast,
To entertain Encas her false guest,
He hoisted up his sails, and nere would view
The Rovall Queen whom his unkindnesse slew.
Poor silly maid deceived by your temptation,
I was overcome, our stories have relation.
I do entreat you then if you would have
A happy life, and find a quiet grave;
That you would view me, not as in Loves bed,
But in the Paradise of my maidenhead.
And had I so continued, I had bin
Preserved in Virgin pureness, clear from sin.
Now like a weeping penitent, I come,
In hope to move you to compassion.
Restore the ruins of my maiden honor,
And think thus with your self, shall I go from her,
That was so kind to me that she would venture,
On promised marriage, to seal loves indenture?
O hear thy Conscience that would thus inform thee,
And for my loving folly, do not scorn me.
But let your Love be mutually expressed,
In confidence whereof my rhoughts do rest.
A Letter of thanks to a Gentlewoman for some favor received.
ALL is from your free mercy, for I know,
All merits are cried down, as far below
Your favors, which you do most freely leave,
With such as be unworthy to receive
Such livelv comforts, but therein I find,
The true d^vinity of a worthy mind.
That on the poorest and unworthiest spirit,
Does let fall blessings far beyond all merit.
And with this bounty, you excite and move,
My soul to wonder and admire your love.
Knowing not how to render thanks as due,
For such expressions, which so fair do show,
That the endeavor of my life will be,
Too mean requitals of your courtesy.
But yet I hope to prove no barren sand,
Nor by ingratitude, a fruitless land.
That does deceive the husbandmans desires,
And both his limbs, and expectation tyres.
But all my powers shall labor with much strength,
Of thankfulness, to pay your love at length.
And may I nere know comfort if I prove
Ungrateful to the merit of your love.
To Mistress Penelope, Natures Masterpiece, the lover expresses his flames of
affection,
WOnder of beauty on whom I repose
Such hope of comfort, that I must disclose
To you my secret thoughts, and dare to name
My sufferings, how I martyred in the flame
Of your affection burn, Let not your scorn,
Increase my sorrows, so to make me mourn.
Till love increase in strength, and do blaze higher,
And my sad ashes, are consumed with fire.
Which should not be, for I do not alone
Doat on those beams which from your eves are thrown.
Nor on your cheeks which are the nuptial bed,
Where Roses are with Lillies muryed.
Nor on your lips which closed seem to smoother
Their beauty, and do only kiss each other,
These pieces of your beauty with a smile,
May seem to build up a sweet funeral pile.
For common Lovers, but my fancy took,
Another course, for it does dare to look
Into your soul, which crowned with virtue sits,
Governed by reason, not by passions fits,
And wears a powerful charm, that both inspires
All hearts with holy thoughts and good desires,
For virtue hidden from the common sight,
Shines out in you, as glistering stars by night
Peep through a cloud, that all may gaze and see,
Your glorious parts, clothed in mortality.
So that I am afraid here to describe,
Your sweet perfections, least they should be spied
By Angels, who dressed in some mortal shape,
Would from the heavens make a swift escape.
To Court you in a dream, and so would stay,
With you on earth, forgetful of the way.
Back unto heaven, whilst that they did prove,
Rivals to me, in seeking of your love.
Therefore the flames of my affections are,
Ingenuous, and not like the common snare
Of Love, which is placed only in the blood,
For though I burn my pain is understood
By such a character, as may be given,
Though it is a flame, it is derived from heaven.
Kindled from a small spark, that here does shine,
On earth, and has a nature that is divine.
O Sweet Penelope thy beauties be
But a fair abstract or epitome
Of brightest lusters, or a stream that lead
Me on, unto the purest fountains head,
Then let me burn still, with a flame most clear,
From sinful dregs, so that my love appear
An imitation of divinest love;
And if my flames too violent do prove,
This shall at last be my concluding prayer,
Let heaven and Penelope both share
Of my poor heart, which thus now burning lies,
Being her martyr, and heavens sacrifice.
To Mistress E.B. Sent her with a RING.
ROund is the world, and so is love,
No art can find out the beginning
Of circles, those on seas do move,
Come round again, by natures bringing,
And those that travel in loves ring,
From one point do at first begin,
Of affection, and having found,
Love for love are then come round.
So this ring sent, shall be
Loves compass, both to you and me,
By which we to sail may venture,
Till we meet both in one center.
To a pretty witty scornful Gentlewoman being proud of her beauty, and after
troubled with the green sickness.
IF I were young as you are, I would prove,
A tyrant unto all, that sought my love,
To flout them, and to hear Narcissus cry,
Echo O Echo, for thy love I die,
And perish in the funotaine of thy face,
What art thou gone, and leave me in this case?
I Will walk away, and my sad story tell,
Unto the Ghosts that in Elisium dwell.
Thus might I play the mad man but my dear
And fairest creature in whom does appear
Glorious perfections, tell me would you have
Me dye for love, or weep into my grave?
And give my body to the Worms to eat,
Their legacy, on one, is woman's meat.
O no, your knowledge will instruct you fuller,
And tell you, that your own cheek is grown duller
Then it was usual, death it seems has struck,
A palenesse in it, and away has took
The former beauty, which he did to be
Revenged, for your scornefulnesse to me.
Death says, that you this choice shall only have,
Either to marry me, or else your grave.
To a weeping Widow, wishing her to wipe away Tears, with the conceit of a
second Husband.
ENough of Tears, their date expires,
Do not three days raise fresh desires
In you, or have you all sense lost,
Is your blood turned to a frost?
A widows grief should always be
An out side of formality,
Or like a hearse cloth, that is laid,
Upon the Coffin, which convai'd
Into the grave, the mourning black,
Is folded up, and so sent back.
Your sorrow like the cloth laid on,
The hearse, should not be convaid home
With you, why should you vex your self,
With fruitless sorrows, can your wealth
Or tears, which from your eyes do rain,
Call your late spouse to life again?
O would you do him so much wrong,
That he having gotten from the throng
Of men, out of this world to be
Blessed with the Angels company;
Should back again return to give
Comfort to you, and here to live
A second pilgrimage, would you wish,
Him for you to leave heavens bliss?
Be comforted, and let not sorrow
From your face such beauty borrow,
But make it lovely, black becomes,
Only funerals and Nuns.
There is no music in the grave,
Though one be lost, still you may have
Another husband, and I am bold,
To ask you, whether you can hold,
A good opinion, of my Love,
Which in these characters does move
As active, to give you content,
You know sweet widow, what is meant
By active, you do never blush,
At words, nor yet once pish or tush,
As maids do use in modesty,
Who will their own desires deny.
For Widows with a better apprehension,
Should know, the secretst thoughts intention,
Then fair one, if this letter woo you,
Let it not be unwelcome to you.
But when you do rip up the Seal,
And read what this sheet does reveal
Unto your knowledge, let your blood
Inform you, that the lines are good,
Touching quick, and he that writ
This Letter, does your fancy fit.
For letters unto widows sent,
Should be like challenges full bent,
To dare them from City or Court,
To play a prize, at Cupids sport.
But you will say that I do Jest,
And do maintain within my breast
A wanton flame, I cannot mourn
With you, nor yet with sorrow turn
Like Niobe into a stone, but live
I would that I might comfort give
To you sweet widow, then be content,
To make me yours, sans complement.
To a young Maid.
COme thou fairest masterpiece,
Of natures work, her golden fleece,
Let me enjoy thee, flower, will fade,
If not refresht, dye not a maid,
Let us agree to appoint a day,
To gather flowers, why should you stay
So long a Virgin, what have you done,
To nature and your self? a Nun
Deserves not beauty, it is a mate,
Makes Cupids darling fortunate.
Since youth and beauty then invite
You thus to play, for your delight,
Let loves tables opened be,
Fear not, you are well matched with me,
Stake your maidenhead, you shall choose,
Whether you will win or loose,
Or if you loose, I do believe,
You will not for your loss once grieve.
To a young Gentlewoman, that disdained her Lover
ONce more I have presumed to ease my grief,
With these sad lines, in hope of some relief,
O wretched I, that suffer in the flame,
Of love, yet dare not of my love complain,
Nor sighs nor tears, will I in this case use,
Nor thee my love, will I at all accuse,
Since it is my cruel fate, that I must be
Martyred with love, and only dye for thee.
Yet let me ask one question, are they least
Rewarded with true love, that do love best,
Or is it but in me, held an offense,
To love you, since that the sweet influence,
Of one fair smile from you, renews life's flame,
And one sad frown, can put it out again,
Like a third sister? If you Love deny,
You cut my thread of life, and I must dye.
A complementall Letter to a Beautiful young Gentlewoman.
FOr me to praise your beauty, would appear
A flattery, for when the sun shines clear,
All do admire his beams, even so your eyes,
Are like to stars, that shine in beauties skies,
And have a kind of influence below,
To make hearts all obedience to you show,
Your cheeks are Roses, and your hair is amber,
The odor of your breath perfumes your Chamber,
Your lips are like unto the respasse berry.
Or like unto a full ripe swelling cherry,
Your brow is Cupids bow, most sweetly bent,
From whence loves golden arrow still is sent,
Your breasts are like unto a pair of mountains,
Not yet resolved into nectar fountains,
Till love a pleasant moisture to them brings,
And raises up on them two happy springs,
But then below, there lies the happy valley,
Where young Adonis did with Venus dally.
And to behold it seemed much ashamed,
He blushed, and so this valley is yet unnamed.
Yet howsoever it be not expressed,
Lovers have fancies, to conceive it best,
Thus I acknowledge you, divinest creature,
To be a model of the sweetest feature.
Then since that nature has adorned each part.
With such perfections, I do hope your heart,
Is of so sweet a temper, to let fall
Pity on him, who does not know at all
The art of Complements, for Love is best,
When it is naked, with plain words expressed,
Yet if you please to reckon me for one,
That am devoted in affection,
Unto your service, I shall repute of this,
As earths chief happiness and heavens bliss.
Phrases, for the beginnings of Letters, for our greater speed in our urgent
occasions.
DEsiring to refresh the memory of your good will.

I thank you for the courtesy I received at your hands.

I pray you honor me so much, as to bear my Niece company.

Let me request this courtesy at your hands.

I must entreat you to have me excused.

I am wonderfully taken with the reading of your Letters.

Sir, I am not ignorant of the affection you bear to me.

There shall be nothing wanting in me who have been always tender of your
honor.

Sir, I have well considered of your friendship, and the worthy affection you
bear me.

Sir, Let me advise you, not to let slip this opportunity.

Excuse me, if my haste force me to be too familiar with you.

Phrases for the conclusions of Letters in haste.
Wherefore I pray you advise me, or give me counsel, since in all things you
may dispose of me.

Wherefore be pleased to excuse me.

Wherefore I do again desire you.

I will employ all my power in it.

The best interest, or use which you shall have for the money you lent me, is,
that I will here confess and subscribe my self, your, etc.

So as you will have a little patience, I will do you reason, or, I will do
all that shall be fitting.

When you shall have need of my ware, or of any thing my shop affords, it is
at your command, or service.

In any thing, wherein I shall have the means to serve you, I will do it with
a very good will.

If you have need of me, I pray you spare me not since I am always yours.

If you think good, I pray you send for it, for it is at your command.

I shall acquit my self therein, as I should do in my own business.

You shall find me always ready to obey you.

If you deal well with me now, you will give me occasion to pleasure you
another time.

If you send not the sum you owe me, you will constrain me to take some
other course.

I pray you advise me in it.

I will ever do it with all my heart:

I will not fail to advertise you.

All that I have, it is at your command.

I will take the boldness to salute you, with my most humble recommends.

I shall do it with as good a will, as I now recommend me to your good
favor, with my prayers to God, to give you even what your heart desires.

Desiring God to give you the continuance, and increase of all kind of
prosperity, with my prayers to God, to give you, with your perfect health, the
accomplishment of your wishes.

Praying to God for your contentment. Even so I take my leave.

And so I rest or remain for ever, evermore, always, Yours, etc.

The Garden-Knot of fair and rare Letters of Complement.
An offer of service.
SIr, These strokes of my hand, shall serve to entreat you to honor me with
yours, and to confirm to you anew the purpose I have always had in my soul,
which is a perfect will to live faithfully, that I may die constant.

Yours, Sir.

Another.
SIr, This my duty shall confirm the rest, which I desire to yield you by my
service. With this request, that you hold me still in your remembrance, as him
that shall never affect other merit then that of obeying you, whereby to be by
you esteemed,

Sir, The most obedient of all Your servants.

Another upon the sending of a token.
SEE, Sir, I do not forget you, witness this present, and a thousand more
evidences, which I shall give you for security of my continued affection; and
in all occasions, you shall find me what I profess, that is,

Sir, Yours.

A Letter of request to entertain a friend.
SIr, If I can tell how to crave of you, much better can I obey you: but for
lack of your commands, I make my prayers to you and especially for this, to
honor this friend of mine with your favor; he shall be obliged, and bound to
you; he, as indifferent, and I, Sir, as

Your most affectionate Servant.

Another to the same effect.
Sir,
MY passionate desire to do you service emboldens me to take pen in hand, to
beseech you to do this friend of mine a favor; the matter is but small, but
the acknowledgment shall be great. I shall expect this courtesy of you, as you
from me will look for all manner of service, since in very deed Sir, I am

Your most humble Servant.

A Letter for Answer to requests.
I Honor your requests too much to refuse them, much more your commands to
refuse them; so that by obliging you, I content my self. I have therefore
effected your will, which I account mine own, with as much vehemence, as shall
be requisite for your service: for whilst I am any thing, Sir, I am,

Your Servant.

Another humble expression of ones self to a friend.
SIr, I am so destined to obey you, that I never had a more passionate desire
in my soul for any thing, endeavor then to content me, by making use of my
services, for they belong to you, and I bestow them on you; without reserving
ought, but the honor of that employment, since that will make me still
appear, wheresoever I am, like my self, which is,

Your most humble, etc.

Another.
SIr, Your requests are effected, and by consequent, my desires accomplished;
the one depending on the other: for the least of those things that may pleasure
you, shall be always my contentment. Spare not then my services, that I may
obey you; for should they be unworthy of your commands, remember at least, how
they proceed, Sir, from

Your most humble Servitour.

A Letter of Excuse.
SIr, Though you were deprived of my Letters, you were not of my remembrance:
but if the want of a good opportunity will excuse me, my good will must
satisfy you. And indeed I had no news to send you, Sir, save only, that I am
always

Yours.

To a sick friend.
SIR, Being ascertained of your sickness, I was no more in doubt of mine own
harm, since the least you feel, is to me an extreme grief. Now if my
prayers can do any thing for your health, and consequently, for my comfort,
you will be soon well, and I content,

Sir, Who am, your most humble.

A Letter to her Sweet heart.
YOu bind me and unbinde, pardon me fairest, if this word offend thee, when
you tell me you love me, can I have any greater obligation? the offense is
not small that you had not written to me, but that you promised me, for I am
indebted to your promise, and not to your love: remember I beseech you that I
am not yours, because I have promised you, but because I am truly yours, and
that I desire not Letters for the conditions that are between us, but for the
sole witness of your good will not wel-comming them as merchandises, but as
being sent me from a wounded heart,

Thus I am thine, Farewell.

A Letter from a quondam Mistress.
SIr, since I am constrained by my fathers commands, I must entreat you to end
that love which heretofore I conjured you to keep eternal. I am intended for
an advancement, yet can I not leave sensibly to feel the separation of our
loves, yet since it is folly to contrary that which must fall out otherwise, I
counsel you to arm your self with strong resolutions, and so to forget all
that has past between us that you have no memory of me, as I for duties sake
am constrained to forget thee,

Being now not my own.

His Answer.
Go paper more happy then him that sends thee, accompanied with thy blots
instead of tears kiss her hands, which having kissed, since she has robbed
me of my heart, certify her that day and night, I turn my self into
streams of tears to wash away her unfaithfulnes, tell her faithful paper
that by unbe^ding the bow she can never heal the wound which she has made in
her faith, and my love, and that my griefs shall witness to the world that as
she is most fair, so she is most unconstant to her Lover who can find
content in nothing but death, and therefore bids her for ever farewell.

A Letter to a Lord protesting Love.
SIR, I received your Letter and withal perused those undeserved commendations
of my perfections as you call them, to which you annexed the protestations of
your service, which you must give me leave to question, for I shall always
doubt whither so honorable a personage as your Lordship can yield service to so
mean a Lady, or if Love had such power, whether you would obey: now worthy
Sir, upon these warrants and your free offers of service, I bind you by a
courteous request to conclude a speedy peace, that I may without danger of
hostility repair to Dianaes temple, so shall I be bound to do you any
honorable favor, Farewell.

His short answer.
MY dearest, if the dissembling which you injoyne me to, be to cause me to dye
of grief, you may easily do it with a frown, and then my death will give you
a speedy and deplorable demonstration how truly I have loved you, Farewell.

Her Answer.
IF there be any thing in you that pleases me, your death is the least: the
acknowledgement of your fault has satisfied me, and I will have no other
revenge of your boldness then the miseries you suffer: know your self better
hereafter.

Farewell, and live, cherish your self and hope.
A Letter on his Mistress in his absence.
Fairest, I left thee with grief, but am returned with pleasure and
contentment, deny me not therefore thy presence, but let me see thee, that I
may recount my fortunes to thee who art the fortune of my fortunes,

Farewell.
A Letter protesting affection.
IF I have not always loved you, let me never be beloved of any, if my
affections do ever change, let my present misfortunes never change, If you
believe not the oath I have made you, take what proof you will of me, and you
shall find that I am more yours, then I can assure you by my true, but most
feeble words, Farewell.

To congratulate a friend.
SIr, I much rejoice at the success of your business, and even so, as if it
had arrived to me, I could not more celebrate it in my soul; so much do I
tender your content: but this is but a duty, to the friendship I owe you; and
a necessity, to the zeal I have to your service, wherein I do but oblige me
to my self: mean while be it how it will, the same proceeds but from,

Sir, Your most humble.

A farewell to a friend going a necessary Voyage.
SIr, an irksome necessity deprives me a long while from the honor of your
presence (but not without grief) for your conversation is so pleasing to me,
that I have always preferred it before all manner of delights. Judge now
therefore, if separated from you, I can live content: but for all that, I must
suffer this harm, since it is necessary for my good. Mean while, remember your
self, that I shall never forget you, and where ever I be, will appear as I am,

Sir, Yours.

Excuse.
SIr, If lawful excuses exempt duty, I am absolved of the promises I have made
you, through the importunity of affairs that have befallen me: it grieves me
nevertheless, for not keeping my word with you, and that grief, with my good
will, may satisfy you, I shall shortly do my self the happiness to see you,
and the honor to serve you,

Sir, Since I am Yours, etc.

Of a new married man to his Brother in Law.
SIr, The honor of your alliance is so dear to you, that I shall never think
me more happy, then when I shall deem my self capable to deserve it. This
duty will witness to you, how considerable you are with me, which at once
has given me, with the desire to know you, the will to serve you, I have no
other passion in my soul, nor other ambition, in my designs: it is all I hope
for, it is every thing I look for, yea, with so much impatience as I have left
off my liberty (after so sweet a servitude) to live faithful, that I may dye
constant

Sir, The most humble of your Servants.

A Letter by way of protestation.
SIr, The honor of your friendship so obliges me to make some worthy
acknowledgment, that I am all full of will to serve you, and as full of default
in the performance; I will therefore wait the time and occasion, wherein by
your command I may signallize my obedience, which shall always, and
wheresoever I be, make me appear as I am,

Sir, That is, Your, etc.

Another of a friend obliged by favors.
SIR, you still delight in obliging such as are most beholding unto you; I am
witness of it, and your courtesy is the trial: so that I am ashamed to be
always engaged, without so much as the hope ever to acknowledge the favor
rightly. Nevertheless, if a fervent passion perfectly zealous for your
service, can satisfy you in my defaults, accept of it, I beseech you, since it
proceeds,

Sir, From your most humble, etc.

To complain for some offense.
SIR, Your words offend much, and your deeds much more; I pity them both; the
one makes you seem mild, and the other, rash; I think you are not the man to
repent it: but he that does ill, is not absolved for being sorry for it, be
must do penance for it. Look to your own matters therefore, that you may
never talk of others. I take nothing in jest, when one pinches me. If you
doubt it, there is my Name, which shall make good my words.

N.

A presentment of service.
Mistress, It is long since, that too much discretion has kept me from writing
to you; and it may be too much boldness permits it me now: I pray you
therefore pardon me, before you judge me guilty: that so I may be rather
absolved, then accused: for although I had no other purpose, then to tender you
my service, as now I do, with my faith to boot, for assurance of my fidelity:
yet am I fearful of too much undertaking: but howsoever, chastise me as you
please. Mistress, There Is my Name and Surname,

Your humble, and most affectionate Servant.

Another of Love.
Mistress, Since at the sole aspect of your eyes, my heart sighs for love, as
taken with your wonders; I shall incessantly bless the day of your
acquaintance, and consequently of her that is the most perfectly fair on
earth: and already resigning my will to yours, I will so passionately cherish
my thraldom, that the fear alone of being free will make me miserable. Make
good my purpose then Sweet, Mistress, But always in this quality, of your most
affectionate Servant.

Another.
Mistress, When to admire you I staid mine eyes at your object, my heart
insensibly taken, bewailed her captivity; so as I found my self in love,
before I had so much as the hope to be so. And yet I should not complain; I
rather will bless the day that bereft me of my liberty with the sole arms of
your merits, without reserving any freedom to my self,

Mistress, other then the word to speak me, Your servant.

Another.
LAdy, I have such an inclination to your love, that I must neds be destined
for your service. Now if it be a fatal instinct in me, that my obeisance
should wait upon the honor of your commands, is it not necessary for you,

Mistress, To believe me to be your servant?

Another.
Mistress, If admiration have only eyes for your beauty, and if Cupid be not
blind, but to eschew hurts from you, can I have an heart without loving you,
or a soul without adoring you? And can I be mortal, and not sensible of your
charms? Oh no, Mistress, I have too much honor, in being your Captive; and too
much glory, in being your slave.

Another.
Mistress, This instant letter will tell you I am your servant. If you ask me
the cause: It is your merit, and the effect shall be my obedience, if you deem
me as worthy of your commands, as you are of my services, I have a Mistress to
my wish, and by consequence, am

Your Servitour, etc.

Another.
Mistress, I am yours: for having nothing to offer you worthy of your merit, I
bestow my self; but it is as your Captive and slave.

Another.
Since your eyes have wounded my heart, the wound is mortal. If I must die, it
shall be for love. Happy death, happy cause! I will have no remedy, for my
heart is too noble to crave a cure. Confess only you have vanquished me, and
I shall confess my defeat, being it proceeds from the most perfect creature
on earth.

A Letter of a despairing Lover.
Sometimes Love, at this time the despair of Love, has put the pen into my
hand, with a purpose if it return me no redress, to change it into a sword,
which promises me a full though a cruel healing; the blanke paper which you
have sent me, for an answer, is a testimony of my innocence, since it is as if
you had said, you have found nothing to accuse me of, from whence otherwise
could your silence proceed? if you have any remembrauce of my faithful
service, for pity I desire of you either life or death: this is all that is
requested at your hands by your despairing Lover.

Her answer.
DRaw from your evil the knowledge of your good: if you had not bin beloved,
you could never have had a sense of any thing; till you are forgiven, you shall
not know your offense: in the mean space hope and live.

To a Lady promising revenge on his enemy.
MAdam, who doubts of my innocence shall be guilty and offend against truth,
closed eyes see not the light, though without a shadow it shine on them,
especially when those eyes are shut against the brightness of my Justice:
therefore if the blood of mine enemy cannot wash away my stain, I will
voluntarily add thereunto mine own, since that I have no other way to
preserve my life left me, I am ready to render it; farewell.

Her answer.
SIR, The wounds of the body are not always healed, though they be out of
danger, no more they of the mind; but having removed the difficulties by your
valor and prudence, you must give time leave to work her ordinary actions, in
the mean space she that loves you waits an opportunity till the blemishes of
your honor are washed off by the expressions of your virtues, that you may
appear clear, and as bright as day again in the eyes of her that admires you.

A Lovers offer of his service to his Mistress.
Fair Mistress, had I virtue to persuade you as you have power to make me love
you the discovery of my blazing affections would melt you, were you a mountain
of Ice, to pity, but for that love is more vehement in the heart, then in the
tongue; I appeal to your motions for grace, if you have ever loved; if not, I
hope for such Justice at Venus hands, that you shall thus much I say, though I
place no confidence in my own wishes, because they convert to air, yet I
presume of my own endeavors, for that I have vowed my life to death, to do you
service, of which you can have no better assurance, than to employ me, nor I a
higher favor than to be

Yours.

A letter of a lover, requesting speedy remedy
GOod Madam, Martyr me not with doubts, since my affections are so violent, and
the excellence of your beauty does so exceed, so that the full power of love
has made me in the state of flaming flax, which is presently to be quenched,
or will suddenly burn: thus longing for your gracious and sudden answer, I
kiss your hand, and am No more my own.

A Letter from a languishing lover.
MOre of zeal to do you service, than desire I have to live, I here present
you my consumed self, only kept alive by the light of your fair beauty, that
sits crowned in the palace of my heart, which bleeding at your feet, beggeth
the means of my cure: if you vouchsafe it I live; if not, you must see my
death: and thus doubtful between both, till I kiss your sweet answer, I
remain,

Unto my last gasp Yours.

Her Answer.
I Am not cruel, though with difficulty I consent to love; and for that your
passions are so extreme, I keep your picture in my bosom, but with what
thought, I blush to write, though pity be my warrant, so that I leave the
event of our love to your consideration: for know sweet Sir, that being
overcome to see your passions so great, I cannot but commit my love, my honor,
my self, and all to your affection, and wise government, Farewell.

A Letter to his Mistress.
FAirest, since it is a common thing to love and a miracle to subdue affection,
Let it not seem strange that I am a slave to your beauty, nor wonder though I
sue for grace, since the lover like a sick patient, is enforced to seek
comfort of his mistress: to prove that I love you, needs no other testimony then
the witness of your rare perfections, for the present I balm my wounds with a
hope that I shall kiss your gracious hand, and that your answer will return an
acceptance of the service of him

Whose heart waits on your Beauty.

A Letter to his Mistress, upon service enjoined.
Fair Nymph, May all contents and pleasures dwell with you, as all mine depend
on you, I perceive now you command me to action, but Love which is ever
accompanied with doubts commands me to tremble, but let heaven do with me
what it pleases, I know it will not deny me a grave.

A Letter complainining of the cruelty of his Mistress.
FAirest, If your eyes were as full of variety as they are to cause love, the
sweetness which they promise at the first, would make me adore them with as
much contentment as they have produced in me of vain hope; but so far are
they from the performance of their deceitful promises, that they will not so
much as confess them, and so wide from healing my hurt, that they will not
acknowledge themselves Authors, as if with you they purpose to equal cruelty
with beauty, since you have ordained that the affection that you have caused to
be born in me should cruelly dye in me, was there ever a more unpitifull mother
but I, who held more dear that which came from you than my life, being unable
to suffer so great an injustice, am resolved to carry my affections with me
into the grave, hoping that the heavens moved at last, will through my patient
suffering, make me as dear to you, as you are now cruel to me, Farewell.

A Letter from a despairing lover.
IF you have regard to the presumption which has forced me to love, my death
which follows it, shall revenge it on you; but if it be indifferent to you, I
assure my self, that this last act of my affection shall gain somewhat more in
your soul: if it fall out so, I shall cherish the resemblance of your beauty
more than my birth, since by it I came into the world to be troublesome to you;
and by the other, I go out of it, and leave you.

Another.
Mistress, My heart is yours, my obedience belongs to your commands, and my
whole will is yours: so that I have nothing free but speech, to say, I am

Your Servitour.

Another.
Mistress, From the time that with your beauty, I had the knowledge of your
merits, I felt some secret power, which sweetly enforced my will to honor you,
and my heart to aspire at naught but your love. If so be then, that my
services, whereof Heaven has reserved the integrity for your commands, may be
never so little pleasing to you, permit,

Mistress, That I may honor my self, with this title of your Servant.

Another Letter of Service.
SIR, I have received, by way of duty, the honor of your Letter; whereby I
have seen the submissions of services which you do me, but unfittingly, for
which I am more beholding to your courtesy, then to any merit of mine: Now to
accept of them were without reason; as to refuse them would be held
disdainful; I do therefore receive the proffer, but leave the effects to your
self, that so you may not serve

Sir, Her that favors you.

Another.
SIR, If the services which your honesty will needs yield me, gather only life
from my merit, or beauty, they have but their name; for there can be no defect,
if there be no cause: So that I never having any beauty, or merit, you are but
my servant in word, Sir, but I am yours in deed.

Another.
SIR, If my duty have entertained yours, mine honesty has refused your offers,
as too worthy of me, and I am unworthy of them. I shall nevertheless, for mine
own sake, reserve the honor to my self, Sir, who am

Your servant.

Another to the same effect.
SIR I accuse my duty for your satisfaction, for that I have deprived you of my
Letters; and confess me guilty, before you accuse me, the rather to merit
grace. Deny it me not then I beseech you, as you regard him that begs it Sir,
who is the most affectionate of all your Servants.

Another to the same effect.
ALbeit one self same cause makes us pardonable, for having been alike
silent, yet do I know my duties interest, in having unjustly deprived you,
(being obliged to you as I am) of the effects of my remembrance, which grieves
my soul, and which grief I present to you, but always in my quality,

Sir, of your humble servitour.

A Letter desiring better acquaintance.
SIR, Although my merit be not such as may presume to deserve the honor I have
to write to you, yet the desire nevertheless I have to introduce my self into
your acquaintance and friendship, has emboldened me to present these lines to
you, and to receive the honor of your commands, and to tender to you the
offers of my service.

Yours.

A Letter from on to his Mistress.
IT is impossible to see you without loving you, but much more to love you
without being extreme in that affection, so that if for my defense it shall
please you to consider this truth when this paper shall present it self before
your eyes, I assure my self that the greatness of my hurt shall obtain by
pity as much pardon from you, as the boldness which has raised me to this
worth, may merit just punishment, attending the Judgment which you shall give,
suffer me a thousand and a thousand times to kiss your fair hands and rest.

A Letter to Coelia.
Mistress.
IF perfection be not in the world, but to make you admired; if love be not
love, but to make you be beloved; if sacrifices be not but to make you be
adored; who can see you without admiration, who can admire you without love,
and who can love without adoring you? he must be one that has neither eyes,
heart, nor soul: for if my eyes admire you, affection will have it so: if my
heart loves you, reason commands it, if my soul adores you, heaven permits it:
so that these three necessities forming it for you, I present it to you

Dear Mistress, under the Title of yours, Eugenius.

A Letter.
SIR, It is needless for me to say I love you, since my actions hitherto have
given you no testimony to the contrary. Truce then for my words, I will that my
deeds shall speak, and tell you that in effect I will during life be

Yours.

A Letter of acknowledgment.
WHat worthy acknowledgement can I give to your obligations, when their
extremity bereaves me of the hope: my duty remains pensive at the excess of
your courtesies; for being never able to tend^r you other, than unworthy
effects of your merits. I have indeed but the will, and that is but a shadow
for a body; yet compose it, I beseech you, whilst you remember how it proceeds
from

Your most humble servant.

Another.
SIR, With what kind of duties shall I acknowledge your courtesies; which have
so obliged me, that to tell them right, one must be silent? To offer you my
service; it is already your own. To present my self; I am yours long since. I
then have naught but defaults, for your satisfaction; but a thousand services,
for your obeisance; for my being in general, depends on that particular, of
Your most humble servitour.

Another.
SIR, I have nothing, yet I owe much. To present you with wishes, for effects,
were but too weak recompenses. I will therefore give you mine endeavors, for
all your courtesies; honoring and serving you whilst I live; all which life of
mine is destined for no earthly thing, but your commands.

Another.
SIR, Your courtesies have too much obliged me, ever to forget them; I shall
celebrate them particularly in my soul, whereby to be able to acknowledge them,
in the least presenting serviceable occasion, and live always with this will,
never to die beholding to you,

Sir, but yet your most humble Servitour.

Another.
SIR, I can honor your merits by reason, and acknowledge by duty your
courtesies which have too much obliged me, to be ungrateful: though I can
never make you worthy satisfaction; yet shall I have always both the desire
and hope of it, and in the mean while a steadfast will to live and die,

Sir, Yours.

For telling of news.
SIR, Desirous of your contentment, as of mine own, I have taken pen in hand,
to tell you whatsoever has past. Now you have seen what is new, take the old
with it: which is, that I am always,

Sir, Your Servitour.

A Letter of acknowledgement of being beloved.
Shall I conceal such an excessive happiness, as to be loved by you, My
dear? Or shall I publish it, to make it greater? No, no, my silence may honor
it, yet my words shall make it the more glorious; for in leaving it, I shall
deprive its memory of forgetfulness. I will therefore have my mouth
continually closed up, against the confession of it, my mind taken in the
thought of it, and my soul wrapped in the sole object of its Idea. And so
blessing my birth, for the happiness of yours, that your death may be my
Tomb. In the mean while, my whole happiness and glory shall consist in this
quality, of

Your most humble servant.

A Letter of absence.
Mistress, Since the day of your departure, which was also reckoned the same of
my contentment, tears and griefs have been inseparable with my life: all kind
of objects are to me defective, nothing pleases me, but what dislikes me; and
if your memory did not still accompany me in my actions, I should forget my
self, and in stead of preserving my life for your service, should destroy it
for mine own content. If you desire to judge of my grief, judge what your
self are, Mistress, which is the fairest of the world, and I the most afflicted
of all your servants.

Another.
Mistress, Since for counterpoise of my love, I suffer the grief of your
absence, I do even endure all that ever can be conceived in rigorous torments:
the days shine not on me, but to inlighten my mishap; for the Sun laughs at
my pain, as I scorn his brightness, in that I acknowledge none more worthy,
than that of your eyes, long since my Conquerers, and still mine idols. But
what shall I say? I am borne to indurc, and to love you, Mistress.

But always in this quality, of your most humble Servant.

Letters of Absence.
IF those griefs, which are still present, since your absence did not make me
hope for a speedy death, I should bewail the birth of my days, that do
enlighten me without thining, for deprived of the brightness of your eyes, I
can acknowledge none other in the world, as having vanquished me, and that with
so many charms, as that they are not content, that I adore them, but that they
are still burning me. Well, this is somewhat too much; but yet too little for
your merits. Wherefore I will never be weary of suffering, no more than of
loving you. Believe my harm at leastwise, and your belief shall be my
remedy, and my honor my quality.

Mistress, Of your most humble Servitour.

Another.
Mistress, If the sorrow which your absence has caused in my soul, could give
me as many words to express it, as I have griefs to bewail it; I should
think my self satisfied. But for too much enduring, I must be silent in my
torment; yet never in my quality,

Mistress, Of your most humble Servant.

Answer.
SIR, What kind of trouble can such an indifferent absence bring to your
content? No, no, it can be but an imaginary feeling, though it seems real, by
your own words, speaking you unable to express, being there is no such thing,
your silence is your great advantage; since it expresses your torment, without
saying any thing of it: But not the title which your fair carriage gives you,
of being my servitour; as to me it does likewise the endeavor, Sir, of
deserving the style and quality, of your servant.

Another.
SIR, I can give but fained remedies to an imaginary torment like yours, for
mine absence is of too indifferent a nature to cause your grief or trouble, and
I beseech you dispense with me for believing it, since also mine own knowledge
forbids it, as reason does otherwise to say I am

Sir, Your servant.

Upon a point of rigor.
IF love and cruelty be two contrary things, your love must needs be fained,
since your rigor is real. Cease then to make me suffer, and I shall believe
you love me, for my pain and your cruelty are too opposite to persist
together: Adieu my dear, and though too cruel.

J am your Servitour.

Another.
SIR, You complain of my absence, and I of yours: you would enjoy my presence,
but your discretion forbids it you, and me the happiness to see you; but my
want of power opposes it: so that grievances should be less in that they are
equally shared: but not the quality which I take,

Sir, of your servant.

Another.
TO see you without admiration, is past my power; to admire and love you, is a
necessity; but to love and endure yours, is a consequence for you have so much
merit, that one can hardly desire, much less hope for the honor of your good
favors. Judge then who can but worthily serve you? Sure he is yet unborn, nay,
in earnest, i will pawn my soul on it, yet with your leave, Mistress,

For I am Yours.

To his Lady.
TO despise such as honor you, to disdain such as love you, to make no
account of such as are faithfully yours, are those the actions of a fair soul
like yours? Or are these but words, that honor me with a hope of some effects
of your good ^emembrance? Oh, it is a little too rigo^ou^! Confess it, that
you may repent, and ^o give him content, who cannot be absent from you,

Mistress, As your most humble Servitour.

To a kinswoman.
Mistress, Albeit your actions, in appearance have witnessed, that I was no
^therwise in your esteem, than of an indif^erent quality; yet my desires being
still ^ecretly zealous for your service, in their na^urall instinct, aspiring
at nothing but your ^ood, have disarmed my purpose, bent to ^our disgrace, so
to restore me to my self, and make me the same I am to you, which (...),

Mistress, Your most affectionate servant and kinsman.

Upon the inconstancy of a servant.
SIR, Our Sex is not always accused of inconstancy, and yet do I now take that
law from you: you, I say, whose oaths gave such faithful testimonies of
affection, that I durst not doubt of it, for fear of offending my self: And
yet has the wind carried away your words, but not your love, for you never had
any: so that now when I blame my self for having believed you, I praise my
self withal, for imitating you, but always with the sorrow of not being your
example: for it was fit I should precede you, as your Mistress,

Sir, Though at the present, Your servant.

A Letter.
Mistress, It is well to be seen that you have no love, since you have eyes to
see my unworthiness. Love is blind, you should be so too in regard of my
merits: let it suffice you that I love you, and that I adore you, even as the
rairest and most perfect creature on earth.

A Letter from a despairing Lover.
THere is no creature Madam, so bereaved of reason or deprived of sense, which
being oppressed with direful calamities feels not by mere instinct of
nature a present medicine for his malady, man only excepted, who by reason of
his want may justly accuse the injurious powers of in justice, the Unicorn
being sick recovers his health by swallowing the buddes of a date tree, the
Dear being stricken feeds on the herb Dictamum, and recovers; but man has
no secret salve so excellent, nor plaster so perfect by whose secret virtues
he may appease his passions: this Madam I now know by proof, and therefore
speak by experience; for your divine beauty and the perfections of your mind
have kindled such a flame in my heart that by no means I can quench, but it
will turn my body into dry earth, and cinders; unless by the drops of your
pity, it be speedily extinguished: therefore fair one, now at last be
merciful, and let not my service and royal love be recompensed with such
disloyal refusals: strive not for my life, since you have my liberty, seek not
my death, since you are the saint to which I offer up my devotions: Madam, let
the sweet balm of your benevolence salve the sore which so painfully
afflicts my careful conscience, and with the dew of your grace redeem him
from misery whose life or death stands in your answer, which I hope shall be
such as belongs to the desert of my love, and the graces of your beautiful
mind.

Farewell.
Her Answer.
IT is impossible Sir, to strain moist liquor out of the dry flint, to procure
a heat in that which is key cold, or to force the sturdie streams to run
against their common course, know Sir, you are the man I loath, but cannot
like; make therefore a virtue of your necessity and assuage the flame your
self, which I know not who else will quench, by an importunate persisting in
thy purpose where no hope is, thou provest thy felfe rather a desperate sot,
then a discreet Soldier: take my nay therefore for an answer: if I would I
cannot; and if I could, I would not, so farewell.

No way yours.

To one who is not really what she seems.
ADmire not though I rail against thy follies, since thy mercylesse mind has
misled me by thy ingratitude, and thy imperfections have delineated these
impressions of my pen: for thy beauty, if I admired it once it was when I
knew not that thy ill conditions like bad commodities, were to be put off with
it, but now making use of reason: I question whether at that time I had sense:
persuade thy self therefore, if I were to dye presently, and thou were part of
that I should leave the world, I would bequeath thee with thy good face, and
bad conditions for a legacy to my most inveterate enemy. And for my own part
whilst I do survive, and thy remaining upon this earth, does yet afflict me, be
confident fair painted Sepulcher, I will epitomize all thy vices, that the
world by reading thy volume may shun thee as the only obstacle to felicity, and
learn the wages of virtue, by those things that are thy contraries, for the
present: admire not though this paper be staind with the blemishes of thy ill
name, since nature her self was deceived which bestowed her features so
rashly, and inconsiderately on thee, certainly thou were ordained to rectify
my mind, that by thee, I might learn to know that a good face is not always
exempted from a hoarse voice, I protest to thee I would not buy the distempers
of thy soul at so high a rate as to enjoy thy beauty, much rather will I
endeavor to express my gratitude to heaven, in that I fail not to practice
this resolution.

Never to enjoy thee.

Her Answer.
WOnder not Sir, though you see an answer to your frantic letter, do you
think by brawling like a beggar to become a King? No Sir, as I know your
knavery, so I pass not for it, neither can your bragges go for payment. I
marvel not though your dogged Letters savor of Diogenes doctrine, you
Cinicall Dunce, what felicity can you have in biting those of whom otherwise
thou can not be revenged? Indeed gentle Balaams Ass; if I had bin so light
to have loved you, for feeding my fancy on thy ill favored face, I might
justly have reapt such profit, since I then have filled my eyes so full with
the figure of a fool; hereafter keep your Letters Patents in your beggars
box, adieu Sir dunce, the more you mislike me, the better I love my self,
whilst I account it the greatest felicity of S.M.

To be rid of such a fool.

A Letter from a distressed lover.
MAdam, as my cares proceed from your cruelty, so let the effects of your
courtesy procure my bliss, since the perfections of your beauty have made me
miserable, let me beg of you to send the messenger of present consolation to
him that pineth away and is yours only and ever.

Still in hope.

A Letter from a lover professing constancy.
THey who have the honor to see you run a dangerous fortune: if they love you,
they are saucy; if they love not, they are without judgment; now fair
creature, I have chosen that which is most after my humor; and from which it
is impossible for me to withdraw my self, think it not hard Cruel Diana,
that having seen you, I love you: if this boldness deserve punishment, you
caused it, and it is no more in my choice, for I must while I live, be your
servant or not be alive, Farewell.

A letter from an inconstant lover
I Write not now to tell you that I love, for you have believed it but too
well, but to assure you that I shall love you no more, perhaps you may be
amazed at this alteration, for you have always loved me above my desires; but
that which draws me from you is, I must confess your misfortune that will no
longer continue to you the pleasure of our loves, or rather my good fortune
which will have me no longer stay at so poor a thing, and to the end you may
live to complain of me, I bid you for ever, Farewell.

Her answer.
SIR, It was your arrogance persuaded you I loved you, wherein you were most
infinitely mistaken, I swear to thee by all the merits which thou think thou
have but are not in thee, there was never any such likely matter, as for the
Letter thou have sent me I cannot be unthankful to thee for the pleasure
thou have done me in it, since it has taught me to reject hereafter the
importunities of such cox-combes as your self, in the mean time be as content
as I am, in being freed of such a burden: believe me Sir, it is no small
happiness. Farewell.

A Lover to his inconstant Mistress.
IT is not to complain of you Mistress, that I take up my pen, but only to
deplore my misfortunes which make me so contemned of you, since at other times
you were not wont to use me in this sort. I am the same man that have served
you in all respective submission, and you are the same that at first were mine,
since you received me for yours. I am become no less, nor you greater; if it
be so, why do you not judge me worthy of the same entertainment? I have
called my soul to an account for her actions, since it pleases you, I will
display them all before your eyes: for my part, I cannot accuse any one of
them, if you shall judge otherwise when you have heard them, it shall be no
small consolation to the poor condemned to know at least the cause of his
punishment; adieu cruel one.

A Letter.
IF love taught me as well to speak my torment, as to suffer it, my pity would
make you sensible of my plaints, but dumb in their too much sufferance. I have
but my constancy, for remedy, that is all my hope; your sweetness, for my
desire; and your command, for mine honor, Mistress, for my quality is,

Your most humble Servitour.

Another.
SInce your merits cause my torment, I will never complain: the more rigorous
you shall be, the more constantly I will oppose all my respects, to your
neglects; my honors, to your disdaines; and my fire, to your ice; if I breath,
it shall be love; if I sigh, it shall be in passion for your service: In a
word, if I be, I shall be,

Mistress, Your servitour.

Letter.
TO have no soul, but to adore you; to have no heart, but to love you; and but
one only life, for your service; have you not cause to complain? You, whose
beauty, has so many charms; and merits, so many baits, that one would detest
this name of liberty, to die your slave. Should one talk of miracles, you are
the example; in discourse of rarities, you are the comparison: so that Heaven
and nature are in dispute, for whom you were made. Now to say, I am your
servitour, that is a quality too high: to say I am your slave, that is yet too
lofty. Behold my Surname, now give me what name you please.

Letter.
IF for desiring death, one were to loose his life, I should have been gone
long since: for too much love, makes me hate my self: but me thinks the more
I live, I still lengthen my days: and that being wretched, I ought to live the
longer: I fly that which flies me, the grave: so as I have neither comfort of
my life, nor hope of my death. And thus I am,

Mistress, Always your servitour.

Another.
TO love, and not to be loved, is to live without hope, and by donsequent, to
die. Have you resolved my death, and by disdaining my services, to forget them
for requital? It is too much rigor, for your beauty: you will confess it
one day, but too late for your repentance, for I shall no longer by consequence
subsist, as I am for the present, Mistress, The most humbe of all Your servants.

A Letter.
Mistress, Thus to forbid me to love you, and to will me not to honor you,
what would you have me do (my deares) I must change my heart, if I would
change my Mistress; and Nature must give me other inclinations, to deprive you
of my respects, and of my obedience: forbid me to live rather; I will dye, but
it shall be for love, and so at the price of my days, I shall do you service;
leaving this truth, for a remembrance to after times.

A Letter from a Gentleman to his Mistress.
IT is you, fair creature, that have gained this advantage upon me, that I
forget my self, to remember you perpetually. Do not think, that unless I see
you shortly, I can longer survive, whereby I might continue the affection of my
services to you. So that two things will infallibly bring me to my grave; your
absence, and my grief, for not acquitting me toward you, as I desire. Choose
now (fair soul) whether you had rather have me dead for your content, or to
see me daily offer you up the fruits of my services, upon the altar of your
merits, in the quality of

Your most loyal, and most affectionate Servitour.

A Letter of a Gentleman, evil spoken of for the love of his Mistress.
SOme one that is envious of my happiness, had a mind to calumniate me toward
you, and to persuade you, that I have showed some testimonies of affection to
another besides you, who have sooner believed it of me then I should have done
of you, if the like had been reported to me. Shall I accuse you then? Or
shall I excuse my self? For you make me an overture for both. Should I excuse
my self? That would make me guilty in some sort: and if I accuse you not, I
shall witness that I honor you, and love you still, as your own faithful
purchase.

A Letter of a difference betwixt a Gentleman, and his Mistress.
I Think it was no inviolable vow that was betwixt us, when we swear so
solemnly. But for ought I can learn, the change has better pleased you, then
the continuance of my services. I know not whom I shall accuse, you, or I; for
possibly the long time I have been without seeing you, is the cause of it, or
else you have been drawn to it by your own natural condition. Make me such
an answer as you please. No earthly thing shall hinder me from loving you, for
I had rather choose a thousand deaths, than to be inconstant in my love: and
will fly, with the hazard of my life, the reproach of disloyalty (whether you
will or no.)

Your servitour inviolably.

A Letter of a Gentleman, after a visit to a Lady.
Mistress, the honor I received in the late visit I made to my dear Cozen at
your house, has so obliged me to both of you, that I thought I should commit a
heinous fault, if by some honest endeavor, I should not witness a feeling of
it. If ever I have the happiness to see you at my home, which is yours, I
shall endeavor to make you as welcome, as I can; and do conjure you to come
see my Sister, as you have promised her; otherwise, farewell all friendship;
not so nevertheless, but that the mean while I desire to continue,

Mistress, Your Cozen, and best friend.

A Letter, of a fond Maid, that disdained the service and love of a gallant
Gentleman; who was counseled to disdain her also.
FOrsake that Maid, that forsakes you, and no more remember her
forgetfulness. She has changed, to change your mishap. She has changed, that
she might not change her natures inconstancy; Her small acquaintaince, should
make you know her fault. Your good judgment, may show you what a little she
has. You cannot but get by the loss of her. If you lose a sweet heart, you
gain a liberty; you should keep some love for your self, and not cast it all
away from you. If you love something, do not hate your self for all that. If
fortune give you any thing, she will be well rewarded. If she take a heart from
you, think it was not yours. Whersoever you go, tarry with your content, and
love not what is contrary to you; unless you will contrary him, that loves you
dearly,

Even to the Grave.

A brave reply of a Gentleman to his Mistress by way of Derision.
Escopites,
THe small shot of your beauty, does enough singe the doublet of my soul,
without the Canion of your rigor to break the very bones of my pretenses. You
have enough forraged the plains of my heart, without moreover billeting there
the Regiment of despair, which runs after me, even to the ruin of my life.
Alas! I pray you do not let those Carabins of disdain eat up the bread of my
hopes, nor beat up the bongues of my fidelity, that are so full of good wine of
patience. I have so often told you, that as soon as the Baker of your bounty,
should have heated the Oven of your heart, I would set in the bread of my
thoughts. But the bad rich man of your judgment, has despised my poor Devil
of desire, that is going now to die in the Hospital. Out alas! Gogs-nigges,
what will become of the Goats of my conceits, if this wicked woman of your
cruelty, pull the bed from under them of my contentment, to make them snap at
the crust of your Ieeres? No, I believe the bottle of my perseverance once
broken, you will bewail the Orleans wine of my devotion, when you will get
none else, but some tart wines of faining, which will vex the tongue of your
knowledge. But if you rid your hands of that vicious horse of your distrust, I
believe the rest will not rush upon the Bibets of my thoughts, which hold the
bridle of constancy. What ever befalls, the Pilgrims of my designs, desiring
the Scollop-shels of your friendship, will be still grobling in the dirt of
good courage. But if the feet of my offers, take bladders of refusal, farewell
Cupid's voyage. The vintages of my services will be soon done, if the hail of
your pride blast the grape of my pursuit. But whilst the sithe of your
judgment, moves the grass of your rigours, I shall ever kiss the hands of
your perfections, and make my self an everlasting wood of the fire of your
beauty.

A Letter of holy love between two lovers, containing three letters besides.
YOu have made me feel, fair Calistena, the ardent sparkles of your
friendship; the memory whereof I shall still honor, and esteem my self a
great deal the more happy, if my happiness may prove more extreme, when I
shall burn in its flames, wherein my soul shall live with a thousand
delights, and my heart resume new life in its ashes. And that I may be
condemned to this wished punishment, do not let your fair mind conceive any
doubt of my loves eternity, since constancy shall be ever its faithful
companion, and that the fire which kindled it, can never be quenched, should it
be combated by the Ice proceeding from that fear you might have of your
enviers. And if it were so, yet would it melt, as soon as you should but
contemplate the Sunne-beames of my discretion. You may as well assure your
self of the effect of my words, as I do of the consummation of my hope; which
have none other scope, then to serve your merits, and to fit up to your use.

Your faithful Floridon, etc.

A Letter in answer.
YOur desires are my laws (dear Floridon) and your loyalty cannot finish but
with mine: they shall both alike shine bright over our lives, and nourish
themselves with our flames; wherein I shall think me very happy to live with
you. That silence which knit up my tongue at your fair discourses, proceeded
only out of fear: you might know that, by my exterior signs, which
sufficiently showed you, how sorely it greived me: but with you only: for I
would not have you think me in any sort afraid of the scorching sparks of the
envious, since nothing can withstand that faithful love, which from
henceforward is contracted, by

Your dear Calista, etc.

Another.
IF my steadfast love were not answered by yours (dear Calista) I should have
reason to complain of you, and my complaints would be so stout, as not to give
way to ought, but torments. But must I needs open the gaets to sorrows, when
your Letter is an article of my faith, and that you suffer a thousand tortures
for my love? I doubt not, but envy has been buzzing something in my Parents
cares of our loves, and that Felicity her self, as jealous of our
contentments, might put such a poor trick upon us. But you have so fair a
soul, and so generous, that you will constantly repulse all those onsets to
honor still, with your love,

Your faithful Floridon.

A Letter in answer.
PLeasures are of short continuance, and their fair days are too soon
eclipsed, we cannot promise our selves a long enjoyment of them, since they
are in the hands of the great JEHOVAH. It is constancy that gives us
happiness, after all our adversities. You are the subject of my bypast sorrow
(dear Floridon) but now your presence serves me for Sunne-beames: though
indeed some doubts of future obstacles do even bury me in an obscure night of
anguish. And were it not that joy follows sorrow, I had ere this skipt over
the step of this life of mine, to be freed of my pain. But, time will one day
give us the happiness to make each other amends, by receiving usury for our
patience. Be comforted then in your self, and consider so well with your
discretion (though I be thus in my fears) that there wants nothing but the
Spire of our felicities, which we shall attain to I hope shortly, or it shall
be no fault of hers, who is

Your faithful CALISTA, in as much as you desire with honor.

Styles and Terms used to The King, or Queens Majesty, either in our Speech,
or in Superscriptions of Petitions directed to them.
If you present any thing.
Sir, May it please your Majesty.

If you write in form of a petition to the King.

Sir, May it please your Majesty to understand, or to grant.

To the Queen.
Madam, May it please your Majesty.

On the Superscription of some business, directed both to the King and Queen.

To the most Excellent, and most Mighty, Caesar Augustus.

To the most Excellent, most mighty Lady the Queen.

A Style used by Men of Quality, when they speak to the King.

Sir, May it please your Majesty.

To the Queen.
Madam, May it please your Majesty.

Styles used to the Nobility in our Superscriptions are diverse, but the most
general are these.

If to an Archbishop.
To the most Reverend Father in God.

If to a Bishop.
To the right Reverend Father in God.

If to a Noble man, eminent in place.
To the Right Honorable.

Or otherwise.

To the Honorable.

To persons of inferior degrees.

To the right worshipful.

Otherwise.

To the worshipful.

Divisions of Letters.
AMorous, loving Letters.

Moral, civil Letters.

Oeconomicall, household Letters.

Political, witty Letters.

Excusatory, Defensive Letters.

Petitionary, Letters of Request.

Gratulatory, Letters of Thanks.

Nuncupatory, Letters of News.

Subscriptions, with Subscriptions adjoined to them, as they are most properly
applied.
TO the High and most Mighty Monarch.

Your Majesty's most faithful and obedient Subject.

To the Right Honorable.

Your Honors most humble devoted.

To his Honorable Lord.

Your Honors in all duty and service.

To the Honorable, and his highly respected Lady.

Your Honors to command.

Or, Your Honors devoted.

To the worthy and Noble.

Ever yours to serve you.

To the right Honorable and his highly esteemed Patron.

Your Honors observant.

To his most loving Father.

Your obedient Son.

To his dearly beloved Wife.

Your most loving Husband.

To his loving Uncle.

Your observant kinsman.

To the honorable Colonel.

Yours sworn to worthiness,

To the only life of his desires.

Your afflicted friend.

To the fullness of his contentment.

Your living and dying friend.

To the only hope of his fortunes.

The honourer of your matchless perfections.

To the noble and truly virtuous Gentlewoman;

Yours in death it self.

To his best choice.

Yours, in the midst of fear.

To his virtuous, and dearly beloved.

Yours ever resolved.

To the Mistress of his thoughts.

Yours, dying in Constancy.

To his beloved friend.

Yours assured.

To the lovingest of all my friends.

Yours inseparably.

To his highly esteemed friend.

Yours, as I have professed,

To his tried and trusty friend.

Not living without you.

To his honorable friend.

Yours in true friendship.

To his newly displeased friend.

Yours, if you wrong her not.

To her best resolved friend.

Yours wheresoever.

To his well advised friend.

Yours, and virtues.

To his loving, and long expected friend.

Yours, with good wishes.

To his respected friend.

Yours, well assured.

To his approved friend.

Yours in true liberty.

To her much disquieted friend.

Yours in honorable love.

To his loving Niece.

Your affectionate kinsman.

To his dearest Brother.

Yours in all occasions.

To his well experienced and much esteemed noble friend.

Yours as you can desire.

To his well disposed friend.

Yours to trust only.

To her dearest Husband.

Your ever loving Wife.

To his much disordered friend.

Yours in reformation.

To his unkind friend.

Yours, if you will have it so.

To his ill advised Son.

Your displeased Father.

To his miserable rich friend.

Yours, if you can be your own.

To the worthy Lady.

Yours, as a lover of Honor.

To her unkind Husband.

Your true Wife till death.

To his perjured, and lacivious Wife.

Your Husband if you do not divide him.

To her jealous Husband.

Yours in her very thoughts.

To his suddenly displeased friend.

Yours, when you conceive aright of me.

To his well resolved friend.

Yours, whilst mine own.

To her unkind friend.

Yours, and yet displeased.

To his honorable and good friend.

Yours, if you think me worthy.

To his well esteemed friend.

Yours most dutiful if you will accept of Humiliation.

To his true helping friend.

Yours recovered.

To his worthy friend, adventurer in the Straites.

Yours individed, though far off.

To his noble and constant friend.

Yours, though amongst Infidels.

To his respected and worthy friend.

Yours, as you have made me.

To his careful friend.

Yours, mindful of you.

To the worthy Doctor.

Your sick Patient.

To his honorable Captain.

Yours, though we never meet again.

To his approved friend.

Yours in all places, and at all times.

To his especial friend.

My own, if in your memory.

To the most perfect of Women.

Yours in the midst of temptation.

To his honorable enemy.

Yours, ready for all dangers.

To his well deserving friend.

Yours unfainedly.

To his over suspicious friend.

Yours, to trust only.

To his wilful, and seduced friend.

Your poor abused friend.

For the Readers greater pleasure and variety, these Subscriptions only are
here placed by themselves.
YOur careful Father.

Your dutiful Son.

Your loving Master.

Your obedient Servant.

Vsque ad aras.

The unfortunate.

Your well wishing friend.

In all humble duty.

Ever thine.

Thy discontented friend.

In all obedience.

Faithfully yours.

Thy true friend.

Yours, more than mine own.

Never less his own.

Thy most constant friend.

As you shall determine of me.

Affectionately devoted to your service.

Your loving Landlord.

Your Worships poor Tenant to command.

Thy sometimes friend.

Yours not safe till I enjoy you.

Yours irremovably.

Yours prepared to suffer.

Yours, in boundless affection.

Your servant.

Your Honors friend.

Yours most passionatly, loyally, and perpetually devoted.

Yours, as far as modesty will suffer me.

Yours, if you please to accept of me.

Yours, as I find cause.

Your best Counselor.

Your injured Mistress.

Your affectionate poor friend.

Once thy Friend.

Your entire Vassal.

Remaining your friend.

Yours, in respective duty.

Yours, as a lover of virtue.

Yours, fearfully loving.

Yours, well affected.

Your plain and true friend.

Your Worships to be commanded.

Your friend to his ability.

Animae dimidium tuae.

Yours in unutterable affection.

Your loyal Wife.

Your imprisoned friend.

No longer your friend.

Yours wholly, and only, if you will.

Yours, so I may be my own.

Thine, or not his self.

Your distressed Debtor.

Yours, as you shall deserve by your service.

Your sorrowful friend.

Yours, what you will.

Your forsaken friend.

Your vowed servant.

Your enemy, till death.

Your friend, whether you will or no.

Your true love.

Yours ever.

One, always yours.

Thine own from all the world.

Yours, in all good sort to be entertained.

Your friend confirmed in all fidelity.

Thine to the end.

Desirous of your reformed imagination.

Yours, more sorry for your ill conditions, then for the wrong you have done me.

Your faithful and ready friend.

Your most humble and passionate Servant.

Yours, in the infringable bonds of affection.

The servant of your worthy virtues.

Yours, most respectfully engaged.

Your ever friend and Servant.

Your Lordships unfeigned honourer, and loyal Servant.

A Table for the understanding of the hard ENGLISH words, contained in this
Work.
A
ACute Witty. Amiable Lovelie. Apt Fit. Austere Sharp. Aspire To look high.
Abstemious Temperate. Amplify To enlarge. Advertise To advise. Augment To
increase. Aspect To look upon. Absurd Foolish. Applaud To like. Altitude
Hight. Acknowledgment Confession. Attractive Drawn to. Aspiration Breathing.
Abhor To hate. Audacious Bold. Alacrity Cheerfulness. Aparent Open. Abjure
To forswear. Active Nimble. Anguish Grief. Apertinent Belonging to Auspicious
Betokening success. Abruptly Unorderly. Ambiguity Doubtfulnes. Arrogant Proud.
Accommodate To make fit Aggravate To make more grievous. Adverse Contrary.
Apprehension Understanding. Affable Courteous. Artificially Workemanlike.
Affectation Curiosity. Academy University. Amity Friendship. Abbreviate To
shorten. Ardent Hot. Adorn To beautify. Antipathie Contrariety. Adore To
worship. Affectionate Loving. Accurate Curious. Act To do, or to perform.
Accident Chance. Assent To agree to. Accomplish To finish. Amaze To strike with
wonder, Admire To wonder at. Absolutely Fully. Adventure To hazard.
B
Beneficial Profitable. Bliss Happiness. Bashful Blushing. Brevity
Shortness. Benevolence Goodwill. Bruit Report. Barbarian A rude person.
Beatitude Blessedness. Besiege To set upon or Court.
C
COmplexion Constitution of body. Convince To confute. Credulity Rashness of
belief. Celestial Heavenly. Civil Honest behavior. Comprehend To contain.
Circumspect Heedy. Celebrate To keep solemnly. Compassion Pity. Consequent
Following by order. Correspondent Answerable. Contrite Sorrowful. Capacity
Largeness of place. Circumstance Quality of time and place. Condescend To
agree to. Cogitation Thought. Catastrophy The end. Credible To be believed
Contribution Bestowing. Confirm To establish. Casuality Chance. Compose To
join. Clemency Gentleness. Convenient Fit. Consecrate To make holy Center A
circle. Competent Convenient. Circumvent To deceive. Compendious Short.
Certify To give to understand. Confer To talk together. Corrivals Partners
in affection. Contract To covenant. Circumscribe To compass about.
Commencement The beginning. Contemptible To be despised. Commemoration
Remembering. Circumlocution Many words. Converse To be familiar. Continent
Chaste. Charms Spells or witchcraft. Conduct Guiding, governing. Curiosity
Neatenesse.
D
DIre Cruel. Distracted Mad. Divert To turn from another. Direct To guide.
Divulge To publish. Delineat To draw a proportion. Desist Leave off.
Dissimilitude Unlikeness. Disperse To scatter abroad. Diety Godhead.
Disloyal Untrusty. Distinguish To put a difference. Decipher To describe or
lay open. Distant Place between. Dispose To appoint. Deformed Ill shapen.
Disturb To disquiet. Dialect A manner of speech. Define To show what a thing
is. Dissolve To unloose. Dissuade To persuade to the contrary. Discuss To
search narrowly. Digress To leave a matter. Decent Comely. Disannull To make
void. Dilate To enlarge. Destitute Forsaken. Defame To slander. Destinated
Appointed. Disputable Questionable. Determine To conclude. Dedicate To give for
ever. Dismiss To send away. Difficult Hard. Defraud To deceive. Desertion
Leaveing. Display To spread abroad. Dexterity Aptness. Dejected Cast down.
Demeanor Behavior. Diffuse To pour out. Disability Unableness. Deprive To
take away. Disjunction Dividing. Deride To mock. Dismal Unlucky. Diffident
Doubtful. Delude To deceive. Dissent To disagree. Depend To hang upon.
Deliberate To take counsel. Dehort To persuade to the contrary. Degenerate To
fall off from goodness. Defects Weakness of capacity. Dissipate Scatter
abroad.
E
Expression Laying open off. Expert Skillful. Extract To draw out. Exact
Perfect. Erroneous Full of errors. Effect A thing done. Emblem A shadow of a
thing. Evident Plain. Expect To wait or look for. Exempt Free. Extinguish To
put out. Efficacy Force. Inflame To set on fire. Expedient Fit. Expire To dye.
Extenuate To lessen. Essence The being of a thing. Echo A sound. Experiment
Trial. Extend To spread forth. Elaborate Curious. Exhib te To bestow.
Expostulate To chide with. Evasion A escape. Eclipse Darkness of the Sun.
Extempore Without sin. die. Exanimate To trouble the mind. Education Bringing
up, Epithete A title given to any thing. Expense Cost. Exasperate To anger.
Evitable To be shunned. Excessive Too much. Effeminate To womanish. Exorable To
be entreated Elegancy Finenesse of speech. Expedition Speed. Exigent Necessity.
Election Choice. Explicit Unfolded. Eloquution Good expression. Exile
Banished. Explicate To declare. Estimate Price or rate. Enjoy Keep or posseffe.
Engaged Indebted. Event End, succeffe. Extraordinary More then common.
F
FRivolous Trifeling. Fortunate Happy. Fiction A tale. Fatal Mortal.
Fortitude Valor. Fervent Hot. Fulgent Glistring. Figurative Shadowed. Faculty
Power or ability. Finite Having an end. Fruition Enjoying. Fabulous Fained.
Fraudulent Deceitful. Fragrant Smelling sweet Fallacy Deceit. Fidelity
Trustines. Fantasy Imagination. Felicity Happineffe. Feature Shape. Foundation
Groundwork Falsify To break ones word.
G
Gratify To pleasure Genuine Natural. Gratulate To be glad. Generosity
Nobility. Glorify To give honor.
H
HAbitude Disposition Heroical Beseeming a Nobleman. Harmony Agreement.
Hereditary By succession. Habit Apparel.
I
IMproper Unfit. Incident Happening. Introduction Entrance. Issue Event. Immature
Unripe. Improvident Careless. Irefull Angry. Judicious Understanding
Indulgence Sufferance. Imprudent Ignorant. Illustrate To make plain. Inamoured
In Love. Immutable Unchangeable Ineffable Unspeakable. Include Shut in. Ignoble
Of base birth. Interpret To expound. Insolent Proud. Incur To run into.
Invective Speaking against. Indignation Anger. Immaculate Unspotted.
Incommodious Hurtful. Instinct An inward motion. Intricate Doubtful.
Improbable Not to be proved. Interrupt To let. Induce To move to. Impediment
Hinderanee. Incommunicable Not to be imparted. Intolerable Insufferable
Intercept To prevent. Impenetrable Not to be pierced. Insist To stay upon.
Indecent Not comely. Interdict To forbid. Imperious Desiring rule. Infallible
Not deceivable Institute To appoint. Intimate To signify. Intermission
Breaking off. Implore Desire with tears. Impertinent. Not pertaining.
Implacable Not to be pleased. Insult To triumph. Incompatible Insufferable.
Instable Inconstant. Individual Not to be parted. Inspire To breath into.
Inculpable Without fault Incomprehensible Not to be conceived. Insensible Not
to be perceived. Incredulous Hardly to be believed. Inseparable Not be
divided. Intentive Earnestly bent. Integrity Pureneffe. Insensity Without
feeling Indisposition Backewardnesse.
L
LInguist Skillful in tongues. Lenity Gentleneffe. Labyrinth Full of windings.
Loyal Obedient trusty. Languishing Pining. Literature Learning. Laudible
worthy of praise. Lascivious Wanton. Luster Brightneffe.
M
Mollify To make soft. Maxim A principle. Mutable Changeable. Manifest Open.
Metamorphosis Changing of shape. Magnificent Sumptuous. Mitigate Assuage.
Mental Belonging to the mind Malecontent Discontnt. Mature Ripe. Mirror A
glass. Metaphor Similitude. Muses Goddesses of learning. Menace To threaten.
Morality Civil behavior. Multiplicity Variety. Magitians Sorcerers witches.
Melancholy Grief, sadness. Merits Deserts.
N
NVptiall Belonging to marriage. Notion Inward knowledge. Nuncupatory
Declaring. Native, Where one is borne.
O
OPposite Contrary. Odious Hateful. Original First beginning Obscure Dark.
Object A thing set against Oratory Eloquent speech. Obsequious Serviceable.
Officious Dutiful. Obdurate Hardened. Omit To let pass. Oprobrious
Reproachful. Obliged Bound to. Occurrences Occasions. Ominous Signifies good or
ill luck. Operation Effect. Observant Dutiful. Odoriferous Smelling sweetly.
Ornament Adorning. Oprobrious Reproachful. Ordained Appointed.
P
PRopitious Favorable Ponderous Weighty. Period End of a sentence. Prolixe
Tedious. Persist To continue. Parragon A pattern or example. Prostrate To fall
on the ground. Perplexity Trouble. Placable Easy to please. Progress Going
forward. Position A question disputed. Paradoxe A strange speech. Project A
plot. Prefixed Set before. Patronize To defend. Promiscuous Confused.
Perfidious Traitorous. Polish Make fair. Prohibit To forbid. Pretermit To
passe-over. Permanent Continuing. Precipitate To cast down. Prosecute Follow
after. Prejudice To hinder. Permission Sufferance. Procrastinate To delay.
Perspicuous Clear. Prescription Limitation. Participate To partake. Personate
To counterfeit a person. Probable Proved true. Perpetuity Continuance.
Fantasy Imagination. Peculiar Proper. Patheticall Full of passions.
Perfections Gifts of nature. Perfumes Sweet smells. Passionately Truly loving
Perpetual Everlasting.
R
RIgorous Cruel. Repulse To drive back. Rusticall Unmannerly. Reject To cast
away. Reduce To bring back. Revolve To determine in the mind. Resemblance
Likeness. Ratify To confirm. Resign To give to another. Repeal To call
back again. Repute To esteem. Resplendent Shining bright. Ridiculous To be
laughed at. Reserve To keep. Real Substantial. Reiterate Repeat again.
Respite To defer. Remit To forgive. Refractory Obstinate. Reassume To take
again. Remunerate Reward. Relics The remainder. Reference Pointing at. Regal
Princely. Retribution A reward. Refulgent Shining. Reflection Casting back.
Reputation Credit good name. Reflect To Look, cast an eye. Remain To continue
constant. Reprovable To be blamed Rarities Things hard to be found.
S
Supreme Highest. Splendent Glistering. Succeed To follow. Structure Building.
Serenity Calmnes. Simpathy Fellow-feeling. Supposition Thinking. Solicit To
move. Succinct Short. Suspense A doubt. Sable Black or mournful Submisse Lowly.
Superiority above another Select Chosen out. Subsequent following. Spacious
Large. Sustain To suffer. Seduce To deceive. Sublimity Hight. Survive To
outlive. Sovereign Highest authority. Scruple A doubt. Superfluous Needless.
Symmetry Due proportion of parts. Sensual Brutish. Stupifie To astonish.
Simplicity Plainnes. Subsist To abide. Society Fellowship. Servile Slavish.
Suitable Agreeable. Suspicious Doubtful.
T
TResses Locks of hair. Transcendent Climing over. Timorous Fearful.
Triumphant Rejoicing in victory. Tedious Troublesome. Transform To change.
Terrene Earthly. Tranquillity Quietness. Tolerable May be suffered. Tragical
Sorrowful. Temporize To serve the times, Transparent May be seen Tenent
Opinion.
V
Universal General. Unanimity Of one mind Vital Lively. Variable Changeable.
Value Esteem. Vulgar Common. Undervalue Discommend. Vigorous Strong and lusty.
W
WReath Garland or Crown.
FINIS.

