AN ADVERTISEMENT WRITTEN TO A SECRETARY OF MY L. TREASVRERS OF INGLAND, BYAN
INglishe Intelligencer as he passed through Germany toward Italy.

CONCERNING

An other book newly written in Latin, and published in diverse languages and
countries, against her Majesty's late proclamation, for search and
apprehension of Seminary priests, and their receauers,

ALSO Of a letter written by the L. Treasurer in defense of his gentry, and
nobility, intercepted, published, and answered by the papists.

Anno Domini, 1592.

TO MY LOVING GOOD FRIND N. SECRETARY TO THE right honorable the L. Treasurer
of Inglande.
LOVING Sir, if my former letters written to you from Midleburg, Colen, Heid
leberg, and Franckford, as I passed by those places, have come safely unto your
hands, then have you understood by the^ the estate of affairs, as I could
learn the^ in so short a stay, as the continuance of my journey permitted me
to make in every of these cities: especially I wrote unto you in all my former,
of the great variety of books both in Inglishe and Latin, and other languages
already come forth, or in making (as by good means I understood) against the
last proclamation of her Majesty published in November for searching 1591.
out, apprehendinge and punishing of Seminary priests, and Jesuits, and such
as receive or favor them in Ingland; which proclamation seems to have so
netled the papists, which we call here Catholics, (and so must I in the
rest of my letters, especially those that shall come from Italy,) that there
is no other talk almost now in these parts, nor of any other matters, but of
this combat of England, and in this country here of Germany, where both
parties live in peace together, our course of Ingland has diverse that approve
it not, though otherwise no papists, for that they think it both
troublesome, and dangerous, whereof at an other time I shall write more unto
you, if I may perceive that my letters do come unto your hands safely,
whereof I have great fear and doubt, consideringe the difficulties of
passages, and manifold interception of letters, whereof I understand daily by
reason of wars.

But to come to the matter, I sent you with my former letters while I was in
flandres two or three diverse kinds of answers made and printed in Inglishe
without name of authors against the said late proclamation, and some others I
was told were in coming forth though I could not learn by whom. Afterward
from Colen I sent you one written in Latin by Ihon Perne Inglis he man, as he
names himself, and it goes by way of a letter, or discourse, written to a
frinde of his that desired his opinion and judgment about the said
proclamation, and it is directed to my L. Treasurer himself.

But now coming to Augusta, I have learned of an other book also written in
Latin, and lately sent hither to be printed again, and is now in hand and
some sheets already drawn of: which book, though I can neither hinder the
printinge thereof, (for I have assayed) nor yet get any whole copy into my
hands to send unto you (for I understand there is but one only as yet in
this city, and this is that which serves for the printer, sent hither by a
certain principal person to be reprinted as soon as ever it had passed the
press in an other place) yet have I so wrought as yesterday being sunday, and
the print standinge still, I gat for money the sight of the book, and in some
few nights I took out all the sum, and chief effect thereof, and do
send it herewith unto you, promisinge further to send also the whole work as
soon as ever it shall come forth, albeit if the haste and greediness of
printinge it in so many places and countries, at one time be such, as here some
would make me believe, it is like you shall have it otherwise there in
Inglande, before I can send it from hence, but yet this shall not let me from
doing my dewtie also in sending it from hence as soon as I can get it.

And in truth if I shall tell you mine opinion about the hasty spredding of
this book (which I suppose you will also think, when you shall have seen the
extracte that herewith I do send you) there are so many points of curiosity,
and hidden histories touching our estate discovered in the same, and so many
personal causes, conditions of men, and secret affairs unfolded, (whereof
man's nature partly by desire of novelties, partly by corrupt inclination to
hear willingly other men's defects is greedy to understand) as I marvel not
though printers to gain thereby, do strive in many places to diuulgate the
same with all celerity, and the like I find by experience in the late history
of D. Sanders in Latin de schisimate Anglicano, which for that it contained
matter of such curiosity, and novelty in personal affairs, I find it
printed again in Latin almost in every state, ^^^ydes the translations that go
in other languages, which I am told are many.

But for this book against the proclamation, I do assure you it is the most
sharp, bitter, and odious thing that ever I thinck was written by the
papists, though the writer pretend great modesty, and does not in deed use
open raylinge terms, but by a close, fluente, and cutting style, and by
discussing (as I have said) of many, and curious perticularities, and by
pretending to prove all he says, by our own books, laws, cronicles, and
records, he fills his reader with infinite desire to read al through out.

More over he puts down the whole proclamation turned in to latin by parts
or Sections, (which is an other curiosity, that other books come out before
observed not,) and after he awswereth the same by several (...) ^eades
distinstely, and in the end, he puts also in Latin the articles annexed to
the commission for instruction to the commissioners, How to proceed in the
execution thereof, with his iudgeme^te, and censure upon the same.

He put^eth down also in his awnswere a lettre of my L. Treasurers writ with
his own hand (as this fellow anoucheth) from westminster the tenth of
lanuarie last paste unto one in the love countries, as by the extracte you
shall see.

The writer names himself Ihon Philopatris priest, and divine, that has
studied at Rome, and descended in times paste of the English blood, but he that
shall see, and read the book (which is some xviij. or twenty leaves of
printed paper or more) will easily see that he has lined lately in Inglande,
or is very extraordinarily instructed in the affairs thereof, and when I
consider that Philopatris in greek signifies a lover, or a frinde of his
country, I easily see that the name is but borrowed, and may be taken up in
their sense by any of our Inglish papists, that live here abroad, and so make
your account that it is.

More I shall write unto you from Italy, and namely from Venice, or Padua, for
here I will stay only until this book come forth, that I may send you a
copy. Which if you think good, you may present to our good Lord and master
in my name, as you may do also the exstract thereof that now I send, though in
truth, the tooth and stomach of the writer seems to be so specially great
against his lordship above all others, and touches him so bitterly in so many
places (esteeming him the principal cause of all the bloudshedd of his party)
that I am ashamed, and half afraid also, that it should be given unto his
honor in my behalf, yet could I not with my dewtie and allegiance but
advertise the matter as I find it, and so have I done in the abbreuiation,
taking out every thing as near as I ca^ in sense though not in words as in
the book it lies, and that in more sweet, and temperate manner also diverse
times, then there it is set down, culling out only the heads of the most
principal matters, and leaving utterly the discourses, declarations, and
proofs of the same, which are in truth more pearcing, plausible, and popular
then will easily be imagined but by reading the whole: and in one word believe
you Sir, that it is a very pestilent book, and so I pray you advertise his
lordship, and commend my service with continuing me in his honors good grace
and favor, which I ever desire to deserve as I may, and so to the lord I
commyt you from Augusta this first of August. 1592.

Your most affectionate.

THE EXTRACT, AND ABBREVIATION OF THE BOOK OF IHON PHILOPATRIS AGAINST her
Majesty's proclamation.
The preface of the Author

FIRST in the preface he takes upon him to discover the true causes of this
proclamation, which he says to be the fear of the new Seminaries lately
begun in Spain, with the continuance, and flourishing of the others in Rome,
and Rheims, fear of the Pope, and king of Spaines preparations of war
against France, the lack of money in Inglande to help the K. of Navarre, and
to prosecute other designementes, and the art to get it this way, by feigning
terrors and troubles at home.

Secondly he shows what modesty, and humility the Catholics (for his
words I will use hereafter in all this extract) have used hitherto in their
own defense, alleging for this, the example of two Apologies written by
(...), and other books, upon hope that some clement and gentler way would be
taken by her Majesty, and her Council: but seeing (as he says,) that by all
their submilsio^ they have profited nothing, he takes leave by the president
and example of many auncie^te fathers, that wrote sharply against the
persecutours of their times, but namely and chiefly of S. Hilarie, whose
words he alleges against Co^sta^tinus the Arrian Emperor, to deal more
plainly in this his awnswere, then others have done heretofore, promisinge
notwithstanding the modesty, that shall be convenient for the time, persons,
and matter he handles.

THE FIRST SECTION OF THE PROCLAMATION, AND ANSWER.
The first Section conteyneth only the title of the proclamation, and is
divided in to three principal heads.

THE first head concerns those first words, By the Queen, about the which
he examineth whether these so many fierce and cruel laws, and proclamatio^s
(as he call leth them) which come out daily against Catholics, do proceed of
her Majesty's own inclination and propension or no, or whether by the
instigation of others for their own commodities, abusing her Majesty's sex,
and age at the beginning, where unto he rather yeildeth, and names five, or
six principal men, who have bin the causes and instruments of all misery to
Ingland as he terms it, and of the perdition of the realm by their
especial authority with her Majesty.

These men he affirms to have bin Sir Nicolas Bacon, Five councelors.
and my L. Treasurer, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Francis Walsingham, and Sir
Christophor Hatton; of whom he says he will tell their beginninges, their
entrance with the Queen, their manner of proceeding, their actions, and their
endinges, observing the order rather of their deaths, and falling, then of
their rising to honors, for that he says the remembrance of this day is more
joyful to good men then that of the other, and so for that my L. Treasurer is
the only man of all the five that now lives, he reserueth his story for the
last place of all.

Of Sir Nicolas Bacon he shows how he rose, and Sir Nicolas Bacon
how my L. Treasurer and he, the one helping the other, by the assistance of
Sir Antony Cook their father in law, and Sir Ihon Cheek King Edwardes
schoole-maister, came both first in favor. That Sir Nicolas Bacons father
being servant to the Abbote of Bery, and keeper He Was chief hynde unto the
Abbot.
of his sheep and cattle, put his son to Greyes Inn, where first he was
vnder-butler, and afterward grew up higher until by the augmentation court,
and atturneship of the Wards he came to be lord keeper, wherein this man
(says he) showed himself so corrupt, and partial for bribery, as never man
before, or since in that place: for which he allegeth a protestation also of
Plowde^ the famous lawier, made at the Chauncery bar Bacon being present,
that he would never return thither so long as so cortupte a judge should sit
in that place, which he performed; here unto he adds diverse other
perticularities touching the life and death of Sir Nicolas Bacon.

Of my L. of Leicester, and the variety of fortune Earl of Lecester.
which he saw and proved in his life; how he was borne, and brought up in all
abounda^ce and felicity, and after saw himself again in extreme calamity,
his father, and brethren being put to death, and himfelf condemned to the same
lotte, but that fortune turning again, lifted him up higher then ever before,
but all to the worse, for that he had never bin so wicked, if he had not been so
potent. How he was the son of a Duke, brother of a King; nephew of an
esquier, and great grandchild of a Carpenter, as the common fame runs, which
if it be true, the Carpenter by all likelyhoode was the happiest man of all the
generation; for that perhaps he was an honest man, and died in his bed,
whereas all the other perished by violent deaths, for their wickedness etc.

Of Lecesters entrance in to favor with her Majesty, of the begininge of his
greatness, how he first left the Catholic faith, which at the beginning for
diverse years he favored; of the murdering of his wife at Cu^ner; of his
adulteries, murders, and rapines, after; of his dealings in flanders, and
miserable death, without heir, or frind, and of the quick marriage of lady
Lettece after his dispatch.

Of Sir Francis VValsinghams serving of Leicesters Sir Francis VValsingha^.
turn in all things; how he was Ambassador in France, and how he came to be
of the Council, how he held a faction against my L. Treasurer, was a man of
hasty, fiery, and cruel nature, especially against catholics, spente
infinitely upon spyery, and when matter wanted, filled her Majesty's ears with
matters feigned of himself: how God plagued him for his furious cruelty
against catholics; how he died in debt, deprived of his great Idol Sir
Philipp Sidney his son in law, and strooken in the secret parts of his body,
as Eusebius reports of Maximus the Tyrant.

After Sir Francis Walsingham, he brings unto the Sir Christophor Hatton.
stage Sir Christophor Hatton, whose good nature he commends above all the
rest, and says that if he had any feeling of any religion, he thought the
catholic to be the trewer, and that so he had signified diverse ways in his
life time, and that he had upon sundry occasions protested most earnestly in
secret to his friends (and namely to father William Crighton the Scottishe
Jesuit at his delivery out of the Tower) that his hand had never subscribed
to the death of any one catholic, nor never should, which yet this awnsweret
thincketh not to be true, considering his authority and place he had in the
Council, and the bitter speeches, which he openly used often times in the
star chamber, and other places against catholics for maintenance of his
creditt.

And here by this answerer frames a certain consideration how wicked a course
this is of the Council, to set forward in common a thing so hoatly for the
murdering, and persecuting of Catholics, which most of them in private will
deny, to their friends to have their fingers in, which he shows also in other
Councellers at this day besides Hatton and namely, and above the rest in my L.
Treasurer who ever secretly feigned him self to be a moderator and mollefyer of
Catholics afflictions, until of late he says his lordship, has been
enforced to show himself openly their unmasked enemy. The like also he
shows, to have bin in the Council of King Edward the sixth, when the Duke of
Northumberland, the Earl of Arundell, the Earl of Penbrooke, the L. Pagett,
Sir William Peter, and others sat daily upon orders to punish, and
extinguishe Catholics, whose religion notwith standing at that time both they
knew to be true, and after chose the same to die therein, when they found
themselves more free of the bondage of ambition, wherein before they lived.
Wherefore he thincketh Sir Christofer Hatton to have bin most unhappy even in
these things wherein other men do thinck him fortunate, which are the favors
had with her Majesty, the causes, begininges, and increase whereof this
awnswerer declares, and finally his death, much subject (as he says) to
suspicion of poison, and how the very next day after his death my L. Treasurer
triumphed and gat forth this, (...) nation against Catholics, which he never
had done if the other had lived, and the causes why.

In the fifte, and last place, he comes to treat of The L. Treasurer.
my L. Treasurer, and that much, more largely then of any of the rest, for
that he yet lives, and for that, as this man says, he more then all the rest
together, has and does in deed seek the destruction of the Catholics by
covert means, though whiles the others lived that were more open, he shrouded
himself, and his doings now under Walsingham, and now under Lecester,
signifyinge in secrett unto Catholics, when they sued unto him, that they
only were the causes, which since has bin known to have bin quite contrary,
etc.

Of my L. Treasurers pedegrie, and how Cecil his father was grome of the
wardrop, and was never called master in all his life unless it were in jest,
and how his mother would never suffer her self to be called Mistress, but
after her son was made Baron of Burlegh: how my L. Treasurers grandfather was
one of the kings guard, and kept the best Inn in Stamford; how my L.
Treasurer himself is said to have been first of al belringer in S. Ihons
College in Cambridge, and after grew by learning and cunninge, and by the
helps, and favors of Sir Ihon Cheek, and Sir Antony Cook, to be secretary
to the Duke of Somersett that was protector, to whom he was a stickler to set
him against his own brother the Admiral, for pleasinge the Duches, and to
cut of his head, as he did, and that he is thought to have bin the principal
instrumente to bring in father Latimer, (that fond and hypocritical preacher,)
to be an agent as he was, in that barbarous tragedy, and that for this service
chiefly by the Duches of Somersets procurement to her husband, M. Cecile was
made Secretary to king Edward the sixth.

How afterward he seeing Dudley the Earl of warwick Treason against his Master.
to be more cunning and potent then the duke of Somersett his master, he
secretly forsook, and betrayed him, and gave matter of overthrow to warwick
against him: for which service, when the Duke, and his trusty friends were
pulled down and cut of, master Cecil was set up by warwick and brought in to
the kings favor and counsel again: and so he followed that man's fortune
ever after, so long as he stood in prosperity, even to the consenting to the
deprivation, and deposition of all king Henry the 8. his children, and nanamely
of Queen Mary, and this Queen, against whom this awnswerer says, that Sir
William Cecill wrote, and penned the proclamatio^s and oaths, that the Dukes
of Northumberland and Suffolk set forth against them, and would have been
content to have been the headsman also himself to have dispatched them both with
his own hands, at that time, rather then they should have escaped to his
loss or disgrace if Northumberland would have putt him to it.

How Queen Mary being established in the crown, Extreme bypocrisie and
cosenage.
and the Duke of Northumberland beheaded, my L. Treasurer bestirred himself to
get creditt with the Catholics, frequented Masses, said the Litanies with
the priest, labored a pair of great beads, which he continually carried,
preached to his parishioners in Stamford, and asked pardon of his errors in
king Edwardes time; what he said, and protested to diverse, and namely to Sir
Francis Inglefeild (then of the Council) about his belief of all points of the
Catholic Roman faith. How he deceived Cardinal Poole, and persuaded Sir
William Peter to resign up his office of the Secretariship unto him, if
Queen Mary would have admitted the same, who never could be persuaded to
believe him.

How M. Cecil being rejected by Queen Mary, he His entrance with this Q.
gat to serve the lady Elizabeth, and how he entered with her afterward when
she came to the crown, to persuade her to the change of Religion for his own
interest, against the opinion of other councelors. What reasons he laid for
the same, and what great difficulties he found in the Queen and otherwise,
and by what craft he overcame them, and how if he had by been admitted
secretary in Queen Mary's time, he had never sought the change of Religion in
this Queens days.

What shifts and deceites were used by him, and M. Bacon in the change of
Religion, how the Earl of Arundell was cosened by them with hope of having the
Queen in marriage, and thereby his son in law the Duke of Norfolk gotten to
their part.

How other noble men were persuaded either to give their consents, or else to
absent themselves from the parliament, or else to leave their voices in the
hands of heretics, and what fraud, breach of order, and aunciente laws was
used in choosing these first burgeses of parliament, and knights of the
shires, and the open violence used against the Bishops, by which means this
answerer holds that this first parliament could have no validity or force at
all, and yet that al foundations of future treasons in matters of religion were
laid in the same, and al other parlaments since have depended thereof.

How the proceedings of Cecil, and Bacon, seeming M. Cecilesca. peth hanging.
at length intolerable unto the ancient nobility of the Realm, they joined
together in the old L. Treasurers house, and concluded to pull them both from
her Majesty by violence, and to hang them at the Coure gate: what the old
Earl of Penbrok said in that meeting and how Leicester was also present and
consenting to this conclusion, and revealed all afterward, and how Sir William
Cecill escaped the danger by flattering and abusing the Duke of Northfolke with
weepinge and fair promises and paid him for it afterwad with cutting of of
his head, and how from that day foreward he took sure order for pulling
down, and disgracing the old nobility.

How my L. Treasurer has gotten in to his own But about some 50. offices in
all.
power, all the great offices almost of the court, and country, and how he
playing the Aman as he does with the Catholics, may justly fear the great,
and high galowes prepared by himself for Mardocheus, and the children of
Israel, for that God is as just now, as he was then and as potent.

Of Sir Walter Rauleys school of Atheism by the Sir Walter Ravvley.
way, and of the Coniurer that is M. thereof, and of the diligence used to get
young gentlemen to this school, where in both Moses, and our Savior; the
old, and new Testamente are iested at, and the scholars taught among other
things, to spell God backwarde.

How miserable a thing it is that her Majesty descending of so noble
progenitors, should be brought to make laws and proclamations in matters of
Religion, according to these men's senses and opinions, and leaving all her old
nobility, and the ancient wisdom, gravity, and learning which Ingland was
wont to have, should rule her self by these new vpstarts, and publish edicts
so contrary and opposite to all the laws, and edicts of all the Kings and
Queens that have bin in Ingland from the first conversion thereof unto this
day, as evidently he presumes to show; and with this he ends this first head
of this section.

The second head of this first section.
THE second head of this first Section, is about these first words in the
title of the proclamation, to wit; A declaration of great troubles pretended
against the realm by a number of Seminary priests, and Jesuits etc. about
which, reserving the peculier defense of the priests and Jesuits coming into
the Realm, unto the fourth Section where at large he handles the same, in
this place he takes upon him to show how that the true causes of troubles,
fears, and perils toward Ingland, do not proceed of the coming in of
Seminary priests, and Jesuits that come peaceably, and to yield their lives,
and without intention to hurt any body, but that they come of their accusers,
to which purpose he alleges the fable of the wolf, who drinking at the
fountain, and desiring to have a quarrel against the lamb, that drunk at a
brook far beneth him, said that he troubled The true causes of the troubles
of Ingland.
his water; also he alleges the example of Nero that punished the Christians
for burninge of Rome, which himself for his pleasure had set a fire, al which
this man applies saying, that these which now govern, finding England quiet,
peaceable, strong, rich, fortified with frinds both abroad and at home at their
entrance, have by change of Religion, by troubling, and vexing, and killing
subjects at home, and by dryuing others to fly abroad, by breaking all leagues
with ancient allies, and by other unquiet means, turned all vpsidowne, and
brought al about their own ears, and now being a fraide of that which the
murderers of Christ suspected when they said will you bring this man's blood
upon us? They would gladly lay it upon most innocente Catholic priests,
which have no part therein.

After this he gathers together diverse particular, and special causes of the
troubles, and dangers of her Majesty, and Ingland, whereof the first and
principal, and root of all the rest, is (as he says) the great, and
irreconciliable differences, and wars in Religion, not only with the
Catholics, but especially between the protestants, and puritanes them selves,
who he says, are mortal enemy, and would have bin long ago by the cares to
to^^^^er had not the fear of the Catholic held them both in awe. He
touchetlt diverse of their books written one against the other as Martin
Marprelate, Mar Martin; The work for the Cooper. The Countercuffe to Martin
junior; The Owls Almanac; The Pap with a batchet, or countrycuffe. Discord of
heretics among them selves.
The Epistle to Huffe, Ruff, and snuff; in which among other things is
affirmed, that the Martinistes or Puritans are much more dangerous for
domisticalbroyles, then the Spaniardes for open wars, which this awnswerer
also confirineth, for that they must needs (as he says) hate her Majesty,
and the protestante Council most deadly, as both by reason, and by their
books, and by their propositions gathered by R. Alison, and dedicated of late
to Sir Thomas Henedge, that no hope remayninge more now of reformation of the
Antichristian Church of Ingland (which they call Babel) all are bound to
forsake it, though the prince do inhibit them.

An other danger, and inevitable peril both of her Incertitud of succession.
Majesty, and the Realm he says to be the incertitude of the succession,
which he says my L. Treasurer and others have especially procured, by keeping
her Majesty from marriage against the example of her ancestors, and other
princes of Christianity, and that for their own interests, thereby to be able
to govern her Majesty the better, and to have her still in their power, as
also to be able to shufle the better for the crown to their own friends when
occasion shall be offered, which he proves at large.

Of the pestilent, and dangerous doctrine of Hacket the late new Christ, and
his Prophets against her Majesty; of the uncertain assurance of Princes
estates upon heretical doctrine, which their authors do varye according to
times, fancies, and commodities; as he shows by diverse examples of later
days in Ingland, by Latimer in K. Edwardes reign, that could apply his
conscience and preachingest, the overthrow of the L. Admiral Seymer without any
cause at all; Also by Cranmer, Sands, and Jewel, that were content under the
Duke of Northumberland to bolster up Queen lanes title, and disinherite her
Majesty that now is; and by Goodman, who in Queen Maryes time both writ, and
preached, that no woman ought to reign, with a comparison of the Catholic
contrary doctrine and doctors in this behalf, and of their modesty,
constancy, and certain rule of conscience, far different from heretics in
these affairs,

And finally he concludes this head with a large proof and declaration, that
by no law of Christian conscience, nor by any reasonable consequence or
illation, can this coming in of priests in so peaceable, and apostolical
sort, as they do come, be accounted treason, and that the Turk, More, or
Persian does not make this consequence against the lewesior Christians, that
live under them; and that of all other infelicities this is the greatest, Great
infelicitie.
that her Majesty should be brought to account such men, so borne, and so
brought up, so learned, wise, virtuous, and modest, and so determined to die in
Gods, and her Majesty's service, if she would accept it, to be her mortal
enemies; and of this he says much.

The third head of this Section.
THE third head of this Section is about these words Insufficient provision.
in the title of the proclamation, with a provision very necessary for remedy
thereof etc. Showing that this provision set down by my L. Treasurers wit in
this proclamation is most insufficient for the remedy pretented, but rather
to make the sore far worses for seeing it is the very same provision, and no
other then Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Decius, Diocletian, and other tyrants, and
persecutours invented against gods servants in old times, to wit, founded
only upon cruelty, tyranny, and false surmysed crimes, it can have no other
end or effect, then theirs had, which was the destruction of the deuisers,
and happiness of the sufferers.

That the old persecutours edicts against Christians, though they pretended
treasons as this does, yet were they more moderate, and discreet in willing
only such to be punished as were accused, or known publicly to offend, and
not to turn vpsid-downe their estates, and Kingdoms with such searching and
reuoluing both of town city and country as this proclamation prescribes,
leaving neither village, house, nor common Inn vntossed, which to all the
world must needs seem extreme barbarous, and to the very protestants
themselves at home intolerable. who must needs also be sought, and examined as
well as others, except they always carry their pasportes with them in their
pocketts, and ride up and down Ingland, as they would pass thorough Turkey.

Of the miserable ends of all common wealths, and governors that have grown
to these extremities in government; and that it is impossible for Ingland and
her Majesty to avoid the same, if this violente course be used to drive men
to desperation. That all the solicitude used to extinguish Catholic Religion
by persecution is mere folly; and that all is very poison to the wound
which my L. Treasurer uses for medicine, that a little time vvil prove this to
be true, with an exhortation to her Majesty to take some other course both for
saving the Realm, and those that stand at the gouernmente thereof.

The second Section.
THIS second section awnswereth the first part of the preface to the
proclamation vvherin her Majesty complains of the King of Spaines proceeding
toward her, and other Princes, and namely toward Nauarr named King of
France, and it is reduced to three principal parts or branches according to
the matters therein contained.

For first her Majesty is made by M. Cecil to complain that the King of
Spain for the space now almost of 33. years had always sought to moleste,
and trouble her dominions without any just cause on her part given. etc.

To this before this awnswerer comes to say any thing in particular, he
makes a large co^plainte against my L. Treasurer, and such other like
politiques, and men of no conscience or religion, as he imagines them who
from the beginning of this Queens reign to make matters of the Catholic
faith more odious, and punish able, have sought to entangle them ever with
matter of estate, and with forged co^spiracies with foreign Princes as
Gensericus, and Hunricus Arian Kings did with the Catholics of Africa, under
pretense they dealte with the Pope of Rome; and so he says that our
governors of Ingland have not pursued matters of Religion, as points of
Religion in this Queens gouernemente, according as the Catholic Church does
use to do with heresies, but rather have chosen to punish them as forged
matters of estate, which this awnswerer shows to be true by diverse former
proclamations, set forth against the Seminaries of Doway, Rheims, and Rome, in
which diverse feigned conspiracies were put to be co^triued by the stude^ts,
with the Pope, the Duke of Florence, and other Princes, all which, time had
proved to be as vain and false, as he says, this is of their co^spiracie now
with the King of Spain.

After this he comes to avvnsvvere M. Cecils co^plainte K. Philips doings to
wards th. Queen.
as he calls it against the King of Spain for his proceedings against her
Majesty and for more equal trial (as he says) he lays down each Prince
his doings toward the other for the space of more then thirty years; and
first for the King of Spain he declares how that coming into England the
year 1554. by the consent, and inuitatio^ of the realm, to marry Queen Mary,
he found lady Elizabeth, after she had bin some space prisoner in the tovver
for Sir Thomas vviates rebellion, committed now to vvoodstoke, under the
custody of Sir Henry Benengfild, and in extreme great danger of her life,
for that both Queen Mary, and the Inglish Council, upon euidente confessions
of Sir Thomas Wiat himself, and others of that conspiracy, were resolved to
have caused her to be araigned, and executed.

How the King delivered her Majesty out of this danger of her life, and of two
the like afterward, to wit upon the conspiracies detected of Sir Antonie
Kingston Vdal, and his co^pagnions; and of Thomas Stafford that took
Scarbrough, and was beheaded at London, in all which her Majesty was again
touched, and had bin executed, but for the special favor of the King and his
Spanis he Council.

Of many other favors of the King to her Majesty, whiles he was in Ingland,
and after; how he gave her freely al Queen Maryes lewells, and other riches
that she had of his; how the to wne of Calis being lost and betrayed by
co^spiracie of Inglishe heretics, that were within it, and specially of the
Lord wentwoorth, without any fault in the world of the King, yet that after
his great victory had against the French at S. Quintins, he would admit no
peace at all with them, but with restoring of Calis, until the Inglish
themselves without him had made their peace with them, and renounced Calis unto
the French for ever.

Of the Kings proceedings toward her Majesty after he returned into Spain,
and how constantly he ever mayntained his league with her for thirty years
together, notwithstanding the manifold injuries that on the other side he
received of the Inglishe diverse ways. How he for conseruing the said league
and friendship refused to give aid to the auncie^te nobility of Ingland the
year 1567. when they meant by force to have reformed the estate, and to have
hanged Cecil and Bacon, again how he denied the same the next year after to
the Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland, and to the L. Dacres when they
rose for the restoring of Religion in the North, pressed there unto by. M.
Cecils vrginge.

How the K. afterwaerds to wit the year 1575. For contenting her Majesty, and
at the persuasion of some of his own officers, but namely of the Commendader
Mayor, that for the present governed Flanders, was content to yield to the
banishement of all Inglishe Catholics out of his estates of Flanders, for the
space of two years, though he paid them always their pensions to live on, as
before. And for the same consideracion of friendship with the Queen, and for
his keeping his league with her, he denied diverse years helps to the Irishe
that demanded the same, as namely the year 1578. to Sir James Fizmoris, and
to Sir Thomas Stukeley, and to the later of them when afterward he came with
some five, or six hundred men that he had brought from Italy, the King would
not grant so much as a port in Spain to enter into, whereby he was forced
to pass to Lisbone, where finding the King of Portugal ready to go with his
army to Barbary he could not refuse to go with him, where he was slain; Sir
Thomas Stukelyes death.
but to Sir James Fizmoris returning again the next year to ask succors
for the Irishe oppressed for their Religion in Ireland the King denied the
same again, until at last at the earnest suit of the Pope (for that D.
Sanders upon his extreme zeal had adventured to go thither before to comfort
the Catholics with less then fifty men) his Majesty was content to wynke
at, and say nothing, whiles Sega the Bishop of Place^tia the Popes Nuncio under
certain of his Italian Captains did send thither some four or five hundred
soldiers taken up upon the Sea cost of Italy, which this awnswerer says
were those which my L. Gray so cowardly, and traitorously murdered in Irland,
after they had yielded themselves by composition the year 1580.

And so from this time forward until the year 1585. Inglishe actions
toward Spain.
he shows that the King of Spain observed most exactely his league with her
Majesty, and the Inglishe nation; at what time being enforced by the Queens
open taking of Flushing, Briel, Oste^de, and other towns in Flanders, he made
the arreste ofthe Inglishe ships in Spain; but on the other side he
declares how the Inglish even from the first entrance ofher Majesty to the
crown, have exercised all kind ofhatefull and hostile actions against the
King, by stirring up and favoring first of all his rebels in Flanders by
intercepting his money first in the Duke of Alua his time, and always after
when they could lay hands on it, by treating also first the coming of the
Duke Matthias into Flanders, and after ofMounsieur the Duke of Alenson, and
assisting him publicly against the King in time of peace, by mayntayninge,
and bolstering up ofDon Antonio that calls himself King ofPortugall, by
sending Hawkins, Frobishire, Drake, Candishe, and other Pirates to the Indians,
and some ofthem even in to Spain it self, for which he alleges out ofStowes
chronicles, special commission given by her Majesty to spoil the King of
Spaines subjects by sea, long before any breach ofleague was talked of by the
Kings part, and so he concludes that this first accusation ofthe
proclamation is most unjust, and that the whole world will laugh thereat, and
that the writer thereof (which he takes to be my L. Treasurer) was very
shameless in setting it down.

The 2. part of this section.
THE second point of this Section, concerns that which the proclamation
affirms of the King of Spaines ambitious doings also toward other Princes
besides her Majesty, and that all Christendom is troubled at this day by his
only wars. For discussing whereof this awnswerer lays down all the
proceedings, both ofher Majesty, and the King of Spain with their neighbors
from the beginnings of both their reigns.

And first for the King ofSpaine he shows his dealings in particular with
the Turk, Moors, and other The King of Spain: dealinges with his neighbors.
infidels, then also with the Italians, Portugalls, French, Inglishe, Irishe,
Scotishe, and Flemishe, and shows al to have bin ever most honorable, quiet,
just, and without injury offered to any, as by their own testimonies, and
witness also of all writers appears, and for the war and other affairs
that have passed in Portugal he proves in particular out of Hieronimo Franchi
a Genoes that was present, and wrote the story, and in other points shows
himself no great frind to Spaniardes, yet does he so justify all the Kings
actions in this affair, even by testimony of the Portugalles themselves, as
they seemed rather over scrupulous, then only justifiable.

He proves also outof Genebrard a French writter, the King of Spaines noble
proceedings with France in all the times of the minorities of al King Henry
the second his children, to wit of Francis, Charles, and Henry the third, and
how he never sought not only to profit himself, or to impair the kingdom of
France, duringe those troubles (as the Queen of Ingland did by taking new
haven) but also ofhis own charges sent aids of men, horse, victuals, and
money often times to the succors of these young Princes, against their
rebels, notwithstanding the old enimities, and emulatio^ between these two
crowns of France, and Spain, and the cruel wars that had passed between
them many years before.

Likewise he shows the kings wonderful clemente proceeding, with his own
subjects that have rebelled in the low countries, as appears by his many
pardons, peaces, and tolerations made with them, his liberal, and noble
dealing with Inglishe, Irishe, and Scottishe, especially such as have bin
troubled, and afflicted for their consciences at home, whom he has sustained
liberally abroad without requyring any service at their hands.

After this he takes in hand to compare with this the Inglish proceedinges
with there neighbors.
Inglishe proceedings toward all their neighbors round about them, to whom
he shows that they have bin the proper, and continual causes of troubles,
wars, sedition, bloodshedd, and utter perdition, as namely in France of four
civil wars, besides all other reuoltes and conspiracies against the true
Kings, turmoyles in Religion, and other garbroyles, and the like to have bin
caused by them in Flanders, by stirring up and ayding first the Guses, and
other rebels of the country, and then by settinge on foot Orange, and
bringing in other princes, and foreign powers, and lastly by open injustice
of inuadinge and holding the same to themselves, as at this day they do.

In Scotland also he declares very particulerly, out of the Inglishe cronicles
themselves what wicked, and sinful stratagemes at the beginning were used,
to putt that people at discord the one against the other, and to pull down
first the Queen Dovvager, by the Hamiltons, and by them the Catholic
religion, and afterward the Hamiltons again by others, and then to overthrow
the true Queen proprietarie with her husband, and to crown her own child
against her self with the slaughters that ensued, and affliction of Scotland
by the often hostile entrance of the Inglishe soldiers, which are recounted
with many particulers of great misery and compassion: their troublesome
proceedings also with other nations are recou^^ed, which compared with the
calm, quiet, and just proceedings of the King of Spain, do show, as this
ansvverer says, that my L. Treasurer, which he accounts to be both author,
counceler, and scribe of this proclamation, not only to lack shame, but also
wisdom and consideration, in that he makes her Majesty to publishe to the
world things so evidently false as these are, that the King of Spain is the
only cause of the trouble of Christianity at this day.

The third point of this section.
THE third member of this Section is about these words, where it is said in
the proclamation, that the King of Spain now in his declined years meetest
for peace, when he ought to be satisfied with his own without seekinge of more
Kingdoms by violence, seeing be possesses at this day more crowns, Kingdoms,
and countries, then ever any Christian Prince had before, that all this
notwithstanding he has begun a most unjust war aganist the present King
of France, most dangerous to all Christendom, which yet is like to be the
ruin of himself, as his enterprise against Inglande gave him just cause to
repent etc.

For answer of all this, there are many points touched, Diverse falls hodes and
folyes of M. Cecil.
first that the King of Spain, not only in this his old age but in all his
life by testimony of the whole world, has bin ever most desirous and
obseruante of peace, and the Inglishe quyte contrary: secondly that this
exprobratio^ of the Kings old age, is ridiculous, her Majesty folowinge him
so nere in years as she does, and my L. Treasurer far passing him, and nerer
to his grave by all likelihood. Thirdly that so great amplification of the
Kings forces, wealth, and power, (being their enemy) was inconsiderate, and
can serve to no other effect, but to terrify their own friends and subjects,
and to animate their contraries, and to show their lack of providence in making
so vnequalla match fowerthly, that this great power of the King of Spain being
so justly and temperately used, at it is, can not be fearful to any good
man, but rather confortable nor is it dangerous to Christendom, but rather a
great and singular stay, and providence of almighty God, who forseing the
tumultes and reuoltes that heresies should bring in these times, has provided
this so potent and opulent a Prince of all ages, for the defense of his
Catholic church in these troobles. Fystly that this war of the King
against Navarre, is not unjust, but most just, and necessary, not for any
intereste of the Kings, but only for the good of France it self, and
consequently that all reasons, and circumstances considered, and the forces on
both parts wayed, it can not be like to be the ruin of the King of Spain,
but rather of Navarre, and other heretics depending of him, or joining with
him; and albeit the Kings last fleet against Ingland, had not the success
which was expected, yet it was not for want of strength, or by any valor, or
praise of the Inglishe, but rather by te^peste, lack of experience in some
principal officers, and other such casualties, that often fall out in war,
whereof the Inglishe ought not to bragg, seeing there are so many reasons, and
examples of enterprices that take success the second or third time, which did
not at the first, whereof this awnswerer alleges many testimonies, and
authorities, both profane, and divine, which in the book are to be seen,

After this he enters to treat at large of Nauarres Nauarres just exclusion
from the crown of France.
unjust pretense to the crown of France, being an open known heretic, as
he says, and refusing to take the oath of mayntayning the Catholic Roman
religion, which all Kings both of France and Ingland have taken before this,
and are bound to take from the first institution of Christian Kings, and
that her Majesty took also the same oath at her entrance to her crown of
Ingland, and that by Cecils council also, by whose council the same oath was
afterward violated; and that the title of particular succession in Kingdoms
being founded only upon positive laws of several countries, (and not upon
law of nature or nations, for that Kingdoms and monarchies neither were from
the beginning, nor are at this day in all realms a like) it must needs
follow, that the whole right of these successions and interests to the same, do
depend of the particular ordinances, laws, oaths, and conditions, with which
each country has ordained admitted, and authorized their Kings, whereof the
chief condition being in the Kingdom of France, hat the King shall swear,
and give assurance to defend and mayntaine the old Catholic Roman
religion, and the professors thereof, and Navarre refusing to do the same, he
can by no law divine or human be admitted to the crown, which is largely
proved by many authorities, examples, and reasons.

Upon this he declares how al Catholic people in France are bound under
pain of damnable sin, to resist Nauarrs entrance into that crown,
considering the inestimable damage that is like to ensew thereof unto that
whole realm, if he should prevail; And for the same consideration he
proves, that the Catholic party of French nobility that either for hope of
honor and commodity, or for hatred, and emulation against others that are
against Navarre, or for any other passion, or pretense whatsoever do follow or
favor him in this his pretense, do offend God highely, and are guilty of al
evils and miseries of their country, and that besides the eternal
punishment, which they are to expecte at Gods hands (except they repent)
they will also be destroyed, and pulled down by Gods just judgments in this
world, as this awnswerer shows by as many of the nobility both of France,
Flanders, Ingland and Scotland by name, as for any pretense whatsoener, have
bin the first ayders of heretics in their countries, have perished and come
to naught.

The III. Section.
THE third Section conteyneth an other large complaynte no less unjust then
the former, as though the King of Spain not only by himself, but by other
men's helps also went about to annoy England, and this by three manner of
ways.

The first is, for that he is said here. for fortifyinge of his strange
violent attempts to have procured a Milanois a Vassal of his own to be
exalled to the Papacy of Rome, and to have seduced him without consent of the
college of Cardinals to exhauste the Treasures of the church, and there with
to leauie forces in Italy (which had no sound of ware in is before) to invade
France a Kingdom that has bin always a mayntainer of that church, in all
their oppressions etc.

These are the words of the edicte, which the awnswerer does play upon
diversely, asking where my L. Treasurers wit was, when se set forth these
fancies; for first he says that it is no novelty for a vassal of the King
of Spaines, to be made Pope, seeing the greatest parts of Italy, and the
Islands adjacent (out of which nation in our times the Popes commonly are wont
to be chosen) are under him, and the only state of Millaine in our days has
had three Popes: which were Pius quartus, Pius quintus, and this Gregory the
fourteenth, whereof this proclamation speaks.

Secondly he shows, that it is rather a sign of great piety and humility in
the King, then to be attributed to ambition, if he should desire a subject of
his own to be made Pope, and thereby to be made his superior and better, for
that, as this awnswerer avouches, the pride of heretical Princes can not
bear such a matter, and in particular he thincketh my L. Treasurer for
examples sake, would not choose Cardinal Allen of all others to be Pope,
though he be an Inglishman.

Thirdly he says that it is a ridiculous complaynt that the King seduced this
Pope to exhauste the Treasures of the church without the consent of the
College of Cardinals, as though the Pope were a child, or that Ingland had
such care to conserve the Churches treasure, whereof it seems that my L.
Burley would also be treasurer, as well as of that of her Naiestie if he might.

Fowerthly it is much more childishe says he that the Pope by leuying
soldiers in Italy for France, did trouble the peace of Italy, as my L.
Cecill insnuateth, and most of all, it is foolish, says he, that the Church
of Rome by sending aid to the Catholics of France does invade that Kingdom
which has bin a mayntayner of that church in all her afflictions; for neither
is this aid of the Popes to invade France, but to assiste France, nor is it
sent against the French, but for the French: neither is Navarre of those
Frenth Princes that aided the church of Rome, but contrary to them, and to
their faith and affection toward that church, neither does there thing with
thing, nor time with time, nor person with person, as he says, agree, whereof
he makes pastyme at large against my L. Treasurer, and and his broken
Rhetorique, as He terms it.

The second point of this section.
THE second point touched in this sectio^ is about the accusations laid
against Cardinal Allen, and father Persons (whom the writer of the edicte
calls heads of sedition and of base birth) saying that they have bin dealte
withal hy the King of Spain to gather together with great labors upon his
charges a multitude of dissolute young men, who either for lathe of living or
crimes committed leave their country, and become fugitives, rebels, and
traitors, and are brought up in certain demies and receptacles, named
Seminaries erected in Rome, Rheims, and Spain.

For awnswere of this, is examined first, why these two men above others should
be so odious to the state of Ingland, seeing they never committed any thing
against them that might justly be imputed to hatred or evil will, but rather
have sought by all means their good both temporal, and eternal if they
would see it.

And whereas the Scribe, as this awnswerer terms My L. Treasure ^^^er of his
ge^try.
him, thrusts in a pare^thesis, as has bin said, that these two men are very
base in birth, the awnswerer handles that point somewhat at large, especially
touching the Cardinal, for that he living in so eminent a place of dignity,
such a slander (as he says) is not to be passed over by silence, albeit the
other being a Religious man and hidden from the world, make less account of
such affairs.

And by this occasion he comes to defend the Cardinals gentry, and to compare
it with the nobility of all the present clergy of Ingland, and with diverse of
the Council his enemies, and namely with my L. Treasurer the bringer in of
this comparison, of whom he says, that a letter of his, written with his own
hand, at westminster, upon the 10. of January last 1592. to a certain
intellige^cer of his in the low countries, came unto his hands, even at this
very time when he was come to awnswer this point of gentry and nobility,
touched in the proclamation: and for that he says the matter of the said
letter, fell out fit for this place, he resolved to awnswer the same here,
reducing the effect hereof to two principal heads.

For my L. Treasurer in that letter first gives thancks to the said
Intelligencer for sending him a copy of a printed pamphlet set forth presently
in avvnsvver of this proclamation, in which avvnsvver both the fact of setting
forth this proclamation, and bloody course determined to be followed by the
same, is with many reasons though briefly, yet very pithely reproved, and
some persons that have bin causers thereof, but namely my L. Treasurer by
reason of this his byte to the Cardinals birth is insinuated to be but of very
mean parentage, whereunto his L. replieth in these words first that this
course is a necessary course, seeing the multitude of priests (says he) that
come in daily appears now to be so great as they are seven for one in a year
in respect of former times, and that this course will not he left for any
such audacious censure of this awnswerer, and that he douhteth not but that the
scope thereof is justifiable in all Kingdoms, and common wealths where it
shall be known.

To which words of his L. this awnswerer says first that the necessity of
this course has proceeded of the inconsideration and evil council of such as
have governed, more for their own passion and interests then for the common
good, and have brought her Majesty by little and little to this bloody
necessity, which can not endure. And secondly if it be true that seven priests
for one do return home now in respect of former times, then says he may his
L. see, what he and others have profited by their former persecutions against
Catholics, and according to that may make their account and proportion for
the time to come, for if they had not so vexed men at home, never so many
would have come abroad, nor if there had not bin so great hope of martyrdom
within the Island, never would so many have desired to return, nor vvoulde
forayne Princes so greedily have set up Seminaries, and offered mayntenance
abroad for the same.

To the third point wherein his L. says, that this censure of this awnswerers
and this laying of their errors Wicked men are warned without open of
amendment.
before their eyes vvil not stay this course begun of persecution, this man
says he is also of the same opinion, and that he took not this awnswere in
hand, with any such hope of stayinge this course, until God shall bend or
burste the same of himself, and that for all this, men may not cease to speak
the truth for that Christ did not omit to tell the Scribes and Pharisees, of
their errors, and wickedness, though he knew that they were obdurate therein,
and would not cease to shedd his blood for the same, so also he surceased not
to forewarne ludas of his perdition albeit he knew it would little avail him;
and generally when he sent both prophets, and other good men to reprehend both
by word, and writings the wicked Kings, and Queens of lurie, and other
countries, and common wealths as Moab, Idumea Egypt, and the like, that
persecuted his servants, he sent them not with any hope (for the most part)
that they would leave, or amend their course thereby, but rather be worse, and
in the sending of Moses and Aaron to Pharao it is wonderful to consider that
on the one side God would have him warned of his ruin, and on the other side
he said in plain words, that he would obdurate, or harden his heart, so as
he should not hear the good council given him, but rather wax more fierce
thereby, and run on headling to his own destruction, for that there are some
kind of people, as the Prophet says, which have made a league, and
contractewith death, so as nothing will make them to avoid the same, which
this later awnswerer shows principally to be fulfilled in wicked and
ambitious governors, who laying commonly all conscience aside, and being tied
to the prosecution of their evil actions once begun with the forcible
chains of honor, credit, riches, authority, envy, malice, and ambition, have
no other way ordinarily of retreat, but when Gods hand enters, and breaks
down all; and then al falls together like old muddy walls with loss of all that was most dear unto them in this life, and of that also that should have
bin for the life to come.

And finally to the last clause, he awnswereth that all forayne Kingdoms and
states are so far of from allowing or justifying the scope of this desperate
Inglish course, that the very protestante Princes and Counselors that
otherwise are no enemies to Ingland, do cry out of the same. The rest that are
adversaries do laugh in their sleeves to see England ruin it self on the
rocks, and the sands, as is does by this course, which must needs be er
long their total destruction; only the poor Catholics (which rather I
should call happy says he) are those that abide the brunte for the present,
who are sent to heaven more hastily, then otherwise they would perchance have
walked of themselves, and others are enforced to merit more by sufferinge,
then they had purposed, which is all the hurt they receive; for as for their
seed it shall remain for ever and peccator videbit, Psalm. 111.
and irascetur, dentibus suis fremet and tabescet.

In the second part of my L. Letter, he defends somewhat the gentry of three
persons touched before in the first Inglishe awnswere, to wit my L. of
Leicester Sir Nicolas Bacon, and his own; and for the first he says that
Leicesters great gra^dfather (whom many men report to have bin a carpenter)
was no less then a lord Dudleys son, wherewith this awnswerer says he vvil
not greatly trouble himself at this present, though this new genealogy seem
stra^g and not credible to many Inglishe men's ears of most knowledge and
experience that live abwade, and never heard of the same before.

For the second his L. says no more, but that albeit Bacons father were no man
of living, yet was he accounted so wealthy as he left to two of his sons
stocks of money to be honest merchants, and to the third (which was afterward
L. keeper) mayntenance for his study in Grayes Inn: al which supposed to be
true (says this awnswerer) it is nothing against that which before has bin
spoken of him.

To the third, which is himself, my L. Treasurer says much more for his
gentry, affirming that his house, to wit the Cecills of Stamford, do come of
the ancient house of the Sit siltes of wales, and are descended from the
reign of the conqueror, and have matched, and come of many noble howses both
of Ingland and wales, yea of the Princes of wales (for these are my L. own
words in his fore said letter) and that his L. grandfather David Cecil came
out of Brytany as a sergeuit at arms first, with King Henry the seventh, and
was by the said King placed at Samford, and was Steward of his mothers house
the Countess of Richmond, and after was squire for the body, both to King
Henry the 7. and also to King Henry the eight: hitherto is my L. Treasures
own allegation for this gentry, and nobility.

To all which, this awnswerer replieth, that so diligent a displaying of
genealogies by his own hand vvriting at this instant, when he handles the
match of his grandchild with Arbella, implies a further sequel, them every man
does look into, especially where he adds that his house is descended of the
very old Princes of wales themselves.

Secondly he takes upon him to show that all this flourish, or at least wise
the more part thereof, is but an ambitious fiction of M. Cecill himself, and
very ridiculous to all Inglish of the discreeter sort; for that he says, that
many yet remember when M. Cecil for diverse years after his coming to creditt,
went about to derive his name of Cecil, from Cecilius the Roman name, whereof
their were diverse, but especially that famous rich man named Caecilius
Claudius who as Plinius writes, Plin. 1. 23. cap. 10.
after great losses received in the civil wars, left notwithstanding in his
testament, above four thousand slaves, and above three thousand yoke of oxen,
and above two hundred and fifty thousand of other catell besides infinite
quantity of ready money, unto whom this awnswerer upposeth that our M. Cecil
at that time, desired to be like as well in wealth as in name, and for that he
imagined that the progenye of those Cecils had remained in Ingland, even from
the Romans time, and that his house was descended of the same: He write
himself (as he does now also in this his letter) Cecil, with two c. c. and
after the first of them an E, which is far different in antographie from
Sitsilt which himself writes with two s. s. two T. T. and two I. I.

By occasion also of this, this defender tells a story, A story.
how that in Q. Maryes time when M. Cecil had deceived Sir William Peter, and
had made him believe he was an earnest papiste, and had persuaded him to offer
the resignation of his office of Secretariship unto him, as before has bin
touched; the old countess of huntingto^ mother to the earl that now lives
(though far different from him in Religion) told the Queen and maids of honor
in the court, that she had hard an old prophecy that one who had two c. c. in
his name should be the destruction of Ingland, which thing said she I know
not whom it should mean, except it were M. Cecil, who being out of credit
at this present, and never like to come in again, I hope shall never be able
to bring that to pass. This do report such as have hard it of the Countess
own mouth, and perhaps her son may yet remember it though he vvil not dare
to speak it; neither remembered M. Cecil at that time to write himself Sitsilt
to euacuate that prophecy, as he might have done, had he known himself then
to have descended of that house which now he pretends.

Moreover this awnswerer asks, how if it be true Manisest arguments.
that David Cecil my lords grandfather descended of the nobles, and Princes of
wales, and was so greatly in creditt with K. Henry the 7. as to be squire for
the body as well to him as to his son K. Henry the eighte, how He is said to
hauebene first
then is it lykely that he would keep an Inn in Sta^ford as diverse
worshipful yet alive or lately dead have affirmed an ostler in that Inn and
after to have marie the hostess.
to have layen in the same; also how it is possible that his son the
Treasures father, named also David Cecil (if I forget not) should be only
groom of the wardrobe, and so plain, and mean a man, as thousands yet can
testify that he was? and how finally William Cecil their child now Treasurer
could be so poor, and meanly brought up, as to get part of his mayntenance
by ringing the morning bell at his beginning in S. Ihons college in Cambridge
as commonly yet in that university is reported.

And lastly this awnswerer takes this for an euidente argument of M. Cecills
cogging and coseninge in this behalf, that for diverse years he took himself
far different arms from these, which of late he has taken up of the
Sitsiltes, for his former arms (if I be not deceived) were two Lions eating
of a wheaten sheafe between Instead of two Forses at a botle of bay.
them, as it is to be seen in diverse of his howses where they are yet
engraven, and afterward seeing the Arms of the Sitsiltes (an ancient house
greatly decayed, if not extinguished) to be six Lions, he has taken them also
to himself, as it is here reported, to terrify the world perhaps vvithal, and
to liken himself thereby to Princes, that commonly have Lions in their arms,
where as a good fatt capon, or a roasted pigg seems a fitter cognisaunce for
an Inneholders grandchild as this man affirms, seeing that those things are
more commonly to be found in Innes, and Osteries then are Lions; and thus much
in effect he avvnsvvereth to the contents of my L. Treasurers letter touching
his gentry, which this defender takes either wholy to be feigned, or most
vainly to be delated by the old man's ambition.

After this he comes to avvnsvvere those words of the proclamation vvherin
is is said, that my Lord Cardinal, and father Parsons do gather together with
great labors a multitude of dissolute young men, who have partly for lack, of
living and partly for crimes committed, become fugitives, rebels, and
traitors; for whom there are in Rome, and Spain and other places, certain
receptacles made to live in, there to be instructed in school points of
sedition etc.

All which words this avvnsvverer examineth, and Ezech. 9. Proverb. 29.
first what difference there is in holy vvryt between dispersers and
gatherers, and what curse there is laid upon the one and blessing upon the
other by Gods own mouth, and that seeing M. Cecill, and other persecutours at
the instigation of the devil do so attend to disperse their countrymen; good
reason some others should serve God in gatheringe, and nourishing the dispersed
for his cause.

Secondly he shows that these two men have no need to use great labors in
gathering together these youths, as the proclamation feigneth, for that God
himself gathers them aboundantely from al parts of the Realm, and the
euidente truth of the Catholic faith stireth them to seek means abreode for
the salvation of their souls, seeing they can not be permitted to have them at
home: and whereas many were let before from coming out of Ingland, for that
they knew not where to go to be received, mayntayned and instructed, now being
informed thereof by this indiscrete proclamation of M. Cecils penning, which
admonis heth all men that besides the former colleges, and Seminaries in
France and Rome, there are other also newly erected in Spain, many have
resolved to come over, which otherwise had stayed in Ingland, and so them
selves at their coming have professed: and the King of Spain among other
Princes having seen so barbarous an edicte, and considered the conscienceles
causes of their distresses has greatly enlarged his favors toward the said
Inglishe Seminaries in his dominions both by his personal visiting of that in
validolid, and larger allowance toward the mayntenance of the same, and thus
does M. Cecil profit by his new diuises.

Thirdly he shows that these students come not out of Ingland neither for
lack of living, nor for crimes committed, as the proclamation most unjustly
does slander them. Not for the first, for that they being commonly gentlemen,
or vvealthie peoples children, and as good wits as any left behynd them, they
might casely have preserrmente, if they would apply themselves to the
protestant proceedings, and here he shows at large the great multitude of
gentlemen's sons, which leaving their inheritances, and other hopes of
vvorldly possibilities at home, do come over daily to study, and be made
priests with infinite desire to return again quickly to Ingland, where
priesthood is more hated, infamed, and pursued, then any crime or wickedness
in the world: and that no such desire was seen in gentry and nobility to
priesthood in Catholic time, when is was honorable and commodious to be a
priest, which must needs proceed of Gods own hand: and that there are
more gentlemen this day in the Inglishe Seminaries of France, Rome, and Spain,
then in all the Clergy of Ingland twice told, to which no gentleman commonly
will afford his son to be a Minister, and much less his daughter to be a
Ministers vvyf; with diverse examples of the baseness of their chief Prelates,
as among others of Pierse, and Cooper; Archbisshop, and Bishop, of york and
winchester, both borne at Oxford, as this fellow says, the one the son of a
labourer, and the other of a cobbler, and diverse others like unto them, which
yet M. Cecil touches not with baseness, nor that they went to their ministry
for need.

And that these students come not over for crimes committed he says is much
more plain by the desire the Magistrates of Ingland have to receive them back
again with all grace and favor, if they would return: and he notes for a
very markable thing, that in these twenty years, wherein above a hundred of
the Seminaries have bin put to death publicly, and willingly for their
religion, and many hundreds have lived in Ingland in common attire of other
men, the more thereby to dissemble their calling, never yet any one of them in
so many years has bin apprehended, or punished for any crime or disorder of
life, or manners; as theft, murder, adultery, quarreling, cosening, or the
like: for which crimes and worse, notwithstanding al Ingland knows that
their ministers, are at every assise almost brought to the bar, and many
times also to the gallows it self: neither at the condemnations of these so
many priests as have bin martyred has any such matter of crime or evil life
bin proved against them, but only matters of judgment and learning laid to
their charge which M. Cecil in this proclamation by a new fond, fantastical
phrase terms School points of sedition, as for example, to teach that a man
must confess his sins to a priest, that he must make restitution of such
things as he has taken vvrongefully from others, that he must hear mass,
that he must acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be superame head of the
Church next under Christ, and the like which were points of school, and
accounted both current and Catholic doctrine in Ingland for a thousand years
before Cecil was borne; and are at this present in other countries abroad,
and will to the worlds end, when a thousand such malignant and wrangeling
worms, as Cecil is, shall be dead, and rotten, and rosting in hell for their
wickedness, and yet only for these crimes of ancient doctrine, and our
fathers faith are these priests apprehended condemned, and murdered, which well
declares their innocence in crimes of life, and manners, whatsoever the
staunderous tongue of Cecill the old Atheiste affirms to the contrary.

The like manifest lie, and sclau^der this awnswerer says it is, whereby such
as go over to the Seminaryes are named here by M. Cecill a multitude of
dissolute young men, whtrin this defender reports himself to the testimony of
all the purseuantes, and catchpoles of England, whether their chiefeste sign,
and mark to descry a papiste or a Catholic young man be not, to note his
modesty, his silence, his gravity, his composition of body and countenance,
his moderation of words, and the like; and if he can come to pearse more
inwardly into his life, then to learn whether he fast, or pray much, whether
he use to wear heareclothes, or some time to lie on the ground to mortify his
body, whether he give much alms, or make secret restitution of things
unjustly possessed either by himself, or his ancestors; which signs of a
papisticall life if any man should bring to a purseuante of England, I doubt
not but that he would think he had just cause enough to suspecte, and
apprehend such a person without further matter; and on the contrary side if one
should come and say that such, or such a person is a papiste, and recusant, and
others should come, and say that they know him to be a good fellow, as they
term him; that is to wit, that he will eat, and drink and toss pottes
with any man, that he will fight, and brawle, swear, and stare, and follow
queanes; cut, and hacke, and take a purse when opportunity is offered; in
this case this defender assures himself that no purseuante in Ingland would
ever lay hands on such a man for a recusant, though he never went to church
throughout the whole year, as most of such protesta^tical good fellows do not
in deed, except it be only once or twice for a show; and yet are they never
touched or called in question for the same; by which is is evident says this
awnswerer, on what side lies the dissolution of life, and licentiousnes of
manners, and where discipline and order is held in the same.

And thus much now at home, where it is well known (says this man) that many a
Catholic youth, to the end he be not discovered, and brought in question, is
enforced to feign himself against the hear often times, to be a Ruffian a
cutter, or good fellow, thereby to get the creditt of a good protestant, or at
least wise, not to be any precise or zealous papiste, which is not the least
misery, and servitude, among others to such as inwardely are otherwise bent,
and would serve God in virtuous life; wherefore it is no marvel (says this
awnswerer (if when they get over the sea, and are in liberty to live as they
would, they betake themselves to so stricte, and precise a form of living,
both of their studies and manners, at that of the Seminariesis, which this man
very particularly prescribes; first, how they enter in, then how they
proceed, and finally in what manor they end, and do turn to there country
again.

He declares what they must do to be admitted, The order and institution of
the Seminaries.
what exercises of learning and virtue they must have in the house throughout
tbe whole day, week, and year; what prayers daily both mental, and vocal;
what meditatio^s, lessons, and disputes they have in the forenoone, what after
dynner, what diet, apparel, conversation, and recreatio^, is allowed them;
what exercises in philosophy; what in school divinity, what in positive,
what in cases of conscience, controversies, tounges, and other learning fit
for the end which they do pretend: how they profit in the same, and with
what mind and furniture they return to Ingland; and at leugth he compares all
this with the loose proceedings of Inglishe universities, and colleges at this
day, where he says that Cecil, Leicester, and such other like, rather
Cancellers of all virtues then chauncelors of universities have overthrown
all, broken down the walls and hedges of all discipline, exiled all sound
and solid learning, extinguished all modesty, shamefastenes, and religion have
laid open the way to dissolution, Ruffianry, and Atheism.

For to these governors he imputes the taking away of porters from college
gates, which greatly kept students in awe; to these he imputes the confusion
in apparel, and immodestie thereof whereby every man wears in the
universities, either as his pride or fancy serves, or as his purse and ability
permits. To these he imputes the filling up, and pestering all colleges
with all harlotry women to be baytes for young men, that study in the same,
the headships given to light and wanton compaignions, the fence and dancing
schools so much by students frequented, the tauernes filled with scholars,
the statutes of founders contemned and broken, the leases embezeled, the goods
made away, and places of fellows, and scholars publicly sold, and infinite
other disorders, confusion, and dissolution, which all the world sees, and the
students themselves do wonder at; when they come over, and see the contrary on
this side the sea, as this defender affirms; and with this and with a place
or two of S. Gregory Nazianzene against lulian the Apostata, very bytterly
applied against my L. Treasurer, he ends the second part of this third
Section.

The third part of this 3. Section.
IN this part of the Section he answers the charge given in the proclamation
against Seminary priests, that their end of coming in to Ingland in such
secret manner with authority of the Pope, is to move men to rebellion, and to
cause them to renounce their allegeaunce due to the crown of Ingland, upon
hope of a Spanish invasion, and that they bind men with oaths, and Sacramenes
to yeilde their obedience to the Pope, and Spanish King: and that for this they
bring indulgences for them that will yield to their persuasions, and curses to
the contrary; all which this defender How priests return to Ingland.
says is feigned stuff, and false calumniations; except the first two
points, that they come into Ingland in secret manner; and that they have their
spiritual authority from the Pope, which two points he confesses, and says
that the former of them is warranted by Christ's own example, which walked not
openly some times but in secret as the Euangeliste says, at such times I mean
as the Jews sought to kill him; and the second he confirms by diverse
testimonies of the same Christ our Savior, who assigned al principality of
spiritual authority under himself to S. Peter, and his successors, whereby
the Catholic Church has ever understood, that no priest can be made, or have
jurisdiction to deal with souls, but by authority derived either immediately
or mediatly from this supreme and universal pastor, and largely he declares
the disorders, and implicatio^s of the protesta^tical clergy, for want of
this subordinatio^ among themselves and the sea Apostolic.

These two points only then granted, he denies all the rest, to wit, the
intention to move sedition, or rebellion, the renouncing of allegeaunce dew
unto the crown of Ingland, the hope of a Spanishe invasion, the binding of men
by oaths or Sacraments to yield any temporal obedience to the Pope, or King of
Spain, or lastly the bringing in of any indulgences, or curses to that end.
All which points are mere fictions says he of William Cecils head, and
devilish devises to make innocente men odious, and to shed their bloods, and
that they were never yet proved, or confessed by any, and can not be presumed
but by infinite malice, and among all other, this old murderers abominations,
(which this man says are infinite and do cry vengeance at Gods hands none are
more impious, and Great iniquity.
damnable, or that vvillye more heavily on himself, and his progeny for ever
(as the blood of Christ does lve upon the jews unto this day) then this
vvilfull slaundering and accusing of men against his knowledge, and conscience
for serving only his own turn, and this is the effect of this awnsvvers
speech to this third part of the Section though more largely delated in the
book it self.

The fourth Section.
THE fourth Section of this proclamation, the awnsvverer reduces to two
general heads, the first concerning the true causes of priests deaths, and
other Catholics suffering, in Ingland and the second touching certain
particularities laid against Cardinal Allen, and father Parsons.

As touching the first, the proclamation avouches, that none suffer in
Ingland for Religion, or are impeached in their lives, goods lands, or
liberties for the same, except only in a certain pecuniary sum as a
penalty for the time to those that do refuse to come to church, and that the
priests, and such others as are put to death suffer not for any points of
Religion, but only for mere treasons, as appears by their, arraignements,
and condemnations, and that is a manifest course to falsify the slanderous
speeches, and libelles of fugitives abroad. This is the total sum yea the
very worcester des themselves of the proclamation in this Section, which this
avvnsvverer taking to come wholy from M. Cecils head and pen, as he does
also the words Contradictions of M. Cecil.
to the same effect uttered in the book entitled the execution of Justice in
Ingland written some years ago, and published in diverse languages, to the same
end that this now is, (though it was evidently refuted out of hand, says
this man, by the Catholics:) he adioyneth here many sentences out of that
book of Cecils to these of the same author in this proclamation, which
affirm that no Catholic at all, yea not one is troubled in Ingland for his
conscience, which words, and sentences after he has laid together, then
does he show the plain contrary, and contradictory by other words of the
Queen, and Cecill himself, and of the whole parliament in sundry statutes, and
in this also, and other proclamations, and by the words of Holingshead, and
Stow in their chronicles, and so makes sport, and vvoonder of Master Cecils
contradictions against himself, and of his shameless impudency in affirming
things so evidently false, as if a soole, says he, upon a stage should
avouch such stuff in a comedy he would be hissed out, and not permitted,
whereas this man tells it both as an accuser, a witness, and a Judge in a
most bloody tragedy, in the sight, and hearing of the whole world.

First then to begin withal, this awnswerer shows out of S. Hilary, S.
Nazianzene, Eusebius, and other ancient fathers, and vvriters, the custom of
all devilish persecutors, and especially of heretics to have bin ever to envy
the glory of such as they put wrongfully to death, to the end they should not
be honored, and accomted for martyrs; and for that reason ever lightly
affirmed the causes of their deaths to he sedition, rebellion, and treason,
which lying course the Catholic Church notwithstanding would never yet use
(says this man) for that she never would punish heretic vndet other title
then only for heresy, but that M. Cecill thought good to follow the other way,
and so to procure a double crown to the murdered, the one of martyrdom in
that they dye for the true faith, and the other of Justice for that they suffer
for supposed false treasons which they never imagined.

After this he passes on to avouch the matter more in particular by diverse
examples both of men, and women martyred in Ingland, whose causes could not
conteyne any show of true treason by any law or reason in the world, nor that
the judges or accusers did in their arraignements, or condemnations allege any
such matter against them, but only of Religion, and Acts of the same, made
crimes by parliament, as if the Burgeses of Ingland should make it adultery to
hear a woman's confession, or theft to give alms, and this he proves by the
very records of the condemnations yet extant, and by the testimony of the
Inglishe chronicles printed by allowa^ce of the present state, which have set
down in print the causes of diverse executed far different from that which M.
Cecil here tells us, vvhos words he cites.

He handles also the peculiar punishements for hearing of mass, and the 20.
L. a month for not coming to Church, which are evident peynes for matters of
Religion, which matters M. Cecil so often, and impudently Great (...).
(says he) in his foresaid book of execution of Inglish justice, denies
utterly to be punished in Ingland, and though in this proclamation he confess
that there is a pecuniary payment for such as refuse to come to Church, yet he
does it very slyly, and underhand, and utters not what the sum is, being
ashamed (as may be thought) that the world should understand, of so barbarous,
and in human a cruelty, and rapyne as no Turk, or Moore at this day does
exercise the like upon his subjects for difference of Religion; for yt the
Turk should impose such a tribute of twenty pounds for every month upon the
Christians, jews, and other subjects of his that refuse to come to
hisMoscheyes, or Churches, what an infinite sum would it rise unto, or what
people would abide to be under his government, says this defendant.

Besides M. Cecil tells not (says he) how recusants are handled besides the
payment of these twenty pounds a month, how they are held in prison, and
carried from bar to bar, let out, and called in, upon every light occasion,
vexed, troubled, spoiled, made subject and obnoxious to every purseuante,
catchpole, and other that list to moleste them, and how they are denied the
common refuge, and course of law in their affairs, as people out of the
protection of their Prince, and country.

Again he says that M. Cecil tells not of the torments, tortures, and other
violences used to Catholics against al law in prisons, to make them confess
and discry others of the same Religion; he says nothing of the barbarous, and
blouddy questions urged upon men for their very thoughts to come; what they
would do, persuade, or judge, if wars for Religion should happen in Ingland;
as if the Pope, or any other Catholic Prince, should ask his friends or
subjects, or the husband should examine his wife what they vvoulde do in
such or such cases, wherein it is evident that under pain of damnation they
are bound to be against him; and yet no civil human Prince will ever ask
such demaundes before hand, so that he concludes Master Cecil to be a An
egregious bloodsucker.
very monster and to break all law of nature, nations, civility, and
religion, and shows out of Luthers own sayings, and many examples besides,
that protestants would never bear the hundred part of these tyrannies, and
oppressions laid upon Catholics.

The second part of this fourth section.
THIS second part of the Section contains particular matter against the L.
Cardinal Allen, and F. Persons, against whom this defender says, that my L.
Treasurer tells a large feigned tale, how that they, as heads of these
dens, and receptacles, which by traitors are called Seminaries have very
lately assured again the King of Spain, that though An impudent tale.
heretofore he had no good success in his army against Ingland, yet if he
vvil once again renew his war for this next year there shall be found ready
many thousands of able people within the land to take his part, and that
there be already many Seminary priests, and Jesuits sent into the land to hold
these reconciled people in this resolution, and that the Pope, and King upon
these assertions (though they know the most part thereof to be false) yet have
they resolved to attempt that matter once again this next year that
comes; and for that diverse of the King of Spaines vvisest counselors doubt
that he shall not prevail, therefore is he otherwise persuaded that if this
his purpose may not take place against Ingland, yet that the same forces may be
well employed against France, or the low countries, or Scotland. Thus far
tells M. Cecil his tale, says this awnswerer, devised ofhis own head, as
resolutely as if he had bin of the King of Spaines council, and present at the
deliberation it self.

And first of all says this defender, seeing that by a little process of ty
me since the proclayming of this famous lie, it is evidently discovered, that
neither the Pope, nor King of Spain have made preparations of war
correspondent to any such intention, as here is set down, nor have not at this
present any least demonstration tending that way; every man vvil easily see
how this old spirit of Beelzabub in Cecil has followed his former accustomed
course of forgery and lying in this blouddy action, of so many peoples
molestation, and destruction, which this wicked man, says he, has vvroughte,
by this hateful, and malicious fable invented of himself, in which fable as
there are many things odious, so nothing, says this defender, carries more
foundation or credit, then is the only conscience of Cecil the reporter,
which conscience by his former actions, may be presumed to be somewhat worse
then that of Nero, Caligula, or Heliogabulus (for they had yet perhaps some)
whereby it is easy to judge in what afflicted case poor Catholics do stand,
whose lives, and beings must depend of the same.

In this narration also the proclavmer says (with like truth as the rest)
that Allen the scholar, for his treason is honored with a Cardinals hat, and
that Persons the schoolma^, does arrogate unto himself the name of the King
Catholics confessor. By which occasion of the words Scholar and schoolman,
and the like fond terms impertinently thruste in, this defender discourses
upon M. Cecils wit and discretion in using these and like words, and phrases
so much out of order, sense, propriety and method in this proclamation, as it
well declares (says he,) that he does not only lack true judgment,
wisdom, and learning, but also that he can not well speak M. Cecil (...)
wise man.
Inglish, with any gravity, or propriety, but lodgethvp all his proclamations
and other writings with idle ynckepot terms, without sense, judgment, or
conueniencie very often, and that he is so far of from all ability to write
any one page of the fluente grave and substa^tious style of the Cardinal whom
he stoffeth at, as if he were otherwise in Christianity and honesty fit for
the same, yet his grace would be loath to entertain him for his secretary,
though the simple Duke ofSomerset a man wholly unlearned, most unfortunately
both for himself and others took him for his, and brought him in to be also
the same to the King his pupil, as both their ruynes felt it after, and since
that time how he has crepte up by abusing her Majesty that now is; and how
undeservedly he has gotten the place, and riches that now he possesses, every
discreet man in England does easily see; and if he were here in banishement
(says this awnswerer to show, and shifte for himself as others do (his far
betters every way and that by his procurement he would appear but a silly
soul, except only in lying, and cosening, which here among us, says this
awnsvverer, is not accounted wisdom, but dishonestie, and though in Ingland
of some of the simpler sort or passionate people, he be reconed for a great
wise man, yet is he not so abroad by those that more substantially look into
matters, and if he had gotten his treasurship with no more treachery, then D.
Allen has gotten his hat with treason, he were a happy man; but the ones
merit, and worthiness, bears no comparison with the others indignity, and
vvikednes, and so I leave them both to the judgment of God, and good men, and
thus much the awnswerer in effect replieth to this point of the Cardinal.

An other point also he handles touching father Persons, whom, he says, my
L. Treasurer in this proclamation by a certain calumniation more rediculous
then envious, affirms to arrogate to himself the name of the King Catholics
confessor, which not being so, nor likely, nor almost possible to be so, for
that this place, and charge requires a man of the same nation, skillful and
practiced both in the language, and affairs of the country, and the said
father not lying, or residing in the court, but commonly in the Inglish
houses, and colleges either of Vallidolid. Civil, or S. Lucar, and no
argument or probability offering it self in the world, why old Cecil should
fall into this so doting an imagination, except it were to scoff by the way
at the King of Spaines being called Catholic, and having of a confessor,
this defendant takes occasion hereby to examine these two words?

First what this word Catholic means, how it The word Catholic.
first began, even with the word Christian, and was invented by the Aposteles
themselves, and put in to their creed to explicate the other word, and to
restrain the signification of a Christian, or professor of Christ his name
in general, unto a true, faithful, and obedient Christian, for which he
alleges the testimony of an ancient holy Bisshopp named Pacianus, pacianus
exempla ad Symp. Nouat.
that said, Christian is my name, but Catholic is my surname, by the first I
am named, but by the second I am known, proved, and distinguisted from all
others, for which cause also the Aposteles used this word Catholic to
distinguish the true Church of Christ, from al other false conuenticles of
heretics, and feigned Christians; of all which this man infers by diverse
testimonies of S. Augustine, and other fathers, that no name is more glorious
in the world then to be called a Catholic; and that the Kings of Spain have
justly to rejoice, and take honor of this title given them by the sea
Apostolic notvvitstanding Master Cecils scoff, and that it is much more
ridiculous, and apis he in the Ministers of Ingland to give the title of
defender of the Catholic faith, so solemnly in every of their sermons to
the Queen of Ingland, seeing it is a title that was assigned to her father, by
Pope Leo the tenth for vvriting only against Luther in defense of papistrie,
which her Majesty impugneth, and persecuteth to death; and therefore to hold
the title, and to deny the faith, no man can imagine (says this awnswerer) how
it can stand together, but only by M. Cecils combinanation, that can pach
together any thing for his purpose in what kind soever.

For the second, why every Prince should have a Kings confessors.
confessor, according to the old custom of all Princes, this man alleges
many reasons, and authorities; and namely out of S. Augustine, who says, that
no Christian will refuse to confess his sins to a priest (that is) Aug. lib.
2. de visit. infirm. cap. 4.
Gods vicar) but only such as either are confounded by shame, or beaddy with
pride to their own damnation: and upon this he infers what a miserable
dangerous state Master Cecil has brought not only himself, but also her
Majesty unto, that whereas other Princes discharge their consciences by
confession, and receiving absolutio^ of the Church appointed by Christ Matthew.
18.
our savior, every year many times; her Majesty has passed over now four
and thirty years, without that benefit, contrary to the example of all the
Kings, and Queens of Ingland her noble progenitors, that ever were from the
first conversion of the same unto her time; whereof none ever wanted this
honor and benefit of a confessor but her self, except it were perhaps King
Edward her brother, who being a child, and in the hands of others, can make no
president to the contrary; but for King Henry her father, he observed the same
also most strictely even unto his dying day, and made it death unto him that
should contradict the same, and so did all his ancestors before him observe
the like most holy beneficial, and Catholic use, in so much that (in deed)
her Majesty is the very first of all Inglish Princes, that ever has
auentured to cast her soul into that aeternall danger, as to heap four and
thirty years sins together, without confession or absolution of theChurch,
and to leave them to the severe iudgeme^te of almighty God, upon contempt of
that spiritual tribunal which he has assigned in his Church for the remission
of the same, and all this upon M Cecils persuasion (says this awnswerer) who
being oppressed with the multitude of his own sins, will not be able to help
her Majesty in that day, and for that Cardinal Allen, father Persons, and
others of their coat, and charity, do pity her Majesty in this great
danger, therefore M. Cecil avouches them for traitors.

Wherefore this Section is concluded with a sharp reprehensio^ of my L.
Treasurers proceedings, words, and dealings against these two men in special,
who yet are avouched never to have done him hurt, nor to any other protestant
that has passed in Catholic countries, where their credites might have
wrought them prejudice, if they would. And in particular he Cecils grandchild
in Rome.
alleges how that both these men being in Rome together the year 1586. they
had understanding of my L. Treasurers grandchild, and heir of his house, being
secretly there, and were so far of from doing him hurt (which they might
have done) as they used all courtesy, and friendship toward him, both in
words, and deeds, and procured from the Pope his safe return, which the
grandfather that well knows thereof, and was privy to the journey, in all law
of nobility, and civility were bound to requite (says this awnswerer) if any
seed of the one, or the other virtue were in his breast.

The fifte, and last Section.
THE fifte, and last Section comprehends the whole conclusion of the
premises with order, and punishment for the offenders; and for that ((...)
this defender affirms) the said premises have bin proved to be most false,
forged, and maliciously aggrauated by the accuser, it is no marvel though the
conclusion be correspondent to the same; that is to say, most unjust, and
injurious, seeing it is inferred, and enforced upon these words in the
proclamation it self, to wit, wherefore considering that these intentions of
the King of Spain are to us made very manifest, which intentions
notvvitsta^ding this awnswerer takes to be so manifesto by this day unto all
the whole world, that there were never any such, as he thinks that Master
Cecil himself for very shame can not deny it, and consequently must needs
confess in his heart, that all this blouddy conclusion of murderinge
Catholics was over hastily awarded, either upon vain fear, or unchristian
malice, and yet does the ^nswerer examine the particular remedies, which (...)
prescribed in the proclamation against these supposed dangers of the realm,
and devised intentions of the King of Spain.

And the first remedy is, that the Godly Ministers of The Ministers (...)
doctrine.
the Church do by their diligente teaching, and example of life, retain the
people steadfast in the protession of the Ghospel, here the avvnsvverer handles
diverse points, first the ^^^ale credit, and authority (as he says) of the
Inglish Ministers doctrine, and teaching, which partly for lack of study, and
learning (those few apostatas being dead that at the beginning made some
flouris he with their skill gotten in the Catholic schools) and partly by
their division, wrangling, and dislension among themselves, the one
discovering the others wants, and principally by the vvritings, and replies of
Catholics in refutation of their childish novelties, the credit (I say) and
estimation of the Inglish ministry, for matter of learning is come to be so
small, among such as have judgment, as they are very contemptible, especially
since they have refused all disputation, writing of books, and other
reasonable trial offered of the other part, and since they have brought their
manner of preaching to only railing, and to blouddy exaggerating of matters of
treasons out of their pulpits, where matters of conscience, good life, and of
sweet Christian charity should be handled: and therefore he concludes that
this first part of remedy has no force in the world, with the wiser sort,
to retain them in the profession of their new Gospel; but rather to cause
men of discretion to run from it, and so would infinite multitudes do in
England, were it not for the only Magistrates authority, which binds the^
against their wills to be at their Ministers Churches, and conuenticles, and to
hear their wild and miserable bellowing from their pulpits.

And much less (says he) can their example of life retain the people
steadfast in their Gospel, seeing they themselves are so variable, and
changeable in the same, and in so few years are fallen to such mortal wars
among themselves about which, and what is their Gospel: seeing also that the
lives and manners of the ministers of England are so scandalous, as no kind of
people within the land have so evil opinion among all sorts of men for
wickedness and loose behavior, as have the ministers, and this may be verified
(snith this man) not only in the baser, and inferior sort of them, (which
ordinarily are the scumme, and refuce of the Realm,) but also in most of the
very chief, to wit, of the Bishops, Prelates and other governors of the
clergy, if the late books of the puritanes tell true, and if the matters
printed of lechery against Sands late Archbishop of Yorcke, and of theft,
and other like crimes against Elmer that presently is Bishop of London, and of
al beastlynes against the present Bishop of S. Dauies, and others his
compaignons lately presented to the press by Norton bear any creditt, then
much less effectual (says he) is this part of remedy then the former.

To this first remedy pertains also that which follows in the same
proclamation, that every man must pray earnestly to almighty God to assiste
this so naturel, honorable, and profitable a sernice, being only for defense
of their natural country, their wives, families, children, (...) goods,
liberties, and their posterities, against ra^^^ing strangers, wilful
destroyers of their natille country, and monstrous traitors. All which this
awnswerer calls M. Cecils ridiculous and rauing Rhetorique; and warring in
the air without an enemy, for that this defenda^t having proved before (as he
supposes) most evidently that there is no sign at all of any such attempt
or invasion toward by the King, nor of any such intention or least cogitatio^
of treason or hostility in the priests, and Jesuits that come into Ingland out
of the Seminarles; all this crying out of Feigned pretenses of M. Cecis.
defense of natural country against strangers and traitors, is but an
artificial flourish of him that would seem to be a friend, and careful
defender, who in deed has bin, and is, the only tyrante, and destroyer of the
same; and has brought it already to that point, that to treat only now of
restoring the old, auncie^te, Catholic faith to the same, wherein his, and
our forefathers from the beginning of Christianity have lived and died so
Godly and worthily, must be accounted to put in hazard our wives families,
children, lands, goods, liberties, and posterities, as though our
predecessors in the Catholic faith did not possess these things far more
abounda^tly then we do now, since the bringing in of new religions, or as
though our natural country was not as honorably defended, and mayntayned then,
when grave, and noble Catholic men had the menage thereof, as since M. Cecil
gat up to the stearne, or as though the intention of these feigned troubles now
were meant to the good of the wealepublique, and not to the mayntena^ce of a
few only in their ambition, or as though finally the fruit of this victory now
intended over good subjects at home, should not be, that M. Cecil without
contradiction may rule all as he list, may put in, and keep out of the
Council whom he pleases, hold up the puritanes against herMaiestie for his
own peculier purpose, keep down the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest
of the Clergy as himself seems best, make his eldest son deputy of
Ireland yfhe can, and his second crooked cubbe to be also of the Council, his
gra^dchild to aspire by Arbellas title to the chiefest garla^d, and his neeces
to match with great men of the land for the fortifying of this and other his
plotts; and all this must be contrived under show, and pretense of most
honorable, and natural defending of the Realm, yea of wives, families,
children, lands, goods, liberties, and posterities, and to the end that no man
may look into these doings at home (especially het Majesty whom most it
concerns) all men's ears are to be filled, and held attent with clamours and
outries of invasions, and dangers from abrod, by ravening strangers, wilful
destroyers of their native country, and monstrous traitors; and for more
hypocrisy, and deceptfull show of some good meaning in this point, all men
are exhorted by M. Cecil to have recourse to God by prayers, whereas it is well
known, by testimony of such as live with him, and others, and see their lives,
and have served them in their chambers, that neither he, nor Leicester, nor
some others that have bin heads of threatening these buggs do ever lightly use
that exercise of prayer, but live as mere Atheists, and laughing at other men's
simplicity in that behalf; and thus much in effect is said to this first
remedy.

But besides this he adds somewhat also about the The vain vaunting of
Gospel.
word Ghospel, which M. Cecil in his proclamations so often iterateth, and yet
(says this awnswerer) no man can easily guess what he means thereby,
considering his own Religion in Queen Mary and King Edwardes days, and his
earnest being against the puritans under this Qneene until of late; and now
his being for them, and yet his complying with her Majesty on the other side,
so that by his ghospel he can not seem to mean any other thing but his own
fancy, and designements for the time present to serve his turn.

And by this occasion this awnswerer declares, how the old fathers and
doctors did not use this name of Gospel commonly, but only for the sacred
writings of the four Evangelists; to whom the privilege of this high word
was peculiarly attributed, for that nothing in the said writing could be false
or erroneous, and that the Religions of Christians founded thereon (especially
against heretics) was usually called the Catholic faith, and doctrine,
until these our days, when every man that devised new opinions or ways,
would needs call it the very gospel it self; so began Luther, and after him
followed Oecolampadius and Zwinglius, though different from him, and after them
both, Ihon Calvin; and about the same time the Anabaptists, Trinitaries, and
new Arrians in Transiluania, and since that in Ingland both protestants,
puritanes, and family of love; of which no one will admit worse name to his
sect, then the sacred name of the holy Ghospel it self; which being but one,
and a simple truth, and these men different and repugnant to them selves can
not possibly be posiessed by them all, though all pretend it; and therefore,
says this awnswerer, as in a city, where one only precious stone is known
to be, if a man should find the streets full of diverse cryers that swear and
protest every one of them to have this jewel to himself alone, it were able
to make a wise man, think rather that none of them had it, then that all
could have it; even so (says he) in this case of pretending the Gospel.

Moreover he shows that of all these sects which at this day profess the
name of Gospel abroad in the world, no one either within or without the
realm, will confess that the Religion generally held in Ingland at this day,
is the pure Gospel, exept perhaps some at home that dare not say the
contrary, or esteem little of any Religion, for abroad he shows first out
of Luther himself, how he condemned to hell the heresy of Zwinglius and Calvin
now held in England, which VVestphalus, Illiricus, and all other Lutherans have
followed since, as appears by their brokes yet in printe, and the decrees are
extant of the Earls of Mansfild in the year 1559. and of the Lutheran cities
of Wittenberg, Hamberg and others the year 1560. and of all the rest of
Saxony the year 1562. which condemned the Religion of Calvin now held in
Ingland for damnable heresy. The like did the Zwinglians as appears by the
doings, and writings of Andreas, Zebedaeus, and loannes Angelus Zwinglian
Ministers against Calvin himself, being yet alive, when they accused him to the
Magistrates of Berna in Zuicerla^d for an Archiheretique: and by the public
decree of the same city and Magistrate yet exta^t, published in the year
1555. Is commanded that Caluius institutions, and such other books of his as
in the assertions impugned by these Ministers were found, should be burned and
prohibited as heretical for ever.

At home also the determination of King Henry the eighte, and his parliament for
his six Articles against this Religion, and the difference of the communion
book in King Edwardes time from this that now is; and the exclamation of
Calvin and Beza against the supremacy of a woman, or lay Prince (whereof
depends the heart of Inglishe Religion) and lastly the multitude of erors,
heresies, and abominatio^s gathered out of late by the puritans (now defended
by M. Cecil) in their late books against the protestants, whom M. Cecil also
must needs admit; all these things (says this awnswerer) do well show what
ground or certainty there is in M. Cecils Gospel, and how little it ought
to move a discreet man his often repeating of the same.

This therefore passed over, he comes to handle the second remedy appointed
in the proclamation, which is of the forces, and preparations of her Majesty
hy sea and land to withstand this imaginary invasion, whereunto M. cecil
exhortethal good subjects to give assistance with their hands, purses, and
aduises: of which three Forces of Ingland.
things this awnswerer says, that he nothing doubts, but that M. Cecil will
easily admit the former two, to wit, that men do assiste with their hands,
and purses; for that in the first which is to fight, or put hands to work
M. Cecil has no skill, nor will to entermeddle himself, but only to set men on,
whiles he, and his do look upon them; In the second of their purses, seeing he
is Treasurer, it serves for his purpose to pull them on as many ways as he
can devise, and perhaps it was the greatest motive of all this tragedy, to
fill his coffers by this devise: but for the third which is to assiste with
their aduises, it is spoken only for courtesies sake; for in matters of most
weighte in gouerneme^te, and state, M. Cecil admits few but himself, and his
own peculier instruments; and in this I report me, says this awnswerer, to
the rest of her Majesty's privy Council, how truly I speak in this behalf.

After this, says this awnswerer, that notwithstanding M. Cecils great bragg
of forces, (whereof the poor people of the Realm do bear the burden,) yet if
all things be indifferently, and wisely considered, it may be said of M.
Cecil, as it was of Moab by the Prophet. We have (...). 16.
beard of the pride, and arrogance of Moab; his pride, land his arrogancy, and
his wrath is greater then his strength. which this man applies to M. Cecils
arrogancy, and exceeding foolish, and furious wrath in breaking so openly and
arrogantly with all the old Allies of the crown of Ingland, in provoking so
many and so potent Princes abroad to revenge their injuries, in attempting so
great and dangerous changes, and innouations, and exasperatio^s at home, as
must needs at lengh bring all the whole house about his own ears, and other
men's to, and can not possibly endure; by all which, and many other things that
he alleges, this defendant will needs have me^beleue, that my L. Treasurer is
unadvised and not only wants conscience, and Religion, but also wisdom, and
circumspection in the greatest of his doings, and that in very truth laying
Gods cause aside (whereof his care is least) he is also for civil government
a very insufficient man.

Thirdly, and lastly, he comes to the form of inquisition The form of
Inquisition
appointed in the proclamation for the finding out of the Seminary priests,
and punishment as well of them as of all such as shall receive, harbor, or
comfort them, about which point after this awnswerer has showed that this
form of search and punishment is more rigorous, and cruel (considering all
circumstances) then ever was any search in former times of any old
persecutours or tyrants, he shows himself to wonder more at the impudency,
and folly of M. Cecil in setting down this said form of Inquisitio^, then
at any thing touched in this awnswere before.

And for his impudency he alleges these words of the proclamation, wherein
it is avouched that this form of examination, and vexing of men for the
Catholic faith in England, is in no wise contrary, but agreeable to the most
ancient laws, and good vsages of our Realm, which this man refuteth,
beginning from the first Christian King of the Britans named Lucius, that
took his faith from Rome, unto the last called Cadwalladar, that made himself
a monk, and died in Rome; and after that, from Ethelbert the first Inglishe
King Christined by S. Augustine a monk, sent from Rome, until the last
King Edward the co^fessor, held for a saint in the same Religion: and after
him from William Conqueror first King of the Normans, unto King Henry the
eighte father of her Majesty; all which Kings, and Queens this awnswerer
shows to have bin contrary in Religion to this of M. Cecils, and
consequently to have made all their laws, and ordinances in favor of
Catholic Religion, and against that which is now held in Ingland; and so
their forms, of search, and Inquisitio^ must needs be against this, and not
against that; and therefore that it is extreme impudency in M. Cecil to avouch
so openly in proclamation, that this tyrannical form of his invention against
the Catholics, is in no wise contrary, but agreeable to the most ancient
laws of Inglande.

Secondly for M. Cecils folly, and lack both of wit, and M. Cecils folly.
consideration in pressing a free people with such irking, and bloody laws,
which drive to desperatio^, he alleges the authority of all grave men that
ever wrote of gouernemente of common wealths, who affirm that such proceeding
is lack of wisdom, for that violent courses endure not long, and fear is no
good conseruer of perpetuity, and overmuch rubbing brings out blood, and
patience abused turns into fury. He notes also a want of ludgement in
Master Cecil the scribe to put down in her Majesty's name, after recital of
so great rigor, that she is resolutely determined to suffer no favor to be
used for any respect of any persons qualities, or degrees, which may chance to
stir up some Matathias, and his children, and friends one day to do as he hid
in his zeal for Gods cause, being enforced thereunto by the indiscreet
oppression of Antiochus the tyrant, to his own destruction; and seeing that it
is evident that these hard, and rigorous words, could not proceed of her
Majesty's own inclination; but were thruste in by Cecil in despite, and
disgrace of nohility, and principal peers, of whom he was afeard least the
Queen might have some respect in these cases of Religion, this awnswerer
exhorts him to look unto it, and to think betymes Council and exbortation.
upon the end of pierse os Gauerston, and the Spencers, and others that have
abused their Princes favors in England heretofore, to the debasing of true
nobility, and pilling of the people; he wills him also to think of the
ends of wicked leroboa^, and Achab with the death of seventy children of his
in own day; notwithstanding they were as well established and allied for
matters of the world, as M. Cecils of spring can be. Finally he beseeches also
her Majesty to look about her betyme, and not to suffer her self to be carried
away, or to be made a pray to one man's ambition only, who will not be able to
remedy the calamities, that now he sows, but will leave them all on his
Princes back, when he can wade no further, as the pitiful examples of King
Ihon, King Edward the second, Richard the second, Henry the sixth, and others
driven into miseries by such evil Councillors do well declare, nor is it safe
for any Prince to lean to much to one man's council, especially one that
seeks so evidently his own intereste as in M. Cecil does: moderate courses
do endure, but this is desperate, neither want there means to reduce things
yet to some composition, or moderation at least, if her Majesty would follow
her own Princely disposition, and leave the bloody humor of this old
ambitions serpent. Her Majesty's age requires more love and peace of her
subjects now, and to attend rather to security, then to enter into new odious
conflicts; the fly has her spleen, says the Philosopher and much more men of
courage and free education, and so much blood spent by violence as lately has
bin in Ingland can not but threaten much blood again in the end. All this and
much more to purpose says this awnswerer, and in the end concludes all with
certain effectual co^solatio^s unto Catholics out of Eusebius, Gregory
Nazianzene, and Victor Vticensis, who recompte the exceeding comforts, which
God gave unto Catholics that had suffered for him after their persecutours
were destroyed and confounded.

He writes also certain annotations upon the instructions annexed to the
proclamation for the commissioners how to execute their form of inquisitions
and all he makes very odious and cruel, which I can not set down here for
lack of time, but I hope to send you the book it self very shortly.


