THE Deposition of Don Diego Piementellj, chief Master of one Regiment of the
Camp of the King of Spain, as he deposed before, and in the presence of the
chiefest Lords of the Counsel of the Haghe in Holland.

Translated out of Dutch into English, by F. M.



Printed first at Delfe, and now reprinted at London by John Wolf, Anno.
Dom. 1588.

The examination and deposition of Don Diego Piementellj, chief master of the
Regiment or Tertio of Sicile belonging unto the Spanish fleet.
()

DON Diego de Piementel, borne in Valle d'Oliua, says: that he is the Marquis
of Taneras Brother: and Cosine unto the Earl of Benauents, of his Mothers
side, and Nephewe unto the Earl of Calna, which at this present is Vice Roy of
Sicile. That his Brother the Marquis, is married with the Lady Iohanna of
Toledo, Sister unto Don Pedro de Toledo, Marquis of Villafranca, and Duke of
Ferdinandina. That his Father was of the Chamber of Don Charles, Prince of
Spain.

Says that he is a Knight of the order of Saint James, and that it is about a
year ago, that the King did give unto him the Crusado, whereby he hoped that
the King should give him the benefit of a Commanderie of four thousand
Ducats a year.

Says, that he has been Commissioner general of the Cauallerie of Sicile,
and Captain of threescore Lances, and that the benefits and profit which he
reapeth thereof, amounts unto two hundredth Ducats a month.

Says, that he was Governor of the said Regiment, about the time of two
years, and that he has had in this Fleet, fifteen companies of that
Regiment, and seauenteene of another. And that the said Regiment, was of three
thousand and four hundred men. And that in his Ship there were three
companies, to wit, his own, the company of the Captain Martine Daualos, and
the company of the Captain Marquis, amounting together unto two hundred and
threescore men.

Says, that in his Ship were threescore Mariners, and fourteen Gunners.

That the Pilot was a Portingall, and a man of no skill.

That there were in his Ship three English Gentlemen, the one named William
Brown, the other Nicholas Raphaell, but the name of the third he knows not.

That the foresaid Brown was married in Spain.

That there were in his Ship, yet two other Spanish Gentlemen, the one called
Don Jews Vanogas, the other Don Rodrigo Veniero, and both were of the order
of Saint James, and that the one had five thousand, and the other one thousand
and five hundred Ducats yeerelie incomming.

Says, he had sent them to the Duke of Medina Sidonia for help, but that they
were not yet come again.

That Don John de Velasco, Son to the Earl of Ciernella, was come with him
for his own pleasure.

That Don John, the bastard Son of the Admiral of Aragone, has twenty
crowns a month of the King.

And that Don Johan de Toledo, Aluaro Garcia, Governor of Toledos son, had
likewise so much.

That the Captain Alonso de Vergas, is taken prisoner with him, and likewise
Don Diego de Cordua, aduenturer. And so much had likewise Don Lopes de Peers,
and N. Cannirio.

Says, he had a hundred and thirty crowns a month, and that it was about
fifteen months that he departed out of Sicile.

That the Earl of Miranda his Nephew, is Vice Roy of Naples.

That the Earl of Fuentes, Captain general of Portugal called Don Pedro
Henriques, is his Uncle.

That Don Pedro de Toledo, Marquis of Villafranca, General of the Galleys of
Naples, is his Nephew.

That the Duke of Medina del rioseco, Admiral of Caillie, is his Uncle. So he
is kindered with the principal Lords of Spain.

Says, that it is about two years past, that this Fleet did begin, but that
it never could be known whereupon they would go, but that it was thought that
it might be for England.

That they did lie the whole Month of May, in the River of Lisborne.

That the Fleet was of the number of 145. Ships, of the which 110. were very
great and prepared for war, and that the other were somewhat lesser, serving
for all kind of men, and provision, and that among the said Ships, there were
4. Galiasses, and yt in each of them were 300. Soldiers, and upon the
principal of them 400.

That there were eleven Galions of Portingall.

That he himself came in one of these Galions, the which was not the greatest
but of the strongest.

That there were 19. Galions of Andalosie, of the which was Captain general
Don Diego flores de Valdes, and that these Galions were of the guard of the
fleet of India.

That there was yet a great Galion, belonging to the Duke of Florence, whereupon
were 600. Portingalles.

That there were 20. Ships of Leuant, to wit, Venetians, Aragonians, and
Catalonians, where over was General Don Pedro de Valdes, with one other, which
he knows not.

That the Squadron of the General Michaell de Oquendo a Biscaine, was of 12.
Ships.

That the Admiral John Martins de Ricaldo, a Biscaine likewise, had under him,
ten or eleven Ships.

That there were about twenty Hulkes, whereupon Nicholas de Medina did
command.

Says, that there were 4. Galleys, each of them having twenty four seats,
the which were lost in a tempest before they came on the Coasts of England.

That the Duke of Medina Sidonia, was Captain General of the whole Fleet,
and Johan Martines de Recalde Admiral thereof.

(...) out the loss of any of their Ships, and that so they departed again,
and did nothing else.

Says, that the English Army came ye third day again, and shot upon theirs,
and theirs upon the English, and that with a great fury, and that the two
Armies were so near one another, that they thought there should have been a
battle. That after they had shot a certain time very furiously the one
against the other, that ye two Admirals did join so near together, that they
shot the one to the other. So that both the Armies drew near, every one to
his Admiral to help them, and so joined together in such a sort, that it
seemed to be a great scarmasing, continuing a large hour, and so departed the
said Admiralles the one from the other, the Armies departed likewise, every
one on the side of their Admiral.

Says, that that same day, notwithstanding that great fury, they lost none of
their Ships, but that they did set on fire one of the English ships, but that
it was by and by quenched. That the same night they cast their Anckers before
Calice, and that he knew not whether it was on a Tuesday or on a wednesday,
and that yt same night about two hours after they had cast their Anckers, they
did see eight English ships full of fire and burning, coming and driving
toward their fleet, the which as it seemed were tied together with chains,
for they did drive very close and equally together. Wheruppon their General
and the whole fleet chopping and cutting of their Cables and Anckers, drew
toward the depth of the Sea.

Says, that they came the next morning again, and did ancker before Calice,
and that they of Calice did come to visit their General the Duke of Medina,
and brought to sell every thing for money, as bread, flesh, pasties, fruits,
and other necessary things, every one for his money to be refreshed therewith.

Says, that the English Army, was that day somewhat more separated from them
then she was wont to be, but yet she was always in their sight, and that
there were more Ships in it then the ordinary, for they told at one time 23.
ships more, of the which, there were three very great, and the other were but
mean Ships, but he cannot tell whether they remained there that night or not.

Says, that the next day, the English fleet came again to meet with them, and
yt they begun very early to shoot one against another on every side, ye which
continued more then four or five hours, and that he himself with his ship,
was always one of the next to the English Fleet, whereby the English were so
charged, that they at last did send two of their Admirals, and two of their
principal ships, so near unto him, that he might have reached with a Pick
from his ship unto theirs, and that they shot very sore the one to the other
(so with Muskets, as with small shots) the space of an hour and more, so that
he being departed from the^, descended down into his ship, to visit it, and to
view the same if she was in any danger, whereupon, he found the danger so
great, because there was come in so much water already, that the Ship begun to
sincke.

Says, that he then sent his Sergiant Mayor, toward the ship of the General,
to advertise him, yt his ship was in danger of sincking, desiring him to
provide thereupon, and to send some speedy remedy. And that he incontinently
after the said Sergiant was gone, (perceiving that the water increased very
much in his ship) did send two Spanish Gentlemen again, to ye said General,
to let him understand yet more earnestly their great need and danger wherein
they were of perishing, and to be drowned altogether, if remedy did not come.

That the said Sergiant Mayor, did return again unto him, before the other two
might be unto the Generalles Ship, and brought with him, a Boat, to save his
own person there withal if he would.

That besides that, the Duke, did send an other Creuell or boat unto him, to
know further his desire and need, Whereupon he answered, that he would
save all his men, and that therefore his Excelencie should send and provide
wherewithal, or else he would perish and be cast away with them all, saying it
was his duty and right, that he should be the last that should go and depart
out of his Ship.

Says moreover, that then the General did set out a sign or token, whereby
he let them understand, that they should come so near on boorde as they could.

That they came so near, that they could speak the one unto the other, but
yet that they did remain that whole day in the self same state.

That toward the evening, he seeing his ship did begin to sinck, and to ware
so heavy, that with her full satle she was not able to follow ye General, he
discharged two pieces, thereby to certify his great peril, but he had no
answer thereupon, neither did his Sergiant Mayor, and the other two Gentlemen
before named, return unto him again, whereby he was that whole night very
desolate.

Says, that he thereupon took counsel with his men, to know what their best
remedy should be for to save themselves. Whereupon they concluded altogether
to go backwarde, and to try if they could get themselves into the Haven of `
Dunkerke, and so to be helped by the Duke of Parma, and to come by him.

That thereupon they went to work, but that his Mariners and Pilot, could not
tell where to direct themselves, because they had never been in those quarters.

Says, that the next day they saw land, and they thought it was Flushing,
because there came many Fisher boats out on every side, that they called unto
them, and desired them to come on boorde, but that they would not, but fled
away from them, whereby he perceived that the same land and Sea, was under
the enemy. That he then was but at five fadames water, and that his ship went
four fadames and a half deep.

Says, that after this, they met with another boat, the which did come
somewhat nearer, of ye which he required to be brought into any Haven
appertaining unto the King, and that thereupon he departed from him, saying,
that the Haven of Dunkerke was right over against Flushing.

That thereupon, they went once again from land into the Sea, and that they
knew not where they were.

Says, that the same day toward the evening, they found another boat, the
which did aboorde, and promised them, that if they would reward him, he
would bring them into Nieuport, the which was not far from thence, and did
appertain unto the King, and that they should get therein a great deal
better then into Dunkerke.

That the said Fisher went with his boat before their ship, conducting the
same, making a fair demonstration, as though he would have brought them in a
good Haven.

That he spoke many times with him, showing him a chain of two hundred
Ducats, promising unto him that same, and any thing else what he should desire.

That the Fisher said unto him, that he would deliver him into the Haven, or
else he would loose his head.

That he required the Fisherman to come into his ship, but that he refused it,
that he thereupon did fall in suspicion of him, and took him to be an enemy,
although he did conduct him well.

Says, that toward the evening, his ship remained still, and could go no
further, and that he was upon seven fadames, and did cast his Ancker, and
that the Fisher came to speak with him, saying that he would come the next
morning again to help them, but that he would fish that whole night. That he
did ancker within their sight, and remained there about three hours, and
afterward he went his ways.

That they did look for him the next morning, but that he did not come.

Says, that they pulled up their Ancker and hoysed up their sails for to go
their ways, and that a little after they saw three ships, and by and by two
more, sailing toward them straightly, and that the one did set up a white flag,
whereupon he caused another to be set out of his ship, thinking they were
friends, and that they came unto him in a Boat, willing him to give himself
over unto them.

Says, that he answered thereupon, yt they should depart, or else that his
Musketters would shoot at them, but yt he would not suffer it, because they
were come under his flag.

That thereupon the five ships did come near, and shot all upon him, whereby
they did greatly hurt his ship, and his men, and killed above forty of them.

That he had lost but fifteen men, for all the shottes of the English Fleet.

Says, that he gave himself over for prisoner, unto the Admiral Ionker Peter
vander does, upon his word, and that thereupon he went into his ship, with all
his men without Arms, and yt so they were brought where they be now.

That during all that time, there had been 50. of his men continually at the
pomp, drawing out the water day and night. Says, that at his departing from
the Groyne, he had thirty and eight great brass pieces in his ship, of the
which he has cast seven or eight into the Sea.

That he had yet a great deal of Gunpowder, but that it was spoiled with ye
water, a great deal of Rice, Pease, salted Porke, Wine, Vinegre, Oil, and
fresh water, whereof the master Steward, and the Captain of his ship, could
better tell the quantity then he himself.

Says, that he had no money belonging to the King, but that he had six great
chests full of apparel, and linen cloth, serving for his person, and for a
Table of eight persons, that he knew not in which ships the Kings money might
be.

Says, that the King did daily pay for every portion, or each man, two
Reales, and that they had paid the Soldiers with less then half a Real, so
that the King looses by every man, a Real and more every day.

That before he was separated from the fleet, they he lost no ships yet, but
only ye ship of Don Pedro de Valde the which was lost because it could not
follow the others.

That the Admiral of Oquendo, was set on fire, and that they did pierce him
through, for to sincke him, at the entering of the Channel of England.

Says, that the principal of the Galiasses, where over Don Pedro de Moncada
was Governor, did remain before Calice, upon the sand. That he does not
know whether the Dukes of Parma and of Medina, have had any advertisement, the
one from the other or not.

That the deliberation of their Army was, to join with the Duke of Parma, and
then to resolve and conclude with him, on what side they might best aboorde,
and set their men on land in England.

That they knew very well, that there were some ships of war before Dunkerke,
for to hinder and to stop the Duke of Parma from coming forth,

That their meaning was, to sail no further then Calice, because they knew
very well, that they could not into Dunkerke, for to help the Duke of Parma
forth, for otherwise they should not have departed thence as they did.

Says, that he knew not, if the King had commanded, to land any men in
England, before they should have communicated, and concluded with the said Duke
of Parma. But that he well thought that the Kings pleasure was not, that they
should land but ten thousand Spanyardes, without any Artillery and great
pieces, whereby their throats might be cut incontinent.

Says, that on land, no man else should have commanded as General, besides
the Duke of Parma.

Says, that they had understanding, that the Duke of Parma had about 38000.
men together, among the which there were 4000. Spaniardes, and 2000. horsemen,
so that if these two Armies might have joined together, that it should have
been the greatest number of natural Spaniards that ever came out of Spain
with any King, or without: and where more men of great quality were.

Says, that they could not come to fight with the English fleet, because
their ships were light and easy to turn, and could turn about four or five
times, before theyrs once, but if that they might have come together, that they
were sure of the victory, because their ships are very high, and the English
very low, and that one Spanyshe ship, was able to spoil four or five English
ships, and that their shyps are one English Elle thick of Timber, so that no
great bollet could go through, except it had been shot off very near.

That of all the iron bollets that were shot upon his ship* there were not
twenty, that were gone through.

That the upper part of his ship, was strong enough against a Muskets shot.

Says that they were determined to iuuade the whole Kingdom of England, to
keep the Queens grace in. prison, and to serve her, as a Queen ought to be
served, until their King should have appointed any other way with her, and
that this was but as he did think.

Says, that they were assured (having 50000. men on land) to bring that
Kingdom very easily under their subjection, because that the English nation is
used to live very delicatly, having likewise no experience of war, and that
therefore they should easily have brought them under their feet, with their
continual travels and troubles, the which they had not been able to endure, as
their Spanish nation would have done, the which is used to suffer hunger,
thirst, hardly to lie, not to sleep, and yet nevertheless, always ready to
their work. That they had understanding, that there were many Catholics in
England, but that they made no account of them, because they knew very well,
that the Queen had so provided therein, that they were not able to stir,
neither to come to their help, and that likewise the most part of the^ would
have fought for their native Country.

Being asked, what they had determined to do, if so be that ye Duke of Parma
could not come to their help, says: that they never thought, (that ye said
Duke, having a hundred ships, so great a number of boats and Lighters, and an
Army of about forty thousand men) should not always have come out at his own
pleasure, and that he thought it very strange. that the said Duke having such a
power, was not come forth. Or at least, to have set forth so many of his boats
and Musketters, that they might have kept his enemies so busy, that in the
mean time his shyps of war might have come forth.

Being asked, if they had no intelligence in any other place or Haven of the
Low Countries, or of their neighbor Towns. Says, that thereof was not once
spoken among them and that their intention and deliberation, was never
otherwise then to land in England.

Says* that these two Armies, so to water as to land, did stand the King
every day in thirty thousand ducats.

Being asked, if there might not be made a good peace between Spain and
England, he says no, or very hardly: except it were upon such condition, that
the King might so bridle the Queen of England, that she should stir no more
thereafter, and that so it were better (as he thought) to have a sure peace,
then that the King should continually keep such an Army for to keep free
the passage of the Indies, as he has prepared now, for to subdue and to
overcome the whole Kingdom of England.

Asking him, if their deliberation was not, that after that they had been the
Masters of England, that then they would have come to subdue these Countries
by force of Arms.

Says, that thereof was not any remembering or speaking.

Says, that the occasions which made the King to undertake these wars, were,
that it was not convenient unto unto the King to suffer and forbear, that one
Drake, with two or three rotten Ships, should come always, and at his
pleasure, to spoil the Havens of Spain, and to rob the best Towns thereof,
and so to hinder the negotiation of the Indies. And that he did think with
lesser charge to subdue and to invade England, then yeerelie to entertain such
an Army as this to defend himself of such invasions, and that if so be that
this Fleet does not speed at this time upon England, that the King does
intend to send the same there again against next Lent.

Being asked if he knew not what the Duke of Parma would do, now when he did
see, that this Army and his could not join together. Says, that he will
keep his men close together in good Garrisons, and that he will not be so bold
to separate them in any wise, neither to undertake with them any other
enterprise: saying he knows, that the King is resolved, to continue and to
pursue this war upon England.

FINIS.
Examined in the presence of my Lords.

The President Vander Mylen, President of the Provincial Counsel of Holland.
D. Barneuelt, Aduocat of Hollande. The Lord of Villiers. And of my Lord of
Famaes, General of the Artillery of the united Provinces.



