A GODLY EXPOSITION UPON CERTAIN CHAPters of Nehemiah, written by that
worthy Bishop and faithful Pastor of the Church of Durham Master JAMES
PILKINGTON.

AND NOW NEWLY PVBLISHED.

In the latter end, because the Author could not finish that treatise of
Oppression which he had begone, there is added that for a supply, which of
late was published by ROBERT SOME, D. in Divinity.

Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it: except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in vain.

Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: let them prosper that love
thee.

Psalm. 80. 14. 15. Return, we beseech thee, O God of hosts: look down from
heaven, and behold and visit this vine, and the vineyard, that thy right hand
has planted, and the young vine, which thou made strong for thy self.

Imprinted by THOMAS THOMAS printer to the University of Cambridge.

1585

A PREFACE OF M. JOHN FOX, To the Christian Reader.
AS it is greatly to be rejoiced, and the Lord highly to be praised for the
happy enterprise of the Godly work of Nehemiah, begone by the reucrent and
vigilant Pastor of Christ his Church of famous memory M. James Pilkinton,
Bishop of Duresme: So again it were to be wished, that if the lord had thought
it so good, his days might have continued to the full perfiting of the same,
which now is left imperfect, only containing fine Chapters by him expounded'.
For the setting out where of being requested hereunto, I thought to add these
few lines in recommending the same to the godly reader, trusting no less,
then that whosoever will take pains in reading thereof, the same shall find
his labor therein not altogether lost. And that for diverse causes. First for
the better explaining of the Chapters whereof he entreats. Secondly for the
opening of ancient hystories intermixed withal, much needful to be known.
Thirdly for the opportunity of the time well serving for the purpose present.
For as Nehemiah then by gods providence was set up for the reedifying of the
material Tomple of Jerusalem destroyed by the Babylontans, so in like sort
the spiritual Church of Christ, in this spiritual Babylonicall captivity,
being a long time in ruin and decay, stands in great need of Godly helpers,
and good workmen, as blessed be the Lord, some we have seen, and do see,
right zealouslie occupied to the shedding of their blood in repayring Christ
his temple. Yet notwithstanding the matter being of so great importance, and
the time so dangerous, it shall not be amiss in these our days to be taught
by the time before us. First, that the outward temple in Jerusalem destroyed
by the Babylonians, did lie wast for many years, it cannot be denied. Which
being granted, it must needs follow, that either the said material temple
does bear no representation of the spiritual Church of Christ (which cannot
be denied) or else that the same Church of Christ must necessarily suffer some
captivity, and Apostasy for a time by certain spiritual Babilonians
inlatter times: which being so, then must it likewise follow consequently, that
as that former temple of God in Jerusalem after long captivity at length was
restored again by the mighty hand of God, so the like is to be accomplished in
Christ his Church, after long wrack and decay, to be repaired again, as we
see now come to pass. For what oppression, what tyrany, what darkness has
overwhelmed the poor Church of Christ these many years by the Romish
Assyrians, who is so blind that sees not? wherefore much deceived be these our
Pope holiepretensed Catholics, who dreaming in their fantasies no other true
Church to be in earth but only their holy church of Rome, falsely so persuade
themselves, because the outward state of their Romish church, so gloriously,
and richly shines in the world, and therefore the true Church of Christ is at
no time to be blemished with ignorance and darkness, but continually
florisb without spot or wrincle in the eyes of men, never to suffer any wrack,
or decay, but perpetually to be preserved from all ruin or distress. By which
ruin if they mean the perpetual, or final desolation of the true Church of
Christ, true it is that the same shall never sinallie be for saken nor
overthrown, but for a time the same to suffer vioience and oppression by
enemies it cannot be denied. For Antichrist, by the secret permission of God,
must have his own course, and reign here in the church for a time, in which
time by the assured Testimony of S. Paul's Epistle there must come a defection
and Apostasy, whereby is signified no doubt a spiritual and as it were a
general departing from the right faith of the gospel, for a time and space,
till it shall please the Lord again to give his book to the mouth of his
Prophets, and to send down by his Angel his measuring reed to measure the
wasted temple of the Lord' for the reedifying again. as we read, (...): 10. 11.

Howsoever Antichrist in the meant space does flourish in this world, sitting in
the Temple of God, boasting himself as God, and drawing the faith of the
people from God to him-selse; Certainly with the true Church of Christ it
stands much otherwise, which must be brought down by Antichrist not to final
destruction, but for a time to be oppressed, till it shall please God again to
repair it, as we by experience have good proof to declare. Wherefore let no
man marvel at the decayed state of Christ his Church, which has been solong
time continued, nor thinks the worse of the Gospel non preached, as though it
were a new faith or a new Religion lately erected. If this gispell now preached
were not taught by Christ himself, by Paul, and other Apostles, let it (...)
for new. If the Popes doctrine be not agreeing to the same, then let every man
judge which is new, and which is old. Briefly, let us take example of the
ancient tabernacle or house of God, first set up by Moses, afterward more
magnifically (...) to the like proportion in timber, and stone by Solomon:
which house or tabernacle the Lord promised to stand for ever: yet
notwithstanding the same temple of God (exemplifying no dout the spiritual
Church of Christ here in earth) was utterly overthrown by the Babilonians for
a certain space, and afterward repaired again by Gods people with much
difficulty, and hardness of times: and after that the same again miserably
dispoyled, and destroyed by wicked Antiochus. In like manner the spiritual
Church of Christ, although it have the true promise of Christ to endure for
ever, as it does and ever shall do, yet lacks not her Babilonians, her
Anticchus, her ouerthrowers, and temporal oppressors: yet not so oppressed,
but at length, by laborers, and artificers of God, is to be repaired again,
albeit sent in great sharpnes of time, we see it now come to pass.

Which being so, let us therefore, comparing time with time, look well to the
matter every man what he has to do. Such as be builders may take example of
those good builders thereof, whom we read that with one hand they builded, and
with the other they held their weapon, that is the spiritual sword of Gods
word to keep of the enemy. Such workmen the Lord send into his vineyard to be
diligent laborers, not loyterers: nor braulers, but builders, laboring, and
working, not with one hand, but with both hands occupied. And likewise upon
these laborers the Lord send good overseers, such as this good Nehemiah, who
not regarding his own private charges, and expenses, bestowed all his care in
tendering and setting forward the erection of the Lords house, to encourage the
workmen, to provide for their necessities, to defena them from enemies, to
keep them in good order from strife and variance. For as every good building
there best goes forward, when the workmen in one consent join themselves
together: So contrariwise nothing more hinders the setting up of any work, as
when the workmen are divided among themselves. Albeit during the time of (...)
we sinde no great sturs among the people, or if there were any, it was seen
composed by the wise handling of that good governor, as in the fifth chapter
may appear. wherefore for the better example to le taken of these distressed
dales, I thought it not amiss in this so dangerous building up of Christ's
Church in the perilous latter times, this treatise of Nehemiah, compiled by
the right reverend and famous prelate M. James Pilkinton of blessed memory, to
be published and commended to Christian readers, whereby all good laborers, and
overseers of Christ his Church may receive some fruitful advertisement to
consider in these so great affairs of the Lord his business what is to be done
and looked unto.

THE BOOK OF NEHEMIAH.
Benign fac DOMINE in bonavoluntate tua Sion, vt aedificentur muri Jerusalem.
Non nobis, DOMINE, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Non moriar, sed viuam,
and narrabo opera DOMINI.
THE ARGUMENT Imperfect, and so much thereof as was found, is here put down.
ANd because both the books of EZRA and NEHEMIAH entreat only of such things,
as were done under the Kings of Persia, which few other parts of the Scripture
do, it is not amiss something to touch the manner of living, and behavior,
both of the Kings, people, and nature of the country, that thereby things may
better be understood, as STRABO in his book, LEOVICIVS in his Varia Historia,
and others have left them in writing. SVSIA was that part of the country,
which lay toward BABYLON, wherein was also the chief city SVSA. which was
like in building unto BABYLON. These were a quiet people, never rebellious, and
therefore Kings loved it the better, and CYRUS was the first that made his
chiefest abode there. Other houses the King had, which were strong, and
costly, and where there treasure was kept. At SVSIS they lay in winter, at
ECBATAVA in summer, at PERSEPOLIS in harvest, in the spring at BABYLON:
PAGASABIA, GABIS, and other houses were not neglected, although destroyed with
the kingdom shortly after by Alexander Magnus. The riches of the kings were
great: For when all was brought to ECBATAVA, men report, that there were 180.
Talents.

This country of SVSIA was so fruitful, that their barley and wheat would bring
forth an hundredth fold or. 200. as much as was sown. Their kings be of one
kindred: and whosoever obeieth not, he has his head and arm cut of, and cast
away. They marry many wives, and keep many harlots. The kings yearly give
rewards to them that have gotton most sons. The children come not in their
fathers sight, before they be. 4. years old. Their marriages are made in March.
From. 5. years old unto. 14. they learn to shoot, pick darts, ride, and
chiefly to speak truth. Their Schoolemasters be men most sober, applying all
things to the profit of their scholars. They call their schullers together
before day, by ringing of a bell, as though they should go to warte or to hunt.
They make one of the kings sons their ruler, or some great men over 50 in a
band: and command them to follow their Captain 30. or 40. furlongs when he
runs before them. They ask account of those things that they have learned,
exercising their voice, breath, and sides, to hear, cold, rain, and passing
of rivers. They teach them to keep their Armor and clothes dry, and to feed
and live hardly like husbandmen, eating wild fruits as acornes and crabbes.
Their daily meat after their exercise is very hard bread, Cardanum, salt,
and flesh roasted Their drink is water. They hunt on horsebake with picking
their darts, shooting their shaftes, or casting with their sling. In the
forenoone they are exercised with planting of trees, or digging up the roots,
or make harness, or apply themselves to working ofline, or making of nets.
The kings give rewards to those that get the best game at running and other
games, which they use every 5. year. They bear office and play the
soldiers on foot and horse, from 20. years old unto 50. They be armed with
a shield made like a diamond. Besides their quiver, they have their crooked
falchion and daggers: upon their head a steeple-cappe, upon their breast a
coat of plate. Their Princes have their breeches triple fold, and a coat
with wide sleeves lined with white, and side to the knee, and the outside
colored. Their apparel in some is purple, or else of diverse colors: in winter
of diverse colors. Their cappes like unto the Miters of their southsaiers,
their shoes high and dubble. The common sort wear a lined coat to the
mid-leg, and about their head a role of sindal. Every man uses his bow and
sling. The Persians fare daintilie, having many and diverse kinds of meat,
and their tables shine with their plate of gold and silver. They debate their
weighty matters at the wine: if they meet their fellows or acquaintance by
the way, they kiss them: if they be poorer, they make courtesy. Their
southsaiers they leave unburied to the birds. The greatest riches that the kings
had, were in buildings, and they coined no more money, then served the present
need. The people were temperate in their living, but their kings passed in
excess. The kings attire of his head was of myrrh and other sweet gommes.
They kept commonly 300. women which slept in the day, and sang and daunced
all the night. If the king would go to any of them, the floor was covered
with fine arris: He rode seldom, but in his chariot. If he suffered any man to
come to his speech he sat in a throne of gold, standing on four pillars,
with precious stones. At the head of his bed were 5000. Talents of gold, which
where called the kings pillowe: at his feet were 3000. Talents of silver,
which was called his footestoole: over his bed was a golden vine, withgolden
branches and grapes, drawn with precious stones.

Thus far the Argument was finished, and no more thereof found.
AN EXPOSITION UPON PART OF THE BOOK OF NEHEMIAH, BY MASTER James Pilkinton,
late Bishop of Durrham.
CHAP. 1.
The word of Nehemiah the son of Hachalia.
ALthough there be diverse opinions, whether Ezra or Nehemiah wrote this book,
yet for my part I rather believe, all reasons considered, that Nehemiah wrote
it, as Wolphius well proves it. But whether so-euer the one or the other
wrote it, if the authority of the writer may give any strength to the writing,
or man's worthiness add anything to the credit of Gods holy Scripture, it
skilleth not much: for they were both the true, learned, and faithful servants
of God. Yet surely this worthy man Nehemiah, which in English is to say, a
comfort sent from God, to comfort his people in those troublesome times,
should not be robbed of his well deserved thanks, but first God should be
chieslie praised, that raised up so worthy a man, whose pedigree is unknown,
and his fathers to, in so ill a time to do not only so great things both in
the commonwealth and Religion, in peace and war: and then should Nehemiah also
be worthelie next commended, that so faithfully obeyed the Lord his God, so
painfully traueiled for the wealth of his country, also attained such
learning, that he could, and was so diligent in study among all his great
affairs, that he would, to the great glory of God and comfort of all his
Church unto the worlds end, put these his own doings in writing. A worthy
example for all that love religion, be seruitours in the court, attend on the
Prince, bear office in the commonwealth, or captains in the wars, to
follow. For in all these things was Nehemiah famous: in religion earnest, in
great favor with his Prince, with all uprightness of life toward all, in
war skilful, curragious, and painful, and with his pen so learned, that he
could so clerkelie put it in writing. Gentelmen therefore and men of the world
are not borne to live in pastime and pleasure, as they list, and many doc, no
more then poor men: but first to serve the Lord, promote his word and religion
earnestly, minister justice severely, maintain peace quietly, defend the
commonwealth stoutly, relieve the oppressed mightily, follow learning and
study diligently, that so they maieincrease in virtue and honesty, as
Nehemiah did, and after all these great travails refresh themselves with
honest pastimes measurablie. Among the heathen Princes such a one was Julius
Caesar, in the wars cunning and happy: in government of the commonwealth
commendable, and in learning so excellent, that no man has written more
eloquently. Such like were Alexander Seuerus, and Marcus Aurelius, Emperors.
But I will not persuade much in Gods cause with profane examples. And to
return to our purpose, I would not have men think that the scripture takes
his authority and credit of the man that writes it, but the writer is to be
credited for the holy Ghosts sake, who inspired him with such heavenly
knowledge, and whose instrument he is for God to speak by. Scripture comes
not first from man, but from God, and therefore God is to be taken for the
author of it, and not man. The Gospel says: It is not you that speak, but the
Spirit of your father, that speaks in you. And. S. Petersaith, Prophecy Mat.
10. 20. 2. Pet. 1. 21.
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. Augustine, says well. The Scripture is a
letter sent from God the creator unto man his creature. Therefore when thou
read this book or other parts of the Scripture, do it as gladly and
reverently, yea and much more to, then thou would use and read the Princes,
or thy friends letters, seeing it is a letter sent to the from thy God for thy
salvation. God then is the chiefest author of this book, as he is of the rest
of the Scripture, and Nehemiah the pen or writer of all these mysteries.
David said of himself, my tongue is the pen of a writer that writes swiftly:
meaning Psalm. 45. 2.
the holy Ghost to be the writer, and his tongue the pen. So Nehemiah was the
author of this book, as David of the Psalms. And because they should know
which Nehemiah he was, he says he was the son of Hachalia. For there were
diverse others of that name, but not his sons.

V. 1. It came to pass in the month of November, and in the 20. year, that I
was in the castle of Susan.

2. And there came Chanani, one of my breethren, he and men of Judah: and I
asked them for the Jews which escaped, and remained of the captivity, and for
Jerusalem.

3. And they said to me, the remnante which remained of the captivity there in
the country, be in great misery and reproach: and the wall of Jerusalem is
broken down, and the gates of it are burned with fire.

4. And it came to pass when I heard these words, I sat down and wept, and
being sad certain days, I fasted, and prayed before the Lord of heaven.

THe Scriptures use not to reckon their months after the order of our
calenders, but by the exchange of the moon: for our callenders are not of that
auncientie, that the Scriptures be by many years. The first month in the
year with them began at the next change of the moon whenever it fell after
the 22. day of March: when the days and nights be both of one length. And
then was March called the first moon of the year, whereas we make January
our first moon. So this moon here which is called Casleu, was the 9. month
from it, and fell in the latter end of November, what day soever the moon
then changed. The 20. year, that he speaks of here, was of the reign of
King Artaxerxes, as appears in the beginning of the 2. Chapter, of whom ye
shall hear more there. Susan was the chief City of all the kingdom of Persia,
where the king had both his palace, and a strong castle also of the same name,
where his treasure was kept. this City (as Strabo writes) was long, and in
compass 15. miles about.

Who this Chanani was, it appears not, but beelike some honest man of good
credit, and more earnest in religion and love to his country then others,
because his name is put down in writing, and the others are not. And where
Nehemiah calls him brother, it is not necessary to think, that he was of
the same father and mothere that Nehemiah was, but either further of in kindred,
or else of the same country and religion. For this word brother, in the
Scripture signifies all those sorts of brotherhod, that be any ways kinsmen,
or else of any country and religion. S. Paul says, I wish to be Romans 9.
accursed from Christ for my breethren and kinsmen after the flesh, which be
the Israelites. Where he calls all the children of Israel his breethre^,
because they came all of one father Jacob long ago, and now were of one
country, and professed one God. What occasion these men had to come to the
court, it appears not: and therefore not necessary to be searched: but
belike some great suit for their country, because they took so long a iourny
in the winter, and so unseasonable a time of the year; which men commonly use
not to do for small causes. And by this we may learn a good lesson, that no
time is so troublesome, no journey so long, but good men will not refuse it, to
serve God and their country. And where Nehemiah, walking abroad about the
(...), begins to examine the^ of the estate of the Jews, how they did, and
of the City of Jerusalem, in what case it was, it declares the great love
that he had to his people, country, and religion. O worthy example for all
courtiers to follow, sometimes to walk abroad, to see what suitors there be,
and learn the state of the country from whence they came, and help to further
their good causes. The contrary is to commonly used: they lock themselves
up, and will not be spoken with, their doors must be opened with silver keys,
many means and friends must be made, and a long time of attendance, before ye
be heard, except some servant about them have some gentle remembrance to help
you to their speech. And this is more common in the meaner sort, then the
higher. yet I say not that all walkers abroad and talking with suitors be ever
good men. For Absalon walked before the court gate, took them by the hand, and
embraced them, asked what suits they had, pitied their causes, but for an ill
purpose, to bring the King his 2. (...). 15.
father in hatred with the people, saying, there was none about him that would
hear and help them, and to bring himself in favor with the people, saying,
if he were King, he would do them justice, hear their causes, and they should
not wait so long, but be quickly dispatched. God diliuer us from such
courtiers, for by this means he robbed the hearts of the people from their
natural and liege Prince, and by flattery wanne the people so to himself,
that they rebelled against their King, and set up Absalon. We need not at these
days to complain of all courtiers, that they be so hard to speak to, and
thatmanie times the master is not at leisure, until the servant be pleased with
something, though the master bid the contrary. For there be too many, that when
suitors do come, they will learn too diligently, what suit they have, out of
what country they come: and then if they will faithfully declare unto them,
what office is there void in the country, or what good farmeholde is to be
had there at the Princes hand, or rather at any Church, they promise they will
help to further his suit diligently: but when they have learned all that they
can, then they know him not, when they meet him again the next day, or else
give him fair words with strange looks and many delays. By these means
and such like they are so cunning in all corners of the realm, that they can
perfectly tell what the Prince or any man in the country has: and if it be
not presently void, they are content with a reuersion, though it be many
years to come: yea and often sue for the same thing, that the poor man came
for, saying, another would have had it, if he had not stayed it: and so under a
cloak of freindship make him paic more then he needed. We seek what should be
the cause of such needelesse dearthes as the realm is full of, and surely
though many be given, yet I think none greater then this. For when these
leases be granted, the landlord has but his old rent, and the tennante no
more but his old fermeholde: but the leasemonger, that is crept in betwixt the
landlord and the tennant, goes away with the sweet from them both. For first
he racks the rent, and sacks the tennante so, that he is not so able to sell
his things so reasonably, as else he might, nor serve the Prince nor his
landlord, as he should: nor the landlord paying so dear for all things, is
able to live as his Elders did before. This undermining micher lives better
then they both, and takes no pains at all for it, that they both should live
on, and the one relieve the other. Haman walked before the court gates to see
who would reverence him, as he passed by, and who would not: poor Mardocheus,
because Ester. 3.
he would not, was brought in great danger of his life, and all the Jews with
him: but God that overthrows such courtiers diliuer us from the like, and
raise us up some godlic Nehemiah to favor the commonwealth and religion, as
he did. The miscrable end of Absalon, Haman, and such as we have seen in our
days, makes wise men to take heed how they live and behave them selves in
the court: for none is so high, but by like offending of God, they may have
as great a fall. As this touches not the honest sort of courtiers, so the
good ones will not be offended, and those that be guilty, God grant them to
amend it.

3. And they said. After that Nehemiah had of good will toward his people and
country, so diligenlie inquired how they did, and in what case they were:
Chanani and the other Jews that came with him, declard in what miserable case
the people were, in hatred and despised of all people about them, and that
Jerusalem their city, where God was chiefly worshipped, lay waste, and burned,
and unbuilt. Thus God brings goodmen together one to comfort another, and
things are not ruled by chance: for both Nehemiah and these Jews lamented the
miserable state of their people and country, and by their talk God provided a
remedy. Nehemiah was in good state to live, and in great favor whith the King,
and needed not to trouble him self with the cares of his country, if God had
not otherwise moved his mind to pity, with talking with his country men.
This good then courtiers, lawiers, and great men may have by talking with poor
suitors, that if there be any spark of grace in them they will be moved with
the lamentable complainte of poor suitors. Surely thou that art in authority,
or have learning, ought to think, that the poor suter comes not to the
by chance: but the same God, that gave thee thy authorite and learning, has
sent this poor man to thee to be releiued by thee. Look therefore upon him,
hear him, as Solomon teaches, saying: the good man heaereth the cause of the
poor. Hide not thy self from him, consider his Prouer. 29.
complainte, pity and help him, and not so much for money, as for charities
sake, for so did good Nehemiah. What can be a greater grief to an honest heart,
then to have all things that he does or says, be they never so good, to be
taken in ill part, to be hated and ill spoken ofby all his neighbors, to be
slaundered and beelied, and to have displeasure where none is deserved. In this
case were the miserable Jews, then the beloved people of God, though now
justly cast of, for their wicked hate to our Christ, the Son of the living
God. Beside that, their City was burned, the gates stood open, that enemies
might rush in, murder, and spoil them when they list, except they should
keep a continual great watch, which was to trouble some and costly for them.

4. And it came to pass. What good comes by hearing poor men speak,
appears here plainly in them that fear God. For that pitiful state, which
he understood his brethren the Jews, and that famous City Jerusalem to be in,
by their report, did so move his heart and greiue him, that he satte down,
and wept certain days, was sad for them, fasted, and prayed unto the Lord of
heaven for them. Hearing and seeing be tow senses, which bring into the mind
of man, to consider all things that be painful or pleasant to others: for
except we see them, or hear them, we cannot learn or understand them, much
less pity them, or be glad of them. S. Paul says likewise in Gods cause.
Faith comes by hearing: For when thou hear the preacher declare the
glorious majesty Romans 10.
of God, his sharp punishing of sin, the wretched estate of man, that of him
self can do nothing but sin, and the everlasting pains appointed for all
hardharted sinners, it makes him to quake, to enter into himself, condemn
himself, ask for mercy, and from thenceforth to become a new man: so when
he hears Gods great mercy declared to man in Christ, it makes him to
believe, love, obeie, and follow so loving a father. This profit then comes
by hearing the poor man's complainte, that it moves them to pity, to tears,
to fasting, and praying the Lord to relieve the misery of thy oppressed
brother. Turn not therefore thy face from the poor, but hear them, and pity
them, as thou woldst be heard and pitied thy self. So in religion, if thou will learn to fear God aright, to know thy self, amend thy life, and what
blessing God has prepared for thee, run not from the Church, as many do, some
for one cause, some sor another, but none for good: but humble thy self in the
sight of thy God and his people, hear his word reverently, believe it
steadfastly, obey it diligently, pray earnestly, and God shall heap his
blessings on the plentifully. And that we may the better understand how this
miserable case of his breethren and country did touch his heart inwardly, he
shows it by his behavior outwardly: for the affections of the mind declare
themselves openly in the face and behavior of man, when they grow great in
the heart. As if we be sorry, our countenance is heavy, sad, and clowdie: if we
be merry, our face has a good culloure, and shows it self pleasantly: when
we be ashamed of ill doing, we blush: in fear we be pale, in anger high
culloured and swollen in the face, etc. So this sorrow for his breethren did so
pinch him at the heart, that he could not stand, but sat down, as a man's legs
in heaviness are so weak, that they cannot bear him: his heart was so burdened,
that he could not forbear, but brast out into tears: for certain days he
could not be merry, eat nor drink, but fasted, and in the end found no other
remedy, but turned himself unto the Lord, fell unto prayer, assuring
himself that God would hear him, and relieve them in his due time, when he
thought good. By this we may learn how coldelie they pray, that cannot bend
nor kneel, when they speak to the Lord or if they kneel, it is but on the
one knee, and that must have a soft quishion under it, and a softer under his
elboe. Weep he may not, for disfiguring his face: fasting is thought
hypocrisy and a shame: and when his panche is full, then as priests with their
drunken nowles said mattins and belked out, Eructauit cor meum verbum bonum,
with good devotion, as they thought, so he blusters out a few blustering words,
without due consideration of them, and then he thinks he has prayed well. O
wretched man, that forgettest thy God and thy self. Remember what thou art,
alumpe of carth, a sink of sin, worms meat: and that belly which thou
carest so much for, is but a stinking dunghill. Down proud pecocke, consider
when thou praicst, that thou speak to the Lord of heaven and earth, at whose
beck the deuiles do tremble his thunderbolts fly abroad to punish thy sin:
who in his anger drowned the whole world, except eight persons, burned Sodom
and Gomorah with fire and brimstone from heaven, to pull down thy Genesis 7.
and19.
proud heart, and teach thee to fear his majesty. Learn of the poor
Publicane, which was so ashamed of his wicked life, that he durst not look up
unto heaven, but condemning him self, cried O God be merciful unto me a
sinner: whereas the proud Pharisie stood stoutly, craking of his holiness, as
thou do. Learn of the Luc. 18.
woman of Chanaan to be earnest in prayer, go not away from Mat. 15.
the Lord, until thou feel thy conscience comforted, and mercy promised: for
no doubt the Lord will hear such a prayer. These out ward things, as kneeling,
weeping, and fasting, are good helps and preparations unto prayer: as Sara
continued three days in fasting and prayer, that the Lord would deliver her
from that shame: and so Tob. 3.
Tobie marketh a general rule ofit, saying, prayer is good, ioinedwith
fasting. Ecclesiasticus says. The prayer of him that humbles him self,
pearceth the clouds, and she will not be comforted, until she come nigh, nor
Eccles. 35.
go her way, till the highest God have respect vntoher. God grant us here to
learn to pity our poor breethren, and thus to prepare our selves to pray
for them, that our prayer may be heard in their need. and although I noted
before the disordred life of some lewd courtiers, which make so much of their
painted sheath, esteem themselves more then all the world does besides, and
when they think they deal so cunningly, that they be not seen, many one
espieth them, and laughes full drilie in their sleeves at them: yet now in this
godly gentelman appears a contrary dealing, and he may be a worthy pattern
for all courtiers to follow. The court is not ill of it self, but a man, if he
will, may setue the Lord vprightlie, and also defend his Church, and profit
the commonwealth mightelie, and good men may live in it honestly. It is a
dangerous place, I grant, to live in, and many occasions of ill are offered
daily in it: yet not so wicked, but good men living in it may take great
occasions to do much good in it. Joseph, in Pharaos court a godless king,
provided for all the country in the time of their great Genesis 41.
dearth and scarcity, relieved his father and breethren, then the only known
Church of God, in their necessity. Moses in the same court, though not under
the same king, learned all the wisdom of Exo. 14.
the Egiptians, and delivered all the people from the slavery that they
liuedin. Abdias hid and fed a hundredth Prophets in caves, by 1. King. 18:
fifty in a company, whose lives Iesabel sought for, him self being in the
wicked court of Achab and Iesabel. Dassid feared the Lord in the court of
Saul, though he escaped often not without many great dangers. Daniel an
ancient courtier, in three kings days kept the law of God his Lord
diligently, and being in great authority with the king, had the charge of
diverse countries committed unto him: which he ruled faithfully, and relieved
gods people mightelic. So did his three companions, Sidrach, Misach, and
Abednago. Mardocheus in the court of Assuerus saved the Ester. 6.
kings life, whom his Chamberlaines would have murdered, and delivered all the
Jews, which were appointed al by Haman on one day to be slain. Jerome in his
epistle commends one Nebridius, who living in the court, and being Nephew to
the Empress, behaved him self so virtuously, that all his suits were for the
Relief of the poor. Tom. 1. Ep. 6.
The place therefore makes no man ill, but his illnes comes of his own
wicked and crooked mind. The dangerous life of courtiers, if they will rebuke
sin, and not sing Placebo, the example of John Baptist, who lost his head for
telling the truth, may suffice to teach. But let not good men be afraid: for
God has the heart of Mat. 14.
Princes in his hand, to turn as pleases him. Do thou thy duty in the
fear of God, and he will defend the, as he thinks best.

5. And I said, I be seech thee, O Lord God of heaven, thou great and fearful
God, which keep covenant and mercy for them that love thee, and keep thy
commandments,

6. Let thy ears hearken, I be seech thee, and thy eyes be open, to hear the
prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee this day, night and day for
the children of Israel thy servants, and knowledge for the sins of the
children of Israel, which they have sinned against the: yea, I and my fathers
house have sinned.

7. We have outragiouslie sinned against thee, and have not keapt thy
commandments, and thy ceremoneis, and Judgments, which thou commaundest
Moses thy servant.

AS a man that is earnestly bent to prayer, has commonly these outward things
joined with all, that were spoken of before, as sitting, or kneeling, weeping, a
grieved mind, sad countenance, fasting and abstinence: so necessarily he
must have a charitable mind and pitiful toward his breethren, and an earnest
and lively faith toward God: which both appear in Nehemiah: for without
these tow his prayer cannnot be heard. His loving mind toward his breethren
appears, in that he leaving all other pastimes, so diligently inquireth of
their estate, and their country, and disdaineth not to hear them: but it is
seen more evidently, when he weepeth and mourns, fasteth and forbeareth
dainties, as though he were in misery with them: but specially, when he
takes so great pains and travail to do them good, as appears hereafter
throughout this book. His earnest faith appears, in that he prays, and
that only to the GOD of heaven, and with such vehement and meet words, as
do declare his full mind, that he doubted not, but God both could, and would
help them. In trouble no man asks help but ofhim, whom he thinks will do
him good: And because there is none so merciful to hear, and so willing to
help, as god himself is, in all our greifes we must turn unto the Lord of
heaven alone: for other saint there is none that Heb. 11.
will help, or can help. The Apostle says, that he which will come to the Lord,
must not only believe that there is a God, but also, that he is a rewarder of
them that seake him. This faith therefore let us bring with us when we pray.
This faith did continue in Nehemiah, though he had lived so many years
amongst the unbelieving Persians: which was a special gift of God to him in
such troublesome times. In prayer let us ask only such things, as may stand
with Gods good pleasure. For where many times folishly we ask things to our
own hurt, God of his wisdom and fatherly goodness does not grant them, as S.
James teaches us, saying: Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask euilly, to
spend it upon your lusts. I am afraid to enter into the opening of this
prayer, because it is so parfect of it self, that it cannot be amended: yet
for the help of the unlearned, for whose cause only I take these pains, I
shall in few words open it more plainly. O thou Lord God of heaven and earth
which of thy mere love toward man madestheauen and earth, the sea, with all
the furniture in them, as the Son, Moon, and Stars, fish, foul, herbs,
trees, corn, fruit, and cattle, and appointed them to serve him, that he might
serve, honor, and obeie thee: which not only rulest, feedest, gouernest and
guidest the^ all according to thy good pleasure, but have made heaven thy seat,
and the earth thy footstole, that from hence out of this vale of misery, we
should look up unto thee our only God: where thou reignest in thy Majesty
above all the heavens, and from whence we should look for our deliverance out
of all troubles. O thou great and fearful God, whose creatures pass all
powers of Princes, against whom to strive is mere folly, and with whom to
wrestle is extreme madness: whose might, wisdom, and justice is infinite,
whose mercy, goodness and pity has no end: which art so great, that thou
fillest all places, and not concluded in any, but art present every where,
and see all things: whose majesty surmounteth all creatures so far, that
it cannot be contained or ruled of any: Thou great and fearful God, which in
thy anger threwest thy angelsthat offended the out of thy glorious presence in
heaven, into everlasting darkness ofhell: who in thy rage drownedst all the
world except eight persons, which burnedst up Sodom and Gomorah Genesis 19. 24.
with fire and brimstone from heaven: which did cast Adam and us all out of
Paradise for eating the forbidden Apple: who causedst the man to be stoned to
death for gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath day: which man would judge to
be but small faults, Number. 15. 36.
yet were great, because they were contrary to thy commandments: who killed
Vzzah for upholding the Arc being ready to fall, which plauged Pharao with
froges, flies and hailestones, which made Nabuchadnezer of a mighty king a
vile beast to eat grass, and made Herod to be wiried with lice: O thou great
and fearful God, at whose beck the devils do tremble, the earth does quake,
and the heavens shoot out hot fiery thunderbolts, the clouds power out
great storms and tempests, to destroy thine enemies: O thou God of heaven,
thou great and fearful God, I thy poor wretch, vile worm and miserable
creature, void of all goodness, and full of all wretchedness, I forsaking my
self, and trusting on thy goodness, am bold to creep in at a corner, and
present my felfe before thy throne of mercy, quaking and trembling at thy
fearful judgments, and sharp justice against sin, I offer unto thee this
poor soul and carkesse, the work of thy own hands, made glorious by thee,
but foulie defaced by me. I Lord, I God do most humbly with a heavy heart and
troubled mind beseech thee, I most earnestly with bitter tears beg and crave
of thee, to cast me not away out of thy sight, but graciously to hear my
prayer. For although thou dwell in thy high and holy place in heaven, yet
thou look down into the earth, to hear the sighing of the poor, and
deliver the oppressed: and though thou be great and fearful in all thy
works, yet I know thou art great in mercy and rich in goodness. For although
thou have punished sharply, yet thou sauest more mercifully. Adam was cast out
of Paradise in justice, and yet had mercy offered unto him in great plenty. The
entising of a woman made him to offend thee, and the blessed seed of the same
woman has bruised the serpents poisonful head, and delivered us. Thou
therefore that art a God oftrueth, and keep promise and show mercy to
them that love thee and keep thy commandments, look pitifully on us, which
forsaking our selves, hang upon thee: and though we see thy deserved rod, yet
we fly to thy promised mercy: though we have not kept our promise made unto
thee in our Baptism, that we should forsake the Devil, world, and flesh,
serve, honor, and faithfully obey thee, our only Lord and God, with all our
heart, strength, power and soul, yet art thou a true God in keeping thy
promise, and not casting us of. When we run from thee, thou call us again,
and not destroying us suddenly, tariest for our amendment. When we hate thee,
and become thy open enemies, thou remembering thy promise made to Abraham,
David, and our fathers, seek by all means to bring us home again to thee:
though we be unfaithful, thou art true: though we forget thee, thou remembrest
us. Though we deserve to be cast away from thee without al hope of redemption,
yet when thou fatherly correctest us, in the midst of thine anger thou
rememberest thy mercy, and receiuest us again to thee. We grant, O Lord,
that we do not love thee, nor keep thy commandments as we ought, yet Lord
thou that art love and charity it self, and love all things that thou have
made, and in thy dear son Christ Jesus do embrace us, not looking at our
deserts, but at his worthiness, who has fulfilled the law for us, and made us
partakers of thy rightcousnes: Lord God hear us, and have pity on us. O thou
Lord God of all mercy, which never did cast any away that fled unto thee,
open they ears, and hear the prayers of me thy humble suter: shall I be the
first whom thou will not hear? Is thy mercy all spent, and none left in store
for us? Open thy eyes O god of our salvation, and behold the miserable state of
thy poor people. Our city lies waste, the walls unbuilt, our enemies rush
in on every side, and we are a laughing stock unto them: thou heardst the
crying of Agar being cast out of her house, thou lookedst at the oppression of
Egypt, thou pitiedst the woeful sighing of Anna: and when thy people were
oppressed of any enemies round about them, thou raisedst up one Judge or other
to deliver them. Consider, O Lord, I beseech thee, our woeful state: we are
spoiled on every side: mark and hearken to the prayer, which I thy poor
seruante make unto thee, which see al secrets this day, continually crying
night and day with a simple and unfeigned heart, not for mine own self, whom
thou have so well placed in the court, with plenty of all things, but for my
breethren the children of Israel thy servants, the offspring of thy deerbeloued
Jacob, which be in great heaviness. While they be in misery, I cannot be
merry. Their grief is my sorrow, and their welfare is my rejoicing. I grant O
Lord we have gricuouslie offended thee: yet have we not cast thee of, nor
forsaken thee to be our Lord: we be thy servants, though vnthristy, unthankful,
and miserable, and thou art a God rich in mercy, to all that turn unto thee.
I confess, O gracious God, that the children of Israel have sinned against
thee, yea not only they, O Lord, but I and my fathers house have haynouslie
broken thy commandments, and yet we despair not to obtain thy favor
again, as children that have offended their loving father. There is none of us
free, we plead mercy and not justice, we stand not in defense of our doings,
but yeald your selves into thy merciful hands. While thou give us a heart to
pray, we continually believe thou wiit hear us in the end. O Lord correct
thou us after thine own good will and pleasure, but give us not up to the lust
of thy enemies, which blaspheme thee, saying; their God has forsaken them,
their God cannot nor will not help them: they hate us, not so much for our own
sins, as for that we be called thy servants. O Lord let not thy holy name be
ill spoken of through our wickedness, rise and defend thine own cause, cast not
away thy servants in thy heavy displeasure. What vantage can thou have in
giving us over to thy foes? they shall laugh when we shall weep, they will
slander thy goodness for our forgetfulness of thee. Thou promisedst O Lord by
Ezech. 18.
the mouth of thy Prophet, that in what hour so-ever the sinner did repent,
thou wodlst no more remember his wickedness, nor lay it to his charge. We
weep, we confess and acknowledge our manisold wickedness wherewith we and our
fathers have offended thee, we call for mercy, we pray night and day, not
doubting but thou will keep thy promise in delivering and hearing us in thy
duetime. Though we have broken our promise in disobeying thee, yet if it please
thee thus to try our faith and exercise our patience, by laying on us thy
heavy hand and sharp correction, thy good will be done: give us strength to
bear that thy wisdom will lay upon us, and lay on us what thou will. Thou
gave us thy law to be a bridle to rule our wicked desires, and keep us
within the compass of them: but we like mad men, or rather wild and untamed
beasts, that cannot be tied in cheines, nor holden in any bands, have
outragiouslie broken all thy commandments. No laws could rule us, no saying
compel, nor correction could stay us, but wilfully we followed our own
fantasies. There is nothing, o Lord, that thou can lay to our charge, but
we willingly and frankly confess our selves guilty thereof: for we have
neither kept thy commandments, which thou gave us by Moses thy servant,
wherein priuatlie we might learn how to direct our lives, both toward the
our God, and also toward all men: Nor the ceremonies, Sacraments and
sacrifices, which thou appointedst us to keep in thy Religion, and in them to
worship the, we have not duly regarded and kept, but cast them away, and
followed the fashions of the heathen people about us, and such as we devised
our selves: Our Priests and Prophets have taught us lies and devises of their
own heads, yet have we been more ready to hear, believe, and follow them,
then thy holy will and word, declared unto us in thy Book oflife. The Civil
laws by which thou appointedst thy common wealth to be ruled, we have broken
and disobeied, living at our own lust and pleasure. Our Judges, Rulers and
lawyers have sought their own gain more then Justice to their people,
oppressing them wrongfullie: There is no goodness in no sort of us: Prince,
Priest, People, Judge, Ruler, and all sorts from the highest to the lowest, we
have all run astraie, we deny it not, but with many tearsand greiuous heart we
fall before thy throne of mercy, earnestly craving, andfaithfully believing to
find mercy grace and pardon at thy hands. With these and such like words he
powered out his grief before the Lord. For no doubt he spoke much more then is
here written, but these may suffice to teach us the like.

8. Remember, I besecch thee, the word that thou commaundedst Moses thy
servant, saying: Ye will offend, and I will scatter you among the heathen.

9. And if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments, and do them, if ye
were cast to the uttermost parts of heaven, from thence I will gather you, and
will bring you to the place, which I have chosen to set my name there.

10. They are thy servants, and thy people, whom thou have redeemed in thy
great power, and with thy mighty hand.

11. I beseech thee, my Lord, I pray thee let thy ear be bent to the prayer
of thy servants, which desire to fear thy name: And give good success, I
pray thee, to thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of
this man. And I was the Kings cupbearer.

Give me leave, Lord, I beseech thee, to speak unto thee, and put thee in
remembrance of those things, which thou seem to us to have quite forgotten.
Thou forewarnedst us by thy faithful servant Moses, that Ifwe offended thee,
thou would drive us out of that pleasant country, which thou gave us, and
scatter us among the heathen people in all countries: yet ifwe would turn unto
thee again and keep Deu. 4. and30
thy commandments, there was no part under heaven so far of, nor none so
mighty or cruel against us, but thou would bring us again, and settle us in
that place which thou had chosen, and appointed us to call on thy name there.
The first part, O God, we find too true: we have sinned, and thou have
punished us: we have broken thy laws, and thou have scattred us into all
countries: And if we lived among a people that knew thee, or loved thee, our
banishment and loss of our country would be less grievous unto us. But alas,
good God, we live amongst them that hate thee, and laugh at us: they worship
Gods of their own making, and think them to be of greatermight, then thou the
almighty and everliving God art: This grief we can-not digest: this is so
tedious unto us, that we cannot be merry, until thou restore us. After our long
captivity by Nebuchad-nezzar in Babylon thou seemedst to remember us some
thing, and moouedst the good king Cirus to give license to as many as would, to
go home and build thy temple again: and this was some good token of thy love
and favor toward us: but yet alas, O Lord, there be as many years, or more
past, since Cirus began this our deliverance, and y et we live among the
unbelieving Persians, a people as cruel and wicked as the Babilonians, and the
Caldeans were, thou chaungest our captivity from one Kingdom to another, and
from country to country, yet we never a whit the better. We are not brought
to thy promised place and holy land, our City is burned up and lies
uninhabited: the walls are pulled down and the gates lie open, that our enemies
may rush in on every side, spoil and murder us at their pleasure. By thy
good servant King Darius thou did build us a Temple to call upon thy name in
it, and that was some good hope, that thou would fully deliver us from our
enemies, and mercifully restore us to our undeserved country. Thou seem, O
Lord, to have kept part of thy promise, but yet the greatest part is behind.
Remember, O God, I beseech thee, thy promise, and bring us home again: finish
the thing that thou have so prosperously begun. Thy enemies will think that
either thou can not, or wilt not perform thy promise: Arise, O Lord, and
deliver us fully, that the world may know, that thou art a true god in keeping
thy promise: Let thy enemies see, that there is no people so strong to hold
us, nor country so far of, but thou both can and wilt destroy them that
rebel against thee, and fully deliver us and bring us home again. Pardon my
rude boldness, gracious God, which so saucily speak unto thee: the grief of my
heart is so great it brusteth out, I cannot hold in, but talk unto thee, as
one does to another. The faithful hope that I have in thee, that thou will
perform thy promise fully, makes me thus boldly to speak: yet the
greatness of our misery, and the weakness of our faith makes many to think
that thou have forgotten us. Bear with our weakness and pardon our impatience.
The sick man that lies in great pains, and looks for the physicians
coming, thinks he comes but slo wlie, when he makes all the haste he can:
and when he is come, except he give him some ease quickly, he thinks that
either he cannot, or will not help him. But the wisdom of the physician is
such, that if he should purge or let him blood presently, it were great
danger: or if he should satisfy his fantasy, letting him eat and drink
what he list, it would increase his pains, and therefore he tarieth, until he
see better occasion given: so we, O Lord lie in great pains, and think thou
tariest long: we would gladly have our desires fulfilled, but thy wisdom
sees the time is not yet come. Give us patience, O God, to tarry thy leisure,
or rather a speedifull deliverance. Our weakness is such, that we cannot but
murmr and grudge at our delays, and think thou have forgotten us. Bear
with our foolishnes, O Lord, which cannot understand the secret wisdom ofthy
doings: we judge the according to our own wits, as we think good, and submit
not ourselves to thy wisdom which know what time is best and meetest for us
to taste of thy undeserved goodness. We think thou have forgotten us, is thou
speedely satisfy not our desires. Arise, gracious God, and deliver us, that
the world may see that thou remembrest thy promise made so long a go to thy
faithful servant Moses. This profit we have by rea ding thy scriptures left
unto us by thy servants the Prophets, thatour faith is increased, our hope
fails not, but manfully tarieth with patience for thy coming. Faith douteth
not, and hope is not weary, though our grudging nature cannot be contented.
Increase our faith O gracious God, our hope and strength, that we fall not from
the, pardon our murmuring and mistrusting of thee, though our state be despised
when we look at our selves: yet when we remember thy promise, we cannot disp
air. We follow our father Abraham, who contrary to hope by reason, hoped in
thee, that thouwouldest fulfill thy promise to him, though reason could not see
it. And that thou may the more willingly do it, O Lord, consider who we be.
We be thy servants, other Lords and masters we seek none: we are thy people,
and thouour God and King: can any master forsake his servant, or any king his
subject that humbly submits himself unto him? though we have sinned and
deserved to be cast away from thee yet art thou, O Lord, rich in mercy, a king
of great power, and thy glory shall shine in our deliverance. Is any fault so
great, that thou can not forgive it? Is any man so hard hearted, but at length
he will be entreated? and shall any wickedness ouerflow thy goodness so far, that
thou will not be entreated. So many years punishment would satisfy a stony
heart, and forgive and forget all that is past: think on us O Lord what metal
we be made of, and deal not with us in the balance of Justice but in mercy.
We are by nature earth, dust, and ashes, and therefore heavy, sluggish, and
forgetful: we are borne of sinful parents even from the beginning, and
therefore of our selves must needs follow their trade in ill doing: we be no
Angels, and therefore cannot serve thee as we should do. Take in good part, O
Lord, our simple good will, that that wants in us, thy Messiah thy son our
Lord and Christ has fulsilled for us, and made us partakers of his
righteousness. Look at him O Lord and not at us, who redeemed us with no gold
nor silver, but by his own precious blood, and let that price satisfy thee,
and deliver us. Igraunt, O Lord, thou deliuerest our fathers from their bondage
and slavery in Egypt, wherein we should have continued if thy mighty hand,
great power, and strength had not made us free. And not only then, O Lord, we
tasted of thy goodness, but ever since when the Philistims, Ammonites, Moabites,
or other enemies round about us, oppressed us, thou heardst us, thou
deliueredst us, and shall we now be clean forgotton? Arise, O Lord, speedely,
and let thy people know that thou remembrest them, and have a care over them.
How shall thy goodness be known, if thou have not a people to praise the? I
beseech thee, Lord, pardon my importunity. I cannot depart until I obtain my
suit at thy hands: though thou seem to deal hardly with us so many years,
yet I will say with patient Job: although he kill me, yet I will trust in him
still. I know thou love us, what so-euer thou do unto us: and therefore I
will trust in thee still. Though thou have seemed hitherto, O Lord, to look
strangely on us, yet now bow down thine ear, and hear the prayer of me thy
poor seruante, and the prayers of all the rest of my sorrowful breethren thy
servants: which would gladly, so far as the weakness of man's nature will
suffer us, fear thy name. Thy holy spirit gives us a desire to serve thee,
but the rebellious flesh, which we received of our first father Adam,
withstandeth al such motion's, and draws us from thee. Deal not with us
therefore, O God, in the rigor of thy Justice, but in the unspeakable measure
of thy mercies. Rule thy seruante this day, and grant me to find grace and
favor in the sight of this mighty king (...), whose cupbearer I am. It lies
most in him to help and to hinder us, to set us at liberty, or keep us
prisoners still, to build our Citic, or to let it lie waste. I see O Lord, the
fierceness of his nature, and how little he understands thy goodness toward
him: but yet I know, O God, that the hearts of Princes, even Infidels, are in
thy hands, to dispose as thou think good. Have pity therefore, O God, on
thy people, and bend his mind to pity them. Other friends I do not seek,
for without thee all suit and labor is in vain.

A PRAYER.
LOrd God, which of thine own mere good will inspiredst thy Prophets in old
time with the knowledge of thy secret mysteries, and of thy great love toward
us thy servants have caused them to be put in writing, and have preserved them
from destruction by thy mortal enemies, that we might learn in them thy
mercies, showed to our fathers, and promised to us,: give us, we beseech thee,
a willing mind, with reucrence to hear and read thy holy word, declared in
this book, and a diligent (...) to follow the same. Raise up, we pray thee,
in these our latter days such faithful servants about the Prince in the
Court, as Nehemiah was, that would pity the miserable state of the poor
people and afflicted Church, rather then seek their own ease, wealth, and
profit. Grant us, we pray thee, to weep, fast, and pray, with such love to
our breethren, and sure faith in thee, as Nehemiah had, and not to cease,
until we have obtained some grace in thy sight, as he did. Our need, and
misery in these latter days are as great as was in his time, and yet we see
it not. Thou correctest us, and we feel it not: thou teach, and we will not
learn. Thou have brought home part of the Jews from their captivity, and
yet many remained behind: so Lord thou have in our days opened the eyes of
some, and delivered us from that Romish slavery, wherein we were so long
drowned: but alas, O Lord, many of our breethren lie blind, and will not see,
have ears, and will not hear. Open their eyes, O God, and fully restore us,
that we and they may jointly fear thee, as our Lord, and reverently love
thee, as our dear Father, to the confusion of Satan and his partakers, and
the everlasting glory of thy blessed name, and comfort of thy poor people,
through Christ thy Son, our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
CHAP. 2.
1. It came to pass in the month of March, in the 20. year of king
Artaxerxes, that wine was before him, and I took up the wine and I gave it to
the King, and was not sad before in his sight.

2. And the king said to me, why is thy countenance so sad, and thou art not
sick? It is nothing else then a heavy heart. I was very sore afraid.

3. And I said to the king, O king, God save thy life for ever. Why should not
my countenance be sad, when the City and the place of my fathers burials lies
waste, and the gates are consumed with fire.

4. And the King said to me, for what thing do thou ask? And I prayed to
the God of heaven.

5. And I said to the King, if it be thought good to the King, and if thy
servant find favor in thy sight: send me into Judah to the City of my fathers
burials, that I may build it.

6. And the king said to me, the Queen sitting by him, how long will thy
Journey be? and when will thou return? And it was thought good in the kings
sight: and he sent me: and I appointed him a certain time.

THe month Nisan as it is called in the Hebrew here, is the first Month of
the year as the scripture uses to reckon, and answers unto our March:
beginning at the first change of the Moon after the 12. day of March, when
the days and nights are both of one length. And although many doubt who this
Artaxerxes was, I take it certainly to be him that was called Longimanus, long
hand, because the one hand was longer then the other: as Edward the first was
called Long-shanks because of his long legs. I love not to fill up books with
moving doubt unto the unlearned, for whose cause specially I write: and namely
such doubts as be harder in searching, then profitable in understanding. The
learneder sort, that list to try their wits, may search many men's writings
and see diverse opinions: but a most apparent truth simply told, is best for the
unlearned. Yet in the 4. Cha. of Ezra I have fully enough opened the matter,
which I think after good consideration will be best liked of most men. Among many
things which prove the good disposition of Nehemiah, these certain times
that he appoints of his doing most clearly declare the same. In the 9.
month November, in the latter end of the year, reckning the year by the
course of the Sun he received these heavy news of the misery of his people
and country. And in the first month of the year following (yet both these
months fell in the 20. year of the king Artaxerxes) God gave him this
occasion to speak for the releife of them to the king.

It often falls out that the latter end of the year by the course of the
Sun, is the beginning of the year by the reign of the king. As our gracious
Q. Elizabeth began her happy reign in November, yet March in the year
following is part of the same year of her reign, that November was in the
beginning. All this while (4. months at the least) from November to March was
Nehemiah sad, weeping, fasting, praying, and seeking some good occasion, to
seek to the king for the relief of his country. After this sort will good men
commend their suits unto Princes, first by weeping, fasting and praying unto
God, because they know the Princes heart to be in gods hand to dispose and
turn, as he thinks good: but the wicked worldlings that have not God before
their eyes, nor think not God to rule the world and Princes to, seek clean
contrary ways, and by rewards, by him and by her, by flattering and
dissembling make their way and break their suits unto Princes. When Queen
Ester should speak to the king for the deliverance of the Jews her people, as
Nehemiah should here, she bad Mardocheus go and will all (...). 4.
the Jews to fast and pray for her, that she might find favor in the kings
sight and obtain her suit for them: and by these Godly means both Ester and
Nehemiah prospered in their requests. But because every one cannot have access
to speak unto the king, and break his suit him self, nor it is not fit that
it should so be, it is not amysse to use the means of some good man about the
prince to open the suit unto him symply in the fear of God, committing the
success thereof by earnest prayer, to Gods goodwill and pleasure. And better
it shall be for them thus symply to walk in the fear of god, and to fail in
the suit, then by lying, flattery, or briberie, to obtain it. A hard lesson
for Courtiers to follow, but a most true and godly way. When Absalon was out
offauour with his father David: by the, means of Ioab and the woman of Thecoa
he was brought in againe-but by practice rather, then upright dealing, and
therefore it prospe 2. (...). 14.
red not. Nehemiah had hitherto kept his inward sorrow so secret, that the king
perceived it not: but it overcame him now, and he was not able to cover it any
longer. What earnest love was this in him toward his country, that thus long
fasted, and prayed? and we are so nyce, that what danger soever hangs over
us, we cannot forbear a dynner, that by some abstynence from the belly, we
may more earnestly give our selves to prayer. They that with reverence will
consider Gods secret providence, and care that he has for his people, how he
governs all things yea even those that seem outwardly of no value, after
such a sort, that his heavenly wisdom and fatherly love does most manyfestly
appear in them, toward those that seek him, may here see a manifest example
of it. Not by chance (for so nothing falls out) but by gods great
providence, the king had wine before him, was dry, and called for drink.
Nehemiah also, as God had appointed, stood by, and as his office required,
being his cupbearer, took up the cup, tasted, and gave it to the king to
drink, looking very sadly, whichhe was not wont, and Princes love not to
have any to do so about them: Upon this sad look falls out all the
matter, which otherways he durst not open. The king demands what makes him
so sad: Nehemiah opens his grief: the king asks, what he would have.
Nehemiah makes his petition: the king grants it, and sends him tobuilde
Jerusalem and gives him liberally things necessary, to the doingof it. A
weighty matter to rise by occasion of a sad countenance: but thus our God of
small things can bring sotth great matters. David used to sit at king Saul's
table, until he fell in displeasure with him: when he saw his place empty, Saul
would ask where he was, that he came not to dinner. And if he spoke angerly,
Jonathan Saul's son, would let David know, that he might keep him out of
Saul's danger: thus by an empty place at the table David's life was diverse times
saved. Ester, when she would go to speak for her people, and oflong time
before had not seen the king, nor might not come in his presence, except she
were sent for, puts on her costly apparel, and stands before the kings
window, where she might be seen. The king (...). (...).
seeing her, sends for her, and she spying her time, makes her suit to the
king for her people, and delyuereth them. Thus of small occasions God works
great things, that we may know that he rules all things, be they never so
small in man's sight. But among many great tokens of Gods providence and good
will toward Nehemiah, none is greater, then that he being a prisoner, a
stranger borne, and one not of their religion, serving Idols, but worshipping
the true living God, should be called to such a place of credit and worshipp,
to be the kings cupbearer and taster. None uses to put any to such offices of
trust, but such as be thought to be of great honesty, truth and fidelity. No
doubt many of the Persians desired that office, and disdained that Nehemiah a
stranger should enjoy an office of that credit, and authority, where he might
have free access to the king, and take occasion to move his suit for himself
or his friend. Yet this is Gods accustomed goodness, that when his people be in
trouble, he always provides some to be about the prince, which both may and
will help to defend them. In this long captivity, under king Darius was Daniel
and his fellows in great authority with the king: under king Assuerus were
Ester and Mardocheus, under king Cyrus were Ezra, Zorobabel, and others: under
Artaxerxes was Nehemiah in great favor: which al being Jews borne, did
wonderfully relieve and comfort the oppressed people in this great extremity
under heathen kings. A strange work of God, to cause heathen Princes to favor
and defend the religion that they knew not, and to defend that people which
their subjects hated. But such a loving lord is our God to us, that though he
punish his own people sharply for a time, yet he casts them not away for
ever: and if he lay on heavy load, yet he gives them strength to bear it.
Here may be moved a hard question on these men's doings, whither it be lawful
now for a Christian man to serve a heathen Prince or no, as they did then: let
the case stand as it does here, and it is easy to answer. These men all were
prisoners, taken out of their own country by violence, lived under heathen
kings and therefore ought faithfully to serve, and quietly to obey them. So
lived Joseph in Egypt under Pharaoh: so Daniell, Mardocheus, Ezra, Nehemiah,
and others. So did Jeremy and Baruch the Prophets teach them to live saing
unto all the Jews then being Captives under infidels, Pray Iere. 29.
for the life of Nebuchad-nezzar and Baltasar his son, seek the peace of
Baruc. 1.
that country whitherye be carried away prisoners, and be not troublers of the
commonwealth. So Saint Peter taught the christians in the beginning of their
receiving of the gospel, that servants should not 1. Pet. 2.
forsake their masters, though they did not yet believe, but serve them
faithfully, andobey them reverently, yea though they were hard and froward to
them. So Saint Paul and Peter both bids the faithful wife not to leave her
unfaithful husband, but behave 'her self more honestly, that by her well doing
the husband may be won to the lord, and Gods holy name not 1. Cor. 7.
ill spoken of through them. What good could a rude unfaithful people 1. Pet.
3.
think of that God or religion, that would teach the seruante or wife to run
away from their masters or husband? The scripture teaches no such thing, but
all faithfulness, duty, and obedience toward all men, so far as we offend not
God. But in these days, if any should leave the company of Christian people
willingly, and go serve an infidel king for vantage sake, that were il done,
and differs far from the case of these good people, and may not be done,
except it were to go and preach. Good men before rehearsed, dissembled not
their God, nor their Religion, but among the infidels boldly confessed it, as
all Christians ought to do in all places, and before all men, though they be
cruel against them.

2. And the king said. The good will of the king toward Nehemiah appears, in
that he marketh the countenance of his servant so diligently (which Kings use
not commonly to do, but to such, as they love dearly) and asks the cause
of his sadness. Some would rather have chidd him, and bid him go out of the
Kings presence: (For, Princes may not have any occasion of heaviness showed
before them, but all devises that can be to make them merry) yet God would by
this means move the Kings heart to pity his man, and by granting his suit,
comfort his heavy heart. The King belike was a wise man: for by a heavy
countenance, he could perceive the heaviness of his heart. A good kind of
reasoning, and seldom untrue. The heart is the beginning and wellspring of
all affections and motions of the body, and by outward signs shows what it
thinks inwardly. Momus (which is one that finds fault with all things) when
he was willed to tell, what fault he could find in the fashion and shape of
man, says, man was not rightly made, for that his heart was locked up
secretly in his breaste, that his thoughts could not be espied: he should
have had some glasses set there, that his thoughts might be seen. But he that
will diligently mark the countenance and behavior of a man, shall easelie
perceive what the heart thinks. Hypocrites may dissemble and cloak them for
a time, but time will soon discrie them to a wise man. Solomon says, A merry
heart Prou. 15. 13.
makes a cheerful count enance, and by the sorrow of the heart the mind is
heavy. Ecclesiasticus says, a wise man is known by his countenance: and the
next verse is, A man's garment, laughter, and going, declare what a man is.
Gregory Nazianzen, when he saw Iulianus apostata the Emperor first, by his
countenance and foolish moving of his body, coniectured truly of his
wickedness and falling from God, which followed afterward: and cried out, O Lord
God, how great a mischief is nourished in the empire of Rome. Other affections
likewise, when they grow much, as Inuectiua. 2. Niceph. 10. Chap. 37.
this sorrow of Nehemtah did, work greatly. When Ophni and Phinees were
slain, and the Ark of God taken, El: their father hearing the 1. King. 4.
news, for sorrow fell of his chair and died: and Phinees wife, being near
the time of her childe-birth, hearing the death of her husband, fell on travel
and and died for sorrow. When the blessedvirgin Marie came to salute Elizabeth,
the child sprang in her womb for joy. So much a merry heart can do. I cannot
tell whither the wisdom of Nehemiah in bridling his affection, that in so
great a sorrow he cried not out like a woman, or the good disposition of the
King, that so pitied the sorrowful heart of his man, is worthy more praise: but
suerly both are to be followed of al Christians. Affections must be holde^
under, that they grow not to much: and heavy hearts would be comforted. for
as the King seeing the sad countenance of his man, diligently searched out the
cause of his sorrow, so Christians when one sees an other in heaviness should
brotherly comfort him, and weep with them that weep, as though we were
partakers of the same sorrow, according to the rule of S. Paul: If one member of
the body, be it never so small, be in pain, the rest of his body is grieved
also, and every member seeks to ease it, as they may, so they be naturally
Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12.
linked together. So should all Christians, being members of Christ's mistical
body, one bear the grief of another, and help to relieve him. when Nehemiah
had been thus long sad, weeping, fasting, and praying, he was now cast into a
very great fear, by reason of the kings earnest re quiring the cause of his
sadness. Thus one sorrow follows a another, and a Christian man's faith and
patience is continually e xercised: when one grief is ended, it has another.
streight-wayes following. The king said, this sorrow must needs come from a
heavy heart, seeing thy body is not sick. This touches a man near when he must
needs open the secrets of his heart to a king, whom he cannot tell how he will
take it, or what opinion he has of him. Many thoughts and suspicions rise in
good men's hearts, as well as ill men's, and cast them into great fear: for every
man is subject to affection of his own nature. Nehemiah might fear lest the
king had heard some accusation against him, or had taken some displeasure with
him, or would not grant his request, or some other would hinder his suit, or
might lose his office, etc. and therefore no marueil if he were sore afraid:
but a strong faith will boldly pass through all such cares, and trusting in
God, will continue his good purpose. The troubles of the righteous be many,
says Psalm. 34.
David, but the Lord will deliver him out of them all.

3. And I said. After that he had something overcome his fear and recovered
his spirits, he declares unto the king the cause of his sadness. The Majesty
of a king will make any good nature afraid to speak irreverently, though they
be daily in company with him and favor, as Nehemiah was. And though the
courtesy of a Princebe such, that he will abase and humble him self familiarly
to use his subject: yet the subject should not over boldly nor saucely behave
him self toward his Prince. Diogenes said, Aman should use his Prince or peer
as he would do the fire. The fire if he stand (...).
to near it, will burn him, and if he be to far of, he will be a cold: so to
be ouer-bold without blushing or reverence, brings in contempt of both syds.
For the King will think him tosaucie, and the subject will forget his duty.
And to be ouerstrange and afraid, will cause the King to think him to be of an
ill nature, and not bearing a good heart toward him. Therefore Nehemtah not
ouerbold with his Prince, with most humble obeysaunce wishes the king good
life, as the common phrase of the scripture uses to speak, and plainly
tells the true cause of his sorrow and sad countenance. Here we may learn the
duty of Christians, that live under heathen Princes: That is, they may not
only serve them, but ought humbly to obey and reverence them. For surely this
kind of salutation in Nehemiah, to pray for the kings life, was not holy water
of the court from the teeth outward, Saluta libenter: but from an unfeigned
heart desiring it. S. Paul who lived under The Emperor Nero, as wicked a man as
ever the earth bare, bids to pray for all kings and them that be in
authority (which then were all infidels) that under them we may live a quiet
life with godliness and honesty. And if thou think such ill men are not to be
prayed for, yet for the quietness of gods Church thou must pray for them, that
God would so rule their hearts, that under them we may live a peaceable and
godly life. For that is the reason that Saint Paul yealdeth, though such
wicked men will not learn their own salvation themselves. After that
Nehemiah had thus dutifullie behaved himself to the king, so that there could
be thought no just cause of any evil suspicion in him toward the king, then he
boldly declares the cause of his sadness, and says, the City where his
fathers lay buried lay waste, and the gates were burned. And is this so great
a cause why Nehemiah should be so sad, weep, fast, and pray so long? had he
not seen nor heard of greater Cities and countries then it was, which were
destroyed as miserably as it was? Babylon, which was much bigger then
Jerusalem, was conquered not long before by Cyrus: Samaria their neighbor by
Senacharib, and Salmanasser, etc. But this City had a greater cause to
belamented for, then others. For it was taken from wicked men by gods mighty
hand, and given to gods people. It was increased with many benefits from God,
beautified with religion, Priests, a Temple to worship the living God in:
strengthened by many worthy Princes and laws, and was a wonder of the world.
It was the holy City, because it was dedicated to the Lords service: though
the people were evil that dwelt in it, and misused it. The gospel says, the
Devil tempting Christ our savior, took him into the holy City, and set him
on a Math. 4.
pinnacle of the temple: and Christ our lord foreseeing the destruction of Luke.
19.
it to be at hand, wept for it. This was then the cause of Nehemiahs sorrow,
that God was dishonored, for that this City, which was dedicated to his name,
and given to his people to serve him in, was now defaced, by heathen Princes,
his religion decayed, and people subject to strangers. Azelous man cannot
abide anything without great grief, that seems to deface the glory of his
God. But if these causes were not, yet the natural love to his country had
been sufficient to move him to tears. For as it is a pitiful sight, to see a
Prince or Noble man to be cast from his dignity, to be spoiled of his honor,
lands, and goods, and become a carter, and drive the plowe, or lie tied in
prison: so surely, it must needs move any heathen man, to see the City,
where he and his elders were borne and buried, to be overthrown, lie open to
all enemies, unfenced with walls or gates, and be inhabited with a few
cottegers, and no better then the poorest ragged hamlet in a country: much
more Nehemiah must needs be touched for this city, which was so famous through
out the world. There may be good reasons alleged beside these, why he should
weep for his City and country, as, because it was a great relief and
succor, in all needs, to all that lived in it, from time to time, and a
great strength to the country about it. But what is that, to be sad for the
place where his elders were buried? Is there any holiness in the ground that it
is better to be buried there, then else where? Or the dead men aniething the
worsse, if they be pulled out of their graves? What is the cause? In deed it
was called holy, in diverse places of the Scriptures, as other outward things
be, that are appointed and consecrated to a holy use. S. Matthew says, that
diverse dead bodies Chap. 27.
after the resurrection of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, rose out of their
graves, came into the holy City, and appeered to many. This holiness came not
by holie-water casting or hallowing of popish Bishopps which hallowed Church or
Church yeard, but by gods appointing, and choosing it for his dwelling place,
where he would be worshipped, as the Psalm. teaches, The Lord has chosen Sion,
he has chosen it Psaline 132.
for adwelling place for himself: this is my resting place for ever, here
will I dwell, because I have chosen it. So on gods behalf and appointing it
for a place, where he would be worshipped, it was holy, though the wickedness
of the people had defiled it, and justly procured gods anger to destroy it.
Christ Jesus our Lord finding his temple full of all usurers, buiers and
sellers, gata whip, and drove them out, saying, my house is a house of prayer,
but ye have made it a Luke. 13.
den of thieves. So by Gods appointing, it was a house of prayer, and by man's
misusing of it, a den of thieves. And he seeing the wickedness of the people
in it, wept for it, and said, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and
stonest to death them which are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered
thee, as the hen does her chickens under her Matthew. 27.
wings, and thou would not. The Prophets of old time, for the wickedness of
the people in it, have likewise rebuked Jerusalem sundry times, How is this
faithful City, which was full of justice, now become Esai. 1.
an harlot? And again, hear thou harlot, speaking to Jerusalem. Thus one
thing, by Gods appointing it to a holy use, may be called Ezec. 16.
holy: and by man's misusing of it, become most unholy. But the place it self
makes nothing holy, as it is written: God chose not the man for the place
sake, but the place for man's sake: and therefore this City did not make the
dead men holy that were buried in it, nor any thing the worsse, if they were
buried out of it. Therefore the papists are both wicked, in teaching the people
that one place is more holy then another, to be buried in: as in the Church,
rather then in the Churchyeard, and near the high altar, rather then in the
body of the Church: and they are thieves also, in picking poor men's purses for
the same. In these were many abuses, as in any one thing. But he that will keep
these three rules, shall not err. First, That he do not cast out the dead
bodies unburied, to be devoured of wild beasts, nor bury them in dunghils,
ditches, or such like places, where none else is buried. Diogenes, when his
friends asked him, How he wolud be buried, bad them cast him out, it skilleth
not how. Why? say they, the beasts will devour thee. Nay then, says he, lay
my stafe by me, and I shall drive them away. A barbarous saying, and meet for
a heathen man. Yet I think the laying of the metyarde in the grave with the
dead man, came up on some such like cause, or else to drive away devils.
Socrates, when he was asked the like question, answered more honestly, and bad
bury him so, as were most easyfor his friends.

The second is, to avoid great cost and sumptuousnes, as Shrines, Tombs
Tapers, Torches, Candles, mourning-coates, feastings, etc. which do no good to
the dead, and are to chargeable and unprofitable to their friends. Yet if Civil
policy add some solemnity to Princes and noble men, as their coat Armoure,
flagge, sword, heade-peece, and recognisaunce, I dare not utterly condemn it,
and yet would wish it more moderatly used, then many times it is. As there was
difference in them, while they lived, from the common sort and state, so there
may be in their burialls, for polliciessake, but for no religion or holiness at
al. The third thing to be observed is, that no superstition should be committed
in them: wherein the Papists infinitely offend. As in masses, diriges,
trentalls, singing, ringing, holy- water, hallowed places, years, days, and
month, minds, crosses, pardon-letters to be buried with them, mourners, de
profundis, by every lad that could say it, dealing of money solemnlie for the
dead, watching of the corpse at home, bell and banner, with many more then I can
reckon. These three abuses taken away, remains that comely order, which
Christian charity requires: as to have neighbors quietly to accompany the
corpse to the grave, as it was in the poor widows son of Naim. Brotherly to
comfort those that lost their friends, as the Iuc. 7.
Jews did Marie and Martha, for their brother Lazarus: to confirm faith in
the resurrection of the dead in the self same body, that Joan. 11.
there is put in the earth: to prepare themselves to die daily, not knowing
when our course shall come. To praise the Lord, that granted the man so long a
life among us with honesty, and in the end gave him a steadfast faith to seek
his salvation only in Christ Jesus, who has conquered death, hell, and sin,
by his own death, and by his rising from death has justified us, and will
raise us up from the grave in the end, to live with him in heaven without end.
The comely using ofthese in Gods Church, is a great comfort to all good
Christians, and the want of them, a token of Gods wrath and plague. Abraham was
promised burial in his ripe age, as a blessing from God: Josias was promised,
that he should be buried Get. 15.
in peace, and not see the plagues that should follow: the Gabeonites are 2.
King.
praised of God, and rewarded also of David, for that they buried 2. Sam. 2.
King Saul and his son, though the father was an ill man: contrariwise, to
King Jeroboam and Achab, was threatened for a plague, that 1. King. 14. and 21.
he and his posterity should not be buried, but devoured of beasts: and to
King Ioachim was fore-tolde it, that he should be buried as an ass, for Icre.
22.
his falling from God. Tobias was cheifelie commended for burying Tob. 5.
the dead bodies of his country men, that were cruelly slain. Thus burial is
commended, and to want it was great reproof. Jeremy threatens Icre. 8.
them, that for their wicked life they should be pulled out of their graves.
The place of burial needs no bishops blessing, nor Popish halowing, but
every comely place is holy enough, so it be reserved for that use only. It
is called in the Greek, Coimiterion, that is, a sleeping place, and in the
hebrew, Beth-haiaim, that is the house of the living: thereby to teach us, that
the body sleeps, and the souls live, as Solomon says: the earth shall go to
the earth from whence it was, and the soul shall return to him, that gave it.
Abraham bought a feeld to bury his in, and there was he and his posterity
buried: and that was Get. 23. 15.
a common custom, continued long after by the judges and kings of Judah. So
Gedeon, and generally the rest were buried. It is said of King Osias, that he
was buried in the feeld, where the other Kings before Judge. 8.
him were buried in a place kept for that use only. And the Gospel 2. Cro. 26.
teaches, that with the money, which Judas sold Christ our Lord for, they
Matt. 27
bought the potters field to bury strangers in. These places were sometimes
within Cities, and sometimes without, as Jesus Christ our Master was buried in
a garden without the city Jerusalem, and he met the Luke. 7.
poor widow of Naim at the gates of the City, going farther to bury her
son. It was long after, before they used either Church or Churchyeards. Like
wise mourning for the dead would be bridled, that it be not to much, and seem
to grudge at Gods doings, in taking our friends from us. David wept for his
child and prayed, whilst it was sick, 2. Sam. 12. Mat. 9.
but after it was dead, he wept no more. Our savior Christ cast the minstrels
and mourners both out of the doors, when he raised up the young woman in her
fathers house. By which we are taught that we should not dance with minstrels,
(for that is to barbarous, and against nature) nor to be grieved with the death
ofour friends, nor desperately mourn with the heathen, as though there were no
life after this. I would not have you ignorant, says S. Paul, of them that
sleep in death, that ye mourn not, as they that have no hope to rise again.
Sirach appoints a reasonable time for reasonable mourning, saying, mourning
for the dead is two or three dases, and before he adds, or seven days at
the most. The cost that is made for the dead, is rather as S. Aug. says, full
well a comfort for the living, then help for the dead. For sure it is
comfortable to all good folk, to see our friend in his lifetime to have
behaved him self so honestly, that his neighbors bear him so good will
after his death, that they will see him buried: and it strengthens our faith
of the resurrection, when the bodies are not cast away, as beasts bodies be.
And although this general doctrine of comelynes be most true and comfortable,
yet many times the case falls out so, that many a good man cannot enjoy this
kind of burial. In persecution many good martyrs have been devoured of wild
beasts, many torn in pieces, and hanged on gibbets, many burned and their
ashes cast into the water; yet these good me^ were nothing the worsse for
wanting their grave. For the kingdom of God stands not in outward things,
but in true faith in God by Christ. For as it profits not an evil man any
thing at al to be solemnly buried: so it hurts not a good man to want it in
these cases, if he cannot 2 Cor. 5.
get it. Every one shall receive then, as he has done in his life, and not
after his death, nor his costly burial. We read of the rich glutton, that he
was buried and no doubt costly, as all his life was gorgious, but poor Luc.
18.
Lazarus gatt little cost at his death, that could find so little mercy in
his life: yet was the glutton in hell, for all his pomp: and poor Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom in joy. But among all other foolishnes in Popery, I cannot but
marvel at this, that in their great solemn Ier. Epi. 30.
singing for the dead, they would not use, but forbid, Alleluyia, to be song.
If the Romish Church be the true Church, and all well that they command, why
should the late Synagogue of Room deface that, which the best Bishops of
Room allowed of? I erom writes in his 30. Epistle called Epitaphium Fabiolae,
that at the burial of that noble woman, the people of Room were gathered to
the solemn funeral, and there the Psalms did sound aloud, and Alleluyia
rebounding with his Echo on high, did shake the gylded seelings of the Temple.
On one side a company of young men, on another side were old men, which song
forth the praises and deeds of that good woman. And no marvel said he, if
men rejoice ofhir salvation, of whose conversion the Angels in heaven were
glad. The like is written in the 27. Epistle ad Eusto chium for her mother
Paula. In this I note the old Church of Room that at such solemn sunerals,
they sang Alleluyia on high, as the Papists do now on Easter day. Then they
praised god for the dead, for so Alleluya signifies, and now they pray god for
the dead, to get money with-all. Then they rejoiced of their salvation, and now
they weep for fear of the Popes purgatory. Blessed are thoy that dio in the
lord, says Saint John. Why? then they go not from pains here to misery
there. Why should the new Romish Synagogue mislike that good ancient order? the
one of them must needs err, which many think cannot be, and specially in
this our age. There be other controversies in these our days abroad, which
might have been very well left untouched, if the quietness of Gods Church had
been dutifullie sought, as it ought to be. As whither the ministers should
bury the dead as the common order appoints: and whither burial-sermons are
to be suffered and used? etc. This place gives no great occasion to entreat of
such matters, and therefore I shall let them pass. I love not contention, but
do earnestly require every one in his calling for Gods cause, to seek peace
with all their might, and those that profess Jesus Christ, I desire the Lord
that they would join with their Breethren in pulling down the Romish
Antechrist, the common enemy of all Gods doctrine and Religion, leaving such
unprofitable contentions which breed division. And if they have to many burial
sermons in the city, God grant us some more in the country. Thus much have I
spoken by occasion of Nehemiahs mourning for the place of his fathers burial:
not for the loss of the houses, City, or walls, or that he was troubled with
such superstitious opinions of thinking any holiness in the place, or that the
dead folk wear any thing worsse in wanting their covering in the earth, but
that he was grieved to see the City, which God chose him self, to be
worshipped in, and those good men, whose bones did rest there, or had
faithfully served the Lord in their life, now to be given to heathen men's
hands, Gods Religion neglected, the state of the commonwealth and good laws
overthrown, Gods enemies to triumph over them, as though their god could not,
or would not restore them. This shouldgreeue all Christians in all ages, when
they see the glory of the living God any ways blemished. God grant us this
zeal vnfeynedlie.

4. And the King said: After that the King understood the cause, of his sorrow
and sad countenance, he both pitied the case, and his man's heuie heart: and
God so moved the King to favor his suit, that he asked him, what he wonld
have? When Nehemiah perceived the kings good inclination toward him, and his
suit, before he would declare his petition, he turned him unto the God of
heaven, and prayed him that he would so guide his tongue, that he should speak
nothing, which might justly offend the king, and also that he would so move
the Kings heart, that his request might be granted. A worthy example for all
Christians to follow in their suits making to the Prince. He goes not to any
great man, nor to any other which was in favor with the king, to desire him
to speak for him, to commend his cause, to persuade the King to grant his
request: which he might lawfully have done. Also he offers no rewards, nor
like pleasure to any man, but turns him to the God of heaven as the chiefest
governor of all goodness: which sets up rulers, and puts down Kings, and
is King of Kings, and prays him to prosper his suit. He prays to no Idols
nor saints, though he lived among that Idolotrous nation: for he knew they
could not help him, but faithfully called on the living God, which his good
fathers had worshipped of old time. This prayer was not so much in speaking or
kneeling, but a lifting up of his mind toward God and desiring him to further
his suit. Anna made like prayer, when she powered out her sorrow before the Lord,
moving her lips, but speaking 1. Sam. 1.
never a word. In so much that the hie Priest thought she had been dronken. For
it falls out often, that in great sorrow a man cannot let a tear fall, the
heart being oppressed with grief, and yet he at another time will weep
tenderly: So in prayer often times, the more earnestly that a man prays, the
less he can speak, his heart being so earnestly given to call on the Lord.
As when Moses was in great heaviness, and prayed for the children of Israel,
being in that great distress, God said unto him, why criest thou unto me? and
yet there is not one word written, that he cried, or (...). 14.
said. It is the praying and crying of the heart, that God is so much delighted
withal, and yet never the worse, if it burst out into words and show it self.
Let no man then excuse him self, and say, he cannot pray, except he were in
the Church, or in his Chamber alone: for in all places he may lift up his mind
to God, though he were in the market or Mountain, and with hearty prayer,
though he speak not at all, desire the Lord to hear him, as Nehemiah does
here, in the presence of the King, and many others: and no doubt if he pray in
faith, and for such things as further the glory of God, the Lord will hear
him. Let us learn here to begin all our doings with prayer unto the Lord, and
we shall speed so much the better.

5. And I said. When Nehemiah had made his short prayer in so earnest a faith,
and perceived the Kings good will toward him: then with all humblenes, not
appointing the King what he should do, but referring all to his consideration
and wisdom, desires him, that if he thought it good, if Nehemiah him self
were thought a fit man for the purpose, or his service had been acceptable to
the King, that it would please him to send him to Jury, to the city where he
was borne, and his Elders lay buried, that he might build it up again. No
marueil that Nehemiah was afraid, and prayed earnestly for good success in
his suit: for he knew well that the Jews were counted a rebellious people, and
hated of all countries about them, and the King might think him to make his
suit for building of Jerusalem, that they might settle and strengthen
themselves against him and other Kings, and claim their old liberties that
they had a fore. But God so moved the Kings heart, that he had no suspicion of
any such enterprise by Nehemiah his faithful and trusty servant. With such
modesty Princes would be dealt withal, and not roughly, nor irreverently: for
so Nehemiah does here most dutifullie. If many men had their choice at the
Kings hand (now adays) to ask what they would, as Nehemiah might have done
here, would they not have asked Castles, Lands, Offices, and authority for them
and their issue, that they might have been great men in the world, and not the
building of a City, which would have been a trouble and cost unto them, rather
then any profit, and when they had finished it, it had not been their own, but
other should have enjoyed it, and they little the better for it? But such is
the zeal of them that love the Lord, that they will seek to build, and not to
pull down, as many do, and will prefer all things that may further the
glory of God, though it be with their own loss, rather then seek their own
profitte with the hinderaunce of it. Terentius a nobleman, Captain under the
Emperor Valens, Theedor. Lib. 4. cap. 32.
when he had been in wars and sped well, the Emperor liking well of his good
service, bad him advise himself what he would make suit for, and he would
reward him liberally. Terentius being a zealous man in Religion, and perceiving
the great herisie of the Arrians to be much favored (and the Emperor himself
being thought to be infected therewith) could not abide such blasphemy
against Jesus Christ our Savior, put this supplication in writing, and with
most humble reverence and earnest desire, required the Emperor to grant him
his request, and he would think his service fully recompensed. The effect of
his supplication was, that it would please the emperor to grant the true
christians a Church to serve and worship the Lord Jesus in, seperatlie from the
Arrians, which disnoured him: for it was not fit among the Christians to hear
such blasphemy against the lord Christ, as they spewed out. The emperor,
reading his supplication and considering the effect of it, was very angry,
Niceph. 11.
pulled it in pieces, and threw it away, chyd with Terentius, that cap. 49.
he could devise nothing to ask but that. Terentius gathered up the pieces of
paper courteously, and said, If he could not be heard in Gods cause, he would
not make further suit for his own profit. O noble Captain, where is thy
fellow? who has done the like, but Nehemiah here, Ester, and some few other?
God increase the number of such religious men about Princes, and then they will
not gape so fast as they do, to pluck and pull away from god and his ministers
all that they may scratch or scrape to the dishonor of God, defacing of his
glory, decay of the ministry, Religion, and al good learning: thinking most
highly of themselves, that they be worthy to have all things, where in deed
they deserve least, and the more they get, the less ar they satisfied. It is a
full contentation to all good men, when they see God glorified in his Church,
word, and ministry: for then they know, if they dutifully seek, that the Lord
will not see them lack that which shall be necessary for them: and they will
content themselves with that portion, that God gives them, and will not
greedely seek for other men's things wrongfully, to the dishonor of the high
God.

6. And the king said. When the King had considered his Request, he advised
himself well, and was both loathe to deny him his suit, and also to forgo so
faithful a seruante, asked him how long he would be absent, and when he would
return? So did the Queen to, which sat by the King, they both loved him so
well, and would not have him long from them. A special gift of God to see a
stranger borne, of that Religion and people which were hated of all the world,
to be in such favor with the king and Queen, and to find such favor and
grace in their sight, that he gave license and all other necessary things to
build that City, which had been noisome to so many Kings about them. But such
is the merciful goodness of our God, toward his Church and people, that he
will make Genesis 47.
strangers and their enemies to defend and help them: as Pharaoh Ester. 8. 9.
and Assuerus did, by the good means of Joseph and Ester, etc. And because the
Queen sat by, it is like that there was some solemn feast that day. for the
Queens of Persia used not to come into the Kings presence, but when they were
called for by name, as it is written in the book of Ester: and Strabo writes,
that the Persians used to debate of weighty matters, when they were refreshed
with wine. This might be a great cause of the great fear that Nehemiah was in,
as he said before, to see the Queen present, and many other great men beside
no doubt, as is commonly used at such solempnities. It will make any good
nature afraid to speak to a King, but much more in the presence of so many
estates, who might be hinderers of his suit, and counsel the King to the
contrary. But when God will pity his people and have things forward, he will
so move Kings hearts that nothing shall hinder that he will have done: and so
the King did grant him his request, gave him leaueto go build that City, and
sent him away honorably, and rewarded him liberally, as follows. Nehemiah
appointed the King a time of his return to him again, but when, it is not
here mentioned: yet such a time as the King was content withal. In the last
chapter of this book it appears, that in the twelft year following Nehemiah
returned unto the King, and yet gat license again to go to Jerusalem. But
whither this was the time that he appointed to return, it is not written, and
therefore uncertain, and being unwritten, and uncertain, it is not so
necessary to be known, nor curiously to be searched, but we may content
our-selues to be ignorant of it, as of all uncertain, unwritten, and
unnecessary trueths.

7. And I said unto the King, if it be thought good to the King, let them give
me letters to the captains beyond the river, which may convey me until I come
into Iehuda.

8. And letters also to Asaph keeper of the Kings woods, that he may give me
timber to make beams for the gates of the Palace, which is near the Temple
and for the walls of the City, and for the house which I shall enter to: and
the King gave me according to the hand of my God which was good toward me.

9. And I came to the captains beyond the river and gave them the Kings
letters, and the King sent with me captains of the army and horssemen.

10. And Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobias that servant and Ammonite heard of
it, and they were grieved with great sorrow that a man was come to seek any
good for the children of Israel.

NEhemiah was a glad man that the King had granted his request, and sleeps
not his purpose, nor lets the time slip, but with all diligence prepares
things necessary for his journey. And first because the journey was long, and
dangerous for enemies that hated him and all the Jews, lest he should have
some displeasure done him by the way, he desires the King that his Counsel
and Secretaries might give him a passeporte, and grant him men to conduct him
safely into Iewry. A bold request for so mean a subject, being but the Kings
cupbearer, a stranger, and borne of that people and country, which all the
world hated. What could have been done more for the noblest man in the
country, or for the best seruitour the King had? I cannot tell whither it is
to be more marueiled at, that either he durst ask it, or that the King would
grant it. But Nehemiah perceived Gods good will and the Kings favor toward
him, and was bold to ask: God prospered his suit that the king granted his
request. And as before, so here mark also, that he does not boldly and rashly
appoint the King what he should do, but with all modesty refers his request
unto the Kings wisdom and discretion, to grant or deny, and says: if it be
thought good to the King. Again he does not with bribes or flattery procure
the Kings letters to be signed privily (as many do, that make dishonest suits,
and would not have their matter debated by the wiser sort, lest so it might be
denied) but he requires, that they which are appointed for that purpose, and
do such things by good advise, as Chancellours and Secretaryes, might give him
letters to the Captains beyond the River Euphrates (for that is meant by the
river, because it was more notable then any other River in the country, and
did divide the Kingdom of Persia from other countries about it) over which
into Iewry he might pass. It might be thought strange to some, that Nehemiah
here asks not only of the King his letters of passeporte, but also a number
of souldyers to conduct him safely into Iewry. For Ezra when he had license of
Ezra. 8.
the King to take the same journey and buyld the temple, neither asked, nor had
any to conduct him safely on his way, (though the danger was as great then,
and he was afraid as well as Nehemiah was now.) why should Nehemiah ask now,
seeing he served and trusted in that same God, that Ezra did, and was as
earnest and zealous in Religion as he was? why should this be lawful or
commendable in the one, and not in the other? Causes may be rendered diverse.
There was difference in the persons and times. Ezra was a Priest, cunning in
the law, and had often taught boldly before the King and his nobles, how sure
and safe they were from all dangers, that put their trust in God alone: and if
he should have afterward been afraid, he should have seemed to have spoken
untruly before, and his God should not have been thought able or willing to
defend his people that trusted in him. Nehemiah was a courtier and in great
favor with the King, and had not so openly and boldly spoken of Gods providence
and care toward his people as Ezra had (though he believed it as faithfully as
the other did) and therefore might more boldly without reproach of his God, or
his doctrine and saings, ask it. Yet this proves not that Preachers may not
at any time require a safe conduct of Princes, to whom it belongs to provide
in dangerous times that passage by the hie way may be safe and quiet. Paul, as
we reed, when the Jews had sworn that they would neither eat nor drink,
until they had killed him, desired an under Act. 25.
Captain to bring his Nephew (who told him of that conspiracy) to the high
Captain to declare so much to him, and desired that he would provide some
safety for him, that he were not murdered by the way: and in this doing Paul
neither offended man, nor distrusted of Gods providence and care toward him.
Again in that great and long storm that Paul and his fellows were in on the
sea, where they looked for nothing but to be drowned, the Angel of God Act. 27.
told Paul, that god had given him the lives of all that were with him in the
ship and none of them should perish: yet afterward when the maryners would have
cunningly conveyed themselves out of the ship, under pretense to have cast
anchor, Paul told the high Captain, that if he suffered them to go out of the
ship, they should all perish: and this he did not say, as doubting of the
Angels true message, nor of gods good will and mighty hand, able to deliver
them, but to teach us that although god have made us promise of his mercy we
may not tempt him, lie down and sleep carelessly, but diligently to look for
and use such helps and means as god has appointed us to work by: god works
al goodness in us him self, and yet has appointed means for us to use and do
such things the which we may in no case neglect, and yet al praise is due to
him, whatsoever we do: for it is he that both ordeyneth the end of all things
how they shall come to pass, and also the means how they shall be brought to
pass, and prospers al them that forsaking themselves use such means and
hang on him knowing the beginning, midst, and end to be ruled and com to
pass as he appointed. God inspired the Apostles with all knowledge of the
scriptures suddenly, which were unlearned and never went to the school: yet
male not we think, that we will be learned after the same sort without study
and prayer: for then we tempt God, refusing such helps as he has appointed for
us to come to learning by. And though we study and pray never so much, yet we
shall understand nothing, until he give us his holy spirit, the schoolmaster of
all truth, to lighten our minds, and give understanding of his holy will. We
be like an axe in the carpenters hand, which though it be a good one, yet the
praise of the good work that is Esa. 10.
done with it, is to be given to the man, and not to the axe. Such things be we
in gods hand, by whom he works his will and glory (though not insensible, as
dead things be, yet as unable to work any good thing without him, as the axe
is without the carpenter.) for of our selves we are not able to think a good
thought, as the Apostle says, that all praise may be his, that blesses and
prospers both us 2. Corinthians. 3.
and the means, that he has appointed for us to work by, and brings it to
a good end. We must think likewise of Gods doings and our selves in all other
things, sin except, that he works all in all, yet not without us: that all
may say with David: Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give
all praise and glory. Thus (...). 115.
we see that some man may at some times do that another may not: yea, one
man himself cannot do at all times that he may well do, at sometimes. But
this general rule being kept, that Gods glory be not defaced by doing of it,
it may be done of all men at all times. Paul wrought for his living, when he
preached, which others did not, nor are bound to do: and he might have lived
of his preaching as well as others did: yet the time was such, and the people
so peeuishlie bent, to sclaunder the Gospel of God, that Paul forbear to use
that liberty which God gave him, and would not be thought to preach for
gains, but wrought for his living, would not be chargeable to any man. Such
was the case here, that Ezra might not ask help, and Nehemiah might.

8. And letters also. Nehemiah wisely considering what he wanted yet to the
finishing of such a work as he went about, perceived he should need timber,
and therefore desired the Kings letters of warrantie to Asaph keeper of his
woods, that he might deliver him such trees, and so many, as would serve his
purpose, both for the building of the gates, the towers of the Palace, near
to the Temple, the City walls, and the house that he should dwell in him
self. And here we shall see the King worthy great praise, though he was but
barbarous, that for policies sake, and wealth of his country, both preserved
his woods, and set a keeper over them, that they should not be wilfully wasted.
A good example for Princes, to foresee the like in their countries in all ages:
for commonwealths cannot stand without the use of woods in many kind of
things. Nehemiah is also much to be commended, that although he was in so great
authority and favor with the King, yet he would not take of his woods without
his license and warrant, as many do. If these tow things were kept in this
land, that both the Princes woods and others to should be preserved, faithful
keepers set over them, and none delivered without sufficient warrant, we should
not find the great lack that we generally do. What spoil has been made of
woods in our remembrance, wise men have noted, but few gone about to amend it,
though many have lamented it. What common dealing has been practiced to get
such lands of the Prince and other men as were well woodded into their hands,
and when they had spoiled the woods, rackt the rents, and deeply fined the
tenants, then to return the same land into the Princes hand again, or sell it
over to others, and get as much, it is to well known throughout the Realm,
and to the hurt of many at this day. Nehemiah could ask nothing so much, but
the King did grant it speedily, God did so move the Kings heart and
prospered Nehemiahs doings, in so much that he gives all the praise to God
alone, and says, the hand of his God was good toward him, to set forward his
good purpose of building Ierulem. Nehemiah knew well that God was the common
God of all people and nations, both by creation, and government of them: but
because he seemed to favor him more then he did other, in giving him boldness
to open his grief unto the king: wisdom to make his humble suit without
offense unto the King, and so good success to have all things granted that he
required of the King so unlooked for, he calls him his God, as if he loved or
cared more for him, then for the rest of the world. This is the common use of
the Scripture to call him the God of Abraham, Isaac, Iacoh, David, and Daniel,
because he did both deliver them out of such troubles, as none else could or
would, or any has been so often and wonderfully delivered, as they were: and
also did so bless and prosper them and their doings, as the common sort of
men were not wont to be. So they that see their own misery, and how little
goodness, but rather punishment they deserve at Gods hand, when they see the
Lord pity them, remember them, help them, and bless them, they conceive by
and by such a love toward God that it would please him to look upon them, that
for joy they burst out into tears, they call him their God, because they feel
his good will and favor so much toward them, and more then to other, yea much
more then they could deserve, or be bold to look for at his hands. And as one
man uses to help another, by putting forth his hand to raise him that is
fallen, to give him such things as he wants, and to put away and defend him
from such things as may hurt him: so it is called the good hand ofGod, when he
either bestows his blessing and good things upon us, or when he puts away
such dangers and evils from us, as might hurt us, as it were with his mighty
and merciful hand.

9. And I came to the Captains. Nehemiah has now taken his leave at the
Court, and loses no time, but when he had provided all things necessary for
his journey, he speedeth him self for ward and thinks all time lost, that is
not bestowed in releeuing his country being in such misery. A strange
example to see a courtier leave that wealth, ease and authority that he was in
and go dwell so far from the court, where commonly it falls out that he which
is out of sight is out of mind and sone forgotten, in an old torn and
decayed city, a rude people, and poor country, where he should not live
quietly for his enemies, but take pains to build him self a house, and the
City where he would dwell: to toil and drudge, like a poor laboring man,
that should work for his living, yea and many times to be sore assaulted of
his enemies, both openly and privily, to the great daun ger of his life, as
the rest of the book following will declare. But this is the case of earnest
and zealous men in religion, that they can say with David, I have chosen Psalm.
84.
rather to be a dore-keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the palaces
of sinners: and, it is better to be one day there, then a thousand else where.
God for his mercy sake raise up some such few courtiers as Nehemiah was, which
can be content to forsake their own ease, wealth, and authority, and give
themselves painfully to traueill for the wealth oftheir country. And because
that is to be wished, rather then hoped for, good Lord give us such, as will be
no hinderers, and will be content to live in compass quietly, and not seek to
trouble others that would serve the Lord willingly. Amen.

The king did not only deal thus liberally with Nehemiah at his departure,
but also honorably sent him away with captains and horsemen, safely to
conduct him on his journey, that none should hurt him by the way. And where the
king used him so courteously, no doubt the rest of the court showed him much
curtesy: for courtyers must needs like and mislike, whatsoever the King
seems to like or mislike, to set up or pull down. Courtyers commonly, when
the King speaks, have lost both sense and wit: for if the King seems to
favor any thing, they all, as men without understanding, say it must needs
be so. If the King will not give ear to hear a matter, they are all deaf and
cannot abide to hear speak of it: If the King will not see it, they all cry
out, away with it. So that it is hard to tell, whither is in more miserable
case the king or such dissemblers: for if the King have no judgment of him
self, he shall have no help of such, and they like witless men dare not
speak a truth. Happy is that Prince therefore, that has wise counselors
about him, which will duetifullie inform him of matters vprightlie, wisely
debate the matter with him, without all double dealing, as the other sorts do.
When King Assuerus would advance Haman, every man had Ester. 3. and 8.
him in reverence: but when Mardocheus was set up, then was there crying,
Crucifige, on Hamon. But thus mercisullie does our Lord God deal with his
Church and people, that in every age he has some about the Prince, that both
can and will speak and be heard, though not for all generally in their rage
and persecution, yet for many, as occasion serves, which shall be delivered from
such tyranny, to glorify their God for his mercy: though many willingly spend
their lives patiently, to the praise of the same God eternally. But no rage
shall be so great to root out Gods chosen, but the Lord will ever preserve a
number, even by help of their enemies openly to worship and serve him, in
despite of all their foes.

Plinius the Ruler of a Province under Traiane the Emperor, Eusebius. lib. 3.
Cap. 33.
and appointed to punish the Christians sundry ways, seeing the great number
of them, doubted what he should do, and wrote to the Emperor, that he found
no wickedness in them but that they would not worshipp Images, and that they
would sing psalms before daylight unto Christ as a God, and did forbid all
sins to be used among them: The Emperor hearing this, became a great Ruf.
lib. 1. Cap. 36.
deal more gentle unto them. Salustius tormenting Theodorus a Christian
sundry ways, and along time, to make him for sake his faith, but all in
vain, went to Iulianus the Emperor and told him what he had done from the
day break until 10. of the clock: and counseled him that he should prove that
way no more by cruelty: for they gat glory in suffering patiently, and he gat
shame in punnishing so sharply: because they would not yeald unto him. Many more
such examples, the ecclesiastical histories are full of, where God delivered his
people by the forespeach of their enemies, but these shall suffice at this
present. God had now raised up Nehemiah, and had given him favor and grace in
the Kings sight, to ask and obtain comfort for the deliverance of his Church
and people the Jews, which had been so long in great misery and slavery.
Nehemiah then passes on his journey toward I erusalem with great speed and
honor, passes the river Euphrates and those theeuish and dangerous ways
that he was afraid of, safely comes to the rulers of the country beyond
Euphrates, delivers them the Kings commission for timber, and a band of new
soldiers for his safe conduct into Iewrie, that these might return home
again to the king with thanks that they had conveyed him so far on his way
safely.

10. And Sanballat. As Nehemiah was glad that god had prospered his doings so
well hitherto, so others were as sorry. For at his coming into the country,
Sanballat and Tobias were so sore grieved that any man found such favor with
the king, that he might procure any good thing to ward the children of Israel,
that if he had not brought the kings letters with him, he could not have
escaped their displeasure. It is not manifest in the text what country these
men be of, but I can well incline to that opinion, which thinks that
Sanballat was A Moabite of the City Horonaim, which Esaias in the 15. and Jeremy
48. speak of: and that Tobias was an Ammonite, because the Moabites and
Ammonites were ever from the beginning most cruel against the Israelites in
their coming out of Egypt, and al their doings, though they came and were
borne of near kinsemen. Abraham was uncle unto Lot: of Abraham came the
Israelites; of Lot, when he was dronken, came the Moabites and Ammonites,
gotten by (...). 19.
his own daughters. And this is commonly seen, that both those which be so
bastardly borne against nature, prove not honest, and when displeasure
grows among kinsfolk, and specially for Religion, as this was, it scarce can
be forgiven. Sanballat, by interpretation signifies a pure enemy: and Tobias
was a servant and yet crept into great authority, as the other was. These two
points may well agree to the papists, and all enemies of gods truth, for they
will lurcke privily until time serve them to show their cruelty and then they
will rage feirselie: and so will slaves and servants, Proverb. 30.
that come to authority from base degree. Solomon says, there be three things
that trouble the world, where of the first is a servant, when he com meth to be
a ruler: for then he waxes so proud and cruel, that he forgets what he
was, he disdaineth al men but him self. The Papists are bastardly borne of
spiritual whordome, seruethe Pope as slaves in all his superstitions: they come
of Agar the bond woman, and not of Sara the free woman: and therefore hate the
true children of god which believing the promises of God are saved, and they
will be saved by their own works, contrary to the scripture, and so grieved
when they see any thing pro sper with them, that for very malice and envy,
they pyne away, as these two wicked Imps do here show them selves, because
they would not see Jerusalem restored. As the building of this Jerusalem had
many enemies, so the repayring of the heavenly Jerusalem by the preaching of
the glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus has many more. The malice and envy of
worldlings against all those that set up the kingdom of Christ, and pull down
the pride of man's heart, is so great, that it can never be satisfied. If malice
had not blinded these men, what harm was it to them, to see the Jews do
well, and God worshipped there. The Jews never went about to invade or conquer
their country, and yet they could not enjoy their own country without much
trouble of these enuyous people. Envy ever disdaineth to see other do well,
and specially such as live well and serve the lord Christ, and is glad of other
men's mischief and harm: for then they think none shall be able to withstand
their pleasures and devises. The people of Canaan when they heard of Joshua and
the Israelites coming with so great courrage to possess their cou ntrie, were
so dismayed, that their courage melted away like wax at the fire. Herod Ios. 2.
and al Jerusalem were astonished, when they heard tell that a new king Christ,
being but a child, was borne, and yet the Angels song for joy. When our
savior Christ was crucified and buried, his disciples were sad and the Jews
rejoiced: but when Christ had conquered death, and was risen again, then the
disciples were glad, and the Jews were sad. Thus one thing works
diversely in diverse men. Nehemiah was glad, that he had found such favor with
the King, to build Jerusalem: Sanballat and his fellows were as sorry that any
should do it. The Gospel has foretold, that it should so fall out with the
worldlings and the Godly: the one shall rejoice when he sees Gods glory
flourish, and the other shall be grievously tormented in conscience. The world
shall be glad, says Saint John, but ye shall weep, and yet this your sorrow
shall be turned into joy: for God will Cap. 16.
notsee his servants overwhelmed with trouble, but he will deliver them. David,
describing at large the manyfolde blessings, that God powers on them that
fear him, in the end of the Psalm 1. Cor. 10.
says, The ungodly shall see it, and it shall grieve him, he will gnash with
Psalm. 112.
his testh, and pyne away for malice: but the desire of the ungodly shall
perish. There cannot be a greater grief to an ill man then to see a good man
do well. When there was a question moved before King Frederick among his
Physicians, what was best to make the sight clear, and some said fennel, some
Saladine, some Glass, some other things as they thought good: Actius Syncerus
a nobleman standing by said, he thought Envy was the best: when every man
either laughed or marueiled at his saying, he yealded a reason, and said: Envy
makes any thing that she sees to appear better then it is: for the Envious
man thinks another man's Corn to be better then his own, and another man's
Cow to give more milk, and the least good thing that a good man has, seems
great in his eye that cannot see other thrive, and espieth diligently with
great grief the smalest things the good man does, and that is, said he, to
make the eyesight cleerest, when every smalething shall be best espied. Envy is
worse then any poison of other beasts. The snake, the adder, the toad have
deadly poison in them, wherewith they hurt others, and yet it hurts not
themselves: but Envy is so poisonful a thing, that it kills him that has
it first, and hurts not other, for he fretteth with himself, he fumes, he
pynes away to see others do well: he eats not, nor sleeps quietly, nor can
be merry, until he see some mischief fall on the good man: and as the canker
eats and consumes hard iron and brass, so malicious Envy with fretting
consumes out enuyous stomachs. When Sanballat and Tobias hearing but of
Nehemiahs coming into the country, and that he had found such favor with the
King to buyld Jerusalem, were thus grieved with malicious envy, to see the
Jews do well, what sundry attempts they made afterward to overthrow that
buylding, the residue of this book will declare. How the envious Papists
disdayning to see Gods gospel take place in any country, do rage, fret,
fume, pyne away for sorrow and anger: how they have blooded and bathed their
hands in their Breethrens blood, and yet cannot be quiet, the world sees it to
well, good men lament it, justice cries vengeance, and God will revenge it.

11. And I came to Jerusalem, and I was there three days.

12. And I rose in the night, I and a few men with me, and told no man what
God had put in my heart to do in Jerusalem; and there was no beast with me,
but the beast which I satte upon.

13. And I went forth at the valley gate in the night, and before the
dragons-well to the dung hill-gate, and considered the walls of Jerusalem which
were broken down, and the gates which were consumed with fire.

14. And I passed over to the well-gate and to the Kings fish-poole, and there
was no room for the beast under me to pass.

15. And I went up in the night by the brook, and I considered the well, and
coming back, I came by the vally-gate, and returned.

Nehemiah has now done with the court, and is come to Jerusalem, which he so
much desired: he was weary of the noise and solemnity of the court, and
thought he should live more quietly in his country, but it falls out clean
contrary: for his trouble and danger is double to that it was a fore: and he
comes from the Court to the cart, and from a plesaunt life to a careful.
After his long Journey he rests himself and his company three days,
knowing the weakness of man's body to be such, that it cannot continually endure
labor, but must be refreshed with ease and rest. Thus must good men in
authority not ouerlay their servants with continual labor, but let them have
reasonable time of rest: for God made the Sabbath day, that both man and beast
might rest and not be opressed with continual toyling: such a consideration he
had of man's weakness. we do not reed of any great solemnity that the Jews used
to wel-come him with all, being their countriman, and coming from the court so
honorably with such a band of men to conduct him, and being in so great favor
with the King: it is like if that there had been any such thing, itwould have
been declared, as well as his estate was in the Court before. It was but a hard
beginning, to have Sanballat and Tobias, two ofthe greatest men in the country
to lowre so at his coming, and no greater rejoicing made of his countriemen,
for whose sake he took all those pains: but nothing can discourage him: on
forward he goes with his purpose.

These three days though he rested with his body, his mind was not yet quiet,
he was still devising how he might best and speedely go about his buylding:
how he might open to his countriemen the cause of his coming, how he might
persuade them to join with him in that work, and to declare unto them the
Kings commission and good will toward him, and what favor he found in the
court. For they might well doubt if they should enterprise so great a work,
without the Kings license, they might run into great displeasure, seeing
they had so many enemies in the country about them, that with all their might
had sought the hinderaunce of that buylding so many years. They themselves
had lien so long in despair, followed their own business, sought their own
gains, and cared not for building their own City, nor sought any ways how
to do it: they had almost so far forgotten their God, oppressed the poor,
and fallen to so great wickedness (as appears hereafter) that they had no care
ofReligion in the most part of them.

12. And I rose in the night. After that Nehemiah had thus long debated with
him self how this work should be taken in hand, he could not sleep, but
rises in the night, takes a few of his men with him on foot, and he him
self on his Mule, and rides round about Jerusalem, veweth the walls in what
place they were worst destroyed, and how they might most speedily be repaired.
If he had taken his view in the day time, every man would have stood gazing on
him, wondering what he went about, andhaue hundred it: and not unlike some
would have been offended at him, and his enemies round abut would, as much as
they durst or could, have stopped his enterprise. The night therefore was
thought to be the quietest time to do this in, and he is content to break his
sleep for the furtherance of this great good work. A good example for all men,
and especially for those that be in authority in the commonwealth, as
Nehemiah was now: and for those that have the charge of Gods Church committed
unto them, not to be idle, even in the night season to break a sleep, yea
watch all night if need be, to set forward the building of Gods house and
City. The physician will watch with his patient all night, if need be. The
good Captain will not sleep all the night long, though he have set his watch
before, but he will sometimes at the second watch, sometimes at the third,
arise and see whither his watchmen be fallen on sleep and what they do, or
whither any enemies draw near or no: so should every Christian priuatlie for
him self break his sleep, lift up his mind unto the Lord, call upon him by
faithful prayer, call for mercy at his fatherly goodness, commend him self
and al gods people to his gracious protection, desiring that all stumbling
blocks, which be hinderers of his glory, may be taken away: but specially
those that be negligent to watch a whole night in prayer, devising what ways
Gods glorious name, gospel, and Religion may best be increased, his kingdom
enlarged, Christ glorified, and Antechrist confounded. David says he rose at
midnight to give praise unto the lords blessed Psalm. 119.
name. Our mortal enemy Satan never sleeps night nor day but continually
goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour: and if we had
not as good a watchman to watch for our safety when we sleep, we should be
swallowed up every hour. Behold, says David, he neither slumbereth nor
sleeps, that is the watch Psalm. 121.
man of Israel. All praise be to that mercisull God which takes such care for
his miserable people, and watches when we sleep, that our enemy devour us
not sodenlie. Our savior Christ, to give us example of this diligent watching
to pray in the night, prays Luke 6.
the whole night him self in the mount before he chose his Apostles to preach.
Iosue marched forward all the night long to fight with the Amorites, Iosue. 10.
Judge. 6.
and overcame them. Gedion in the night season pulled down the Alter of Baall
that his father had made, and the grove of wood that was near unto it, being
afraid to do it in the day time, for fear of his fathers house and people
thereby: and in the night also set on the Madianits, and vanquished them. So
good men let no time pass wherein occasion is given them to further Gods glory
night or day, but earnestly follow it until they have brought their purpose to
effect. And that this vewing of the walls might be more secretly done, he
chooses the night season rather then the day to do it in, a few men to wait
on him, rather then many, no more horse then his own, and all the rest on
foot, for making noise: many men and horses would sone have been espied, one
troubled another, made a great noise, and have bewrayed his counsel, which he
kept so secret to him self that he told it not to any man what he went about:
and ifhe had gone alone, he might have fallen into some danger oflife, having
none to help him. The night is the quietest time to devise things in, for then
all things be quiet, every man keeps his house, and draws to rest, no noise
is made abroad, the eyes are not troubled with looking at many things: the
senses are not drawn away with fantasies, and the mind is quiet. Many men
would have committed the doings of such things to other men, and would have
trusted them to have vewed the walls, and after to have certified him of their
doings, in what case they were, and how they might most speedily be repaired:
but Nehemiah lest he should have wrong information given him, though he was a
man of great authority, did not disdain to take the pains himself, break
his sleep, and rode about the walls himself, to teach us, that nothing
should be thought painful at any time, nor disdainful to any man, of what
estate so-euer he were, to set forth the building of Gods City and dwelling
place, which every man ought to do in 2. Sam. 6.
his calling. David, when the Ark of God was brought out of Abinadabs house,
played on instruments, and after cast of his Kingly apparel, and for
rejoicing daunced before the Arc in his poor Ephod, to glorify his God
withal Michol his wife looking forth at a window, and seeing him dance,
laughed him to scorn, and asked him if he were not ashamed to dance so
nakedlie before such a company of women, as though he had been but some light
scoffing fellow. But David, was so zealous a man and earnest to glorify God by all means, that he forgot himself to be a King, abasedhim-selfe with the
lowest and simplest, and said to Michol, that he would yet more lowelie cast
down him self, so that his God might be glorisied in his doings. Michol for
mocking of him was barren all her life and had no children, but David for this
humbling of himself was blessed of the Lord. Moses for sooke to live in
pleasure in Pharaos court, and tobe Hebru. 11.
called his daughters son, and chose to live in trouble with his Breethren
the Jews, and to keep lethros sheep, so that he might serve the Lord. Our
savior the perfect Pattern of all humbleness, did not disdain to wash the
Myrie feet of his disciples and wype them: and last of all, as though that had
not been base enough, he humbles himself to the Ihon. 13.
sclanderous death of the Cross, and to hang on a Cross between two thieves
for us, being his enemies, as though he had been a third: he loved us so
tenderly, that he would go to hell, that we might go to heaven, he would die
so vilde a death, to purchase us so glorious a life: and suffer the pains due
to our sins, that we might enjoy the pleasures of heaven. God grant al
estates this humblenes of mind, that for his cause that forsook al worldly
honor, they may be content to abase themselves to suffer al pains and
reproachful things in the world for the furtherance of the building of Gods
City: such humble abasing of themselves is the greatest honor that ever they
shall get, all worldly pomp without this vilde and shameful. In that he
tells no man, what he went about, and that God had put it in hismind to do
it, he declares that it was not his own device, nor came from any man, but
God himself was the mouer of it, and therefore was more earnestly to be
followed. He that will learn to keep counsel in deed, let him learn of
Nehemiah here to tell no man, not to his dearest friend. Many will come to his
friend and say, I can tell you a secret matter, but ye must keep in counsel
and tell no body: what folishnes is this that thou would have another to
keep thy counsel secret to him self and thou thy self can not keep it
secret to thy self, would thou have another man to do that for thee, which
thou will not do for thy self? Keep thine own counsel, and then thou shall
not need to fear lest other men bewray thee. And if thou would have another
man to keep thy counsel he will think thou should not have told it thy
self, and then it had been safe enough: but in telling him, he tells another
friend, and he says to him as thou said to thy friendafore. I can tell you a
thing that was told me secretly, but you must keep counsel and tell no body:
so with going from friend to friend, it will be known to al men. Therefore the
surest and only way to have counsel kept secret, is to follow Nehemiah here,
and tell it to no man, though he be thy dear friend: for he has other friends
to tell it to, as thou did tell it him. If any do marueil why Nehemiah was
thus earnest in this building, and refused no pains nor ieoperdy, but with
courage went through them all, he tells a sufficient cause here him self,
and says, his God had put it in his heart to do it. He takes not the glory
of it to himself, but gives all the praise to God alone, as we must do in
all good things. Whenever God puts any good thing into man's heart to do,
he drives him so forward, that he cannot eat, sleep, nor rest quietly, until
it be done, he thinks all time long and lost, that is not bestowed on it:
therefore they that be so cold in their work, that they care not whither it
go forward or not, are not moved by God. The holy ghost which works this
great desire in us, is called fire. John Baptist said, he baptized in water,
but he that came Luke 3.
after him should baptize them with the holy ghost and fire. The holy ghost fell
on the apostles in fiery tongues, and our savior Christ said, he came to set
Act. 2.
fire on the earth, and what would he else, but that it should burn? These be
spoken to teach us, that those which are moved of God, are earnest Luke 12.
in their doings. God loves not those that be luke warm, he will spew them out
of his mouth: you must be either an earnest friend, or an open Reave. 3.
enemy: he loves no dissemblers, you must be either hot or cold: he that is
not with him, is against him: double-dealers are the worst people that be, they
are good neither before God, nor man: an open enemy is better, then a
flattering friend: all which sayings do teach us to be earnest in gods work,
or else he puts it not into our heart. Prouer. 27.
Solomon commends plain dealing so much, thathe say eth, the wounds that a
friend gives, are better then the crafty kisses of him that hates thee. This
heavenly fire burns up al desires in man, and kindles all goodness in him.
Jeremy, when he saw the word that he preached to be contemned os the people,
he waxed very sad, he Iere. 20.
would preach no more: but when he had houlden his tongue but a little while, he
said, the word within him was like a burning fire: it burst out, he could not
hold it in, and he fell to preaching again: he was so grieved to see God
dishonored, and so earnest to bring the people to knowledge of their duty,
that he could not hold his peace, but needs must preach again. When Iesabell
persecuted Helias, because he had killed Baalls priests for their idolatry,
he fled into the wildernsse, and the Angel sinding him asked him, what he did
there: Helias said, I am earnestly zealous and grecued for thee, O Lord God 1.
King. 19.
of hosts, that the children of Israel have for saken thy covenant, etc.
Moses loved his people so well, that when Godwould have destroyed them, he
prayed to forgive them, or else to put him out of his book. Exodus 32.
The holy Ghost told Saint Paul, that in eueric town there were chains and
troubles ready for him, but he said he cared not, his life was not Act. 20.
dear to himso that he might run his course. For his country men also he
wished to be accursed from Christ so that they might be saved. The other
Apostles, when they were whipped for preaching Christ Jesus, went away rejoicing
that they were thought worthy to suffer any worldly shame for his names sake.
Such an earnest love should every one have, both the magistrate to do justice
and punish sin, and the preacher to root out evil doctrine and preach
Christ purelie, that nothing should make them afraid, but they should buyld
Gods City, the heavenly Jerusalem, boldie: nothing should weary them, and
allabour should be pleasure, so that they might serve the Lord. Phinies when he
saw whoredom and wickedness abound, and none would punish it, takes the sword
himself, when others would not, and killed the man and woman, being both of
great parentage, in their open whordome. Numb. 25.
God was so well pleased with this zealous deed of Phinies that could not
abide to see sin unpunished, and Gods glory so openly defaced, that he
blessed him and his issue for it after him. Our savior Christ, when he saw
Gods house appointed for prayer, John. 2.
misused, gat a whippe and drove them out. Thus when-soeuer God puts any
thing into man's heart to do, it pricketh him on forward, that he cannot rest
until he have finished it. Nehemiah was here moved by God to this work. God
for his mercies sake inflame many men's hearts with the like earnest desire of
buylding Gods spiritual City, that the workmen may be many, strong and
courageous: for the work is great and troublesome the enemies many,
malicious, and stout hinderers, in number infinite, and true laborers very
few. Gregory says well, there is no such pleasant sacrisice before God, as is
the earnest zeal to win souls unto the Lord. The Judge. 21.
men of Iabes Gilead when the Israelits joined altogether to punish that wicked
adulteryin Benjamin stood by, looked on, and would take part with neither of
them, not knowing who should get the victory, thinking to escape best, and
picka thank in meddling on neither part: but for such double-dealing, the
Israelites set on them afterward and destroyed them. A just reward to fall on
such, as will stand by, and look how the world goes, meddle of no side, for
fear of a change, or else join A just reward to fall on such as will stand by,
and look how the world goes, meddle on no side, for fear of a change, or else
ever join with the stronger part. How full the world is this day of such
double faced popish hipocrites, that will turn with every wind, good men
lament, and God must amend, when pleases him. They be the worst men that live.
Such men be of no Religion: some call them Neuters, because they are earnest on
no side. Some call them vterques, because they be of both sides as the world
changes. some call them Omnia, because if a Turk or any other should come,
they would yeald unto them all. They be like freeholders, for whosoever
purchases the land, they hold of them all, though every year come anew
master. But they say, best it is that they be of no religion: for as there is
but one God, so there is but one religion: and he that knows not the true God
and religion, knows none at all, although he make himself every day a new
God, and a new religion, and the more the worsse.

13. And I went forth. In these next verses is nothing but the way described,
by which he went to take the view of the walls, how they were pitifully
destroyed, and how they might best and most speedily be repaired. The gates of
Cities have their names on some occasion outwardly given, as the North-gate and
the Eastgate, because it goes Northward or Eastward: sometimes of them that
builded them, as Lud-gate and Billings-gate, of Lud and Billinus: sometimes of
things that are brought in or carried out of the City by them, as the
sish-gate, the dunghil-gate, etc. This gate that he goes out at first, is
called the vally-gate, because the way into the valley of Iosephat, which lay
before it Eastward, betwixt it and Mount oliuet, was through it. This valley
was called Iosephats, by reason of a noble victory that God gave Iosephat
there. Diverse people joined themselves together against Iosephat, but god so
ordered the matter, that 2. Chro. 20.
one of them killed another and Iosephat looking on, after the slaughter came
and took all their riches and spoil, and he delivered without any stroke
giving. The Dragons-well had his name of some venomous serpent living there.
The dunghil-gate, because the filth of the city was carried out thatway. The
wel-gate and kings fish-poolc, because there was great plenty of water-ponds,
watering-places etc. The brook he speaks of, is thought to be Cedron, which
is spoken of in the gospel, John the 18. Nehemiah when he had vewed all the
walls returnedin at the same gate that he went out at: but in some places he
found so great store of rubbish of the broken walls, that he could not pass on
horsseback, so miserably were they torn and overthrown, and all the gates that
should be shut, were burned to ashes. Orighteous God, and miserable people. God
of his mercy foretold them by his Prophets, that if they fell from him, and
served other Gods, these mischiefs should fall on them: but they blinded in
their own affections, believed it not. O stony heart, learn here how vile a
thing sin is in Gods sight: for, not only the man thatdoeth sin, is punished,
but the earth, the country, the stones, the walls, the city, trees, corn,
cattle, fish, foul, and al fruits, and other things that god made for man's
necessity, are perished, punished and turned into an other nature for the
sin of m an: yea, and not only worldly things, but his holy Temple, law,
word, and religion, the ark of God, the Cherubins, the pot with Manna, the
mercy seat, Aarons rod, with all therest of his holy Jewels, were given unto
the wicked Nabuchadnezzers hand, for the disobedience of the people: and God
will rather suffer his open enemies to enjoy his wonderful benefits, then his
flattering friends. When Adam had sinned, the earth, which before was decked
with all good fruits, brought forth weeds to punish the^ withal. For the
wickedness of Sodom, God not only cruelly destroyed the people in it, but to
this day that pleasant ground, which before was like paradise is now barren,
full of filthy mire, slitche, tar, etc. and the air of it so pestilent, as
diverse do write, that if any birds sly over it, it kills Psalm. 107.
them. The whole country of Iewrie, a plentiful land, flowing with milk and
honey, of his own nature, by the disobedience of the people became a barren
land, as David teaches in his psalm. The lord turns a fruit full ground
into a barren, for the wickedness of the dwellers in it. Jerusalem was not only
destroyed now thus pitiously by the Babilonians, but after ward by Vespasian
the Emperor, and had not one stone left standing on another, and the Jews
driven out ofit, who now live scattered through the world, abhorred of all good
men, and under Gods heavy rod, for crucifying the Lord Jesus Christ the
son of God, and their continual despising of him. Let every man therefore
learn reverently in the fear of God to live: for sin will not only be
punished with everlasting death in the world to come, but even in this life man
himself is plagued, and all things that should serve or pleasure him, shall be
turned to his destruction, because he would not serve his God as he ought to do.

What can be a more righteous judgment of God, then so to order things, that
no creature of God shall serve a wretched man, which will not serve not fear
the Lord his God and creator. Sin is so vile in Gods sight, that ne will
punish those innocent, insensible, and unreasonable creatures, as the stones in
the wall, the house wherein thou dwell, the earth whereby thou live, which
never sinned, for the sin of thee wretched man. O consider how God abhors
sin and disobedience of his word, that he could never be pacified, but by the
death of his own dear son Christ Jesus for thy sins. O miserable man,
consider thy wretched state: thy sins pulled thy Lord Christ from heaven to
hell, from joy to pain, thou causedst him to be whipped, and hanged on a tree,
thrust to the heart with a spear, by his blood to save the: thou causedst him
to die that thou mighst live. If thou should deal thus with another man thy
fellow, what would thou think thou had deserved? And when thou have thus
misused thy Lord and Christ, the son of God, crucifiing him again, and yet
continuest Hebr. 10.
in sin, contemning his commandments, treading the son of God under thy
feet, and esteeming the blood of his eternal Testament as a profane thing,
how can thou look up unto him? how can thou hope for mercy? Wicked men
are so horrible in Gods sight, that the Angels in heaven abhor them, the
creatures on earth disobey them, good men fly their company, and devils in
hell pull them unto them: and yet malice has so blinded them, that they cannot
turn unto the Lord. But whatsoever there is in us, O God, forget not thou thy
self, show thy self a God still, though we forget thee. As thou louedst us,
when we were thine enemies, so love us still now, whom thou have made thy
friends, and bought so dearly, and turn us, good God, that we may love thee.
Remember, O Lord, whereof we be made: from the earth we came, on the earth we
live and delightin earthly things: unto the earth we shall return: thou can
not look for heavenly things to come from so vile a matter, this earthly
nature cannot be changed, but by thy heavenly spirit: deal not with us
therefore, O Lord, in justice, as we deserve, but in thy great mercy, which is
our sure salvation, and let thy manifold mercy devour our manifold misery,
that our manifold sins be not laid to our charge. Gracious God forgive us: as
our misery is endless, so is thy mercy, and much more large then we can
think. As we see God deal in his anger with this City, for the sin of the
people that dwelled in it, so he will deal with all obstinate breakers of his
law in all ages and places, without respect of persons. The walls of the city
may well be compared to the Magistrates, which both defend the people from their
enemies, and also govern the Citizens within: as the walls keep out other from
inuading, so they keep in the inhabitants from straying abroad: and the gates
of the City may well be compared unto the ministers, which open the door of
life to all penitent persons, by the comfortable preaching of mercy promised
in Christ, and shut heaven gates against al reprobate and impenitent sinners,
by terrible thundering of his vengeance, threatened to such in his word. The
walls are destroyed, and the gates burned, when the rulers and ministers do
not their duty, but care for other things. And as this wretched people had
justly for their disobedience neither walls left to keep out the enemy, nor
gates to let in their friends, but all were destroyed, so shall all godles
people be left without godly Magistrates to govern them, and live in slavery
under tyrants that oppress them, and also without comfortable Ministers to
teach them, and be led by blind guides that deceive them, and so the blind
lead the blind, and both fall in to the ditch, to their utter and endless
destruction. They be not worthy to have either Magistrate or preacher, that
will not obey laws, nor believe the word. This Osee the Prophet foretold them
should fall on them saying: The people of Israel should sit many days
without a Prince, without sacrifice, and Image, without the Ephod and Teraphin:
and yet in the end they should return unto their God. But they feared not
these threatenings then, no more then we do now: yet as they fell on them then,
so will they fall on us now. After that Nehemiah had thus diligently vewed the
walls, and the breaches of them, he was more able to render a reason, and talk
with the rulers how they might be repaired. A good rule for all those that have
any charge committed to them, that they should first priuatlie consider the
things they have to do themselves, and then shall they be more able to
consider who gives best counsel for the doing of it. Rashely to enter on it, a
wise man will not, nor open his mind to others, until he have advised
himself privately first what is best to be done: and so shall he be best
able, both to render a reason of his own doings, and also to judge who gives
best advise.

16. The Magistrates knew not whither I went, or what I did: and to the Jews,
the Priests, the Nobles, the Rulers, and the rest of the worke-men, I told
nothing hitherto.

17. And I said unto them, ye know the misery that we be in, how Jerusalem is
wasted, and her gates burned in the fire: come and let us build the walls of
Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach.

18. And I told them of the hand of my God, that it was gracious toward me, and
also the Kings word, that he spoke unto me: and they said, let us rise and
build, and they strengthened their hands to good.

NEhemiah not only like a Godly zealous man is diligent to set forward this
work, but also like a very wise man, shows in his doings the chief
properties of him, that has weighty matters committed unto him. He that has
great matters to do, must be faith full and trusty, and also secret, and
keeping counsel close: as the Poet says; Fide and taciturnitate est opus. And
where every sort must be made privy in such a work, hitherto he had opened
it to never a one.

19. And I said unto them. After Nehemiah had thus long kept his purpose
secret and diligently vewed the walls how great the breach was, how it might
be best and speedily repaired, and was able to talk with all sorts, and
render a reason of his doings to every one both high and low in authority,
to the common sort of the Jews, to the workmen, Priests, and Rulers: he now
propounds the matter unto them all, and in few words, after he had declared
the misery that they were in, and how that famous City lay open to all
enemies to invade, to their great shame, exhorts and encourages them to fall
to the building of the walls, and live no more in such shame and reproach, as
they had done, but recover their old estimation again, for he had found
favor both in Gods sight and the Kings.

There be two kind of reasons to persuade a man to do any thing: the one is,
if he declare how hurtful and shameful it is to do or suffer such a thing to
be done or undone. The other reason is, to open unto him what good help and
encouraging there is to set it forward. The shame was great, that for their
great sin and disobedience gods people, who craked so much of their good god,
should live in such slavery under infidels, as though their God could not, or
would not deliver them. The hope to prosper well in this building was great,
for that both God and the King had showed great tokens of their goodwills for
the furtherance of this good work. Both these kinds of persuasions he uses
here: his words be not many, but effectual. For as the shame was, to loose
their City, so the glory should be greater in recovering it: and wise men use
and love few words; for either those will serve good men, or more will not. The
woeful sight of those broken walls, and this miserable slavery of the people in
it, were sufficient to move a stony heart to pity, though never a word were
spoken by any man: but those weighty reasons well considered, made them all
to fall to work with great courage. What man had so little feeling of God and
honesty, that would not help to build Gods City and their own country.
Those that love to hear themselves talk, and with many words to couller
their ill meaning, may here learn how a simple truth plainly told in few
words, works more in good men's hearts then a fair painted tale that has
little truth, and less good meaning in it. An honest matter speaks for it
self, and needs no coullouring, and he that uses most flatering and subtle
words, makes wise men mistrust the matter to be ill. A few words well placed,
are much better, then a long unsavory tale.

18. And I told them. After that Nehemiah had briefly set before them, the
misery they lived in, the cruel destruction of Jerusalem, which God chose for
him self to dwell in, and what shame it was for them, not to recover by
weldoing that which their fathers for their wickedness lost: he now declares
unto them, as a full reason to persuade any man that would be persuaded, and
says; both the hand of his God was gracious toward him in this enterprise,
and the Kings words were very comfortable. When a man has both God and the
king of his side, what needs he more? who can hurt him? what should he doubt
or be afraid of: what would he have further? God had given him such a favor in
the Kings sight, that as soon as he asked license to go and build the City
where his fathers lay buried it was granted: and the liberality and good will
of the King was so great, that he granted him both soldiers, safely to
conduct him to Jerusalem, and also commission to his officers, for timber to
this great building. What should they mistrust or doubt of now? There wanted
nothing but a good will and courage on their side: if they would rise and work
lustily, no doubt the work would be finished speedily. Nehemiah: still
calls him his God, as though God heard his prayer only, and moved the kings
heart to give him license to build this City, which many diverse times had
wished and labored for, and could not get it. He thought this to be so great a
blessing of God, that he can never be thankful enough for it, and therefore
calls him his God. He that loves his God earnestly, reioyseth in nothing so
much, as when he sees those things prosper, whereby Gods glory may be showed
forth. He cares more for that, then for his own pleasure and profit. And when
such things go backward, it greeueth him more then any worldly loss that can
fall unto him self. And though some wavering worldlings may say: the King
might die, or change his good will from them, and god many times, when he has
given a good beginning for a while, yet in the end he cutteth it of and by this
means discourage other from this work, and will them not to meddle: The time
might change, and then they might be blamed: and Nehemiah although he was in
great favor with the King at this present, yet being absent long from the
Court, might sone be forgotten: others that bear him no good will, might
creep in favor and bring him into displeasure (for in the Court commonly, out
of sight out of mind:) These and such other reasons would soon withdraw
dissemblers from their good furtherance of this work: Yet God so wrought with
them all, that they all boldly took this work in hand, and finished it. God
of his great goodness, for the better exercising of our faith, has thus ordered
the course of things that although when we look into the world, we shall find
many things to withdraw us from doing our duties to his majesty, yet, by his
holy spirit, he has given us faith and hope of his promised goodness, that
nothing should discourage us from doing our duties: for we have him on our
side, that has all things at his commandment, and whose purpose none can
withstand. Let the world therefore waver never so much: Let it threaten never
such cruelty, let it counsel and persuade as crastily as it can, to meddle in
no such matters of God: Yet good men cannot be quiet, until they have showed
their good will to the uttermost of their power, for the furtherance of Gods
work, and obedience of his will. Abraham, Genesis 12.
when he was bidden to leave his country and kinsfolk, and go into that
place that God would show him, might have many reasons to stay him: as that he
could not tell, how to live when he came there, that he should want the comfort
of his friends, live amongst strangers, and those that would rather hurt him,
then help him: yet none of these could stay him, but he would follow whether
the Lord would lead. God badde him sacrifice his son Isaac, having no issue,
and yet promised him that in his seed all nations should be blessed. Abraham
could not tell how these two should stand together, both to kill his Genesis 22.
son, and to have issue of him: yet he doubted not in faith, but rather Heb.
11.
then his promise should not be true, God would raise him from death, to beget
and raise up seed after him. When Isaac, going to besacrificed, asked his
father where the sacrifice was that should be killed (for he had the wood on
his back) and the fire in his hand: Abraham, not doubting, though not knowing
how, where, nor when it should be done, said, God will provide himself a
sacrifice, my son: and proceeded Genesis 22.
to sacrifice his son, until the Angel stayed him, and showed him a Ram in
the bushes, which he should offer unto the Lord in stead of his son. The
Apostles, when our savior Jesus Christ sent them out to preach without bagg or
wallet, money, or staff, made no Math. 10.
question how they should live, or defend themselves against so many enemies,
or how they should teach others, that never went to school themselves to
learn: but obeying his commandment, and believing his promise, went forth
boldly, and did their message diligently, and God blessed their doings
wonderfully. When they came again unto him, and told him how well they had
sped, he asked them, whither they wanted any thing by the way, while they were
in his service? and they said, nay. Thus good men will not be withdrawn from
serving their God, though many worldly Luke. 22.
reasons might withdraw them: and God will so increase their faith to go
forward, that nothing shall discourage them. They will rather stick to Gods
promise, then any cunning practice of man. A good beginning is a great reason
to persuade a man, that God will give good success unto the end. David
comfort himself to kill Goliath, because he killed a Lion and a Bear,
when he was young, keeping sheep. God never does anything in vain, but when
his faithful servants take things in hand of mere love and duty to further 1.
Sam. 17.
his glory, he ever brings it to good effect. The good success that God
has given us before, should persuade us that he will give us more. Hipocrites,
faint hearted soldiers, dubble dealers, and those that be not grounded upon a
sure faith and hope of his promised goodness, often fail of their purpose,
through their own default. God has promised nothing to such dissemblers, and
those that trust him, he never fails. Let al those therefore that fear the
Lord unfeignedly, boldly begin the Lords work, continue it sted fastly, look
for the mighty furtherance of the same faithfully, and no doubt they shall have
it. Who ever to this day trusted in the Lord in vain, but he had good success
in his doings? Let no man mistrust Gods goodness to further those good things
that he takes in hand: let us work diligently, and commit the success to
him boldly, no doubt he will bring it to good pass. When they had well
considered Nehemiahs words and his good counsel, they cast all perils away, and
said, let us rise and buyld those decayed walls. Let us linger no longer, but
speedely fall to labor, and recover that with our diligence, that our fathers
lost by disobedience. Now they buskle and bowne themselves to this work, they
spit on their hands, and take better hold then before, they buckle themselves
to labor with courage, not to be driuch from it any more. So much can a few
words, spoken in the fear of God vprightlie by some man, at some times doc,
that cannot be gotten at other times by many persuasions, Aggeus, when they had
lien many years on sleep, forgeting the buylding of Gods house, with like few
words so encouraged them to work, that they finished the Temple in four
years, which before had lain almost 40. years unlooked at. So can God make
them earnest in a short time, when pleases him, which before had been cold
and negligent. And this courage that they gather now, camerather by gentle
persuasions, then by fearful threatenings: for good natures are moved rather
with the glad tidings of the Gospel, then sharpnes of the law. The law
threatens correction, the gospel promises blessings: the law kills, the
gospel quickneth: the law breeds fear, the gospel brings love: the law
casts down, the gospel reareth us up: the law lays our sin to our
charge, the gospel says, Christ has paid the price for our reconciliation. A
gentle kind of preaching is better to win weak minds, the^ terrible
thundering of vengeance: yet is the law most necessary to be taught, to pull
down froward hearts, and bring them to knowledge of themselves. I see diverse
of the Prophets terribly threaten the wickedness of their time, yet I see none
of them, that does so mightily dissuade them from their ungodly life, as
Aggeus and Nehemiah with their mild dealing, bring so many to repentance:
Both be good and necessary, but the gospel more comfortable, and the law
fearful. fear makes a man many times to fly from ill, but love makes him
willingly to do good. Solomon says, love is as strong as death: for as all
things yeald unto Cant. 8.
death, so nothing is to hard or painful for him that loves, but he will
adventure at all perils, until he get the thing that he loves. S. Romans 8.
Paul says, who shall separate us from the love of Christ Jesus? Shall trouble,
anguish, persecution, hunger, nakedness, Ieoperdie, or the sword? if thou
would have a man earnest in any thing, rather draw him to it by love, then
drive him to it by fear: bring him once to love it earnestly, and nothing
shall make him afraid to stand to it manfully. Fear makes men cold,
discourageth them, and many times turns them to hatred. That preacher
therefore which will win most unto God shall rather do it by gentelnes, then
by sharpnes, by promise, then by threatenings, by the gospel, then by the law,
by love, then by fear: though the law must be enterlaced to throw down the
malice of man's heart, the flesh must be bridled by fear and the spirit
comforced with loving kindness promised. Nehemiah uses both the law and the
Gospel to persuade them withal.

The 17. verse lays before them the misery they were in, to live under
heathen, and strange Princes, the pitiful sight of their broken wall, their
gates burned, whereby they lived in continual danger of the enemy round about
them to be spoiled and murdered: the shame was no less them the loss, that
they could not repair and recover by their well doing that their fathers lost,
and they had dwelled so many years in it since king Cyrus gave them license to
go home again: all which were the heavy burdens and curse of the law. But
this verse sets before them the gracious goodness of God and the King, which
had given great tokens of their good will and favor toward the work of their
mere mercy: and so both the law and the gospel laid before them, the misery
taken away, and mercy offered unto them, they should most thankfully receive
the goodness promised, and avoid the great burden of misery, that they so
long had borne. This kind of teaching is very meet to be followed of all
preachers, and those that shall speak unto a people, where all sorts of states
ar to be persuaded: sor these kinds of reasons touch all sorts of men: and if
it be done in the fear of God, it will work as it did then. Those be the best
scholars that will learn withont the rod: yet none so good but at times he
needs the rod: and a wise schoolmaster will make such choice of his
scholars, whom he will have learned, that he shall profit more with gentleness
then cruelty: and such asses as must continually have the whip, are meeter to
be driven from the school to the Cart, then by their loytring to hurt others.

19. Sanballat the Horronite, and Tobias the servant an Ammonite, and Gesem the
Arabian heardit, and they mocked us, and said: what is this thing that ye do?
do ye fall away from the King?

20. And I answered them, and said unto them: the God of heaven is he that
has granted us prosperity, and we his servants will rise up and build: and as
for you, there is no portion and right nor remembrance in Jerusalem.

These men as they were sad at Nehemiahs first coming, when they see that any
man had found such favor with the King to do good to Jerusalem: so now were
they almost mad for anger, when they heard that they went about to build the
walls of Jerusalem. Openly to withstand them, or forbid them to work, they
durst not, because they had the Kings Commission to do so: but so much as they
durst they discourage them, they mock them, they threaten to accuse them, and,
of that which would make any man afraid, they lay rebellion to their charge,
and say, they would build that City for no other cause, but that they would
make themselves strong aginst the King, fall away from him, set up a King
amongst them selves, obey none, but use their old liberty, and rule all about
them, as they did before. These men bear some authority in the country, and
like proud braggers, and dissembling malicious enemies to God and his word,
they would hinder so much as thy could this building. The world is to full at
this day of such like dissembling hipocrites. The one soite if they come up of
naught, and get a badge pricked on their sleeue, though they have little, yet
they look so bigg and speak so stoutly, that they keep the poor under their
feet, that they dare not route. All must be as they say, though it be neither
true nor honest, none dare say the contrary. But the dungeon dissembling
Papist is more like unto them: for he cares not by what means to get it, by
fear, or by flattery, so that he can obtain his purpose. These men first
mock the Jews, and scornefully despise them for enterprising this building,
thinking by this means to discourage poor souls that they should not go
forward in this work: After that they charge them with rebellion. These two be
the old practices of Satan in his members to hinder the building of Gods house
in all ages. 2. Pet. 3.
Judas in his epistle says, that in the last days there shall come mockers, 2.
Tim. 3.
which shall walk after their own wicked lusts. Peter and Paul foretold the
same. Our savior Christ, though he was most spitefully misused many ways,
yet never worsse, then when they mocked him: both Herod, Pilate, the Priests
and the Jews. It is thought but a small matter to mock simple souls and so
withdraw them from God: but Prou. 3.
Solomon says, he that mocketh shall be mocked. And David, he that dwells
Psalm. 2.
in the heavens shall mock them, and the Lord will laugh them to scorn. This
shall be the just reward of such scorners. It is justly to be feared, that as
the Jews were given up to Nebuchad-nezzer, for mocking the Prophets and
Preachers of their time, as it is written; so we, for our bitter taunting,
scoffing, reuiling, disdaining and dispising of Gods 2. Chro. 36.
true ministers at these days shall be given into our mortal enemies hands.
What is more common in these days then when such hickscorners will be merry at
their drunken bankets, to fall in talk of some one Minister or other: Nay they
spare none, but go from one to another, and can spy a mote in other men, but
cannot spy their own abominations. Christ was never more spitefully and
disdainfully scoft at, then these Lusty Russians open there mouths against his
Preachers: but the same lord Christ says of his disciples, that he which
despises them, dcspiseth him. What reward the mockers of Christ shall have, I
think every man knows. Good men with heavy hearts commit themselves and
their cause unto the Lord and pray with David: Lord deliver my soul from
wicked lipes and from a deceitful tongue. Solomon says, God will laugh when
such shall perish. Michol, wife to David was barren all her life for mocking
her husband 2. Sam. 6.
when he played on his harp and daunced before the ark of God. The children
that mocked Elizeus and said, come up thou baldepate, come 2. King. 2.
up, were all devoured suddenly of wild bears, that came out of the wood hard
by. David, amongst many miseries that he complains of says, that the
scorners made their songs of him, when they were at their Psalm. 69.
drunken feasts, and when he sees no remedy how to escape their poysonfull
tongues, he patiently turns him unto the Lord, commits all to him, and in
the latter end of the Psalm: God comfort him and tells him, what sundry
mischiefs shall fall on them, for their despitefull dealing. When Belsazar
King of Babylon made his drunken feast to his great men and called for the
vessels and Jewels which Daniel. 5.
Nebuchadnezer hrought from Jerusalem, that he and his harlots might eat and
drink in them in despite of the living God of Israel: A hand appeared writing
on the wall, which Daniell expounded, when none of his sowthsayers could do
it, and said, his Kingdom should be taken from him: and so it came to pass.
For the same night Belsazar was slain, and Darius King of the Medes possessed
his Kingdom. A just reward for all such drunken mockers of God, his people,
Religion, and Ministers, and yet our merry tossepots will take no heed. Sara
saw I smaell playing with Isaac her son, and said to Abraham, cast out the
handmaid and her son, for he shall not be heir with my son. But S. Paul
alleging the same text, calls this playing persecution Genesis 21.
and says: as he that was borne after the flesh didpersecute him that was
borne after the spirit: so it is now: but the scripture says, cast out the
handmaide and her son, for he shall not be heir with tbe son of the Gall.
4.
freewoman: so shall all scornful mockers, Iesters, and Railers on God, his
word, Religion, and People, be cast out into utter darkness, and not be heirs
of gods Kingdom with his children. This playing and mocking is bitter
persecution, and therefore not to be used of good men, nor against good men and
lovers of Religion. yet at this day he is counted a merry companion, and
welcome to great men's tables, that can rail bitterly, or jest merely on the
ministers. Such is our love toward God, his word, and ministers: but sure he
that loves God and the word in deed, cannot abide to hear the Preachers ill
spoken of undeservedly. I cannot tell whither is worsse, the scoffer, or the
glad hearer. If the one had no pleasure in hearing such lewd talk, the other
would not tell it. The other thing they charge the Jews with all is Rebellton,
falling from the King, and setting up a: Kingdom amongst themselves. When
Elias rebuked Achab, and the people, to return unto the Lord, Achab says unto
him: art thou he that troubles Israeli? nay, said the Prophet, it is thou and
thy fathers house: rebuking 1. King. 18.
him, and teaching truth, was counted troubling of the common wealth and the
King. What was the cause that King Saul and his flatterers hated poor David so
much, and so cruelly sought his death, but that the people song after that
Goliath was slain: that 1. Sam. 18.
Saul had killed a thousand, and David his ten thousand: which was as much to
say, as they thought that David was a mightier man then Saul, and meeter to be
King. Daniel set open his windows, and contrary to the Kings commandment,
prayed thrice a day unto the living (...) 6.
Lord, and therefore was accused of disobedience to the King, and cast to the
Lions den to be devoured of them. The Israelits in Egypt, Exed. 1.
when God blessed them, and increased them to a great people, were accused that
they waxed so many and wealthy that they would rebel against the King: and
therefore to keep them under, were oppressed by the taskemasters, and set to
make Brick for their buildings. When our Lord and master Christ Jesus was
borne, the wisemen asked where the King of the Jews was? Herod was mad, and
killed all Mat. 2.
the children of two years old and under, lest any of them should come to be
King and put him down. When our savior Christ said his kingdom was not of
this world, then said Pilate, thou art a King then: Ihon. 18.
Whereupon the Jews took occasion to accuse him of treason: and said,
eueryone that makes him self a King speaks against the Emperor, for we
have no King but the Emperor. The Apostles were accused that they had troubled
the commonwealth by preaching Christ, and filled Jerusalem with their
doctrine, contrary to the commandment Act. 5.
of the Priests and Elders. Jason was drawn out of his own house for lodging
Paul, being accused that he had troubled the world and disobeyed the Emperor.
When Saint Paul had preached Christ in Athens, he was accused for troubling the
state by teaching his new doctrine: Act. 17.
thus ever the building of Gods house by preaching of the Gospel has been
charged with rebellion, disobedience to Princes, and troubling of the
commonwealth and peace. But good men have not been dismayed at such big
words, but with good courage have proceeded in their work, having the
testimony of a good conscience that they be not guilty of any such thing.

20. And I answered. This was the first push, but not the worst that they had
to discourage them, for proceeding in this building: and not unlike but it made
some afraid, to hear such bigg words, and so great matters laid to their
charge, by men of such authority as they were. But as they were not ashamed so
unjustly to accuse Gods people, so Nehemiah steppeth forth, as boldly
answers for them all, and defends their doings. A worthy example for all
those that be in authority to follow: they have not the sword committed unto
them in vain, they ought to defend both by word and deed, in their well
doings, those that be committed unto them. Their duty is, not to suffer Gods
enemies to invade or hurt, sclaunder or blaspheme those, that they have charge
over, but draw the sword, if need be, to drive away such wolves and punish
such wicked tongues. It is not as we commonly say, when any danger or
persecution arises for the doctrine, or that the ministers are untruly
reported of: let the preachers defend it, it is their duty and vocation, we
are not learned, it belongs not to us, our care is for the commonwealth
only. Religious magistrates will neither do so, nor say so: they will not
suffer, as much as in them lies, the Church, Religion, doctrine, nor the
ministers to be ill spoken of, reviled, defaced, nor ouerrunne. They be
mouths, to speak for Gods people, as Moses was unto Pharao: they be hands to
fight for them, they be Rulers to defend the good, and punish the evil. Iephthe
when the Ammonites fought against Israel, defended the cause in disputation
Judge. 11.
by words, and after in battle with sword. The good King Ezechias, when he
received the blasphemous message and letters e. Kings. 18.
from Rabshakeh against God, his Temple, people, and Religion, he seeks by
all means to defend them all, and encourage the people not to fall away from
their God in that great danger. When Holophernes railed on God and his people,
Achior and Iudeth defend them, and she cutteth of his head. When the great
Giant Golias reviled the people of God, and provoked them to fight with him 1.
Sam. 14.
hand to hand, if they durst, for the victory: none we, found that durst do
it: but poor David, with no strong weapons, but his sling and a few stones,
killed that lusty champion and delivered his people. When Dathan, Chorah and
Abiram, with (...) fellows, railed against Moses and Aaron Gods true
ministers, Moses committing (...). 16.
the revenge of it to the Lord, warned the people to depart from their
company, lest they perished with them, by that strange death: and straight
ways the earth opened, and swallowed up them, and their goods, and tents,
where they (...), quick into hell. Nay weomen were not spared: for Marie Moses
sister was smitten with a leprosy for railing on Moses her brother, Gods
liefetenant over them. As the magistrate therefore both with word and sword
must defend Gods cause, his Religion, temple, people, ministers and doctrine,
so must the preacher, and those that be learned, with their pain, prayer,
preaching, and all other means that they can: yea if our goods or lives were
required for the defense of it, no state of man ought to refuse it. For this
end are we borne and live, to glorify our God, and set forth his praise: for
this purpose are all things given us, and therefore must not be spared, but
spent and bestowed, when his glory requires. For this cause Esaias the
Prophet gave his body to be sawen in sunder with a saw of iron. For this
cause Ieremio Iere. 38.
was cast into a dungeon of Mire and filth, Daniel into the Lions den; Saint
Paul pleads his cause often in chains at Jerusalem, and at Rome before Festus,
Felix, and Agrippa: and our Lord and master Christ Jesus, before Annas, Caiphas,
Pilate and Herod: John Baptist lost this head for this quarrel, and no good man
will think any thing to dear to spend in Christ his masters cause. For this
cause Tertullian, Ireneus, Justinius, Athanasius, Chrisostons, Nazianzenus, have
written great books against the heathens, which railed on our Religion. What
infinite number of Martirs have stood stoutly and given their lives in the
same quarrel? he that has seen any learning, can better tell where to begin,
then where to make an end of reckoning, the number is so infinite: and our late
days have given sufficient proof there of under that bloody butcher Bonner,
that the most ignorant, if he will open his ears and eyes, might hear and
see great plenty. But alas the fiery fagots of those days were not so
grievous then, as the slandrous tongues be now in our days. Nebuchadnezzer
made a law, that if any did blaspheme the God of Sidrach, Dan. 3.
Misach, and Abednego, he should be slain, and his house made a dunghill.
Moses made a law, that every blasphemer should be stoned to Leuis. 24.
death. Seeing God and Princes have made such straight laws against such lewd
railers, good Rulers should see some correction done, and not with silence to
suffer ill men to talk their pleasure on Gods city, Religion, and ministry.
While others possibly made courtesy to speak and answer these busy
braggers and quarrelers, Nehemiah steppeth forth boldly, defends this cause
stoutly, answers their false accusation truly, incourageth the people
manfully to go forward with their work, despises their brags, and tells
them plainly, that they have no part, nor right, nor are worthy to be
remembered in Jerusalem. The effect of Nehemiahs answer was, that the God of
heaven had given them good success hitherto in moving the hearts of king Cirus
and Darius first to the building of the temple, and now of Artaxerxes to
restore the city: they were his servants, and worshipped him, end he stirred
them up to this work: for of them selves they were not able to do such things.
They served no Idols nor false gods, they needed not to be ashamed of their
master, the God of heaven was their Lord and they his people, he was their
master and they his servants, he their King, and they his subjects: they would
go forward with their work, they must have a City to dwell in to serve their
God, who would defend them in this their well doing: these men had no
authority to stop or forbid them to work, they had nothing a do in
Jerusalem, nor any authority, they would not obey them, but with all diligence
apply this work until it be finished. The Apostles, when they were
forbidden, preached, and would not obey, but said, they must obey God that bad
them. Thus must all they, that take Gods work in hand, confess it to come
from God, and that he blesses their doings, that all the praise may be his,
and that they of themselves be weak and unable to do such things, without
his special grace and assistance. All good men in such enterprises will say
with David; Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give all the
glory. If these wicked men had had any worldy shame or fear of God in them,
they would have Psalm. 125.
quaked and trembled, as the good men reioiced to have God on their side to
further them: so they, when they heard the god of heaven named to be against
them, and that it was his doing, they would have forsaken their Idols, and
have furthered this building, or at lest have sitten still, and not hindered
it. For who is able to withstand his will, or hinder that he will have forward?
The Devils in hell quake and tremble at the naming and considering of Gods
Majesty, but these wicked Imps not only now, but sundry times, as appears
hereafter in this book, most cruelly, spitefully, and craftelie go forward
in their old malice, and by all means seek the overthrow of this building.
So far worse is a Devil incarnate in an ill man, then by himself in his
own nature. When the Devil will work any great mischief, he takes
commonly one man or other, Angel or creature to do it by, knowing that he
shall do it more easily that way, then if he should attempt it by himself.
How is every murder, false witness, whoredom, robberic, etc, committed,
but when the Devil stirs up one man against another? Let every good man
therefore take heed unto himself, how he yoaldeth unto sin. For in that
doing, he makes himself a slave to the Devil, and his instrument to work
by, One Devil, will not offer that villainy to another Devil, to make him his
slave, but if he can bring man unto it, there is his rejoicing. Take heed
therefore, O man. In that they confess them selves to be the servants of the
God of heaven: it is as much to say, as they wrought not for themselves nor at
their own appointment, nor for their own profit: they wrought for their
masters cause, and for his glory. Good servants in all their doings will seek
their masters profit and praise, not their own: they live not for themselves
but all the profit of their doings returns to their masters. If they take any
thing to themselves more then their master gives them, they be thieves unto
him, they do him no true service. Let all the builders of Gods house
therefore, whether they be rulers in the common wealth, as Nehemiah was now, or
of the learned sort in the ministry, or else where, not only confess in
words, that they be servants to the God of heaven, but most humbly, simply,
and boldly show it in their deeds, that they seek their masters praise and
glory, the common profit of their country and not their own: that they work
for him, and not for themselves, and that they serve him not for any worldly
respect, or gain, or honor, but vprightlie for conscience sake serve and obey
him, yeald al praise to his glorious name, taking nothing to themselves and
being not afraid to go foreward in his building for any braggers, knowing that
all the pride of man's heart, which sets up himself against the God of
heaven, is vile and vain: and that their God will defend his servants and
confound his foes. It is no rebellion against Princes to do that which God
commands: for Princes themselves are bound as well as other meaner degrees
to serve the Lord God of heaven with all their might and maine: and unto the
same God they must make account of their doings as all other must. For this
building they had the Kings commission, and therefore it was no treason to do
it. It is more glorious to be called Gods servants, then to have all the titles
of honor and dignity that the world can give. He that serves the Lord truly
is master of sin, hell, death, and the devil, and by the assistance of gods
holy spirit shall not be overcome of them, but shall overcome and conquer
them: which is greater honor, then any worldly Prince can give. The woman that
had an evil spirit in her, confessed Paul and his fellows to be the servants
of the mighty God, and that they taught Act. 16.
them the way of salvation. See then how devils are afraid of Gods servants.
Paul in all his Epistles rejoices in nothing more, then terming him self an
Apostle and servant of Christ Jesus. The holy ghost told Paul that in every
City where he should come, there were Chains and troubles ready for him: but
he said he cared not for them, for his life Act. 20.
was not dear to him, so that he might run his race, and testify the
glorious Gospel of God. be not ashamed therefore of thy master: for our
savior Christ says, that whosoever denies him before men, he will deny him
before his father in heaven. Worldly masters will not cast away their faithful
servants, but maintain them as they may; and think thou that God will
forsake his servants? Think thou a mortal wretched man to be more loving to
thee then the eternal God and merciful father that made thee, feeds thee, and
defends thee, when man cannot help thee? yea loves thee better, then thou
love thy self, and staieth thee from running from him, when thou would
willingly seek thine own destruction wilfully. Stand to boldly, forsake him
not cowardly. Policarpus an old man, when he Eusebius. 4. Cap. 17.
should suffer martirdom, was advised by some to have pity on his old age,
and not so stiffly to stand. Nay, says he, I have served my master Christ
Niceph. 3. 35
these 86. years, and he did me never harm, I will not for sake him now in my
last days. Thus Nehemiah stoutly answering them, and boldly encouraging his
fellows, goes forward with the work, contemns their mocking and false
accusations, and falls to his building again: so must all good builders of
Gods house neither be afraid nor weary of scroneful mockers, threatenings,
accusations, or violence: but manfully go forward to the end, knowing that
their God is stronger, wiser, and more willing to defend his people, then his
enemes shall be to hurt them. He that puts his hand to the Luk 9.
plough, and looks backward, is not meet for the kingdom of God, says
Christ our Lord. And he that continues unto the end, shall be safe. Mat. 15. 20.
Our savior Christ, when he preached, that what soever went in at the mouth
did not desile a man, was told by his disciples that that doctrine offended
the Pharisees: but he answered them and said, every plant that my father has
not planted, shall be plucked up etc. As though he should say, their doctrine is
not from my father, and therefore cannot stand: let those blind guides alone
seeing they be wilful and obstinate and will not learn: go ye forward with
preaching of the Gospel, care not for them. So every good man must continue
that he may say with S. Paul, I have kept my faith, I have run my raoe, 2.
(...). 4.
the crown of right eousnes is laid up in store for me, etc. After that
Nehemiah had thus boldly answered them, and encouraged his countrie-men to
their work, he now turns him to Sanballat and his fellows, and shows
himself to make as little account of them, as they made of him, and says:
As for you ye have no right, part, nor remembrance in Jerusalem: as though he
should say, what have you to do with us in this building? ye are not Jews
borne, as we be, ye belong not to Israel, nor are partakers of his blessing. Ye
be Samaritans, strangers to his City and commonwealth, ye be none of gods
household: if ye will be doing, meddle where ye have to do. This City God
himself did choose for his people to dwell in, and serve him. Ye be
Idolaters, and worship not the true God of heaven: if ye will be building, build
ye Samaria your own head City: ye are no Citizens here, nor have any
freedom, liberty, or privilege granted unto us, ye be none of our
corporation, nor denizens, ye shall have nothing to do here. All that build
here, have their portion of land and living in this city and country
appointed for them: they shall have justice, right and law ministered unto them,
and for a perpetual remembrance of their faithful service unto the living God,
their names shall be registered, that al posterity may know their doings, and
praise the Lord that strengthened them to this building: but ye have none of al
these. For when the land was divided by lot and measure by Iosue, ye had no
part appointed for you: under the law ye do not live, but have lived after
your own devise, nay, ye bear such hatred unto us, that ye will not willingly
eat, drink, nor keep company with us friendly: let us alone, trouble us not,
get you hence, and let us fall to our building again It is no small blessing
of god when he calls any to be a builder of his house, for both in this world
his name shall be had in perpetual remembrance, and he is written in the Book
of life, where no death canpreuaile. David says, the righteous man shall be had
in perpetual remembrance: and Saint Ihon says, that he that is not found
written in the book of life, shall be cast into the sierie lake. The builders
Psalm. 112. Revel. 20.
of this city now have their names written in the next Chapter following for
their perpetual praise in this world, to teach us, that as the builders of
this worldly Jerusalem have their names registered here, much more the builders
of the heavenly Icrusalem have their names written in the Book of life to
their salvation. Ill men and troublers of Gods building have their names
written in this book to. What more blessed then is he that hinders? Solomon
teaches and says: the remembrance of the righteous is to his praise, But the
name of the wicked stinketh. This is then the difference, and thou Prouer. 10.
may choose whither thou will be remembered to thy praise or to thy shame, and
with the good will of the living or hatred. But by this answer of Nehemiah,
when he says that they have no part, right, nor remembrance in Jerusalem, it
is partly given us to understand: that when they could not hinder this work by
big brags and threatenings, they offered themselves to join with them in this
building to take their part, and bear the charges fellowlike: for why should
he deny them these, except they required it. But Nehemiah a wise man would
neither be afraid of them, as open enemies, nor receive them into his
fellowship, as feined friends. Wherein he teaches al true Christians how to
behave themselves in building of Gods house. That is neither to fear the one,
nor to receive the other. S. Paul says, be not yoked with infidels, what has
rightousnes to do with unrighteousness, light with darkness, or Christ with
Belial? Gods people are knit together with two bonds, the one is Christ their
head, who gives life to al members of the body, the other is brotherly love
among them selves. But neither of these can be found in Idolaters, for they
neither take Christ for their head and live by him, nor they love not
Christians as their brethren, but dissemble with God and man. All Christians
have one God, one father, one baptism, one Religion, one law to live under,
and one heavenly kingdom to look for: but Infidels and hipocrites have many
Gods, al Religions be alike unto them, they live as they list, and that is
their law and will, to go to heaven after their own devise, if they can get
it. Yet they have a delight to thrust themselves in among Gods people,
pretending a love unto them, where in deed it is for no good will, but to
learn their secret counsels and purposes, that by such means they may
betraie them when occasion serves. But wise builders will admit them into no
fellowship nor friendship, as Nehemiah here utterly Ezra. 4.
refuses them, and will have nothing to do with them. But this case is more
plainly propounded to Ezra, and there I have spoken more largely of it and:
Ezra plainly determines the matter there who so list to reed and consider.
God be praised.

A. PRAYER.
WHereas of thy great power, most gracious God, thou have not only made the
hearts of all men, but farther of thy plenteous mercy have taken into thy
custody and defense the hearts of all those that thou have chosen in Christ
Jesus to serve thee, grant us, heavenly father, we be seech thee, such an
earnest love to the building of thy house and city, as thou gave to thy
faithful servant Nehemiah, that as he was sad, gave himself to prayer and
fasting, and could not be merry, until he found grace in the Kings sight, to
repair thy decayed house and wasted City Jerusalem, so we by diligent prayer
calling on thy name, and humbly submitting our selves to thy blessed will and
pleasure, may not cease crying at thy throne of mercy until we by the means
of our spookesman Christ Jesus thy son and our Lord, mate find such favor
at thy hands, that by the assistance of thy holy spirit, according to our
calling we may every one of us build the heavenly Jerusalem, set up the
kingdom of thy crucifiep Christ, and with one consent pull down the tyranny
of Antichrist, to thy eternal glory, and comfort of our consciences. And as
thou then mouedst the hearts of heathen Kings, not only by laws, commissions,
and commandments, to give license to every one that would repair thy house,
but also with great gifts and liber all rewards to set it forwards, so now most
loving Lord move the hearts, we be seech thee, of all Christian Princes, humbly
to throw their scepter at thy feet with all their power, laws, Commissions
and commandments, that they may by the authority committed unto them procure
the speedy repairing of thy heavenly kingdom, and with their liberality
maintain the builders of the same. And alas, O Lord, we are so weak of our
selves, and impotent to do these things without thee, that considering our
miserable case, extreme need drives us, impudentlie to crave thy fatherly
goodness, not only to grant us al these thy blessings, but farther to confound
the wicked devises of al greedy raueners, that seek the spoil and defacing of
thy Church; and defend us from thy foes, our mortal enemies, Sanballat and his
partakers, that we be not afraid of their proud braggs, nor deceived by their
subtle practices. Thou, most mighty Lord, may not only give us all good
things, but also deliver and defend us from all ill: for of our selves we can
do neither of them to our selves. Raise us up such rulers, o god, we most
humbly be seech thee both in the church and common wealth, as may and will
with the spirit of boldness incourag, the dull spirits of the fearful and
wavering people courageously to go forward in thy building, as Nehemiah did:
that neither mocking nor threatening of the Romish Sanballat and his members,
nor the crafty practices of the flattering Ammonites prevail against us, but
with all might and maine we all may be found true workmen in thy house, so
far forth as our vocation shall streatch to the confusion of thy enemies, thy
eternal praise, and our endless comfort in Christ Jesus thy son, our Lord
and gracious savior.

Amen.
CHAP. 3.
BEcause this chapter stands most in describing the building of the walls of
Jerusalem, by whom they were done, and what part every one did repair,
rehearsing the name both of the builders, and of the portions of the walls that
they took in hand to finish, (which thing seems strange, or rather
unprofitable to the people, that understand not the mysteries of it, nor the
fashion and situation of the City) I shall in few words pass over things not
so necessary for the edifiing of the unlearned, and not only such things as
may increase the faith of the simple unlearned, for whose profit chiefelie this
labor is taken: and also in reforming their lives may move and stir them to
a more careful building of the spiritual Jerusalem, which thing is chiefelie
to be learned here, and to the which every one is bound with all his power to
employ him self and all that he has. The holy Ghost, who is the author of
the holy Scripture, has not put down any one word in writing whither in the
new testament, or in the old, that is either superstitious or unprofitable,
though it seem so to many, but it has his mystery and signification for our
learning, and either for the plainnes of it, it may be understood of all men,
or else for the deep mysteries that be hid in it, is to be reverenced of all
sorts of men, and with diligence and prayer is to be searched out, as far as we
may. The new building of this old destroyed City by Gods enemies, puts us
in remembrance how Satan by his members had overthrown Gods City and chosen
people: and where now all sorts of men lay on hands Iustelie to repair it
again, it teaches us our duty how diligent every one should be in his
degree to the restauring of Gods City his Church to his old beauty and
strength again. This City Jerusalem was first called Salem or Solyma, where
Melchisedech was king and met Abraham, returning with the spoil which he
recovered from the king of Sodom and his fellows. Melchisedech Genesis 14.
by interpretation of his name, is first called the King of righteousness: and
after the King of Salem, that is, of peace, who represents unto us Christ
Jesus, as the Epistle, to the Hebrews says, which is the King of all
righteousness, and by whom all we are made righteous, as the Apostle says, and
is a Priest for ever after the order of Heb. 7.
Melchisedech, and offered up that sweet and saving sacrifice of his own
body and hearts blood, to pacify the wrath of God against 1. Cor. 1.
man, and make peace betwixt them both, as it is written to the Ephesians. 2. This
city afterward was called Iebus, where the Iebusits one of the nations did
dwell, whose land god gave to his people of Israel: these Iebusits came of the
cursed seed of Canaan, whom Noe his father cursed for mocking him in his
drunkenness, and inhabited this country Iosue. 15. Genesis 9.
until that worthy king David recovered the strongest part of it 2. Sam. 5.
from them, called Sion, and named it the City of David after himself. That
noble captain Iosue in deed conquered the whole land, and divided it among
the Israelites: but these Iebusits were partly so strong, dwelling in the
mountains, that they could not be vanquished in short time, and partly the
people so negligent, that they would not drive them out or destroy them as they
were commanded, but suffered them to dwell among them, to their great shame and
harm: for they were ever like thorns in their sides, to prick and hurt them,
as it is written, Iosue 23. Whereby we learn, that, as the Iebusites Gods
enemies could not fully be conquered until David came, no more could the
kingdom of Satan be clean ouerthrown, until Christ Jesus the King of glory
was borne of the seed of David, who conquered sin, hell, and the devil, and
possessed the holy hill Sion, and made his people citizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem. And like as they suffered the Iebusits to dwell amongst them to
their great harm, so sin remains in our mortal bodies conquered in deed,
that it does not reign over those that serve the Lord, yet not clean taken
away, but left for our exercise, who having our mortal enemy dwelling within
us, should fight against sin under the banner of faith in Christ Jesus, who
only has, can, and will continually defend his people, subdue their
enemies, and give his children the victory. How King David wanne this City
from the Iebusits, is fully declared in the 2. of Sam. 5. chapter. And how
Christ Jesus the Son of God conquered the whole kingdom of Satan, sin,
death, and hell, the whole history of the gospel declares. And as king David
when he had reigned 33. years nobly in Jerusalem, died with great victory,
so Christ Jesus our Lord and graundcaptaine, after he had preached the kingdom
of his father, gat this noble victory against death and all his enemies in the
33. year of his age, by suffering death, and triumphantly ascending into
heaven, where he reigns a glorious King for ever. After that David had
recovered this City from the Iebusites, it was continually called Jerusalem,
(which is by interpretation, the Lord he will see Salem) alluding to both the
old names joined together, Iebus, Salem, and changing one letter only. In
the gospel it is called the holy city, as when the devil tempted Christ he
took him into the holy City, and set him on a pinnacle Mat. 4.
of the temple, which name it gate rather of the holy law, word and Sacrifices
that were taught there and offered, then of that wicked and unholy people,
that denied the Lord of life, and required Barrabas to be delivered. But when
it was destroyed by the Romans, and not one stone left standing on another, as
Christ foretold it should be, Elius Adrianus the Emperor for vain glory,
builded a new City and called it after his own name Elia or Capitolina. And
when the heathen had gotten it from the Christians, Pope Vrbane the second kept
a council in France, and by his flattering friars stirred up all Princes to
recover the holy land again, more like a superstitious Jew putting holiness
in the place, which then was inhabited with wicked people, then like a true
preacher of true holiness. But it cost many Princes their lives, lands, and
goods, and yet not recovered: whereof England felt his part, when King Richard
the first went thither, and was taken prisoner, paid a great Ransom to the
impouerishing of the Realm. As God gave this City and people falling from him
into his enemies hands: so will he cast us up, if we frowardly forsake him.
This City Jerusalem, aster that it was recovered from the Iebusites, was
enlarged and fortified by David, Solomon, Ozias, and Ezechias, and other good
kings, and had within it two chief hills, Sion, where the Kings Palace was
built, and Moria where the temple was. And after when the people increased,
other two hills were taken into it, Acra and Bethera, as Josephus writes. It
had three wards and walls within it. Within the Innermost wall was the Kings
Palace, and Temple, and the Priests lodging: in the middle ward were the
Prophets and noblemen, their schools, Leuits and Doctors. By which we are
taught how to place and esteem learning and learned men, schools,
universities, and preachers, which are not now much regarded. In the uttermost
dwell the Citizens, merchants and artificers. It was then. 4. miles about, and
after enlarged to 6. It was most glorious in the time of our savior Christ:
for Herod and Agrippa had made great cost on it, and Christ wept for it. David
in the 48. Psalm describes the beauty and strength of this City, and
bids them go round about it, mark and behold it, and count the towers of
it, that were many: that the Lord might be praised for it: The uttermost wall
had towers 90. The middle wall had towers 14. And the innermost wall had towers
60. In the whole 164. towers, as Josephus and others do write. But I take it
that it was so rather in the time of Christ, then of David, or of this building
now: for as it increased in wealth, beauty, and strength, so it did in pride,
riotousnes, superstition, contempt ofGod, and al wickedness, so that this last
and utter destruction was at hand, for refusing, crucifying, and co^demning the
son of god their savior. When-soeuer the scripture speaks of any going to
this City, it says commonly they went up to Jerusalem, because it was built
so on hills, that on what side soever thou came in thou sholdst go up an
hill; which though it seem a small matter to be noted, yet God which does
nothing in vain, as he did by other outward things teach that gross people
heavenly things, as here in this clyming up to this earthly city they left
worldly things beneath them in the valleys: so they that would pray unto the
Lord or seek the heavenly Jerusalem, must climb up by faith into heaven to
the mercy seat and throne of grace, casting away all worldly cares and
leaving that behind. The common opinion is, that Adam our first father dwelt
and was buried here in this City. And the Scripture teaches, that good father
Abraham offered his son Isaac on the mount Moria, where Solomon built the
temple. Which all were Genes. 22.
figures that Christ Jesus the new Adam should be buried in the same place
where the old Adam was, to restore to us that life which old Adam had lost: and
should offer his precious body on the tree for our redemption, a sweeter
sacrifice then Isaac, or any bloody sacrifice, that was offered in the temple
of Solomon. It is comfortable to consider, and wonderful to behold, how the
wisdom of God has made the circumstances of our destruction by Adam, and
salvation by Christ Jesus to agree. Adam in Paradise, a garden of pleasure,
offended God, and was cast out for his disobedience, and we all his posterity:
Christ Jesus was buried in a garden, and has by his death restored to us life
again. By the intising of a woman man fell from God, and by a woman that
blessed seed Christ Jesus was borne, and reconciled us to his father again.
By a pleasant apple was man deceived, but by Christ having bitter gall given
him to drink, man was saved. In that garden had Adam all pleasant things
freely given him: and in this garden without the City had Christ our Lord all
cruel and spiteful torments that could be devised: that we should go forth to
suffer with him, forsaking the dainty pleasures of this City. In the temple
no sin could be forgiven without shedding of the blood of some sacrifice and
in this world is no pardon of our wickedness without the blood of Christ Jesus
the innocent lamb of God. And as by the fall of one man Adam we all were
condemned, so by the rising from death of one man Christ Jesus we are
justified. By the corruption of our father Adam we all did perish, and by the
Innocence of our brother the Lord Christ we al be sanctified. Why should not
the goodness of the one profit us as much as the illnes of the other did hurt
us, or rather much more bless us being the immortal son of the living God,
and the other being but a mortal man made of the earth? And as they that had
any suit to the King, or sacrific e to be offered by the Priest, first entered
in at the uttermost gate, where the common sort of Citizens dwelt, and then
through the second where the Leuits and learned men were, and lastly in at the
innermost gate, where the King and his palace, the hie Priest and the temple
were built: so they that will go to the great King and hie Priest of the
heavenly Jerusalem, must first enter the uttermost gates where al sorts of
Christians are borne into this world, and then be brought to the second, to be
intructed by the ministers in the law of the Lord, and received into the
Church, and there nourished by the Sacraments of God: which being diligently
done, he may boldly enter at the Innermost gate to the Kings Palace and
temple, to make his humble suit, pray and offer his body a lively sacrifice
to God the father by Christ Jesus his son, King of Kings, and Lord of the
heavens, who also is our high Priest and Archbishop, that offered up that sweet
sacrifice of his own blood for our silthie and stinking sins. For as the
king and the Priest dwelled both together in the Innermost ward and on the
high hills: so our King and high Priest Christ Jesus has taken unto himself
the kingdom and priesthood, and by his holy spirit made us a king lie priest
hood to God his father: Kings, that we might by him conquer the kingdom of
Satan: and Priests, to mortify and kill the silthie lusts of our flesh and
offer our souls a living and holy sacrifice to serve him. For as no sacrifice
could be offered any where, but in this only Temple of Jerusalem, so no prayer
nor thankful sacrifices can be offered unto him, but in the name of Christ
Jesus his son and our Lord. Lastly as God of his justice for the wickedness
and superstition both of the Princes, Priests, and the people, destroyed the
kingdom, law, and priesthood of Moses, never to be built orrestored again,
though the Jews sundry times attempted it, and with great sommes of money
would have gotten license to have yearly come and lamented the destruction of
it: Yet both Emperor Elius Adrianus to withdraw them from it, built a new
City in another place, called it Niceph. 3. cap. 24.
after his own name, and graued a Swyne and his own Image over the gates to
bring them in hatred with it, and commanded in pain of death they should not
come thither. God also with Earthquakes overthrew their doings, destroyed their
tools, and swallowed up the workmen: So in his Neceph. 1. cap. 32. 33.
mercy he has built a new spiritual Jerusalem, given us the comfortable
tidings of the Gospel, sent his Apostles to preach it through all the world,
set up a new kingdom and ministry, not in a corner of the world, as it was
then, but through all countries, that all which believe may be saved: and that
not in fear and threatenings as the law was, but in loving kindenes and mercy,
grace, peace, and truth in Christ Jesus. Many of these things are well noted
by Wolphius and other learned men: and because there is diverse times occasion
given in this Chapter to speak of these figures and spiritual comparisons, I
have once for all set them down that I need not often repeat them afterward:
and they that list may briefly here see all set together, and apply them
afterward as occasion serves. I will not in this Chapter, as I have done in
others, follow verse by verse, nor sentence by sentence, nor word by word, to
examine them particularly, because it stands most of names, wherein the
unlearned should not take so much profit as labor in reading of them: (though
the learned may with pleasure pick out good lessons of them by Allegorical
interpretation of the places, etc) but I will briefly note such things here
and there in some verses, as shall give occasion to help the simpler sort to
further the building of these walls, for whose cause specially I have taken
this labor.

1. Eliasib the hie Priest gat him up, and his breethren the Priests and
builded the sheepgate.

2. And next unto him builded the men of Jericho.

AFter that Nehemiah had so stoutly answered Sanballat and his fellows, and
encouraged his countriemen to the building of the walls, all sorts of them
pluck up their stomachs, and are no more afraid, but lustily fall to their
work. And among other Eliasib the high Priest and the rest of the Priests also
gat them up, and took in hand to repair the sheepegate which went toward
mount Oliuet, and so the wall all a long unto the tower Hananeell. Such goodness
comes by having a stout Captain where the people be faint-harted. Aggeus
complains in the building of the temple, that Prince, Priest, and people,
were fallen on sleep, until he came with message from the Lord to awake them,
and then they fell lustely to work: So now here, after' that Nehemiah came
with commission both from God and the King, they lingered their building no
more, but boldly went on forward with it, though it had lain many years
unlooked at, and now in the beginning they had many stout brags. Chabrias, as
Plutarch does write, was wont to say, that an host of hearts should be more
feared, if a Lion were their Captain, tben an host of Lions should be, if a
heart were their Captain: teaching what profit comes by a stout Captain: and
so it fares in Gods cause too. Saint Paul considering what a chargeable office
was committed unto him, and how fearful a thing it was to preach Christ a
fore Princes and wicked people, desires the Ephesians to pray for him, that
he might have vtteraunce given him, boldly and freely to do his message in
preaching the gospel. He desires the same thing of the Colossians. 4. Chap.
And the. 2. Thessalonians. 3. So that where we see this boldness in preaching
joined with wisdom and discretion, we may persuade our selves that it is the
gift of God in such a man, and above the nature of man to do it. This lesson
is given to all good builders of Gods spiritual house, that they should not
fear him that will kill the body, and cannot hurt the soul: but fear him
that can cast both body and soul into hell. And Saint John says in the
Reuelat. 21. that those which be fearful, shall have their part in the
burning lake of brimstone, with murderers, adulterers, and idolaters. And by
the example of Eliasib and the Priests which disdained not to be admonished and
learn their duty of Nehemiah, coming from the court, we shall learn
humblenes of mind, Mat. 10.
and not disdain to be admonished of our duty at mean men's Reuelat. 21.
hands. They are not offended at him, nor think him saucy to counsel and
teach them, which were teachers of others, but are content to join in this
work with him and the rest, yea boldly to begin and give good example to the
rest, as their duty was, and to encourage others. So no estate must disdain
to be warned of his duty, and to be encouraged though it be by mean men: for
all sorts high and low, learned and unlearned are fearful and forgetful of
themselves, until God stir them up by his word, holy spirit, and messenger.
And reason it was that as they were shepherds to the people, so they should
build the sheep-gate which was at the East End of the City where the temple
was, in the uttermost wall where the sheep came in that were offered in
sacrifice, and whereof they had their parts, according to the law. This gate
may well be compared to Christ Jesus, who sought the lost sheep and was
sacrificed as a lamb, and is the gate whereby only we enter, and his
shepherds must be the builders of it, and bring the people into the fold.
Many good lessons might be plucked out of the interpretation of the names
herein contemed, and what were signisied by them, but those be meeter for the
learned, which can by order of learning keep them selves in compass, and
apply all things to the rule of faith, then to the unlearned which have not
that judgment. And where the men of Jericho join with the hie Priest in this
building, it teaches that not only priests and Citizens must build Gods City
but also countriemen, yea those that dwelt farthest of and be lest regarded,
must put to their helping hand. It is commendable in both, that neither the
Priests refused their aid, and they that dwelled farthest of were the first
that came to work. So must all that be of Gods household help to build, even
the simplest and basest as well as the best: for as he is God of all, so he
will have all to serve and worship him. If either Nehemiah or any other had
taken this work in hand alone, it would have been thought great arrogancy in
them, and others would have disdained that they should have all the praise of
so great a building alone. Common things would be done with common consent, and
the common aid of them to whom it pertains would not be refused. Iericha
was the first city that Iosue overthrew for their wickedness, and it is now the
first that comes to help this building. So great a change comes when god
turns the hearts of the people. Without this gate was that watring place or
sheep-poole, whereof S. John writes in the 5. cap. and where the sheep were
washed, that came to be offered.

3. The fish-gate builded the sons of Senaah: they covered it, and set on the
doors, locks, and bars.

5. The great men of Thecoa put not their necksto the work of the Lord.

THis gate was at the west end of the city, where the fishers came in atthe
Sea coast with their fish to sell. If a man would stand on figures and
allegories, this gate may well signify Christ, who made his Apostles and
Preachers fishers of men, who by him brought and daily bring them into this
spiritual Jerusalem: for he is only the door whereby all must enter into the
Lords city. These men like good builders leave nothing undone that might
fortify that gate, for they set on not only the doors, but also bolts and
locks. So must Gods Church be made strong by laws, discipline, and
authority, that ravening Lions, nor filthy Swyne rush not in, and disquiet or
devour Gods people: and the wholesome doctrine must be confirmed with strong
arguments, and reasons against false teachers. Much controversy there is now
about discipline, which every man grants to be necessary, and desires to
have: but whether this that is so vehemently urged be the right way to
strengthen the Church, as stronger doors, locks, and bars, that should keep
out all ravening wolves and wild beasts, or they be like to spiders copwebs
that will catch a weak fly, and let the great drones burst through, I leave it
to the consideration of the wise: I will be no partaker of these troublesome
contentions. And if a man would study for an exan ple of this, I cannot tell
where he might find a fitter. These poor men of Thecoa work willingly and
diligently, but the Richer sort were to stif-necked, would not stoop nor
obey the superiors of the work, for so the Hebrew word signifies him that is
appointed a ruler and Master, as well as it does signify the Lord God: and
diverse of the best learned do so turn it into latin. Euorie company of
workmen had their overseers, appointed to direct and keep them in order, that
every one should not do what he list, work when, and where he list, nor
loyter and be idle: other companies did obey their Masters of the work, but
these richmen were to proud. This kind of speech ( they put not their neck to
the work) is taken of oxen, which being made for the yoke to draw, should
teach al laborers in gods building as well lay men as kircke men to be painful
as the Ox, and not to stately to stoop under the yoke. The scripture sundry
times commends this painful laboring by the example of the plough and the
Ox. As, he that puts his hand to the plowgh and looks. etc. and, thou
shall not mussle the mouth of the Ox etc: for no kind of people are exempt,
neither poor nor Luke. 9. (...). Corrin. 9.
rich, learned nor unlearned, man nor woman, but they must bend and bow their
necks under the yoke, and be not ashamed nor to stately to work at the
building of Gods City. The proud Pharisaicall Popish friars and Monks, which
have so many privileges from their father the Pope, may not say, Domine nos
sumus exempti, we may not work, the solemn Prelate, the fine fingred dames,
nor the Surly Lords of the land, the daintle and trim Courtier, nor the loftic
Lawier are exempt, but every one must bow his neck in his vocation painfully
to work at Gods building: as in this Chap. ye shall have examples of all these
sorts that painfully wrought at this building. But I fear me that if after the
order of this dicipline which is so greedely sought, and many do like of it,
because it is so gentle, the Rich would not care for it, but live as they list.
If their consistory of Seniors were set in their seats with their Pastor in
every Church with their full authority in all causes ecclesiast. they should
find many proud Pecocks, that would not bend their necks under the yoke of
such simple sily woodcocks as every parish presently is able to give. For as
yet in few places shall able men be found that dare and will wrestle with the
rich in correction. A proud Thacker of Thecoa would laugh them to scorn and
contemn their dispiling discipline. For they that will contemn correction, the
laws and officers standing as they be: it were also necessary to have the
Princes power, doors of iron, Bolts of brass, and locks of steel to bind the^
fast: Ad alligandos reges eorum in (...), and nobiles eoruminmanicis (...):
then with such kind of dealing to be mocked. They would stoutly say,
Disrumpamus vincula eorum, and (...) (...) Iugu^ Psalm. 2. Niceph. 12.
ipsorum. We reed of Ambrose that excommunicated the Emperor Theodosius, and
how humbly he obeyed it, but whether was more to be praised, he that durst do
it, or the other that would obey it, I cannot tell: and I know not where, in a
good cause, the like has been done since, though the proud Pope for his wicked
authority has attempted and achieved the like sundry times against
Emperors. In deed excommunication rightly executed is a fearful bond to all
good consciences, for it locketh up heaven gates and throws into the pit of
Hell: yet worldly men that fear not God nor love his people, are more afraid
of prison, iron chains, and fettershere, then of gods eternal wrath there.
Such therefore must have a sharper consistory then our Seniours be. God for his
mercies sake grant us a worthy discipline for such stif-necked Thekoits. For
the simple ones will be more easily ruled with a gentle discipline. Such as
have the wealth and authority of the country given them ofGod to benefit and
defend the country withal, are not worthy to live in the country if they
withdraw their helping hand from their country as these Thekoits did now. The
Porters of every City and great men's houses are commonly tall, big, and bold
men to keep out unruly people: and reason is that it should be so, for else al
men would be bold to trouble the gates. So must the ministers and rulers of
Gods house, whom the holy ghost calls his Porters, be more stout
menandstrong then every realm is able to setvp in any parish. Surely the
having of these seniors might do much good in many matters, but in my opinion,
after another sort then as yet is put down: which I refer to the determination
of the wisest. how many Papists at this day do contemn the Church and all the
discipline in it because it is sosoft? and if the fear of the magistrates
sword did not more bridle the^, then any honest fear, they would daiely
increase in boldnesand contempt of al orders. Ifye did but Excommunicate the^
they would heartily thank you and laugh you to scorn: for they willingly
excommunicate themselves, and will come at no congregation, and under pretense
of your excommunication they had just pretense of absenting themselves, and
never would seek reconciliation. God grant all such obstinate contemners of
his Church and his word their iustanddeserued discipline. This overmuch softnes
that is used, and an opinion of some that be zealous in religion, whereby they
think they may not punish an ill man for his conscience and religion, does
much harm, and imboldneth the^ in their il doings: surely in my opinion they
that have authority and will not correct such wilful dealings be partakers and
mainteyners of others ill doing, and fill both the Church and commonwealth
with disobedient persons.

6. The old gate builded Ioiada, etc. they recoueredit, and set on the doors,
Locks, and Bars.

BEcause this setting on oflockes, doors, and Bars is sundry times rehearsed
here, it shall suffice once to declare it, and not to fill up books with much
writing, and trouble others with often reading of it. Doors serve to let men in
and out, to shut them in, or keep them out: Locks serve against treasons or
conspiraces within: and Bars serve against open enemies and violence without.
So must Gods Church be fensed and strengthened with sundry doctrine and
discipline to instruct the ignorant, comfort the weak, raise up them that Mat.
16.
be fallen, encourage the forgetful, bridle the unruly, and confute al
errors. This promise God made to his Church, that hell gates should not
prevail against it: It has been often sore assaulted, and yet never conquered:
and never worsse dealt with, then by her own Psalm. 121.
children, and feyned friends, rather then by open enemies, as this day well
proves: no force: it has a watchman that neither sleeps nor slumbereth,
which can neither be overcome by strength, having all things at his
commandment, nor deceived by treason, practice, nor policy, having al
wisdom to foresee mischiefs pretended, cunning and great good will to prevent
them al: wherein stands the comfort ofall good men, that they have such a
Graundcaptaine. By the right use of this discipline and doctrine is heaven
gates set open to al penitent believers, and locked up against all obstinate
Mat. 16.
and double-faced hipocrits. And what-socuerthe true and faithful Porters of
these doors do bind in earth, it is bound in heaven, and what-soeuer they
loose in earth, is forgiven in heaven: and who-soeuer they let in are welcome,
and whom they keep out are cast away. Such commission and authority has god
given to his word and ministry for the comfort and correction of his people,
that al dissolute behavior may be banished from amongst his, and all good
order, peace and quietness mainteyned. The Lord for his mercy sake grant his
Church faithful Porters to open the doors to the sheep, and shut them fast
against the wolves, and drive from this chargeable office of trust all
picklockes, and conspirers to betraie this City and Citizens of the spiritual
Jerusalem. For this is the duty of all good builders, not only to set up
the walls and house, leaving the doors and windows open: but to make it
strong with doors, Locks, Boltes and Bars, and set true and faithful Porters
and overseers of the house and all in it. The building of this old gate is the
preaching of the old commandments 1. Ihon. 2.
of faith and love, which S. Ihon writes of, as Beda notes well.

7. The men of Gibeon and Mizpah builded unto the Throne of the Duke beyond the
Riuor.

NOw this work goes forward, and the towns in the Country come and help to
work lustily. Such goodness comes when God sends such a faithful Ruler
as Nehemiah was: God increase the number. Who this Duke was, it is uncertain,
whether he was a Jew, or a stranger: but God is to be praised, that stirred up
such to set forward this work. Some think him to be Daniel, that was set in
great Authority by King Darius: and not unlike to be lie, if he lived so long:
for he was as zealous toward his country as any Dani. 6.
other. Diverse Jews were in great authority in their captivity and
troblesome times, who euerhelped them in their great need. So God provides
for his Church that when any does trouble them, he rayseth up some to domfort
them (...) about this time was in great favor with Assuerus: Sidrach, Misach,
and Abednego, Est. 8. Dan. 3.
Daniels companions, were much accounted of in their time. The River that he
speaks of here, is Euphrates, which was a great notable River in the borders
of Persia, and is over signified by this kind of speech amongst the people, as
Nalus was called the River in Egypt and understood by that name in that
country, as they be both called by that name in one sentence. Genesis 15. Some
translate unto the Throne, and some for the Throne, as Munster, and others:
both may stand well, and not unlike but this Duke, though he was out of the
country, yet bare his portion of the charges, and builded his part. What cause
is there to name him here, If he did nothing to this biulding?

In the. 8. verse come in the Goldsmythes and Apothecaries (for so the Hobrew
words signify) and they leave their fine work and sweet Spices, and fall to
work in rough stones and mortar. None must be to dainty to file his fingers
in working at Gods building: al sorts as they he the Lords, so they must serve
the Lord, and the Lord looks for it of duty.

But in the (...) the Moabits, which is most marvel (for they were most (...)
enemies to the Jews) (...) and help to build. Thus God who has the hearts of
all men in his hands, of (...) makes friends, and where great hatred was
before, much love to ensud. And though the greatest part of the Moabites were
ever utter enemies unto the Jews, as the Jews be unto the Christians: yet
some Jews be turned unto the faith now, as some Moabites were then. And in the
12. verse Sallum an Inchaunters son (for so the hebrew word signifies)
comes with his daughters, and falls to work. Wherein I cannot tell,
Whither I should marvel at the father or the daughters more. The father was a
great man of authority in Jerusalem, and therefore no doubt the daughters were
as nice and fine as their calling required and therefore great marvel that they
would humble themselves to work in mire and clay, No less marvel that
Sallum having a wicked coniurer to his father, should for sake that science,
which many great men delight in to their own destruction, and fall to work at
such rough work. But thus God calls whom pleases him, and those that be
truly called are neither weary nor ashamed to serve the Lord in the lowest
kind of service. Thus David promised that the Kings of Tharsis and the Isles of
Arabia and Saba should bring gifts and (...) (...) Lord Christ, which all then
were heathen people and knew not God. Coniuring was a common thing among the
Jews, in so much that some of the high Priests were infected with it, as
appears Act. 16. yet at Paul's preaching they came and brought in their
coniuring Books and burnt them. A comfortable example is this to all those
that have illmen to their fathers, that the ilnes of the father shall not hurt
the (...), if he turn to the Lord, leaving his fathers steps. And all daintid
dames may here learn of these gentle women to set more by working at Gods
house, then by trimming of themselves. Would God they would spend that on the
poor members of Christ and Citizens of this spiritual Jerusalem, that they
wastfully bestow on themselves, and would pity their poverty something like
as they pamper themselves, S. Peter bids them leave their gold and friesled
hear, and their costly apparel, and so modestly behaure them solues that
their husbands seeing their honest behavior may be won to the Lord by (...);
for so Sara and other holy (...) did attire themselves and (...). But it is
to be feared, that many desire rather to be like dalying (...) then sober
Sara: And if the husband will not mainteinc it, though he sell a peace of land,
break up house borow on Interest, raise rents, or make like hard shifts,
little obedience will be showed, (...) the Empress, the (...) wife of (...) the
Emperor, would visit the sick folks in their houses her self, and help them,
would taste of their brothes how (...) were made, bring them dishes to lay
their meat in, and wash their cupps: and if any would forbid her, she said she
offered her labor for the Empire to God that gave it: And she would often say to
her husband: Remember what ye were, and who yo be now, and so shall ye always
be thankful unto God. It were comfortable to hear of such great women in
these days, where the most part are so fine, that they cannot abide to look
at a poor body, and so costly in apparel, that that will not suffice them
in lewels, which their elders would have kept good hospitality withal. When
Moses moved the people to bring such stuff, as was meet for the making of
gods Tabernacle and other Jewels in it, the women were as ready as the men,
and they brought their bracelets, earings, Rings, and Cheynes all of Gold: and
the women did spinne with their own hands both silk and Goats hoare, they
wrought and brought so much willingly, Exodus 35.
that Moses made proclamation they should bring no more. Compate this peoples
devotion with ours that be called Christians, and ye shall find that all that
may be scratched is to little to buy Jewels for my mistres, though she be but
of mean degree, and if any thing can be pulled from Gods house or any that
serves in it, that is well gotten, and all is to little for them. God grant
such costly dames to consider, what metal they be made of: for if they were so
fine of themselves as they would seem to be, none of these glorious things
needed to be hanged upon them to make them gay withal. Filthy things need
washing, painting, coullouring, and trimming, and not those that be cleanly and
comely of themselves: such decking and coullouring, makes wise men to think
that all is not well underneath content your selves with that coullour,
comelines and shape that God has given you by nature, and disfigure not your
selves withyour own devices: ye cannot amend gods doings, nor beautify that
which he has in that order appointed. Learn of these good women to offer your
Jewels to the building of Gods city, lay to your hands, and spinne rowgh goats
hear, to clothe the poor, stoop and work, be not ashamed of it, it is the
greatest honor that every shall win. If ye will be partakers of the
pleasures of Gods city, ye must take part of the pains to build it. If women
would learn what God will plague them for, and how, let them reed the (...)
chap of the Prophet Esai: and if they will learn what god wills them to do
and be occupied withal, though they be of the best sort, let them reed the
last chapter of the Proverbs. It is enough to note it, and point them to it
that will learn: for I fear few will read, fewer learn, and fewest practice
it: but many rather wish it cut out of the book, that they should not be
troubled with hearing of it.

In the 13. and 14. verses, and others following, come in the Ruelers of the
country towns, with their people, for to work: wherein we learn that not
only the Priests and Levites, but the great men in every country, yea and
the Country people too must work at Gods building. This valley-gate that he
speaks of is thought to be the gate that goes into the valley of Iosephat,
which otherwise was called Gehennon. This is a worthy example for all
christians, that they should not live to themselves, but help to bear the
burdens of the Church and Commonwealth. That City and Temple were the common
places appointed whither they should resort to serve the Lord, and whither they
might fly and find succor against the enemy, where vitals and other
necessary provision might be had for all sorts. Therefore if zeal toward God
and love toward their neighbors could not move them to lay to their helping
hands, and open their purses wide to set forward this building, their own
private profit would move those that had any consideration of themselves to
mantaine this city. And that noe man should disdain to work at the vilest
place in Gods city, here comes a nobleman and builds the dung-gate, where
all the filth of the City was carried out, and where all the sinkes, Canals,
and conduits, did wash and convey away all the sweepings and filth of the
streets into the Brook Cedron. As in all great and well ordered cities there
be officers appointed for that purpose, which be men of wisdom, painful; and
in authority, and have a great care for the health and wealth of the
inhabitants, who will daily and duly look that such noisome things be conveyed
away out ofthe streets for infocting the people with pestilent smells and
contagions: so in Gods Church and city, must be men of gravity, wisdom,
learning, and authority, which must dare, and will wrastell with the stoutest,
and see due correction done, and such rotten members as would infect the whole
body cut of, and carried away from among the congregation, to the comfort
ofthe good, and terror of the evil doers. In Gods house there be both good and
ill, as in the field the corn grows not without the chafe, nor in the
garden the good herbs without the weeds, yet the good husband will carry in
the good Corn and winow the chafe. When thee weed ouergroweth the herbs,
the good gardener will pick out the weeds and carry the good herbs to his
house: so in Gods Church open blasphemers, notorious wicked livers and
teachers, must be castout, that Gods holy name be not ill spoken of, as though
he loved suoh ill doings, and would not with Justice punish them: and also that
other by theiril example should not fall into the like mischiefs. Saint Paul
bids, that if any brother were called covetous, a fornicator, drunkerd, a
railer, extortioner, Idolater, they should cast him out of 1. Cor. 5.
company, not eat, nor drink with him, that he may be ashamed of himself when
he sees himself abhorrea of all men, and so amend his wickedues.
Excommunication is the common remedy for such disobedient persons, which God
for his mercy sake grant that it may be restored to his true use, and that
every one may willingly submit him self to Godly correction. We have so long
contemned the Popes curse, that now we think we may live as we list without
blame, and if any due correction be offered, we laughe it to scorn, despise
the ministers of it, and by this means shall cause the Lord to take the whip
into his own hands, and then who shall be able to stand. God will not have
sin unpunished, and if we refuse this gentle correction, that he has given
his Church to execute and bridle ill doers withal, we shall find it an
horrible thing to fall into the Lords Heb. 10.
hands, and he will rule us with an iron road, and bruise us all to pieces.
Such dung and filth may not be suffered in Gods house, and it is Psalm. 2.
as necessary to have a gate to carry such out at, as it is to have a gate to
bring good ones in: for as the rain from heaven washes the streets, so Gods
grace from above must first wash the heart, that the mind may be renewed. In
worldly matters, prisoners condemned to die are carried out ofthe City to
suffer execution, as members not meet to be suffered in any company: so Gods
City will not suffer such ill doers to live amongst them, but cast them out.

The Stairs which be spoken of in the 15. verse, and the Tomb of David, in
the 16. verse, conteyne good lessons in them, if they be well applied: forall
outward things in this worldly Ierusalems building, have a signification in
them, to teach us to build the spiritual Jerusalem. By these Stairs the King
came down from his Palace on the hill Sion into the lowest part of the city:
and by the same steps all Suitors went up into the Palace to make their
petition. So the merciful Lord Jesus by taking our nature on him, and being
made man in his mothers womb came down from the boosome of his father in
heaven into the lowest part ofthe earth, yea and humbled him self unto the
vilest death, and hell too: that we by the same ladder, Steps, and Stairs of
humblenes, may climb by faith from virtue to virtue, into the heavens, by
Christ Jesus our Lord, who is our only spokes-man and meane-maker unto that
high and mighty king God his father. And as David borne in Bethlehem when he
had reigned 33. years over all Israel, was buried in Jerusalem and great
treasures laid in the grave with him, with part of which Hircanus delivered
the city when cruel Antiochus besieged it: so Christ Jesus borne in Bethlehem
in the 33. year of his age was crucified, and buried in Jerusalem, in whose
grave we find great treasures of our Redemption: for both our filthy and
(...) sins are there buried with him, and the sweet Balmes, Spices, and
Oyntements, that he was imbalmed withal, are there to be found by faith (and
no holiness of the place) that is, forgiveness of sins, and rising with him to
life everlasting in heaven.

In the 17. verse and the rest of the chapter following to the end, is almost
no great matter to be noted, but the earnest (...) of the Lenites and Priests
(which were sonie cheise men and Rulers as appears here) and their
bondseruants, to set forward this building, and for the most part in repayring
the innermost walls in the 1. and 2. ward. Whereby we shall learn, that they
were not so beggarly as many would make them in our days, if they might have
their will, but of good wealth. How vain are those foolish exemptions, which
the Pope gives to his shameless shauelings, that they should not bear the
common burdens of the Church and commonwealth? Saint Paul bids them, and
all others, to pay tribute and taxes to whom they bedue, and show their
obedience to the high or powers in all Godly things, as well as any of the
Laity. Our savior Christ paid tribute for him self and Peter, and Mat. 17.
willed the Pharisees to do the like: but these unprofitable Pharisaical
drones because they will be most unlike to him, will pay none at all. There is
yet remaining here amongst us a sort not Popish as they pretend, but carnest
builders of Gods house in their own opinion, where in deed they be the
ouerthrowers of it: which are in effect as il Pharisees as the Papists be. They
will take a benifice and cute of souls promising solemnlie to feed the flock,
but when they have turned their back they have a dispensation in a box to lie
from it, and flock, and floute who so ever would have them to continue there
and do their duty, con tending by law they may do it, and stand on their
defense, Domine nos exempti sumiv. God for his mercy sake take away such
laws, grant disereete officers, that will not dispense so vnaduifedly with
every one for small causes; as is too commoblie used, and give those
unprofitable Caterpillars such remorse of conscience, that they will take
pains to seed the flock as well as they feed themselves, eating until they
sweat again, and become Pillars, to uphold Gods Church, and not powlers of his
people, nor so greedy to pick their pursses and pluck of the fleece, as
painful to relieve and comfort the weak both in: body and souls with
wholesome doctrine and corporal sode as the great God will ask a straict account
of them at the last day, where their dispensation may not be pleaded, nor will
be allowed, nor the dispensor can (...) excuse him-self not them, but both like
wolves and (...) shall be charged: Vae pastor and Idolism (...) (...) and, (...)
eorum de manu (...). Ezec. 3. Full little Zac. 11.
do such men consider, what assewel God has committed to their charge, and
less they (...) the charge (...) have taken in hand. Jesus Christ came down
from heaven to preach his fathers will unto his (...) sheep; and (...) his
precious blood to purchase us (...) and these Idle laborours will not take
pain to visit, teach or feed them, whom our Lord God has bought so deerly.
God amend us nll: This second measure, another part of building, which is so of
spoken of here, is thought of the most part of writers to be the second ward
and wall, which was called (...), where the (...), Prophtes, and learned men did
dwell, and was deulded into (...) man his portion to build: or else were they
appointed first to build the half hight of the wall for a time to be some
succor for them against the enemies. Some were so earnest in building, that
they finished the second hight unto the top of the wall before other had built
the half hight. As in the 20 verse (...) burst out in a heat for soreadeth the
hebre (...) being angry, both with him felfe and others, that were so (...) in
working, and had done no more, and in a (...) rose up and finished his portion
in a short time. Such anger is good, when a man is offended with himself or
others, that they be so slow in serving their God and building his house: it
will make him more earnest and diligent afterward.

In the (...) verse (...) is commended, that he built so far as the (...) of
the high Priest, raught. A small praise, if the house were not of some
greatness. And so other Priests against their houfes, in the verses following,
and in the 28 verse. I do but note it, because that many disdain that any
ministers should have a house of any countenance. But among all builders none
are worthy more praise, then these. (...) be. They were no Jews borne, but
descended from those heathen (...), which deceived Iouse, by puttingon old
shoes, and having (...) bread in their bags, clowted sackes and broken
bottles, feining them selves to have come a long journey to be received amongst
gods people. By law the Jews should have destroyed all heathen people at their
entering in to the land of promise: but where by this policy Iosue had
granted them life and liberty, and so could not destroy them, for his promise
sake, he gave them to the Lord to serve the Priests in carrying water, cutting
wood, and such other drudgery works for the sacrifices. So that Hebrew word
signisieth them that were freely given unto the Lord: and all this people from
that time forth, as long as the common wealth stood, served the lord as
faithfully as any Jews eue^ in their captivity, never grudging that they
were not called to no higher estate, nor disdayned not at their drudging, never
(...) away in any troublesome time, as they might casely have don; nor
claymed any liberty, nor wrought any displeasure to the (...) where they might
have often betrayed them, and now most earnestly fall to building, and serve the
Lord. A strange example, that such a people continued faithful in the house of
God so many years, and stood so stoutly in all storms but when God calls,
he blesses, and nothing is painful, so they may serve the Lord, as David
says, I had rather (...) a door (...) (...) the house of God, then to dwell in
the Palaces of Psalm. 84.
sinners. Saul would have destroyed this people, but god saved them and plagued
him. If we look unto our selves without (...), we shall castly perceive how
unlike we be unto them, how cold in serving the Lord, how soon weary of our
estate, how desirous to climb higher, how chaungeable in (...) (...), how
(...) to profess our Religion, how flattering to men, and how carried away with
every blast of new doctrine: God grant us to (...), to be ashamed of it, and
to amend it. Our own days have given us to many examples of such wavering
worldlings: And I fear our sins will shortly pluck the saine plagues on our
heads again, so little tokens of repentanee appear amongst us. We be the right
Nethanims, made free from sin, and servants to the Lord. God grant we be not
found worsse, (being called. Christians, and living in tho time of grace under
the bright light of Christ Jesus, declared unto us in his gospel, and by whom
we be saved and made free) then these heathen people the (...) were, living in
bondage vndershadowes of Moses law. (...) the fixed fanire of Salech wants not
his praise here, who being a younger brother falls to (...), and no mention
made of the elder. There must be no courtesy making who shall begin: God has
often called the younger to serve him before the elder, as Jacob, David etc. Thus
the holy ghost has Registered unto us the names and diligence of the builders
of this earthly City Jerusalem by the pen of his faithful servant
Nehemiah, for our comfort: and to teach us that much more he has registered the
names of the builders of the spiritual Jerusalem in the book of life, where
no devil can scrape them out, but shall be the dear Children of the Lord God,
defended by him from all ill. Let us therefore cast away this slothful
sluggishnes, wherein we have lain so long, rise up quickly, work lustely, spit
on our hands, and take good hold, that we fall not back again from our Lord
God. It is more honor to be a workman in this house, then to live the easiest
life, that the world can give.

A PRAYER.
AS thou did choose unto thy self here in earth, O mighty Lord, a certain
place and City Jerusalem, whether thy people should resort to worship thee to
offer their Sacrifices and make their supplications unto the, and as long as
they did it faithfully, thou did bless and prosper their doings, when they
offended and fell away from thee, thou laidst thy heavy hand and sharp scourge
upon them: so grant unto us, O gracious God, whom thou have made free by thy
dear son Christ Jesus, and not bound us to any one place, but have left us
free in liberty of conscience to assemble our selves and call upon thee in
every place and corner of the earth, to preach thy word, learn our duty, and
set forth thy majesty, to receive thy sacraments, and offer our selves, our
souls, and bodies a sweet sacrifice to thee: grant us we beseech thee, O
merciful father, thy loving countenance to continue thy blessings amongst us,
and deal not with us in thine anger as we justly have deserved to be cast away
from thee: but as thou in thine anger grievously punishedst thy people the
Jews, burnedst their City, destroiedst their Temple, Spoiledst the country,
leddest a great number into Captivity, killedst more, and broughtst them all
into bondage and slavery under heathen Princes: So, loving Lord, we confess
our horrible sins have deserved no less in justice at thy hands, but thy
mercy, O God, triumphs against justice: for as after a few years
correction, thou mouedst diverse heathen Princes to send home thy people with
great gifts, to repair the broken walls, build the Temple, inhabit the
Country, and restore thy Religion: and stirredst up also thy people, Priests,
Princes, Nobles, worshipful Ruelers, and Private men, Artificers, Women, and
of all sorts some earnestly to work at the building of thy city: So heavenly
King, let us not be cast away in thy heavy displeasure, and be the first that
cannot find favor in thy sight, but turn the hearts of Christian Princes to
give sree course and liberty to thy word of salvation, and raise up faithful
workmen of all sorts and degrees to build thy spiritual Jerusalem, thrust
forth true laborers into thy harvest, root out all slothful slugishnes from
amongst us, that we be not unprofitable members of the Church and commonwealth
and let all magistrates know that by thee they rule, that thou set them in
authority and mainteinest them that fear thee, and make them not only to
offer unto thee their bounden duty and service in building and working
themselves, to the good example of others, but also in encouraging and
defending the faithful laborers in thy vineyard, and compelling the froward,
diligently to set forward thy building: grant us strong walls and bulwarks,
to keep out Turk, Pope, Tyrants, Atheists, Anabaptists, and libertines, with all other hinderers of thy building, that thy simple people may live quietly,
and serve thee without Invasions or persecution. and as of thy great mercy
thou have left to us in writing the names of al such as were the chiefest doers
in this work for our comfort and example to follow: so we beseech thee, loving
Lord, to stir up those whose names thou haste written in the book of life,
that manfully they may stand in the defense of thy truth to the confusion of
thy foes, and thy immortal praise, for thy Christ's sake.

Amen.
CHAP. 4.
1. It came to pass when Sanballat heard that we builded the wall he was very
angry in himself, and disdeined greatly, and mocked the Jews.

2. And he spoke before his breethren and the Souldyers of Samaria and said,
what do these Impotent Jews? will they make themselves strong? Shall they
offer Sacrifice? Shall they finish it in a day? Shall they rear up the stones
out of the dust, where they were brent?

3. And Tobias the Ammonite was beside him and said: yea that which they do
build, if a fox come up, he shall break down their wall of stone.

THe last Chapter declared unto us the forwardnes of al sorts of men from the
highest to the lowest, both of the laity and the Ministry, Strangers, and
Citizens, to build and repair the broken walls of Jerusalem: and this Chapter
and diverse others following describe the manifold lets, subtle devises bold
enterprises, both of the outward enemy, and hipocrites amongst themselves, to
overthrow all this building, so that if God had not, contrary to reason,
assisted, encouraged, and defended his faithful servants, this work had never
been finished. Such has been, is, and shallbe unto the end, the state of Gods
people and Church, that in noe age it has wanted or can want many sore
assaults to overthrow it, if it were possible. But let us trust his faithful
promise that said, he would be with us unto the end of the world, and we
shall not be overcome. Let no man marvel therefore in these our days, because
he sees the like troubles fall among us, nor blame the doctrine that is
taught, as though that were the cause of all mischiefs: for God is not so
gracious to any Country in any age to set up his Kingdom there, but the
devil is as busy, and malicious to overthrow it, as much as he may. Let
every man also that will faithfully serve the Lord think this to be most
true, and look into this state of the Jews, as it were in a glass, and he
shall find, that by many troubles we must enter into the kingdom of heaven,
and that it is a narrow way that leads thither, Act. 14.
as it is written Matthew the 7. only take thou heed that thou deserve not to
be persecuted, and the Lord will confound them. Math. 7.
The rich glotton went to hell with all his belly cheer, and the poor beggar
Lazarus to heaven, and all his sorrow was no hinderance. Look at the
foote-steps of all our forefathers, the Patriarchs, and Prophets, Christ
Jesus, and his Apostles, with all other Martirs and good men, and we shall find
none but his whole life was aperpetuall warrefare, subject to infinite sorrows,
and the ending of one was the beginning of a new: but he that continued to the
end was saved. Let us not look to come into heaven, if we walk another way,
and be of good cheer, for the end shall be happy. These be spoken and written
for our learning, not to discourage us, but rather to encourage us, that we be
not found unlike to our forefathers, but manfully to stand in all trialls,
knowing that we have the same God that they had, that he is as able now and as
willing to defend his chosen congregation as he was in the beginning, and will
never forsake his dear children. In the second Chapter: verse 10. Sanballat
and Tobias hearing that Nehemiah was come with commission from the King to
build Jerusalem, they were grieved very sore within themselves, cast into a
dumpish sad heaviness, almost amazed for sorrow, that any man should come to
do the Jews any good at al, but now that they heard say they did work so
iustily at this building, (...) first burst out into anger, he stampes, he
stares, he frets, he fumes, he rages, he raileth, and takes on like a mad man
and cannot tell how to stay them: and after that he falls on mocing and
mowing potting and smyling at them, and flocking and flouting, scorning and
scoffing of them, in fingring, flecring, and girning at them, to try them,
whether they by this means would be dismayed or afraid to work any more. A
shrewd trial for a sort of poor people, which were but lately restored to
their country, and yet not well settled in it, to see the greatest ruler in the
country to be so angry to ward them, to scorn and mock them. If God had not
strengthened them, it would have made them to leave their work for fear and
run away. Look round about you in these our days, and ye shall see that if
but a mean man in authority, or his man with a badge on his sleeue, do but
look sowrelie, speak roughly, or behave him self any thing stoutly, al about
them stoop, make low courtesy, run when they are bidden, and dare not
whisper nor mutter one word, no not in their good and just cause: yet where
gods holy spirit gives comfort, al these braggs are nothing regarded, but in
their well doings they will on forwards with their just cause and serving the
Lord. Let every man take hced how he falls into wickedness, for he cannot
get out when he would. These men increase in mischief and amend not, so shall
all they that yeald unto it, and stay not in the beginning.

2. And he spoke before his breethren. The malice that the wicked men bear
against the Godly is so great, that it cannot be forgiven nor forgotten:
whatsoever falls out well to the good man, they are sorry for it: and they
think all the posterity of the Godly to be their disgracing and overthrow.
Cain envied Abell, because God accepted his sacrifice better: Saul envied
David, because he was more esteemed of the people. The Pharisees disdained
Christ our Lord, because they see their doctrine decay and his received. And
what makes such a stur this day in the Church, but that the Pope and his
partakers see their Kingdom decay and the truth appear? These be written for
our learning, that we should not discourage our selves in these miserable
times, but boldly stand and continue to the end. Sanballat, after that he had
thus chafte in himself, and also had scorned and scoft at their doings, he is
so sore vexed in his mind, that he cannot hold in, but bursteth out into
blustering big words, and says openly before his fellows and country men,
which were of the same mind, and superstition that he was, and it might be more
fearful to the Jews, to discourage them, he speaks and braggeth it out
before the Souldrers, which were set there to repress all mischieu ous
attempts and enterprises that any should take in hand. As who should say, that
if any went forward with his building the soldiers should overthrow it and
destroy them, for they were as ready to do such a mischief as he was to bid
them. And thus he says, what do these beggarly Jews, these slaves,
Pesantes, and villanes, what go they about? what mean they? will they take in
hand such a building as no mighty Prince is able to finish? and that many
noble Kings before them could scarce in many years perform, will they on a
sudden bring it to perfection? But if they be so foolish to think that they
can finish it themselves, are the heathen people so mad to stand by, look on
and laugh, and suffer them to go forward with this building which has been
of old time a great enemy unto them, and may be now again, if they be suffered
to work still? Do they think the Gentiles so foolish, that they foresee not
their meaning, or do they think them such Cowards that they dare not, or so
impotent and unable that they cannot hinder and overthrow this work, or so
unwilling to help their country, that they will suffer them to go forward in
it? Nay I warrant you, ye shall find them stout men, ready and willing to
defend their country, and will not suffer such runnagates to strengthen
themselves against them. Shall they offer their old sacrifices? shall they
restore their old Religion, in dispite of us and our Country, and go about to
draw others to their Religion? Shall they use their old accustomed solemn
days their great assemblies, and have it for well done? Nay let them assure
themselves we shall find them otherways occupied, we shall hold their nose to
the grindstone: they shall not have leisure to pray and to be merry as they
look for. They work so lustily as though they would finish it in one day,
before their neighbors should epsy them, but they shall find it far
otherwise: we foresee their meaning well enough, we will be heavy neighbors to
them: it shall not fall out as they look for. Many Kings before them were
busy to build, some one place, and some another, and in many years, but
these braggers go to it so greedelie, as though they could finishit in a day
or two. A sort of beggarly vagabonds and proud beggars take this work in
hand, as though they were able to go thorough with it. What will they do?
will they glue the old stones together again? when will they get new stone?
The old ones are burnt to powder, knocked in pieces, and will not serve for
any building again. They shall find it another manner of work to finish, then
they look for. The same miseries is the building of gods Church subject to at
this day, the same scoffs, mocks, threatings and Ieopardies are daielie spewed
out by such like wicked ruffians and Popish impes, some in corners and their
drunken feasts, some before Princes and rulers, yet God confounds their wicked
devices, comfort and encourages his poor people to go forward, and the
Lord blesses their doings. God in all ages has chosen the abiects of the
world to set up his kingdom 1. Cor. 1.
by, and to overthrow the pride of man's heart, be they never so worldly wise.

6. Tobias the Ammonite. It was not sufficient for this Miles gloriosus
Sanballat, to rail at Gods people and their building, as proud Golias, and
blasphemous Senacherib did before him, to their open destruction, but starteth
sorth another flattering lewd lubber Tobias an Ammonite, that slave, peisant,
servant, and bondsman, as he termed him before ca. 2. ver. 19. and he, not with
so many words, but with as bitter scoffs, scorneth as scornfullie at them as
Sanballat did before. And he stands up and says, if it like your worship you
need not thus to vex and chafe your self at these vile Jews. For let them
go on forward with their building as they have begone: when they have done the
worst that they may, if a fox come up he shall break down their stony wall,
he shall scrape it down with his claws and deface it. What needs your
mastershippe to care for so small a matter, it can do no harm: quiet your
self, we shall be able to deal with them well enough, and overthrow them: ye
are a man of wisdom and authority, and may easelie put these vagabonds to
flight: we need not so much the strength of a Lion, as the subtlety of a fox
to vanquish them. Thus bragging Thraso, never wants a flattering Gnatho, and
one Jade claweth another by the back, and all to discourage the poor
worke-men. Our miserable days can give many like examples, as when the bloody
butcher sat broiling gods Saints: and that glorious disputation at Oxford with
Gods good and learned ministers, whom after many such like blasphemous mocks
the Lord of his mercy took to his rest, and yet suffers some of his enemies
to live in shame, who in so long a time cannot repent, but are given up to
their own lusts and hardened hearts, so far as man can judge: beside many
other young whelps of their teaching which can bark in corners and make
themselves merry, with railing, and scoffing at the holy Scriptures of God, the
ministers and professers of it: ye some became so shameless that they would call
their dogs by the names of the first writers and professors of it. But our
God lives, who will defend his own quarrel and confound his foes, laugh they
never so merrily, or brag and scoff they never so bitterly. Solomon says,
God will mock them that (...)
mock. And David says, he is blessed that sits not in the seat of
scorners. Diocletian the Emperor, as Volaterane writes, had a Jest er Psalm. 1.
called Genesuss, who used to make him merry at his dinner, and amongst other
devices would scosfe at the Christians, with madiestures: but God plagued him
for example of others, that they should not do the like, and yet it is to
common at this day: they cannot eat their meat nor be merry, except they have
some at their elbowe that will blaspheme, scorn, and laugh at the Religion,
Scriptures and lovers of it. A shrewd kind of trial for poor souls: for
some are so weak that rather then they will be mocked, loose their estimation
amongst their acquaintance, or have a strange look of many a gentelman their
neighbor, they will forsake God, his word and religion, and say what soever a
man will have them. What hinders more at these days, then such like bragges
and mocks as these? What will these new fellows do, say they? will they
overthrow that faith that our selves had so many years ago? Nay let them
alone a while, sit down, and laugh at them, they will be trapt in their own
snare. Do they so turn the whole world into their own fantasies? will such a
Prince or such suffer it: See ye not this great man and that great man look
straungelie at it? `Doe any of the ruelers belceue it, but a sort of rude and
common people? Are not al countries in trouble about it? and have been many
years. Live quietly and let them alone a while, and look for a day, and
apply it better when it comes, then ye did, the last was lost for want of
good looking to in time. But the good Christian will with patience go forward,
and not be ashamed of God nor his word, nor affraied of such proud bragges, nor
amassed at their bitter scoffs. He knows that all which will live godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, and that all good fathers from the
beginning have suffered the same, and prepares his back and shoulders
patiently to bear all sorrows for his masters cause. David complains in all
good men's names we are become amocking stock to our neighbors, alaughing
matter and Psalm. 7.
scoffing to them that be round about us. When Peter had preached the fearful
last day to be at hand, they mocked him saying, where is 2. Pet. 3.
the promise of his coming that thou hastso long talked of? Since our fathers
died, do not all things continue as in the beginning? But enough was said of
this matter before in the 2. Chap. 19. verse. This is then the remedy that
David uses in all these griefs, fall to prayer, commend thy cause unto the
Lord, fall not from him for any storm, tarry the Lords leisure, and play the
man, comfort thy heart, look for the Lords coming, and sat unto him with
David, have mercy on us, O Lord, have Psalm. 123.
mercy on us, for we are utterly despised. Our soul is full of the
sclaunders of these wealthy worldlings and dispising of the proud. No doubt
the Lord will comfort thee, and confound the^, as our days have well declared.

4. Harken thou, O our God, for we are despised: turn their shame upon their
own head, and make them despised in the land of their captivity.

5. Cover not their wickedness, and let not their sin be put out of thy sight:
for they have provoked the builders.

6. Then we builded the wall, and the whole was joined together unto the half
hight: and the people had a mind to work.

AFter that he had described the mockings and threatenings that they had for
their bold enterprise in building, to discourage and drive them from it, if
they could, if it had been possible: he now declares what remedy and comfort
he found by prayer at the Lords hand. Nehemiah seeing their great danger,
turns him to the Lord, the people praying with him, and says; Our God that
have chosen us only, though most unworthy, for thy people amongst the whole
world, and whom only we worship, and at whom we seek for help and
deliverance, in all our trouble, hearken we beseech thee, O Lord, bow down
thine ear and hear our prayers, for thou art a righteous judge and mighty
revenger of all thy faithful servants: we thy poor people are in a miserable
case, we looked for aid at our neighbors hands and they are our utter
enemies: we hoped for comfort of them, and they utterly despise, mock, and
contemn us: but thou art a God that never for sakest any that come unto thee,
nor castest any away that faithfully trust in thee: hear us, O gracious
God, and turn their own shame, that they would lay on us for building thy
city, on their own heads: that villainy that they would do to us, let it
fall on themselves. If thou let this cruelty escape unpunished, thou shall be
thought negligent and careless of thy people: these Samaritanes that be so
cruel against us, be strangers in the country where they dwell: as we were in
Babylon, they were brought out of their own country and placed here by
Ezer-haddon King of Assiria: make them, O Lord, to be despised in this land of
their captivity, as well as they despised us in our misery: O Lord let not
their wickedness be hid, but make it known to all the world and all ages to
come, how dispitefully they deal with us for thy sake: others will attempt the
like, if this escape unpunished. Forgive not their sins, but ever keep them
in thy remembrance, thou shall not be thought arighteous judge, if thou wincke
at such wickedness: they hinder not our own buildings, but they provoke the
builders of thy house and City. They despise us because we serve thee. They
hate us, not for any of our wickedness, but for the hatred that they bear to
thy house, Religion, and City, which they would have lie wast, overthrown,
and trodden down. We grant we have deserved to be cast away from thee, if thou
deal with us in justice, and yet after thy fatherly correction we obedientlie
return and submit our selves unto thee, whereas they contemptuously still
rebel against thee, and hate us because we love thee. If they did persecute us
for our own deserts, we would bear it: but to see thy majesty defaced, we
cannot abide it: they would have thy City to lie unbuilt, that men might
speak ill of thee, that thou were a weak God, not able to defend thy people,
that call on thy name so mightelie as their Idols do them that know not thee.
The shame that they would lay on us shall turn unto thee, O Lord: for it is
done unto us for thy sake, and hatred of thee and thy word. Avenge thy own
quarrel, O God, and look not at our own deserts: for though we have
grievously offended thee, yet we repent and they obstinately stand in defense
of their own wickedness. O Lord forget not this malicious dealing of them
toward us for thy sake: abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound
their devises, that they intend against us: comfort and encourage thy poor
woorkemen and builders whom they provoke to anger, and grant us, that we may
by thy aid with good success finish that, which we have through thy goodness
so well begone. Amen. Out of his prayer may arise two doubts, one, whether it
be godly and good men may use the like that he prays for here: that is, that
the same ill may fall on them, that they would do unto the Jews; The other,
that their sin should not be forgiven them. The Scripture teaches both to
pray for our enemies, and to forgive them, and also that God would revenge
their cause himself in his justice. Our savior Christ prays for them, that
crucified him, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. S.
Steven likewise. But David Act. 7.
many times prays the contrary, as, Let his sorrow be turned on his Psalm. 7.
own head, and let his wickedness fall upon his own pate. Again, let them be
confounded and ashamed that seek for my life, and let them be driven Psa. 69.
109.
back and ashamed that seek to (...) me evil. These Psalms and others are
full of such like speeches. And where some expound such places to be a
prophecy and foretelling ofsuch mischiefs as should fall on them, rather then
a wishing or praing that they should fall, it is not ill that they say: but it
may be doubted whither it be most agreeing to the text: but howsoever it be,
this must be most taken heed of, that in all such prayers nothing be asked of
malice against the party, which is hard for our froward nature to do: but
only for the glory of God, which is to be sought in all our doings and
prayers, which may be in showing his justice. In the Lords prayer, we say,
hallowed be thy name: we desire not God only that he would direct both every
man in his doings to set forth his glory, that his name may be hallowed: but
also that he would stay, confound and take away all hinderers of the same,
with all their devices and subtle practices: that all stumbling blocks being
taken away, his name may be sanctified in all nations. So prayed `Dauid, O my
God make the counsel of Achitophel to seem foolish: so in the commandments
the affirmative (...). Sam. 16.
is included in the negative, and the negative in the affirmative as, thou
shall not kill: wherein we are not only forbidden all cruelty, but are
commanded to relieve, succor, and help by all means that we may. Nehemiah
hates not the men but their wickedness: so we learn to put a difference
betwixt the man and the sin of man and pray for mercy to the one, and
justice to the other. Man is Gods good creature, and to be beloved of all
sorts: Sin is of the devil and to be fled of all sorts. And it is a great
difference whether we pray for revenging our own private quarrel, which may
not be in any case: or it be for Gods cause and glory, which we would seek
the furtherance of, by all means we may.

6. Then we builded the wall. This verse declares what they got by this short
prayer. The peoples heart was encouraged to go forward with this work, in so
much that they repaired all the breaches of the wall, and joined it all
together as though it were one whole sound wall, and never had been defaced
before. Prayer is a sovereign Salve for all sores: for it will heal not only
the wounds of the body and soul but also hard stony walls. This is the
common practice of all good men when they be scorned for the Lords sake, to
turn themselves unto humble prayer, commit the cause unto the lord who will
justly revenge his own quarrel when he thinkerh good. David when Psa. 69.
he had complained unto God how the Judges did mock him, and the drunkerds and
minstrels sang their songs against him, to make them merry withal, and could
find no remedy, he says thus after that he was sore grieved at them: but I,
O Lord, made my prayer unto thee, and then the Lord comforted him. Likewise,
King Ezechias gets him to the Temple, when Rabsachis had railed against the
living Lord, 2. King. 15.
and written blasphemous letters, he read the letters in the sight of God,
falls to prayer, and desires the Lord to help him in that extremity, and
his God delivered him. This prayer of Nehemiah is not long, for God regards
not so much the length of our prayer, as the earnest hearty desire of the
mind, with an humble submission of himself to the Lords good will and
pleasure, repenting earnestly for his offenses, and faithfully hoping without
mistrust, for the Lords comfortable assistance, when, and as he shall think
good: by this prayer they obtain at the Lords merciful hand boldenes to go
forward with their building, and to contemn their proud mockes and brags, they
finish the whole length and the height of the wall, in dispite of their
enemies: and the people were not weary of working, but the more they wrought,
the more desirous they were to work still: for the good success that they had
in building hitherto, did encourage them to go forward with it, and they
doubted not but that god was with them, and therefore feared no other. Let us
learn therefore, at these good men's examples to be bold and constant in well
doing, and not to fear every brag and blast of wind. Let us be as a lusty
horse that goes through the street, and cares not for the barking of every
curre that leapeth forth, as though he would bite him: so let us not be afraid
of the barking curres, nor look backward, but go on forth not changing with
every tide: and the mighty Lord will strengthen our weakness with good
success to finish his building: for so have all good men done from the
beginning.

7. It came to pass that when Sanballat and Tobias, the Arabians, the
Ammonites, and the Azdodites heard tell that a Salve was come on the wall of
Jerusalem, and that the breaches of it began to be stopped up, they were very
wroth.

8. And they conspired altogether to go and besiege Jerusalem, and to make a
scattering in it.

9. But we prayed unto our God, and set a watch by them day and night in their
sight.

10. And Judas said, the strength of the bearers is decayed, and there is much
mortar, and we are not able to build on the wall.

11. And our enemies said, they shall not know nor see till we come into the
middle of them, and we shall slay them and make the work to cease.

AS good men go forward with Gods work, so the wicked swell for anger,
increase in malice against them, and by all means possible not only by
themselves go about to overthrow all their good enterprises, but they seek
all the partakers that they can get, and will refuse no kind of man be he
never so ill, to join with them, so they may obtain their purpose, and hinder
the Lords building. Sanballut and Tobias before thought with their bitter
scoffs, big words, and hautie looks, to have dashed these poor souls out
of countenance, and made them to leave building: but now when they see they
were not afraied but wrought more lustilie, they make other devices, they will
fight for it, they gather a great company of neigbours, as ill as themselves,
and will set upon them, kill them, and overthrow their building. Such a thing
is malice once earnestly in man's mind conceived, and specially for religion,
that it so blyndeth a man, that he sees not what he does, nor what will
follow of his doings. He that falls from God, wandereth in darkness, and
cannot tell what he does, where he is, nor whither he goes, but the farther
he stirs, the farther he is out of the way, and the more darkness he is in:
for God is light, the way, truth, and life, and he that has not God for his
guide, cannot find the true way to everlasting life. Let every man therefore
that will walk uprightly in the fear ofGod, take heed how he once give place
to any wickedness: for if the devil get a little entrance into thee, he will
draw the clean away with him, if God be not more merciful to hold thee.
When the devil tempted Eve, he appeered in likeness of a serpent, to teach us,
that as the head of the Serpent is the greatest part of the body, and
wheresoever the head gets in, the whole body follows easily: So the
devil if he once enter into man's heart, he will creep into all parts, and
never cease until he possess the whole man, and bring him to everlasting
death with him and destruction in this world, as he did with Judas, entering
into him first by little and little, but after that Jesus Christ had given him
the soppe, he did so fully possess him, that straight ways he betrated his
master the Lord of life into the hands of wicked men, to be put to most vile
death, and all for greedines of a little money. Sanballat by the help of Tobias
had now gotten a great band of Souldyers, of others, and specially of Arabians,
Ammonites, and Azdodites to fight for him against these seely souls, and for
no other quarrel, but because they heard say, that they had repaired all the
breaches of the walls of Jerusalem. Their foolish madness appears the more
because they rage so fiersly for only hearing how well the work went forward,
as though that had benethe greatest fault that they could have committed.
Wisdom would have tried, whither such tales had been true, before they had
believed them: but anger is so hot an affection, that it cannot abide to be
ruled by reason. There is no difference (...) an angry man and a mad man, but
that anger lasts but for a time and continues not still, as madness does.
(...) or (...) est; Anger is a short madness, says the Poet: and again. ^
Anger lets the mind that it cannot see the truth. Saint James therefore
bids, let every man be swift to he are, but slow to speak, and (...). 1.
slow to anger: for the anger of man works not the righteousness of God. And
though anger ought to be suppressed in all things that it grow not to any
extremity, yet is it most chiefly to be holden down when any correction is
to be executed. Tullie teaches well, Qui iratus accedit ad poenam nunquam
mediocritatem illam tenebit, quae est inter nimium and parum. He that punishes
when he is angry, cannot keep that mean which is betwixt too much and too
little. Theodosius the Emperor when he had caused a great number Lib. 2. cap.
18
to be slain in his anger at Thessalonica, and for his rashness in so doing was
excommunicated by Ambrose Bishop of Millanne, after that he knew his fault and
openly confessedit, made a law that no execution should be done on any
offender, whom he judged to die, before 30. days were expired, that he might
have so long time to consider in, whether he had judged rightfully. God grant
every man a diligent care to foresee, that he do nothing in hisanger
unadvisedly, but with patient modesty, may do all things in the fear ofGod.

Tobias was an Ammonite of the seed of Ammon, whom Lot begat of his own
daughter in his drunkenness, and as they were ever Genesis (...).
utter enemies to the Jews, though they were near kinsemen, the one being
come of Abraham, the other of Lot his Nephew, so now having such a man of
Authority their countriman to be their Captain, as Tobias was, they were more
easelie drawn to join with them, that by this occasion they might more
easelie revenge old quarrels against the Jews more bitterly. The Arabians
were their next neighbors, a wild Mountain people living much by robbery
and therefore easelie brought to such a mischief. The Azdodits were one corner
of the Philistines their old enemies and would rather run to such a mischief
unbidden, then tarry for any calling for. So we may see how readily one wicked
man will be drawn to help another, and how the wickedness of one will infect
another, that will give ear unto it. But good men are often lest to themselves
without help or comfort at man's hand, as the Jews were here now: and the
Church ofGod has been from the beginning subject to such dangers and shall be to
the end, that Gods glory may more evidently shine in defending ofit, in
despite of all their foes. The Metaphor, or kind of speech that is used here,
when he faith, a salve was come on the walls of Jerusalem, is taken from
Chirurgions who when they heal wounds, join the flesh together again, which
before was cut in sunder: so the new breaches of the walls, which before lay
gaping open, were now joined together and made sound, as though it were one
whole sound wall. And as it was such a grief to these wicked men, to hear
tell only that the walls went well forward in repairing: so is it at this
day the greatest grief that Gods enemies can have, when they hear tell that
religion goes forward in any country: then they conspire, both by
themselves and their friends, and specially by that bastard Tobias, their
Pope, so much as in them lies, though it be with fire and sword, or any other
cruel device, to overthrow it.

8. And they conspired. When they perceived that mocking taunts, high looks,
nor proud words could not drive them from their building, they will now make
open war against them to dash them out of countenance, put them to their
shifts, and scatter them a sunder that being amazed at such a company coming
on them suddenly they should not assemble any more to work there. Thus the
wicked never cease by all means to hinder Gods building: but as Satan their
Father goes continually about like a roaring Lion to devour the Lords slocke,
so do they: but our God is as diligent tosaue us that they do no hurt, and
watches us when we do sleep, that they overcome us not. Pilate and Herod,
were not friends before; but to condemn our Lord Christ Jesus they soon
agreeed, and were Luke 23.
friends afterward. So thus many kind of people, which agree not well many
times among themselves, yet now to overthrow Jerusalem, they all put on
armoure, join themselves together, become friends, and agree all in one
mischief. David marueileth to see how all sorts of people and Princes
conspire together against Psalm. 2.
the Lord Christ, and cries out, why do the heathen so fret, and the people
devise vain things? the Kings of the earth have risen together, and the
Princes have assembled together against the lord and his anointed. But when
David had considered al their raging madness, he comforts himself and says,
he that dwells in the heavens shall mock them, and the Lordshal laugh them
to scorn, etc. So shall gods faithful little flock be defended and comforted in all their troubles unto the end: and their proud enemies shall be confounded. But
this is all our froward nature bent unto, that we be so ready to mischief,
andslow to do good.

9. But we prayed. As Nehemiah declares the manifold troubles that fell on them
for this building, so also he setteh forth their (...) (...) and Gods favor
toward them. For if (...) should continually assault us, and the Lord leave
us to our selves, man's weakness were not able to stand, so strong and subtle is
he, so unable, and wretched are we. They forsake themselves therefore, and by
humble prayer submit themselves to their God, who never failed them in all
assaies. Prayer is a sure anchor in all storms, and they never perish that
humbly fly unto it, and faithfully cleave unto it. Prayer is a salve for all
sores, yea it heals not only body and soul, but even hard stony walls.
No kind of carthly physic that God has made is good for all kind of folk
at all times, and all kind of diseases: but this heavenly physic of prayer
in wealthand woe, in plenty and poverty, in prosperity and adversity, in
sickness and in health, in war and peace, in youth and age, in life and death,
in mirth and sadness, yea in all things and times, in the beginning, midst,
and ending, prayer is most necessary and comfortable. Happy is that man that
diligently uses it at al times. But he that will so effectually pray that he
may obtain the thing he desires, must first prostrate himself in the sight
of his God, as this people did, for so the Hebrew word here signifies
forsaking himself, as unable to help himself, condemning him self as
vnworthle to receive such a blessing at the Lords hand: and yet nothing
doubting, but that his God that never forsakes them, that unfeignedly fly
unto him, will deal with him in mercy and not in justice, deliver him and
comfort him, not for any goodness that he finds in him, but of his own mere
pity, love, grace and mercy, whereby he may show him self a glorious God, a
present help and succor to all afflicted and oppressed minds. He that finds
any thing in himself to help and comfort him self withal needs not to
pray, but he that sees and feels his present want and necessity, he will
beg earnestly, crave egerlie, confessing where his relief is to be had. No
man will pray for that thing which he has or thinks him self to have, but
we ever ask, desire, beg, and pray for that we want. Let us therefore in all
our supplications and prayers unto the Lord, first confess our beggarly
poverty and unableness to help our selves, the want of his heavenly grace and
fatherly assistance, and then our gracious God will plenteously power his
blessings into our empty souls, and fill them with his grace. If we be full
already, there is no rowme left to take any more: therefore we must know our
selves to be empty and hungry, or else we shall not earnestly desire this
heavenly comfort from above, which is requisite in all prayer. For he that
asks coldlie, gets nothing. And the more that we confess our own
weakness, our want, and unableness, the more we confess our God to be almighty,
rich in mercy, possessing all things in his own hands, and dealing them
abroad to his poor people, where he sees them need, and sending the rich
empty away. And as we must thus cast down our selves in our selves by faith
to our God, and to pray to no other, but vuto the living Lord, that made
heaven and earth, as this people does, and therefore call him their God. For
if we seek help at any other, we mistrust him, we do not faithfully believe
on him, and then we shall not be heard of him. Call on me in the day of thy
trouble, says thy God, Psalm. 50.
and I will deliver thee, and, I ask no other reward but to glorify, praise
and thank me, knowing thy safety and deliverance to come from me. But these
men did not only pray to their God, but according to their duty they put
themselves in a readiness to defend themselves against their enemies, which is
lawful for all men to do. It is not sufficient to pray, and then to neglect
such means as God has appointed us to use for our defense and comfort, no
more then it is to say when he has prayed, I will live without meat, and
drink, and God himself shall feed me. For as the Lord has taught us to
pray, give us this day our daily bread, so he has comman ded us to work for
it, and says, he that does not labor, let him not (...). These. 3.
eat. So here it was not sufficient to call upon their God, though he was most
mighty and loving unto them, but they keep watch and ward, put on Armor,
take their weapons, not cowardly creeping into corners, but stand forth
stoutly on the top of the walls by the workemens elboes in the sight of their
enemies, that they might see that they were not afraied of them, but would
manfully defend them selves and the workmen, against al assaults they could
devise. They had a stronger God to defend them, then any devil could be to
hurt them, or overthrow their work. So prayer and Gods providence destroys
not policy but maintayneth it, and when they be joined together god blesses
them both, as his own ordinance. They knew well how true it was that David
said, Except the Lord defend the City, the watchmen watch in vain that keep
Psalm. 127.
it. But when the Lord defends it, and the wacth-men do their duties
faithfully, trusting in the Lord, and not foolishlie bragging of their own
strength and power, then is that city well and strongly kept. The Children of
Ruben, Gad, and the half tribe of Manasse, as it is written, when they fought
against the Agarens, gat the victory, and all because they joined prayer with
their power, not trusting in themselves, but in the mighty Lord of hosts,
who heard them and overthrew their enemies. Thus must good Captains learn to
join prayer with policy, if they look to obtain the victory, and not
trust in horse, Spear, shield, or other kind of weapons. God rules those
that fear him, in battle as well as in peace, and those that trust in their
own strength, he will overthrow. Constantine the great, that worthy Emperor,
our country man, taught his soldiers daily to pray thus, We knowledge thee,
O Lord, we know thee Eusebius. lib. 4. De vita constat.
for a King, we call on thee for our help, from thee we have the victory, and
by thee we are conquerours: we give thee thanks for this present prosperity,
and by thee we hope for things to come: we all are humble suitors unto thee,
that our Emperor and his Godly Children may be preserved safe long to live,
and we humbly be seech thee that he may be a valiant conqueror, etc.

And that Captains may not do what they list, but must learn to defend good
causes only, Theodosius the good Emperor teaches in his prayer, that he
makes for him self, saying. O almighty God thou know that I have taken
these wars in hand in the name of Christ thy son, for a just revenge, if it
be otherwise revenge thou it on Rusf. lib. 2. Chap. 23.
me: but if I come hither in a good quarrel and trust in thee, then reach
forth thy right hand unto thy people, lest peradventure the heathen people will
say, where is their god? By Moses law the priests should go to the sield with
the army to encourage, teach, and comfort them, even when they should Deuteronomy. 20.
join battle. The papist will have his morrow mass Priest with him; and yet
such negligence is in those, that call themselves Protestants, that they
think the company worsse, if a learned minister be among them: and if he will
rebuke their spoil, gaming, swearing, whooring, they are weary of him; and if
he touch any of the better sort, then away with him, or else work him some
displeasure. So rashly we cast of the Lords yoke, so folishlie we enter into
wars, as though the victory laic in our own hands, and God did not bestow
it on whom he thinks best. John Baptist, when the soldiers came to him to be
baptized, as other sorts of men did, he taught every one how to amend their
lives: and to the soldiers he says: do violence to no man, accuse none
falselie, and be content with your wages. Luc. 3.


God grant all good soldiers to follow these lessons unfeignedly: for the
holy Ghost notes these as common faults, that such kind of men be infected
withal. Many lusty yonkers think not themselves brave enough, except they
can look big, speak stoutly, and pick a quarrel against every simple
man, dealing hardly with all sorts, that they can come by, they think all is
well gotten. How common this kind of dealing has been, I leave it to the
consideration of others. And for that diverse have fallen to a great sobriety
and lived orderly since they learned Religion, God is to be praised, and God
increase the number. They be not made Soldiers to do wrong, but to correct
them that offer wrong: they enter not that trade to live without law, but to
bring them in obedience that offend the law. They may not think the Princes
coffers to be at their disposition, but must content themselves with wages and
that portion that is allotted to them. He that deals other ways gets it
unjustly, and though he thinks he deals so cunningly that it cannot be
espied, yet the righteous Lord will punish it in this world to his shame, and,
if he be not more merciful, most greeuouslie in the world to come. Thus prayer
and policy joined together, make a perfect work, and the one halteth if it
want the other. David when he fought with Goliath, though he refused King Saul's
Armor, yet he took his Sling and stones in his shepherds bag, and calling
upon the Lord, overthrew that Giant mightelie. So shall it be in Gods Church
when the ministers and people pray earnestly, the Preachers speak boldly,
beat down sin mightelie, and watch night and day, that Satan by his members
creep not in subtly and disturb the flock of Christ. God grant us so to
watch and pray, that the Lords name may be worthelie praised in us: for so S.
Paul teaches, be diligent in prayer, watching in it with thanks giving. And
S. Luke says, watch and pray at al times, Coloss. 4.
that ye may escape all the evils which are to come. This kind of fighting
against all fiery assaults of Satan, is as necessary in Gods Luke 25.
Church, as open war is against the enemies of the common wealth.

10. And Judas said. This gappe was not so soon stopped, but there bursteth
forth another worsse then that. Open enemies can do little harm, if the other
parties within be true amongst themselves. But if the soldiers within the
City fall at a Mutiny among themselves, disobey their captain, discourage
their fellows, or work any treason, drawing parties together, then the
danger within is greater, then any can be without. The greatest part of the
tribe of Judah now wax faint-hearted, draw back, discourage their fellows,
murmr against the Captains, and would gladly leave working. A perilous
practice in such a dangerous time, and able to overthrow all. One coward in an
army breaking the array, running away or discouraging the rest, may easelie
discomfet the whole army. But here come now a great company, not of the
meanest sort, but of the Kings tribe of Judah and they murmr, they discourage,
they dissuade, and hinder the work, as much as they may. The Israchtes in
Egypt, when Pharaoh increased their labor, because Moses and Aaron would have
them delivered, they cry out on Moses and Aaron for their weldoing. When they
were come out of Egypt and wanted their fleshpottes, they cry out of Moses
Exodus 16.
and Aaron, which brought them out, and would return again into Egypt. The
spies that were sent before to bring word what a people and country they should
come unto, were faint-hearted, and discouraged the rest, saying, the men were
great Giants, their Cities stronger then they could conquer, though the ground
was fruitful and pleasant of it selse. Thus Satan never cease to devise
something to overthrow Gods building.

The reasons that Judas alleges, were great, and able to persuade any man:
first the workmen were weary, say they, their shoulders aked with bearing so
many heavy burdens, their strength was gone, they were not able to bear
any more. Secondly, there was much mortar to carry away, both of the old
rubbish of thebroken walls, and also new mortar to be brought in for the new
building. The Hebrew word will serve for both, which I had rather follow,
though some learned apply it only to the old rubbish of the old walls, and
some to the new mortar, to be carried for the new building. This troubled
Nehemiah more then any bragges of his enemies abroad. For of these he looked
for help, and of the others none. These should have comforted him, and now they
discomfort. Now he must first pacify and please the men, then he must comfort
them and also stir them up to their work, lest others should faint and fall
away as well as they. It is an easy matter to begin a good work, but a
special gift to stand in all storms and continue to the end. The proud Papist
at this day, at whose hands no goodness is to be looked for, neither toward God
nor good man, does not hinder the building of Gods Church and preferring of
his gospel, so much as these faint-hearted Protestants, white liuered
Hipocrites, double dissemblers, and seruers of time.

When they set them down and look into the world, what, say they, we have
wrought our selves weary these fifty years, and profited little: our
showlders ache, the more Popish rubbish we carry a way, the more we see remain
behind. Our open enemies are so many and so cruel, that they will not let us
work, and our friends are so weak, that they are not able to help themselves
and us: many of those that seem to be friends are saint hearted, wax cold,
and deal cunningly against a new day and a change do come, and (...) we
shall be left in the briars. So much old Popish rubbish is left behind in the
Church that it will never be carried out: so much new good order and discipline
is to be brought in, that it is hard to tell, whether it be a harder matter to
carry out the old dreggs, or to bring in new mortar to build new walls. How
many have they burned, how greedelie do they gape to be broyling again? S.
Peter in the Acts of the Apostles asks, why they would go about to lay that
yoke of Moses Ceremonies on the neck of the disciples, which neither they nor
their fathers were able to bear? And if that might be truly said then, of
those ceremonies which came from God himself, how much more may it be verified
now on those which come from the Pope, the father of all superstition. The
double dealing of wyly wordlings is such, that it is to be feared this popish
rubbish will never be clean rubbed of. For we ever keep some Romish room in
store to turn our selves on, so often as the world shall turn. And this old
Judas may well be a figure of the latter Judas, that betrayed our master
Christ, and al other such hipocrits, which being faint hearted would betraie
the building and builders that Gods City should not be finished. There is
great striving who shall be Peter's successor in authority, but I fear Judas
has more followers, which cowardly and greedelie for a little money hinder,
betraie, and undermine, both the faithful builders and building. If it be
heinous treason to betray one man, whom thou owe duty, reverence, and
faithful service unto: it must needs be much more heinous in a City, a
Camp, a Church, or any society, where faithfulness should be found, to
deceive, run away, deal dissemblinglie, or to dissuade, discourage, and
withdraw any or many from their dutiful obedience, labor, diligence, and
faithful dealing, to the dishonor of God, the overthrow of Religion, and hurt
of his people. God for his mercy sake root out all desperate Iudases from
among all faithful companies, that they may not discourage others, and
specially from among the flock of Christ, whom he has so dearly bought,
that the Lords building may go forward lustily. What these Romish rubbish be,
I had rather leave it to other men's considerations, then by blotting of paper
and filling men's ears with such filthiness, stand to rehearse them: but among
many I think none worsse, then many lewd dispensations, which such idle
lubbers seek for, whereby their duty is undone. But many a good builder will
not build on the sand, but dig to the sad earth, and the good husband will
pluck up the weeds before he sow good Corn: so surely in Gods Church ill
doctrines, Ceremonies, Customs, and Superstitions, must be rooted out, before
good Laws, Orders, wholesome doctrine, and government can take place.

11. And our enemies said. The malice of Satan by his members Is so great
against the building of Gods City, that by all means, openly and privily,
inward enemies and outward, fair words and foul, Sword, fire, and fagget,
war or peace, Teaching or holding their tongue, knowledge or Ignorance,
undermining or Conspiracies, and all other devices whatsoever, they let none
slip, but try all, that they may overthrow all, and not so much to do them
selves good, as to hinder others to set up themselves in the sight of the
world, and to deface the glory of God: but in the end all is in vain, and our
God shall have the victory. They will not yet use any open violence, but
cunningly come on them unawares, be on them before they know it or look for it,
secretly prepare all things necessary for their purpose, and steal on them
privily, that they shall be in the midst of them before they wot where they be,
they will kill them, shed their blood mercilesly murder them, and make that
building to cease, overthrow the walls, pull down the Bulwarks, and so
ouerwhelme them, that they never dare attempt any such building any more. O
monstrous malice against thy Lord to thine own destruction in hindering his
building, and his immortal praise in defending of it! What foolishnes is this
to strive against the almighty? a wretched worm on the earth to rebel
against the lords holy will and determinate pleasure in heaven? Nothing
greeueth them so much as to see this work go forward: if this work were
laid a sleep, their hearts were well eased: but our God in patience lets
them utter their malice, that in his justice he may overthrow them.

In this Serpentine, crafty, and deuilish dealing of these wicked men
appears the old Serpentine deuilish nature and malice of Satan that old
cankered enemy of God and man from the beginning. God said to the Serpent,
that the seed of the woman should tread Genesis 3.
upon his head, and the Serpent should tread upon his heel. Crafty and
subtle men when they will work a mischief go privily about it to deceive
the good man, as the Serpent if he will sting a man, will not look him in the
face, but steal on him privily when he sees him not. God endued man when he
made him with such a majesty in his face before he fell to sin, that all
creatures did reverence and fear him: and although sin has much defaced and
blotted out that Noble Majesty and grace that God endued him with, yet it is
not utterly disgraced and taken away, but some spark and Relic remains at
this day, that no wild nor venomous beast dare look a man in the face
boldly, and hurt him: but will give place for the time, and seek how he may
privily wound or hurt him when he sees him not. It is good wisdom therefore
for every man, that shall be in danger of any such hurtful beasts, always
to look them in the face, and beware when he turns his eye from them, that
they sodenlie and subtillie leap not on him and hurt him. These crafty and
subtle foxes therefore, like the seed of the Serpent, would not openly
invade, nor gather any great power of men against them, but at unawares steal
on them privily, before they should suspect any such thing. This is the nature
of wicked men, so craftelie to undermine the Godly.

The next property of the Serpent that appears in these devilish men, is,
that they mercileslie would murder them, when they had once thus suddenly
invaded them. Satan was a murderer from the beginning, as Saint John says:
and therefore no marvel ifhis Children be bloodsuckers like unto the father.
when he would (...). 8.
not spare the innocent Lamb of God Jesus Christ, but most cruelly crucified
him, why should we marvel to see himby his wicked Childrenso greedelie seek
to shed innocent blood still?

The last property of Satan appears here most plainly in these wicked men,
in that they would so gladly overthrow this building of Jerusalem, that it
should never be thought on any more. Satan is the Prince of this world and
therefore cannot abide another King to reign, nor any kingdom to be set up
but his own: and for mainteining of that, he will strive by his members unto
death. If a man would describe a Papist, I know not where he should find a
more lively Example then these men be. The Papist is close and subtle in
going about to work his feate on a sudden, as these men were, before it be
spied, if God utter it not. Their bloody hearts and hands have filled all
countries in all ages with shedding innocent blood: but especially this age
plainly declares to them, that will not be willfullie blind, howtrue it is.
Those bloody marriages in France of late, which were pretended to be made for
peace, love, and quietness, shallbe witnesses against them of these kind of
dealings, (though they rejoice in their mischief) unto the worlds end. Saint
Paul calls the Devil not only a Prince: but a God of the world, because he
disdaineth the glory of God, and would have that honor given unto himself.
And that ye may easily see (...). Cor. 4.
who is his truly begotten son, look who sit teth in the Temple (...).
These. 2.
of God, boasting him self as God, as Saint Paul says. who sits so
deeply in ignorant men's Consciences, that they dare not offend him, but
think him to be holiest? who takes in hand to bestow heaven, and hell, and
purgatory at his own pleasure, to forgive sin, and make righteous, which
belong to God alone, but the Pope and his Chaplains? Therefore he that will
not wittinglie deceive himself, may easily judge whence Popery comes,
and whether it leads us. No marvel therefore if the Papists at this day be
so earnest to serve their God the Pope and hinder the building of Gods Church
and City, lest their Kingdom, Superstition, Pride, and authority decaie.
Open your eyes and see, mark the practices of Superstitious Idolaters from the
beginning, and ye shall find them in nothing more earnest, then in hindering
the true God to be worshipped as he ought What made Pharaoh so desirous to
stay the Children of Israel in Egypt, but that they should not go Sacrifice
to the Lord as he had appointed? Wherefore (...).
did the Scribes and Pharisees so rage against Christ, but that they would not
have their traditions to decay, and the true Mat.
doctrine of Christ Jesus to be set up? Why did the high Priests and elders
whip the Apostles, and command them to preach no more in the name of Jesus,
but that they would overthrow his Kingdom, Act. 5.
if that they could? Why were so many thousand martirs so Cruelly murdered
in so many ages, but that they would know no God and Savior, but only the
Lord Christ? Why does the Pope and his Partakers so rage at this day, as Herod
did, when he heard that a new King was borne, but that he sees his Kingdom
and Superstition overthrown, by the preaching of the Gospel?

And as it falls out thus generally in the building of Gods spiritual house
and City, that all sorts of enemies most diligently apply themselves,
their labor, wit, Power, Policy, and friendship to overthrow the true
worship ofGod: so particulerlie Satan goes about like a Roaring Lion seeking
whom he may devour, and therefore every man has great need to be wary and
circumspect, that he be not suddenly overthrown, but let him watch, and put
on all the Armor of God, which Saint Paul describes saying; For this cause
take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the
evil day, and having finished all things, stand fast. Stand therefore, and your
loins gird about with verity, and having on the brestplate of righteousness,
And your feet shodwith the preparation of the Gospel of peace. etc. that he
may stand stoutly in the day ofbattell, and through the might of his God get
the victory. The devil Ephe. 6.
never cease, for if he cannot overthrow the whole Church, yet he would be
glad to catch any one that belongs to the Lord, if he could.

12. And it came to pass, when the Jews which dwelt beside them came and told
us of their practices 10. times out of all places whence they came unto us,

13. I set in the low places beyond the wall and in the high places also I set
the people according to their kinreds with their swords, their Spears, and
their Bows.

14. And when I saw them, I rose, and said to the Nobles and to the officers
and the rest of the people, be not afraied of the sight of them, but remember
the great and fearful Lord, and fight for your breethren, for your sons, and
your daughters, your wiue's and your houses.

15. And it came to pass when our enemies heard tell that it was told us, God
disapointed their purpose, and all we returned unto the walls, every man to his
work.

THis comfort our loving God has left to his chosen people, that as the devil
cease not by his members to trouble and vex his church and beloved Children,
by all means that he can devise: So the mighty Lord of his own free goodness
by his holy spirit, his Angels, his creatures all, and most sensibly by the
comfort that one good man gives another, in all our greefes fails not to
aid and comfort us night and day, privily and openly, that ever we may have
just cause to rejoice in him for our deliverance, and not in our selves. These
wicked Samaritans, Sanballat, Tobias, and their fellows were not so cunning
privily to prepare men and armor suddenly to invade Jerusalem unlooked for, to
murder the builders and shed innocent blood: but the living Lord to glorify
himself in opening their subtle practices, which they thought had been kept
close from all men, by other of the Jews which dwelt among them in Samaria,
Arabia, and other places, does bewray their conspiracy and makes it known
in Jerusalem often times, out of all corners of the country. Thus it proves
true, that the Gospel says. Nothing is hid, but it shallbe openly known, be
it never so craftelie devised: Nothing can be so privily devised to hurt the
man of God, but the wisdom of our God does foresee it, his merciful goodness
does open it, and his mighty hand does so rule it, that it ouerwhelmeth us
not. God increase our faith, and help our unbelief, that in all dangers we
may humbly submit our selves unto him, and without grudging, or doubting
boldly look for his help in due time, and patiently tarry his leisure: for no
doubt he will help them that faithfully look for and earnestly beg his aid.
King Saul purposed diverse times sodenlie to have slain poor David, but God
opened his mischievous mind and malice by Jonathan his son and Michol his
daughter, and David was delivered. The Kings chamberlaynes 2. Sam. Cap. 18.
(...).
had privily conspired to have murdered Assuerus their King and Master, but
Mardocheus opens his treason, and the King was saved. Benadad the King of
Syria made war against Ioram King of Israel, and by counscl of his servants
laid imbushments privily to trap Ioram the King of Israel by the way: but
Elizeus the Prophet perceiving Ester. 6.
that Ioram would go the way where the imbush was laid in wait for 2 King.
cap. 6.
him, gave the King warning, and bad him go another way: when Benadad heard
tell that his sccret purpose and counsel was known to Iora^, and he came not
that way, he was angry with his servants and said, they had betrayed and
opened his counsel to Ioram. Nay, says one of his servants, there is a
Prophet in Israel Elizeus, and he opens what-soeuer thou speak in thy
privy Chamber. King Herod minding subtillie to kill the young Babe Christ
Jesus, craftily bad the wise men go and learn where the new king was borne
and he would come and worship him, as well as they did: but the gracious god
which never fails at need, bad them go another Mat. (...)
way, and not tell Herod, for he meant to kill the young babe Christ. The
wicked Jews made a vow they would neither eat nor drink until they had
killed Paul: but Paul's sisters son when he heard their conspiracy, opened
it, and the Captains set Soldiers to defend him and deliver him out of their
hands. I cannot tell whether these Jews Act. 23.
which dwell abroad in diverse Countries, and came and told them in Jerusalem of
the conspiracy that was intended against them by Sanballat and his fellows, be
worthy more praise or dispraise. It was their duty to have come home, stood
in storms, and help to build Jerusalem, as well as these other their fellows
did: but God which turns our negligence and foolishnes to the setting forth
of his immortal goodness and wisdom, gave them a good will and boldness to
further that building as they might, and sturred them up to come often times
and open unto them in Jerusalem the great conspiracy that was intended against
them: that they might be ready to defend themselves when-soeuer they were
assaulted. It grieved them to understand the mischief that was purposed, both
to have their breethrens blood cruellyshed, and also that building to be
overthrown: and though they durst not come and join with them both in
battle and working, yet they are to be commended that they so pitied their
breethren and the work, that they gave warning of that great conspiracy
purposed against them. Thus God uses the service of all men and creatures to
the benefit and comfort of those that fear him truly. So among wicked people
many times do good men dwell, both to bring them from their wickedness by their
good example and counsel, and also to be a relief to other good men abroad in
other places, when occasion shall serve. Thus was Lot in Sodom, Joseph in
Pharaos house, and Daniell in Babylon: and if these Jews had not dwelt abroad
among the Samaritans and Arabians, this conspiracy had not been opened to the
builders in Jerusalem, but they should have been suddenly slain, before they
knew of their coming. Thus is Gods providence and care for his people, when
they understand not their own danger, to be praised, and this natural love
that these Jews bareto their Country and Breethren, in fore-warning them to
defend themselves, is to be followed of all good men.

Demeratus of Lacedemon was unjustly banished his country: yet when he heard
that the Athenians would make war against his country, he gave his
countrie-men warning of it, that they might be in a readiness to defend
themselves. When the Israelites had made the Golden calfe, and God in his
anger would have destroyed them, Moses falls to prayer, though they often
rebelled Exodus 32.
against him, and desires the Lord to pardon them, or else to put him out of
his book. Saint Paul wishes to be accursed from Christ so that he might win
his breethren the Jews to the Lord Christ, though Romans 9.
they often sought his death.

Thus good men will forget displeasures done unto them, and be ready always to
help and comfort their Country, and specially those that be of the household
of faith. This may be a comfort to all good men, that as God opened this
conspiracy to his people at this time, by the Jews that dwelt far from
them, so his fatherly care never fails them that love him, but he will
defend and deliver them: for he makes his enemies, if they be made privy of
any such mischief, so babbling, that they will open it, either for vain
Glory, briberie, malice, or else their own consciences do accuse them that
they cannot quiethe suffer such a mischief to be wrought. And although they
were thus often and out of all corners warned of this conspiracy, yet they could
scarcely be brought, many of them, to believe any such thing to be
attempted, it was so horrible and incredible. Good men judge others to be like
them selves simple, and plain dealers, and cannot easily be persuaded that
any man would go about such a mischief. But the gospel teaches, that we
should be wise as serpents, and as simple as doves: the serpent is wise to save
his own head, and hide him self until the danger be past, and the dove will
not crastelic devise any harm to any other: so the man of God must be wise
as the serpent, and not be carelese of his saftie, (for God has given him
reason to defend him self and foresee mischiefs and provide for them) nor he
must not be crafty to hurt others, as the dove is not: but he must rather
think, that the wicked men, whom Satan has so possessed, will leave nothing
undone that may overthrow the good, and therefore they ought to be as wise,
circumspect, and diligent to defend themselves and their country from such
mischiefs by all honest means, as the other shall be busy to devise or doc
them anic harm, or else they shallbe guilty of their own destruction and
many others, which cannot be defended in conscience, nor the Lord can allow it
in justice, being hurtful to so many.

13. I set in the low places. Nehemiah by leaving the Court where he lived in
case, is now come to a goodly bargain. First he was master of the work, set
every man in order, that none loytered, nor wrought otherwyes then he was
appointed, and that none troubled his fellows, daily dabling in the mire,
mortar, and clay, as long as he might, and yet would not be weary, with great
displeasure and grudging of those that should be his friends and helpers, but
now is become a warrier, is driven to put on armor, keep watch and ward night
and day, and ouersee them him self, to set his people in array, and appoint
them their standing places, giving them their weapons, and teaching them what
they should do. Such reward shall they have that sorsake the world and will
build Gods house and City: God and the world cannot be friends: and that
makes so few Courtiers to tread this trodde. Moses being brought up in Pharaos
house, and might have been called as son to Pharaos daughter, refused the
Court, and chose to be in trouble with his Hebrew. 11.
breethren the Jews, and serve the Lord, rather then to have all the dainties
in the Court, living in Idolatry and displeasure of God. I know not many
courtiers which might thaue lived in the court with such favor and authority,
and would not, to set by these two men. God increase the number and make many
earnest folowers of them. Nehemiah now like a good Captain sets some of his
soldiers in trenches that they could not be seen be-low, where the walls were
lowest, that if any entered there, they should be entrapped by and by: some he
sets on the top of the walls with their bows, that they might both be seen
far of, and so make the enemy afraied to come near, when they should see them
in such readiness, and also that they might shoot far of at them, and hurt
them before they could assault the walls. And like a wise Captain he sets
all of one kindred together, that one should be true to another, as kinsfolks
will rather then Strangers. It has been a common practice with us of late to
take the soldiers of one country from their Captain whom they know and
love, and put them to a stranger whom they know not, what goodness has come
of it, let wise men judge: in my opinion little or none, except it were the
private profit of the Captain. But sure it is not without great cause that the
holy ghost declares here the order that Nehemiah set them in by their kinreds
together, teaching us that nature will move one kinsman to be truer in all
dangers to an other of his kindred, rather then to a stranger: and that one
kinsman will open his grief to his friend, and take comfort at his hand,
rather then to him whom he knows not. He cannot be bold with a strange
Captain, nor a strange soldier, and that discourageth him, and casts down
his spirits: but when neighbors, friends, and Cosinnes are together under a
Captain, whom they love and know, it imboldneth them, they cleave together
like Burrs, if one be in danger the rest will not forsake him, where as
strangers every man seeks to save himself, and cares not for his fellow,
but lets him shift for him self, as he may. This godly Example of Nehemiah
in placing friends together is to be followed, rather then the private profit
of one Captain. How strangely strange Captains have used their strange
soldiers it is strange to remember, and pity it is to see the soldier how
unwilling he is to serve among strangers, and many times does serve but
slowly. I have seen when a mean gentleman has gone to the wars, his renants
would strive who should go with him first, and if he refused any to go, he
thought his master loved him not: but now by this dividing of neighbor from
neighbor, friends and friends from other, neither the gentleman that cannot
have his trusty men about him, nor the soldier having not such a Captain and
fellows as he loves, trusts, and knows, both the master and the man
seeks by all means to tarry at home, and so the worst men are thrust out to
serve which is to be lamented. God amend it. It is possible some will think me
to saucie to enter into matters wherein I am not skilled: but that forces not,
the truth must be spoken, though some do grudge, and this Example of Nehemiah
shall defend me, whatsoever is said to the contrary. The scripture teaches
generally every man his duty what kind of life soever he live, and God will
require that every man should frame himself to that rule: therefore the
preacher may enter into consideration of every man's duty so far as the
scripture leads him, even to the controulling of the mint, as master Latimer
of worthy memory, being found fault withal for meddling in such matters,
alleged the Prophet saying: thy silver Esai. 1.
is turned into dross. When John Baptist began to baptize, and all sorts of
people resorted unto him, amongst whom came the soldiers too, Luke 3.
he taught both the soldiers and all the rest how to behave them selves in
their kind of life, if they would receive the gospel. Here may be noted also
what simple kind of weapons were then used in the wars, and how many cruel
and subtle devises we have of late devised one to kill another. Here is none
other mentioned but the sword, if they joined handstroks: the Spear, to push
them away if they scaled the walls: and the bow to shoot a far of, to keep
them from coming near the walls. What glory this Realm has gotten with
these weapons, and specially by the Bow, all Chronicles declare, and all
nations for that feared us: but how in shooting the old gloric of this land is
decayed, and gaming and alehouses haunted, to the hurt of the youth, wasting of
their money, weakening of their strength, and decaie of this worthy exercise,
good men lament, and few go about to amend. Shooting is a special thing, not
given to al men and nations, but chiesly to the Jews, first while their
kingdom stood: then to the Persians, who yet can do something with it, and
then to the English men, who have wrought great feats by it. Few histories make
any mention of other Countries that could or did use it much in the wars, and
if there were some few among them that could do something in it, it was to
small purpose or none in the battle. Look at our neighbors round about us,
even to the Scottish man which goes nearest unto us, and coming both of one
Auncetor, and it will easily appear how true it is. If any shoot ill
fauouredly, we say he Shoots like a Scott: and yet some few of them shoot
well too. The scripture, which is Auncienter then any kind of learning by
many years, makes mention, that I smaell Abraham's son was a cunning
Arther. King Asahad out of one little tribe of Benjamin two hundredth and
fourscore Thousand, Archers. King Saull was chased with bow men and slain
with the Philistians. The sons of Ruben, God and Gene. 21. 2. Chron. 1. Sam.
31.
Manasses were good warriers and Bowemen forty and four thousand seven
hundred and threescore. Indas Machabeus set his Bowemen in the forefronte of
the Battle. Plintlib. 7. cap. 5. writes that Perses the son of Persius, of
whom the Persians had their surname, should be the first deviser of shafts:
but how untruly it is reported, these scriptures before rehearsed, which were
long before this time, will testify. By the which the Auncientie of the
scripture appears before all other learning: and yet the Papist will stand on
his Auncientie and say, they have all old learning on their side, where their
fathers the Popes were but yesterday, in comparison of the scriptures, which
were elder then any of these by three thousand years: but such lewd Doctrine
is meet to come from them that will not obey the truth. The Persians loved
shooting so well, that they set an Archer on their Coin of Gold which was of
great valor, as we do the Angel: and as we use to say, when a man has
great suits and cannot be so well heard as he would wish, that he must make
Angels to speak for him, and they cannot be said nay, which thing by report
is too common and true at this day: so the King of Persia, being offended at
Agesilaus, gave the Athenians thirty thousand pieces of this great Coin of
Gold of theirs: which thing when Agesilaus understood, he said merrily, but
yet truly, that he was driven away with thirty thousand Bowmen (meaning
their coin of Gold, which had an Arhcer coined on it) and how should he a
poor man be able to withstand so many Archers. No more truly then our men
can say Angels nay. For the feats of war done by our Elders in this land with
Bowemen, I referr it to be considered by our own Chronicles. But I will not
enter into a full discourse of this matter, it belongs not so much to our
purpose: this short touching of it shall suffice now. Who so lists to see
more of the commendation of it in time of peace, may read that learned Book
which Master Askame wrote of it.

As these Samaritans ceased not continually to hinder the building of this
earthly Jerusalem, so Satan by his members, Papists, and Arrians, etc. cease
not in every age to hinder the comfortable building of Christ's Kingdom and
spiritual Jerusalem, by all means that he can devise: and never more
feirselie then now in our days. But as God stirred up Nehemiah then, to defend
and encourrage the people to go forward with their building, notwithstanding
their cruel assaults, so the Lord stirs up some few to stand in defense of
this truth, and Gods enemies win not at their hands so much as they look
for.

And as Nehemiah here sets the People in order by their Kinreds, with their
Swords, Spears, and Bows, to defend the workmen, so should good Magistrates
place every where stout Soldiers, of one doctrine, and Religion, in dued with
the special gifts of the holy Ghost, as knowledge of tongues, discerning of
spirits and Doctrines, able to confute the false, and defend the truth, with
gifts of utterance, Eloquence, and persuading, and with government, to bridle
the unruly and troublesome folk, that the flock of Christ Jesus which he
bought so dearly, be not drawn away headlong by deuillish Doctrine, from
their Lord and Shepherd of their souls the Lord Christ. God for his mercy
sake stir up the hearts of Magistrates, and specially Courtiers, to set this
example before themselves, and diligently to follow it, that we be not found
more negligent in this our free liberty under the light of the Gospel in
serving our God faithfully, then these poor Jews were under the Ceremonies
of Moses after their Captivity. A lamentable case to see how bold and earnest
these Jews were against so many feirce enemies, and how cold, negligent, and
careless, we that bear the names of Christians be. Lord increase our faith,
help our unbelief, and make us with courrage to work at thy building. We are
lulled on sleep, we wallow in wealth, and forget thee, we seek our own
advancement in the world, and care little or nothing for the advancement of
thy Kingdom, thy glory, thy people, and the wholesome doctrine of salvation,
declared unto us in thy holy word.

14. Andwhen I saw them, Irose and said to the Nobles. After that Nehemiah
had thus, like a good Captain, set the people in array by their kinreds,
appointed them their standing places and weapons, and conveyed himself into
some corner to breath, and refresh him-felfe, he looked about him, and behold,
Sanballat, Tobias, and their fellows were at hand, appeared in sight, and
Marched forward in Battle array toward the walls stoutly, to dash them out of
countenance, if it had been possible. But then Nehemiah, though he was weary
and satte down to rest himself, besturred him, rose up quickly, forgatte
that he was weary, plucked up his spirits, and called the Nobles, officers,
and the people together: and because the time would not suffer him to use many
words, the enemies drawing so near, he makes a short, but a pithie oration to
them, and in effect so much as could have been spoken in a long time and at
leisure: and all to this end, to imbolden them to cast away the fear of man,
and fear the mighty Lord of hosts, in whose hand it was to dispose as he
thought good: and not only that, but the honesty of the cause was such, that
they could not, without great shame and reproach, leave it undefended, so far
as their power would stretch. They fought against infidels for the mantenaunce
of God his true Religion, they fought for their breethren, for their sons,
their daughters, their wives, houses, life, lands, and goods. They had of late
been in captivity, they felt the smart what it was to live under strange
Princes: God had mercifully restored them to their country again, and
prospered well the beginning of their buildings, and should they now cowardly
fly away, loose all that they had gotten, fall into their own slavery, live
among Idolaters, their wives and children to be prisoners before their face? He
that had any blood in him, and cyther feared God, or loved his country and
people, would first step out in so good a cause, manfully defend it spend his
blood in it, would strive who should be the first and foremost to give the
onset, not doubting but that mighty God, who had so prospered their doings
hitherto, would with good success finish it to their great comfort and
perpetual commendation. Ioab uses the same reason to Abisai and his
Soldiers, tofight for their people and country. God never fails them that
fail not themselves: do thou thy duty, and no doubt God will fill out the
rest. What a courage had Nehemiah that being come thither but of late, durst
speak so boldly to the noble 2. Sam. 10.
men and rulers, with the people, which should have taken the matterin hand
themselves and encouraged others rather then he. But in Gods cause when those
that should be furtherers of it, wax cold, and either will not, or dare not,
then those whom God does thus earnestly move, may, and ought, so much as in
them is, encourage all sorts of men, manfully to go forward in serving the
Lord. And whereas fear is a great hinderer of al well doing, he begins to
pluck away that block first, which being removed, boldness must needs follow
and take place. Fear not says he their braggs, their stern countenance, and
proud looks, their glistering armor, their great bands of soldiers, their
mighty captains, their long spears, and sharp swords, they are cowards, their
heart fails them, they are like mules with golden Trappers, and costly
foote-cloth, which outwardly show bravely unto the eye, but underneath are slow
Asses and dull beasts. So these big boasting Thrasones and vaunting Milites
gloriost make a show of great matters as though they would and could pull down
all, destroy all before them at their pleasure, where in deed they be faint
hearted lubbers and dare do nothing, as it appears here after. Our god is an
almighty Lord at whose look the earth quaketh and the devils tremble: and
these wretches be vile worms meat, mortal men, Gods enemies, and children of
darkness. Our God alone is strong enough for all the devils in hell, and out
ofhell, withal their members and partakers. Why should ye be afraid to fight
in his quarrel? he has done what he will in heaven, earth, and hell, as the Psa.
says. All things bend when he does beck, and all be at his call and
commandment. Shrink not from this Captain and he will defend you, manfully
fight under his banner and the victory shall be yours. The worst that the
wretches can do you is to hurt the body: but our God teaches us to fear him
that casts both body and soul into hell fire. Remember the old graund
Captain of our fathers, Moses, when Pharaoh (with a mighty power chased them
to the red Sea, where the people were afraid and saw no remedy but either
leap into the Sea and be drowned, or else tarry Pharaoh and be killed) call to
remembrance I say, what Moses in the like distress and ieopardie then, that
ye be now in, said unto them in few words. Standstil, says Moses, behold and
mark the Exodus 14.
end: when ye are not able, the Lord him self will sight for you: these cruel
enemies whom ye see this day ye shall never see any more. And so it came to
pass: for by Gods mighty hand the Israelites passed through the Sea safe, and
Pharao with his people were drowned. The scripture teaches that the fearful,
unfaithful, murderers, adulterers, Reuela. 22.
inchaunters, Idolaters and liers shall have their parts in the burning lake of
fire and brimstone. If ye will not stick unto this God and fear him as
children ought to love and reverence their father, yet fear him as servants
do their masters, and as ill men do which are afraid of punishment, and
forbear ill doing for fear, rather then for love. The grievous punishment
which is threatened to fearful men, is the second and everlasting death both
ofbodie and soul: which, whosoever has any true fear of God in him, will
tremble and quake when he thinks on it: be not therefore afraid of them, but
pluck up your stomaches and boldly stand in the defense of that City, which
the Lord God has given you to serve him in. To fight for sons, daughters,
wives and houses, I think it were an easy matter to persuade any man: for
they be our flesh and bones, and we be ready enough to such matters: and
surely not without a cause: for both the law of god and the law ofnature
binds us to defend them in their well doings. Moses in his law says, that if
thou traueyling by the way do sinde thine enemies ass fallen in the mire
under his load, thou shall not pass by but help him up: surely the meaning of
this law was not for the ass, but as Saint Paul alleging the like law, thou
shall not mussle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn, said; Had
God care for the Ox? Nay verily, but for you it is written 1. Corin. 9.
that ye should feed your painful teachers which labor for you as the Ox.
So, I say, this law was not made for the Ass his sake, but even for thy
enemy, who is ouerloden, as the Ass was, and specially those, to whom thou
art bound by nature: for else thou art worsse then an infidel.

But in this matter men are sone resolved what to do: there is a harder matter
in men's minds, that is, whether we should fight for Religion, as these men did,
or no. We see great troubles in many countries against their Princes in our
days for religion, and many doubt what they may do herein. Let the case stand
as these men's did, and it is sone answered. These Samaritans, Sanballat and his
fellows, were no Princes, but subject to Artaxerxes, as the Jews were, nor
had any authority over them: they were Gods enemies, and did the Jews wrong,
that would not suffer them to go forward with that building, which the King
had given them license and commission to do. Therefore they might justly
defend them selves against such thieves. Further here is to be noted also that
they defend the^ selves only and do not invade the other, offering any
violence to them, but would quietly enjoy their own, if they might. And this
is a great difference in the wars, whether a man stand to defense of him
self and his people in any cause, or do invade others and offer them wrong.
Defending a man's self is allowed by all laws in many causes, and yet in
religion by flying, and not by drawing the sword against his Prince: but to
rebel and draw the sword against thy lawful Prince for religion, I have not
yet learned, nor cannot allow off it, nor I cannot see how so many martirs in
all ages would have submitted them selves to death willingly, if they might
have fought for it. Peter drew his sword to cut of Malchus ear, and would have
fought for his master: but Christ Jesus bad him put up his Sword: for if the
matter stood by fighting, he could ask his heavenly father, and he would
give many thousands of Angels to fight for him. The Prophet bids the
Israelites in their captivity in Babylon pray Iere. 29.
for the life of Nebucadnezar and Balthazar his son, and seek for the peace
of the City, in which they were prisoners, and not trouble them. S. Paul
bids pray for all them that were in authority, and then was Nero Emperor,
a beast in condition, rather then a man: yet he must be prayed for. David would
never hurt King Saul though he 1. Tinso ca. 2.
might, and had him in his danger sundry times and might have killed 1. Sa.
24. 26.
him, if he would. Therefore as Christ overcame his enemies by suffering, so
they that be Christ's shall get the victory by patientnes and bearing the
cross, not by rebelling and drawing the sword. As Nehemiah therefore here
encourages the Nobles, Rulers, and people, manfully to stand in defense of
their country, City, wives, children, breethren, and howses, against their
enemies: so in the spiritual kingdom of Christ, must the Preachers and
Pastors encourage all sorts from the highest to the lowest, manfully to stand
to that wholesome doctrine of salvation, which they have been taught out of Gods
holy book, and not be afraid nor change with every blast of wind, and
turn with the world, as all sorts in this land have done, to the offense of
Gods majesty, and their great reproach, and specially ofthose that were the
heads and should have been stays to others. Religion is not a thing at the
pleasure of Princes, to change as they list (though the outward circumstances
in it may be changed by them) but it is the unchangeable will and determinate
pleasure of the almighty Lord of heaven and earth, decreed by high Court of
parliament in heaven, before the world was made, and declared unto man by his
Prophets and Apostles, in such times as his infinite wisdom thought meet, and
cannot be altered by any man nor authority in any age. I am God, and am not
changed, says the Lord, my thoughts and my ways are not like your thoughts
and ways which are ever changeable and uncertain, but I am ever one and
change not. Stick therefore fast unto that Lord which shrinketh not a way from
his people, but manfully delivers them, and by suffering we shall have the
victory, as our Captain Christ Jesus had: for if we suffer with him, Saint
Paul says, we shall reign with him. In bearing his cross and sufferance then
stands our conquest, not in Rebelling; in dying to him, and not living to our
selves. Mark now the mighty hand of God fighting for his people, and the
cowardly hearts ofthese boasting braggers, how sone they come to naught: they
but hard tell that the Jews understood their conspiracy, how they thought to
have come sodenlie and murdered them, and that they were ready in armoure to
withstand and defend themselves against them, their hearts fail them, they
run away, lay down their weapons, and the Lord defeated their whole purpose
and devises. Thus lightheads they had, that when they heard tell that the Jews
went forward with this building, they prepare them selves to fight with them,
and when they heard tell that they were ready to defend themselves, they run
a way. Such rash heads have wicked men always, unconstant, and changing
with every wind: but Nehemiah is ever one man, constant and bold in well
doing, and goes forward in building Gods City, notwithstanding all their
braggs. Here appears how true it is that David says, the Lord brings to
naught the counsel of the heathen, and disapointeth the devises of the people:
but the counsel of the Lord endures for ever, Psalm. 33.
and the thoughts of his heart throughout all ages. The Scribes and Pharisees
and the high priest gathered a council against the Lord Christ, thinking to
have overthrown him and his doctrine, that it should never have been heard off
more: but David said truly of them, why did the heathen fret, and the people
imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the Psalm. (...).
earth stood up together, and the Princes assembled against the Lord and
against his anointed: but all in vain, for the Lord raised up his son Christ
from death, and destroyed them. Judas with a band of Soldiers thought he
should have been able cunningly to have wrought his pleasure against his
master Christ Jesus. But as soon as Christ asked John. 18.
them that came to take him, whom they sought: they all fell flat to the
ground, and were not able to stand at the hearing of his word. Achitophell
thought by his wicked counsel to have overthrown his Lord and King David: but
God overthrew his devise, and he went and hanged him self, and so did Judas
too, when he saw the matter fall out otherwise then he looked for. These and
such other terrible examples may teach men to be wise and that they take
nothing in hand against the Lord, though it be never so wisely devised: for it
shall prove true that the Prophet says: there is no wisdom, no foresight, no
counsel against the Lord. All shall be overthrown, and the more cunning it is,
the sooner it shall be cast down: none can stand against him: he only is
wise, and all other that have it not from him, be fools. Good men may also
learn here not negligentlie to look to themselves, nor to go nakedlie
without weapon, to yeald them selves into their enemies hands: for so they may
be guilty of their own death. A weapon boods peace, as the common saying is:
for God has made the weapon to defend the body, as he made the meat to feed
the body: and these braggers like thieves will set on no man, that they see
weaponed, and will stand against them, but on those that be naked or faint
hearted, they will be cruel. God requires not such peakishnesse in a man, that
he suffer him-felfe to be wounded, that by the law of nature aloweth every man
to defend himself with weapons against such thieves, if peace cannot
otherways be had.

Now that their enemies were vanquished and fled away, they brag not of their
strength and courage, they go not to the Tauern to toss potts, and boast of
their great victory, but in the fear of god return to the walls, and every
man falls to his work again. Thus we learn here both in the spiritual
battle against Satan and his members, to put on the spiritual armor, that
S. Paul armeth the christian soldier withal, and they will fly away as these
braggers Ephesians. 6.
did, if we stand boldly prepared to fight against them, as Nehemiah and his
fellows did. It is true that the common verse teaches, Hostis non laedit,
nisi cum tentatus obedit:
Est leo si cedis: sistas, quasi musca recedit.


S. James agrees to the same saying: withstand the devil, and he will Iam. 4.
fly from you. And S. Peter teaches how to withstand him, saying: stand
against him being strong in faith, etc. 1 Peter. 5.
And also we learn not to be idle, unprofitable, or unthankful, after the
victory and our deliverance, but to return to our work again and sleep not,
nor be negligent: for our mortal enemy never sleeps: and if he prevail not
one way, he attempteth another, he is not ashamed to take a foil, but he will
assault us again some other way: he is not weary, for he hops to speed at
length and take thee napping. All histories declare that the greatest Kingdoms
which came to great power and authority by taking pains, by painful
battles, by suffering hunger and cold, even the same, when they fell to
idleness, wallowing in wealth and riotous feasting and daintines, they lost
their former glory faster then they won it. Such be those time-seruers, which
the Gospel speaks of, that for a time make a show in serving the Lord, but in
the time of trial they fall away: their hollow hearts declare plainly that
they never feared the Lord vprightlie. Thus must the men of God neither be rash
in attempting things unadvisedly, nor negligent in providing things necessary
for their defense, or desperately fear the brags and power of the enemy: but
in the fear of god stand to their lawful defense, committing the success to
the almighty, whose wisdom rules al things at his pleasure, who defends
his people, and no power can withstand him.

16. And it fell forth from that day forward that the half part of the young
men did work, and the other part of them held their Spears, Shields, Bows,
and brestplates: and the rulers were behind the whole house of Judah.

17. They that builded the wall, and those that bare burdens, and those that
laid on the burdens, with the one hand wrought their work, and with the other
held their darts.

18. And every one of the builders girded their Swords upon their loins, and
so they built: but he that blew the Trumpet, was by me.

19. And I said to the Nobles and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people:
this work is great and large, and we are scattered on the walls far every
one from other.

20. In what place soever ye shall hear the sound of the Trumpet, thither come
together to us, our God will fight for us.

21. And we will labor at the work: and the half of them held their Spears
from the day spring until the stars did rise.

22. And at that time also I said unto the people: let every one with his
servant lodge in the midst of Jerusalem, that in the night we may have watch,
and in the day labor.

23. As for me, my breethren, my servants, and the watchmen that followed me,
we put not of our clothes any of us, but only to wash them in water.

ALthough Sanballat and his fellows were fled and retired back, yet Nehemiah
like a wise Captain, fearing some new practice, and lest they might hide
themselves for a time, and come again on the sudden and overthrow them,
deuideth all the young men into 2. parts, and the one half follows their
work, and the other stands ready in armor to defend the^ if any sudden
assault should be made against them: So must good Captains not be negligent
nor careless, when the enemy is fled: for many times they will retire for a
time, for policy sake, to see whether the other part will be careless and
negligent, and yet come again on a sudden: or else to draw them into the field
from the defense of their town, and there join battle with them, and having
some ambush of soldiers lying privily, who should invade the town, being left
without sufficient defense, might sack and burn it at their pleasure, as we
reed the Isralites did against Gibea of Benjamin, Judge. 20.
in revenging that horrible abusing of the Levites Concubine. Such other
policies ye shall read diverse, both in the scriptures and other histories: a
good captain therefore as he must not be a coward and fearful, so he must not
be to careless and negligent, but still provide for the safety of his people:
though he had good success of late and seemed to have vanquished his enemies.
So must the preacher not be careless, when he sees that God has blessed his
labor, moved the peoples hearts to the receiving of his doctrine, and that a
reforming of life and love to the truth does appear: but he must water his
gardens, pluck up the weeds, and labor continually, for Satan never cease:
and though he be once cast out, yet he will return to his old house, and if he
find it swept and made clean, he will come with 7. other devils worsse then
himself, and then the end shall be Luke
worsse then the beginning, as the gospel teaches. Christ our savior says
also, that when tares and darnell appeered among the good Corn, that it was
done by the enemy, when men were on sleep. Watch therefore and pray
continually, that we be not taken napping. These young men stood not naked, but
had Armor of all sorts, both to defend themselves, and to hurt the enemy: to
shoot and smite far of, and keep them that they drew not near: so must
every christian in his spiritual battle against Satan and his members put
on the whole spiritual armor of God, which S. Paul teaches him, that he may
quench the sierie darts of Satan, and not stand naked of Gods grace, trusting
in his own strength. It is marvel to see, how Nehemiah, being so long a
Courtier, is now become so cunning a soldier on the sudden, being not used to
it before: he sets the young men before, to bear the brunt of the battle, as
most strong and able to bear it: and the rulers come behind, as being wise
men to direct and teach the younger sort what they should do, and how to behave
themselves. young heads of themselves are unskillful, and therefore it is
necessary they should be directed by others: so that when youthful courage is
governed by the sage counsel of the wise and ancient ruler, the battle will
fall out well. Tullie said well, parum sunt arma foris nisisit consilium domi:
and as it were determining, whether strength or wisdom in the wars be more
profitable, he says; Cedant armatoge, concedat laurea linguae. Courage and
strength without wisdom is foolish rashness, and wisdom without courage and
strength, is fearful cowardlines: join them together, and they make a perfect
soldier. And here the wise ruler comes behind in a place of more safety,
and as it were a thing more necessary in the wars to save a wise captain and
Counselor, then to save the strong and lusty soldier. The stronger that a
man is, wanting wisdom, the sooner he overthrows him-self: as a tree that
the wind has shaken loose at the root, the higher and greater that it is, the
sooner it is overthrown. In persecutions therefore every man must stand armed
with these spiritual weapons, and the preachers would be preserved so much as
may be, lest the people, being destitute of faithful guides and counselors,
cowardly fall away or else overthrow themselves by rash dealing. Niceph. 10.
cap. 19.
When the Emperor Julian took displeasure with Athanasius, and needs would
have him banished, the people wept, and he comforted them saying: Be of good
cheer, this is but a little clowd, it will pass away

17. They that built. Not only the young men were thus weapned set in order,
and exercised to pains taking, and taught to defend their fellows, but the
workmen themselves, both that were mastermasons, and cunning in their
occupation, and also the common laborer, both they that laid on the burdens,
and they that bare burdens of stones and mortar, had every one his sword or
his darte by him while they wrought, that they might be ready to keep of the
enemy, defend themselves, when need shall require. This kind of weapon was to
pick, as a dart, and is light and easy to carry, and would not hinder their
working much, and so with the one hand they wrought, and with the other hand
they held their weapon. O worthy workmen! O noble Captain Nehemiah! What a
godly sight was this, to see every one so full of courage, that they feared not
the enemy, and so willing to work, that they would not be weary, but with
the one hand work, and with the other hand hold their weapon. Let Christian
men look into this notable example, and be ashamed of themselves, that are
afraid of every blast of wind. And where these people, being under the dark
shadows, and heavy burden of Moses law, would take these pains for building
an earthly City, to serve their God in: yet we, that live under that blessed
light of the Gospel so plenteously powered on us, lie loytering and will not
open our eyes to see the light, nor put forth our hand, to receive that, which
is so freely offered to us, that it would fall into our mouths, if we would
gape. Let the fine courtier, that hadrather be adainty carpet gentleman, then a
labourer at gods building look at Nehemiah, and learn to be like him.

18. And every one. The chief workmen had their Swords girded unto them also:
by the which we learn, that in the building of this spiritual Jerusalem, not
only the people, Princes and rulers, must be armed, but the Preacher, the
minister must stand in armor against Gods enemies, and work and not forsake
his flock, but com fortablie assist them, and take such part as they do.
Paulinus bishop of Nolawhen his flockwere taken prisoners and led forth of
the country, he Gregor. dialog.
followed them, wrought for his living, preached unto them, and comforted them:
and when for one widows son being a prisoner he offered himself to lie in
prison for him, so that he might be restored to his mother, it so moved the
Tyrants heart, that he let them all go free. Moses commanded that the Priest
should go to the field with the people, to comfort and teach them, because
Soldiers commonly fall to licentious living, if they may have their will,
and be not called back: yet the Pope will have his chapleines free from going,
except they take some hedge priest to say them a mass, but they will not have
a preacher in any case, no not often among the professors of religion, because
they will not be told of their duty, but more licentiously live at their
pleasure, follow the spoil, and get the gains and this is a great occasion of
much wickedness committed among soldiers, and often causes god to plague the
whole host, and the enemy to prevail. How many lesson s the best Captains
may learn of this worthy man Nehemiah, God grant they may well consider.

He keeps the Trumpet by himself at his elbowe, to blow when and after what
sort he would command: and good reason it should be so: for he that was
appointed to be the chief builder by the Kings commission, reason would that
he should have the disposition of the chief things that belonged thereto, at
his discretion. And every one would not be trusted with such a charge, as the
Trumpet was: for some were hollow-hearted, bewrayed his secrets to Sanballat,
and his fellows, and received letters from them. Some gave ill counsel, and
would have had him to have left of his work: as appeered by Judas before in
this Chapter, and by Semias Noadia, etc. in the 6. Chapter. The Trumpet is a
thing of such importance in the wars, that if it be not in the hand both of a
skillful and trusty man, he may discomfite the whole host on a sudden.
Therefore he trusts himself best with that charge. Moses committed the
blowing of the Trumpet unto the sons of Aaron, as a thing Number. 10.
of great trust and importance, and they were counted as men of better credit
then other, for their vocation sake: though now, I cannot tell how every
common man is put to that office, though his credit be not much. God in his Law
made such a count of the Trumpet in the wars, that he appointed yearly a
solemn feast and holie-day of the Trumpets, to put them in remembrance how often
he had given them the victory by sounding the Trumpet, that they should not
brag of their own strength, and policy, as though they had conquered all by
their own power, but praise the Lord of hosts, who vanquished their enemies,
and rejoice in him. Yet now I cannot tell how it falls out, every thing
being turned contrary ways, the Trumpet is used at great feasts and
solemnities, to make us merry rather then to stir us up to any praising of
the Lord for his blessings bestowed upon us, or to put us in remembrance of
the last Trumpe, when the dead shall arise out of their graves, and the Lord
shall come in his Majesty to judge the world. These were good lessons to
think on, at the sounding of the Trumpe, and not only for mirth, and
solemnity, to strive who shall blow the lowdest, and be the meriest, though
mirth is not ill.

19. And I said to the Nobles. The more than a man looks into Nehemiahs
doings, the more Godly wisdom, manly courage, earnest zeal, and
painfullnes, that would not be weary, appears in him: so that he may be a
pattern for all good Captains and builders to sollow: a mark to shoot at,
but few or none will hit it. Now he turns him to the nobles, rulers, and rest
of the people, that wrought not, but serve in other turns, in watching,
warding, and preparing things necessary for the workmen, and makes a short,
but a wise and pithie oration unto them, as the time would serve. In wars, and
specially in dangers, many words are not to be used, but briefly the
captains and soldiers are to be warned of their duty, and encouraged to go
forward boldly. So Nehemah tells them here of their danger: for the
compass of the walls was great, the laborers were not many, and yet those
that were, were scatered on every corner of the walls: one far from another,
so that when any assault was made, one should not, nor could not be ready for
to help another in any short time. The compass of the walls at this time is
thought by good writers to be certain miles about, and yet was enlarged as
much afterward by Herod. Many thousands would not serve to manne such a
ground, to keep out the enemy, but while they defended one piece, an other
would be assaulted. Thus in peace he provides against danger to come, as all
wise men will: for else often it will be to late if such good foresight benot had.
A wise man should not say, had I wist this or that, I woul have provided for
thisand that: provide for the worstand the best will save it self: and if the
worst fall not out, thou have more to thank God of. Possibly some man would
think Nehemiah to bold or rather saucy, that he being a stranger and new
come, would take in hand to teach the nobles and rulers what they had to do:
but surely he that with reason will consider all the circumstances, shall
easily perceive that neither he passes the bounds of modesty and duty, nor
takes more on him, then he had authority given him to do. The king by
commission appointed him to be the chief doer at this building, as appears
hereafter, and therefore he presumed no farther then he lawfully might: and in
many ofthe rulers he perceived either a coldness or fearefulnes to set forward
this work, so that if he had tarried on their leisure, little or nothing should
have been done at al. So in gods cause a man must be bold and blush not, and if
he see them slow that should be forward, he may and ought with modesty to put
them in remembrance of their duty, as Nehemiah does here, neither chiding nor
reuiling them, but brotherly, godly, quietly and modestly encourage them,
telling them the danger that hangs over them, if they do not wisely provide
for it, and manfully withstand it. A man forewarned, is half armed, as th s
common saying is.

20. In what place soever. And because they were scatered so far a sunder on
the walls, working in every corner of them, he gives them warning, that where
soever they heard the Trumpet blow, thither they should all resort: for there
was then some danger toward: he him self would walk round about the walls
continually, searching the watch how diligently they kept their standings, he
would spy if any enemies drew near, and then by the Trumpet he would give
them warning, whither they should resort unto him, to defend such or such a
place: and if they would brotherly and manfully join together, no doubt God
would fight for them and deliver them. This reason, to hang upon god, is
sufficient for him, that fears the Lord, and knows that all victory
comes from him, and in that he will quiet himself, not doubting of his aid:
but the worldly wise man, that trusts in his strength, Policy, ordinauns,
friends, and Soldiers, will laugh such reasons to scorn, and the mighty Lord
of hosts will make such proud braggers to become a laughing stock to the whole
world in the end. Nehemiah knew well that David had written long before: Except
the Lord defend the City, the Psalm. 127.
watchmen watch in vain which defend it: And he knew also that David had
said, Blessed be the Lord my God which teaches my hands to fight, and my
fingers to the battle: yet he cease not to keep watch Psalm. 144.
and ward night and day, to search the watch him-self, to teach the Soldiers
how to use their weapon, to set them in array, to encourage them, to teach them
to understand what the Trumpet means, and how in all things to obey their
Captains, and to be loving and true one to another. And all this is to let us
see, that allthough God do work all things himself, and as he has appointed,
so they fall out, yet he works them not without us: we must not be idle, we
must show our diligence and due obedience to our God that has made us, and
commanded us to exercise our selves in these things, and yet, when we have
done allwe can, all the praise must be given to him, and we must say, we be
unprofitable servants. We be as an axe in the Carpenters hand, where the axe
may not claim the praise of well doing from his Master that works with it:
and though the axe be a dead instrument without life or feeling, and man has
life, wit, and reason given him, to do things withal, yet is man as unable
to work his own salvation without the free mercy and special grace of God,
as the axe is unable to build the house without the direction and ruling of the
Carpenter. Crearis, sanaris, saluaris, quid horum tibi ex te homo? says
Bernard. Let every man be diligentand a painful labourer in his vocation, and
work his own salvation, as far as an instrument may, not loytering, nor
living unprofitably, thinking that God will bring such things to pass if we lie
down and sleep: but the chief praise and effect must be'giuen in all good
things to God alone. The Lord has promised nothing to idle bellies, and unto
him that laboreth to serve his god faithfully, he has promised his sure aid,
and will surely perform it. Adam in paradise was not suffered to be idle, even
in his innocence before he sinned: and shall we misers that have so often and
grievously offended our merciful God, thinks to live as we list at our ease?
Iosue at his death puts the people in rememberaunce how the Lord had fought
for them, and driven out their enemies, and to encourage Ios. 23.
them still to serve their God faithfully, and forsake strange Gods, he
promises them, that if they will so do, the Lord will fight for them still,
and so did Moses before him. Gods bare promise by his word is surer then any
promise made by man, though you have never so many good sureties and bonds
with forfetures, and it be sealed Exodus 14.
and delivered, and devised as cunningly as law can think. God is truth it
self, and therefore cannot lie, and what so ever he promises, he performs:
for else he should be untrue, like a miserable man, which cannot be. God grant
us such Captains as Moses, Iosue, and Nehemiah were, that with like
persuasions they may encourage their Soldiers. For surely if they went to the
field with like mind, faith, reverence, and due obedience unto the Lord, that
these Godly men did, the same God lives still, and would bless their
enterprises, as he did the other: for he is not weary of well doing and
releeuing his people.

21. And we will labor. Among all these great troubles he forgot not his
principal work in building of the walls, but went on forward still, like a
faithful servant to his Lord and God. Such earnest Zeal the Lord powers into
his servants, when he will declare his majesty and mercy to the world. For as
the greedy merchant for love of him self runs by sea and land, so far as
sea or land will carry him, to increase his worldly goods, so he that is
inflamed with this spirit of iealousy toward gods house, will go through thick
and thin with wisdom, fears no dangers, and will suffer neither open
enemy to invade, nor flattering friend to deceive the dear Spouse of his Lord
and master, but manfully will stand in defense against all sorts, deal they
never so cunningly. I cannot tell whether is more diligent and praise worthy,
the soldiers or the workmen. They be both at their business from the day
spring unto the late in the evening, that the stars did rise. A rare example
to be found at this day: for the laboring man will take his rest long in the
morning: a good piece of the day is spent before he come at his work, then must
he have his breakfast, though he have not earned it, at his accustomed hour,
or else there is grudging and murmuring: when the clock smites, he will cast
down his burden in the mid-waie, and what-soeuer he is in hand with, he will
leave it as it is, though many times it is marred before he come again: he may
not loose his meat, what danger soever the work is in. At noone he must have
his sleeping time, then his beuer in the afternoon, which spends a great
part of the day: and when his hour comes, at night, at the first stroke of
the clock hecasteth down his tools, leaves his work, in what need or case
soever the work stands. The common soldier thinks long while his course
is to watchand ward, it is cold standing on the walls, he must to the
Alehouse, refresh himself with gaming, swearing, whooring, or elsse he
thinks himself no body: he thinks it shame to live honestly in order.
Thus all sorts are out of order: and though Abbeyes be gone, yet the
Abbey-lubbers which will work until they be cold, eat until their belly
ache, and sleep until their bones ache, are too common in every house. A
lither days work is thought with many no sin, but a pastime, and yet is it
theeuerie to take the days wages, and do not a good days work for it. Saint
Paul bids servants obey their Masters, not only when they stand by and
look on, Ephe. 6.
but in their absence, and where they see them not. What is more hard in these
days, then to find a faithful true servant? Good masters complain and find
great lack, though many be better rewarded then they deserve. It is lamentable
to see: the stones in the wall many times bear witness of the murmuring of the
one ag ainst the other. The seruanthe will write on the wall, Fidelis seruus
perpetuus Asinus: The master will answer, deserve and then desire: and both
misliking the one and the other, when the servant cannot have that he gapeth
for, then he takes bribes, and the master must winck at it, because he will
not otherways prefer him, so both being to blame, both procure Gods anger
toward them. Beda considering the great troublesthat fell on the building of
this second Temple and walls, asks why it should fall out so now, rather then
in the building of the tabernacle by Moses, or the first temple by Solomon,
which both were finished with great quietness: and when he has mused on it
long, he says, that it fared with this outward Temple as it does with every
particular man, that is the spiritual Temple of the Lord. when God made man in
his innocence, it had been easy for him to have stood, ifhe had would: but
after that he fell, it was much harder to restore him again. It is harder to
repair an old rotten house, then to build a new: And to make an old man
strong, then a young. God made Adam with a word easily, and breathed life into
him: but after that Adam fell, what trouble and misery fell before he could be
restored? Christ Jesus must come down from heaven unto the earth, nay into
Hell, to pull us out of hell: he must be accused, whipped, scourged, falsely
condemned, thrust to the heart with a spear, die, and be buried, ascend unto
his father again, open heaven gates, which before our sins had locked up, and
abide many more sorrows, before we could be restored into Gods favor again,
and follow him where he sits on the right hand of his father. So it is an
easy matter to enter into Gods Church by Baptism, but if thou fall after, how
hard it is to rise again, daily experience teaches. We mustrepent, fast,
pray, give alms, forsake our selves, condemn our selves, with bitter tears
and trembling work our salvation, stand in continual war against the devil,
the world, and our own affection: which thingsto do, are more common in our
mouths, then in our lives, and more do talk of them, then practice them. God
for his mercies sake forgive us, and amend us all. It fares so likewise in the
outward Church of God in all ages. In the beginning Peter conuertedat one
sermon 3000. and at another 2000. Paul filled all the countries from Jerusalem
to Illiricum with the Gospel: The (...). 15.
Apostles and their suc cessors converted the whole world unto the Lord in few
years: but how many ofthese countries, where their successors preached, have
fallen back, and how little hope there is oftheir returning again unto the
faith, the Jews, Turks and Infidels declare, whom God has given up to their
own lusts: and though they inhabited the same countries, where true Christians
dwelt before, yet they have hardened their hearts, that they will not understand,
nor open their eyes, to follow the footsteps of them that went before, that they
may see the light. How hard a thing it is at this day to turn a Papist, and
specially to see one that knew the truth once, ifhe fall to Popery or other
errors, to rise again and believe the gospel, we have to many examples to
teach us. I fear the saying of the Apostle may be verified on them: it is
impossible for them, that were once lightened and knew the truth, if they fall
away, to (...). cap. 9. 10.
be renewed by repentance. The Lord in his mercy stay us that we fall not from
him: for it is horrible to fall into the hands of the living God in his Anger.

22. And (...) that time also. Now when Nehemiah had thus persuaded the nobles,
the rulers, and the people, manfully to stand in defense of their city and
diligently to follow their work in building of the walls: hadset both the
souldiersand the (...) in order andaray like a good captaineand master of the
works, looked diligently to each of them all the day long, that they slipped not
away from their charge, nor loytered at their work, kept the trampet with
himself, as a thing of great importance and trust, to give warning if the
enemy did approach: lest there might some mischief fall out in the night, he
appoints awatch for the night season also, to prevent al practices that might
be devised against the^. A good Captain will so provide both for day and night
in peace and war, that the enemy, who is ever to be feared, even when he
pretends most quietness and friendship, and when he seems to flee, retireth
ost on a sudden, to see whether there be any power remaining to hold him out:
he will forsee, I say, that the enemy have no vantage against him, but every
place be well manned and fensed to withstand him. He wills the people
therefore that every man shall watch in the street before his own dorewith his
servants, that no mischief fell out within the City, where so many
hipocrites and hollow-hearted people and unwilling folk of all sorts to
further this work did dwell. The outward enemy might do much harm, but
inward treason might overthrow all in a short time. For the utter enemy the
watch of the wall would be able to withstand him, and give warning to the rest
for aid: and if any practice were within the City, the watch in the streets
might suppress it for a time, until more aid came. He had good cause to
provide for this: for experience taught him, as is written before, that the
tribe of Judah was weary and discouragedthe people to work: Semeia and Noadia,
as though they were Prophets sent from God, counseled him to take sanctuary
and save him self, for they sought his life, which was not for any good will,
but to discourage him from his work and diverse of the rulers were joined in
friendship and marriage with Sanballat and Tobias, received messengers from
them, and bewrayed his doings to them again, as appears hereafter, and
therefore not knowing whom he might well trust, he could do no less but
keep watch and ward day and night, on the walls and in the streets, both
against the outward and the inward enemy. O worthy, wise, and stout Nehemiah,
where is one courtier that has followed thy footsteps since thou wast borne?
God for his mercy raise up some, that though not with that fulness of spirit,
yet with such courage and measure of grace, as shall please him to give, some
one may, in jealousy of spirit, take in hand the repayring of the old ruinous
walls of Gods Church, house, and City, that both the outward and inward
enemy, which have wrongfully possessed invaded, and wasted the Lords
inheritance, may be vanquished and suppressed: and Gods Children may in
quietness of mind worship and serve the Lord our God, as he has taught us.
After all this watching and warding, he is not weary, but, we will to our
work again, says he, as soon as the day peepes. Who could or would have
taken these pains but he? it would have discouraged any man but him. But
Nehemiah knew well that Satan never cease to trouble the Lords flock: and
though slothful Idleness be meetest for him to work by, yet he forsakes not
the painful laboring man, and will assault him like wise. Let every man
therefore take heed how he stands, and see that he fall not: for Satan
refuses no sort of men to overthrow them, no time, nor place he disdaineth,
but is glad if he can devour the poorest simple sheep of the Lords, if he
cannot meet with a better pray. The people are worthy no less praise, then
the rulers: for they are as ready to obey, as the other to command, and so
joining to gither in the fear of God, brotherly love, and due obedience to
their rulers, this work goes forward, and God blesses their labor.

As for me and my breethren. Now lest Nehemiah should seem to busy and
impious to command all other, and to do nothing himself, which were a point
of oppression or tyranny, as Pharaoh did to the Israelits in Egypt, he says,
both he, his breethren, and servants and watchmen, took as much pains as the
worst of them, which is the property of a good Captain to do: for they
wrought and watched (...). 3.
so diligently, that they put not of their clothes to sleep or take rest,
but only when they were foul and must needs be washed. O worthy example!
God grant us many such rulers and Captains, both in Gods Church and
commonwealth. When the people and soldiers shall see the rulers and Captains
take pains as well as they do, it makes them both ashamed if they draw back,
and also encourages them to be with the foremost. Julius Caesar to encourage
his soldiers would not take pains himself, but the rather to stir them
more willingly to labor, he calls them not soldiers, nor commands like
a Captain, but gently speaks unto them, and calls them fellowe-Souldiers,
as though he were no better then one of them. So in great works the chief
master, when it comes to a dead lift or some danger like to follow, he will
lay to his hand him felfe, he will climb, he will lift as busily as any of
his servants, and say to them: now good fellows spitt on your hands, lift once
again and we have won it, now play the men and we shall be past the worst
straight way. Such examples of the better sort with gentle persuasions in
words will make the common sort to refuse no pains, be the danger never so
great. Abimelech, when he would smother the men that fled into the tower of
Sichem, and could not Judge. 9.
get them out, he gat first him self boughs of green Trees, and bad every
one of his Soldiers do as they saw him do. When every man had laden him
self with green boughs, Abimelech goes first and sets his boughs on
fire: the rest of the Soldiers seeing him so bold and forward, they set their
boughs on fire too, and so easily they killed them that were within with
smoke. So much can the example of a Captain or good master do. God grant
many such foregoers in Gods Church, and then the people will follow fast
enough. What makes the people draw back so much at this day, but that
gentlemen and priests go not before? Want of good example and due correction
makes many to do ill without fear of God and man. David when he would stir
up the people, earnestly to serve the Lord, and diligently to resort to the
Tabernacle of prayer, says: O Psalm. 95.
come let us sing unto the Lord, let us rejoice in the strength of our
salvation. He bids them not go pray, and he will go play, but he will be
foremost him self in praising the Lord, and call on them to follow. When they
were thus to watch and ward night and day, to forgo their pleasures, and take
infinite, pains in building this earthly City and walls of Jerusalem: it
teaches us how diligent we ought to be in building the spiritual Jerusalem,
Christ his dear Spouse and Church, by prayer, preaching, watching, fasting,
and all other Godly exercises.

A PRAYER.
AS thou O Lord of thy infinite and undeserved goodness stirredst up thy
faithful servant Nehemiah, to pity the lamentable state of Jerusalem, and
gave him such favor in the sight of King Artaxerxes, procuredst license and
liberty, great rewards and liberality to all them that would repair the
broken walls of the City, mouedst his heart to leave the wanton pleasures of
the Court, and made him willing to toil at thy work, and not only
prosperedst their doings, but defendedst them from their mortal enemies many
and sundry times, being cruelly assaulted both by inward hypocrites and
outward force; so we beseech thee most merciful father for thine own mercies
sake, look pitifully at thy ragged and torn church, the conte^ned spouse of
thy dearly beloved son Christ Jesus, raise up some faithful servants in every
country that may obtain such favor in the sight of Chistian Princes, that
with freedom of conscience and quietness of the country, the Kingdom of thy
son and our savior may be truly preached, obedientlie received,
faithfully believed, and diligently followed, to the overthrow of Antechrist
and all his members, and the endless comfort of thy poor afflicted people.
Confound, O gracious God, Sanballat, Tobias, and all their partakers, which
laugh to scorn the simplicity of the Gospel and builders of the Church, make
them to be scorned that the world may see, what foolish wickedness it is, to
rebel against thy holy will, and how little all such shall prevail in the
end. Turn away all open violence, that shall be devised against us
outwardly: Keep us from civil war and sedition inwardly: Confound all
wicked counsels, and conspiracies of Ahitophell with his fellows, and
overthrow the subtle practices of Judas, and such hypocrites: Encourage the
people, that they fear not their braggs nor big looks, but manfully may
stand in defense of thy truth, and boldly confess thee in all dangers,
knowing thee to be the only Lord and giver of all victory, and that none
shall be ashamed nor left succourles, that fly unto thee in their great
necessity. Give us grace to pray and put our trust in thee, as this people
have done before us, that we may find the like grace, favor and deliver aunce,
that they did. Give us, we most humbly beseech thee, O gracious God, such
guids and Rulers in the commonwealth, as will work with the one hand, and
fight with the other, keep watch and ward night and day, to drive away the
outward enemy, and will defend thy poor sheep from the Rebellious practices
of Satan among our selves: Thurst forth such faithful preachers for the
adauncement of thy glory only, which without any worldly respect of profit or
pleasure, may purely teach thy holy will declared in thy blessed word, root
out all errors in doctrine and deformities in life, and may by the power of
thy holy spirit bring home all those that be run astray, confirm and
strengthen those that do stand, and raise up those that be fallen, that in
unity of mind, brotherly love and Christian faith, we may be lively stones
in the spiritual building of thy house, may acknowledge thee our only God,
and thou of thy accustomed goodness and free mercy may take us to thy
children, and defend us as our Lord: Teach us as a Schoolmaster, feed us as a
Shepherd, make us partakers of thy glorious Conquest of sin, death, hell, the
world, and the slesh, that afterward we may reign with thee in thy blessed
Kingdom which thou have so dearly purchased for us, by the death of thy
Christ our savior, thy son, our Lord, to whom with thee and thee holy Ghost
be all honor and glory for ever,

Amen.
CHAP. 5.
1. And there was a great cry of the people made and their wives against their
breethren the Jews.

2. And there were that said, our sons and our daughters and we are many,
therefore we must take corn that we may eat and live.

3. And there were some that said, our fields, and our vineyeards, and our
houses we have laid to pledge, that we might have Corn in this hunger.

4. And there were some that said: we have borrowed money for the Kings tribute
upon our lands and vineyeards.

5. And now as the flesh of our breethren is, so is our flesh: and as their
children be, so are our children: and mark, we bring into bondage our sons
and our daughters as servants: and there be some of our daughters in bondage
already: and there is no power in our hands: our lands and our vineyeards are
in other men's hands.

WHile that Nehemiah had traueiled him self weary in keeping watch and ward,
and setting the people to building the walls again, and thought all was quiet,
both within the City, and safe against the utter enemy, behold now bursteth
out a new sore worsse then the former. The people and their wives come with
open mouth and make an outcry against the rich and Rulers among them, which
vnmercifullie had spoiled and oppressed them, in so much as they were not able
to live. Such is the state of Gods people here in the earth, that as our master
Christ says, He John.
came to overthrow the works of the devil: so the devil cease not by all
means to overthrow, or at the least, so much as in him is, to hinder by his
partakers, the building ofGods house, and the setting forth of his glory. And
to declare the vehemence ofthe cry, the holy ghost notes it by such a word in
the Ebrew, as signifies those vprores and outcries which are made in
Rebellious or Seditious Riots, or else ofsuch as cry out for great grief and
anguish ofheart. The parties that make their cry, are the common people and
women, of which it is hard to tell, whether of them is often more importune in
outcrying, and many times without iustcause. The people if they smart a little,
and have not their own wills fulfilled, are ready to exclame, and women can
weep and howl when they list, and the basest sort are the worst. The parties
against whom they cry, be the Jews their countrie-men, breethren in kindred,
and professing one religion. If this oppression and cruel dealing had been by
strangers, where no mercy is commonly showed nor looked for, it would have
been less marueiled at, and less it would have grieved them: but to be
entreated cruelly by their countriemen, kinsmen, and those that served the same
God, and professed the same Religion that they did, and at whose hands they
looked for aid and comfort: this was thought so strange, that it would make
any astonished to hear tell of it. With these circumstances the holy ghost
sets out the greatness of the cry, to make it more horrible in men's sight,
and so the more easily to bring them to repentance, and make them ashamed of
their cruel dealings. When the devil prevailed not by Sanballat and his
fellows, to overthrow the building, he sets now on the poor common sort
and women to cry out against their rulers, thinking by this means to
overthrow all, rather then to procure any remedy orreliefe for them: Though
God of his accustomed goodness (turning often our wicked doings to the setting
forth of his Glory) by this means wrought their deliverance and liberty.
Such is the wisdom of our God, that by our foolishness he declares his
mighty power, wisdom and majesty: and our ill dealing shows forth his
justice and mercy, and that against our will and meaning.

2. And there were that said. The cause of their Cry is set forth in these 4.
verses following: Hunger, need, oppression, pinching poverty, and pining
penury, made them so to cry out. And this is to common a fault in our days
in the preaching of the gospel. Some of the pooter sort, though they had not
lands and goods, yet God, as he uses commonly, had blessed them more then the
richer sort with children so many, that they could not tell how to get bread
for them, except they should sell them as slaves: and where they were free
borne, they should now become bond, and be used as beasts. What a grief that
is to a good father, that loves his child dearly, in the fear of God, to be
driven, by the unmerciful dealing of the rich, to sell his own children for
bondmen, I leave it to the consideration of those that be natural and loving
Parents: for none can express the greatness of that grief, but he that has
been pinched with it and felt the smart of it. When Jacob should send little
Benjamin into Egypt with his breethren for corn, it was long or he could be
brought to it and he almost had rather died for hunger, then let him go from
him. What a love had David toward his wicked son Absolon, even in the midst
of his rebellion, and what charge gave he to his captains, that they should
not kill him? Such is the 2. Sam. Ca. 18.
love of natural Parents toward their children, that they will love them, and
cannot cast them of, even in their ill doings, though many times the children
be most unthankful. Liberty is a thing that every man naturally desires
and by all means seeks for, therefore bondage must needs be such a thing as
every man does abhor and sly from: yet hunger is such a thing, that it will
break stony walls, and rather then a man will bear it continually, he will
sell lands, goods, wife, children, yea himself, to be slaves for ever. Nay
hunger is so pinching a pain, that a woman will eat her own child, as in
the siege of Jerusalem in Samaria, and Saguntine, yea a man his own flesh,
rather then he will die for hunger. Hunger of all things may not be abidden
what inconvenience soever fall out after. Consider then what miserable case
these poor men were in, that had so many children, and could get no bread to
put in their mouths: and wicked men, the richer sort, were they, that had
brought them to this poverty, and now would not relieve them in this their
extremity. We read of a Bishop of Mentz in Germany called Hatto, who had
great store of corn and would not relieve the pcore with it in time of great
dearth, but let the rats eat it, in revenge of which, God raised so many Rats
about him, that they drove him from house to house to save his life: and where
he had a strong tower in the midst of the great river of Rhene, which yet
stands there to be seen in the midst of the river, he thought him self
sure if he could sly thither: notwithstanding the Rats swam after him thither
and there devoured him, and it is called the Rats tower at this day. Solomon
says, he that hides up his corn, shall be cursed among Prouer. 11.
the people, but blessing shall be on them that sell it. God grant the richer
sort pitiful hearts to open their barnes and pursse to the relief of the
poor, that they may escape Gods plague and man's curse.

3. And there were some that said. Thus far goes the cry of the poorest
sort: now follows another company, that cry as fast, but they are not
altogether so poor. They were pinched with hunger, but they had some lands,
vineyards, and houses to lay to pledge, that they might have some corn to fill
their bellies withal. These men were hungerbitten also: for though they had
land, yet they were not able to store it, nor husband it, as husbandry
required: and therefore had no profit by it. And like enough they were such as
Aggeus the Prophet complained on, saying: that every man builds for him
self fair houses and Gods house lay unbuilt, and therefore God plagued them.
They had sown much, and reaped little, their corn wasted in their Barnes, and
their grapes consumed away in the winepresse. These days were like the time
of Micheas the Prophet, who cries out against the rulers for their oppressing
of the poor so extremely, saying, they pluck of their skins frrom them,
and their slesh from their bones. Mich. 3.
And they eat also the flesh of my people, and flay of their skin from them,
and they break their bones, and choppe them in pieces, as for the pot, and as
slesh within the caldron.

4. And there were some that said. Yet comes another sort, but they were in
some better case, for they had some corn, and no money, and they cry out as
fast as the rest. The King of Persia, although they had given the Jews license
to go home to build their Temple and City, yet they laid a great task on
them, which they should pay in token of their subjection, and recompense for
their liberties sake.

The Rulers and chief of the Jews had engrossed up in their hands
vnmercifullie all the corn and money that could be come by, so that little or
nothing could be gotten to fill their bellies, and to pay the kings tribute
withal: therefore these men must pledge their lands and vineyeards toget some
money for this purpose. O miserable wretches, that had thus miserably
oppressed their poor breethren and countriemen, who had taken as much pains
as they or more for the defense of their country, building of their Temple and
City: and now in their great need could find no comfort nor relief at their
hands.

But these be no new things in the world, for Amos the Prophet complains
likewise of the opression that the richer sort used toward the poor in his
time. When will this moon pass away, say they, (...). 8.
that has so much plenty: and the time come that we may make the measure
less, and buy the poor for Silver, and the needic for shoes, and sell the out
cast of the wheat.

5. And now as the flesh of our breethren is. But now come they all howling and
crying together, and say, what better case are we in, that be come home to our
country, then our breethren, which live in captivity under the Chaldies,
Assirians, Babylonians, Medes, and Persians, or any other country,
where-soeuer they be scattered on the face of the earth. They live in penury
and hunger, and so do we. They be oppressed with their Rulers, and so be we.
Their flesh is partched with toiling in the heat, and frosen up with cold, and
so is ours. Their bellies cleave to the very back for hunger, and so do ours.
There is no strength nor courage left in them, no more is there in us. They be
weary of their lives, and so be we. They have not where with to fill their
belly, and cover their back, and no more have we. They pine away for sorrow,
and so do we. They have nothing left but skin and bones, and those will
scarce cleave together for sorrow, and in the same case be we. If they get a
penny with great labor, one or other is ready to snatch it from them, and so
it is with us. As their children live in as great slaueric and misery as their
fathers, so do our children live as miserably as we do. There is no respect
of age nor youth neither there nor here, but all kinds of sorrow are laid
upon us without mercy: If this sorrow were laid on us alone we could better
bear it, but when we see our children, young infants that cannot help
themselves, to be wrapped in the same misery that we be, and can help neither
them nor our selves, it doubleth and tripleth our sorrow, and yet both is
remediles, endless, and comfortles.

These be strange things which were laid to their charge for their ungentle
dealing: butloe, mark and consider farther, and these dealings that follow are
much worsse: monsters in nature, and things intolerable, both before God and
man. This word lo, mark or behold, Ecce, ever betokneth throughout the
scripture some notable thing either verle good or very ill, that is spoken of
immediately afterward, and such a one as commonly falls not out among men:
And the holy Ghost of purpose uses to mark such notable things with this
word Lo, Ecce, mark or behold, to put men in remembrance, and awake them to
the consideration of the weighty matterthat follows, that they should not
lightly pass over it, but deeply mark and consider it. Mark the greatness
of this oppression and unmerciful dealing of the richer sort toward us their
poor breethren and countriemen, of the same religion and serving the same God
that they do, and have taken as much pains in building the Temple, City, and
defending our country as they have done or more: and yet can find no mercy
at their hands, but are made their slaves. For behold in strange countries,
where our breethren dwell, strangers take their sons and daughters by force
and make them bondmen and slaves: but we are brought into such misery, that
we our selves are driven by necessity through the oppression of our rulers,
against our will, and willingly to bring and offer our sons and daughters to
them to be their bond-seruants, slaves, and used as beasts at their
commandment, that we and they may live, though it be in great misery, rather
then perish for hunger or penury. And that ye may see the thing to be true and
not feigned, some of our daughters are in bondage to them already. It is a
great grief to parents, to see their own children taken by strangers and
made slaves in their own sight: but it is a greater grief for fathers to be so
cruelly dealt with in their own country, at their friends hands and
countrie-men, that they shall be compelled willingly, though against their
wills to sell their children for slaves, or else die for hunger. At strangers
hands, and specially if they be of another religion, no man looks for any
favor, and if any do come, it is more then looked for, and so much the more
welcome, when it comes: but at a friend and countrie-mans hand, where all
courtesy is to be looked for, and to find none but all extremity, is a
grief above all griefs, and man's heart can never digest it. It is against God,
against nature, and common reason, which teaches all gentleness to such: nay it
is worsse then beastlines: for one beast will not deal so cruelly with
another of his own kind and one thief will not rob another: therefore to
be spoiled and robbed by them of whom they should be defended and relieved, it
is a grief that passes all sorrows. But if these sorrows could have an end,
or there were any hope to have release of them in time, we could take it the
better, and have some comfort: but all hope is taken away, for we have no power
left, we have nothing to help our selves withal, we have wrastled as long as
we might, and made shift as long as it would be, but now we are able to bear
it no more, we have nothing left, all is spent and gone, and we cannot devise
where to get any more: our houses, our lands and vineyeards other men have
cruelly gotten from us, and vnmercifullie do keep them, and have no regard
to help us in this our great and extreme necessity. We can do nothing, but
cry out on heaven and earth, but they hardened their hearts and stopped their
ears that they will not hear nor pity us. Mercy is gone, cruelty,
oppression, and greedines carry them away, that both forget God and themselves.
This was the miserable state of that time: a man would have thought that the
misery, slavery, and bondage, that they themselves were in oflate, under
heathen princes, in strange coun tries, and so late being restored through Gods
free and undeserved goodness to their own country with liberty, great gifts
and liberality, to build their temple and City, should not have been so sone
forgotten, but as they then would have been glad of some relief, succor, and
courtesy to be showed unto them at strangers hands, so they should now show
the like unto their breethren and countrymen. But such is the wickedness of man's
heart, that the more mercies we receive at Gods hand, the more unthankful we
be, and such is the malice of Satan against God, his Church and people, that
when the Lord of his own free will and undeserved goodness bestows his mercy
upon his servants, the Devil by his members and all devises possible, goes
about to overthrow and withdraw all sorts of men, so much as in him is, to a
forgetfulness of such merciful goodness bestowed upon them, and makes them
unmerciful to their breethren, which have received so great mercy at the
Lords hand. Religion is the chiefest help that God has given us to know him
by, to bridle our ill affections and desires withal, to make us love one
another, and set forth his glory: and yet if we look into our selves in these
days, we shall find that there was never greater cruelty, oppression of the
poor, Hypocrisy, and dissembling in Gods cause, and unmercifulness amongst
men, in this land, then has been since the beginning of the reforming of
Religion amongst us: yea, and that is more wonderful, of such as would pretend
to be favorers of Religion. Hypocrites, as they use nothing well, so they
misuse Religion, for a cloak to work their own will and pleasure by, to the
defacing of all good Religion. Things be fresh in memory, and cannot be
forgotten of them that will not willingly be blind: but they that list to
reed, may see in that worthy Father master Latimers Sermons many such things
opened, that then were preached, and would to God they were now reformed, or
not fallen to worsse and more shameful dealings, without hope of amendment. As
for begging or buiyng good things at the Kings hand, then selling the woods,
surueying the land, to the uttermost acre or roods of land, inhaunsing of rents
to the highest, from twenty pounds to an hundredth, racking the Tenants by
intolerable fines and Incomes, Sine fine, every 5. or 7. year commonly,
laying load on them, to carry and recarie whatsoever is to be done, paying
never a penny for their labor, ride and run, when he is commanded, etc.
Then turn it into the Princes hand again, get as much, and use it as ill or
worsse, This practice has been so common, and declared by diverse, that few can
be ignorant of it, and many cry out on it at this day, but remediles. Yet
this is not the worst: if there be any broken title of the land that may make
question in the Law, or if there be any danger of waters or extraordinary
charges, reparations, etc. then it is meet for the Prince by exchange. When
it is rackt to the highest, and a good thing gotten in steed of it, yet that
the Prince shall not be thought to have an ill bargain, he will desire to be
fermer of it him self after the same rate, to stop men's mouths for a time. As
it is reason, honorable, and Godly, that the Prince should liberally reward
and encourage the good seruitor: so is it reason again, that the Princes
goodness, nor the subject be misused. Master Latimer did freely speak of
these things, not without blame, as peradventure this will be to: but would to
god this had been used only in the Princes state: but he that will look
abroad and see, shall find the like to common in mean men's doings. As for
pulling down of Towns, turning tillage to pasture, and turning out the
tennants, as Achab did to Naboth for his vineyard, that they may have elbow
room, make them large demeans or set a shepherd and his dog, where so many
have dwelt, and that a poor man may not dwell so near a man of worship: these
be so common among the meanest sort of Purchasers, that men need not to study
where to find them. Raising of Rents and taking unreasonable fines and
gressans, is thought no fault, it is so common: but some are waxen so cunning,
that it is strange to think of. A landlord is hungry, and needs must have
fines even of the poorest sort: and because he will be thought to deal
mercifully, this way is devised. The poor man has no money, and yet he must
pay: his goods, and specially his sheep, though they be few, shall be
preised, and according to the rate out of those goods the fine shall be raised.
And that some pity shall be thought to be showed, the poor man shall have his
goods again by the price, to pay his fine withal, and for occupying of those
his own goods he shall pay a yearlie rent or interest, as it were an usury:
and this dealing is thought great courtesy. Solon, when he was asked, why,
among the other good laws that he made, he made not one for him that killed
his father? He answered, because he would not put men in remembrance, that
there was any such a mischief, that could come into men's heads: So I fear the
opening of these things shall give occasion to some ill men, but not to the
good, to learn the like devises. So ready we be to learn that that is ill.
The law in deed opens sin what it is, that a man should fly from it, and
not be condemned for ignorance. Saint Paul says, I had not known lust and
(...). 7. 7.
desire of il things to be sin, except the law had said, thou shall not lust
nor desire them. The law is not to blame in declaring what sin is, that by
knowing of it we may fly from it: no more then the Physician is to blame in
opening the disease to his patient, and teaching him what things to avoid, that
he may recover health. But as an ill stomach, what good meat soever it eats,
turns it into ill humors: and the Spider gathers poison on the same flowers
that the Be gathers honey: So on the holy word of God and his blessed
laws, which he made for our health and salvation, ill men gather death and
damnation, through their own wickedness, and no fault in the law nor
lawmakers. As the Israelites cried out in this time justly on their Rulers for
this great oppression, so it is to be feared that in our days there is no
less cause to cry aloud, that God may hear, when man will not. There be
four things that cry for vengeance out of heaven unto the Lord, and the
scripture uses the same word of crying with them, which for memory sake are
contained in these two verses: Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis, vox Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, mercesque retentalaborum.


For murder and bloodshed God said to Cain, when he had killed his brother
Abel, the voice of thy brothers blood cries out from Genesis (...).
the earth to me inheauen. For the filthy incest, fornication, Pride,
Glotonie, wealth and Idleness of Sodom, the Prophet Ezechiel and Genesis
testify saying; the cry of Sodom, is come up to me. The Israelites oppressed
in Egypt with making of brick etc. God delivered Genesis 19. Eze 16. Exodus 2. 3.
Iam. 5.
them when they cried unto him, and drowned the oppressors. S. James says,
the wages withholden from those that reaped their fields cried out unto the
Lord of hosts. These be good lessons for such as oppress the poor, or deal
streightlie with their tennants, thinking they may use the like slaves or
beasts at their pleasure. Though they be servants here, yet they be children of
the same God, and bought by the same price that their masters be: and therefore
ought of duty to be used with Christian and brotherly charity, as thou
would be, if thou were so. There be other sorts of cruel oppressors, but
not so common as these: As cosening, by cunning dealing to creep into men's
bosoms, to be Fcoffies of trust, Executors of will, Gardians ofinfants, and
these play best be trust, but they trust themselves best, and go away with
all. Cariers of corn, victuals, and other commodities out of the realm, to
make a dearth within the realm, yea, and often to seed our enemies, and enrich
themselves, by procuring licenses to carry them out, are to well known how
hurtful they be through all countries. As for Ingrossers, forestallers,
regraters, leasemongers, they are thought honest me^. The lawyers of both sorts
by feeding their Clients with fair words, and the Questmongers with sluttish
shifts, making them believe their matter to be good, and with long delays
impouerish the suitors: and if he come to be Judge in the same matter afterward,
wherein he was a counselor before, he says, I spoke then as a counselor, and
now I must speak as a Judge, and thinks that he has spoken good reason: as
though God had made it lawful at any time, or in any case to bear false
witness or speak untruths. The Physician and the Apothecarie deal so
cunningly, that no man espieth them, and yet be as ill. The clergy that will
take the profit and refuse the pains, Lie at his ease from his charge, and let
his sheep hunger, are not better then the rest. Pen-clearks, shirifs, bailifs,
and summoners are not worthy to come to this company, for they can return
Non est inuentus, when they stand and talk with him: and make cunning delays,
until they make men pay double fees for expedition. Worst of all comes the
common cutpursse the usurer and his broker, he stands on his reputation, he
sits highest on the benche, and looks big; nay it is crept unto mean
men's dealings, he speaks courteously, and deals cruelly: he defends his
doings to be charitable, when he eats up house, lands, and goods, turns
infants a begging, and overthrows the whole kindred: Captains convey as
cunningly as Iugglers with leger-demaine. Merchants and Artificers are so
honest that they may not be touched: they have so few faults, that they cannot
be told, and yet there could never be laws enough made to bridle them, but
they will creep out. When receivers are become deceivers, controulers be
pollers, Auditors searchers, and Customers look through their fingers and
keep their old custom: And generally, every man is a Thief in his
occupation, as the common proverb says, there is craft even in daubing: it is
to be feared, that as the course of a stream being stopped, it gathers a great
damme, and being let sodenlie go, it overthrows all in his way: so Gods
anger being stayed a time, the windows in heaven being opened, it will power
down on our heads plentifully. How should Gods plague be far from us, when
these cry vengeance daily? the thief by the high way is not so ill as any of
those, that deal not vprighthe in their vocation. For against a thief a man
may fight for his pursse wittinglie, and say, master thief gramercie. If a
man consider in how little Tents, Shops, Offices, and houses those men dwell,
and how great gains they get, he shall easily see where the profitablest
ground lies in the Realm. If this people had such cause to cry out then on
their Rulers, what cause have we now here among us, where not only the richer
and mightier sort ouerload the poorer, but every one in his degree uses craft,
subtlety, and deceit, to oppress, undermine, and scratch from other, without
respect of friend or foe, what he can, not regarding how he comes by it, by
hook or by crook, by right or wrong, be it short or long. Here is nothing
spoken particularly against any man's vocation or occupation, nor any man
that deals honestly in them, but generally to note the general faults of
the offenders, that every man may look into his own bosom, consider his
doings and amend one. If every one would amend one, al should be well straight:
but every one would amend another, see other men's faults, but not his own,
and therefore all lie still as they did, nothing amended, and every one makes
courtesy who shall begin. Sophonie the Prophet complains of his time, and
says, Thy rulers are roaring Lions, thy judges are ravening wolves in the
evening, and will not leave the bones until morning: thy prophets are lewd and
unconstant, thy Priests have desiled the holy place, and broken thy law.
Micheas cries out and says: there is not a goodman lest on the earth, and
not a righteous man among men, all lie in wait for blood, every man hunteth
his brother unto death, etc. God grauntour times were not like. Among us it is
merrily said of some, that there be some Courts where law is executed without
conscience: Another, where conscience is without law: the third, where neither
law nor conscience; the fourth, where both law and conscience shall rule, I can
rather pray for, then look for, until the last day come, when the righteous
Judge shall judge both with law and conscience. In the mean time we may
mourn, and turn unto the Lord, that he may forgive us, and receive us in his
many and great mercies, for we are full of many and great miseries. The pride
of weomen is through the fault of men, therefore they be blameles: God amend us
all. It is written that Joseph in Egypt used the people Genesis 47.
almost of like sort that they do here, and yet is he praised and these
justly reproved: which possibly some marvel at, not understanding the
diversity of their doings. Joseph laid up corn in the time of plenty, when
every man had enough: these men did it at al times, without respect, in
plenty and scarsitie. Joseph brought the money into the Kings cofers, to serve
the common wealth: these men laid it up in their own Cofers, to their own
private use. Joseph bought their cattle for such price as they were worth:
these men pay not the just price for any thing they take. Joseph buieth their
land and makes the people bond unto the King, restoring them again the land,
the King finding the seed to sow, the people only laboring to till the
ground. And where we think we deal courteously if we let them sow to halfes:
the Egiptians have the fourth part for their labor, and pay the king the fifth
part of the increase for the land and seed, but these men kept all in their
own hands. Joseph bought not the Priests lands, but gave them alowance of such
things as they wanted out of the kings store: and these men like unto our
days, if they can scrape any thing from the Church, that is a pastime among
all other to laugh at, and thought best gotten. So much more is a minister of
Gods gospel thought meeter to be spoiled by these cutpursses, then Joseph
thought meet to do to those Idolatrous priests. Joseph opened his barnes in
time of dearth and sold liberally to the needy: these men the greater that
the need was, the faster they locked it up, until they had their desire of the
poor. Joseph restored their land and took but the fifth part of the increase:
these men restore nothing, and yet take interest. As this cruel dealing toward
their breethren and countrie-men, was thought strange to be found amongst this
people, in the time that God had showed to them such great mercies, in
restoring them again to their country, giving them the liberty to build their
temple and City, with great gifts, liberality, and favor of the kings, under
whom they were bondmen and slaves: So it is much more marueil, that among
Christians, in the time of the gospel, (...) mercifully restored unto us, and
so freely taught, greater cruelty should be found and exercised, then among
the hard hearted Jews or Infidel pagans. But this is the common practice of
Satan, that in no age, people, nor country, he can be quiet to see Gods
kingdom set up and flourish, and his power fall: but he will rage, storm,
besturre him, and by all devises that may be, and by all power that he can
ouerthrowit. And seeing this is no new thing but has fallen out diverse times
before, let us not now be astonished nor dismayed at it, nor murmr and grudge
against the doctrine of our salvation, so mercifully offered unto us, as though
it were not the true word of God, because men live so far contrary to that
which is taught, and they openly profess. The devil is content, when he
cannot overthrow the truth of the doctrine, to deface it so much as he can,
with the ill life of those that profess it. But the gospel teaches us what
to do in this case, saying; do as they say, but do not as they do: The
doctrine is good, though they be ill. The truth and worthiness of Gods word
hangs not on our life and doings, but our Math. 23. 3.
life and doings should be reformed by Gods word: for that it is a Lantern to
our feet, and a light to our stepps, that we may know when we be in the right
way and how to come into it. We must be Psalm. 119.
judged by Gods word and not it by us: we must be ruled by it, and not ouerrule
it according to our fantasies: we must hang on Gods true saying, and not on
man's cuill living.

Because the Author, being prevented by death, could not finish the rest of
this treatise, much less of this and the other Chapters, which remain
untouched, I thought it good, for the better instruction of the reader, and in
stead of a supply, for this point of Oppression, which that godly and zealous
father had begone, to annex and set down that, which of late was published by
Robert Some, D. in Divinity.

To the Reader.
IT has pleased an English papist, to give out in print, that the Church of
Room does both teach, and require actual restitution, and that our Church
does neither. His speech of us is verle slanderous, and my treatise against
oppression, is argument enough to confute him. If they of Rome teach and
require actual restitution, it is no work of supererogation: they do no more
but their duties. If we should fasle in this clear point, we deserve great
condemnation at almighty Gods hands. I confess that a man is good (and
therefore justified in Gods sight) before he does goodworkes: but with-all I
set down this, that goodworkes do follow him that is truly justified, and
that such as have oppressed, or injured any man, shall not be pardoned at Gods
hands, unless they make actual restitution, if they be able to do it. If
any require proof of this, I refer him to this Treatise of mine against
oppression.

A GODLY TREATISE AGAINST the foul and gross sin of OPPRESSION.
Question.

What is oppression?

Answer.

It is unjust dealing, used of the mightier, either by violence, color of
law, or any other cunning dealing, against such as are not able to withstand
them. The ground of this definition is contained in these places of Scripture.
Micheas. Chap. 2. verse. 1. 2. 1. These. Chap. 4. verse. 6.

2. It is not lawful for any man to oppress another.

Give us this day our daily bread. Mat. Chap. 6. verse. 11. Every Christian
desires God to give daily bread, (that is, all things necessary for this
life) both to himself, and to others: therefore no Christian is privileged
to spoil another of his necessary food.

If one of us must pray for the good of another: one of us may not pray upon
another. He that takes his neighbors living, is a Eccl. chap. 34. verse. 23.
murderer.

Thou shall not desire thy neighbors house, his field, etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 21. If
we may not desire his house, or land, then we may not spoil him of his house,
or land, or enclose that ground, whereby the poor either by right are, or by
right ought to be relieved.

If thou meet thine enemies ox, or his Ass going astray, thou shall bring him
to him again. If thou see thy enemies Ass lying under his burden, will thou
cease to help him? thou shall help him up with it again. Exodus 23. 4. 5.
Almighty God commands us to deal well with our enemies Ass, therefore we
may not by undoing our neighbor, or spoiling him of any part of his land or
goods, make him an Ass and send him a begging.

He that oppresses the poor, reproves him that made him, etc. It is a gross
sin to reprove the majesty of God: therefore it is a gross Prou. chap. 14.
verse. 31.
sin to oppress the poor.

It was one of the sins of Sodom, not to reach out the hand to the poor.
Ezech. 16. 49. If it be a great sin, not to relieve the poor, it is a very
gross sin to spoil the poor. The bread of the needful is the life of
Eccl. 34. 22.
the poor: he that defraudeth him thereof, is a murderer.

There is a writ in England, which bears this name, Ne unjust vexes, that is
to say, vex not any man unjustly: This is a godly law, and is derived from
the law of God; which forbids and condemns oppression.

There are certain beggars, which of purpose keep their legs sore, to get
money by it: If they are justly misliked which gain by their own sore legs,
what deserve they to be thought of, which gain by other men's sore legs?

When thou sellest ought to thy neighbor, or buiest at thy neighbors hand,
ye shall not oppress one another. Leuit. 25. ver. 14. This is the will of
God, that no man oppress or defraude his brother in any matter. 1. These. 4. 6.
Therefore men of trade may not gain by little measures, false weights, and
false speeches and oaths, nor any mighty men, may gain by cunning dealing,
by color of law, or by using any violence what-soeuer.

3. They which have done wrong unto, or oppressed any, must make actual
restitution.

GOd faith thus unto Moses: speak unto the children of Israel, when a man or
woman shall commit any sin, that men commit, and transgress against the
Lord, when that person shall trespass, then they shall confess their sin
which they have done, and shall restore the damage thereofwith his principal,
and put the fifth part of it more thereto, and shall give it unto him against
whom he has trespassed. But if the man have no kinsman, to whom he should
restore the damage, the damage shall be restored to the Lord, for the Priests
use, etc. Number. 5. ver. 6. 7. 8. We are taught in this place, to whom this
actual restitution must be made, even to him, whom we have injured: if he be
dead, we must restore it to his kinsman: if he have no kinsman alive, actual
restitution must be made to almighty God, for the Priests use, and in our
time for the poores use.

Michah robbed his mother of 11. hundred shekels of silver: his mother Iud.
chap. 17. ver. 2. 3.
did not know that he had it, but he had remorse of that sin, and made
actual restitution.

Samuel says thus of himself: Whose Ox have I taken? Whose Ass have I
taken? or whom have I done wrong to? or whom hane I hurt? or of 1. Sam. 12.
whose hands have I received any bribe, to blind my eyes therewith? and I will
restore it you, etc. It is certain that Samuel did not deal either corruptly
or unjustly in his office: if he had, he would have made actual restitution.

Zacheus was some times very disordered in his life: it pleased our savior
Christ to be a good god unto him, and to lodge in his house: Zacheus having
feeling of his former wants uttered these words, If I have taken from any man
by forged cauillation, I restore him four fold. If Zacheus of Jericho, after
his conversion, was content to restore four fold, it is a good consequent,
that they have littel sense of Religion, which will not restore the principal.

Question.

If a man have deceived, robbed or oppressed other men, shall he be pardoned at
Gods hand, if he make not actual restitution?

Answer.

God will not pardon him, unless he make actual restitution, if he be able to
do it: my reasons are these.

If the wicked restore the pledge, and give again that he had robbed, he shall
surely live, and not die, says the Lord. Eze. 33. 15. Therefore, it is a
sure consequent, that he shall not live eternally, which being in Chap. 18.
(...). 12. 13.
case to make actual restitution, does it not accordingly.

Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness,
to take of the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break every yoke, etc. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, thou
shall cry, and he shall say, here I am, etc. Esa. 58. 6. 9. If the oppressor
must let the oppressed go free, he must make actual restitution. If almighty
God will not hear the prayer of the oppressor (until he let the oppressed go
free) it is a necessary consequent, that God will not pardon him.

Augustine, is very flat for this point: if men be able to make actual
restitution and do it not, poenitentia non agitur, sed fingitur: that is
Epist. 54.
to say, their repentance is no repentance, and their sin shall not be pardoned,
until actual restitution be made.

Question.

If a man have secretly either robbed or deceived another, and is very willing
to make restitution, but cannot do it with out some worldly danger, and
disgrace to himself, what must he do in this case?

Answer.

Let him send that which he has taken unjustly, by some trusty messenger to
him whom he has wronged, and let his name be concealed.

Question.

If he that has taken unjustly from others, has wasted all, and is not able
to make restitution, what shall he do?

Answer.

Such a one, must desire pardon very humbly at Gods hand, and water the earth
with his tears.

4 It is the duty of the Magistrate to deliver the oppressed out of the hand
of the oppressor.

EXecute judgment in the morning (that is, carefully and without delay) and
deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor, says Ier. 21. 12.
Esaias. 1. 17.
the Lord, etc. Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
and defend the widow. Almighty God commands the Magistrates to execute
judgment in the morning, therefore they must use no delays in doing justice.
God commands the magistrates to seek judgment, therefore in cases of
oppression, they must not stay till they be called for. God commends unto the
Magistrates all that are oppressed, but specially the fatherless and widow,
because they want the defense of their parents, and husbands, and every man
goes over, where the hedge is lowest.

Josias executed judgment and justice, he judged the cause of the afflicted
Ierem. 22.
and poor (says the Lord of Josias).

Job says thus of himself: I delivered the poor that cried, and the
Fatherless, and him that had none to help him, etc. I put on justice, and it
covered Job. 29.
me: my judgment was the eye to the blind, and I was a father unto the poor,
and when I knew not the cause, I sought it out diligently, I brake also the
chawes of the unrighteous man, and plucked the pray out of his teeth, etc. It
appears by this, that Job was a worthy Magistrate: God send us many such as
Job was.

The Sunamite (whose son Elizeus raised to life) soiourned in the time of
famine seven years in the land of the Philistines: in her absence, her lands
and goods were unjustly entered upon: at her return, she complained of the
injury to Iehoram the King of Israel: Iehoram without delay commanded an
Eunuch to restore her goods and lands unto her: Restore thou (says Iehoram)
all that are hers, and all the fruits of her lands, since the day she left the
land, even until this time. 2. Kings. 8.


The Jews in Nehemiahs time were greatly oppressed: Nehemiah was very angry
with the Princes and rulers which oppressed Neh. chap. 5.
them, and said unto them: you lay burdens every one upon his breethren, etc.
Restore unto them this day their lands, their vineyards, their olives, and
their houses.

If it be the magistrates duty to deliver the oppressed, they must take great
heed, that themselves be neither principals nor accessaries Amos cap. 5. v. 7.
and chap, 2. v. 6.
in the sin of oppression. If they be guilty, judgment shall be turned into
wormewoode, and the righteous shall be sold for silver, and the poor for shoes:
that is to say, filthy bribes shall be more accounted of, then men's lives, which
are most precious.

5. The Magistrate loses nothing by delivering the oppressed.

IF he do it with a single heart (beside the testimony of a good conscience
which is a continual feast) he may assure himself of Gods favor and
blessing, and of the singular liking of all Gods people.

Josias did eat and drink and prosper, when he executed judgment and
justice, when he judged the cause of the afflicted, and the poor. Ierem. 22.


Job delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherles, and him that had none
to help him, and the blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon him.
Job. 26.


Our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth has dealt graciously with many poor
suitors at the Court, she has spoken comfortablie to them, and procured
restitution accordingly. If it be no disgrace to this noble Lady, which
sits under the cloth of estate, to deliver the oppressed, it is no blot to
inferior magistrates if they do the like. If the Prince pleases God highly,
and wins the hearts of her subjects soundly, for releeuing the oppressed,
it is very certain, that those Cormorants, which grynde the faces of the
poor, are accurssed of God, and loose the hearts of his people. If the Prince
sits fast in the seat of her Kingdom for tendering the case of the
oppressed, can they assure themselves of sitting quietly under their vines
and figge-trees, which eat bread, baked with the tears of men? It is
certain, they cannot. for (besides the manifold curses of god and his people)
their own consciences do mightelie sting them, and are enemies enough to
torment them.

6. Oppressors shall be (...) punished.

CVrsed be he, that remoueth his neighbors mark: and all the people shall
say, Amen. If they are accurssed by God, and his people, Deu. 22. ver. 16. 17.
which remove the mark of the land, they are more accurssed, which take away
house and land.

Oppression makes a wise man mad. Madness is a grievous punishment: God
punishes Oppression by madness, one gross sin, by Eccl. chap. 7. ver. 9.
another.

Ye have builded houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: ye
have planted pleasant vineyeards, but ye shall not drink wine of them: The
reason of this is set down by almighty God in the same verse, Amos cap. 5. 11.
in these words: your treadings are upon the poor, and you take from him
barthens of wheat, (that is to say, the necessary relief of him and his
familiy.) If the taking away of burdens of wheat from the poor was so great a
sin, the taking away of arable ground (which by tillage and gods blessing
brings relief to a man and his family) is no little sin.

They shall not mourn for him (says God of Ioachim the King of Iere. 22.
Judah, which was a great oppressor) he shallbe buried as an ass is buried,
and cast forth (as a carrion above the ground) even without the gates of
Jerusalem. Ioachim had closed himself in Cedar, but that was not able to keep
Gods judgments from him.

The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it, etc. As if almighty God should say, rather then the vile Abac.
chap. 2. ver. 11.
dealings of Oppressors should not come to light, the stone shall cry out of
the wall, I am built of blood and iniquity, and the beam out of the Timber
shall answer, I am built likewise of blood and iniquity. If the stones and
beams of oppressors houses, give in their evidence (like honest Iurates)
against such houses, the Oppressors must prepare themselves to hear this
fearful sentence pronounced, by the Lord chief justice of heaven and earth
against Abac. chap. 2. ver. 12.
them: woe unto him that builderhat own with blood, and crecteth a city by
iniquity.

They which oppress others, do more hurt themselves, then those whom they
oppress: the smart of the oppressed has an end, the smart of the Oppressor
Aug. Epist. 211.
is everlasting: for he heapeth unto himself wrath against the day Romans chap.
2.
of wrath, and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.

There were never any oppresfours so many and mighty, but at the length they
were met with. Gods judgments have feet of wool, but they have arms of
brass: It is long ere God begin, but when he strikes, he pays home. Esaias
chap. 30. ver. 14. 17.

Woe unto them that imagine iniquity, and work wickedness upon their Iere. 5.
beds: when the morning is light, they practice it, because their hand has
power, and they covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses, and take
them away: so they oppress a man and his house: even a man and his heritage:
therefore, thus says the Lord, behold, against this family have I devised a
plague, where out ye shall not pluck your necks. Mich. 2. ver. 1. 2. 3. god be
merciful unto us and make us afraid of his judgments.

7. Oppressors have no religion in them.

GOd looked for judgment, but behold oppression, for righteousness, but Esaias.
5. v. 7.
behold a crying etc. Judgment and righteousness are the true fruits ofGods
religion, therefore oppression is no branch ofGods religion, and consequently,
the oppressor is void of all religion.

Do not all the workers of iniquity know that they eat up my people as they
eat bread? they call not upon the Lord: Psa. 14. ver. 4. Oppressors call not
upon the Lord, therefore they are void of religion: for invocation is a
principal and necessary fruit of religion. Ifthe oppressors say, that they
stretch out their hands and make many prayers, I grant they do so, but
almighty God gives them this answer: I will hide mine eyes from you, I will
not hear: for your hands are full Esaias. chap. 1. ver. 15.
of blood.

I will be a swift witness against those, that wrongfully keep back the Mich.
chap. 3. ver. 4.
hirelings wages and vex the widow, and fatherles, and oppress the stranger,
and fear not me, says the Lord of hosts, etc. They which oppress Malach.
cha. 3. ver. 5.
others sear not God, therefore they are void of Religion. If they say they
fear God, they deserve no credit, because their doings confute their speech.
A good tree brings forth good fruits, and a iustifiyng faith appears by
good works.

The former governors did burden the people, but so did not I (says Nehemiah)
Nehem. cha. 5. ver. 15.
because of the fear of god. If Nehemiah did neither oppress nor deal
hardly, because he feared God, it is manifest that oppressors fear not God,
and therefore are void of religion.

When he (that is Josias) judged the cause of the afflicted, and the poor, he
prospered: was not this, because he knew me, says the Lord: But thine eyes and
thine heart (he speaks to Ioachim the King of Judah) are but Iere. 12. ver.
16. 17.
only for thy covetousness and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression
etc. Josias was a singular defense to the oppressed, because he did know and
fear God: Ioachim was a notable oppressor, because he did neither know, nor
fear God, that is to say, because he was void of Gods religion.

This which I have set down against oppression, may serve for oppressors to
look upon, and to reform themselves by. If it work their good, it is happy
for them: If it do not, let them remember that dye they must, and that after
death they shall have a fearful judgment. The best advise that I can give to
them which are oppressed, is that they desire the magistrate, to be their
defense. If by this ordinary means, they cannot compass their own, they must
patiently bear injuries, and commit their cause to almighty God, who has
their flittings in his register, Psa. 59. ve. 8.
and their tears in his bottell, and will be surely, but yet justly, revenged
of their Oppressors.

Veritas and dulcis est, and amara. Quando dulcis est, parcit: quando amara,
curat. Aug. Epist. 211. ad Romulum.
6. And I was very angry, when I heard their cry and these words.

7. And my heart within me advised me, and I chidd the Noble men and the rulers
and I said unto them: every one of you ley burdens on your breethren, and I
assembled a great congregation against them.

8. And I said unto them we have redeemed our breethren the Jews which were
sold to the Gentiles, as far as we were able, and will ye sell your breethren
again, and shall they be sold to us? and they held their tongue and found not a
word to speak.

9. And I said, the thing that ye do is not good, ought ye not to walk in the
fear of God, for avoiding the slander of the heathen which hate us?

10. Both I, my breethren, and my servants, lent them money and corn: I pray
you let us leave of these burdens.

11. I pray you this day restore them their land, their vinyeards, their Olive
gardens, and their houses: and the hundredth part of money, and of the corn,
and of the wine, and of the oil, which ye do exact of them.

12. And they said, we will restore them again, and we will require nothing of
them: we will do as thou have said: and I called the Priests, and did swear
them to do according to these words.

13. And I also did shake my lapp and said, let God thus shake every man which
mainteineth not this word out of his house and his labor: and after this
manner let him be (...) out and void, and all the multitude said Amen, and
praised the Lord, and the people did according to this word.

HEre we shall learn well both what the cry of the poor oppressed prevails
in the ears of the Godly, and what a good ruler ought to do in such a case.
Magistrates are mortal Gods, and God is an immortal magistrate: therefore as
the merciful God hears in his holy habitation in heaven the cry of the
miserable oppressed people in earth, so should every Godly Ruler hear and
relieve the pitiful cry of the oppressed being his breethren, seeing he is
Gods Lieutenant, and has the sword and law in his hand to bridle such ill
doers, and must not for favor, gifts, nor fear, suffer it vnamended: else he
does not his duty unto the mighty Lord who sethim in that place, gave him the
authority, and will ask a straight account how he has used it to the relief
of the oppressed. Nehemiah hearing this open outcrie of the people, and fearing
the inconvenience that might follow of it, deals wisely. First, as justice
requires, he is very angry at it, and yet with wisdom bridleth his
affection, that he does not rashly punish them, but after due consultation
within him self, and good advise taking, first with words shraplie rebukes
them, and after by authority compels them, not only hence forth to leave
their cruel dealing, but also to restore that which they had so wrongfullie
gotten. Some be of opinion that a magistrate should not be moved with anger in
doing his office, but give every man fair words, pass over matters slowly,
please all men though he do them little good: but the truth being well
considered, it may be judged otherwise. Lactantius writes A book De Ira Dei,
wherein he proves that God him-selse is angry, and every anger is not sin.
If God then be angry against sin, why may not a good man in Gods cause then
do the same? Hate not the man, but his ill doing, be not angry without a just
cause unadvisedly, keep not thy anger long, that it grow not into hatred, let
it be no more, nor no less, then the fault deserves, and let it be without
raging, fuming, fretting, Swelling, and rauing, and disquieting of body or
mind, not for malice of revenging, but for pity or justice to correct and
amend: and Anger well qualified is not ill. Phinees being angry with the
filthy whordome committed openly and unpunished by those that were in
Authority, took his Sword, killed Number. 12.
both the parties in his zealous Anger, and for so doing the Lord blessed him
and the plague ceased. Moses is called the miledest man upon earth, and yet in
his anger he threw down the Tables wherein God wrote the ten commandments,
and brake them, when he saw they had made the Exodus 32.
golden calfe. Jesus Christ our Lord was angry when he whipped the buiers and
sellers out of the Temple. Saint Mark says, he looked on them round about
with anger. Every anger therefore is not ill. This is not spoken to give
liberty to anger, for we are to ready to it by nature, but rather to bridle it,
seeing it stands on so narrow a point to keep measure in. This qualifying of
anger is declared in the scripture as that it should not continue. S. Paul
says, let not the Sun set upon your anger. And that it should not be rash
lie without cause, nor more then the cause requires, the gospel te acheth,
saying, he that is angry with his brother without a just cause, is guilty of
judgment. Math. 5.
This anger of Nehemiah was just in all circumstan ces, and kept the Rule of S.
Paul: Be angry, and sin not: which is a hard point to keep.

FINIS. SOLI DEO SIT GLORIA.

