VERTVES ANATOMY. OR A COMPENDIOUS DESCRIPTION OF THAT late Right Honorable,
Memorable, and Renowned Bedfordshire Lady, the Lady CHEANY, of Tuddington.

By CHARLES PIERSE.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse Street. 1618.

TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS, AND TRVELY RELIGIous Lady, the Lady CROFTS, wife to that
worthy Knight Sir JOHN CROFTS, all health and prosperity in this world, and
eternal joy and felicity in the world to come.
RIGHT worshipful, or rather Right worthy Lady: the title of the former, being
made more illustrious by the fruition of the latter. For honors and dignities
are not the precedent cause of virtue, but virtue of them: I have, I fear,
assumed too much upon me, and broken the bounds of that old proverb; ^e suitor
vltra crepitum: yet, worthy Lady, on whose favorable acceptance, not on my
own deserts, I altogether rely: do humbly crave your Ladyships most gracious
protection, to shelter me from those maligna^t, which might oppose themselves
against me: I know it wants that beauty, hue, and amiable aspect, which should
externally adorn it, and make it pleasing in your eyes. Yet if your Ladyship
please to take a view of the inward truth and sincere devotion of the heart, it
may prove as true begotten, though not so fairly featured as the rest. For as
it is in nature, so it is in art, much vice may lie hid in fair complexions,
and much hypocrisy in art. I speak not this, good Lady, to derogate ought
from learned Arts, or worthy wits enriched with eloquence, whereby my
impouerished and naked lines should be clothed with their garments; but that I
fear the hard ce^sures of these ill spoken times, as much as I hope to receive
some favorable co^struction from your worthy self.

If any put out a Quaere, and ask me why I wrote this book, I could allege
many reasons: but I cease to erect too large a portall to so small a structure;
I had rather my book should be abstracted then detracted. Give me leave
therefore, rather in few words to express what I would, then in many what I
could speak. Since so many, whose loves depend upon your Ladyships deserts,
do offer up gifts, a testimony of the love they owe, which have of long time
known your most free and gentle dispotions, and seen the virtuous
inclinations of your mind. I could not choose, nor in common Christianity do
any less, if no other bound affection, nor duty had moved me, but show some
thankfulness with the rest, though satisfaction I cannot give with the best. I
have therefore presumed to present unto your Ladyship, not such as your honor
does deserve, or as I desire, or as my duty and the subject of my book do
require, but such as my small ability, or rather inabilitie, could prepare to
offer unto you: for having no need of external gifts, I give the internal
gifts of the mind, as a free thought, a lame sacrifice not worthy to be
recorded with those great ones, which could cast above a widows mite into the
treasury, or offer up unto their master more then a cup of cold water. Read
it, most pious Lady, if ought be in it worthy the least respect or favor, it
is not mine, but her honors and your Ladyships, from whose most pure and
eminent virtues this dim and dark candle of mine took her first light. Some
may hold it a disparagement to her honor, because est ab indigno, others may
judge I write truly, but not sufficiently, both are right: for silent duty,
though in it self it is commendable, yet in respect of others, it winnes more
love being active, laus virtutis actio; and for the other, what my weak skill
does deny, yet my urging will supply: vltra posse non est esse. What should I
speak of your Ladyships free and bounteous disposition? What should I speak
of those ornaments and graces you are both inwardly and outwardly endued with?
which with as many tongues as Argus had eyes, spread abroad your deserved
worth, that I cannot tell whether our soil more justly admires you, or inwardly
desires you: Where virtuous life, fair children, happy state,
Do all concur to make you fortunate,
And whereas many will hereafter mind you,
Blessed in the issue that you left behind you,
In which most fruitful buds as may out-liue you,
Your worth and yours a double life may give you,
Where though your soul had reached eternity,
Your name on earth may live and never die.
So thrive fair Lady, and flourish ever in those fair paths of virtue, that
as it was a blessing to David that one of his seed did inherit his earthly
Throne, so it may be a greater blessing to your Ladyship, that many of your
seed, should inherit the Throne eternal. It was not so great a glory for
Solomon to inherit his Fathers Kingdom, as his Fathers holiness and virtues:
Then how much, Madam, may you rejoice in either, that yours enjoy not only
much temporal honors and blessings, but also are endued with many gifts and
graces of the Spirit, great lovers of virtue, and imbracers of true religion
and piety. Long may they so continue to your Ladyships full joy. Long may they
all live and grow old in honors and virtues, and with that Poet ever wish:
Fortunati omnes, si quid mea carmina possunt:
Nulla dies vnquam memori vos eximet aeuo.
Thus humbly entreating your good Ladyship to accept this my first and mean
labor, under whose wings it most hopefully trusts, I rest.

Yours all too mean, and far unworthy servant, but not least devoted,
Charles Pierse.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, THE LORD WENTWORTH.
WHen meannes speaks, and honors balance weighes him:
Had need speak well, for fear his tongue betrays him
Lest undiscerning, there discovered lies
Some mark of folly to judicious eyes.
Even so, great Lord, my timorous quill proceeds
Much like a scholar, that his lesson reads
Before his awful master, trembling still
Whether unkind he said it well or ill.
So like that pupil I the lists do enter,
More bold then wise to give the perilous venture:
And cannot tell what dangers may ensue,
Did not I hope much honor lay in you.
Not like that Fortunes brood, whose ayrie spirits
Do mount them Icarus-like above their merits,
Where when their flight's at highest rise of all,
The Sun does melt their wings, and then they fall:
Or like Narcissus, who did fondly look
On his own shadow in a crystal brook,
And doting on it, stepped nearer to have kissed it,
Where he fell in, and drowned himself, yet mist it.
Even so this world which these fair streams behold,
Build their attempts upon such hopes too bold,
Making the drossie substance of this earth,
The greatest cause of honor and of birth:
Some loving honors so, buy them, to make them:
Better contented they, that can forsake them,
Yet our best natures fail in this and use them,
He Is a rare man that proffered, can refuse them.
But you great Lord descended of a race,
Which virtue merit, and desert does grace,
Made great by birth and honor, not by chance,
As Fortune's wont her followers to advance,
Can better tell these things then I can name them,
And learn, such vain affections, how to tame them:
Whereby your Predecessors got more grace,
And more renown, then time can ere deface:
Combining to your noble house that fame
Which lives in you unblemished, far from blame.
And though that I, great Lord, do write of that,
Which Fame, the world, and time have wondered at,
And by aduenturing, wrong my shallow wit,
In aiming at the mark I cannot hit.
Yet let some gracious censure from your honor
Fall on my pen, which took too much upon her,
Since from that stream and fountain you do spring,
As this most noble lady did, I sing:
Her worth impeach't, yours must eclypsed be,
Which in all things with hers does co-agree.
Though my plain duty, all too mean, prefers,
Yet read great Lord not for my sake, but hers,
Which was a light to those, that far succeeds
For virtuous (...) and honorable deeds:
Who draws (...) such; how much more then
Need they, of virtue store to equal them,
When springing honor in such tender years
Unto the world, so fresh and green appears.
What shall we think of after coming time,
But that your glory more and more will shine;
Where that bright star, within your breast begun,
May quickly rise to be a glorious Sun:
And in the highest Sphere of golden fame,
Rides heavens large circuit with your noble name,
So thrive still, honor flourish ever fair,
Let no clouds rise, such glory to impair,
Nor your proceedings any whit dismay,
T'eclypse the beauty of so fair a day;
But that your glass at eu'nings watch match may run
As fair and clear, as when it first begun.
Then noble Lord my humble duty spare,
What wants in me, your Honor may repair,
And mend those ruinous breaches, which my quill
Has fallen into, for want of better skill:
And I as bound to this, shall tune my song,
Pray heavens true honor may continue long.
Thus not presuming, what may be amiss,
I pardon crave, and make an end with this.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lady WENTWORTH
RIght Honorable ere I do begin
I pardon crave, presumption is a sin,
Lest I too much upon my self relying,
May Icarus-like perhaps repent my flying.
The plague of many Poets, which do think
Their own to be the pure immortal drink,
But I that far inferior am to them,
Ascribe no such vainglory to my pen,
Nor yet will ouerprize, what I do know
Is past my skill to judge, or power to show.
If ought within this little volume lies,
A work too weak for your judicious eyes,
Which might against me the smallest fire incense,
I should be loath to give so much offense:
Yet do not fix your wrath before you try,
And hear great Lady my Apology.
Perchance my meannesse bars me of that favor,
Which others gain in as unworthy labor,
If that it does or bare original birth
In sight of heaven, is naught or little worth:
He Is no accepter of the noblest blood,
Above the meaner persons which are good,
All Is one to him, his power created all,
He Is great'st with him, that on his name does call.
The abiects and the outcasts of all things,
In this prerogative may compare with Kings:
Heavens are not partial, all is alike respected,
None for their greatest honor are elected,
If this be not the cause, another yet
May hazard what this former could not hit,
And bid me call in question straight my pen,
That has not writ so learned as other men,
Having a subject so repleate with honor,
And could not show no better skill upon her.
This plunges deeper, and hard claim does lay
Unto my thoughts, I know not what to say:
But since thou can not paint, nor steal no wit
With borrowed shapes, or Arts to furnish it,
In plainest colors thou have truly penned them,
Virtue and honor need no art to mend them.
Besides, it was her pleasure, mind and will,
To have her virtues undervalued still;
For it is not so true, as common known,
The purest virtues never seek their own,
And heavens agree, and with their names dispense
To grace the truth, and leave out eloquence:
For he respects the heart more then the tongue,
Or else we all should do his Godhead wrong.
Then if that heavens in this from blame does free me,
Why should not mortals through his glory see me?
And set me free from any scorn and hate,
Since heaven in all things, all should imitate.
It may be yet another may arise
And show it self unpleasing to your eyes;
And that is this: the want of wealth and state,
Which holds too many in disgrace and hate,
Yet in the sight of heavens the poor'st are graced,
And are not for their want of means displaced:
If the small'st mite or spark of grace he finds
Does work at all, within their hearts and minds:
Nor does he cast away the poorest slave
From entering in, if grace be found to save;
But like unto decayed plants, does cherish
Their dying roots, and will not let them perish,
Then noble Lady, if that these may claim
The least respect, and shelter me from blame,
I shall be glad: when first I undertook
To write to such great minds, this little book;
Where my too worthless duty more affords,
Concealed within, not to be told in words.
Accept it (Honor) then since it is the first,
Your greatness soon may graced, or make it worse:
But whether it is my fortune or my fate,
I now must take it, repentance comes too late:
Yet many favors, far above my merit,
I have received from your most noble spirit:
Which makes me hope, that now I shall not miss,
But likewise be received and graced in this,
For which I Will study by my best endeauer,
In faithful service, bound fast yours for ever.
Then, noble Lady, deigne to take a view
Of those fair virtuous parts, and honors true,
Which fair example left so rich behind,
To fill the virtuous storehouse of your mind,
Whose worthy branches from that tree descended
Make honors go with virtues rich attended:
Where some of them, if all you do not find,
Engraven in your honorable mind.
TO SIR HENRY CROFTS.
IF that my lines may be at all respected,
And not for their unworthiness rejected,
Which, though too mean, feign would remember yet
The love I owe, which many do forget,
The service and the duty which desires,
(Though your deserts far greater worth requires)
To yield some thanks by mean endeavors pressed,
You in your better judgment know the rest:
From Shepherds cells, expect no more to find,
Then what may please the best contented mind.
Our tables are not furnished with such cost
For sumptuous cheer, or lofty fair to boast:
Such as we have we give, on trust we go not,
To entertain you, Sir, with that we owe not:
Nor yet by stealth do seek to win your love,
To bear the name of that we cannot prove:
Though intertainment, house and cheer be small,
The heart is true which does inuit you all;
And will in better wishes more content ye,
Then in this book my barraine brain has lent ye.
I cannot fly in learned lofty phrases,
But do adorn my style with truth, not praises:
Nor pass I for conceits, which are precise,
But only write to please the virtuous wise:
For I have read, that true and noble minds,
The best content in willing natures finds.
Honor receives no fall, by want of skill
If Gentle doom do fall upon my quill:
Then, worthy Knight, since that you are some aim,
And not the least hopes that my Muse does claim,
Accept and pardon what amiss is found,
That built this frame upon so weak a ground;
Nor let not duty, wanting learned lore,
Be counted folly, nor my service poor;
But be received, wherein it comes far short,
Respecting more my will, then my desert.
TO THE LADY CROMPTON.
MAdam, it is not for want of time but wit,
That I no sooner of her virtues writ;
Though late, yet take that chance which does befall,
Better thus meanly sung, then not at all.
Where I delaying for some learned wit,
Let slipped occasion which might better fit:
Yet since her virtues were so great and many,
Which cannot justly be denide of any;
Much less of you, and of that house before,
Where they engraven lie twice ten times more,
Such kind affections work in worthy breasts,
That honor dying, yet is not deceast;
But lives in you, where often it does find
A heavy memorandum from the mind:
Such honored friends are not so soon forgotten,
Though in their graves they long lie dead and rotten,
But ever now and then the Spirit will move,
And fetch a sigh or two for her it loves,
Bewraying of it self in tears, when any
Speaks of the name of noble Lady Cheany:
Then fair and worthy Lady, whose pure mind
Does virtue in so fair a mansion bind,
Whose parts for natural, moral, and divine,
Excels the force of my weak feeble rhyme.
Vouchsafe to read her, whom you once so loved,
And spare those faults which love and duty moved;
Nor, Madam, do not judge my service slack,
That pays not here your merits what they lack,
Nor prise your worth, nor that fair mark can hit,
But make affection play the thief for it,
Where since I reached at wit, as 'twere by stealth,
Let that worth in you better praise your self.
TO THE LADY BENNET.
MAdam, the service I do owe to all
Your sisters, and your house in general,
Would ask a volume, if yt I could write it,
Or had but wit sufficient to indite it.
Yet, Madam, since I have no worldly store,
I give you that, I never gave before:
And wanting one, yet may you take the other,
The fruits, my weak invention could discover.
Here in this little volume may be read,
Some of her noble virtues, being dead;
Where you may strive in imitation,
To make more glorious by your application.
Some can gleane virtue from the smallest things,
And honey suck from meanest flowers that springs:
Then how much more from her, whose honor true,
Such store of virtues does afford to you.
Where, Madam, your fair intellectiue mind,
May more then I can, or have uttered, find.
Read over her life, and in your judgment view her,
Who has not much admired, that ever knew her?
Where eyes, ears, hearts, are vanished with the same,
Of her long happy, and time-honored name.
Then, Madam, since my meannesse is too great,
Of such a weighty subject to entreat:
Some favor lend, to grace this work the better,
For which acceptance, I will die your debtor.
TO THE LADY MILDMAY.
MAdam, some strangeness may possess you, when
You look on these, and think upon my pen,
What vain and high conceit my bosom haunted,
That would not be with such great honor daunted.
Yet, kind and virtuous Lady, let me crave
What others in the like attempts may have:
You which do represent to me her name,
How can I hold you guiltless of her fame?
But they must both concur within your breast,
To keep for ever their most bounteous feast:
No small affection she could bear to you,
Give Honor and your own Deserts their due:
She loved you living, and with many graces
Did fill your soul, which virtue now embraces:
Where Nature has so well the workman played,
And her full due to every member pai'd;
That naught does want within her bounteous store,
But lent it you to grace her glory more.
Then, fair and worthy Lady, condescend
To read these humble lines, and favor lend
To what may with your judgment disagree,
Your liking lent, can grace both it and me:
For such rare minds with noble deeds ensue,
Will ask no little wit to sing them true:
It Is no small work, nor slight, nor easy task,
Wherein her virtues do so dimly mask.
What my defective pen does want of skill.
Your virtuous mind accepting, may fulfill.
To whose clear bosom I do leave the rest,
Which owes you more, then can be here expressed.
TO THE IMPARTIAL AND indifferent Reader.
REader whatsoever thou art accept, if may be,
These humble verses clad in shepherds weeds,
My subject is an honorable Lady,
And of her virtuous life and sacred deeds.
Therefore I would entreat thee when thou reads
Vomit no venom forth, nor poisoned gall,
Lest that the like upon thy pen befall.
Perchance thou lookst for, that I cannot give,
Some ouer-flowing phrase of eloquence,
Wherein her high deserts might better live,
And yield the curious artist less offense:
But with his itching vain I can dispense
And tell him this, pure virtue loves to wear
Not all rich stuff, but sometimes Camels hair.
I do not know thy nature nor condition,
Be what thou will I Will nere orerunne thy favor,
I only write to gentle dispositions
And may as well respect the meanest labor
Then do not show thy self of rough behavior
As sharply for to censure what is written,
Mad dogs they are when none can escape vnbitten.
Then pass thy verdit gently on my lines,
Show not thy self more cruel then the rest,
I write not for to please disordered times,
But those to whom time has marked for the best,
Then take thy course or yield to my request,
For I do stand indifferent rightly then
Speak what thou will speak and blame not my pen.
VERTVES ANATOMY.
Ye powers divine, sole aid of humane wits,
Assist me with your sacred spirit a while,
And guide me in that path where virtue sits,
And not with idle matters to defile
My time, her honor, and thy glory best,
With light vain pamphlets, as have done the rest.
But in some fairer course direct my lines,
That they may quiet pass untouched of wrongs,
Too weak I know to please these curious times,
Which swarms about like bees with stinging tongues:
Keep thy steps even, for there is none to right thee,
If once Detraction that mad dog does bite thee*
Then Oh thou doleful Dame and tragic muse,
Which in black sable tunes do ever mourn:
Some of thy power into my breast infuse,
That my dim candle may the better burn,
And give the clearer light unto her honor:
Admird so much of all that e're heard on her.
A subject far unfit for such a quill
But that I think some fatal hand does guide it,
And carries me away against my will,
Not suffering me within my breast to hide it:
Such fire as this does seldom burn within me
That has such power thus from my self to win me.
Nor do I think sufficient my weak skill
So great a subject for to entertain,
Far be such thoughts from my unworthy quill
Which humbly writes, and not for glory vain:
No I do know my self, praise cannot tempt me,
Since Learning, wit, and all things else prevent me.
But for some stricter bond, which nearer ties me,
And zeal unto that honored house I owe,
Which far above my power does seek to try me,
My duty in these humble lines to show:
This mite of wit, this little tallent lent me,
Which my bound service, al too mean has sent thee.
For which I do confess Minerua might
Have cause to sing in memorable lines,
The Muses, if they did her honor right,
Might have sufficient work for after times;
And all the learned wits that were of yore,
Might spend some pains to grace her virtues more.
But this vilde age which for the most part graces
The vicious nature and the hartlesse minds:
And honors asses spring from golden races
Wherein true merit seldom any finds:
For where there is one such, fit for honors place,
There Is ten for him which fills them with disgrace.
For gilded greatness stick too much with praises,
Whose swelling pride bears al things down before the^,
This age to greater fame and fortune rayses,
That like to Demigods the world adores them,
What pearls of praises daily of them rings,
Blown with the wind of adulations wings.
What arms, what trophies have they not erected,
What glory brought their vpstart houses to,
And in this world what persons more respected
What is it so hard but that their power can do:
Mamon their God, can purchase all for them
Lands, fame, renown, nay more the souls of men.
These like the Dragon carry with their tail
The third part of the stars, and rule the earth:
Their pride and power with control prevail,
And eat up poor men like a timelesse dearth:
These which their greatness keep the world in awe;
Their will, their reason, and must stand for law.
For which great cause Dame virtue ever mourns
That her own heirs are destitute of favors,
And others worthless placed in their romes
To feed upon their true deserving labors:
Whilst they do swell with honors she does pine,
And must be forced to beg or serve the time.
Oh ye desired times reuerse your course
Unto those ancient customs which were then,
And let not these preferments lighs of worse
Which were ordained for wise and learned men,
For honor, virtue, wisdom, worth and merit,
Are the true heirs those places to inherit.
Oh pardon me if I mistake my pen,
And from my purpose do a little swerve,
It is the great abuses of these men,
Which do the time, themselves and fortune serve,
That are unto that height of greatness grown,
Masking in merits shape, and not their own.
Was this the first cause of gentilitie,
Or from what stock or root did it descend
Was this the ground of true humanity,
Their greatness, by their greatness to offend:
Was this the race from whom all Gentles sprung
Wherein that worthy name was first begun?
Was lands or large possessions the foundation
That men unto that reverend title came,
Or this worlds largest rule or domination,
Whereon so many did their glories frame,
If these must be the cause what will you call
Adam to be, which first possessed all?
If what this earths great compass forth could bring
Whereof the least part makes a Gentile now:
Might neither be a Gentlle, Lord, nor King
Nor to him honors nor renown allow,
Why should his brood with pride so much abound,
Possessing but a little piece of ground?
Wast wealth or all the riches of the earth,
Without the which the best are held in scorn,
That could compose a Gentleman by birth,
Being merely from the loins of Adam borne?
Oh no if I should crave that fair descent,
From that foul root I fear I should be shent.
Wast might or some oppressing Nymrods hand
Whose powerful pride did awe the weaker creatures,
And sought by force and violence to command
More then his own, and raise that name to nature,
No heavens forbid usurping tyranny,
Should ere be sprung from true gentility.
What was it then from human birth derived
And had it her first being from that kind,
The mark for which antiquity long has strived,
And which does challeng the most fairest sign?
Oh, how can nature (I would ask this first)
Be gentle called, whom heavens before had cursed?
No Adam, if that these can title claim,
(As none without them now lives in request)
And challeng to themselves this gentle name,
Which at the first was only given the best:
Then was thy birth, thy wealth, and worldly store
The most, and great'st: what man had ever more?
No, these are but th'admired brood of time,
Blown like a bladder up with froth and wind,
Made worldly great by providence divine
When small gentility rests in their mind:
Their fortunes rises but their virtues fall,
Poor'st in greatst plenty, weak when great'st of all.
But why do I to little purpose strive,
And make my self more curious far then wise,
This name from her beginning to derive?
When every vulgar worldling (too precise)
Do hold too little for his swelling pride,
Whom no bounds hold, nor compass true can guide.
Yet since my laboring pen so much does crave,
To search the ground of this so worthy name,
I must attempt with that bare skill I have
For to define, least that I purchase blame.
For all these four rehearst can never do it,
Although they lay hard claim, and title to it.
'Twas virtue, merit, and an humble mind;
'Twas courteous qualities, and most fair conditions;
'Twas true desert, love, and affections kind,
Graced with the mil'dst and purest dispositions;
'Twas learned arts, and honor which proceeds,
Not from rough might, but weak and bou^teous deeds.
'Twas an assisting, not oppressing hand,
That did extend to charitable uses,
Defending right, and truth which could not stand
Free in those days from wrongs, and some abuses,
Whose zeal did burn with virtue, and made all
Their end true honor, not an others fall.
'T was justice, piety, and a sacred spirit,
Which first enforced that fair name to be given,
Adored with famous deeeds, and noble merits
Whose birth, and being is derived from heaven;
No carnal birth no wealth, nor worldly honor
Can well be said to have affinite from her.
And yet the most (this age so much bewitches)
Digress from these, or else my muse mustly
Translated now to honor, state, and riches,
In which most hold, is tru'st gentility,
But let them have it, I will not contend,
Their honors may deceive them all in the end.
Great King of heaven and earth, how shall I speak,
Which am but dust, and ashes unto thee,
When my souls faculties are all too weak
Once to conceive the meanest thought of thee?
And yet thou tearmst thy self but Son of man
Which vild worms scorn, whose glorie's but a span.
Ambitions age, can Avarice blind thee so,
To build such castles in uncertain air?
What can your honors, powers and riches do?
For age, and death thei'le leave you to despair,
Where thou can not redeem an hours time,
Though all the goods in thousand worlds were thine.
Think ye to buy his favor with a price,
Or fee him with so many golden mines?
Can any let sin purchase paradise,
Or give sufficient ransom for your crimes?
Oh no these dreams do but your senses tickle,
For in that hour, all that you hau's too little.
Reuerse your error, let not these molest you,
Why should fair falsehood blind your mental eyes?
That it may once be said virtue possessed you,
Wherein the truest fame and honor lies:
For smal's that greatness, poor and weak's that glory,
Which has his trust upon things transitory.
Then seek not to enrich posterity,
With an oppressing hand and cruel might:
Nor build your houses up by tyranny,
Nor take possession of the poor man's right:
Lest Achab-like, in buying so you sell
Your house, your soul, and all you have to hell.
What profit shall your tired souls receive
Of all these riches, you have heaped together?
When in a moment you must take your leave
Of all your store, and go you know not whither:
Your children show your wealth, ye world your shame,
And all do hate the memory of your name.
Most odious ever, hated of God and men,
Accursed riches, which will waste in using,
Unlucky, and unblessed issue then,
When all you have is purchased by abusing:
Your parents knew not that their goods ill gotten
Their heirs would spend, when they were dead and rotten.
Oh what a joyful thing it is to behold,
Heirs to succeed their fires in virtuous lore?
And strive their houses honor to uphold
With greater glory then it had before:
Studying by noble deeds t'inrich their name,
To their immortal praise and endless fame.
But ah I fear, what I would not mistrust,
That heirs to prodigal vices rather turn;
And leave their honors trodden in the dust,
The loss whereof some ancient houses mourn,
Not living like themselves, in birth; but slaves,
Burying all virtue in their fathers graves.
The cause of which great waste and fall of heirs,
I judge the impious times of wretched fathers;
Whose auaritious thoughts and greedy cares;
To fatten them and theirs, unjustly gathers;
And waste their brains in studying day and night,
To purchase that, which is another right.
Oh why should these be graced? why should a pen
Dipped in the purest liquor of those springs,
Attend the earthly glory of these men,
Which shame unto the truest honor brings:
As we do see Fame none so much does boast
As those whose lives have tyrannized it most?
If these, unto such fortunes have attained,
Built on the slippery ground of fading Fame,
Then what great glory shall thy honor gain?
Or what sufficient pen can praise the same?
If Vice with Tombs, and Epitaphes is renowned,
VVherwith shall thy rare virtuous deeds be crowned?
If outside honor, if usurped greatness,
If painted pictures of Iniquity,
Can have their praises sung with wondrous sweetness,
Which nere deserved the meanest dignity;
What shall the true bred honor of the mind,
Adorned with virtues excellencies, find?
Did not thy ventures challenge from Fames wings,
One quill or pen t'immortalize thy name?
Is any envious Serpent left that stings,
Or can with th'smallest tincture touch thy fame?
Are not thy virtues and thy honors blessed
With as great grace, and glory as the rest?
Then why should not some worthy spirits vprise,
And with undaunted quill her honor sing?
Why should they not her worth and virtues prise,
As high as theirs which from corruption springs?
Whose shame's their glory, and their aime's (their stain)
At naught but worldly things, and glory vain.
No, worthy Lady, do not think a Tomb
Can thy fresh memory from this world divide:
Nor think that this earths all-deuouring womb
Within her bowels, can thy virtues hide,
Nor wrong thy merits, nor arrest thy worth,
Which spite of Time, will spring and flourish forth.
That monumentall white, fair marble Tomb,
Cannot contain thy noble deeds and merits,
When all the world is known too little room
To comprehend, in bounds, thy boundless spirit:
But still shall time, with us, be ever telling
Ages to come, thy virtuous life excelling.
Nor, do not think, though in corruptions bed
Thy body lies interred at Tuddington,
That therefore thou art quite forgot and dead,
Or from our memories clean exiled and gone:
No, no, thy name and fame again will raise thee,
And spite of death, will make the world to praise thee.
No 'twas decreed of everlasting fate,
That virtue should endure, and never die:
Made to out-liue Times rage, and longest date,
Writ with a pen of sure eternity:
Where if the Muses fail her worth to raise,
Then babes and sucklings will speak forth her praise.
Which has induced my infant Muse to write,
My suckling wits, which all too mean presumes,
Where if that learning cannot well indite,
How shall I do with these impolish'd tunes?
But hope the best; for evils come soonest then,
When least suspected, and deserving them.
Then launch into the Ocean of her honor,
So rare a Phaenix, and our countries wonder:
Thy Muse, I doubt much merit will take from her;
Or else her silly back will split asunder,
Yet bear the sails up, heavens may send a wind
T'inspire me how to praise her virtuous mind.
Which they that true religion pure and blessed,
Not mixed with Idolatry, nor defiled:
Whose virtuous life and deeds did her profess,
An Israelite true, in whom there was no guile;
Embracing of the sacred truth in love,
From which no worldly cares could her remove.
That sought to know and learn those arts Divine.
Which only unto true salvation tend;
And therein much did exercise her mind,
To profit by the truth which all defend:
Misplacing errors, which do seek to blind
The way of truth, in selfe-affected mind.
No verbal, but a mental true profession,
Engraven in her honorable breast;
Wherein it took most sure and deep impression,
That grace and honor here did ever rest:
Making the one illustrious by the other,
As if they were both twins, sprung from one mother.
And surely so they are, as near allied,
Who wins their honors by their virtues first
Can witness well their noble deeds have tried,
Though Fortune now bestows them on the worst:
It Is but external honor they do win,
Whose houses end, before they do begin.
For thou Religion art a seely sound,
Accounted in these nice and curious times,
Of many mighty troubles made the ground,
Whom ouer-searching doubts, and errors blindes:
So many truths, that which of them to take,
To many wandering wits do question make.
This is the truth, they will never start away;
From this unto another straight they are gone:
Then to that sect they know not what to say,
Thus are they busy in all, but firm in none:
Then this they like, then that, then straight they will turn
To any thing, I think, before they will burn.
Such trees, which like the fig tree seems most fair,
When naught but leaves and blossoms it affords;
And in the eyes of the world are judged most rare,
That only paints Religion out in words,
That learnes to tip their tongues with Arts divine,
When damned Hypocrisy rests in their mind.
Whose gesture, works, looks, words, and actions all
With similar shows are varnished to deceive men,
With heau p up hands and eyes to heaven they call,
As if devotion would of sense bereave them:
And knock their breasts, when as their hearts within
Lie buried up in flesh, and blood, and sin.
Such strange comixtures of Religion holds them,
That they, like madmen, care not where they bite:
And Iudas-like, a little price has sold them,
That even the worst of errors they do like:
Thus are they, through their own rash-daring skill,
Led captive of the Devil, to do his will.
How many strange Religions are there found,
That will dispute of truth, and seem to know it?
How many sects, and rules, yet all unsound?
As this vain, light-beleeuing age can show it.
If such a number into errors fall,
How many more, which hold no truth at all?
Good God, which art the only truth and guide,
Keep's from those errors, wherein some are caught,
That we from thee may never fall nor slide,
But willingly embrace the Gospel taught:
That no inventions, heresies, crafts or guiles
May work in us, our safety to beguile.
But, worthy Lady, who did keep the truth
From superstition, and Idolatry free;
Both in old age, in middle years and youth,
That in such greatness few have done like thee:
Where many live, to whom that name belongs,
Which only Christianize it in their tongues.
But thy firm resolution fixed was,
And unremoved stood against all those,
Which seems to set a color, and a gloss
Upon Religion, falsehood to enclose:
Under which fair pretext often does lie,
Most dangerous deep deceits our souls to try.
The truth thy soul delighted: not to strive
On idle questions, which no profit brings;
Whilst some new sought inventions can contriue,
To draw hard questions from the meanest things:
Wresting those words, that sense, to what they would have it,
And not as right and true constructions crave it.
But thou, the praise of these unconstant times,
Made not this world the pattern to do ill;
But like a candle did in darkness shine,
And fram'dst thy life unto thy Makers will,
Not tossed to and fro with every wind,
Which wraps in many errors wandering minds.
But did continue, to thy utmost breath,
A zealous Protestant, and religious friend:
Not stained with heresy in thy life, nor death,
But seald'st thy last gasp with a glorious end:
Which made the Angels sing, and heavens rejoice,
That thou with Mary made so good a choice.
Thy faith as great and rare, did apprehend
The second person in the Trinity:
On whom thy whole salvation did depend,
Wrought by his passions so effectually:
Not mingling of his merits with humane powers,
Ascribing that to us, which is not ours.
But to thy self by private application,
Did ceize on all those promises sweet and fair,
Writ in the Scriptures for our consolation,
To keep us up from horror and despair:
That when deep floods, and waters seem to drown us,
Our faith may shine in darkness then, and crown us.
And bring our souls into that glorious rest,
Wrought by his passions, sufferings, death and merit,
Which he has purchased for the chosen best,
After this mortal labor to inherit:
Redeeming us, when we were cast away,
With such a price as none but he could pay.
That holy one, that pure unspotted Lamb,
That did descend, from his eternal thrown,
For us vile sinners, being God and man;
To satisfy the wrath of heaven alone:
And underwent such torments, griefs, and pains,
To make his greatest loss, our greatest gains.
Oh happy Lady, whose erected mind,
This glorious object of thy faith so loves?
Thy souls delight, which joys and comforts find,
Where all the trial of thy faith he proves:
And viewes the pure devotions of thy heart,
Which for his service thou had set apart.
There, in that everlasting book of fate,
Are written down the trial of thy love,
Thy faith, zeal, piety, and that happy state,
Which far beyond our thoughts, thy soul does prove:
Such great felicity, joys, which joys excel,
That tongues of men and Angels cannot tell.
Could the heavens see thy labors and endeavor,
And to thy loving cares give no regard?
Thy constancy, whereby thou did persevere
Unto the end, and yield thee no reward?
Oh no, it is hard to think, but worse to say,
That heavens great giver should himself denay!
He that rewards unjust and wicked men
With ample benefits, shall he not be kind
Unto his own dear chosen children then;
Or suffer them to slip out of his mind?
If he so liberal be to the unjust,
What shall he be to those that in him trust?
Oh no, Great Lady, he will do no wrong,
Nor once deny himself, let none so think;
He Is just and true, although he bears long;
Nor is he blind, although he seem to wink:
But does behold thy faith, which never faints,
Where he does crown thee with his dearest Saints.
That bitter combat held with flesh and blood,
And mighty conflict, which assaults the best;
Which by his powerful hand thou have withstood,
And quenched those fiery darts which never rest:
But still new battles, war and strife begin
Against our souls, fair Sions fort to win.
Yet all these cannot shake thy glorious hold,
See firm and constant faith does still endure,
Which makes thy trust and confidence so bold;
Aid him that most undoubted aid assure;
He takes thy part, he will not see thee foiled,
Nor to thy foes become a prey, nor spoild.
Here did the trial of thy faith appear,
In his continual fight with flesh and blood,
Which showed thy love unto thy Savior dear,
Which could not be by worldly hopes withstood:
But still persisted, striving for to win
That powerful monster, Hydra-headed sin.
Thou never unto Saints and Angels prayde,
Nor made petitions to them in thy need;
Which whilst they lived, did want our Saviors aid,
Whose sins, as well as ours, did make him bleed;
And was the cause that stopped his glorious breath
To ransom them, as well as us, from death.
Yet will not these proud Pharisees be persuaded,
But urge traditions, from their fathers taught:
And have the Gospel through their power invaded,
And many holy needless relics sought
Of ancient Saint, and holy men deceased,
Whereby their great Idolatry's increased.
If Peter, James, nor John, nor reverent Paul
Would never suffer, but denied those men
To offer any sacrifice at all,
Nor with the smallest worship honor them:
Why should we think they crave such wondrous ods,
To be adored, or prayed to now, like gods?
If that the Angel would not suffer John,
(Whose brightness made him fall down flat before him,)
Ascribe no honor, but to God alone,
Nor with divine prostration to adore him:
Why should those Saints, which were but sinful men,
Desire such grace and glory done to them?
Nor sure they do not, did not superstition
Broch now for doctrine, what true faith enuies;
And by their Romish trash make such Division,
Which God, Saints, Angels, heaven and all denies;
Where Christ with them, and they with Christ agree
To make their prayers t'only none but thee:
For him has God the Father sealed true,
He paid the price, he bought us with his blood;
Then unto him the debt is only due,
Which can in humane justice be withstood:
All worship, prayer, praise, and glory too,
Belongs to him, and more then we can do.
For there is no precept which that duty binds,
No law that doctrine found to ratify,
Unless some false zeal, and affections blind,
Should broach for truth this error first: for why
Should not the Prophets, Patriarchs, and the rest
Be prayed unto, which were as highly blessed?
Yes sure, their grace, their merits, and their faith
Were even as great, as were the great'st of them;
And had as much praise given (as Scripture says)
Which heard, saw, knew, and talked with God like men:
More love, more grace, more favor who has known
To be to any of The Apostles shown.
And yet Romes Tower, proud Babell will withstand,
And broach their own inventions for pure truth;
With sweet compounded doctrines held in hand,
They cunningly beguile unstable youth,
And do deceive their souls with name of him
Which did descend from heaven to die for sin.
Which in the habit come of harmless sheep,
Yet are most strange devouring wolves within,
And many holy observations keep,
To varnish out hypocrisy and sin:
They seem pure Saints, but look a little further,
And you shall find, their poisonings, rapes and murder.
And yet the heavens their lingering vengance spares
(Good Lord grant grace unto thy little flock)
For to discern their frauds, deceits, and snares
And build our trust on thee, the living Rock,
That sure and certain ground which never falls
When theirs shall waste, consume and perish all.
But thou which build'st upon that corner stone
Thy faith, whose fruits so evidently appears,
And made thy souls desire to him alone,
Which on his head a crown of thorns did wear:
Whose unpolluted conscience better tells,
That truest faith with grace, and virtue dwells.
And where thou see with those translucent eyes,
Thy Sovereign Lord and Savior crowned in glory,
Which all the ways of his elected tries
Through pains, griefs, tears, and sad afflictions story:
The patient sufferings of his poor elected,
Which in this world are vil'st of all respected,
Thus, worthy Lady, if thy faith was weighed,
With many Ladies now it would contend
For crown, and praise, and all their pride vpbraid,
Which makes external honor all their end:
And glory, in the greatness of their birth,
Or else their wealth, which is as little worth.
But thou which honor, praise, and glory sings
Unto the Father of eternity.
And to his Son, which such salvation brings,
Crowning our faithes with immortality:
Were now translated to that place of rest,
I Will leave thy faith triumphing with the best.
And to that virtue which few ladies knows,
Or at the least will not acknowledge, known,
Because it loves not pride, nor Court-like shows,
But still retires it self to live alone,
Sequestered from those great resorts of sin,
Which many spend their youthful glories in.
Is that rich virtue, Great humility,
Yet not too great, in great men now adays,
The only badge of true Gentilitie;
If gentle bloods would ponder all her ways,
And scand thy worth, or truly find thee out,
Then Adams brood would never be so stout.
Nor would the mighty Monarchs tyrannize,
Nor seek by violence to usurp a crown,
Nor noble bloods their honors prejudice,
In treading poor despised Orphans down:
The quondam Farmer turned a gentle now,
Would not upon the backs of poor men plow.
Oppression would not bear so great a hand,
Nor these Rent-raysers rack their tenants ground,
Authority would not on such strict terms stand;
Nor with his grisly looks the weak confound:
No pride, nor periuries, fraud, nor glory vain
Shall haunt thee, when this virtue thou have gained.
The key t'vnlocke the knowledge of the mind,
That all her imperfections may appear,
The salve to cure her eyes that were so blind,
The wholesome balm to heal the deafest ear,
The sovereign cordial which the heavens affords
To mortal men, not to be spoke with words.
Oh thou which makes the heart of man as poor,
As is the sparrow on the houses top,
And commend'st him with fear and shame the more,
When conscience pleads the sins which he forgot:
A heavy reckoning, did not heaven forgive us,
And with their grace and mercy great relieve us.
Thou which pul'dst down the proud aspiring spirit,
And makes it level with the low estate;
Confoundest natural pride, wit, strength, and merit,
An leauest humane worth clean desolate:
Rob'st us of power, and works, to build our trust,
Not in our selves, but Jesus Christ the Just.
Thou Queen of virtues, and the only guide
Which lead'st this lady to that heavenly rode;
And that mean path so opposite to pride,
Which in these sinful times but few have trod:
The reins, which bridles Natures power, and tells the^
How vile a sin ambition is, and swells them:
Thou whose low spirit, meek heart, and humble mind
Did crown the Conqueresse over the crown of pride,
Thou which did lose these toys, those joys to find,
And have thy self, within thy self, denide.
Have found by meekness, honor; rest for crosses,
Joys for thy sorrow profit for thy losses.
So gentle, courteous, affable and kind,
That most would think it would disgrace their honor,
If they should bear but such a lowly mind
And much renown and dignity take from her:
As not to use that state to her belongs,
Impair her worth, and noble honor wrongs.
Why should not persons of the noblest strain
Their honors use, their state and name uphold?
Why should they not their glory great maintain,
As well as their forefathers did of old?
It is their own, and they were borne unto it,
Why is it counted pride in them to do it?
It Is true great Lady I do know no cause,
If honor in it self does live confinde:
Nor breaks not justice, love, nor natures laws,
Which sauadge beasts in some affections bind:
That has well learned to know and rule himself,
Embracing virtue, and contemning pelf.
But they that glory in their state and greatness,
And gentle courtesy, count base slavery,
Which holds the highest pride, but cleanly neatness;
And their strong Tyranny, brave validity:
Nor in his nature's found but little good,
What profit is their in this noble blood?
What house so famous that did not begin,
And from most meek and worthy minds proceed?
Which did at first their brave achiuements win,
From virtues time and honorable deeds:
If it be so why should not humble spirits
Possess us still, like glory to inherit?
But such are the vilde customs of these times,
That virtue is ashamed, her self to know,
She shall be taxt, she fears for some base ruins,
If their full power, and grace she public shows:
Virtue must wear the cloak of vice about her,
Or else your greatest gallants will but flout her.
It Is now dishonor to be honorable,
And right must now endure a little wrong:
Truth like the times must change, or be unstable,
Or else she must but whisper with her tongue:
Love, pity, charity, if they want, I fear,
Must get their liuinh where they cannot hear.
Well could thy better guided spirits approve
To keep a mean gate in an humble path,
And not to climb those lofty seats above,
Which many cares and discontentments has,
Whereof Dame fortune queen of change does reign;
And who she list shall up, then down again.
But still pure heavens thy honor did preserve,
Clad in those humble garments Christ did wear,
From which thy virtuous mind did never swerve:
But still a gentle spirit did love and bear,
And never had this lesson far to seek,
Come learn of me that humble am, and meek.
But had both read, and known from the beginning,
How grace attends the one, and shame the other,
Greatness, and honors are such spurs to sinning,
And there is no vice so great, but pride can cover:
Humility, the first true lesson learnes us,
How we should know our selves, and best discernes us.
In thy fair breast this virtue fixed lies,
Which like a precious Jewel does adorn thee,
And as a chain those other graces ties,
Which through the earth with such renown has borne thee
With mounting Icarus do fear no fall,
Nor yet seeks means to raise thy state at all.
Great Lady whose rare virtues passing thought,
And weak imagination cannot attain:
A prize for mortal men too dearly bought,
And which the Gods themselves can best maintain:
For who can tell the spirits power that is given,
From that all powerful power, the king of heaven.
Thou which did seek to hide thy honor great,
Lapt up from fame within our countries arms,
To keep with us thy residentall seat,
So fair and sure from high aspiring harms:
Suppressing by a life retired that guest,
Which crown's thee with more glory, then the rest.
No, that true honor which from virtue springs,
Like to a spark will kindle without blowing,
Or like a tree which fruit in autumn brings,
That spite of winters rage is ever growing,
And fills the owners breast with glory store,
That Kings never knew, nor yet possessed before.
Whilst those that live in greatest Monarchs grace,
And sit upon the pinnacle of fame,
That fortune at their pleasure can embrace,
And think to get a never dying name:
Have not to half thy praise with all their pains,
Arrived unto, which thou unsought for gains.
Thy humble life like to thy Savior led,
In greatest greatness meek, in plenty poor
Did make thy fame renown and honor spread,
And did increase thy praises more and more,
That in concealing as the worthiest uses,
Thy honors grace thee, and more grace infuses.
Thou did not bear a lofty scornful eye,
Nor glory in the greatness of thy state,
Nor exercise thy mind in things too high:
But vnder-ualuest what most highly rate,
And made thy mind, a map for all to see
The strain of virtue, in gentility.
Thus did thy humble life in high degree,
Raise thy unwilling mind to more renown,
Induing thee with greater dignity,
Then those that with mo worldly pomp were crowned,
For thine were true, and did from virtue grow,
Else heaven and earth, would never have graced them so.
But for her temperance in attire and diet,
Which show how much she worldly pomp despised,
And free from that super-abounding riot,
Which is by some to prodigal bloods devised,
So strict unto her self to others free,
That gave content in liberallity.
And which did live confinde in her estate,
Not prodigally to wast in surfets store,
Nor after such a vild luxurious rate,
To pamper flesh with cloide delights the more:
But kept a better course, and shunned those sins,
Which curious and delightful appetites brings.
Whilst some in beastly Epicurisme spend,
And waste their days in vild licentiousnes,
Glutting insatiate tastes, but to offend,
And make their God their bellies for excess,
Which eat, and drink, and spend their time like slaves,
To fatten sin, worms, Satan, and the graves.
Whilst she did use the means that might procure,
The least offense that could be given in this,
No such delitious bayts could her allure,
To Abuse heavens gift in using them amiss;
But did observe and keep so true a diet,
As kept her health full, and her soul in quiet.
What Abstinence has she used to subdue
Those causes, and those motions which might tempt her
To make her prove unto her self untrue,
Or with the taste of follow could prevent her,
Oh no who strives that glorious mark to win,
Must fly the means, as well as fly the sin.
What man that open lies unto his foes,
From dangers and disgraces can be free,
What man that with his enemies walks and goes,
That can stand firm, and never conquered be?
What man that graspes sin in his wanton arms,
Can free escape, and never be touched with harms?
Oh no it is too hard for flesh and blood,
If heavens should us with our own frailties trust,
We should come short for to perform that good,
Alas what power and strength does lie in dust,
When every wind, blast, tempest, storm, and weather,
Blows us away far lighter then a feather?
Good Lady how far was thou blessed above us,
That could so moderate thy affections here:
Where thy example is enough to move us,
If any love, zeal, grace and heavenly fear
Were wrought in this obdurate heart of ours,
To make us better serve the eternal powers.
That civil block not larded with much cost,
Nor wrought with broadered work most curiously,
Whereby some have both wealth and credit lost,
A just reward for thoughts that mount too high,
Could not surprise, nor in subjection bring,
Her mind at all to like so vain a thing,
For well she knew that flesh and blood is apt
Of it own nature to be proud enough,
And needs not such inticements to entrap,
As cloth of Tissue, gold, or richer stuff,
Which often makes the wearer wondrous proud,
Though it is for Kings, and princes courts allowd.
Yet for those men that can direct their minds,
Whose gentle spirits in virtue have bin bred,
And by deserts have unto honor climbed:
Such costly garments have been given and red.
But vpstarts now have took that glory from her,
Most imitate the fashion, few the honor.
But she which for this virtue lives a wonder,
Lashes not loosly into such extremes:
But keeps without constraint her greatness under,
And with her honor and her state dispneses,
Fitting her habit ever to her mind,
Most civil, modest, pure of virtues kind.
She decks not out with gaudy ostentation,
This earthly substance to be gazed upon,
No new inventions, and disstinguish'd fashion,
These changing times can tempt her to put on:
But lives alone makes virtue all her gain,
Despising worldly pomp and glory vain.
She couets not this popular admiration,
The which ambitious nations most desire
Nor makes her glory this worlds reputation,
Which sets the heart of men so much on fire,
Nor stands on honors, titles, nor renown,
Whose broken trust has cast a number down.
(...) Nor does she spend her time like some of those,
In dressing, trimming, varnishing of beauty,
Wherein too many do such trust repose,
They clean forget all heavenly love and duty,
And spend their dearest hours, and sweetest days,
In flourishing that fair, which soon decaies.
Nay which is worse, a lamentable case,
Some new complexious and adulterous art;
They can devise to paint their fading face,
And help that work which nature does impart,
Whose dambd inventions seeks to mend that hew,
Whom heaven at first did make most best and true.
And pamper up the flesh in all delights,
And sooth their pleasures, in what they do crave,
Which in vain studies spend whole days and nights;
What diet, fashion, and attire to have:
Consuming half their time in flattering glasses,
To idolize that which is dust and ashes.
Which trim, and dress with artificial shapes
Their painted bodies like to rotten combs,
And only but for worldy glory gapes,
As if they sprung not from corrupted wombs,
But had some privilege both from heaven and nature
To be adored like Gods, not mottall creatures.
Whose proud ambitious thoughts do swell so high,
They think no mortal worthy to come near them,
But they must crouch or kneel submissiuely,
Their looks and greatness makes them so to fear them,
That scarce a furlongs distance will content them,
f prostrate duty be not done, and sent them.
Nay, when they'aue done the best, and all they can,
If grace, speech, action, does not well adorn him,
And rarest gesture, art can give to man,
The'le hold him for a servile clown, and scorn him,
His duty and behavior comes far short,
To grace such honors as attends the Court.
Ye glorious heavens to whom all honor's due,
Ye blind us not to such strict service here
So that our hearts be firm, upright, and true,
And your great reverent name does love and fear:
These outward duties ye did never require:
Which greatest bloods, and mightiest men desire.
Yet there be duties, would but true ones serve them,
That none in human justice can deny,
For to be given to those that best deserve them,
And keep their thoughts from mounting up too high,
But if they once abuse them duty flies,
And flatterers straight do sooth them up with lies.
What will this age come to, will it not burst
With vice, and sin, and split it self a sunder,
Can patient heavens forbear their lingering curse,
And not with speedy vengeance quickly thunder:
Then truth and conscience, justice, love, and pity,
Fly quickly hence to that eternal city.
For here is no respect, nor friendship dwelling,
For any of you clad in poverty,
It is ingrost quite up by all men's telling,
Within the closset of eternity,
Where they do dwell sithence as little worth:
Till Christ does come again to judge the earth.
Art thou a Lady great in birth and honor,
Art thou of state, rank, means to equal others?
Then why should thou take any glory from her,
Or by obscurity thus thy greatness smother:
Is there a better honor bred within thee,
That from these worldly honors thus can win thee?
Yet Lady had thy never ranging eye,
Took but a view of what they might behold,
How many vanities might they soon descrie,
Which nature needs not, daily to be sold?
Where more spent far in superfluity,
Then would some nature in necessity.
But thou which from these vain delights did fly,
And little knows the vices of these times,
Closed up in one room from society,
In better studies and in arts divine,
Did show thy temperance from all worldly joys,
And those false baytes which many minds annoyes.
Thus did thou spend thy precious hours and time,
In reading virtuous and most sacred books,
And truly serving of the powers divine,
Nor to these worldly vanities once looks,
Wherewith thou had continual war and strife
Which crowns thee such a meritorious wife.
Her senses were not organs unto folly,
Nor conducts to receive in vanity,
These outward entrances she kept more holy,
And not exposed to worldly amity.
But for heavens zeal, and glory stopped those sluices,
And bars the passage which might cause abuses.
Nor did her ears itch after novelties,
Nor yet inquisitiue was in curious matters:
But ere restrain those powers and faculties,
From smoth tongud Gnatoes which are used to flatter,
Whose whispring tongues if that they once come near the^
Will strait infect them, if they deigne to hear them.
And like to honey drop into their ears,
That poison which soon swell ambitious spirits,
That nothing else they do desire to hear,
But their own praises, honors, worth, and merits,
And rockt asleep in their security,
Make themselves equal to the deity.
Oh had but great men or great princes courts,
Been free from this how happy had they bin?
Such treasons, massacres, and plots of sundry sorts,
None had contrived to snare the mighty in,
They might have stepped securely without fears,
Had not this rancker crept into their ears,
Oh snare to honor, stayne to noble blood
Thou great disease, obsequious adulation,
Which Vulter-like do feed upon the good,
And preys upon them in so fair a fashion,
That thou do bite by fawning, kil'st by smiling,
Strangl'st by love, and by most trust beguiling.
But she which loves not no such Sirens singing,
Does tune far better music to her mind,
And knows those rare contents, and co^forts bringing,
With all those joys which those that prove them find
Whilst many cares and troubles vexed their spirits,
Which hunt for praise, and glory vain inherits.
And waste their bodies and their souls together,
To compass here this windy blast of praise,
Which having got they have but caught a feather,
And like to smoke, and vapors soon decaies,
But those whom truest fame and virtue raises,
Never luls themselves a sleep with their own praises
Pardon great Lady my unworthy quill,
That it should do thy name, and honor wrong.
And look not to my art, but to my will,
Which more affords then can be told with tongue:
What learning wants, let something else supply,
I know his pitch is for my reatch to high.
She that did live so long, and rule alone,
And fairly did support her houses fame,
A widow, wife, and maid, confinde in one,
In all, and several states so free from blame,
That envy, nor the injurious hand of time,
Could ever stain, or touch with any crime.
Her thoughts so continent, and her chaste desires,
Which never rioted in exppense of time,
Sprung from those true eternal living fires,
Which does all virtue to it self combine
Not lightly led, nor starting now and then
To place new fancies in affecting men.
But truly kept her self unto her love,
Her worthy love, in youth, in age, in death:
So constant, faithful, true as turtle dove,
Where her affections gave no second breath:
But lived in one pure love, and never changed,
In thoughts so firmly knit, they never ranged.
Which for the space of almost thirty years,
Did rule alone her house admir,d of many,
Such holy graces in her life appears;
Such perfect virtues seldom seen in any:
A virgin, wife, a widow, maid, to be,
So old in honor, yet from folly free.
Could not her long deceased spouse before,
Graced with so many worthy after loves,
Nor time, nor nature which could argue more,
Nor any thing from that strict course remove:
But still her resolution does persevere,
Inuiolate unto the first for ever.
Why then poor pen do thou attempt so far,
And can not touch the riches of her honor,
Nor nothing near describe this glorious star:
But rather much vnhidden worth take from her,
The little world of thy poor wit on fire,
Will rather burn then satisfy desire.
Yet give me leave great Readers to admire,
Fair imitators of her honors worth;
Although I cannot satisfy desire,
Nor set her high deserts, and honor forth,
Accept my will, which must remain your debtor,
Till time, or heavens shall grace me to sing better.
She in whose breast, grace such impression took,
That made her time not like a mortal creature;
Which honors, state, and dignities forsook,
A thing most hard and wondrous strange to nature,
That virtue should be found for to contemn,
Such means and fortunes, as aduanceth them.
Could grace and virtue natures force expel,
And break those laws wherein she binds too many*
Could heavenly gifts in such a concord dwell,
So welbelou'd within the heart of any:
That in so many days they should not fall,
Nor yet be touched with any crime at all.
Pure-thoughted Lady which preserues thy soul
So clean from fleshly crimes, and carnal pleasures,
Nor did consent unto such actions foul,
Wherein too many wallow out of measure,
That inbred sin which never leaves the most,
Till nature's ready to yield up the ghoast.
One love thy soul delighted, which decease,
Did live a fresh in the still undivided.
Two persons joined in one makes no release
Till both be dead in love so firmly guided,
Death parts the body, but the soul does honor,
In shadie groves to meet so true a lover.
So constant Lady thou which after death,
In strengh of years to no such bayts did yield,
Gains fame a second life, and longer breath,
Whose steadfast love, on better ground did build,
Where palms of victory in thy hands are found,
And laurel wreaths to girt thy temples round.
Where thou Diana-like did lead a life,
In sacred love mixed with most chaste desire,
Or like those holy vestalls void of strife,
Which keeps their honors spotless, and entire,
And never looks so true a course they live,
To those enchantments which the world does give.
Where purest love like to the morning dew,
Sent down from him which all good gifts infuses,
Inioyes those rare contents given but to few,
To very few which worldly traffic uses,
So great and meek, so chaste, and yet a wife,
For not a mortals, but an Angels life.
Which only keeps not from society,
Thy person free, but quenched those inward fires,
And from loose thoughts, and vain delights did fly,
Hating th'imbracements of unchaste desires
And gave no place to such inticements vain,
Which proves the owners loss, the actors pain.
How can thou then great Lady all forsake,
So many thousand bayted hopes to see,
And many great ones little rest to take,
Whilst thou securely sleeps from dangers free?
No thy chaste bosom never lusted so,
To loose a friend for to embrace a foe.
Thou worthy pattern of this wanton age,
Whose pure affections dispossesseth sin,
And acts thy part upon this earthly stage,
As chaste as she whose love Troy town did win:
Oh who would wish more honor in this life,
Then die a virtuous widow, virgin, wife?
Thou mighst have knit thy self in sacred bands,
With honorable persons in degree,
In Hymen's rites uniting hearts and hands,
And not have wrong this first love being free,
Oh but thy soul says to thy self alone,
That faith most firm, that keeps it self to one.
No friend nor lover since thy bosom smothers,
But Christ thy Savior, spouse, and husband dear,
For whose dear sake thou have forsook all others,
How great, or rich so e're they lived here;
And sworn unto thy self, and made a vow
To serve, love, fear, and keep him only now.
Oh happy choice, yet man and wife do varry,
From these pure paths, which unto virtue tends,
They care not who, nor yet how often they marry
For love of lucre, lust, or worldy friends:
Exchanging often the better for the worse,
Who weds a second never loved the first.
Such soul respects are so engraven in us,
First beauty, that fair object does allure us.
Then mighty friends in state or means does win us,
That from ensuing dangers may secure us:
But last and greatest is wealth, revenues, riches,
The which the souls of men so much bewiches.
Long may thou live in thy more happier choice,
That everlasting love which fades never,
Long may thou, with that Bridegroom fair rejoice,
In those triumphing joys which lasts ever,
Long may thou honor, praise and glory sing,
Unto the sovereign Lord, the King of Kings.
Where thy pure thoughts, chaste bosom, virtuous life,
Weds thy unspotted soul to endless joys:
Whose love to that great spouse makes a chaste wife,
And whose rare gifts weak flesh and blood destroys:
Whose outward honors many equals find,
But few to match the honor of the mind.
Why should my striving pen desire to tell,
What it by force cannot attain to know?
Why should my will against my skill rebel,
My passions thus against reasons laws to show?
What ardent furies works within my mind,
To seek for that no wit, nor toil can find?
Oh give me leave to break off, thou my Muse,
I cannot diue so deep, I may be drowned,
Then spare my weakness, and defects excuse,
Which must retire when it can feel no ground:
That glorious stream of honor it is too deep
For my weak brain, above the waves to keep.
But yet her bounty does inuit my pen,
That virtue which does challenge praise with best,
And vrges my dull hand to write again,
Which crowns her with more glory then the rest,
And makes her name and honor mount the higher
With such great grace, as makes the world admire.
Her bounty, Alexander-like, did win
A general love, and liking of the best;
Her fame and honor does but now begin,
As if no worthy gifts had filled her breast,
And she had not been fraught with such great store
Of virtuous parts, in all her life before.
Here Fame and Bounty are at strife together,
Which shall excel each other in their praise;
Such copious matter both affords, that neither
I cannot tell her worth, will highest raise:
Both speaks so well, that I will doubtful leave it.
Unto the world that better can conceive it.
Yet in the book of true recording fame,
Such mighty volumes of her virtues stand,
Most fairly drawn by ancient time, which came
Attented with a fair encompassed band
Of minutes, hours, days, weeks, months and years,
And spoke a speech that ravished humane ears.
I that fell down at that most pleasant spring,
Make my petition unto aged Time,
That he would open the book again, and sing
Those too much blessed words, and crowned lines:
Whereat he smilde at the weakness of my brain,
And said 'twas more then nature could contain.
For in deep characters here does lie inrol'd
The famous Arts and memorable deeds
Of all those worthies which have been of old,
Which from fair Virtues line and stock proceeds:
The monuments of Fame, which through my hand,
For rustie age have been forgotten long.
Where she amongst the rest of honors line,
Lies surely writ in those eternal scrowles,
Inrol'd in those great monuments divine,
Which true and everlasting fame in rolls:
In heavens great storehouse locked, till fatal doom,
Raises her body from this earthly tomb.
Where her most bounteous and munificent hand,
Which never turned unto her self in vain,
Did more affection in our soil command,
Then thought can think, or honor can obtain:
Made friend of foes, and feared love combines
In those that love, but miserable minds.
For Bounty is a key that will unlock,
And mollify the cruell'st dispositions,
Able for to dissolve the hardest rock,
And make it flexible to th'mild'st condition:
For none, I think, so obdurate e're have bin,
But bounteous deeds, or liberal gifts could win.
For it is a badge of Christianity,
A cognizance to know the noble natures,
The truest touchstone whereby we may try
The generous race, from base and worldly creatures:
Whose greedy cares do eat the soul like rust,
And never leaves, till leave them needs it must.
This sin of Avarice makes us like to hogs,
Which roots in the earth, and digs in the ground for gain,
And with a thousand fears our conscience clogges,
Vexing our spirits with long, lean, pining pains:
Which like a mad consumption wastes all,
Both soul and body, for a rising fall.
That like a vulture, feeds upon the liver,
And gnawes the intralls like a pining sickness,
Which, where it once possesses, leaves never,
Take the young man in the Gospel for a witness:
For this rank age is much far worse then him
Which kept the Law, and was not stayed with sin.
He something had to answer for himself,
And justify him for this life of ours;
Had not he been in love with worldly pelf,
A clearer light shined not in humane powers:
For who can tell that he has done so well
As this rich young man, that is gone to hell.
Oh no, dear heavens, in mercy look upon us,
One of a thousand cannot say so much,
Yet do not take thy grace and favor from us,
Although so pure a life we cannot touch:
For we renounce our selves, and trust in thee,
Out of this mortal toil to set us free.
Then, noble Bounty, I must needs commend thee,
If that no other cause were given but this,
And with more praise, then I can give, commend thee,
Which had he known, of heaven he could not miss:
If for one sin, heavens cast this man away,
What shall we do, that sin thus every day.
Well may the greatness of this virtue move us,
And prick us forward, Bounty to embrace,
Which generally does make the world to love us,
But most those men of greatest birth and place:
If Avarice be so great and vile a sin,
What praise and glory then shall bounty win.
Great honors mirror, in whom I do find
Such rare perfection, that my soul admires it:
Thy virtues marching in their several kind;
That those that hears it, more and more desires it:
And glutted pen does surfeit with the store
Of those rich virtues, Ignorance makes poor.
Her bounteous hand, and great rewarding mind,
What pen from you, can well the same express,
As thy true merits, and deserts does bind,
And not eclypse the same, and make them less:
If those that tread the tract of honor true,
Deserve a golden pen, it falls to you.
Where though thy soul has reached eternity,
And thou art there inrol'd in joy and glory:
Yet give thy servant leave, his wits to try,
And write ensuing times this sacred story:
For heavens decreed such virtues never should die,
Nor such bright honors taste mortality.
Yet there be some, whom my concealing pen,
For breuities, and for manners sake omit
That caries virtues, or should carry them,
Which can themselves, and virtue too forget,
And can, since honors hand did them prefer,
Take ease and pleasure, and not think of her.
Whose power as weak, as others were before,
Now fully fed, can swell, and keep no bounds,
And most insatiate, covet more and more,
That should not be in art and learning found:
Which once for half that means would humbly bow,
Where having all, are not contented now.
Yet, bounteous Lady, let not this thing grieve thee,
That Benefactors are so ill respected,
But let thy innocence in this cause relieve thee;
Christ had but twelve, yet was by one neglected:
If one from him, needs more must fall from thee,
Which being once dead, their loyalties cannot see.
It Is our corruptions that is bred within us,
Which is the cause of this, and has been ever;
And present profit has such power to win us,
That dead and gone, we straight forget the giver:
And few remembers good turns past and gone,
Where such great persons natural glass is run.
Could I collect together, in one sum,
A record of the honorable deeds,
Of all those gifts bestowed, and favors done,
Which from her free and bounteous minds proceeds:
Then should I to small purpose spend my days
In writing that which has no end of praise.
What bounds or limits has her honor known,
Or who can sound so deep, or well declare her,
When those fair wings, she flies with, are her own,
Which to that mighty height of fame did rear her:
I need not add unto the Ocean more,
What is one drop unto such wondrous store?
Alas, great Lady, thou have little need
Of my harsh tongue to praise thy bounty so;
In every place thy fame as well does speed,
And better too, then I have power to show:
Thy worth by me no more disgrace endures,
Then Sun, when clouds her glorious light obscures.
No, Honorable Lady, know thy self,
Although I cannot pay thee half thy due,
But tossed am upon misfortune shelfe,
And cannot sing thy honors full, nor true:
Yet from these ashes may a Phaenix spring,
When they have heard thy worth and better sing.
Then take this virtue now into thy hand,
My feeble spirits begin for to retire;
Such power thy virtues have, they can withstand
A better pen, and bid my thoughts admire,
And glory in the subject, not my Muse,
Which can more faults then I have done excuse.
Yet give me leave a little to proceed,
And some more graces of her mind discover;
My fond affection, in this vain to feed,
One virtue still, you see, calls in another:
Where though I do begin, and speak of many,
Yet can I find no end of praising any.
Thy hospitality did as much renown thee,
As cannot be by mortal tongues expressed;
And with as great deserts and praises crown thee,
Filling thee with more glory then the rest:
And brings thee forth upon this stage to show thee
What thy deserts and their affections owe thee.
Thy speaking praise from Cottage to the Throne,
Attend thee, Lady, with no common glory;
Thy bounteous deeds so spread abroad and known,
Writes in men's hearts thy never dying story;
Where it shall live past all succeeding ages,
As willing pen and virtue true presages.
Thy bounteous table kept, who may declare,
Or greatness of thy hospitality,
Whose liberal mind no cost at all does spare,
To grace thy honor with more dignity?
Where overwhelmed with affections store,
She to her friends thinks greatest bounty poor.
What long enduring house has honor kept,
And with thy bounteous cheer, and wondrous store
Fed many mouths; whilst some have basely slept
In Mammons arms, still coveting more and more:
Snorting in mines of gold, feeding their souls
With that, the best, and worthiest minds controlls.
Which loves to hear the fall of honor true,
And envy those rare gifts they do possess;
Detracting those which bounteous deeds ensue,
And yet these slaves will creep and be their guests;
To all those famous houses, which they hear
Do keep up bounty, and maintain good cheer.
Whilst they do scrape and gleane, what they can get
From Bounties hands, and liberal dispositions,
Which never a good house kept themselves as yet,
Nor never will do, so base are their conditions:
If they can creep but into honors favors,
They Will feed and burst upon another labors.
Thus from great persons free, and bounteous tables,
They heap up wealth by wretched misery,
And make their heirs so strong in means, and able;
That in the compass of gentilitie
They must be drawn and honored of some men,
Although their fathers basely begged for them.
I do not urge this, most renowned Lady,
Though many men have bettered been by thee,
To aim or point at any thing, that may be
Thought prejudicial to thy dignity:
But as thou art most liberal, free and kind,
So to express the bounty of thy mind.
Now can the City, Country, and the Court,
Whose ears have heard of thy dispersed fame,
Unto thy Princely Palace make resort,
And fill their thoughts with thy admired name:
Where hearts, eyes, ears, and all desires to prove
The great magnificence of thy grace and love.
With courteous, kind, and honored dispositions,
Such as is wont in noble breasts to dwell,
Thou entertaines great birthes, and fair conditions
With such rare grace and gestures as excel:
No wise conceits, nor curious Artist found,
But for thy courteous grace thy praises found.
No worthy Lady, of the noblest strain,
Which for her parts and wisdom was divine;
But thou with bounteous hand did entertain
And show thy self as free as Caesar's mind:
Whose salutations were as fairly dressed,
And powdered with the wisdom of the best.
Here greatness does another greatness grace;
Love meets with love, here honor, honor kisses;
Here noble minds each other do embrace,
Naught to make up such sweet contentment misses:
So fair a troop of worthy persons meeting,
But few have seen in such great honor greeting.
Here liberal Ceres plays no niggards part,
Here Heaven, earth, Seas their greatest plenty brings,
Here Bacchus cheeres the melancholy heart,
Whilst a learned consort of sweet Music sings:
A feast that did more sumptuous cost afford,
Then Cleopatra did that noble Lord.
Who has been famed for hospitality,
That has not ranckt her name among the rest?
Who have for bounty and for dignity
Admired been, and left her vnexprest?
Who has a worthier house kept all her days
Then she has done, and lived in greater praise?
No, Lady, though our Shire did thee contain,
Yet are thy honors and thy bounty spread;
And can as great a share and glory claim,
As theirs can do, and grace thee being dead:
With true deserving fame, for ever blessed,
To equal Pellam, Ramsey, and the rest.
No niggards hand, nor greedy gain did hold her,
The noblest minds are not in love with riches,
Nor have her virtues for such trifles sold her,
Though many great ones powerful gold bewitches:
But what means here the heavens her freely lent,
She wastes nor, though liberally she spent.
But to a better end and purpose used them,
The hungry members of our Lord to feed,
And not in such disordred sort abused them,
But helped the weak afflicted in their need
With Joseph, to refresh the brethren poor,
Which stands and waits for charity at the door.
Her yerning pity did so far extend,
That deep compassion she did on them take,
And in their great necessities did befriend
Their souls and bodies for mere charities sake:
With gifts and good rewards she did supply
Their extreme wants, and saved them like to die.
How many has she eased of Lazars crew,
The poorest members of our dying Lord,
Whose great distress the kindest natures rue,
Tossed to and fro, and in this world abhorred:
Despised and made a scorn of every eye,
Which does behold their woe and misery.
Thus do they show from whence they are descended,
From that old serpent their adopted father,
Which never will, nor ever have extended
The least relief, as Dives crummes to gather;
His dogs were kinder for to lick his sores,
Then me^ are now, which beats them from their doors.
But thou, great Lady, wherein virtue rested,
Did daily feed them at thy bounteous gate,
And the poor members of Christ's flock have feasted,
Comiserating here their woeful state,
Which nothing have in this world to relieve them,
But what such liberal minds as yours does give the^.
Poor naked worms which feel the sharpest air,
Which wants food, cloth, and home, which many have,
What is here left to keep ye from despair,
When all your hopes and comforts are the grave:
And if it were not for some worthy minds,
Your souls would faint and die before your times.
But thou, most true devoted Lady, gives
Both cloth, food, harbor, to such orphans poor,
And helpest those which in extremities live,
And never expuls'd the needy from thy door:
But at the point of death their souls did cherish,
And saved those lives which ready were to perish.
Thus did thy faith bear sweet and pleasant fruits,
Which ever from that flourishing tree proceeds,
With such rich graces, as best honor suits,
And did extend it self to bounteous deeds:
Relieuing cheerfully those silly elues,
Which had no means here for to help themselves.
Thou fair example live without compare,
Thou map of honor be for ever blessed,
Since to the poor such pity thou do bear,
Which meaner persons in their pride detest,
And do extend thy hand to help their need,
Whilst their fell cruelties make their hearts to bleed.
Nay not contented thus, thou lefts behind,
As long as any age or time indures,
A fair example of thy bounteous mind,
Which shall for ever stand most firm and sure,
Where thou have means, and living left in store,
To help the helpelesse, and releive the poor.
Could I but reckon what her honor gave,
Or what a number at her gate she fed;
How many needy wretches lives she saved,
For want of food half pinde and almost dead,
The sum I fear would grow so wondrous large,
And far extend my weakness to discharge.
No it is not to be told with any tongue,
Those great accounts my pen must let alone,
Unless attempting I should do her wrong,
To take away from her what is her own,
For numberless they are, and so I Will leave them,
Where endless joys for endless good receive them.
For what she gave to those, she lent to him,
Which will repay't again unto a penny:
She shall not loose by that she knows, but win,
And crowned be in heaven, with joys as many,
Where double recompense she shall surely have,
And thousand fold more find then here she gave,
Her goods possessing she did not possess
But made them free for others which did need them,
They were not hers she often would confess:
But lent her to refresh the poor, and feed them,
Where she as tenant held from his great hands,
All that she did possess, both goods and lands.
And knew right well that she account must give,
Of all those rich demeanes she here inioyd,
And in so great a calling how she live,
Unto what use her Talent was imployd,
Where now with that good servant she does find,
Her masters joy and ten times more assignde.
Oh Lady why do I this virtue urge,
So much in thee and cannot find in others,
Art thou alone unto these times a scourge,
To whip their dullness forward, and discover?
Those monstrous wolves which never will be fed,
But eat up poorest Orphants like to bred.
Religion is the cause of this I hold,
That to good works will not ascribe salvation,
Which makes our age in charity grow so cold,
As few will give because it is out of fashion,
Then let our works be meritorious found,
It may be then more charity will abound.
Thus does this topsie-turuie age delight
In contraries, and leaves the good undone,
Wrong has the upper hand of truth and right,
And every man to swift perdition runs:
If this salvation were, as none it is,
Who would be damned then that should do amiss?
But, world, thy share will come far short, I fear,
For vain's that hope, whose faith brings forth no fruit,
Nor shows it self in virtuous actions here,
What Is better for a tongue if one be mute:
Or for that rise which breeds a greater fall,
Or for that faith which shows no works at all.
Good Lady, thou which did possess so much,
And spent'st so little upon idle pleasure;
How far do thou digress from these I touch,
And seek to store thy soul with better treasures?
Those secret graces which the heavens impart
To such as be upright, and true of heart.
Where zeal, grace, faith, love, hope and piety,
Concur in one to make a blessed soul;
Where temperance, bounty, and humility,
Do all foul Vice, and errors false control:
Where her renowned hospitality,
Makes her most happy, joined with charity.
Where with that worthy Captain well she speeds,
Nor fears she death, that freely is forgiven;
Her prayers, gifts, rewards, and almesdeeds,
Are now remembered in the sight of heaven:
Where she does hear the voice of him she loved,
Which has her faith through such affliction proved.
And where her works, and deeds, and virtues all,
Attends her after this expired breath,
And did not suffer her great name to fall
Into oblivion, by forgetful death:
But breaks those prison doors, and sweetly sings,
Hell, where is thy victory? Death, where is thy sting?
Thou fore-decreed by that eternal doom,
A sacred vessel of most free election,
A mark of piety to the times to come,
Sealed with heavens finger at thy first conception:
Graced with his grace, which does all grace secure,
Which time consumes not, but does still endure.
Look when as Tytan from his scarlet bed
Does rise, and all thick vapors drive away,
And all the curtains of the heavens are spread,
Without a cloud to blemish any way,
Where that bright frame to mortals does appear
Most wondrous calm, most perfect, fair and clear.
Even so this rising Sun of honor shines,
The hopeful sign of a most glorious day,
And all the graces firmly so combines,
That mists, nor clouds, nor vapors can dismay:
This fair vnblemish'd frame keeps still true honor,
Which Time, Death, Fortune, never shall take from her.
What man so great in pomp and earthly glory,
That hunts full cry with hungry breath for fame,
Can write ensuing sins a fairer story,
Or win more honor, or a grater name:
Or graces be with more deserts and praise,
Then she had been so truly all her days.
Those that in the full circuit ride of pride,
Lived in a world of eyes for to behold them:
Had what this earth could grace them with beside,
And at the highest rise of fame has sold them:
Made all their words and deeds like Herod's then,
Which cried the voice of God, and not of men.
Yet in the midst of all their pride deceived,
Have brought their honor to untimely ends,
And of their golden hopes have been bereaved,
Which with the world would die such mighty friends.
Their mistress with vae vobis leaves them all,
When they do least dream, and suspect to fall.
But they which build their house one virtues ground,
And lead that life which thou before have done,
No age no fortune ever shall confound,
Their honors when their natural glass is run,
But they shall flourish fair and still survive.
Death takes not them like those which dye, alive.
Thus having loosed these earthly fetters here,
That heavy bondage worse then Egipts thrall,
And overcome by faith those doubts and fears,
Which greues the best, and does in question call,
Our lives and deeds with many frailties shaken:
How shall we stand when such strict reckonings taken?
But fly to the heavens true and only son,
Dear Savior and redeemer whose strong might,
Di'dst that huge black internal host overcome,
And put those powers, and enemies all to flight.
That conquerest quite, hell, satan, death, and sin,
Which none before, nor since could ever win.
And open sets the door t'eternall life,
Freed us from all our enemies by thy death;
Although we suffer toil, cares, grief, and strife,
Within our selves during this mortal breath:
Yet when thou think good thou will enlarge us,
And of our weary, heavy load discharge us.
Whereof being freed, and set at liberty,
Thou endless joys for ending grief imbracest,
And di'st no more but live eternally,
With him from whom thou have been ever graced,
Where now enjoying what thou wantedst here,
Thou sing'st Halluiah with that heavenly quire.
Where, now unto that glory I will leave thee,
That true felicity, and eternal rest,
Which like to earthly joys, will not deceive thee,
But still endure effectual and ere blessed,
Triumphing with those Saints which ever sings,
All praise and glory to the King of Kings.
Here noble Lord some virtues of your own,
May in this dark, and little glass appear,
Or of that seed which you your self are sown,
Which cannot (like your honors) shine so clear,
Yet may you see some shadow of your favor,
If that you truly do but read my labor.
For in this little book I have not erred,
Although her honors worth I could not weild,
Nor vice before true virtue have preferred,
Nor yet on such false slipperie grounds do build,
As grace a sin by a dissembling tongue,
To do the best, and noblest natures wrong.
No let me never rise but rather fall,
If lower then I am I can descend,
When ever I take vices part at all,
Or aim at any such vain hopes or end,
But rather study virtuously to please,
Then have my duty sick of that disease.
No, worthy Lord, I Will never sell my self,
Though I should be far poorer then I am,
By unjust means to purchase worldly pelf,
As sooth up folly in the greatest man:
That gain is loss, that glory turns to shame,
Which branded is with Gnato's flattering name.
Then let not honor judge my lives amiss,
Although your judgment far extends my verse,
My duty's true, and so shall prove by this,
Which I unworthy far, have here rehearst:
If I in ought through weakness have offended,
Let greatness by their fair acceptance mend it.
For I do know two noble natures springing,
From one pure fountain cannot be divided;
What wrong to her, to you some blot is bringing,
Which cannot be but by your worth decided:
For you that do succeed her room and place,
Are heir unto her virtues and her grace.
Whose fair example happy you may prove,
And like a greater light the lesser guide,
Adorned with honor, glory, grace and love,
And blessed with all these earthly things beside:
That wanting naught to fill up eithers store,
Your honor still may flourish more and more.
Who takes a pattern of his glorious maker,
And seeks to tread the tract of honor true,
Cannot at first be made a full partaker
Of all those rich demeanes, to honor due:
Such fair examples must have time and space
To overtake them, it is no common race.
Which she, true virtues pattern, left behind,
Much like a marble pillar vnremou'd,
Such tokens of her honorable mind,
As make her here generally beloved:
Whereof when you shall take a fuller view,
Shall find those honors fall to the house and you.
Where I do pray that heavens would grace it still,
With as great honor as it had before;
Or greater, if it be his blessed will,
Until the surges ouerflow the shore:
That Wentworths noble race with Cheauies name,
May be inrol'd in everlasting fame.
And you, fair Lady, graced with Natures gifts,
And with a spirit that has true virtue in it;
Which my dejected Muse from sorrows lifts,
And has more power, then others have to win it:
Bound with a duty which must not be broken,
Given at my first conception for a token.
You the true Image of that Lady great,
For virtue and an honorable mind,
Of whom for your fair worth I would entreat,
More then affection does in others bind:
To whom I owe more then you deigne to crave,
Love, service, duty, life and all I have.
A present all too mean if 'twere far better,
In one whom meandness, meandness does excel,
To whom I must and will remain a debtor;
A debtor great, how great I cannot tell:
Whose many favors showed to friends and me,
Lies hid within, that cannot uttered be.
What shall I give, that nothing have to pay,
The widows mite will not pass current now,
That metall's grown naught with us now adays,
Nor is it for true current pay allowed.
Yet where there is nothing to be had you find,
Accept, good Lady, of a grateful mind.
This work to your pure mind I do present,
This honors prize unto thy Judgment sound;
Where if for any fault I should be shent,
Let some defense in thee be had and found:
Lest if some tempest should arise too fast,
I should be shiprack'd, or in danger cast.
For well I know you loved her honor living,
Entirely so, as pen cannot declare,
And after death in true affections giving,
Did love and zeal still to her honor bear:
Then for her sake let these some favor find,
That was her self so courteous, free and kind.
Good Lady, which her life have seen and known,
And all her virtues and her honors proved,
To whom her thoughts, and counsels all were shown,
So much was you, and she of you beloved:
Can better tell what store of virtues lie
Hid in her breast, which no man can descrie.
I do but add a drop unto the sea,
For who can comprehend in any bounds
Her honor it is but labor cast away,
To find out that, which is not to be found:
But as a spark is to a mighty fire,
So must I yield and value my desire.
And though her modest blushes will not let her,
Her virtues prize, nor take what is her own,
Nor with that true deserving praise beset her,
Which to the world is blazed so much and known:
Yet shall her virtues in their force abide,
Which through her modest veil she sought to hide.
For what can heart desire, she has not found?
If wealth or riches she has not least store,
If fame or praise, her name with that does sound,
If honor, who, for her estate, had more?
If with long life, or length of days and time,
Who longer lived, whose honor more did shine?
If with the gifts or graces of the mind,
Who with her almost now may well compare,
Or has had more, or better been inclinde,
Which kept her virtues with the fairest fair:
And like that praise, which Scriptures David gave,
Brought good old age and honor to her grave?
Thus in this little volume may you read,
Some virtues of her honorable mind,
Some of her merits, worthy parts and deeds,
For all it is impossible to find
Unless that I should out of nature dwell,
And learn such notes, which humane notes excel.
Thus hoping of your gracious censures all,
I leave ye to that everlasting bliss,
'Twas fate, not wit, which to this task did call
My meaner spirits, and raised my mind to this:
If ought miscaries blame not my intent,
For what is rudely sung, is better meant.
To which pure, sacred, blessed Trinity,
Which rules unseen all things for the best above us,
Those Persons three enclosed ith unity;
A wonder strange, yet not so strange to love us:
Being such sinners against his Laws rebelling,
Past all the tongues of men and Angels telling;
To him in all and unto all in one.
Be all praise, power and glory given alone.
FINIS.

