BREIFE MEDITATIONS OF the Most Holy SACRAMENT And of Preparation, for Receuing
the same.

And of some other things apertaining to the greatness and devotion of so
worthy a Mystery.

COMPOSED in Italian By the REV. FATHER LVCA PINELLI of the Society of JESUS.

A BRIEF TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
OF the Institution of the most holy Sacrament. Cap. 1 OF the excellency and
dignity of the Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 2 Of the wonderfulnes of the Blessed
Sacrament. Cap. 3 Of the Effects of this most Glorious Sacrament. Cap. 4 Of
three diverse manners of receiving the Blessed Sacrament. A Dialogne betwixt man
and his soul. When Christ did communicate his Apostles. Cap. 5 A meditation
divided in to two parts upon the antiphona of the Church O Sacrum conuiuium.
Cap. 6 Of the end which should move us to receive the Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 7
A Spiritual exercise for preparation unto the Blessed Sacrament when we go to
the Church Cap. 8 When we remain ready to receue the Blessed Sacrament Cap. 9
Upon the preparation which Saint Paul teaches us. 1. Cor. 11
Cap. 10 Of the devout soul favored by Christ in his last supper. Cap. 11 Of
the hestory of zacheus. Luc. 16.
Cap. 12 Upon those words of the Himne. Mors est malis vita bonis. etc. Cap.
13 Upon those words of the Himne. Ecce panis Angeloru^ etc. Cap. 14 Of
freque^ting the B. Sacrament. Cap. 15 Of the same Cap. 16 Of the same Cap. 17
Of the same Cap. 18 Upon some defects which hinder the frut of the B.
Sacrament. Ca 19 Of the holy Sacrament when it is to be given unto the sick
for his viaticum. Cap. 20 A Dialogue betwixt a worlding and a spiritual man,
co^ncerning the most Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 21 Of spiritual receiving. Cap.
22 Of seven principal figures which prefigured the most holy Sacrament. Cap.
23 Of the reverence and devotion which Saints have used toward this most
divine Sacrament. Cap. 24 Of diverse fruits of this Blessed Sacrament. Cap. 25
Of reuerentiall fear which ought to he had of this Blessed Sacrament Cap. 26
Certain Miracles of this most holy Sacrament gathered forth of approved
authors. Cap. 27 An admonition to the Christ a^ Reader. Cap. 28 Himnes gathered
out of S. Thomas de Aquino Opusculo. C. 29 Remembrances of mother Teresa de
Giesu, foundres of the barefoot Carmelitan Nuns.
TO THE DEVOVT READER.
THIS Sacrament of the most Blessed body and blood of our Lord devout reader
being the Sacrament of love and for love left unto us of our most louinge
Savior: for avoiding of vngratfulnes, it is very requisite that it should be
received and administered with love: we having in this life no other thing to
reco^pense the love which Christ our Savior has evidently showed unto us by
instituting for our commodity so most lovely a Sacrament, saving love,
whereof god has made us masters and Lords, seeing that we have Power to place
it where it best pleases us. Wherefore as Christ giving him self unto us for
meat, does give us that which is his own; and likewise the most precious
Jewel which he has, even so by giuinge our love unto Almighty GOD, we give
unto him that which is our own and that which is the cheifest tresure which we
have. From hence it comes to pass that God worthily makes more account of
this only thing then of all other things in the world: And this is that
which he requires of us when he says, Praebe, Prouer. 23.
fili mi cor tuum mihi. Give unto me (my son) thy heart. that is, love, which
is thine own. But consider here the maruailous skill and art of our most
liberal Jesus, who for to give unto thee, the greatest perfection which can be
given unto any creature, which consists in the perfect union with his
creator, gives thee this most precious Sacrament, and requires at thy hands
noe other thing but love, for since that it is the property of love to
transform the lover into that which he loves; which is Almighty God: And
being moreover the property of this heavenly Sacrament, as divine meat which
conuerteth into it self him which eats it to unite us with God him self, it
consequently follows that this Sacrament and our love being after this manner
conjoined to gither does unite us with Almighty God and makes us one soul
and one heart with him. But because that man's will is not moved to love, if his
understanding does not represe^t unto him a worthy object, and the obligation
which binds him to love the same: for this respect I have composed this little
book, which shall give thee occasion to know the greatness of the gift which
Christ Jesus has bestoed upon thee in leaving unto thee this most maruelos
Sacrament it will also declare the obligation whereby thou stand bound to
love the gift to gither with the giver: and this is that which chiefly I desire
to the greater glory of our common Lord in this my little work. Therefore I
beseech the divine goodness as he has prevented us with so amiable a gift so to
grant us virtue to receive it worthily and to the salvation of our souls.
Amen.

THE FIRST MEDITATION
OF the institution of the most holy Sacrament. CHAP. I.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how our Savior instituting for us this most maruailous Sacrament
declared the cordial charity which he had toward us, for that he could not
give us any thing more great or more precious; as S. John most plainly
signifies saying. Cum dilexisset suos, Joan. 13.
qui erant in mundo in finem dilexit cos.

2 Consider how that Christ instituted this most loving Sacrament wha^ he was
to pass from this world unto his eternal father, hereby to leave us a lively
memory of his passion, suffered for us, which should inflame our hearts with
love toward him.

3 Consider that which S. Chrysostom affirms, saying, that our Savior in
the institution of this divine Sacrament showed his desire to make us one
thing with him self, for that is such a kind of meat, that it conuerteth
into it self all those which worthily eat the same. Luc. 22. Mar. 26.


4 Consider finally how that when as the Jews prepared cords and the Cross
to bind and torment our redeemer, and Judas went about this treason to deliver
our Savior into the hands of his enemies then did he institute this most
gracious Sacrament to bind us with the chains of love.

The Fruit.
The friut which ought to be gathered by this meditation is that the person
which meditateth, should use acts of love: rendering unto Christ, who has
prevented us with such love, as to feed us with him self in this heavenly
Sacrament.

A discourse in manner of a spiritual speech
Is it possible my sweet Jesus, that love toward us has brought you to
this, that being King of eternal glory and creator of the universal world
you would vouchsafe to become meat for your vile and base creature. O love;
exceeding great is thy force: I thought that the wise man had spoken
sufficientlye enough of thy force and power when as he said Fortis est vt
mors dilectio. Cant. 8.
Love is as strong as death. But now I see full well that of thy force may be
spoken much more; for that thy sharp and swift arrows passed through the high
heavens and arrived unto the very breast of Almighty God, whither the persing
darts of death could never come nor approach any thing near. And not
contenting thy self herewith thou woundest the heart of the lover in such
sort, that thou make him to do what thou list and by transforming him into
the thing which he loves, thou do not only separate him from all created
things as death does: but also from him self. It would have been sufficient
enough my creator that thou should have been given unto us, for our Lord and
our God, which thing your holy Prophet accounted for a great blessedness when
he said Beatus populus cuius Dominus de us eius. Psalm. 148
Blessed is the people whose Lord is God. But love has farther enforced thee
to do those things which human wisdom cannot comprehend. It is verily most
true that thou being the God of majesty, Infinite and Immortal, wast made
man, not only to suffer and die for us, but farther to feed our souls with
thy most pure and sacred flesh. Thanked be love which could so prudently
find out this maruailous means. Let therefore worldly wisme^ go and masure
with their small understanding the infinitnes of this divine love. Luc. 10
wherefore (my Lord) with very great reason Abscondisti haec a sapientibus, and
prudentibus, and reuelasti ea paruulis: Thou have hidden these things from
wise and prudent men, and have revealed the^ unto little ons. But yet I cannot o
my Savior but remain altogether amassed with the mighty boldenes of this your
love, since that, at the very time when as the torrents of your tribulation
were so maruilously increased, Luc. 22.
that the only thinking thereof in the garden made you to swet blood: it made
you so forgetful of your self and of the torments which were prepared for you
that you thought only how to provide for us this most divine meat. O most
loving Jesus, full well is it written of this your charity. Aquae multae non
potuerunt extinguere charitatem, Cant. 8.
nec flumina obruent illam. The great waters of your passion, and the fludes
of your greiues could not hinder your charity from bestoing upon us, this so
precious and so singular a gift. O my soul, 4. Reg.
the Prophet Elizeus made great account of the cloak which Elias his master
at his departure leaft him, with the which he divided the waters of Iordaine
and passed through them dry shodd: The Lord and God of Elias, being to pass
from this world unto his Father, has left thee not a garment, but his most
sacred body: to thentent he might be thy companion in this painful pilgrimage,
thy comfort in tribulation, and a most wholesome meat in spiritual life. Judge
now therefore what accounte thou ought to make, and with how great devotion
thou ought to receive him: Pray therefore unto this thy most liberal
benefactor that the same may not happen unto thee, which happened unto the
people of Israel to whom Jesus our Savior was given for a master and a
guide, but they making noe account of so worthy a guide nor yet of his heavenly
doctrine, remained still with the veale of ignorance over their eyes, and that
which is worse, adjoined unto their blindness the vice of ingratitude.

THE SECOND MEDITATION.
OF the excellency and dignity of the Blessed Sacrament. CHAP. II.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how this most venerable Sacrament is the beginning of all grace and
heavenly gifts; for that in it self it contains Christ, from who^ as from
the lively frountaine is derived al grace and al holiness which can be found in
the other Sacraments and in the wholle Church.

2 The great miracles wrought by this misterious Sacrament, and the severe
chastismentes where with God has punished those which unworthily hanled it; do
euedently declare the great dignity thereof.

3 Consider how to receive the other Sacraments, it is sufficient to have
contrition, that there may be no let or hendrance of the grace which they
confer: But to receive this Sacrament (after that one has fallen into
mortal sin) besides sorrow and reverence, is required another Sacrament, that
is, of Confession which is an euedent sign of the greatness thereof.

4 Finally the magnifice^ce where with the Church keeps the sacred Eucharist,
the solemn processions which are made when it is carried abroad, and the
faling down on their knees of all great Princes, at the only sight of this
mystical Sacrament; give great testimonies of the dignity and excellency
thereof.

The fruit.
That which is to be reaped by this meditation is devoutly to reverence, and
humbly to honor with affection of heart this so worthy and so excellent a
Sacrament not only with internal but also with external acts.

A discourse in manner of a spiritual speech.
REJOICE and be glad O holy Church, for this so precious a gift which from
heaven has dsce^ded unto thee, for so great and so worthy is this gift, that
nether in earth nor in heaven ca^ be any greter thing since that it contains
in it self him who^ the Apostle calls, Heb. 8.
Splendour gloriae Dei: the brightness of the glory of God, although hidden and
covered for thy greater favor. Thou know very well that when Moses
descended from mount Sinay where he had talked with Almighty God, the sons
of Isralel could not speak with him for the brightness of his countina^ce: for
which cause the holy Scripture says that Posuit velamen super faciem suam:
Exodus 34.
He put a veale upon his face that thereby every one might speak and converse
with him. After this sort our heavenly Moses has done with us, who not
contenting him self with delivering of us from the hard servitude of Egypt,
has vealed and covered him self with the accidents and form of bread, that
by this means the brightness of his glory should nether fear us, nor make us
remain far of from him. O vnmesureable love, how much have thou prevailed
with my Lord. Thou holy Church have good reason to build rich Altars, to
erect goodly Tabernacles, and with many lights to honor this most holy and
reverend bread. Cloth therefore thy walls with precious tapestries, and make
great Pixes of silver and of gold for to keep and place the same: for since
that it is the rich Jewel of that ringe whereby thou art espoused unto
Almighty God; it is most fit and convenient that it should be adorned with
allkind of rich and precious ornaments Albeit whatsoever thou art able to do,
it is all little or nothing in respect of the excelencie and merit thereof, yea
when thou shall have done as much as thou know, as much as thou can and as
much as thou would: thou shall never be able to add any one thing to the
greatness of this most glorious Sacrament the majesty thereof being such that
it rather gives others reputation then receaueth any from others: wherefore by
it and by the presence thereof, Preistes, Alters, Tabernacles, and Pixes
remain honored and sanctified And no marvel at all, since that it contains
in it self, him who has created the Universal world, from whom the Angels
have had their being, who is the infinite sea of all perfection and so mighty
and so great, that he infinitely surpasses all humane capacity. Psalm. 144.
After this sort the Prophet understands him when he says Magnus Dominus
and magnitudinis eius non est finis There is no limitts or terms to the
greatness of Almighty God and therefore we can not add unto him any perfection
at all. And this is the cause my soul, that with the consideration of the
excellency of this most mar uailous Sacrament, the eyes of man's mind are
dimmed and daseled, wherefore now, thou have no more to marvel at the great
gifts which king Assuerus bestowed (after that he was married) upon Hester,
Hest. 2.
because they were earthly gifts which gave noe life of spirit. But rather
marvel still at the most precious gift, which God has given unto his
millitante Church, after that he was espoused unto the human nature, for this
is a heavenly gift, of infinite valeur, and gives eternal life to those which
worthily receive it. Alas (my Lord) that for to bestow a gift on us
conformable unto your magnificence, you have bound us in such sort: that
unless your self help and succor us, we shall remain ungrateful and
co^fused. I know very well (my Lord) that it is not your custom to confound
those which desire to serve you, with sincere love; grant me therefore I
beseech you that being helped with your grace I may always herafter love and
serve you.

THE THIRD MEDITATION.
Of the wonderfulnes of the most holy Sacrament. CHAP. III.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER the maruailous wisdom of our Savior, who determining to become
our food and knowing how nature abhors to eat human flesh and to drink
man's blood; he left him self under the forms of bread and wine, which are the
common nourishments and grateful unto every one.

2 Consider afterward the infinite goodness of Christ Jesus, who communicating
him self unto us, under the forms of bred and wine, does give us cause of
merit, for if Christ our Savior should be seen in the sacred host, our
merit would cease: but not seeing him, we exercise our faith, which increasing
in us by multiplying of acts, makes us to increase likewise in grace, and for
to merit greater glory.

3 Consider farther, the great power which Christ our Savior has showed in
this most maruai lous Sacrament, since that by the force of those few words
of Consecration, our Savior coming into the Host, their altogether presently
cease the substance of bread, and the accidents which we see and touch above
all order of nature are sustained by them selves.

4 Consider how this heavenly meat is not converted and changed into the
substance of him which eats it, as naturally it happens unto other meats;
but it conuerteth us into it self, wherefore because it is a Divine kind of
meat, it likewise makes us divine and the sons of God.

5. Consider how other meats only sustain the Body, but this meat nourishes
the soul in spiritual life. Moreover when it is received, it is al received,
and vet it is not consumed, nor never fails as other meat does: and one
receaueth as much as a thousand.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this Meditation, is to remain with admiration, that GOD moved
with pure love, has given unto us his ungrateful creatures such a worthy
Sacrament: and to be confounded for that we have neither been answerable unto
the gift, nor yet the love wherewith our Savior has bestowed it upon us.

A spiritual speech.
It cannot be denied (my Lord) but that the great workmanship of this huge
world, by your omnipote^cie produced of nothing, is a marvelous thing. And
more over I confess that the composition of man is a most rare and wonderful
matter, since that in him your divine wisdom has so included all other
creatures, that with good reason, man is called of the wise and learned, a
little world. And yet ADAM was not God, and the world is neither God, nor man.
But that which you have given me in this little HOST, is both God and man
together. Trewly a most marvelous work. O wonder, above all wonders, how
well art thou in few words comprehended of the holy Prophet when he say eth.
Psalm. 110.
Memoriam fecit mirabilitu^ suoru^ misericons and miserator Do^ninus ^scam
dedit timentibus se. this meat which our Lord has given unto those which
fear him, is a remembrance and a brief of all his marvelous works. I will
say more then this, my Lord, when as with admazement unto the Angels you
Clothed your self with our flesh, You wrought surely a great and marvelous
work; but this misterious meat far exceeds that other work; for that in
your incarnation your Apostle says, Heb. 2
that Semen Abrahae apprehe^disti you took humane nature mortal and passible,
and united the same to your self. But when I communicate, I receive you my
Christ, true God and man, immortal and glorious, by means whereof you unite me,
or rather convert me into you. Hest. 15.
for the which very well agrees unto you the saying of Hester. Valde mirab
lises Domine and facies tua plena est gratiarum. O Lord thou art exceeding
maruailous, and thy Face is full of grace. Yet I will say more then this, when
as it pleased you my benign Jesus, to snffer and die upon the Cross for those
which most greeuouslye had offended your divine Majesty, with great reason you
made the Heavens to be amazed with your great humility, and immeasurable love;
but if for this respect, that work was maruailous and wonderful yet much more
marueilouse is this Divine Sacrament in the which you have showed more
profound humility, and more unmeasurable love: for that on the Cross once
only as the Apostle S. Paul says, Heb. 7 and 5
you offered up your self for sacrifice unto your heavenly Father, and for the
price and redemption of mankind: but in this celestial mystery, you offer and
give your self not once, but many times every day, not unto your celestial
Father, but unto ungrateful men; not for price and ransom, but for meat and
nourishment. Who therefore now sees not, that this work far excels the
other in wonderfulnes? O how well said King David Magnus es tu, Psa 85
and faciens mirabilia, tu es solus Deus, and non est similis tui Domine. You
only my Lord are great and in doing of marvelous works there is none like unto
you. Since therefore good Lord, it is proper unto you, to do great and
maruailous things, behold me a pore and weak creature, bring to pass I
most humble beseech you that I by means of this most glorious Sacrament,
become rich with your heavenly gifts, and strong in the adversity of this
life.

THE FOVRTH MEDITATION.
Of the effects of this most glorious Sacrament. CHAP. IIII.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how this glorious Sacrament does in such sort lighten manes
understanding that it makes him to know God, for which cause those tow
Disciples which went to Emaus, Luc. 24.
presently as soon as they had communicated, had as the sctipture says their
eres opened, and knew our Savior.

2 It remitteth venial sins, and as corporal nourishment, does restore that
which natural heat has cousnmed; so this heavenly nourishment renews that
which the soul has lost by sinning venially through the heat of
concupiscence.

3 It conioineth us with Christ our head, and with our neighbors which are his
members, mouinge us to love them as we ought for this respect it has been
called of the holy fathers the Sacrament of union, and of charity and therefore
S. Augustine affirms that for this, it was instituted under the forms of
bread and wine, that as bread is made of many corns of wheat, so this
Sacrament of many hearts makes one will.

4 It gives us force to walk well in this dangerous pilgrimage: and for this
cause it is called our viaticum our voiages provision. It helps us likewise
to gain eternal felicity, Joan. 6.
and there fore our Savior says He that eats my flesh has life everlasting.

The fruit.
The profit of this. 4. Meditation shall be to desire with our whole heart, and to
procure most efectually a good disposition to be made partakers of the worthy
effcts of this most wholesome Sacrament, and to pray unto God to make us worthy
thereof. Adnotations.

Of three manners of receauiug the blessed Sacrament and of the fruit which is
received by every one of these. Taken out of S. Thomas De Aquino. Opusculo. 58.
cap. 17.18.19. Of che which the holy Council of Trent likewise entreats. ses.
13. cap. 8.
1 SOME communicating do receive only the Sacrament these are notorious
sinners, who receuinge the Most Holy Sacrament vnwhorthely, not only receue not
any of the most holso^ effects thereof but) as the Appostle well says)
Iudicium Sibimanducant. Cor. 11.
that is, they make them selves whorthy of Damnation this also the Church
signifies when as in her Hunne she says Mors est malis, vita bonis. that is
the Sacrament is life unto the good, and death unto sinners: I here call al
those sinners which having their conscience defiled with mortal sin, are not
confessed, when as they may; or are excommunicated, or else do receive for some
evil intention.

2 There are others which communicate spiritually, and these are such, as with
a lively faith do believe that in the consecrated Host, is our Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore they desire to be united with him, and so they
communicate with affection and desire preparing them selves unto this
spiritual receiving with humility and dtuotio^ such as these, receive not all
the effects of this Sacrament, but some part of them.

3 Others finally, being well prepared, and beawtifully adorned with the
wedding garment of charity, and purity, do not only communicate spiritually
with desire, but also Sacramentally, by receiving the most sacred body of our
Lord. And these together with the Sacrament receue all the effects thereof
conformably unto their preparation, the which look how much greater it is, so
much more capeable the soul is made, of the virtue, gifts, and graces which
this Sacrament gives and conferreth. this Almighty God does signifi when as by
his holy Prophet he says, Dilata os tuum et implebo illud. Open wide the
mouth of thy soul and I will fill and replenish it.

A spiritual speech in manner of a Dialogue, betwixt man and his Soul.
MAN. It is true my soul, that this sacred meat is given thee of our most
loving Jesus, but tell me trewly, what help can meat do unto a dead man,
albeit that it were very precious?

SOVLE. Nothing. M. and therefore the holy Sacrament willnot help thee if thou
shall be dead S. It is true, but how can I die being immortal? M. True it is,
that thou can not die of corporal death, as brute beasts do die, but thou
may die by spiritu all death which consists in the separation of the grace
of God from the soul as corporal death consists in the separation or the
soul from the body: S. Then does the grace of God give life unto the soul?
M. Noeorherwise then the soul gives life unto the body. S. And what can
deprive the soul from grace which is her life? M. Mortal sin, Ezech. Cap. 18.
wherefore the Prophet Ezechiel says Anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morie tur.
The soul which sins shall die. That is, shall be deprived of grace. S. From
whence has sin such power? M. From the ordination of Allmighty God, for that
the soul consentinge unto Mortal sin, rebelleth a against God. And therefore
as a rebel is justly deprived of his goods, so the soul by sinning comes
to be deprived of grace which is an inestimable good given unto the soul by
Almighty God. S. If therefore to receive the effects of this Heavenly meat,
it is necessary, that the soul live in grace, this SACRAMENT does not revive
the soul by raysinge it from death to life. M. Ordinarily noc; but being
spiritual meat, it presupposes spiritual life, and being receued by the
soul it nourishes it and prescrueth it from vice. S. But tell me I pray you,
what is convenient to be don for to taste this facred meat, and to be made
partaker of the worthy effects thereof? M. First it is necessary to be hungrye
because our Lord Animan esurient em satiat bonis, Psalm. 106
will fill the hungry soul with good things: and afterward with
contemplation to ruminat and chewe this celestial meat, considering the
greatness and excellency thereof. S. Alas, that the poison of pleasures and
delights have clean taken away my taste, Alas, that the vanities of the world
do so occupy and possess my heart, that they neither suffer me to taste, uor
yet to consider this most marvelous meat wretch that I am wretch that I am. M.
Let us torn our selves my soul, unto him who is able for to healpe us. To my
Most mrcifull JESUS, who will draw forth from this my poor soul all deadly
poison, to thend that I remain not deprived of the taste, and of the effects
of so wholesome a SACARMENT? who will prepare for me this Notable Medicine? O my
LORD I will noe other healpe but you, since that your heavenly Father has sent
you from heaven to be our Physician. O holy King David, how much more great
is our favor then thine: when thou were poisoned with thy aduoutrie of
Bersabee, 1 Reg 11. and 12
and with the death of Vrias her husband, Nathan the Prophet was sent unto thee
for to draw forth from thy soul that poison: but unto us comes the Lord of
al Prophets, who for the exceeding love which he bears unto us, has
vouchsafed to be both our Physician and our medicine. Praise and glory be
therefore unto thee my benign Jesus, and since that thou art a Physician noe
less potent then loving: I hnmbly pray thee that by this sacred medicin of the
blessed Sacrament thou will make me become an other David, conformable unto thy
heart. O heavenly father, the flesh of the first Adam, is such, that being
united with the soul, it in fecteth and impoisoneth the same bring to pass I
beseech thee, that the life of the second Adam Christ our savior being united
with my soul may both heal purge and purify the same, this flesh being
without all comparison more potent and mighty then the other. Grant me I be
seech thee O Lord, that as man being united with old Adam by means of his
corrupted flesh is partaker of all his euells; so I being united unto Christ by
the new Adams means of his sacred flesh may be made partaker of the grace and
good nes of Christ. Amen.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION.
When Christ did communicate his Appostles CHAP. V.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how Jesus, foreseeing the tribulations of the Apostels in his
passion; to comfort and strengthen them determined to give the^ the blessed
Sacrament by the virtue where of they should receive help and consolation.

2 Consider how our Lord for the better disposing of the Apostles to receive
worthily such a Sacrament. Joan 13.
firs washed their feet and afterward exhorted them unto humility and
charity, for that, the filthiness of the flesh, pride of heart, and hatred of
others, are deadly enemies unto this divine mystery.

3 Consider the wonderful joy and gladness of the Apostles, who having hard
the magnificencie of this Sacrament and that they were to be the first tasters
thereof, by thinking of this most special favor, never granted before to any
of the Saints nor yet to the Angels of heaven, they wonderfullye exulted in
spirit.

4 Contemplate with what devotion and tears, the Apostles received the blessed
Sacrament at our Saviors hands, Mat. 26
and how only Judas remained with his eyes dry with out tears and with his
heart wholly attentive to betray Chirst.

5 Contemplate the great amazement of the Angels, by seeing, the word
incarnate, their Lord and God, beginning to give himself unto man for meat.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this meditation, shall be: before thou receive the Blessed
SACRAMENT, humbly to beg at Gods hands, and diligently to procure chief
purity great humility and charity with thy neighbors, unto the which
virtues Christ exhorted the Apostles before he did communicate them.

A spiritual speech.
I confess my sweet Jesus that your love toward us, far excedeth the
limits and signs of all great charity, for that making noe account of the
torments hanging over your own head, you were wholly atte^tiue at your sacred
table, to comfort the Apostles, and us in their persons against the outrages of
our enemies. O how well may every one of us pronounce this saying of thy
Prophet: Parasti in conspectu meo mensam aduersus eos, Psa. 22
qui tribulant me. Thou have prepared a table against those which trouble me.
But if it be necessary (my Lord) to come unto this your table with clean
feet; who shall wash mine? who shall cleanse me from the filth of earthly
affections? which do not only defile my soul, but farther draw me downward:
Alas that neither man nor Angel is sifficient to make mundum, Job 14
de immundo conceptum semine, nisi^^tu qui soluses. You only my redeemer are
able to do this, to who^ the Father has given all power. Mat. 28
But poor and miserable, that I am, for that when you my Lord of your infinite
charity wash my feet, I want the water of tears which is very necessary for
such an effect: wherefore I shall be co^stained with sobbes and sithes to cry
out with the Prophet Hie remie. Hier. 9
Quis dabit capiti meo aqua^ et oculis meis fontem lachrimaru^? Who will give
water unto my head, and a fountain of tears unto my eyes? And when as you my
Lord moved with my cries, to co^passio^ will vouchsafe to strik the rock of my
hard heart to give me water of tears; how yet shall I presume, although I am
washed to approach unto this thy sacred table, for that when as Iosue co^ducted
the Arcke toward Iordaine, Iosue. 5
thou gave commandment that the sons of Israel should not a proch so
near unto the Arcke as to be within the space of. 2 thousand cubits of it
least thereby they should happen for to die, as in an other voyage it chanced
unto Oza who co^ing unto the Arc and houlding it with his hands fearing least
that it should fall down: 2. Reg. and
presently fell stark dead? which sudden action feared King David in such
sort, that he durst not to receive this Arcke of God into his house. And shall
I, who am not like David, agreeable unto the heart of God, presume to approach
unto this sacred table, in the which is that chief and supreme Lord for whose
honor and reverence the Arcke was made? How is it possible my sweet Jesus that
I should be so boulde as to touch thee with my sinful mouth, since that you
said unto your most dear Disciple Magdalene, Joan. 20
when she desired for to have touched you: Noli me tangere. Touch me not: And
shall I who as yet have shed no tears nor any precious ointment on your sacred
feet, not have been at the foot of your Cross on mount Caluerie nor at your
sepulcher with precious ointments, be so bold as to approach and come near
unto you? It will be greater security for me good Lord to stay still a while
until you shoot at me with one of your darts of love, that being wounded
there with, in manner of the heart, I may run unto you the fountain of life.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION.
Divided into two parts upon that Antheme of the Church. O Sacrum Conuiuium in
quo Christus sumitur, recolitur memoria passionis eius, men's impletur gratia,
and futurae gloriae nobis pignus datur. Taken out of S. Thomas Opusculo. 57.
CHAP. VI.
Points to meditate in the First part.
1 CONSIDER five special differences, betwixt this banquet of Christ and those
of the world all which are comprehended in the aforesaid Antheme. First the
banquets of the world are profane, in the which is given no sacred meat
neither are they commonly instituted either for the health of the soul or for
the glory of God: but this of Christ is called Sacru^ Conuiuium. In respect of
the holiness of the meat which sanctifies the soul, to the glory of God the
creator thereof.

2 In the banquets of the world is variety of meats, and the greter that the
diversity of meat is so much more sumptuous in the banquet, for that one
forte of meat not containing the taste and perfection of the others can not
content or satissie the guests: But in this sacred banquet, In quo Christus
Sumitur: In which Christ is received; is present one only kind of meat, which
is Christ Jesus, who because he is infinite, contains in him self all
perfection; and this alone is able to satissie and content man: A figure
whereof was Manna, the which had all kind of delight and all sweetness of taste.

3 In the banquets of the world men are accusto^med to talk not of death
neither of suffering travel and torments, but of joyful and cheerful matters.
In this Christ; Recolit ur memoria passionis eius: Is renewed the memory of
his Passion, and of the death of Christ suffered for our love and salvation.

4 Men's impletur gratia the mind is filled with grace. In this banquet of
Christ the soul is filled with grace, which brings salvation and increase of
heavenly gifts; but in the banquets of the world the body is in such sort
filled with meats, that often times they bring diseases unto the body, and
spiritual damage unto the soul.

5 The banquets of the world by means of the great disorder and excess
which is used in them, send souls into hell and so they are as pledges of
eternal pains: But the sacred banquet of Christ, lays heaven open unto us,
being the pledge of eternal felicity: for which cause in the Antheme it is
said. Et futura gloria nobis pignus datur: The pledge of future glory is
given unto us.

Points to meditate upon the Second Part.
1 CONSIDER how loving Jesus is content that in this his holy banquet we do so
much as a guest invited by some Prince unto his banquet is accustomed to do:
for this guest be sides the desire which he has that the time of the banquet
should quickly come; endeavors to appear decently apparrelled, and comes
not with a full stomach, that he may better taste the meats: knowing well,
that it greatly pleases the feastemaker, when his guestes cate with good ap
etite those meats which he has prepared for them.

2 He takes dilligent heed not to do or say any thing which may offend the
Prince which has in uited him: and the banquet being ended: he goes not
presently away but accompanies the Prince some while in his conversation,
some times praising his great liberality, other-times the magnificence of the
banquet.

3 When he is to depart he thanketh again the Prince for this favor which
he has done him and heartily offers him self unto him to yealde him all
dewtifull service, If he therefore which co^municateth shall perform the like,
spiritually with Christ, who has invited him to this his sacred banquet: I
think that he shall satisfy in part his office and dewtie.

The Fruit.
The profit which may be reaped by this meditation, shall be to procure
gratefullnes toward such a liberal Lord, who honoreth us and bestows much
upon us, and little requires at our hands.

A discourse in manner of a Colloquium.
It is no marvel my Lord if the magnificencie of your sacred banquet do
make me remain amazed, since that the Prophet Esaias soreseeing it many ages be
fore as an shadoed picture stood astonished therewith, and in praisinge the
beawtifulnes thereof said: Facit Dominus exercituu^ omnibus populis in monte
hoc, Esa. 25
conuiuium ping uium. A great banquet shall this be, O holy Prophet because it
shall not be made by a mean person but by the Lord of Hoastes: and he will not
make it for some particular persons but for all the people of the whole world;
neither will he make it in every place, but in the mountain whereon shall
stand the Church of God which is Ciutt as supra montemposita, a city placed
upon a hill, Mat. 5
finally it shall be a banquet of fat things for Christ our Savior shall be the
meat who is anointed of the Holy Ghost. Rejoice and be glad therefore O
holy Church, because thou art that mountain of God, which he has chosen for
this divine banquete, in thy arms stands ready prepared this heavenly
table, and thy dear sons Sicut uouellae oliuarum in circuitu mensae tuae,
Psalm. 127
stand at this table in manner of new Olive plants, Rise up my soul and
spedely depart from the obscure valle of thy self, because our Lord upon the
mountain expects thee to come to his heavenly banquet, Exodus 9
not now thundering and lightining as he did in time past to the children of
Israel: but inuiting us to come unto him with most beninge and louinge words
saying: Mat. 18.
Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, and oneratiestis and egoreficia^ vos: Come
unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you Let us
therefore go securelye for that law is now noe more of force, which said,
Exe. 19
Qui tetigerit montem morte morietur: He which touches the mountain shall
die: but rather he which shall come unto this mountain and shall eat of this
holy banquet Viuet in aeternum shall live for ever. Joan. 6
But consider well my soul that not all can ascend but only as the Prophet
says, Innocens manibus and mundo cord, Psa. 23
there is need of the Innocence of life and purity of heart: this is the
wedding garment, where with we must be adorned in this sacred banquet of
Christ. Otherwise we shall hear these terrible and dreadefull words Ligatis
manibus, and pedibus eius mittite eum in tenibras exteriores. Mat. 22.
bind his hands and feet and cast him into vtterdarknes. Woe is me, my
Lord, that by living licentiously like an other prodigal son, I have
defiled and torn the garment of Innocence which I received in holy baptism,
Luc. 15
Alas if you help me not I can not appear at this your sacred banquet, what
shall I do good Lord if for my demerits and faults I shallbe rejected by
you? what shall I do? shame forbids me to come without apparel. Genesis 3
Shall I peradventure make me a garment of leaves as Adam did after he had lost
the garment of Innocence which God gave him? Alas, this will help me no more
then it did Adam him self who daringe not to appear before Almighty God with
this garment did hide him self: and if I hide my self, shall not I remain
deprived of your most wholesome banquet? To you therefore O father of mercy do I
convert my self: humbly confessinge that I have in such sort offended your
divine majesty that Non sumdignus vocari filius tuus I am not worthy to be
called your Son. Luc. 15
but having only trust in your infinite piety I humbly beseech you not to
regard my sins but the greatness of your accustomed mercy: I remember well
my Lord that the prodigal son, was not only received of his father but was
provided of a garment and adorned with a ring that thereby he might come unto
the banquet of the fat calfe provided for him.

THE SEVENTH MEDITATION.
Of the end and intent which should move us toreecaue the sacred Communion.
CHAP. VII.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how this most divine Sacrament, being instituted of Christ our
Savior as a medicine both to preserve us from evil, and like wise to nourish
our soul in spiritual life; it is very co^uement, that this self same as
the next and proper end do move us to Communicate which afterward we must
direct to the glory of God, as to the last end.

2 Consider how that which God chiefly intends by this spiritual
nourishment, is, that we by means of the holy Eucharist should be
transformed into him, living conformably unto his divine will, which is none
other but to have god to live in us

3 Consider the louinge desire which the father and the son have of our
salvation, and perfection: the father sent unto us his only begotten son, to
the intent that we should immitate him in humility, patience, obedience, in
contempt of the world The son left us this most louinge Sacrament. to help
us to obtain the a foresaid virtues, and to live as Christ lived: and this
ought to be the chief end and intent which should move us to communicate. The
fruit of this meditation shall be diligently to endeavor to trans form our
selves into God, by imitatinge the virtues and life of Christ: and this was the
meaning of Almighty God, when he said unto Moses. Exodus 23
Fac secundum exemplar quod tibi in monte monstratum est. do according unto
the example which I have showed thee in the mountain.

An Annotation. Of the end and intention which they ought to have, which do
communicate.
For to receive, to the intent that we may feel comfort and spiritual
sweetness, so that this be the principal end of our receiving: it is not well
because it proceeds of self love, yea, we should rather be moved with desire
to suffer with Christ, this Sacrament being a memory of his passion.

Neither is it well to receive principally for to obtain of god earthly
things, for this heavenly SACRAMENT being a spiritual food of our souls ought
not to be directed principally unto things of the earth, yet is it not
forbidden to demand of God some temporal benefit, and to receive with this
intention, conditionally, if it be for the best, and for the greater glory of
god

3 For to receive, thereby to be accounted spiritual, and to get the name of
a Saint: is very naught, for it were hypocrisy and an abuse and injury of so
great a Sacrament.

Of the good intentions and ends which may be pretended by those that receive.
Besides the proper end for which this Sacrament was instituted and for which
intent every one ought chiefly to receive this Blessed Sacrament: has been
already declared in the points of meditation: there be ten others are set
down of S. Bonauenture. Tom 7. in opusc. de Praeparatione ad Missam. cap 8.

1 We may communicate to obtain remission of our sins for that this
Sacrament is a most grateful sacrifice unto Almighty God, and a very
effectual mean to have our sins pardoned.

2 We may communicate to get remedy of our infirmities and weakness, that by
means of this holy medicine, we may be kept and preserved from all kind of
great evil.

To be delivered from any tribulation or tentation.

4 To impetrate and obtain some grace or spiritual benefit for that in this
holy Sacrament is he to whom the heavenly father denies nothing.

5 To thank God both for the temporal and spiritual benefits which he has
either bestowed upon our selves or upon any other: Psa. 115
and this is, Sacrificare hostium laudis and pro omnibus, quae retribuit nobis,
calicem salutaris accipere, to sacrifice unto God, the Host of praise, and in
lieu of all that which he has rendered unto us, to take the chalice of health
and salvation.

6 To help our neighbors as well dead as alive: To. 8.
for that he remains in this Sacrament. Qui interpellat pro nobis who prays
for us.

7 To praise and honor God and his Saints: this being the greatest and most
glorious sacrifice which may be.

8 For love and affection toward our Savior, that by receiving of him in this
blessed Sacrament we might familiarly converse with him.

9 For desire of increassing in grace because that the fountain of all grace
remains in this Blessed Sacrament.

10 To be united with Christ in such sort, that hereby we may be made all one
with him, and may be keept and preserved in his love for ever.

A Colloquium.
Very excessive is your love my sweet Savior, it had been sufficient enough
for us if you had provided us some good remedy and help by some one or other
of your creaturs, and we should have accounted the same for no small favor:
but this seemed not to satisfy and content your flagrant and inflamed
charity, and therefore you your self would be the medicine of our souls: for
which thing, very well is full filled in you the saying of the wise man. Amicus
fidelis medicamentum vitae, and immortalitatis, a faithful friend is a medicen
of life and immortality. Who is a more faithful friend then you? And what
medicine is of greater force and efficacy then this holy Sacrament which
gives life everlasting; but besides all this, you have showed ever great
kindenes in that you would that the effect thereof should greatly depend of us:
if corporal medicines should work co^formably unto the intent and desire of
sick and diseased parsons, they would bring forth great effects, and the
sick would be greatly behoulding and bound unto the composer and maker of
chem. How great then is our bond unto you, who with such infinite love have
provided for us such an effectual and wholesome medicine, that of it self it
is able to work much more the^ we can possibly wish or desire? O my Lord how
great is the difference betwixt the rules of human Philosophy, and between
the rules of your charity? What Philosopher of this world would have ever
spoken or thought, that God the king of majesty, and the immensible sea of all
perfection, would provide for his base and vile creature? What wise man of the
earth would have ever imagined that God the Lord of all glory would become
meat for man, that thereby he might unite man unto him? But your inestimable
charity thought and intended far otherwise. Rise up therefore my soul, and
now make an end of these thy mornefull tears: and lament noc more, thy baseness
and debilitie: for that three dear sisters our advocates, baue pleaded our
cause before Christ our Savior. Mercy has presented our infirmities and has
demanded help: Wisdom has found out the mean for to help us; Charity has
enforced Jesus our Savior to effect it, the manner is this, that by means of
this most potent Sacrament. Christ Jesus will so unite us with him self that
thereby we become all one with him, for to this end do we receive him. I most
humbly thank you our heavenly Adam; who have repaired that, which earthly Adam
destroyed, he with his meat made us to be alienated and to stand far of
from Almighty God. whereof did arise our baseness, infirmities and other
miseries: but you my sweet Savior by this celestial meat do reunite us with
God, from whence arises our nobility, our strengh and fortitude, and
spiritual gifts. I pray you therefore most beninge Jesus that, this union
may be so, and so sure that neither death nor life, nor tribulation nor any
creature may be able to separate me from you. Grant me good Lord, that I may
in such forte be united with you that I may glory with the Apostle and say:
Gal. 2
Vino aurem, ^am non ego, viuit vero in me Christus. I live not, but Christ
lives in me.

THE EIGHT MEDITATION.
A spiritual exercise to prepare our selves for receiving, when we go to the
Church. CHAP. VIII.
Points to meditate.
THAT day wherein thou determinest to communicate in the morning as soon as thou
wakest, think that our Savior with great desire expects thee in the
Church, that for to come and repose him self in thy soul, wherefore thou like
un to a spouse for to please him, ought to use more d^ligence in the inward
adorning of thy soul, where with he is well plea sed: then about the
external trimming of the body.

2 By the way as thou go unto the Church, consider what mirth and
cheerfulnes thy good Angel keeper feels seeing thee go to receive his and thy
Lord, and thou shall pray that he will help thee to receive himworthely.

3 Being entered in to the Church pray unto the Blessed Virgin, or to some
other thy devoted Saint, to accompany thee in receiving of Jesus thy Savior,
who will be thy guest.

4 As Soon as thou beginnest to see the Altar, where the Blessed SACRAMENT
remains make humble reverence there unto, with thy heart, and esteeming thy
self far unworthy of so great a majesty, Euc. 18
say with the Publican, Deus propitius esto mibi peccatori. God be merciful
unto me a sinner.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this eight meditation shall be to procure a spiritual reioicing in
thy soul, by cause thou art to receive thy heavenly spouse, for this kind of
rejoicing greatly pleases our Lord.

A Colloquium. Kneeling down before the Altar make this, or some such like
speech unto our Savior, before thou do communicate.
HOW great favor is this my beninge Jesus, which you now yeald me? Am not I
that miserable creature which so often and by so many means have most
impudently offended you? What goodness is there in me that with particular
inspirations you should draw me unto your sacred table, If David O Lord, made
lame Miphiboseth to come unto him, and would have him to eat at his Regal and
kingely table, 2. Reg. 3.
and to be used as a Kings son: because he was the son of Ionathas his
special friend, of whom David had received many benefits; But if you my Lord
behold me you shall find me lame, both hand and foot, having never done any
thing well and worthy of praise and if farther you consider my first father
Adam you shall find disobedience and rebellion; Now that you my sovereign
Lord, infinitely more wise and more mighty then ever king David was, make me
an ungrateful worm of the earth to come unto you, that I might be fed with
the most precious meat of your heavenly table, is a thing of such exceeding
greatenes, that it confounds me overmuch; for that I am not only unworthy
to approach nere unto your sacred Altar, but also worthily deserve to be
repelled far of from you, as one that is cold, and ungrateful behold O Lord
I am come to receive you in to the house of my soul. But O Alas, Solomon the
wise, having spent many years, and bestowed great charges in building up of
a most rich and sumptuous Temple, Marvelled much with him self, that the God
of majesty would vouchsafe to come and dwell therein, wherefore being amassed,
and as it were besides himself said Si enim caelum, and caeli caeloru^ te
capere non possunt, quanto magis domus haec, quam aedificaui? 3. Reg. 8
If heaven and the heaven of heavens can not comprehend you, how will this house
which I have builded for you upon earth, now, what shall I say who have
scarcely spent two hours to prepare my soul for you? O my Lord, since that it
pleases you to come and repose your self in the house of my soul, I humbly
beseech you to make my soul a house of prayer and consecrated to your heavenly
father, to thente^t you may repose therein, and I remain comforted: and singe
with the Prophet: Virga tua, and baculus tuus ipsa me consola ta sunt. Psa. 22.
your rod and your staff have comforted me.

THE NINTHE MEDITATION.
CHAP. IX. When we are ready to receive.
Points to meditate.
1 BEFORE that thou do communicate, consider well these words of the Blessed
Virgin, which she spoke unto the Angel when as the son of God was incarnate
in her. Luc. 10
Ecce Ancil la Domini fiat mihi secu^du^ verbu^ tuum. Behold the handmaid of
our Lord, be it done to me according to thy word. Since therefore that thou art
to receive the self same Son of God, thou ought to account thy self as a
servant, remembering well that the servant depends of his master desiring that
only which his master desires, and neither more nor less.

2 When as thou do communicate, think that even then, thy LORD does enter
into thy soul, to whom thou shall do all reverence by adoring of him as thy
God and most dear Master.

3 Consider afterward how thou art compassed round about with Angels, adoring
and doing chief reverence unto their Lord, who really remains under the form
of Bread which thou even then have received.

4 Finally think, that now thou art no more thine own, neither art thou to
use thy self as a thing of thine own but as a thing of Gods.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this Ninthe meditation shall be to make a firm purpose to be
faithful affectionate, and diligent toward God him self and likewise
toward all things which belong unto his divine majesty. For without those
qualities noe servant can be acceptable unto his Lord and master

A Colloquium,
O my Lord, how greatly have you humbled your self by coming unto the poor
house of my soul? it should have been sufficient enough for your love, Luc. 2
to cause you to be borne for me in a stable and not so often to make you enter
and repose in a stable. That you my beloved Jesus, would come down from
heaven to rest your self in the sacred womb of Blessed Marie. was not so
maruailous, because it was a virginlike womb and more pure then the most pure
Angels of heaven. Luc. 1
O holy Elizabeth thou being visited and saluted of the mother of this same
Lord considering her greatness criedst out saying Whence is this to me (or how
have I deserved this) that the mother of my Lord does come to me? And now what
shall I say to whom the king of Majesty infinitely more worth then Blessed
Marie is now come? and he is come not only to visit me but farther to unite me
to him self, and to enrich me with heavenly gifts and benefits. O my soul I
am glad that willingely thou have given unto Jesus the scepter and possession
of thy self But be thou well advised that by this self same act, thou have
bound thy self to make open war against all sin and iniquity for that
they are enemies of this thy Lord, to whom thou have given thy self; and
therefore thou canste not with out plain rebellion permite sin to have any
entrance into thy house now devoted and consecrated unto Christ. Be thou also
further advised, that it is not Convenient that thou which have eaten the bread
of Angels, 2. Par. 8.
should now any more eat the meat of beasts. Thou know full well, that
the wise king Solomon would not permit, that the daughter of Pharao (albeit
she was his wife) should dwell in the same house whereas remained the Arcke of
God, for that he accounted it for a very unseemly matter that a woman
descendinge from Gentills which were enemies unto God, should abide in place
whereas the Arcke of God had been. But how much more unworthy a thing is it that
sin should have any entrance into that place where is GOD him self, the Lord
of the Arcke? It was a special favor, O my soul, that our Lord would accept
thee for his servant, wherefore thou ought to enforce thy self to be most
diligent in his service, as he most worthily deserves: Call thy self to
remembrance, how the Patriarch Jacob, Genesis 29.
first served Laban seven years that he might have his daughter Rachel for his
wife and after that he had married her he served him other seven years, which
time seemed unto Jacob very short by means of the great love and affection
which he had unto Rachel his wife. Muchmore short and little ought that time
seem unto thee which thou spendest in the service of this thy Lord, and all
labors and trauells taken for his sake ought to be accounted as light and
easy since that he is infinitely more beautiful and amiable the^ any creture
whatsoever. Happy shall thou be my soul if thou may know what it is to
serve this master. Remember how that in times paste when as thou wickedly
waitedst upon this vain world thou were subject to diverse passions tossed
with many suspicions tormented with envious emulations and many sharp sour
and bitter morsels thou swallowedst up most gredelie: But now by the healpe of
this thy heavenly master which this morninge thou have received, thou may
easily tread under thy feet the vanities of this life, and become Lord and
ruler over all thy passions, yea also over the world since that Seruire
Deoregna re est to serve God is to be a King.

THE TENTH MEDITATION.
Of the preparation which Saint Paul teaches us 1. Cor. 11 CHAP. X.
Points to Meditate.
1 CONSIDER how the Apostle, requires, three things for preparation to
receiving The First is that every one should well examine his conscience before
he goes to communicate, 1. Cor. 88
and this is signified by these his words Probet autem seipsum homo and sic de
pane illo edat And if he find him self to be defiled with any Mortal sin;
let him before he receive go to confession and with tears of his heart cleanse
and purge his conscience.

2 The Appostle would have this sacred Communion to be received worthily,
otherwise he says Iudicium sibi manducat. That is to say, who soever without
humility, or with a guilty conscience, or with evil intention receaueth the
sacred body of our Lord, makes him self worthy of eternal damnation; and
this is signified in these words Qui manducat indigne, iudicium sibi manducat.

3 Finally S. Paul would, that he which co^municateth should make difference
betwixt this sacred table and other profane tables; betwixt this heavenly
meat and other common or ordinary meats; and this is to judge Corpus Domini
the Body of our Lord. For he which truly beliueth that in the sacred Hoaste
is really present Jesus our Savior true God and true man; will receive it with
all humility and reverence, and from his wholle heart will say with the good
Centurion: Mat. 8
Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum meum: Lord I am not worthy that
thou should enter into my house.

The fruit.
The fruit of this Tenth Meditation, shall be to make acts of contrition, and to
be often sorrowful even from the heart for all sins past, Psa. 50
Because Cor contritum and humiliatum Deus non desspiciet: God will not despise
a contrite and humble heart: And after this, with most affectuall desire to ask
of our Savior an exceeding purity, Crying with the Prophet: Cor mundum crea
in me Deus: Create in me (O God a new heart.

Annotations.
These three things which the Appostle requires for preparation unto the
sacred Communion, were trewly seen in the Prodigal son, when his father
received him, to the banquet of the fatt calfe. 1. First the prodigal son
examined him self, and perceauing his unhappy estate rose up sorrowful for
the errors which he had committed and of the bade life which he had lead went
to his Father, confessed his sin, and making promise to change his life and
to be obedient unto him, was reconciled unto his father, in which acts, is
very well designed confession.

2 He was newly appareled and adorned with a ringe, by these ornaments are
understood the (...) which are necessarielie ^^quired for thew orthie
recea^ing of the sacred Euchariste: as faith, love, humility and devotion.

3 He sat down at the table and eat of the fatt calfe, and knowing that it
was killed for his sake and that there was difference betwixt that table and
others.

Here, further it is to be noted that he which has committed a mortal sin,
must first be confessed before that he come to receive the most sacred body of
Christ, albeit he seem to him self to be contrite: And if any Preiste upon
urgent necessity should celebrate, not having made his confession before hand
for want of a confessor, he is bound afterward to go to confession as soon as
he can thus the holy Council of Trent has (...) dained and decreed. Sess. 13.
cap (...) And if any one presume to teach^^ preach, or obstinatly affirm or
publicklye disputing to defend the contrary he is excommunicated ipso facto
that is presently Idem Council. Trid. Sess. 13. can. 11 Moreover the holy
Roman Catholic Church has appointed for the great respect and reverence
which is to be had unto this so worthy a Sacrament, that who soever goes to
celebrate or to communicate, should be fasting that is should neither have
eaten or drunk since midnight last passed, so it is ordained De consecrat.
d^st. 2. Can. liquido unless it be some sick person when he receaueth this
Blessed Sacrament for his viaticum. De consecrat. did 2. can. Presbiter.

A Colloquium.
Although O Lord, your Appostle had never made mention of the purity of
conscience which the receauinge of this Blessed Sacrament requires, yet who
would not have judged that you the fountain of all purity and cleanenes ought
to be received with a pure and clean heart. If your most sacred body, Mat. 27
Luc. 23
albeit that it was then dead, was wrapped in a clean sheet and buried in a new
sepulcher, Joan. 19.
where in none before was ever buried: how much more now that your most holy
body is glorious, ought to be receued and placed in a clean and pure heart?
well was this signified by your prophet when as he said Lauabo inter
innocents manus meas: Psa. ^5
and circundabo Altar tuum Domine It be houeth us first, to wash our hands,
that is to cleanse away the faults of our evil works, and after this to
approach unto the Altar of God, to taste this heavenly bread But how little O
eternal father do you require at our hands the eatinge of the immaculate
Lamb, which you sent us from heaven to redeem us from the servitude of sin?
When the Jews were to eat the Pascall Lamb which was a shadow and figure of
this which lies hidden under the form of bread; were bound to provide a
Lamb, which should be but one year old, and without any spotte, to eat him
roasted, Exo. 12
and in have with unleavened bread, and with wild and bitter lettesse, with
their Loins girded, with shoes on their feet, and with a staff in their
hand. Alas how heavy and troublesome a yoke was this? S. Peter says that it
was such a one that Neque patres nostri, neque nos portare potuimus. Act. 15.
neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear. But in the law of grace
to eat the true Lamb, qui tollit peccata mundi, Joan. 1
which takes away the sins of the world, is required no more, but purity
of conscience and devotion of heart. O my beninge Jesus how true is that which
you said of this your law: Mat. 11
Iugum meum suaue est, and onus meum leave: My yoke is sweet and my burden light
yea it is so light and so sweet, Psa 39
that if it were not that Fingis laborem in praecepto, you feign labor in the
precept, as your Prophet says it would not deserve the name of burden nor of
yoke O my soul see how little thy Savior Christ has bound thee. unto, to
give thee in this life by means of the most venerable Sacrament, a bounda^ce
of grace and afterward to croune thee in Heaven with eternal Glory. Look
well therefore unto thy self, that our Lord having of his infinite goodness
made this inestimable gain so light and easy for thee, that by thine own
negligence i^turne not to thy eternal pain; weigh well that which thou have
in hand: Not to receive such a beninge Lord, who comes to replenish thee
with his heavenly gifts, is a great discourtesie unto him, and infinite
hindera^ce unto thy self: and to receive him vnworthiely through thy own
fault, and retch lesnes is to do unto him injury and to burden thy self
with pains. It will therefore be very good for thee: to do as the poor
Country man does when he understands that his King will come to lodge with
him in his house: This man with great carfulness does remove forth of his
little cottage all whatsoever may either hinder or offend his King; with great
diligence makes clean his house, and although he cannot possibly adorn it
conformablie unto the greatenes of his guest yet never thelesse he does do his
whole endeavor to receive him worthelie. After this with great haste, he goes
forth to meet his King; and having found him out, with all hearty affection
he thanketh him for this special favor, and with great cheerefullnes he
receueth him into his house: Now then if all this is to be done for an earthly
prince, what ought thou O my soul to do for the heavenly king, who
comes not to spend thy wealth but to bestow on thee his: Endeavor therefore
to the uttermost of thy power, to cle^se and dispose the house of thy heart, for
before he comes he will send his Harbenger with Princely furniture to
beautify and adorn the lodging, where he vouchsafes to rest, and that
coming he will say unto thee, Tota Pulchra es Amica mea, and macula non est in
te.

THE.XI. MEDITATION.
Of a devout person invited by Christ to his Last supper. CHAP. XI.
Points to meditate.
1 IMAGINE thy self to have been in the city of Jerusalem, when as Christ
our Savior instituted this precious Sacrament, and that he for a special
favor toward thee, would vouchsafe by some one of his Apostles to call thee
to be present at this so great a mystery: Now then consider what gladness thy
soul would have fealt and how willingly thou would have laid a side all
other business that thou might have gonne presently,

2 Imagine, that coming unto the sacred chamber; our Savior did presently
wash thy feet, and sheeding tears upon the^, said these words unto thee: I
do this to take away the offenses which thou have committed against thy
Creator, by walkinge in the wicked ways. I wash thee also that thou may
better dispatch the labors which thou shall undertake for my love by walkinge
in the way of spiritual life. Consider now what streams of tears thou
would then have powered forth, what great confusion thou would then have
had of thy self, and what courage would thou have had to fulfill always the
will of God for the rest of thy life.

3 Finally, Imagine, how afterward our Savior causes thee to sit down at
the table, and often turning unto thee those his loving eyes says these
words un to thee. I have prevented thee with so special favors, and I am
determined to bestow on thee far greater, it behooves thee therefore to
persevere in my love: Consider now what modesty, thou would then have used
at that sacred Table, with what settled attentio^ thou would then have
harkened unto those divine words of Christ Jesus, what firm pruposes thou
would then have made of execu^ing his counsels, and finally with what
devotion would thou then have received?

The fruit.
The fruit of this XI. Meditation shall be with thy wholle heart to thank our
Lord; and to pray him that he let thee not die ungrateful.

A Colloquium.
As with out all doubt my Lord, this would have been such a special favor,
and such exceeding love, that it might well have moved thy Angels with great
admiration and amazement. So it is very certain, that I should have remained
most bound, not only to walk in the ways of your commandments, and to
observe your holy counsels, but also for your sake, most willingly to spend
my life. But O my Lord, even then you should have given me no better meat nor
no greater gift, then that which you now give us in the Blessed Sacrament,
since that in this little consecrated Hoaste, which from your holy Altar is
given us, miraculously lies hidden your Divinity, your Soul, and your
humanity. If therefore the gift be the same, and from the greatness of the
gift, proceeds the greatness of our bonds and obligations, who sees not that
I am exceedingly bound un to you my Benefactour? And who sees not that I
should be very ungrateful and altogether sottish, if I should not acknowledge
so singular and notable a favor. Open wide thy self my heart, and show forth
this obligacion wherewith thou art bound to love thy loving Jesus. O my God how
different is the manner of your proceeding from that of worldly Princes; 4. Re.
20
King Ezechias to do great favor unto the Ambassadors of the king of
Babylon, Isa. 39.
showed them his riches and his treasors without giving them any part or
parcel thereof. But you (my Lord) do not content your self with bare shows,
but give most liberally not only your heavenly treasures but likewise your
self: O Love, Mat. 6.
O liberality; I see not, O my heart, how thou can in any wise be aunswerable
unto this inestimable favor. unless thou wholly give thy self to the love
of thy Creator, Luc. 16.
seeing that it is not possible for any on with love to serve two masters, as
it was not possible for the Idol of Dagon and for the Arck of God to remain
on foot in one Temple. 1. Reg. 5.
Resolve therefore, to whom thou will wholly give thy self, whether to Jesus
thy Savior, who has first given him self unto thee, being borne for thy
guide and companion and diing for thy ransom and redemption: who in this
sacred table gives unto thee him self for meat, and afterward in heaven
will give him self unto thee for reward: Or else altogether forgettinge this
great obligation thou will give thy self to the love of cretures? Alas thou
should be over much ungrateful unto thy God, and over hard would be thy
servitude besides the great loss which thou should sustain if by loving
any creature thou should make thy self subject thereunto. Remember my soul,
that we are created to love and serve God, Call to remembrance that by the
grace of our Savior, and by n^eanes of this heavenly meat we are made sons
of God, and partakers of his divinity, it is therefore against all reasone,
that thou should make thy self slave unto this vain world or settle thy
love upon any creature: since that no one of them nor yet all of them together,
are able to content thee, seek as much as thou list thou shall neuerfind any
thing that can satisfy thy desires, nor shall thy mind be ever quiet, unless
by love thou reposest thy self in him which has created thee.

THE.XII. MEDITATION.
Taken out of the History of Zacheus, Lucae, cap. 19. CHAP. XII.
Points to meditate.
The first part contains the history it self.
1 ZACHEVS being desirous to know Christ our Savior, when as he could not
for the multitude, because he was of a little stature; running before, he went
up into a Sycomore tree, that he might see him: because our Savior was to
pass thereby.

2 Christ passing by and lifting up his merciful eyes upon Zachaeus said unto
him, Come down in haste, because this day I will come unto thy house, Zacheus
therefore in haste came down and with great reioicing received Christ into his
house, accounting this a special favor.

3 When the Jews saw that Christ was go^ne in to the house of a siner, they
murmured; which Zacheus perceiving, he turned him self unto Christ and said
unto him: behoulde the half of my goods, Lord, I give to the poor, and if I
^ane defrauded any man of any thing I restore four fold as much, Jesus said
unto him, this day salvation is made to this house.

Points for the second part which contains the application hereof.
1 Who soever will be made partaker of the spiritual health and salvation which
this blessed Sacrament brings, it is necessary to desire to know and to
taste our Savior, who is in the Sacred Host: For to know him it is
necessary, first that we have our minds lifted up on high, considering the
greatness of God: Having for that time, all earthly things under our feet, as
Zacheus had, when he was upon the tree, that is, when we are to communicate, we
must diligently labor to have our worldly business under us, and not over our
heads to distract our devotion.

2 Secondly, we must receive our Savior, not with melancolines of mind, or
with affliction of scruples, but with cherfulnes as Zacheus did, which
proceeds from a loving affection toward this most blessed Sacrament.

3 Consider how it suffices not to receive our Savior into our house, and
afterward to remain with our hands in our bosom: but we must accompany our
receiving with good works, releeuinge the necessities of our neighbors as
Zacheus did: and who shall do after this manner, shall hear our Savior saying
un to him: Hodie salus domui huic facta est. This day salvation is made unto
this house.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this XII. Meditation, shall be to desire and ask at Gods hands
great affection toward this Blessed Sacrament, from the which springs forth
spiritual gladness very necessary for receiving.

A spiritual speech or Colloquiu^.
How liberal are you, O my benign Iesue, unto those which desire and seek
you, Zacheus desired you, but it was only that he might see you, and you did
not only show your self unto him, but farther you called him, you invited your
self unto his house to which, for a special favor you gave salvation: O how
well said the holy Prophet of you: Exultent and laetentur super te omnes
quaerentes te and dicant, Psa. 39
semper magnificetur Dominus, qui diligunt salutare tuu^. They may all exult
and rejoice who seek you, and do love your salvation. Thou have good reason O
Zacheus to rejoice, for that thou have receued him into thy house who reioiced
the verre Angels. Enjoy therefore thy gladness, and care not a whit although
the envious Jews do murmur and say, that thou art a sinner; since that he is
present with thee who is able to defend and justify thee; adioine thy self
unto him, and he will be thy buckler: and thou shall withal taste Quam suauis
est Dominus How sweet our Lord is. Psa. 33.
O my soul thou also have good cause to rejoice and happily more then Zacheus
had since that this morning the fountain of all true joy has come unto thee;
Zac. 9.
Hear that the Prophet Zachary says unto thee: Exulta a filia Sion, iubila
filia Jerusalem: Ecce rex tuus venit tibi iustus, and saluator. Rejoice O my
soul for that the king which is come unto thee this morning, is not come to
exact any tributs nor to impose any new taxes up on thee, but for to work thy
salvation and to defend thee from the force and fury of thy enemies: nor
think that greater favor was showed unto Zacheus then unto thee; for that by
receiving of thy Savior lyinge hidden under the accidents of bread, besides
the great merit of fatih which thereby thou receauest; he gives thee to
understand that he comes not only to converse with thee and to give thee
salvation as he did to Zacheus his hous-holde; but farther to unite thee with
him self and make thee al one with himself which is the chief affect of this
most heavenly meat And who sees not that this is greater favor. Ah my
beninge Lord, since that you have vouch safed to enter into this my poor
house, Mat. 22.
grant me grace that the same may never happen unto me which happened unto
the ungrateful Jews, who upon Palm Sunday received you into Jerusalem with
great ioyfulnes and triumphs, Luc. 23 Joan. 19.
but with in few days after they cried out un to Pilate Crucifige crucifige
Crucify, crucify him and with a Cross on your shoulders they cast you forth
of the city let me first die (good Lord) yea die a thousand times, before
that I should ever drive you from me, for this would be to drive you from your
own house.

The XIII. MEDITATION.
Upon these words of the Himne of the most holy Sacrament Mors est malis, Vita
bonis: vide paris sumptionis quam sit dispar exitus. The Blessed Sacrament, is
death unto the wicked, and life unto the good. S. Thom. opusc. 57. CHAP. XIII.
Points for to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how that this most divine Sacrament, Mat. 26.
even from the very beginning of the institution thereof did work these two
contrary effects for that in the eleven Apost ^es it brought forth fruits of
life Act. 5.
but in Judas by means of his peruers will, it wrought his ruin death, and
damnation.

2 Consider how that our Lord gave this condition and propriety unto this
Blessd SACRAMENT for our great profitte; to the intent that this Blessed
Sacrament should be both loved and also feared of us, and that Christians
should be careful to communicate with great purity and cleanenes of
conscience.

3 Consider how the hurt which this sacred meat brings unto such as
unworthily receive the same, proceeds not from any defect of this Blessed
Sacrament but from the evil disposition of those which receive it, wherefore
the Apostle faith unto the Corinthians, Cor. 11.
for this cause, there are many amongst you infirm and weak, and many die
because they receive this Blessed Sacrament unworthily.

4 Consider how that albeit the eleven Apostles (as S. John affirms) were
pure and clean yet nevertheless our Lord would wash their feet thereby to
declare unto us the great purity wherewith this holy Sacrament ought to be
received, cap 13. cap. 15
that it might bring life to the receauer.

The Fruit.
The fruit which may be gatheted by this xiii. Meditation shall be to demand of
our Lord a holy fear of reverence which proceeds from love and is a girte of
the holy Ghost; which reti^^th us back from offending of the divine goodness
and causes us forward toremoue far from our selves what soever may be
displeasing unto the eyes of this most holy Guest.

Annotation.
We ought not to marvel, that this great sacrament which of it seife is
wonderful, wholesome, and profitable, should neuerthe less be occasion unto
some of hurt: since that we see the same daily practiced in natural things, as
for example the warmth and heat of the Sun is profitable unto healthful
persons, but the same is hurtful unto sick and aching heads: Again, meat is
wholesome unto a good disposed stomach, but it brings infirmity and death
unto a stomach full of bad humors: In like manner Physic being taken in dew
time, is very wholesome unto him which taker^ it but being received out of
feason it is hurtful and dangerous, finally faith a Doctor: Even as the
lively and well rooted plant comes to his perfection, and brings forth
abundance of fruit, by the been fit of the heat of the son and of the rain
of the heavens: Even so the soul which lives in charity, and is well rooted
in Corist by the help of this holy Sacrament, and by the divine grace which it
brings from heaven, increases in perfection and becomes very fruitful:
And contranwise, as when a plant is dead of full of worms by the shining of
the sone it is sooner dried up, and by the falling of the rain itsouer rotteth
and becomes fit fuel for the fire: Even so the most Blessed Sacrament
coming into a soul which is eaten with the sharp gnawninge worms of sin or
else corrupted intentions makes the same sooner to dry and wither away, and to
be apt for nothing else, but to burn eternally in hell fire.

A Spiritual speech in manner of a dialogue Betwixt, Man, and his Soul.
Soul. Shall I be so boulde to approach near unto the sacred Altar, and there
to receive the Lord of glory?


Man. Why not?


So. Because I am miserable in firm, wretched and euel inclined. Ma. But he is
both the Physician, and the medicine, and he has said. Non est opus
valentibus nyedicus, sea male habentibus: They that are in health, need not a
Physician, but they that are ill at ease. Mat. 9.



So. But if he be occasion of death he must be feared and therefore I must
not come near him, but abide far of from him: Ma. But he like wise is occasion
of life, and therefore thou ought to love him and not to fly from him: only
dispose thy self to receive him worthily and he will be unto thee salvation;
let the^ fear death who unworthily approach to receive him. Mar. 1.



So. If S. John Baptist, who was sanctified in his mothers womb, accounted him
self not worthy to unloose the latchet of our Saviors shoes: Luc. 3.
And S. Peter reputing him self unworthy to remain in the presence of
Christ, Luc. 5.
said unto him: Go forth fromme because I am a sinful man O Lord How shall I
being a miserable sinner, presume to receive my Creator, without danger of eter
nall damnation?


Ma. If his coming from heaven was to call sinners unto him for to give them
grace, Mat. 9.
and to work their justification, why should not thou go to him?


So. But who will warrant and assure me, that I shall not be punished?


Ma. Humility and love will work thy security, through the one thou shall be
exalted, and through the other, thou shall be rewarded.


So. Alas, God severely punished the Bethsamites, 1. Reg. 6
because they beheld the Arcke: and shall I be so bold as to receive the Lord
of that Arcke?


M. The Bethsamits with great reason were punished, because that for curiosity
they beheld the Arcke and used not dew reberence thereunto: but thou my soul,
being accompanied with humility and love, Job. 26.
wilt not do as the Bethsamites did.


So. If the Angels of heaven tremble at the presence of this great Lord, how
would thou that I a vile creture and worm of the earth, should dare to
place him within my body?


Ma. If thou likewise considerest well the infinite Majesty of this most
Sovereign King which lies hidden under the form of bread, thou shall find
just cause of fear and trembling, but this fear ought to spring forth from
love, that is, thou ought to be afraid ever any more to offend so amiable a
Lord, and therefore being stirred up with love and accompaned with humility, go
on forward a Gods name, because thou shall be so far of, from offending of
him thereby, that thy most loving Jesus will most beningly intertaine thee.


So. Aie me, I know my self to be far unworthy thereof.


Ma. The Centurion likewise did acknowledge him self unworthy to receive
Christ our Souiour into his house; Joan. 9.
But our Lord Jesus makes them worthy to receive him who acknowledging their
great unworthiness do come unto him with great humility:


So. Who knows that in me is no such evil disposition, by means whereof
this divine Sacrament may be cause unto me of death.


Ma. If thou know any such remove it away, but if thou know it not, use
such diligence that thou may know.


So. Omercifull Jesus, trusting in your infinite goodness, I come unto you
humbly befeeching you to anert your eyes from my miseries, Psalm. 29.
for that Si iniquitates ob seruaueris Domine: Domine quis sustinebit? If thou
O Lord wilt observe iniquities who shallbe able to sustain thee? But if it
shall please you to behold the^ do it I pray you not as a Judge to punish
the^, but as a mercrfull physician to beale and redress them, and grant me
Lord that these my miseries may serve for your greater glory and honor, Mat.
8.
like as the infirmity of the blindborne man, for by your delinering of me,
from them; so much more apparently will your mercy and valor shine in me, by
how much more miserable and unworthy I was before.


THE XIIII. MEDITATION.
Upon these words of the Himne Ecce panis Angelorum, factus cibus Viatoru^.
Behold the bread of Angels, is made meat for Travelers. CHAP. 14
Points for to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how traiuell and tears was the ordinary meat of man, after that
for his finne he was cast forth of Paradise.

Consider the estate in which man was, in this desert of lame^ting, for that he
was constrained to wander in this world, without any sure guide or sufficient
provision, wherefore for want of the one he might easelie have gone out of the
way: and for want of the other defecisset in via, Mat. 15.
he would have fainted in the way.

3 Consider the loving carefulnes, which our most mereifull Savior had of him,
since that he him self would vouchsafe to become a guide and meat for man in
banishment.

4 Confider how that the meat of Angels is no other but God the King of
glory, with whom the Angels in heaven are nourished and by contemplatinge him
they enioie him. Now the self same meat our most loving Redeemer has made
the meare of man, and therefore it is said in the Himne Eoce panis Angelorum,
factus cibus viatorn^.

The fruit.
The fruit of this xiiii. meditation shall be to practice loving acts of
gratitude toward our Lord who has so greatly favored us; and to pray his
divine Majesty to make us fully to understand how infinitely we are bound for
this unto our Savior Jesus.

The Colloquium.
It is possible O Lord that you be so inamoured of man, that you would feed him
with the food of Angels? is it possible that you seek by the means of this
Angelical meat to make him all one with you? Rejoice O sons of Adam,
because this saying of the Prophet is no longer agreeable unto you: Fuerunt mthi
lachrimae meae panes die ac nocte, Psa. 41.
du^ dicitur m by quotidie, vbi est Deus tuus: My tears have been bread unto
me day and night, whilst that they said unto me, where is thy god? for that
now your meat is no more tears, but the food of Angels; and your god is not
angry, nor far from you, but is present under the form of bread which he
often gives. O heavenly spirits assist me, that I may know so great a
benefactour. O holy Angels teach me I pray you: (but perticulerlye ye
Scraphines) how I ought to love my Redemer, who by giving me to eat your bread,
has showed me favor far above my desert. O my Lord, your holy Prophet
being astonished reioriced saying: Psa. 77.
Pane^ Ange loru^ ma^ducauit homo: Man has caten the bread of Angels: spea
king of Manna which was made by the work of Angels. But what glory and what
admiration should I have, who may say with all verity Mauducat Dominum pauper
seruus and humtlis? Ores mirabilis: The poor and humble servant eats his
Lord. O maruailous matter? What recompense am I able to give you my most
beninge Jesus, for that the more I do for your love, the more favor I
continually receive, since that it wholly redoundeth unto my good? Ah, hard and
perverse heart how do thou, being fed with this heavenly meat remain so
earthly when will thou become heavenly? How art thou so sensual and with out
spirit being nourished with Angelical meat? How is it possible that thou art
not inflamed and dissolved with the sacred presence of most beninge Jesus, who
is become thy meat and is a flame of love, is it peradventure because thou art
of earth? Call to mind O sweet jesus, vour own words, Luc. 12.
ignem veni mittere interram, and quid volo nisi vt accendatur? I came to cast
fire on the earth: and what will I but that it be kindled? Let this fire
therefore be kindled within me to the intent that the earthlines of my heart
being burned and consumed, I may in manner of a fiery flame, ascend on high to
search quae Sursum sunt; Col. 3.
the things which are above, for that they only are able to content and quiet
me. O my soul how is it possible that thou remainest alive at the coming of
so great a Majesty? how is it possible that with the divine pre sense of the
King of glory thou art not dissolved into thy nothing? Ah, Alas from whence
comes this to pass that an Angel coming unto Daniell, Dan. 10.
he like unto a withered plant, in such sort fell down upon the ground, that
as the Sacred Scripture says, there remained in him no strength but lay
prostrate upon the earth, having lost his speech and his breath: And thou at
the coming of the Lord and creator of the Angels do neither tremble nor
shake? The pillars of Heaven (says Job) do tremble and quake at every little
look of this self same God: Job. 26
and thou stand firm and nothing moved? Ah my Lord, you are the cause of
this, since that the love which you show us in this Sacrament is so great, that
it rather inuiteth us to love you again, and to be glad and rejoice, then to
be moved with fear and trembling; for that the property of love is, For as
mittere timorem: 1. Io. 4.
to put fear forth of doors.

THE XV. MEDITATION.
Of frequentinge the Blessed Sacrament. CHAP. XV.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how that in the primitive CHVRCH which was governed by the Apostles
the Christians did often Communicate, and that from receiving did proceed the
great holiness and feruor of spirit which was then: it is most certain for
that by experience we have been taught, that as this use began to decrese and
be diminished so likewise did sanctity and feruor decay and wax less in the
Christian people.

2 Consider how that in this our agean the which God of his goodness has
stirred up greater devotion and more often frequentinge of this venerable
Sacrament, is seen greater goodness and perfection in those which frequent the
same, and the Catholic Church is greatly increased by many new and holy
orders of religion.

3 Consider how that this divine Sacrament being the meat of man's soul which
comfort and sustaineth the same in spiritual life it consequently follows
that the more often the soul is fed with this precious meat, the more strong
and more perfect she remains in spiritual life.

4 Consider more-ouer, that as this heavenly Sacrament is the fountain of all
perfection and holiness, and imparteth most wholesome effects to all those which
worthily receive the same; so is it certain that the oftener that any person
does communicate, the more he is made partaker of the graces thereof: for this
cause all the holy Fathers of the Catholic Church do earnestly exhort us
often to frequent this B. Sacrament.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this 15 Meditation shall be to make firm purpose, both of making
worthy preparation for this divine Sacrament and alsO of often freque^ting the
same, for such as the one is, such will be the effect of the other. In preparing
our selves we ought principally to procure soundnes of love, the which will
cause out often receauinge to be pleasing and gratfull unto God.

A Colloquium.
O my sweet Jesus, what great favor and grace is this which you do unto me,
for you vouchsafe not only to discover unto me that precious mineral which
remains in the field of the holy Catholic Church, and is that Thesaurus
absconditus, hidden treasure, which makes the man which finds it to sell all
that ever he has for to buy the field: But farther you innite me that I should
often dig forth of this mine this most precious treasure, thereby to enrich my
soul: And this makes me to marvel much that for the obtaininge of this field,
and for taking forth of this treasure as often as I list, you have granted me
such a wonderful commodity that I need not to sell any kind of thing for the
bying thereof: Blessed be you my SAVIOVR, that for my greater good it has
pleased you to hide your glorious Body under the form and accidents of bread
to thentent that I should often return to taste the same, Isay. 45
and should say with your holy Prophet Vere tues Deus absconditus Trewlye you
are a hidden God. O my Lord if for the taking forth of this divine treasure,
you should have ordained sharp fastinges, long pilgrimages, sheding forth of
blood and other such like hard penances, yet all these pains and labors should
have been well employed to have once only tasted your most sacred body; But O
unspeakable charity, you have vouchsafed to make it both eafic and delightful
unto me, that by this means I should often come unto this divine mineral. O
Adam, how much better is the condition of thy posterity, then was thy own?
Thanks be therefore to our bening and liberal Jesus: Genesis 3.
Thou were cast forth of Paradish and to the intent that thou should not
return to eat of the tree of life thereby to have lived for ever: God most just
placed a Cherubine with a fiery sword to keep thee from entering in: but we
thy sons and offprings, remaining within the Paradise of the holy Church,
are not only not prohibited of an Angel with a fiery sword, but farther,
the Lord of the Angels with fire of love, most earnestly inuiteth us often to
come and eat of the tree of life, or rather to receive him who gave virtue
unto that tree of life, and who gives us most happy and eternal life, for
thus he promises us, inuiting us to come unto him: Qui manducat mea^ carnem,
Joan. 6.
viuet in aeternum: He that eats my flesh shall live for ever. Awake a little
my soul and magnify thy God. Qui fecit tibi magna, qui potens est. Luc. 1.
Because he that is mighty has done great things unto thee, dust thou not
see how that for enriching of the he has made him self thy treasure? Come
therefore often to dig it forth, for since that he is a most precious
treasure he will give thee good contentment, and seeing that he is infinite, he
can never by drawing forth, fail or be wanting unto thee.

THE XVI. MEDITATION.
Which is the second concerning often Receiving. CHAP. XVI.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how that the Devil in no wise can abide and endure the use and
frequenting of this most wholesome Sacrament, for that he knows very well, how
greatly it helps man to the obtaining of eternal blessedness, which he him
self lost by his pride. He moreover detesteth it, because it lively
represents the Passion of Christ our Savior, whereby he was vanquished and
spoiled of his dominion which he had over human kind.

2 Consider, how that for these causes the devil enforces him self by
diverse means to withdraw men from often teceauing whereby we may well
perceive how profitable it is unto our souls often to be fed with this
heavenly bread, since that it so much displeseath the Devil, who is a mortal
enemy unto our good

3 Consider, that since our nature of it self is very feeble and weak, ill
inclined, and often by the Devil solicited to do evil, the best and surest
remedy is often to communicate: it being the property of this blessed
Sacrament, to give force unto the soul to resist all kind of tentations and
uniting the same with Christ who is the guide and rule of all good, it comes
to be directed by him to good works as is plainly seen in those which often
and worthily do receive.

The Fruit.
The fruit which ought to be reaped by this XVI. Meditation shall be to demand
of Almighty God force against so crafty an adversary, and then to do acts
of hamilitie, which does discover the deceits of the devil, and makes him
with confusion to run away.

A Colloquium.
See good Jesus by how many means this infernal enemy seeks to divert me
from your most sacred table. Some times he tempts me in faith concerning the
hidden mysteries of this divine Sacrament, some times he tormenteth me with
fearful scruples, some times he would draw me back for some human
respect and vain speches of the world: other times he would entertain me with
hope of greater commodity and devotion. And when by these means he fails of
his wicked purpose and intent then he makes the body lament that it is over
troublesome to frequent often the receiving of the most Blessed Sacrament. O my
soul if most loving Jesus remained not hidden in this holy Host or if it were
not profitable unto us, often to be fed with this most holy bread; without
all doubt the devil would let us alone or rather he would much rejoice, that
herein we should vainly loose our time: But this malign spirit knows full
well who lies hidden under the form of bread, he also well knows the great
profit and commodity which we receive thereby, and therefore being pricked
forward with envy and hatred against us he seeks by all means possible to
let and hinder us. And why do thou (o perverse and deceitful body) murmur
and grudge? Is it possible that for obteininge of thy poisoned delights and
pleasures, thou regardest no kind of pain or travail, and thou carest not to
adventure any kind of danger and beco^mest thousad and sorrowful to yield
unto thy soul so easy and so wholesome a comfort. See good Lord what war the
enemies of my salvation do waige against me to skirmish and encounter with
the^ all, I require no other thing of you, Job. 17.
the^ that which your faith full servant Job demanded and obtained. Pone me
tuxta te, and cuiusuis manus pugnet contra me, place me near unto your self,
and then let any fight against me, take thou my part O Lord: and I shall be
secure that nothing can be able to hinder the frequentinge and often receiving
of this heavenly Sacrament. I pray you therefore my beninge Jesus, that as by
your bounty and goodness you have inspired me to begin for to taste this most
precious meat; so you will give me grace to frequent the same with lovely
perseuera^ce. Grant me (good Lord) that I never be unmindful of this most
holy Sacrament, for else my heart will faint and languish, Psa. 101
and with sorrow and bitterness I shall be enforced to say with your Prophet
Aruit cor meum quia oblitus sum comedere panemmeum: my heart is withered away
because I huae forgotten to eat my bread, Amen.

THE XVII. MEDITATION.
Which is the third concerning often Receiving. CHAP. 17.
Points to Meditate.
1 CONSIDER how not without good cause, our Redemer instituted this divine
SACRAMENT under the form of bread; to give us to understand hereby, how that
we ought often to be fed therwithall: for as ordinary bread being often
received does maintain our corporal life: so the often receiving of this
blessed Sacrament, preserves our spiritual life, and of this heauently bread
many holy Doctors do understand that, Luc. 11.
Panem nostrum quotidianum danobis hodie. But if we should receive it seldom
how could it be our daily bread.

2 Consider how that by freque^ting of this blessed Sacrament, the party
comes to be devout and spiritual: for besides that which this divine
Sacrament works of his own nature, hereunto is also adioined devout
preparation which consists in acts of virtue, as of Faith of Contrition, of
Paier, of charity, and of such like; which acts if they be often frequented
will bring forth in us many virtues whereby the body will become chaste and
obedient unto the soul; and the soul unto Almighty God; and this is to be
devout and spiritual, which we obtain not if we seldom communicate.

3 Consider how that by receiving of Christ in this blessed Sacrament with dew
preparation, we do honor unto him and make great account of him; wherefore he
which more often receives, more often does honor and reverence him; but he
which honoreth Christ on earth shall be honored of his father in heaven; and
this was pretended by the Blessed Virgin our Lady, who (as some holy fathers
affirm and as afterward we will say more at large) did often communicate.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this XVII. Meditation shall be to demand grace of our Lord that
this heavenly meat may never come to be loathsome unto our soul, as this
earthly bread brings no fastidiousnes unto our body.

A spiritual speech.
What shall I do my sweet Jesus, since that two most valiant Captains do very
fiercely assault me? that is, Fear, and Love; Fear, setting down before my
eyes, the greatness of this maiesticall Sacrament, makes me to retire; Love,
shewinge me the importance of the union which this divine Sacrament causes me
to have with you, urges me vehemently with loving desire to go forward. But
alas what shall I do, if Fear overcome me, and make me remain far of from
your most sacred table? and you having said. Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij
hominis, Joan. 6.
non habebitis vitam in vobis: Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man,
you shall not have life in you; how shall I live without this vital and
wholesome meat? And, if love overcome me, shall I be so audacious as without
fear to receive this Sacrament of so great Majesty? I being not worthy to
behold it, much less often to receive it? What shall I therefore do O my
Savior? I know very well, Mal. 1.
that the one pleases not you without the other, for that you being our
father, we ought for to love you; and you being also our Lord it behooves us
likewise to fear and reverence you: wherefore I resolve to yield my self
overcome unto them both, with this condition that the one and the other do
keep me company, Love will cause me to come often and cheerfullye: and Fear
will make me come consideratly. And you (most merciful Redeemer) since that
you vouchsafe so often to call me unto your Sacred banquet; grant me this
favor, that these two valiant Captains who are under your command, do never
leave and forsake me. Oh, heavenly father seeing that you have bound me with
such benefittes, and with such chains of love; I beseech you for that love,
which you always have borne unto your only begotten and beloved son, that
you will not leave me thus bound, but that it may please you to draw me unto
your sone, because you have so promised me by your Prophet saying: Tra ham c^s
in vinculis charitatis. I will draw the^ with the chains of charity. Remember
likewise sweet Savior that you also promised to draw us unto you, when you
said: Joan. 12.
Ego si exaltatus fuere a terra o^nia traha^ ad meipsum If I shall be exalted
from the earth I will draw all unto me. Now O Lord you have been already
exalted; it remains therefore that now you draw my heart unto you, who
finding no other place to rest it self, like an other Dove returns unto the
arcke of salvation. Genesis 8.
But if you my Lord do not stretch forth your holy hands, and draw it unto
your self with in your Arc, it will remain abroad and be casely drowned in
the stinking waters of this life.

THE XVIII. MEDITATION.
Which is the fourth concerning often Receiving. CHAP. 18.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how that be cause this Sacrament is one of the greatest benefittes,
which God has bestowed upon us in this life, there is no one thing which can
more freely deliver us from ingratitude, then often receiving, for besides this
that hereby we do an act most gratfull unto God our benefactor, we do farther
often hereby renew the memory of him, which thing he requires of us when as
he says: 1 C^. 11
Hoc facite in meam co^memorationem. Do this for the commemoration of me.

2 Consider, Luc. 22
how that the not frequenting this blessed Sacrament (when opportunity
serves) commonly proceeds for want of love, because it is impossible that
any one does love Christ trewly, Joan. 6.
and does not receive him often, especially since that he desires that we
would receive him, and inuiteth us so affectuouslye, that therefore he
promises us life everlasting.

3 Consider how that it is proper unto the Grace which this divine Sacrament
imparteth, for to unite us with Christ; wherefore the oftener that one
receaueth it, the more grace he obtains, and so much more firmly is he united
with his Creator, then the which, I know not if any greater thing can
possibly, be either desired or wished for, in this mortal life.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this XVIII. Meditation shall be to desire and pray our Lord to give
us internal affection toward this divine Sacrament, because that from
affection proceeds perseverance in frequentinge of it.

A Colloquium or spiritual speech.
Rejoice and be glad my soul because we have a Lord who in giving is very
liberal, and in exacting is very sparing, Rejoice and be glad for that the
magnificence and mercy of our Savior has valourously foughten for us
Magnifice^ce has brought to pass that our Lord regarding the greatenes of his
celistiall treasures, and our necessities, has bestowed most largely and
liberally upon us: And mercy has wrought that the self same Lord considering
our weakness and poverty, has taken compassion of us, and requires little or
nothing at our hands. Who would ever have thought, that a Lord of such
majesty, after that he had travailed and spent the whole time of his life for
one benefit and commodity, would in the end, not for any interest of his own
but for pure love toward us become our meat? Who would have immagined that
for recompense of this so worthy a gift he would receive of us, neither Jewel
nor gould, nor yet any other thing which should cost us labor or sweat: but
having given him self unto us for meat, desires that we should often
strenghen our selves therewithal. O unmeasurable liberality? O charity
without bond or limitt. Go to my soul be thou not affrighted, for albeit with
gifts; bonds and obligations are incresed, and the greater that the gift is,
so much more dangerous is the abominable vice of ingratitude: yet thy most
loving Jesus by his infinite grace has delivered us from such peril and
danger by requiring at our hands no other then little and easy things, And
this O Lord is nothing else but wholly to confound me, seeing that to receive
you often in this venerable Sacrament, is both easy and delightful, and also
redoundeth to my good, by getting of great grace on earth, and glory in
heaven. And what else is this but to heap one benefit upon an other But what
will become of me O Lord, who having received at your hands such benefits do
still requit you with ungratefulness? and who for this precious meat which your
grace gives unto me, do render again unto you gall and vinegre? Worthelie
therefore may you to my confusion object against me, that which by your
Prophet Isay you objected against the people of Israel saying Quid est quod
debui vltra facere vineae meae and non feci ei? What ought I farther to have
done unto my vineyard, and have not done? An quod expectaui, vt faceret vuas,
and fecit labruscas? In place of sweet grapes it has yealded me sour wine. I
confess my beninge Lord that I justly deserve for my great ingratitude, all
those euels wherewith you threatened that ungrateful vineyard of Israel: but
remember most merciful Jesus, that this vineyard has cost you dear, for that
you have planted it by sustaining infinite labors and pains for the space of
thirty three years; and you have watered the same with the sweat of your
brows, with the tears of your eyes, and with the most precious blood of your
sacred body if therefore you now prohibit the rain to fall from heaven and do
tear up the heads thereof. Psa. 79.
Suddanly there will come Aper de silua the Boar of the wood to tread it down
and root it up, enter rather O Lord your self and visiting the same Perfice
eam quam plantauit dextera tua.

THE XIX. MEDITATION.
Upon some defectes which hinder the fruit of the blessed Sacrament. CHAP. 19
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how that besides mortal sin, there are other impedimentes, which
albeit they take not clean away yet they abate very much the fruit of this
divine Sacrament, as for example, to be overmuch employed in business, and to
have overmuch conversation before we go to receive, which although they are
not of themselves evil, yet notwithstanding they take from us that
recollectio^ of mind which is required for so great a mystery, wherefore by
these means we remain deprived of the spiritual taste and feeling which God
is wont to give unto those which devoutly receive him.

2 It is also an impediment to go to receive with out making reflection over
him self, by considiring whether he goes, what he pretends, whom he has
to receive, and what preparation he has made. And since that in all our small
affairs we consider before hand all the circumstances thereof, it is very
convenient that likewise we should well consider all circumstances which
appertain to this divine business beelonginge unto our soul.

3 Finally it is an impedimente when as one having scarce received falls to
reasoninge or other business, for by these things the spiritual heat and
fervor which by receiving we have obtained easily vanishes away: and we do
a certain kind of injury unto the Blessed Sacrament as it would be a great
inciuilitie to receive a great Lord into our house and shortly after to go
forth of the doares leaving him in our house all a lone. In like manner do they
who after receiving go to talkinge or reasoning, either for recreation or for
other business.

The Fruit
The fruit of this XIX. Meditation shall be, to be sorry, and to lament these and
such other defectes, with purpose of amendment.

A Colloquium.
Do thou not plainly see, O my soul, how very little our Lord requires
of us, for to give unto us the great and most wholesome fruit of the venerable
Sacrament? it behooves thee therefore to go thereunto with great devotion and
recollectio^ of mind for this he requires of thee. Remember when God was to
speak with Moises in the mountain, Exodus 19
he commanded that nether man nor beast should approach near unto the
mountain, to the intent that Moises should not be distracted by any kind of
creature: yea to the end that Moises should remain with greater attention and
recollection, the whole mountain was covered, with a great and obscure cloud:
Even so my soul do thou diligently procure that (to the Altar where God
expects thee) no kind of creature may accompany thee, thereby to distracte
thy devotion and attention, for that thou have not only to talk with, but also
to receue thy God and thy Creator, and be tho^ surely persuaded that he will
never desire and love thee, vnle^ thou clean forgett all created things when
as thou come (...) to this sacred Table to receau^^ thy Creator, whom only
tho^^ ought then to remember. Psa. 44.
Harken what the kingly Prophet says unto thee. O daughter after that thou
shalt forget thy people and the house of thy father, then Concupiscet Rex
decorem tuum: will the King desire thy comelines: And most worthelie O Lord,
for since that you^ are chief goodness, and infinite lie to be beloved, it is
not convenient that you should be inamored of that soul which being
entertained of creaturs by over much affection toward the^, comes not freely
unto you, neither seeks after you with whole affection of heart. But what
shall I do O Lord to obtain this devout attention. My mind by the greuoues
wound which she received in terrestiall Paradise remains disordered in such
sort, that ordinarily against my will she goes forth of the doors like a
vagabone? What shall I do since that the infernal enemy to with draw me from
you and from your holy table does so overthwart my head with such terrene
thoughts, that I can not keep my heart firmly settled upon you? Now you see
most merciful JESUS in what state I remain weak by nature and in such sort
wraped and overwhelmed with earthly things, that unless you help and succor
me, I shall remain deprived of the comfort of this most holy meat, help I
pray you with your grace my weakness, and remove from me all impedimentes that
like a hungry Falco^, I may fly unto your most sacred body, which it has
pleased you to give me for meat,

THE XX. MEDITATION.
Of the most holy Sacrament: when it is given unto the sick for a viaticum
CHAP. XX.
Points to meditate.
1 CONSIDER how that emongst many other most worthy effects of this celestial
Sacrament, one is to render those strong and valiant (against e^ptations)
which worthelie do receive the same: wherefore in ancient times it was given
unto those which were to suffer ma^tirdome, that they might remain firm in
the Confession of Christ. And for that in the passage from this life unto the
other the devils do assault us with diverse tentatio^s, for this respect the
holy Church uses to fortify and strengthen us with this most holy Sacrament
of eternal life.

2 Consider how it helps likewise to obtain the health of body when it is
expedient for the salvation of our soul, for if so be by the only touch of
the garment of Christ many received their health, Mat. 9. et. 14.
what will Christ him self do, when as by this blessed Sacrament he enters
into the soul of the sick?

3 Consider finally that Christ having instituted this most holy Sacrament for
the spiritual help of our soul, it is to be thought that when we have
greatest need (as is went to be in dangerous sicknesses) that then this
blessed Sacrament works most effectually his most wholesome fruies, for that
it is proper unto our Lord which therein lies hidden to healpe where is
greatest necessity.

The Fruit.
The fruit of this last meditation shall be, to do louinge acts of gratefulnes,
by heartily thanking of our Lord for the great care and solicitude which he has
had over us by helping and releeuing our spiritual need and necessity, with
this most loving Sacrament.

Annotation.
1 Here it is to be noted, that this most holy Sacrament is to be received for
a viaticum, when there is danger of death and not to expect, until the sick
person be half dead, (so that he is unable to do acts of devotion and
contrition) because this Sacrament works most effectually when as it is
accompanied with our contrition and devotion.

2 The privilege of this blessed Sacrament, when it is received for a
viaticum, is this, that the sick party may communicate at all times, albeit
he be not fasting, this the Church grants De consecr. did. 2. Caa. Liquido
and Can. Presbyter.

3 If the sickness be long and lingting, the diseased party after that he has
communicated for his viaticum, may often times afterward communicate for
devotion: but then he must be fasting from midnight last past, as I have said
before in the tenth meditation.

The Colloquium.
A wake O my soul, and contemplate this new favor which thy bening Jesus does
unto thee whereby arises in thee a new bond. Do thou not see, how that in
this last conflict thou have to fight and make combat with the hateful
enemies of of thy salvation, and since that thou art altogether unable to go
unto his holy Altar, there to be armed, fortified and strenghned with
heavenly meat, he vouchsafes to come home into thy house? O loving humility,
thou have good cause to exult and rejoice my soul for that the Lord of Majesty
vouchsafes to come unto my house, to honor thee, to comfort thee, and to be
thy companion, as well in this thy last conflict and assault with the devils
of hell will give thee to try if they can get thee for their prisoner as also
in the last passage which thou have to make from this life unto the other. Be
therefore of good courage, for although thou thy self art weak and infirm and
thy enemies strong and mighty, yet nevertheless having received the comfort
of this most holy meat thou may boldly say with the blessed Apostle S.
Paul. Omnia possum in eo qui me conforta^: Phil 4.
I can all things in him that strengthens me, place therefore all thy hope in
thy Jesus, and thou shall not be overcome nor confounded. 4. Reg. 13.
Thou know well that the dead body of Eliseus brought life unto an other
body by only touching of it: But if so be the bones of a dead Prophet had
such force and virtue that they were able to recall a dead man unto life, and
the thieves which stood about the sepulcher of Elizeus amassed at the matter
durst not do him any harm at all? What will not the lively and glorified
body of Jesus be able to do, coming to dwell and remain within thee? Past
all doubt he will give thee far greater force and virtue; he being God
omnipotent and Lord of the universal world. And all the devils of hell by
his only presence shall remain confounded and vanquished. O holy Daniell
instruct me, how I ought to thank my most loving Lord, who seeing me in this
my simple bead, compassed round about with feirce lions of hell: altogether
fainting for want of food, has not sent me meat by Abacuc, Dan. 14.
his Prophet nor yet by his Angels from heaven: but he him self vouchsafes
to come, and gives me meat, not prepared by the art of man, nor yet sent for
reapers or haruestmen, but prepared by the wonderful work of Almighty God,
for his faithful servants and loving fronds Qui de spiritu metent vitam
aeternam. Gal. 6.
Who of the spirit (of God) shall reap life everlasting. O Marie Mother of my
lasting. O Marie Mother of my Lord O my good Angel and keeper, and all other
my devoted Saints, since that I neither know how, nor yet can render such
hearty thanks (as is convenient) unto this my heavenly benefactor, thank him I
pray you on my behalf. And thou my soul never cease from thankinge our Lord,
Luc. 1.
for that Fecit tihi magna qui potens est, he that is mighty has done great
things to thee See and consider that he has not only loved thee at his own
end, when as passing from this life unto his eternal father, he instituted for
thee, this so worthy a Sacrament: Joan. 13.
but farther he most singulerly loves thee at thine own end, when as thou
being to pass from this life unto the other, he gives him self unto thee for
meat and a companion. O love without measure. O my Lord, since that in this
world I can neither receane nor desire any thing more great and more
beneficial; it only remains that with holy old Simeon I cry out and
demand of you saying Nunc dimittis Ser uum tuum Domine in pace, quia viderunt
oculi mei salut are tuum, Now thou do dimisse, thy servant O Lord according
to thy word in peace, Because mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Go to my
soul Conuertere in requiem tuam quia Dominus benefecit tibi, turn quickly
unto thy creator because in him thou shall find such repose that thou may
justly say Haec requies mea, in saeculum saeculi. This is my rest for ever and
ever.

A DIALOGVE BEtwixt a worldly and a spiritual man, concerning the most
blessed Sacrament of the Altar.
In the which is disputed whether it be better to Communicate often or seldom,
supposing that both the one, and the other be dewlie done; that for love and
devotion; and this, for humility and reverence. CHAP. XXI.
VVORLDLING. I know not for what end and profit thou should so often
communicate because that I always see thee with the same defectes, often
disdainefull, and always full of threatenings.


Spiritual. I know that others by often receiving are much amended of their
defects, and if I should not often communicate, without all doubt I should be
much worse, and peradueuture even at this instant I should have been burning in
hell fire.


W. How know thou, that thou should be worse?


S. Because experience teaches me, that when I am shortly to communicate, I am
more advised in my actions, and I keep my self more diligently from
committing of sins, be they never so small. Contrariewise when as I am not
of a long time to communicate, I am not so watchful over my doings, and I
find my self sloe in my devotions, and easily ready to fall in to
imperfections, wherefore if my soul reaped no other commodity, this alone
were sufficient enough, to make me to frequent this divine Sacrament.


W. I doubt, that by receiving of our Lord so often, I should loose both love
and fear of him which commonly proceeds from over great abundance, of
familiarity.


S. Nay rather it happens clean contrary, for if so be that by familier
conversation, and by often receauinge of our Lord, should be laid open and
discovered some imperfection of his, you had good reason to think that thereby
would be diminished our love and fear of him, as it often happens in human
things; but here is no such matter, for that he being the infinite sea of all
perfection, by how much more a man conuerseth with him, so much the more he
perceueth his goodness and his perfection, and therefore so much the more is
increased in us our devotion, love and reverence toward, his divine majesty.


W. Be it as you would; yet experience teaches that the often frequenting of
any thing, albeit never so good, yet in the end it breeds loath somnes.


S. This is true in temporal things, and in sensual delights but as S
Gregory very well no teth: In spiru ualibus delitijs saturitas appetitum
parit In spiritual delights plentifulnes causes appetite, for that the^
their goodness is better known, and for this cause the more they are possessed,
the more they are desired, for this respect also the divine wisdom says Qui
edunt me adhuc esurient, Eccle. 24.
and qui bibunt me adhuc sitient. They which eat me shall still hunger after
me, and they which drink me, shall still thirst after me.


W. Saint Paul says that he which receaueth unworthily receaueth the same to
his eternal damnation, 1. Cor. 11
but if thou receive every Sunday, it is a sign that thou accomptest thy
self worthy, but is not this manifest pride? And therefore thou receauest
unworthily?


S. As though seldom receiving did make us worthy, it is not so, but if by
being worthy you understand that one should be equal in perfection with this
Sacrament, then it is certain that no creature albeit most holy, no nor yet
all creatures together are worthy of this Sacrament. Yea if such worthiness were
necessary; no body could communicate; for that no creature can come unto that
perfection which should be equal with this Sacrament. In like sort that a man
should receive worthily is not necessarily required that he should be of
excellent perfection and of rare and singular virtue; for this is obtained by
ferquenting this divine Sacrament, therefore for to be worthy, it is
sufficient according unto S. Paul that the party which receaueth have that
disposition wherewith God is contented; that is beforehande to examine his
conscience, to have contrition and to confess his sins; and so to receive
the B. Sacrament is not pride.


W. If this be sufficient, what is the reason that some Saints for reverence
of this so great a Sacrament, refused to be made Priests, as did S. Frances?
In vita eius.
And Mark a holy Anchorite, out of one of his fingers because he would
bevnable for Preisthood?


S. The Saints of God have had diverse gifts of the holy Ghost, from the which
gifts have spronge forth diverse deeds, all which are to be praised, but all
are not to be imitated of us, that these Saints shunned Preisthood for
humility was well done. Other Saints have been, who either for devotion or for
obedience, or else for some other good end have been made Preistes, and have
celebrated every day; and these also have done well.

More over those saints did abstain from the dignity of Preisthoode, but not
from often receiving whereof we now reason, and it is an ancient use, where with
the Church of Christ began; Act. 2.
as S. Luke the Evangelist reherseth.


W. Yet nevertheless, because that we have not in these days such fervor and
devotion as was the^ in the primitive Church it seems more secure to abstain
from the Bressed Sacrament, then to receive often, least we be not so well
disposed to receive our Savior often and we ought always to follow the
secure way.


S. Yea rather, because we have not such fervor as they then had, we ought
more effectually to be moved often to frequent this most wholesome Sacrament,
which is able to heat and inflame our devotion, for that cold persons have
more need to approach near unto the fire then those which are hoate, and every
time that we are rightly confessed and go with good intention, there is no
danger at all; and therefore we may securely communicate.


W. I have always heard say, that the Sacraments were instituted of Christ as
medicines, but medicines must not be taken so often.


S. If men were seldom spiritually sick your argument were of force, but
because our nature is so weak and infirm, that it often faints and falls
sick, it is very requisite that it should be often helped and strenghned with
this most sacred medicine Moreover for that this holy Sacrament preserves our
soul from spiritual euells, it is much better therewith to prevent those
maladies, then after their coming to cure them, finally there is great
difference betwixt corporal medicines, and this spiritual medicine, for they
expel sicknesses from the body, and often times together with bad humors do
take away also the good but this brings unto the soul Grace, Fortitude, and
other heavenly gifts. for these respects they ought seldom to be taken and
this ought often to be received: Hereunto may be added that not without good
cause corporal medicines most commonly are bitter and loathsome that therefore
they should be taken as seldom as might be. But this spiritual medicine
being both sweet and delightful should conformablle to the institution of
Almighty God be often reecaued,


W. But can you deny that it is a good and virtuous act to abstain from
receiving, for reverence of this most worthy Sacrament?


S. I do not say, that this act is not good, but I affirm that to frequent
the Blessed Sacrament for devotion and for desire to be united with Christ, is
much better, for this springs forth from love, and that from fear: and
every one knows that love is more perfect then fear, wherefore you should
do very well to begin to communicate also every eight day as many one most
worth he do.


W. I am altogether unworthy to receive so often,


S. Wherefore are you unworthy?


W. Because that every day I fall into many sins.


S. If the sins of eight days do hinder you from receiving the Blessed
Sacrament; much more the sins of a whole month or of a whole year, will let
and hinder you, and so you shall never communicate.


W. Nay rather by communicatinge seldom I shall have more time and leisure to
examine and prepare my self.


S. O Brother thou much deceauest thy self, for since that our nature is of it
self inclined unto evil, the longer that sin reigns in it the worse
always it becomes, and the longer time that our reckonings are delaied, the
harder they become. Wherefore my dear Brother, if thou will provide well for
thy self, refourme thy self with all speed possible, for the longer that a
tree grows crooked, so much more badly and more hardly is it brought unto any
straightnes.


W. I understand not what deceit this is, for that I see that they which
communicate often go coldly thereunto without devotion, and as it were of
custom and they which seldom go, communicate with great reverence and
devotion, therefore it is better to communicate seldom then often.


S. First this is false, for rather many of them, which for folfilling the
precept of the Church do receive once a year, do communicate without any
affection of love, very coldly, and as it were by constraint. Moreover if there
be any which without devotion do frequent the holy Eucharist, they do
naughtilie: and I reason not of them, but of such as go well disposed to
receive.


W. If as you say, it be better to receive often then seldom, how happens it
that some men (which are also learned) do not praise often receiving.


S. I have neither seen nor heard that any one of judgment and devotion did
ever dispraise this action, so holy, so profitable, and so grateful unto God:
But it may well be that some vicious and sensual persons do not praise the
often receiving of our Lord, for that thy think him to be unworthily received
iudgeing those which frequent this Blessed Sacrament to live as badly as they
them selves do.


W. You have said well, and I know trewly that it is more secure, often to
confirm and stre^ghthen the soul with this heavenly bread: but I do it not
for avoiding the speech of the world, which uses to scorn and scoff at
those which often use to communicate.


S. If you will make account of that which the world says, you shall not only
loose your soul, but also your brains and your wit: do you not know how that
it is the property of the world, as being ignorant of spiritual things, to
cherish the wicked and to bark at the good?


W. Nevertheless as long as we remain in the world it is necessary to
accommodate and conform our selves unto the world.


S. Now this is mere madness: for if the world be one of thy three deadly
enemies, how would thou with out thy own manifest ruin, accommodate thy
self unto the world and follow his liking? Do thou know what a thing it is
to with draw thy self from frequenting the Blesled Sacrament for the vain
prattling of the world? It is no other then to be ashamed and to account it
dishonor unto thee, for to be a good and virtuous Christian, Luc. 19
wherefore with good reason Christ will be ashamed to receive then in to heaven.


W. If I should often communicate, I must necessarily give good example unto
others, I must be watchful over my self, I must deprive my self of
recreation and sports, and this would make me loose my liberty, and
consequently it would bring me into a consumption, or to be old before my time.


S. Albeit you do receive but once a year, yet not withstandinge you are bound
to give good example unto others, and you know how great offense it is to give
scandal unto any one. Moreover often receuing takes not away recreations and
sports but rather it does bless and allow them, so that they by lawful and
honest, and where as you say that thereby we loose our liberty, it is false,
for that if you think by not communicating you may lawfully do what you list,
you deceive your self, for whether you receive often or seldom, you are
bound to shun and avoid sin, yea rather whosoever for recreation and
sporting does offend his creator loses true liberty by making of him self a
shame unto sin, and he loses true mirth which proceeds from a good
conscience, which this foolish world understands not.


W. To receive this holy Sacrament it is necessary that the party which
receueth, should have a quiet and contented mind, but this can not be often
had, for the great adversities and manifold troubles of this life, wherefore it
is not convenient to receive so often.


S. The troubles and adversities of this life and miserable banishment ought
rather to prick us farward to frequent this Blessed Sacrament, which amongst
many other effects, gives us force and strength to resist all adversity, as
the Kingly Prophet well signifies saying Parasti in conspectu meo mensam
aduersus eos qui tribulant me. Psalm. 22.
Thou have prepared in my sight a table against those which trouble me for
which cause in ancient time the holy Eucharist was given unto such as were to
suffer Martyr dome, that they might be valiant in their torments.


W. If I should once perceive that God did call me to communicate often, I would
do it very willingly.


S. But tell me I pray you when you say the Rosarie of our Blessed Lady,
Visit the Churches or else do other your devotions, do you perceue your self
to be called of God to do those deuotio^s


W. Noe.


S. Why therefore do you them?


W. Because these things seem good unto me, and the Preachers do often commend
and praise them.


S. But receiving the Blessed Sacrament without all comparison, is far
better, and more profitable then all these, and it is so greatly praised of
all Saints and holy writers and so greatly healpeth us to the obtaining of
eternal glory, that most worthily the holy Church calls it, Pignus futurae
gloriae the pledge of future glory, Antiph.
what calling would you have more then this.


W. Yet notwithstanding I dare not go often unto this sacred table, because I
have so many wicked habites, that they make me often to commit a thousand
imperfections.


S. This I have already answered in my former words: either thou do trewly
desire to have those wicked habits taken from the, or not: If thou earnestly
desire it, the most holy Sacrament being received with dew preparation will
give thee such force and vertew, that thou may easily pluck up by the
roots all evil and wicked habits, as it is very plainly to be seen in many
who by frequenting this beauenly meat, of sensual are become most spiritual
persons.


W. Your reasons do plainly convince me, and very willingly I would
communicate, but I feel inmy self no devotion.


S. You would with tenderness of heart sigh, weep, and lament, but this is not
altogether necessary, neither in this consists true devotion, which makes
any one to receive worthelye: tears of heart are sufficient which are sorrow for
our offenses passed, and a firm purpose of abstaining from them from hence
forward: And he is trewly devout who in all things conformeth him self to the
will of Almighty God, wherefore I would not have you to abstain from receiving
because you feel neither sithes nor tears, for these (as before I have said)
are not necessary, and God gives the^ to whom it pleases him.


W. To tell you the truth, I rest wholly persuaded that it is much better to
receive often then seldom but to speak sincerely that which I think, it is
tedious unto me, to go so often unto confession, and to make other preparations
to receive worthelie the most sacred body of our Lord, moreover my business are
many and some hinder me to perform this work.


S. This is a manifest temptation of the devil who to deprive you of the fruit
of this divine Sacrament makes both Confession and other preparations for the
blessed Sacrament, to seem tedious unto you, furthermore business do not
hinder our good works, but when we will our selves, for when we resolve, to
frequent this sacred table, we shall easily find time enough to do our affairs
with out abstaining from this blessed Sacrament And when as we should find any
difficulty wisdom wills us, that matters of great importance should
always be preferred before things of less moment: now then I leave you to
consider with your self, of what importance it is to receive our Savior into
our soul, Finally remember how that the Kingdom of heaven (as our Savior
him self says) suffers violence and therefore to obtain the same, Mat. 11
we must needs take labor and pains.


W. It is true as you say and therefore I yield my self over come: and resolve
to frequent this most wholesome Sacrament, but yet I would gladly know your
opinion how often Ishould communicate.


S. In this you shall do much better to take counsel and advise of your
spiritual father, and to be obedient unto that, which he shall advise you, and
so doing you shall accompany the receiving of this Blessed Sacrament with the
virtue of obedience, which is very grateful and pleasing unto Almighty God.


W. But I pray you fail not to tell me your opinion thereof.


s. My opinion is all one with that, which is exta^t in the book de
Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, the author whereof was Alcumus, an ancient writer,
and not S. Augustine, as it is commonly cited, where it is written in the 53
chapter after that he had said, to receive every day, I neither praise nor
blame, he presently adioined these words. Omnibus tamen diebus Dominicis
Communicandum suadeo, and hortor, si tame^ men's sine affectu pecca^di sit. I
persuade and exhort men to receive every Sunday, so that their mind be without
affection and purpose of sinning: And thus it seems unto me that it should be
sufficient for thee to receive every 8. day, and in the more principal feasts
which happen within the week. If at other times thou find devotion and
desire of communicating, thou may demand leave of thy Confessor, and if he
shall deny thee, thou must not be so importunate, as to enforce him thereby to
give thee leave; but it shall be much better, by obeying of him pro^ptly to
mortify thy self: Other days and less principal feasts, thou may
communicate spiritually for that thereby thou will feel great help for thy
soul.


Of spiritual receiving the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. CHAP. XXII.
FOR that spiritual receiving is very fruitful and profitable for souls, I
will here breefly entreat thereof; that devout persons knowing what it is, and
how it ought to be done, may likewise comfort and profit them selves thereby.
I will speak therefore offower things. First where in consists spiritual
receiving. Secondly, what fruit it brings unto the soul. Thirdlye, what
preparation it requires, and the manner how to practice it. Fourthly how
grateful it is unto Almighty God.

1 Concerning the first, it is to be noted that as well spiritual receiving,
as Sacramental communicating, are gronnded upon faith: because that a party
believing that in the Blessed Sacrament remains our Lord, author of all our
good, he is moved to receive him seeing that for this end he has left him
self under the form of bread that we thereby should feed our souls, wherefore
when as really we receive the consecrated Host, it is called Sacramental
receiving, but when we receive it only with affection and desire, it is called
Spiritual receiving. To receive therefore Spiritually is no other, then to
desire with affection of heart the Blessed Sacrament, that by means thereof we
might be united and incorporated with Christ our Lord. And after this manner are
to be understood these words of S. Ambrose Non manducans ma^ducat. Some which
eat not the body of our Lord Sacramentally, do eat the same Spiritually.

2 Concerning the second, it is to be noted that the fruit which Spiritual
receiving brings unto our soul, is the grace of the felfe same Sacrament
with some other effects, for as he which being moved by the holy Ghost
believes, repents him of his sins, and louin gof God, desires to be
baptized, receaueth the grace of Baptism, and this desire to be baptized is
called of divines, Baptismus flaminis; even so the like is also in this
Sacrament. It is very true as the holy Council of Trent notes, Ses. 13. cap.
8. that he which communicates spiritually receives not all the effects of
the blessed Sacrament, as he does which being worthily disposed and prepared
receaueth also Sacramentally, whereof I have spoken before in the Annotation of
the fourth Meditation. S. Thom. Opusculo. 58. cap. 19. toward the end makes
mention of three effects of spiritual receiving. The first is remission of
sins; The second is, delivery from eternal death. The third is true
participation of the sacred body of our Lord to eternal salvation

3 Concerning the third, it is to be noted that the preparation and manner of
spiritual receiving, consists in these 5. points. First when as the party
is ready to hear Mass, let him purpose in mind to communicate spiritually
praying unto our Lord to vouchsafe to make him partaker of the fruit of this
venerable Sacrament. Secondly brefly let him examine his conscience repenting
him of his defectes, and demanding pardon of Almighty God, with purpose of
amending and of confessing of them at dew time, and of him self he may do some
little penance. Thirdly, when the Priest is at the Offertorie, he shall also
offer up him self unto our Lord, praying him again to make him partaker of the
virtue of the most holy Sacrament, and for this end he shall pray unto the most
B. Virgin or some other of his devoted Saints to be his intercessors. Fourthly,
when as the Priest is ready to communicate, let him recollect him self as if
he would communicate Sacramentally, and afterward with devout affection let him
receive the holy Eucharist mentally into his soul. Fifthly and finally, let him
give thanks unto Almighty. God. That which is here spoken of the holy Mass,
is not said, for that it is necessary for the party which would communicate
spirituallye, to hear Mass or to do these things in the time of Mass,
because that he may do the^ in his chamber out of Mass, and diverse times in
the day. But I have spoken this for that spiritual receiving is more easelie
done and with greater devotion in the time of the holy sacrifice of the Mass.

4 Concerning the fourth thing which is, how gratfull vnro Almighty God is
spiritual communicating or desire of Receiving the holy Eucharist, this I say
may easily be understood by these miracles.

1 S. Ambrose drawing near unto death, was much afflicted for that he
carnestly desired to communicate, and could not express the same by words,
because he had lost his speech: But Almighty God three times in the night
called unto Honoratus the Bishop of Vexcells, and willed him to go and give the
blessed Sacrament unto Ambrose his servant; who seeing the sacred body of our
Lord, exulted in spirit and received the same devoutly.

2 Marullus writes in his 4. book and 12 chapter, that when as S. Onufrius
lived in the wilderness of Egypt, and was most desirouse to communicate:
Almighty God every eight day, sen tone of his Angels to bring him the B.
Sacrament, and so he communicated at the hand of the Angel with his great
contentment and comfort.

3 A Soldier called Segundo, being converted and baptized of the holy Martirs
SS. Faustinus and Iouita, desired most earnestly for to be communicated: these
two Saints prayed unto God for him, and behold there came a fair Dove, which
brought in her mouth a consecrated Host, which Faustinus (because he was a
Priest) took with great reverence, and therewith communicated Segundo the
Soldier. Ita Vigl. de fruct. sanct. discor. 27.

4 Iacobus de Voragine in a Sermon of the holy Sacrament, writes rhat a
certain woman having demanded the blessed Sacrament of her parish Priest and
not obteining it at his hands, remained much discomforted, and retired her
self into a corner of the Church, where she wept and lamented bitterly: but
behold a venerable Prelate entered into the Church accompaned with diverse
Clearkes, who demanded of this woman wherefore she wept, and understanding the
cause, he willed her to come unto the place where as the blessed Sacrament
remained where taking forth a consecrated Host, he communicated her saying:
Let this my body give thee true salvation. By which words the woman understood
that this Prelate was Christ our Savior the Curate coming afterward unto the
Altar, and finding in the Pixe but two little Hoastes, wh^^ as he had left
three: remaine^ therewith much amassed, and th^^ woman exceedingly comforted
Vigl. de fruct. sanct. discor. 27.

5 It is written in the life of Sai^^ Laure^ce the first Patriarch of ^^ nice
that the virgins of a certain^ MOnastarie having no mean^^ to communicate in
the feast^^ the most holy Sacrament, se^^ humbly unto the foresaid Patr^^ arch
to desire him in his Ma^^^ to recommend them unto o^^^^ Lord, which thing the
Patriar^^ most willingly performed, a^^^ in the midst of Mass bec^^^^ rapt
besides him self, without being perceived of the heare^^ of his Mass, he went
and communicated one of those Virgins who being retired unto her Cell ^emained
in prayer desiringe to ^eceaue the holy Eucharist. this Virgin alone received
the blessed Sacrament, because the other Virgins were busied with other
exercises.

Of the principal figures of the most holy Sacrament. CHAP. XXIII.
1 THE first figure of this venerable Sacrament is in the 14. of Genesis when
as Abraham had that notable victory over those Kings, and returning
victorious, Melchisedech King of Sale^ being a Priest of Almighty God, offered
bread, and wine, and Blessed Abraha: that Melchisedech was the figure of Christ
proves S. Paul Hebre. 7. that the bread and wine which he offered were
figures of the body and blood of Christ, that he also (being a King and a
Priest Secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Ps. 109.) offered up to Almighty God,
and afterward left unto us his body under the form of bread, and his blood
under the form of wine, the holy fathers do generally say. This figure gives
us to understand, that to receive Christ in the most holy Sacrament, and to be
blessed of him, it is necessary that we have fought against our inordinate
passions, and with Contrition and Confession drinen away sin, as valorous
Abraham drove away those Kings his enemies.

2 The second figure of this most holy Sacrament was the bread of proposition,
which was kept on the table of the Tabernacle in the sight of god. Exodus 25.
Leuit 24. It was not lawful for any one to eat of this bread unless he were
clean and sanctified, for which cause 1. Reg. 21. Mat. 12 it was called holy
bread; and sanctified bread. By the which is signified unto us, that for to
eat the most holy meat of the law of grace figured thereby, it is necessary
that the party be chaste, and have a pure conscience.

3 The third figure of this divine Sacrament, was the Subcineritiall bread,
which the Angel brought unto Elias, who being comforted with the virtue of
that bread, as the scripture says 3. Reg. 19. walked forty days and forty
nights, even unto the mountain of God, Horeb. where afterward he saw our
Lord. This figure signifies unto us the force and virtue which the Blessed
Sacrament gives unto us, to walk in this laborsom pilgrimage, even unto the
mountain where we shall see God to our incredible contentment. Now then, as
ordinary and common bread, 1. conserueth our temporal life. 2. augmenteth and
strengh theneth us. 3. albeit we often eat whilst we are in health, yet it is
never loathsome: yea rather it is an ill sign when any one likes not bread 4.
without bread the banquet is never perfect although it abound with all other
precious meat: Even so this heavenly meat under the form of bread,
conserueth our spiritual life 2. co^ferring or giving grace which is the life
of the soul, it augmenteth the same and makes it more strong against all
assaults of the deuell 3. this sacred meat is never loathsome unto spiritual
men, and if so be that it pleases not the sick, it is because that Animalis
homo non percipit quae Dei sunt. 1. Cor. 2. the sensual man perceives not
those things that are of God. 4. Let a Christian have all the goods of this
mortal life. yet if he have not there with all, that which is contained in the
sacred Host, it is worth nothing, or rather he may trewly be accounted most
miserable. Finally bread before that it comes unto his perfection, suffers
very much, for corn which is the matter of bread, first is sown in the ground
harrowed and covered with earth afterward it is reaped, threshed in the
flower, winnowed with the sieue, ground in the mill, molded or made into
loaves finally it is baked in the hoate fiery oven, wherefore it very well
agrees with this B. Sacrament, which represents unto us the passion of
Christ our Lord which suffered so much for us.

4 The fourth figure was the pascall Lamb Exodus 12, whose ceremonies were
these. The Lamb ought to be without spot, of male kind, and one year
oulde, It was to be eaten roasted, and in haste, with wild lettice and also
with unleavened bread, and they which did eat it, should have their loins
girded, with staves in their hand, and with shoes on their feet, by which
ceromonies God signified unto the Jews that they were pilgrims and waiefairing
men

S. Crisostome Homelia. 83. in Matheum. Infers that we also, ought to do
after this manner If the Jews (says he) being only to go into Palestine did
eat the Lamb with such obseruances; what vigelance ought thou to observe
when as thou eatest in this Blessed Sacrament the immaculate Lamb, having to
go into heaven? So much the more, (says the same Saint) in that most great
pains are appointed for those which unworthily do eat the same.

5 The fifth figure was the Manna Exodus 16. which God gave to the people of
Israel in the desert after they had passed the red sea whilst that they went
unto the land of promise.

S. Augustine Tractatu 10. in Ioannem writes, that the holy Eucharist is also
given unto us in the desert of this life: whilst that being washed with the
water of holy Baptism we go toward heaven which is the land of promise and
our country.

That the Manna was a figure of the most holy Sacrament and the red sea a
sigure of Baptism S. Paul affirms. Cor. 10.

The Manna had these properties. First, some gathered much and other some
gathered little; but yet afterward all found the self same measure. Even so
the self same Sacrament, and the self same virtue is in the whole consecrated
Host, and in every little particle thereof.

Wherefore in the Himne made by S. Thomas it is said: Tantum esse sub fragmento,
quantum toto tegitur. There is as much in every fragment, as in the wholle.
Secondly, the Manna might be gathered every day, saving the Saboth day: Even so
this venerable Sacrament may be received any day whenever, until the
eternal repose, signified by the Saboth, when as with happy quietness we shall
see God. Thirdly the Manna had all sorts of taste according as he desired which
did eat it. Sap. 16. Angelorum esca nutriuisti populum tuum, and paratum
panemde coelo prestitisti illis sine labor, omne delectamentum in se habentem,
and omnis saporis suauitatem. O Lord thou have nourished thy people with the
bread of Angels, and without labor thou have given them food from heaven,
which has in it self all delight and all sweetness of taste.

4. Many of the Jews were punished severely because they despised the Manna,
saying. Anima nostra nauseat super cibo isto leuissimo. Our stomach loatheth
this most light meat. Even so it hach happened unto many, who having despised
the most holy Eucharist, are become either he retickes or bad Christians: And
therefore S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. recounteth that even in his time many died
because that of esteming little this divine Sacrament they received it
unworthily.

6 The sixth figure was the Arc whereof S. Thomas intreatinge: says. I. B. q.
102. ar. 4. ad 6 Exodus 25
Even as the Arcke was made of wood of Sethim that is of pure and shining
Cedar; even so the body of Christ our Lord consists of most pure members.
Furthermore the Arcke was gilted both within and without, the which gilting
signified the wisdom and charity of Christ our Lord. In the Arcke were three
things. First there was a golden pot, wherein was kept contained Manna, and
was a figure of the soul of Christ which contains all fulness of sanctity
and divinity. Secondlye, there was the Rod of Aron, the which signified the
Preistlike power and authority of CHRIST. Thirdly there were the two tables,
which signified that Christ should be a lawgiuer. And as the Arck stood in the
tabernacle covered with a vealc. Exodus 26 30.40
Even so Christ lies hid den in this divine Sacrament, covered with the forms
and accidents of bread and wine.

Two special things besides many others, the holy scripture reherfeth of the
Arc, the which are also maruailously seen in this Sacrament.

The first is, that God by means of the Arcke bestowed innumerable benefittes
upon the sons of Israel, not only in particular to that house, which
received the Arc worthelie, as he did un to the house of Obededo^; which by
the coming of the Arcke was blessed of God, 3. Reg. 6
but also in general to all the wholle people, who passed over the river of
Jordan dry shod, because the Arc going before them made a way for them, and
the water which came downwardes at the presence of the Arc remained firm and
became like unto a high wall. In like manner this divine Sacrament, not only
brings blessings to all those which worthelie receive the same into the
house of their soul, but also to Provinces and whole Kingdoms over whose
wicked sins and offenses God takes not general revenge in respect of this
most venerable Sacrament.

The second thing is that God grievously punished those which did not reverence
the Arc as in dewtie they ought: or else used the same vndece^tly, as it is
written. 1. Reg. 4.

The people of Israel having in one battle, which they had with the
Philistians, lost four thousand fighting men, they made means that the Arcke
should be brought into their tents, thinking that by the presence of the Arc
they should get the victory. But it happened clean contrary, for that the arc
was taken by the enemies, and of their owte army were killed and slain
thirty thousand; for punishment of their little devotion and bad life. The
Philistians likewise because they used unworthily the Arcke of God, putting the
same in their abominable Temple near unto the Idol Dagon were so grievously
punnished, especially the Azotians, that the holy Scripture says. Aggrauata
est manus Domini super Azotios, and demolitus est eos. 1. Reg. 5.
In such sort the hand of our Lord was so aggrauated upon the Azotians that it
ruined them all. Furthermore the Beth samits for that they did not dew
reverence unto the Arcke, and because they beheld the same with curiosity,
the Scripture says. 1. Reg. 6.
Percussit de populo sept uagin ^a viros, and quinquaginta milia plebis. He
struck seventy men of account, and fifty thousand of the common people. The
self same happens unto those which unworthily use and practice this dreadful
and Misterious Sacrament, by receiving the same in mortal sin, which is
signified by the Idol Dago^, because these can not dwell together.

7 The seventh and last figure, was the meal or flower of Elizeus, for that
this Prophet having sodden certain herbs to give unto the sons of the
Prophets for to eat, 4. Reg. 4.
and they tasting of them, presentlye found them so exceedinge bitter that they
cried out saying unto Elias Mors in olla, vir Dei. O man of God death is in the
pot. For which cause the holy Prophet took meal and mingled the same in the
pipkin and it took away all bitterness from that meat, Christ of this meal
being made bread, and a Sacrament: does sweetten the bitterness of all our
tribulations, and afflictions, and eauseth that they bring unto us not death,
but life.

Of the reverence, and devotion which ancient Saints have used toward this
most divine Sacrament. CHAP. XXIIII.
THAT we may begin with the Queen of all Saints the most B. Virgin Marie, S.
Bonauenture writes that she was most devout toward this divine Sacrament,
and that S. John (to whom our Savior commended the Blessed Virgin his Mother)
said Mass and communicated our Blessed Lady, who with great humility and
devotion received the most glorious body of our Lord, not for remission of her
sins who never committed any one, but to honor and thank our Lord for the
innumerable benefits which she had received, and also to impetrate abundance
of grace and of celestial gifts, for the new and late made Christians. S.
Luke also in the Acts of the Apostles Chapter. 2. very sufficiently declares
the reverence and devotion with those Christians of the Primitive Church, used
toward this heavenly meat of the Altar, for that with great devotion they
often used to receive the same: from hence sprang the great holiness and fervor
of those Ancient Christians who by this means had gotten a facility and
delight, in giving their goods unto the poor in sustaining of injuries, and of
shedding forth their blood for the love of Christ.

It is written, of that, no less godly the^ valiant Emperor Constantine the
Great that he had such devotion and confidence in the virtue of this
misterious Sacrament, that he would never put his souldears into bartell array
for to fight, until they had first done reverence, and had adored the most
holy Eucharist which was consecrated in the Mass which he caused to be said
unto his wholle army upon a portable Altar stone Eusebius in vita Constantini.

S. Augustinae in Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium, says that our Savior for this
respect, deferred to institute this Maiesticall Sacrament until the end of his
life, to the intent that the greatenes and magnificencie thereof should remain
better imprinted in the hearts and memory of his Disciples, and herewith
should be inflamed with love and devotion toward him.

S. Hierome a little before his death demanded the most holy SACRAMENT, which
being brought unto him, he caused him self to be placed on the ground upon a
sack where kneeling, he communicated, with many tears, Eusebius i^ eius vita.

S. John Crysostome in his sixth book of Preisthood, writes that in his time,
a venerable and devout oulde man saw a great multitude of Angels with great
brightness to stand about the most holy Sacrament, and bowing down them selves
they did reverence thereunto, in manner of souldiars when as their Captain is
present with them, or else passes by them.

The same S. Crisostome Homelia 60. ad populu^ Antiochenu^ speaks unto us
after this manner. Think O man how much thou art honored of God, and what
table thou enioiest when as thou do communicate, for that the Angels seeing
it do tremble, and by reason of the great brightness which comes from
thence, they dare not freely to behold it: he says yet farther. Vnus sit nobis
dolor: hac mensa priuari: For no one thing we ought to be so much grieved, as
when we are deprived of this table.

And the same Saint Homelia. 61. calls this Blessed Sacrament, the Miracle of
mysteries, of the law of CHRIST in the which our Sauionr has given unto us
his body, to show unto us the desire which he has toward us, for to make us
the self same thing with him self which is only proper unto those which love
most intierly: And in Homelia 45. in Ioannem. he says that by receiving of
this blessed Sacrament, we become terrible unto very devils, and that we ought
to rise up from this table, in manner of Lions which breaths forth fire.

S. Cirill Bishop of Alexandria, In Ioannem lib. 4. cap. 17. exhorting unto
devotion to ward^ this B. Sacrament says: that it does not only drive away
death, but also delivers us from sickness, quieteth the crewell and
disordinate laws of our members, strengthens our devotion, and pacifieth the
perturbatio^s of our soul. And Christ being received of us, as a good Pastor
which yeel death his life for the safeguard of his sheep, delivers us from the
perilles of this trouble some life.

S. Thomas of Aqu^ne, Opus^. 57. after that he had called the B. Sacrament a
pretiouse banquet, marvelous, wholesome, and full of all sweetness, to induce us
^o devotion toward the same, ^e adioineth these words, say^ng^ that no one
Sacrament is ^^ore wholesome the^ this, for that ^^ereby sins are purged,
ver^ues do increase, and the soul is ^atted with the abundance of ^^ll
spiritual goodness, the sweer^es whereof no one is able wor^^ely to express,
for that in it ^^irituall sweetness is tasted in is own proper fountain, He
^aieth moreover, that CHRIST ^nowing that his disciples would ^e sad and
sorrowful for his de^arture from them, he left unto them this Sacrament, as an
only ^olace and consolation unto them and also to the wholle militant Church.
Again he affirms, that this Sacrament does not on^y help the living but
also the ^^ead.

S. Ignatius in Epist. 10. ad Ephesians. says that by this blessed Sacrament is
expelled and driven away the power of Satan, who directs his actions, like
so many fiery darts, to induce us unto sin.

Cap. 25.
OF the fruits of this marvelous Sacrament, many have written. as Richardus
in 4. sent. did. 11. S. Thomas Opuse. 98. from the 21. chapter until the 25.
But yet all may be reduced unto these twelve points. 1. it reuiueth, 2. it
releaseth, 3. it inflameth, 4. it gives patience, 5. it nourishes, 6. it
restores, 7. it unites, 8. it Communicateh, 9. it heals, 10. it conscrueth,
11. it streng theneth 12. it conducteth. S. Bernard. says that it is the
propriety of the holy Eucharist, to make man meet to receive correction,
patient in traiuells, ardent in love, prompt to obey, and douout in thanks
giving.

S. Vincentius, adds an other which is, that this divine Sacrament is the
best remedy of all others, to escape the pains of Purgatory, for that by
frequenting of this blessed Sacrament it diminishes the pains dew unto sins
that are past.

S. Laurentius Iustinianus here notes, that as corporal meat does nourish
us, and causes us to increase, albeit that we do not perceive it: Even so
this divine Sacrament comfort and strengthens oursoule with increase of
grace although we per ceaue it not.

Cap. 26.
Now, concerning the reuerentiall fear which ought to be had of this so great
and so dreadful a Sacrament, I have have noted some things. First S. Luke in
the Acts of the Apostles cap. 1. Math. cap. 27. do write, that sacrilegious
Judas, having alrea die suiour, and now going about to deliver him into the
Jews hands, and did not withstanding communicate with his perverse intention,
at the end, seeing that Chirst our Savior was condemned, Laqueo se suspendet,
crepuit medius, and essusa sunt viscera eius. He hanged him self with a
halter, burst in the midst, and all his bowels gushed forth, which were so
crewell against his bening Master and benefactor.

S. Paul likewise. 1. Cor. 11. writes of the Corinthia^s, that many of them
were sick and diseased, and many died (not only spiritually, but also
corporally) because they unworthily received the body of our Lord.

S. John Crisostome. Homeli. 6. Adpopulum Antiochenum. says If thou art
offended against Judas, because he betrayed Christ our Savior, and likewise
against the Jews because they crucified him: what wilbecome of thee if after
so many benefits which Christ our Lord has bestowed upon thee, by being made
man, by suffering and by dying for thy love, thou neucrthe lesie receauest him
with a soul defiled with sin? Et Homelia. 83. in Mat. he says that God will
use great revenge, not only against those which unworthily do communicate, but
also against them which knowing such to be wicked and unworthy do communicate
unto them the blessed Sacrament; furthermore he says. Eucn as corporal meat
finding the stomach full of bad humors does hurt and greatly offend him,
which receaueth it. Euca so the most holy Sacrament being spiritual meat
finding malignitie and wickedness in the soul, does ruin and destroy the same;
which proceeds by the fault of him which receives the same with an ill
disposition. S. Augustine affirms the like, in the place before cired;
saying, that they sin no less who receive Christ with a heart defiled with
sin, then they did, who delivered Christ unto me Jews that they should
crucify him.

S. Hierome in a certain Epistle unto Priests, has these words. Tell me
wicked catiue (says he) who receauest the B. Sacrament; how dare thou with
those lips tokisse the sone of God with the which thou have kissed a stru^pet?
O Judas, with a kiss betraiest thou the son of man.

S. Bernard tractatu de modo viuendi ad sororem sermon de communione. Says:
The body of our Lord is life unto them, in whom Christ does live; and it is
death unto them who by their own fault are members of the devil, receiving
the blessed Sacrament to their own damnation. Et sermon de caena Domini he
says, they which wickedly do communicate, with Judas the traitor receive
poison. And an other Doctor says to communicate in mortal sin is no other,
then to kiss Christ, afterward that he has sold him for sensual delight.

S. Thomas opuse. 58. cap. 28 de claring the great ingratitude of those which
receive our Lord in mortal sin, speaks after this manner. Tell me (says S.
Thomas) If a slave had a Lord so loving, that besides other infinite benefits
which he had done unto him, should afterward with his own death deliver him
from hanginge: and this slave receiving afterward his Lord into his house,
should thrust him into a filthy stable, deliver him unto his enemy, and they
together should tread and trample his Lord under their feet, would not this be
over exceeding in gtatitude? But the self same does he which receaueth the B.
Sacrament unworthily

Now. if you ask me, who are they which communicate unworthily? I answer that
they are all such, as being in mortal sin, without Confession, or without
repenting them of their sins, or without firm puposes of finning no more
mortally, or being excommunicated, or else with evil intention do communicate.
The reason is, because they do injury unto this so great a Sacrament, which
containing Christ, who is the fountain of all holiness and purity, ought tobe
received with chief sanctity and purity, and this our Lord would fignifie
unto us, when as he washed the feet of his Apostles before that he would
communicate them. Joan. 13.

S. Cyprian sermon. 5. de Lapsis rehearses. 4. Miracles which happened in his
time, for chastisment of those which unworthily had received or handled this
most divine and venerable Sacrament.

S. John Chrysostom Homilia 5. in Epist. ad Timothoum. says to this purpose.
Nonest audaciae saepius accedere ad Dominica^ men sam; sed indigne accedere,
etiam si semel quispiam in toto vitae tempore accedat: It is not presumption to
go often unto the table of our Lord; but it is presumption to go unworthily,
albeit one go but only once in the wholle course of his life. Et in oratione
de. B. Philogom, he says Communionis Tempus non est Festum nec celebritas sed
conscientia pura vit aque a peccat is repurgata. The time for to be
communicated, is not the feast nor celebritie, but a pure conscience, and a
life purged from sin.

S. Hilarious, vt refertur de con secrat. did. 2. Can. Timendum est. says, Ne
diu abstractus a corpore Christi, alienus remaneat a salute: Under qui peccare
quieuerit, communicare non desinat. It is to be feared least that the over long
deferring of the blessed Sacrament, should alienate a man from salvation,
wherefore let him not fail from communicating, who has rested from sinning.

S. Ambrose de Sacrament is: lib. 5. cap. 4. exhorting to fiequent the
receiving of this most wholesome Sacrament, says these words: Sic viue, vt
merearis quotidie accipere: qui emm non meretur quotidie accipere, non me retur
post annum accipere. Live in such manner that thon may deserve to receive
every day for he which is not worthy to receive (our Lord) often, shall be
less worthy to receive him after a wholle year. The very same says S.
Angustine is it Epistola ad Ianuariu^, and Sermon 28. de verbis Domini.

CERTAIN MIRAcles of the most holy Sacrament, gathered out of approved
Authors. CHAP. XXVII.
1 SAINT Gregory the POPE, communicating the people, when as he came unto a
certain Matrone, and putting out his hand to have communicated her, said (as
is also the use at this present) Corpus Domini nostri Jesus Christi etc. the
woman began for to laugh, but this holy Pope perceauing her laughter, drew
back again his hand and placed that Host upon the Altar. when Mass was
ended he called the woman unto him, and in the presence of the people he
demanded of her, wherefore she laughed in so holy and dreadful an action? She
answered that she could not believe how that Host should he the body of our
Lord, since that she had made the same with her own hands. Saint Gregore
presently kneeled down with the people and prayed unto Almighty God, and
soddainly that consecrated Host, was miraculously changed into flesh: wherewith
they all were amazed, the woman was converted unto the faith, and the wholle
people were much confirmed in their faith; afterward prayer being made again,
that same flesh became an HOST again as it was before, and the woman received
the same with great consolation. Ioannes Diaconus in vita Gregory Libro 2.
Cap. 41.

2 S. Gregory Naztanzene in his Oration of the death of Gorgonia his Sister,
writes how that she being sick of an incurable disease and having lost all
hope of human healpe and remedy went secretly in the night into the Church,
where prostrating her self before the most blessed Sacrament, she prayed in
such sort, that she rose up again wholle and sound with great admiration unto
the whole household.

3 Venerable Bede, in Historia Angl. lib. 4. cap. 22. writes that a young
English man called Imma was taken in a battle, and the man to whom he was
prisoner, kept him fast bound in chains until his ransom should be paid him;
But yet every day at a certain hour his bands were unloosed of them selves,
and Imma with great marvel unto them all remained free. Afterward he
understood, that a brother of his being a Priest thinking that Imma had been
slain in the battle said Mass every day for the delivery of his soul out
of Purgatory, and thereby, at the time of the Elevation of the sacred Host and
Chalice, the chains of his brother Imma were losed.

4 A noble man of Germany called Oswald Mulcer: When he was to communicate at
Easter, was not contented with a little Host as other did communicate, but
would needs have: great one. The Parish Priest for fear consented to his
demand. But at the very time of hisco^municating when as the Priest was
putting the great Host into his mouth, the Earth miraculously opened under the
feet of the noble man and began for to swallow him up, wherewith laying his
hand upon the Altar (which was of stone) for to hold up him self, the very
stone became so soft that he could take no hold thereby, wherefore this
miserable wretch perceauing this revenge of Almighty God, demanded at his
hands pardon for his pride and arrogancy, and being not able to swallow down
the sacred Host, the Priest reserved the same, and until this day it is kept,
being colored something with blood, having also some sign where his spittel
did touch it, and likewise is kept the stone of the Altar wherein is plainly
to be seen, the impression of his fingers when as he would have stayed him
self thereby. This Miracle happened in the villadge of Stefeild in Germany
three miles distant from Oenipont, But some years past, the sacred Host and
the Altar stone were transported to Isprug for fear of heretics, who being
enemies unto this most venerable Sacrament seek by all means they can to hide
and suppres the worthy miracles thereof. Tilmannus Bredenbachius lib. 1.
Sacraru^ collationum. cap. 35.

5 When as s. John Chrysostom did convert by his learned Sermons and
preachinge a chief and principal Heretic, who had so wonderful desire to
reduce his wife also unto the true faith, that for seeing her obstinatly to
resist it, he told her plainly that unless she would become a Catholic he
would be separated from her. The wife fearing to be divorced from her husband,
feigned her self to be converted, and to show her self a Catholic, went to
communicate with other Catholics. But because she was afraid to receue the
sacred Eucharist, she procured that a faithful handmaide of hers should
secretly bring from her house a particle of bread very like unto that which
was given unto the communicantes, and when it was time she couertlye took that
bread of her servant, and feigning that it was consecrated, she put the same
into her mouth, which miraculously was turned into a stone. This woman being
affrighted and terrified with this Maracle, went presently unto the holy
Bishop S. Chrysostom, made manifest this fact unto him and showed him the
stone, in the which was to be seen the biting of her teeth: the substance of
which stone was no common matter, but altogether unknown, and the color
thereof was maruailous fair: this woman therefore casting her self down at
the feet of this holy Bishop, with tears demanded pardon, and being
repentant for her obstinacy and wicked dissimulation, was trewly converted,
wherefore she was reconciled unto the Church and lived Catholickely with her
husband. This miracle is written by Nicephorus Calistus lib. 13. cap. 7. and by
Sozomene lib. 8. cap. 5.

6 Rodolph Conte of Aspurge being one day a huntinge, there came a great
tempest of rain, and meeting by chance with a Priest that went alone, he
asked of him whether he went in that great rain? The Priest answered that he
went to carry the Blessed Sacrament unto one of his parishioners lying sick
in the country Rodolphe presently dismounted from his horse and knee ling down
upon the ground, he humbly adored the most holy Sacrament: Afterward he took
of his own cloacke and put it upon the Priest, to whom also he gave his horse
and he him self went by a foot to accompany the blessed Sacrament unto the
poor sick country man's house. The good Priest, admiring the piety and
courtesy of the County, gave him very harrie thanks, and humbly beseeched the
divine goodness of Almighty God to reward him for it. ( amaruailous thing)
within a small time after, Radolphe the County was chosen Emperor, his
Successors Archdukes of Austria, Princes, and Kings of innumerable Countries.
Wherefore it may trewly be said, that the greatness of the house of Austria
sprang forth from devotion and piety toward the most holy Sacrament.
Theatr. vitaehum. vo lum. 27. lib. 3. titulo Sacrorum. 7 Pascasius libro de
corpore Dominicap 14. writes how that a Priest very godly and holy, did pray
instantlye ynto Almighty God, that for his own comfort he might see our Lord
in the consecrated Host; he obtained this favor, and saw our Sauiourin the
form of a most fair young child, with which sight he received incredible
consolation. The same Paschasius says that God is wont to do the like
miracles, either for the confirmation of simple persons, as was the above said
miracle of S. Gregory the Pope; or else for the consolation of those, which love
him most ardently, as was the example of this good Priest.

8 S. Ambrose in the funeral Oration of Satyrus his brother says, that as
Satyrus sailed, the ship being broken, he made shipwreck, fell into the sea,
and was accounted for dead, but because he had communicated before, he was
embarked, by the virtue of the most blessed Sacrament he was saved, otherwise
he would have been drowned, as were the rest of his company.

9 A Jew being desirous to see the mysteries of Christians, went into their
Church and heard devoutly the Mass of S. Basil, and at the Eleuatio^ of the
sacred Host he saw therein the little child Jesus, very gracious and amiable to
behold, with which vision he was incrediblie comforted, and when as the people
did communicate, he also did the like, and reserved a piece of the co^munichine
for to show unto his wife, and telling her also the vision which he had seen of
the child Jesus, and praising the mysteries of the Christians he endeavored to
cause her to bear good affection unto them. The day following without any
longer delay, he went forth to seek out Saint Basil, and rehearsing unto him,
the wholle success of this matter would be baptized of him. Amphilochius in
vita Basilis and Cirus Prodroma in his Epigrames

10 In the time of S. Bernard, there was a poor man, but a good Christian, who
by the witch craft of his aduoutrouse wife, was greatly tormented both day and
night, by means wherofnis flesh was wholly consumed: This poor man was brought
unto S. Barnard, who understanding the pain which he suffered took compassion
upon him, making his brethren to bring him into the Church. and taking in his
hand the Pixe wherein was reserved the B. Sacrament, he put the same upon his
head and presently the poor man was delivered from all witchcraft, and made
altogether whole that by himself he went well home unto his house. Gulielmus
in vita Sancti Bernardi. lib. 1. cap. 10.

11 In the book called Pratune Spirituale. cap. 30. It is written how that in
Dade a city of Ciprus was an hereticl^e called Isidorus, who would by no means
that his wife (who was a Catholic) should communicate; for which cause he
set spies over her: upon a time he knowing that his wife was gone into the
house of one of his neighbors to communicate, the heretical husband ran
forth and came unto her, when as she had even then communicated, wherefore being
altogether furiouse, he took his wife by the throat and did so gird the
same, that by tousing and tossinge of her to and fro he enforced her to cast
up the blessed Sacrament, and not contented here withal, for greater contempt
and dispite, be trod and tra^pled upon the B. Sacrame^n but presently he saw a
flame of fire which carried one high the sacred Host. wherewith the Heretic
remained somewhat a mazed: Two days after this fact was done, appeared unto
him a very black and terrible man, saying unto him. Isidoro. I and thou, are
condemned unto the one and self same punishment. But who art thou said
Isidorus? he answered and said, I am he which buffeted Christ in the pre sense
of Anna, wherewith Isiderus being afraid, he gave himself to do very hard and
sharp penance.

12 It is written in the life of S. Clare that when as Frederick the Emperor
afflicted the Church, the Sarecens entering into Assisia had already scaled the
walls of the monastery to have dishonored those holy Nuns. But S. Clare
being advised who was then Abbas of the said Nunrie, albeit she was weak and
sick nevertheless with sound and firm faith she took the Pixe wherein was
reserved the B. Sacrament, and placing the same toward the place whereas the
enemies were to come she prayed after this manner. O Lord preserve these your
servants, who for to do you service have forsaken the world, and for your love
are here enclosed, defend them your self good Lord, because that I can not
defend them: and she had scarcely said these words when as a voice was heard
to say I will guard and defend you, and presently the Saracens began to sly
away with such fear and dreadfulnesse, Sur. To. 4. Vial. de fruct. sanct d s.
27.
that many fell down from the walls and others were stricken so blind that
they saw not whether they went.

13 S. Malachia Bishop labored much with prinate reasons to convert a Clerk
which denied that in the consecrated Host was Christ our Lord: but he
prevailed nothing. Afterward he twice disputed with him, and although that in
both of these two disputatio^s the Clerk was plainly convinced, nevertheless
he remained obstinate in his errors, wherefore then the good Bishop was
constrained to declare him for an heretic: which thing the Clerk taking in
great disdain, said that he would never change his opinion, (which he said was
the gospel.) Then the holy Bishop with great zeal and with a loud voice said
unto him, since therefore thou will not confess the truth with a good will, God
make the to confess it by force. To whom the Heretic answered, Amen. (A
marvelous thing) The self same day the Clearke fell sick unto death,
perceived his error, and the chastisement of Almighty God, caused the Bishop
to be called for, confessed that in the consecrated Host was Christ our Lord,
both God and Man, and receiving absolution, In vita S. Malachiaescrip ta per S.
Bernard.
and being reconciled unto the Church having bewailed his errors past, and
giving God most hearty thanks for this benefit, he ended his life.

14 Cesarius in sua historia. lib. 9 cap. 12. writes that in his time certain
heretics called Albigenses by their deuilish art did work diverse stranges
things: and emongst others, this was one, that thy walked upon nuers without
sincking, and with this wicked art they drew many simple people unto their
heresy: wherefore a certain zealous Priest being much moved, took the Pixe,
wherein was kept the blessed Sacrament, and with aloud voice spoke these words.
I conjure thee, thou wicked Devil, in the power of him which I hold in my
hand that thou leave of these thy deceitful illusions wherewith thou ruinest
these people. And when as this fervent Priest saw them not with standing to
walk upon the water, he cast the Pixe ^ogither with the blessed Sacrament into
the same river. (A mar ^ailous matter) presently after hat the B. Sacrament
touched he water, the river opened and wallowed up all those deuilish and
wicked heretics, by which Miracle, the people remained much confirmed in their
faith. But the good Priest remained so browfull, that the wholle night ^e
lamented his throwing of the blessed Sacrament into the river Yet in the next
morning he war greatly comforted, for that entering early into the Church, he
found upon the Altar the Pixe with the venerable Sacrament brought thither by
a Angel of God, which he with incredible joy saw and adored, and having
afterward made a solemn Procession with his wholle parishioners, with
abundance of ioifull tears and admiration, he placed the blessed Sacrament
again in the Tabernacle.

15 In Oruieto a City in Italiey a certain Priest saying Mass doubted
whether that in the Host which he had consecrated were our Lord, and going
forward with Mass, in the breaking of the Host (as is wont to be done) there
issued forth such abundance of blood, that it blouded the whole corporal, by
the occasion of this miracle Vrbanus guartus who was then Pope instituted the
feast of the most B. Sacrament commonly called Corpus Christi day: which is
usually celebrated the next Thursday after the week of Pentecost: and a most
fair Church was builded in the saine City, where until this day is kept and
often showed with great solemnity, the aforesaid Corporal died with blood.

16 Nauclerus in the Cronicle. Anno Domini 1280.
writes that in a City of Flaunders, called Mastrich, were about two hundred
men and women a dancing upon the Bridge of the river called Mosa, who when as
the blessed Sacrament passed by the^, did not only keep on their dau^cing, but
farther did no reverence unto our Lord. and behold at the same instant the
Bridge fell down, and of all that unhappy multitude, was saved but one man,
who was witness of this miracle, all the other were either killed with the
breaking of the Bridge, or else drowned in the river.

17 Optatus Episcopus Mileuitanus writes a maruailous thing which happened in
Africa unto Vrbanus Formensis and unto Falix Idecre^sis, Lib. a in Parme^.
both being wicked Heretics and Donatistes: these two wicked caitiues
thinking to take away from the people all devotion toward the blessed
Sacrament, caused before the wholle people that the holy Eucharist should be
cast unto their dogs, that they should eat the same (a marvelous matter)
these dogs by the just judgment of Almighty God, leaving the holy Eucharist
untouched, ran presently upon their own masters these two heretics, and
most miserably mangled, and killed them, as if they had been thieves and never
seen before.

18 In the city of millan was a woman which was many years possessed with a
Devil, which had deprived her, both of her sight and of her hearing, and her
tongue came so far forth out of her mouth that it seemed a horrible thing to
see it, like unto the troncke of an Elephant. This woman was brought to S.
Bernard into the Church, where was ^n very great concourse of people. S. Bernard
taking the sacred Host upon the Patene, and holding the same over the head of
the possessed party, said these words: Wicked spirit I command thee, in the
power of this our LORD, who is thy Judge and died for us, to depart and to
touch no more this servant of God. In vita S. Bernardi lib 2. cap. 3
Presently the Deuell departed and the woman was delivered.

19 Palladius in vita. S. Macharis writes that a virtuous woman by negligence
for some weeks did not communicate as before she was wo^t to do, in the which
time a wicked man did solicit her unto sin, and when as she would not consent
unto him, for dispit and disdain thereof, he went to a Nigromant and inchaunter
to work the woman some mischief This man by his inchauntment brought to pass
that this woman seemed unto all men sightes to be a Mare, and after this manner
she remained the space of three days with out eating, wherefore her husband and
her kindred brought the woman unto S. Macharius, who first praying for her and
afterward by sprinkling of holy water upon her, she presently was free from
that illusio^, and he exhorted her to frequent the B. Sacrament: telling her,
that God had permitted this trouble and affliction to happen unto her, for that
she remained.5. weeks without being communicated. 20 Anno Domini 1556. In
Sachazeto in the kingdom of Polonia, it happened that a Christian servant
called Dorothe Lazezka after that she had received our Lord, she presently took
the Blessed Sacrament out of her mouth, put it into her handkercheif and gave
it unto her Master that was a Jew, who had induced her to do this wicked fact,
by promising to give her afterward a new gown, and some money besides. Now
then this Jew called unto him.3. other Jews Michaleco Sacao and Iosepho, and
these four carrying the sacred Host into their wicked Synagog, there with
daggers and knives gave many blows and strokes upon the consecrated Host,
from the which miracuously issued forth such abundance of blood that gathering
it from the ground with a spone they filled a great vessel. But this
Sacrilegious act was presently discovered and the four perfidious Jews were
sone apprehended, who by commandment from Sigismond then King of Polon were
al burned. At that time in the same country were many which demanded to
receive the B. Sacrament, not only under the Host but also in the form of
wine, Surius in appen dree Cheronologiae Naucleri prope finem.
but the fame of this miracle being spread abroad they desisted from this
demand, saying that because in the sacred Host is seen to be blood, it was
sufficient for the Laietie in communicating, only to receive the sacred Host.

The like miracle happened in Flaunders in a city called Bruscels, Anno
Domini. 1396.
where in the Church called S. Gudula, is showed a consecrated Host, in the
which until this day is to be seen the strokes of a knife which Abraham a
Jew gave unto the Blessed Sacrament upon good Friday and as yet the blood is
to be seen in the Host. Of which Miracle has also written Guicciardinus in
descriptionc Germaniae inferioris: In many other citries of Europe has
happened the like as is noted in Theatro vitae humanae. to. 17. lib. 9. pa.
3225. col. 1

21 Venerabilis Beda in collecta. neis sub finem. writes how that Bonifacius
the Pope communicating the people, a certain young Jew which was there
present, did communicate likewise amongst the rest, who presently after that
he had received the B. Sacrament, cried out with a loud voice saying, run
Bonifacius to Baptize me, for that the bread which I have received does burn
and confound me. The Jews hearing of this matter did raise such an uproar that
the father of this young child having a house of fagotts, put his son therein
and set it on fire, which, his mother seeing began to cry out and call upon
the blessed Virgin Marie that she would vouchsafe to help and succor her
son: but the furious Jews cast like-wise the mother into the fire after her
son: the rumor hereof presently came unto Saint Bonifacius, who in his
Preistlie vestimentes (for as yet he had not put them of) came and entered into
the sire and de liuered the mother and the son safe and sound from all hurt
of the fire.

22 S. Antonie of Padoua being in the city of Tolosa, disputed with an
heretic about the blessed Sacrament, who being altogether unable to answer
the arguments of this Saint: spoke these words. O Antonie thou confoundest me
with thy words and therefore let us now come to some trial of deeds. Let it be
done I pray you said S. Antonie: the heretic replying said. I have a Mule,
whom I will cause to remain three days without eating any meat, and
afterward I will bring her into the market place, whither thou shall come with
thy Sacrament, and I with my prouender, if my Mule leaving her oats shall come
to adore thy Sacrament, I will believe in it, and I promise thee to adore it
also: In the name of our Lord let it be done said S. Antonie; In the mean time
this matter was published through out the wholle city and into many places in
France. The third day being come, both the parties came into the place
appointed with a great multitude of people. Here S. Antonie had caused to be
made an Altar, upon the which he said Mass having about him very many Lords
and noble men, standing with their torches ready lighted and being desirouse to
see the end of this matter. S. Antonie before he did communicate, stood holding
the sacred Host in his hand, and then the heretic began to take forth his
oats out of his sack and put them before his Mule, who with great greedines
began for to eat them: But Saint Antonie turning him self about, full of
firm faith said unto the Mule, in the power of this Lord which remains in
this sacred Host I command the to leave thy oats, and to come presently to
acknowledge and adore thy Maker. (a maruailous thing) he had scarcely spoken
these words, when as the Mule presently left the prouender before her, cast
forth that which was in her mouth, bowing down her head, approached unto S.
Antonie, and kneeling upon the ground made reverence and adored our Lord which
was in the consecrated Host, S. Antonius ^n summa h^st. part 3. tit. 24 Surius
Tom. 3
where with the here ticke was converted and the Catholics exulted with joy
and gladness 23 S. Augustine writes how that in his time the house of Hesperius
Tribunitius was so troubled and afflicted with malign spirits that nether man
nor beast could remain therein, 22. de ciuitate Dei. c. 8.
and how that a Priest saying Mass therein with the presence of the blessed
Sacrament, freed the house altogether from them. The owner of the said house
reported this miracle unto S. Augustine.

24 Cesarius in sua historia writes that an heretic which was an inchanter
being condemned to die, went away laughing, and being bound unto the stake and
in the midst of the fire wherewith he was to be burned, He called upon the
Devil with his wicked art, who suddenly put out the fire, whereat the
Negromancer laughed much more the^ before he did; But the Bishop being
informed of this matter, brought with him the blessed Sacrament and made the
fire to be kindled again: wherefore the heretic called upon the Devil again
for to help him, but he answered him saying, now I can not help thee, for
that he is here present which can do more then I am able to do. 25 In London a
city of England it happened that in the Church of S. Paul, a certain Tailor
being an heretic was accused before the Archbishop (who the^ was Thomas
Arundell of Canterbury) for that he made not reverence unto the B. Sacrament,
the Archbishop most lovingly exhorted him to honor so worthy a Sacrament and
the heretic answered him most impudentlie that the spider was more worthy to
be honored the^ the Eucharist, which words he had scarcely ended, before that
an horrible spider of unmeasurable greatness miraculously fell down from the
roof of the church by his thread which he weaued, and went toward the
sacrilegious mouth of the heretic for to enter therein and to do reueng for
such wicked blasphemy, Tom. 2 cap. 63 contra VViclesum.
Thomas waldensis who with diverse other Prelates was the^ there present writes
this miracle.

26 In Constantinople it was used that when as any consecrated particles did
remain, to call from the school pure and innocent children to whom they gave
the particles which were left. It hap^ed upon a time that amongst these
children was also the son of a jew a glassmaker a chief enemy unto
Christians. This Jew understanding that his son had received the most B.
Sacrament came to be so furious that being blinded with passion he cast his
own son into the furnace of glass which burned extremely, the mother not
knowing of this wicked fact of her husband, went up and down the City
searchinge for her son with sheding many tears and making much lamentation,
the third day standinge at the door of her shop near unto the furnace she be
wailed her l^st son, and with sorrowful sithes she often named him: at length
the son hearing the voice of his mother answered her out of the slaming
furnace, This Miracle is written of Euagrius. l. 4. c. 36. and of G. egorius
Turonensis and of N^^eph^rus Calistus. li. 17. c. 25.
wherefore the mother ran presently unto him and seeing her son in the
midest of the flame miraculously kept and preserved was much moved with this
miracle, and knowing the cause thereof she left her Iudayisme and became a
Christian: and this matter being related unto Justinian the Emperor, be caused
the father being a Jew to be punnished as a killer of his own sone.

27 In Bauaria near unto In^olstade was a certain simple contrie man, but
devout, who by means of keeping of his cattle could not go every feast to
^dore the Blessed Sacrament in ^he Mass: wherefore he secretly ^rocured a
consecrated particle and put the same into a hole in ^is staff, which he had
made ^or this end and purpose, and on ^he feasts when as he could not go unto
the Church he sticked ^is staff into the ground, he ^neeled down upon the
earth with his knees, he adored the B. ^acrament, he said the Rosary of our
Lady, and did other his ^euotions: he had also an other ^affe which served him
to guide and direct his cattle: It happe^ed upon a time, that the beasts which
he kept being moved either with the change of the wether or else by some other
accident, did run up and down hither and thither, he for to gather them
together first cast after the^ his ordinary staff and after that hastily the
other wherein was the Blessed Sacrament, but presently perceiving of it he
became very sorrowful for this fact and kneeling down to take up the staff,
the earth where the staff lay suncke lower and lower and the more that he
bended him self to it, the more it still did sincke, at length sorowfully
raising up him self, he saw all his cattle kneeling round about the ditch
adoring our Lord, with which Miracle this good man was much amazed, and with
great lame^tation went to declare this wholle matter unto his Parish Priest,
who related it unto the Bishop which presently came with solemn Procession
unto the place and with great reuetence and humility took up the staff wherein
was the blessed Sacrament, and in this place for memory of this Miracle builded
a goodly Church, which was called the Church of our Savior, hither came great
concourse of people who took for devotion some small quantity of the earth of
the ditch. I know not what Author has written this history in Italy. But I
have been in this place I have seen the ditch, I have visited this Church In the
which I think that as yet is painted this miracle.

28 In the City of Nouiamage in Gelderland, In the way as the Parish Priest
carried the blessed Sacrament unto a sick woman, were two young heretics
playing with eggs of Easter which should more speedely swallowe up their
eggs. And the blessed Sacrament being past by, one of these two young men said,
I will sooner swallow up this egg the^ that wench will, that Diastro God: for
so in dispite he called the B. Sacrament, and presently therewith put the egg
into his mouth, which miracuously did stick fast in his throat; and this
miserable wretch fearing least that he should be choked therewith, took a
tallowe candell and put the same into his throat for to make the egg go down
(a maruailous thing) all the tallow of the candel went from the weke and was
settled round about the egg and moved it nothing at all, This miracle happened
Anno Domini 1561. 8. die Aprilis, et scribitur a Tillma no Brede^hachio lib. 7.
Sacrarum collet. c. 60.
and ass he drew forth again the week this miserable heretic fell down
dead, and became so black and so brutish that he seemed to be rather a devil
then a man. Afterward his throat was opened and they found the egg toward
the rout of his tongue, with which chastisment Christ showed him self to be the
true God, and not a Diastro as that wicked heretic called him

29 It is written in the book called Promptuarium Exemplorum, and Cesarius
rehearses it also, how that a certain woman perceauinge that her Bees did
yield her little fruit but died pitifully: through the counsel of an other,
she put the Blessed Sacrament into one of her Be hiues and coming afterward to
see if her Bees had gathered any more store of honey then before they did: she
found in that hiue a little Chapel of most white wax which the Bees had made
with marvelous art, in the midst whereof was an Altar, with a Pi^e wherein
was the Blessed Sacrament. The Bishop being advertised he^e of came in
Procession to take forth the Blessed Sacrament, and carried the same in to the
Church with common joy and reioicing of the whole people

30 Unto that which now lastly I mean to speak of, I my self have been an
eye witness: In Rome Anno Domine 1563. In the Hospital of S. John Lateran A
young Turk about twenty years oulde having remained some years in Ancona
with his father a merchant of Turkey, in the end fled from his father unto Rome
where finding no other refuge, he put him self to serve a Gentleman, with whom
he went to Church, heard Mass, and because he had perfectlye gotten the
Italian tongue, he was commonly accounted for a Christian: After some few
months this young Turk fell sick, and his master sent him unto the
Hospital, where he was received and also advised by the master of the Hospital
to prepare him self for to be confessed and to receive, for so was the order
of that house, The young man for fear least that he should have been cast of
and rejected, promised to do so, and did it without any discovering of him
self to be a Turk, (a marucilous matter) presently after that he had received
the Blessed Sacrament, he demanded to be Baptized, with such zeal and fervor
that he could hide him self no longer but publicly affirmed that he was a
Turk. The master of the Hospital thinking that he had not been well in his
wits, sent me who came as a companion of a Father (which preached on the
festival days in the said Hospital) to quiet and pacify him. The young man
rehearsed unto me all that which here I have said, and desired me to solicit
his baptising, affirming unto me that he found great burning with in him, and
that therefore he was not able to rest or repose him self. The Chapline having
well examined the matter, and finding that he had been circumcised, did baptize
him, who having received holy Baptism, was quiet and died the next day.

An Admonition to the Christian Reader. Cap. 28.
REMEMBER (Christian Reader) that as thou art composed of Soul and of body;
even so thou have two lives; the one temporal subject to a thousand
casualties: The other spiritual, subject also to many imperfections and
miseries. That consists in the vnio^ of the soul with the body which was
made in the womb of thy mother: when as God creating thy soul, did unite it
unto thy body: This consists in the vnio^ of grace with thy soul, which is
made in the lap or bosom of the Church our mother, when as in the Sacrament
of Baptism, God infused grace into thy soul. Both the one and the other life,
as they have their contraries and enemies so have they convenient remedies. God
therefore foreseeing, that the enemies of our spiritual health and life (which
are sins) would often times prevail; As a Physician no less skillful then
merciful, amongst many other helps has instituted two Sacraments for
remedy of our spiritual life. One of holy Confession, An other of the B.
Sacrament; that to give spiritual life (which is none other then to live in
the grace of God;) and it is performed by driving away sin and by conferring
of grace: This: to conserve the same life; which is done by feeding our soul
and by giving it force to resist tentatio^s. But that which now a days is
greatly to be lamented, is, that albeit the spiritual life of our soul is
more worthy and of greater importance then the temporal life of this miserable
body, yet nevertheless men make little account thereof, and diversely prefer the
other before it; What ^oth not a sick person for the ^ecouery of his corporal
health? He spares no charges, he regar^eth no traiuells, he cares for ^o
bitterness of medicines, and ^e easily endures the launcing ^f sharp rasors,
and the burning ^f hot irons; he seeks out and ^ndeth for most skillful
Phisiti^ns, and he procures to have all and of most exquisit medicines: and
all this he does for getting ^f corporal health, which whe^^er he will or no
indureth for a small while, and that, with infinite labor and travail. Tell
me now therefore O Christian Reader, if for the recovery of our spiritual
health thou use so great diligence? Judge then if this be not a matter
worthily to be lamented: I will not here by discoursing search and seek out
the cause of this great carelesnes, whether it be for want of belief or else
for want of considering those things which our holy faith teaches us: But for
conclusion of this my small work I do give thee this advise and counsel; if
thou desire as thou ought to desire, to obtain spiritual health and life
go often to Confession: and if thou desire to keep and preserve this life,
do thou also communicate often: for believe me, in the Church of Christ is no
better means, nor yet any more forcible reason, to have security of saving thy
soul (as far as possibly it may be had in this dangerous life) then to
frequent (as they ought to be) these two Sacraments in conformation whereof I
will here set down that which is written in the book called Promptuarium
Exemplorum. Two young studients, being devout and dear friends, bargained
together, that the first of them which died (God permitting of it) should ^ome
and give notice unto the other of his estate: One of these happened to die, and
seventeen days afterward appeared most ^right unto his Companion saying unto
him. I by the grace of God am saved, and enjoy already the glory of heaven:
the other saying unto him, in what thing did thou please God most whilst
that thou liuedst upon earth; he answered, in frequenting of the Sacraments,
and chiefly by often receiving the B. Sacrament with devotion and being far
from all sin. Vigl. de fruct. san. dis. 27.

THIS WHICH Follows is taken forth of S. Thomas de Aquino Opusc. 57. In the
which is the Office and the Mass of the most holy Sacrament. the one and the
other were composed of him by the commandment of the holy Pope Urban the 4.
which instituted the feast of the most holy Sacrament.
The Himne at the first Euensong.
PANGE lingua gloriosi,
Corporis mysterium,
Sanguin: sque pretiosi,
Quem in mundi pretium,
Fructus ventris generosi,
Rex effudit gentium.
Nobis datus, nobis natus,
Exintacta Virgin.
Et in mundo conuersatus,
Sparso verbi semine,
Sui moras incolatus,
Miro clausit ordine.
In supremae nocte cenae,
Recumbens cum fratribus,
Obseruata lege plene
Cibis in legalibus,
Cibum turbae duodenae
Se dat suis manibus.
Verbum caro panem verum;
Verbo carnem efficit,
Fitque sanguis Christi merum
Et si sensus deficit;
Ad firmandum cor sincerum,
Sola fides fufficit.
Tantum ergo Sacramentum
Veneremur cernui:
Et antiquum documentu^
Nouo cedat ritui:
Prestet fides supplementu^
Sensuum defectui.
Genitori, genitoque
Laus, and iubilatio,
Salus, honor, virtus quoque,
Sit, and benedictio,
Procedenti ab vtroque
Compar sit laudatio. Amen.
The same in English.
OF Christ his body glorious
Sing my tongue the mystery
And also of his precious blood,
Which the worlds price to be,
The king of nations did shed forh
Fruit of noble womb was he.
On us bestowed and for us borne,
Of a maid untouched indeed,
Conversant upon the earth,
Sowing of his word thee seed,
And of his time of being here,
Strangely he the end decreed.
The night he with his brethren sat:
And his supper last did make:
In full observance of the law,
Law-assigned meats did take,
Himself food to Apostles twelve
With his hands he did betake.
The word now being flesh become,
So very bread flesh by the word
And wine the Blood of Christ is made,
Though our sense it not afford:
But this in heart sincere to fix:
Faith suffices to accord.
Wherefore a Sacrament so great,
Humbly prostrate we adore,
And unto rites begun of late,
Sawes must yield that were before:
And where our sense is seen to false
There must faith supply restore.
Unto the Father and the Son
Joy and praise ascribed be,
And saving health honor and power,
As also benedicite:
And to him that from both proceeds,
Praises like acknowledge we.
Amen.
The Himne at Mattens.
SAcris solemnijs iuncta sint gaudia,
Et ex praecordijs sonent praeconia,
Recedant vetera, noua fint omnia,
Corda, voces and opera.
Noctis recolitur cena nouissima,
Qua Christus creditur agnum, azima
Dedisse fratribus, iuxta legitima
Priscis in dulta patribus.
Post agnum typicum expletis epulis,
Corpus dominicum datum discipulis,
Sic totum omnibus, quod totum singulis,
Eius fatemur manibus.
Dedit fragilibus corporis ferculum,
Dedit, and tristibus sanguinis poculum,
Dicens, Accipite quod trado vasculum,
Omnes ex eo bibite.
Sic sacrificium istud instituit,
Cuius officium committi voluit
Solis presbyteris, quibus sic congruit,
Vt sumant, and dent caeteris.
Panis angelicus sit panis hominu^:
Dat panis caelicus figuris terminum,
O res mirabilis manducat Domi number,
Pauper seruus, and humilis.
Te trina deitas, vnaque; poscimus
Sic nos tu visita, sicut te colimus,
Per tuas semitas duc nos, quo tendimus,
Ad lucem quam inhabitas.
Amen.
The Himne at the Lauds.
VERBVM supernu^ prodiens,
Nec patris linque^s dextra^
Ad opus suum exiens,
Venit od vitae vesperam.
In mortem a discipulo,
Suis tradendus emulis,
Prius in vitae ferculo,
Se tradidit discipulis.
Quibus sub bina specie,
Carnem dedit, and sanguinem,
Vt duplicis substantiae,
Totum cibaret hominem.
Se nascens dedit socium,
Conuescens in edulium,
Se moriens in pretium.
Se regnans dat in praemium.
O salutaris hostia,
Quae coelis pandis ostiume
Bella praemunt hostilia,
Da robur, fer auxilium.
Vni trinoque domino,
Sit sempiterna gloria:
Qui vitam sine termino,
Nobis donet in patria. Amen.
The sequence after the Epistle of the Mass.
LAVDA Sion Saluatorem,
Lauda ducem and pastorem,
In hymnis, and canticis.
Quantum potes, tantum aude,
Quia mayor omni laud,
Nec laudare sufficis.
Laudis thema specialis,
Panis viuus, and vitalis,
Hodie proponitur.
Quem in sacrae mensa cenae,
Turbae fratrum duodenae,
Datum non ambigitur.
Sit laus plena, sit sonora,
Sit iucunda, sit decora,
Mentis iubilatio.
Dies enim solemnis agitur;
In qua mensae prima recolitur
Huius institutio,
In hac mensa noui regis,
Nouum Pascha nouae legis,
Phase vetus terminat.
Vetustatem nouitas,
Vmbram fugat veritas,
Noctem lux eliminat.
Quod in cena Christus gessit,
Faciendum hoc expressit,
In sui memoriam.
Docti sacris institutis,
Panem vinum in salutis,
Consecramus hostiam.
Dogma datur Christianis,
Quod in carnem transit panis
Et vinum in sanguinem.
Quod non capis, quod non vides,
Animosa firmat fides,
Praeter rerum ordinem,
Sub diuersis speciebus;
Signis tantum, and non rebus,
Latent res exineiae.
Caro cibus sanguis potus,
Manet Christus tamen totus,
Sub vtraque specie.
A sumente non concisus,
Non confractus, non diuisus,
Integer accipitur.
Sumit vnus, sumunt mill,
Quantum isti, tantum ille;
Nec suptus consumitur.
Sumunt boni, sumunt mali,
Sort tamen inaequali,
Vitae, vel interitus.
Mors est malis vitabonis.
Vide paris sumptionis,
Quam sit dispar exitus.
Fracto demum Sacramento,
Ne vacilles, sed memento,
Tantum esse sub fragmento,
Quantum toto tegitur.
Nulla rei fit scissura,
Signi tantum fit fructura
Qua nec status, nec statura,
Signati minuitur.
Ecce panis Angelorum,
Factus cibus viatorum:
Vere panis filiorum,
Non mittendus canibus.
In figuris praesignatur,
Cum Isaac immolatur:
Agnus Pascha deputatur,
Datur manna patribus.
Bone pastor panis vere,
Jesus nostri miserere:
Tu nos pasce, nos tuere:
Tu nos bona fac videre,
In terra viuentium.
Tu qui cuncta scis, and vales,
Qui nos pascis hic mortales,
Tuos ibi commensales,
Cohaeredes, and sodales,
Fac sanctorum ciuium. Amen.
The same in English translated by the Reu. Fa. R. S.
PRaise, O Sion, praise thy Savior,
Praise thy Captain and thy pastor,
With hymns and solemn harmony.
What power affords perform indeed,
His works all praises far exceed,
No praise can reach his dignity.
A special theme of praise is read
A living and life giving bread,
Is on this day exhibited
Within the supper of our Lord,
To twelve disciples at his board,
As doubtless it was delivered.
Let our praise be loud and free,
Full of joy and decent glee,
With minds and voices melody,
For now solemnize we that day,
Which does with joy to us display,
The privy use of this mystery,
At this board of our new ruler,
Of new Law, new pascall order,
The ancient rite abolisheth,
Old decrees by new annild,
Shadows are in truth fulfilled:
Day former darkness finisheth.
That at supper Christ performed
To be done he straightly charged,
For his eternal memory,
Guided by his sacred orders,
Bread and wine upon our Altars
To saving host we sancttifie,
Christians are by faith assured,
That to flesh the bread is changed,
The wine to blood most precious,
That no wit nor sense conceaueth,
Firm and grounded faith beliueth,
In strange affects not curious.
Under kinds two in appeara^ce
Two in show but one in substance
Be things beyond comparison:
Flesh is meat, blood drink most heavenly:
Yet is Christ in each kind wholly,
Most free from all division.
None that eats him do chew him,
None that takes him, does divide him,
Received he whole perseuereth,
Be there one or thousands hou soled,
One as much as all received,
He by no eating perishes.
Both the good and bad receue, him,
But effects are diverse in them
True life, or true destruction,
Life to the good, death to the wicked:
Mark how both alike received
With far unlike conclusion.
When the Priest the host deuideth,
Know that each part abides:
All that the wholle hoaste covered,
Form of bread not Christ is broken,
Not of Christ but of his token,
Is state or stature altered.
Angels bread made Pilgrims feeding,
Truly bread for childrens eating
To dogs not to be offered:
Signd by Isaake on the Altar
By the Lamb and paschall supper,
And in the manna figured,
Jesus food and feeder of us,
Here with mercy feed and frinde us,
Then grant in heaven felicity,
Lord of all whom here thou fee dest,
Fellow heirs, guests with thy dearest,
Make us in heavenly company.
Antiphona.
Ego sum panis viuus, qui de coelo, descendi, si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane,
viuet in aeternum.

V. Panem coeli dedit eis.

R. Panem Angelorum manducauit homo.

Oration.
ECclesiae tuae quaesumus Domine vnitatis, and pacis propitius dona concede:
quae sub oblatis muneribus mystice designantur. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum, etc.

Antiphona.
O sacrum co^uiuium, in quo Christus sumitur; recolitur memoria Passionis eius;
men's impletur gratia, and futurae gloriae, nobis pignus datur.

V. Educas panem de terra.

R. Et vinum laetificet cor hominis.

Oration.
FAc nos quaesumus Domine diuinitatis tuae sempiterna fruitione repleri, quam
pretiosi corporis, and sanguinis tui temporalis per ceptio praefigurat. Qui
viuis and regnas cum Deo Patri, etc.

ANima Christi sanctifica me Corpus Christi salua me, Sa^guis Christi inebria
me, Aqua lateris Christi laua me, Passio Christi conforta me: O bone Jesus
exaudime, intra vulnera tua absco^de me, ne permittas me separari a te, Ab
host maligno defend me, In hora mortis meae voca me, and iube me venire ad
te, vt cum sanctis tuis laudem te in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

REMEMBRANCES OF Mother Teresa di Jesus: who was foundres of the barefooted
Carmelita^ Nuns for her monasteries translated first out of Spanish into
Italian, and now in to English for the profit of every devout Soul.
1 THE earth untilled being never so fertile brings forth but brambles and
thorns: even so is the understanding of man.

2 To speak well of all spiritual things: as of Religious persons and Priests.

3 Emongst a multitud to speak always little.

4 To be modest in every thing which thou shall do, or manage.

5 Never to be ernest in things of small importance.

6 To reason with every one with moderate cheerfulnes.

7 To scoff or jest at nothing.

8 Not to reprehend any, without discretion humility, and thy own confusion.

9 To accommodate thy self to the Complexion of the party with whom thou have
to deal, for the service of God, with the cheerful to be merry, with the
melancholy, sad; finally to be all, unto all, to gain all.

10 Never to speak unless thou have first well thought of it, and commended unto
God our Lord what thou mindest to say, to the intent that thou speak nothing
that may offend him.

11 Never to excuse thy self without very probable cause.

12 Never to speak any thing of thy self that may deserve praise, as of
thine own knowledge, virtue, lineage, unless thou have some probable hope to
reap thereby some commodity; and then do it with humility, and consideration,
because they are gifts which come from the hands of God.

13 Never to amplify any matter, but moderatelye to speak what thou think.

14 In all thy conferences and co^uersations, to mingle always some spiritual
thing, and so thou shall avoid many idle words, and murmurations.

15 Never to affirm any thing before thou know well.

16 Never to intermedle to give thy opinion in any thing, unless thou art
desired: or else charity requires it.

17 When as any one speaks of spiritual things, to harken unto it with
humility, and like a scholar to learn that for thy self which he shall speak
well and makes for thy purpose.

18 To discover and open unto thy Confessor and Superior all thy tentations,
imperfections and repugnances, that he may give the remedy and counsel to
overcome them,

19 Never to remain out of the Cell, neither to go forth thereof without cause,
and when thou go forth to demand help of Almighty God that thou may
not offend him.

20 Never to eat nor drink but at thy usual times, and then to give great
thanks unto Almighty God.

21 To do all things as if thou were in the presence of Almighty God, and by
this means thou shall gain much unto thy soul.

22 Never to harken unto him, which speaks ill of any one, neither to say
evil of any but of thy self, and when thou reioicest rhereat, it is a good
sign that thou do profit.

23 To direct every work which thou shall do, unto Almighty God, by offering
it up unto him, and desiring that it may be to his honor and glory.

24 Let not thy mirth be with immoderate laughing; but with cheerfulnes, that
is humble, modest, affable, and of good edification.

25 Always to imagine that thou art a servant unto all men, and in all and
every one to consider the person of Christ our Lord; that thereby thou may
bear respect and reverence toward all.

26 To be always ready to do obedience, as if Christ Jesus in the person of
thy Prior or Prelat should command thee.

27 To examine thy conscience in every work which thou shall do, and in every
hour, and knowing thy defects, to procure with the help of God, to amend
the^, and by this way thou shall ariue unto perfection.

28 Not to think of others imperfections, but to consider their virtues, and
thy own defectes.

29 To have always a great desire to suffer some thing in every matter and
occasion, for the love of Christ.

30 Every day to offer up thy self many times unto Almighty God, and this
with great fervor and desire of God.

31 That which thou meditatest on, in the morning to have it present with thee,
the wholle day afterward, and to use all diligence herein, because it is a
thing of great profit.

32 To co^serue diligently those good motions which our Lord does send thee,
and to put in execution those desires, which he shall give thee in prayer.

33 Fly always singularity as much as is possible, because it is a great
hurt for the whole co^munaltie.

34 To read often times the orders and rules of thy Religion, and to be very
careful to observe them.

35 To consider in all created things the providence and wisdom of God, and
in them all to praise him.

36 To separate thy heart from the love of all things, and to endeavor to find
Almighty God

37 Never to make show outwardly of devotion which thou have not inwardly:
thou may very well keep secret thy inward devotion.

38 Never to show but in case of necessity thy internal devotion because as
S. Frances and S. Bernard do say, Secretu^ meum mihis My secret is to my self.

39 Not to complain if thy meat be not well dressed, rembringe the gall and
viniger of CHRIST JESUS.

40 Sitting at the Table not to speak to any person, neither to lift up thy
eyes to behold others.

41 To consider the table of heaven and the meat thereof, which is Almighty
God, and the guests which are holy Saints and Angels, to cast up thy eyes unto
this table and earnestly desire for to sit thereat.

42 In the presence of thy Superior (in whom thou ought to consider Christ
Jesus) not to speak, but for necessity, and with great reverence.

43 Never to do any thing, which may not be done before all men.

44 Not to make comparison betwixt this man, and that man, because comparisons
are odious.

45 When thou shall be reprehended by any: to harken unto him with humility
both internally and externally, and to pray for him that has reprehended thee.

46 When one Superior commands any thing, not to say that an other has
commanded the contrary, but to think that both of them have good intentions,
and obey them both as much as thou can.

47 Not to be curious in speaking or demaundinge of things which belong not
unto thee.

48 Let thy life passed be present before thy eyes, for to lament it, and also
thy present coldness, and how much thou want to be fit for to go to heaven,
because these are causes of great goodness.

49 To do always what those of the house shall require thee; so that it be
not against obedience; and to answer them always with humility and meeknes.

50 Never to demand without great necessity, any particular things, either
in eating or clothing.

51 Never to cease from humbling and mortifyinge thy self in all things
until death.

52 To get a custom to do mame acts of love toward thy Neighbor and God,
because they inflame and make tender thy heart, and to do the like of all other
virtues.

53 To offer up all things unto the eternal Father, in union of the merittes
of Jesus Christ, his only begotten son.

54 To be meek and courteous with all others, and sharp and rigourous unto
thy self.

55 In the feasts of Saints to consider their virtues, and in grace to
demand the^ at Gods hand.

56 To have great care every evening to examine well thine own conscience.

57 The prayer which thou have to make the morninge before that thou receauest,
shall be to consider how that thou which art a most vile and miserable
creature, have nevertheless to receive thy God: and the night following it shall
be to remember how that thou have received thy Lord and maker.

58 If thou art a Superior never reprehend any one in choler but when as it
shall be past, and by this means thy reprehensio^ will be profitable.

59 Earnestly to procure to get perfection and devotion, and therewith to
dispatch all affairs.

60 To exercise much thy self in the fear of God, and it will bring thy soul
to compunction and humility.

61 To consider well how soon men's minds are changed, and how little thou
ought to trust unto them, and therefore to have great confidence in God, who
is never changed.

62 To deal those things which belong unto thy soul, with thy Spiritual and
learned Confessor and to communicate with him all: following his advise and
counfaile in all things.

63 Every time that thou do communicate to demand of God some gift, for
that his great mercies sake wherewith he voutsafe to come unto thy soul.

64 Albeit thou have many holy Saints for thy Advocates, yet in particular be
thou devoted unto S. Joseph who will obtain of God great grace for the

65 In time of melancholines and perturbation, never to leave of thy accustomed
good works of penance and prayer and such like: because the Devil will
disquiet thee to thentent that thou should leave them: wherefore follow them
more at such times, and thou shall see that our Lord will soon favor thee.

66 Not to communicate or imparte thy temptations and imperfections with
weaklings and imperfect persons in the house; because it will harm thy self
and hurt others, but with those which are the most perfect.

67 Remember that thou have but one soul, that thou art to die but once, that
thou have but one short life and that particular to thy self, neither is there
more then one glory, which is eternal.

68 Thy desire shall be to see God; thy fear shall be to loose him; thy grief
shall be that thou do not possess him: and thy joy in that which brings
thee unto God; and so thou shall live in great peace.

He that will reap fruit by these Documentes, must read them once over every
week.

Certain Iaculatorie prayers written by the Reu. Fa. R s.
Gracious Lord and sweet Savior, give me a pure intention a clean heart, and
a regard to thy glory in all my actions

Jesus possess my mind with thy presence, and ravish it with thy love that my
delight may be to be embraced in the arms of thy protection.

Jesus be thou light unto mine eyes, music to my ears, swetnes to my taste,
and contentment to my heart.

Jesus I give thee my body, my soul, my substance, my fame, my friends, my
liberty, and life, dispose of me and all that is mine as shall be most to thy
glory.

Jesus I am not mine but thine, claim me as thy right, keep me as thy charge,
love me as thy child.

Jesus fight for me when I am assaulted, heal me when I am wounded, revive me
when I am spirituallye killed, receive me when I fly, and let me never be
quite confounded.

Jesus give me patience in trouble, humility in comfort, constancy in
temptations, and victory against my ghostly enemies.

Jesus give me modesty in cou^tena^ce, gravity in my behavior deliberatio^ in
my speeches, purity in my thoughts, righteousness in my actions.

Jesus be my sun in the day, my food at the table, my repose in the night, my
clothing in nakedness, my succor in all needs.

Jesus let thy blood run in my mind as water of life, to cleanse the silth of
my sins, and to bring forth the fruit of life everlasting.

Jesus stay my inclinations from bearing down my soul: bridle mine appetites
with thy grace, and quench in me the fire of all unlawful desires.

Jesus keep my eyes from vain sightes, my ears from hearing evil speeches, my
tongue form talking unlawful things, my senses from every kind of disorder

Jesus make my will pliable to thy pleasure, and resigned wholly to thy
providence, and grant me perfect contentment in that which thou allottest.

O Lord make me strong against occasions of sin, and sted fast in not
yelding to evil, yea rather to die then to offend the.

Jesus forsake me not lest I perish, leave me not to my ownenes, lest I fall
without recovery.

Jesus grant me an earnest desire to amend my faults, to renew my good
purposes, to perform my good intentions, and to be ginne a fresh in thy service

Jesus direct mine intention, correct my errors, erecte my infirmities, protect
my good endeavors.

Jesus make me humble to my Superiors, friendly to my equals charitable to my
inferiors, and careful to yield dew respect to all sorts.

Jesus grant me sorrow for my sines, thankfulness for thy benefittes, fear of
thy judgments, love of thy mercies, and mindfulnes of thy presence. Amen.

Laus Deo Opt. Max. Bea. Virg. Mariae omnibusque Sanctis. Amen.


