A TREATISE WRITTEN BY JOHAN Valerian a greatte clerk of ITALY, which is
entitled in latin Pro Sacerdotum barbis translated in to English.

The preface of the translatour to the reder.
IT is not unknown, gentle reder, that here in England has been diverse
times busynes for werynge of beardes, so that (as it appears) in no realm
they have been less accepted. Also we may perceive, that in Italy, all
though their use varye far from ours (for shauynge is as little used there
as beardes be here) yet has there ben greatte variance for the same cause, and
namely among the clergy. Whereupon a learned man of that country, called Ihon^
Pierius Valerian, wrote a pistell to the Cardinal Medices for the defense of
priestis beardes: which I have translated into our English tongue, partly
for the cause before named, and partly because I have ever used to wear a
bearde, and have been many times challenged and rebuked for the same. And here
it is to be noted, that if it be proved no unmeet thing for a priest to wear
a bearde, who should both in apparel and deeds show a sad and an honest
example, it may seem so much the more sufferable in a lay manne. But
peradventure I might be judged of sum men to be a very presumptuous person,
because that I having but lyttelle learning, would take upon me to translate.
How be it, when I saw it was no great weighty matter, it made me so much the
more bold to proceed, in following mine intent.

Furthermore where as I have found my copy in many places very tedious, by
plentuousnes of words, I have in my translation used a shorter way, gatheryng
to gether the effect of the matter, as I thought most mete for my purpose.

More over if I have in any place varyed far from the true menyng of the
sentence: I do submytte my self to them that be better learned, desyryng them
to hold me excused, and to account it as an unlearned man's act. But shortly
to conclude, if those that shall read this little book, do wey the matter
indifferentely, I trust they shall find it proved by good reason, that berdes
ar not so greatly to be dispreised, but rather to be used and worn.

John^ Pierius Valerian to the most reverend father, the Cardinal Medices.
FOr because most reverend father, there be diverse, not of small authority,
goo about to tempt the pope (having no regard to his sycknes, wherewith he is
now grievously vexed) to bring up again a law of a certain counseyle
concerning beardes, strengthed and renewed (as they say) by Alexander the
third, which before our time a few years, has been kept, and by our days,
I think worthyly left. Therefore ye have warned us all, that live under your
dominion, to begin to shave our beardes, before this commandment be put
forth: and so we shall both be exaumple to other, and also do that
wyllyngely, that else we should be compelled to do by a law. The which
thing we are redye to obey, only moved by your authority and judgment,
without constraynynge of any law. How be it there be many wise, counnynge, ye
and also virtuous men, that allow not greatly this matter, and think by this
means the shave their beardes for humility in dispysing of apparel, that
they might be disfigured, and had in derision among the people, the which
peradventure we grant in shearynge of the hear above the ears: but there is
not one man, that does well consider, woll judge humility in taking so much
care for smothenes of the mouth. For truly shauyng of the chynne and all the
face, began of a wicked and a delycate mind: and they that often use it, are
iuged without doubt, to be of the feminine sort, though they have many other
good qualities and excellent virtues. I might rehearse here for my purpose
exaumples innumerable of all the aunciente men, both of greeks and hebrews:
but because we be Romans, and it is the Roman church, that we are now in
hand withal, it shall not vary far from our matter, if before we speak of
things done in our time, we first rehearse the deeds of our forefathers.
Wherefore now let us see, how the Romans in time past esteemed beardes. They
truly like manly men, were long ere they would suffer any barbours amongst
them, and for that cause the auncientis of them among writers were called for
the most part, the vnshauen men.

Of truth the.544. year after the building of Rome, the use of barbours was
found: and them P. Ticinius Mena brought out of Sicilia, if we mow believe
Varro: And Plini also bears wytnes, before that time they lived vnshauen, and
first of all men, Aphricanus used to be shaven daily: whom Augustus
Octauianus followed very diligently. And truly Scipio was ever called a soft
and a feminate fellow, so that his delycate facion and strange apparel, neither
after the manner of the Romans, nor yet ware like, and also his great slouthe,
is spoken of to this day: In so much that in that same busynes, which was of
greatte and as weighty as ever the Romans had any, I mean when they went
about to distroye Carthage, for the restorynge of the liberty of Italy, and
safegarde of them self, and the honor of their name: he was compleined of
even in the town of Rome, not priuelye but openly in the Senate house, because
whiles he ruled, the exercysyng of the feats of war were forslowed.

Therefore I say, go ye to, follow ye the examples of the Sicilians, follow ye
asso the strange apparelle, the delicacie and prodigalytie of the Syracusans,
dampened by the manyfolde proverbs of ancient men, and admytte ye be not
dastardes and cowardes, but strong, excellent, and triumphant, yet by that
means ye minysshe a great part of your glory. But what shall I speak now of
Augustus? he without doubt was never so much suspected to be of a femynate
mind, by the baudy versis that he wrote in the baynes, as by the often use of
shauyng.

But leest I should bring in many examples in so evident a matter, in
conclusion, all putting away of hear has been esteemed, at al times, and by
the consent of all people, to be as it were a certain woe manny she thing. By
that it came up, that certain nations would shave their beardes when they
mourned (in the token of sorrow) that they might bewail their wretchedness with
a womannyshe facion, because they thought, it agreed not to mourn with a
manlye bearde.

And truly the Romans did esteem their berdis of so great honor, that they would
never picture Jupiter, their god, without a bearde.

Of how much authority and gravity berdes causid the ancie^tis of the town of
Rome to be it apperith plainly by this that folowith: when Rome was taken of
the Senons, and their enmies were entered, every one of the faders sitting at
his door, with that beardly dignity, brought their ennemies (al though they
were right cruel) in such admiration, that they thought every citizen, that
they saw so sit, had been a god. Tylle at the last one, that was somewhat
bolder than the other, began to stroke one of the senators beardes: and he
would not suffer him, but struck him with a rod. For the which deed their
cruel ennemies being wroth, slew al those ancient and honorable Romans, not
leaving one alive. Thus ye may see, that they that the Romans sword could
not tame, were appeased by the reverence of their berdes: And again those
Romans rather chose to lose their lives with their berdes, than to have the
majesty of their mouth defiled. Yet I wol not deny, but certain people, ye
and also of the noble sort, comanded the berd to be shaue^, and suffered the
here of the heed to grow long behind: the which thing they say, the
Lacedemonia^s did. And Homer writes, that the Abba^tes first divised it: and
for the same cause (Pollux says) they were callid Euboia^s with the long here
behind. Also when Timeus descriuid Hector, he preised his goodly long here,
hangyng down at his back: But that thing made the Lacedemonia^s unlike all
other nations: And also many other fond things were brought up by the
same, far from the custom of other kinds of people. The cause why that they
commanded beardes to be shaven, and to nourysshe the here long behynd, was to
the intent that they might be the more safe in battle, because their
ennemies should have none advantage, in taking hold by their chynnes. More
over if they did purpose to fle, they should remember a long boundell of
hear to hang down behind at their backs, whereby their enmies might take
their hands full, and draw them back again: and so for fear of that, they
should not intend to flee, but like men without other hope of remedy, boldly
resist and assail their ennemies. But when this constitution, and those that
ruled in that time, were ones worn out and forgotten, it was never more after
used.

But now to proceed to such things, as apperteyne to our matter, I would
very feign, that those delycate fellows our accusers, which are so extreme
ageynste us, because they think it so much unseemly, that a priest should
wear a bearde: should declare to me, what fylthynes is in a berde. For truly
I can find in it nothing filthy nor dishonest. But to the end it may the more
plainly appear, let us first declare what a beard is: and so parauenture if
there be any thing in it amys, we shall perceive it. There be many things,
which are hydden in the beginning, that by the definition shall be more
openly known.

The bearde is a garment for manly chekes given of nature for comlynes and for
health: The de^^nition o^ bearde.
and therefore the latins named it a garment, and those that were shaven, they
counted them as naked and vncladde. And also ye shall find written in many
auctours these words: Their chekes were cladde with young wolly hear. That a
bearde is a token of manly nature, the thing self does show more plain,
than any man can declare.

Diogines, which despised all shaven facis, did not without a cause make this
answer to a harbor: that he ware his beard, to the intent he might ever
have in remembrance, that he was a man. And yet to this day, all the nations
of the East parties, where so ever they se men with such smothe faces, they
call them women in scorn.

Also it is had in remembrance, how Alexander of Macedone, a prince of great
name, was scorned both of his subjects and men of war, ye and also of all
nations, because he would be shaven, to show him self feminine: And Atheneus
does witness in Chrisippus, that he was the auctour of shauynge.

It is openly known amongst all kinds of men, that children, women, gelded
men, and those that are tender and delycat, are ever seen without beardis: and
thereby it may be easily understand, to whom those that are shaven, may be
lykened. But lest we should tarry to long in so evident a matter, let us
pass forth to other things, which we purpose to speak.

^hy na^^re gy^ethe a bearde.
That the berde is given of nature for comlynes, we may prove by this. Where as
nature has garnyshed trees with branches and leaves: likeswise to me^ for the
more i^cresing of their dignity, she has apparelled them with here: in so
much that the poetis put no difference, but plainly affirm, that men ar as
much disfigured, when their beardis be shaven, as trees be, wha^ their leaves be
fallen from the^.

It was not for naught, that Haliab^s, with many other excellent philosophers
did write, that the berde of a man was given of nature for comelynes and
dignity. And for that cause thou shall find, that every one of them, if he
were but little bearded, either on the over lyp only, or else upon the very
top of his chynne, as often as he beheld him self in a glass, or put his
hand to his mouth, he would put great fault in nature, and bewail him self,
for being so made. For like as peerles are esteemed the more precious for their
gretnes, even so of the greatness a bearde takes his preyse.

Artemidorus says, that the fathers are worthy to be honored, when their
children be seen with manly beardes.

Furthermore it is worthy our labor, to here the opinion of Lucian, which
thought it as much unnatural to shave a man's beerd, as if thou should go
about to shere a lions maane.

Theseus the disciple of Hercules, which at that time was most excellent
in strength, would never shave his bearde, to the intent he might profess his
valyantnes by that same mannely state. And for that cause some men say, he
made a law, that young men should shave their first beardes, and offer them
to the gods, as a dear and thankefulle gift, thinking that nothing might
be offerred more meeter for that age: and also he would dedicate that, as the
first fruits, to the flodes, and to the god Apollo, according to the
superstition of those days. But this is nothing to our purpose. But Pliny
the younger, in his time did very much preyse Euphrates, an excellent
Philosopher, the which opteyned much honor by his great and white beard. For
beardes were so much honored in old time, that a philosopher without a
bearde, was very little esteemed. More over he that had a bearde, except his
living were approved in gravity of manners, he was yuell reported among the
people, because his honorable bearde and his habit was in syghte, and the
philopher appeared not. In so much that the most aunciente and discrete men in
those days would judge both wisdom and good manners to be joined with a
beard.

^^lth that ^earde ^^seth.
Furthermore as concerning the health that comes by a bearde, we may prove by
this, that for nouryshynge of him self, it sucketh out the abundant and gross
humors from the chekes, and by that means it preserves the feethe long
from peryshynge: which does not lyghtely happen to those that are often
shaven. For they (for the most part) are other totheles long before their
time, or else they have very much pain of the tothe ache. More over in the
hot summer it defends the face from the burning and parchynge of the son
beams: and in the winter it bears of the cold storms and sharp blastis of
the wynd: and it saves a man from the quinsie, the gu^me piles, and many other
diseases. And to the intent we should give the more credence to these things,
it is written of the fablyng philosophers, that Asculapius did always wear a
berd, when his father before him, was ever shaven. Than it is to be thought,
that he, the which was called the auctour of health, would follow such thingis as
perteined to health. Therefore saying there be so many good qualities in a
bearde, I see no such fylthynes nor viciousnes in it, for which it should be
lothed. Well than, if such thyngis, which are honorable, which are
profitable and helthefull, and which are of any estimation at all, shall be
judged unworthy for a priest, I think it wol be hard for us to find what
thing shall be mete for the priestly state. But whether shall I call these
despisers of beardes unequal or malicious, which are so enuiously set
against us, that all our worshyppinges, all our prayers, all our offrynges,
which we ministre to god immortal, in conclusion all that ever we do, be hit
never so pure and chaste, is unsavory to them, only by the means of our
beardes. And they allow no priestis, but those, which ageynste the sentences
of most sobre and wise men, cut away the worship of manhood. In so much
that if any man deny to shave his bearde: by and by they woll suspende him, and
despise him like one that had forsaken his feyth. For truly they think where a
bearde is, there can be no goodness, no holiness, nor no perfect religion. And
first of all they ley ageynste us, the power of the laws, cryenge out that
all thing shall fall to mischefe, if we say, that the laws are not to be
obeyed. But without doubt they know full well, how much we esteem the laws.
Therefore they are so much the bolder, because we have ever gladly given place
to such arguments.

our ma^er lawis
Yet first let them tell me, whether they will allege for them the laws of
nature, or the laws written, or the laws taken by the exaumples of holy
men, or else the laws ordained by the inspiration of the holy ghost. I find
that these four have been kinds of laudable living, every one in his time:
whereby that men might have led their lives, in as much as perteynethe to
dyuyne things, from the beginning of the world hitherto, both with laud
and preyse to them self, and salvation of their souls. Then if they woll
allege the laws of nature, that men shall shave their beardes, the thing it
self woll repugne against them: ye and also both wise men and foles, as many
as are now, or as ever have been syns any man could remember, can tell them,
that Nature has made women with smothe facis, and men rough and full of here.
And more over it has been ever a monstrous thing, to se a woman with a
beard, though it were very little, as the Greeks stories shown of the woman
bishop, which amongst the Pedasenses was chief ruler in the sacrifice of
Minerua. Therefore who so ever, by any craft or busynes, gothe about to make a
man beardles, it may be leyde to his charge, that he has done against the
laws of Nature.

To this they wolle make answer, that Nature has made many things, which
were but of small effect, tylle after by man's wit they were brought to a
better purpose, as the fruits of the earth only for meat, and water for
drink nature has ordained: whereof man's wit has divised to make both breadde
and wine, with many other delycates.

Also nature has set all placis as a wyldernes, full of sharp thorns,
busshes, and great trees, where soon after the inuentiue wits of men have
divised to make gay gardens, goodly earable feldes, fair meadows and
orchardes. And like as many things have been brought to a better order by the
inventions, by the perswasyons, by the counnynge, and by the experience of wise
men: even so it was ordained, that beardes should be shaven to put away the
discommoditie.

But me thinks, that those delicate lawyers might well be lykened to the
Sybarytans, the which in like manner distroyed all the cocks in their
country, lest with their importunate crowyng before day, they should be
diseased in their sweet morning slepes. But yet this gothe well, that the law
of nature is on our side, which they can not deny: and yet their wits are
so froward, that still they bring forth such tryfils against it. Therefore
they let pass the law of nature, and flee to a law written for the
commodity of a few persons, in whose help they put all their hope of
victory. But there be three manner of laws written. The first is the law of
Moses, Thre^ ^ner o^ ^^wes ^^ten.
during unto the coming of Christ: The second is that, which we have
taken to follow by the exaumple of Christ: or else institute, by authority
of the appostels. The third is the Decrees made by the power of the bishops
and counsels.

But because we began with the law of Moses, let us first se, whether
shauynge be commanded there or not. Verily if ye list to mark the manners of
the Hebrews, ye shall read in the history of kyngis, 2. Re. ^
that certain messangers were sent from David to king Hannon to comfort him
for the death of his father, the which messangers, this barbarous king
suspectynge, sent them again with their faces half shaven, in dispyte and
scorn of their prince. Wherefore David commanded them to remain in Ierico,
till their beardes were grown agein, lest that fylthy sight should be showed
to the people. The which thing he would not have done, if shauynge had been
used at that time: for then they might have shaven the rest of their faces,
and all had been well. In like wise if we search the laws of them, we shall
find shauynge forbidden in many places.

^ui. 19.
Also it is forbidden in the Leuiticall books to all people in generalle, and
specially to the priestis it is a commandment without any exception, that
they shall not shave their beardes.

^aie. 7.^.15.
Furthermore among other miseries, which god thretnethe to the Moabitis, by
the words of the prophet Esaie, well nere in every chapter he says: Their
beardes shall be cut awey. Here ye may see, how much this token of a
womannyshe mynd^, was hated among them.

^sal. 132.
It is not for naught, that the honorable memory of Aarons bearde is songen
daily in our temples before the aulters of god and his sainctis: in so much
that the ointment, wherewith his bearde was anointed, is had in remembrance.

More over the people of Nazareth, those most holy men, which were
dedicate to god, did let grow their busshes and beardes, in token of
holiness: And for that cause we read, that sayncte John^ Baptyste, the messanger
of Christ, would never suffer the hear of his heed nor bearde to be cut.

And by what argument more plain, may we prove beardes to please God, than by
this, that the fathers, when they could have no chylderne, they made vows to
let their beardes grow? The which thing if those fathers had thought
unthankful to god, doubteles they would not have hoped to opteyne any grace
of him by such vows. They without doubt being warned of the offense, that
perauenture certain delycate fellows committed by shauynge of their beardes,
did intend both to mende the error, and also to get again the favor
of God, by the means of that vow.

Trewely ye shall find among the Hebrews, diverse times beardes shaven, where
any insufferable pain, or great wretchedness did happen to them, to the intent
they might show them self as men spoiled of all their welthe. A hole day, ye
a hole year would not serve me, if I should continue after this manner, to
remember all the places and exaumples written in those days, where beardes are
commended: the which thing saying it is so plain, I think it not mete to
consume any longer time in a mattier so openly known. It apperethe in the
old law, that beardes were not forbidden, but ordained to be worn, and
commanded by God him self, not to be put away.

Now go to, let us come to an other law, which our christen religion has
followed. 1529. year. This law is named by our divines the law of grace,
which we divide into the law of examples, and the law written by the
inspiration of the holy ghooste. The law of examples is of so great
authority, that that alone suffiseth, as it apperith by the words of Christ,
when he him self professed to give exaumple to us. Therefore we are ever wont
to put Christ before us for an example. And by that argument Ignatius, the
disciple of sayncte John^ the Euangeliste, was moved against the
supersticiousnes of certain men, which thought them self the holyer,
because they absteyned ever from flesh. Christ (says he) did eat
flesh, Peter did eat flesh, and those that followed after: wherefore should we
than under the color of holiness take awey the eating thereof. Christ has
given us example, that what so ever he has done, we should do the same, as
far as our power does exte^d. And so we may plainly say, that every act of
Christ our auctour, is a law and form of our living. And this being
granted, I would wit of our accusers, whether they have any commandment,
saying, or example of Christ, whereby he does either command, or show, or at
the leest weye agree, that men's beardes should be shaven. Without doubt there
is none found of that manner. On the other part the exaumple of Christ him
self, which is said ever to wear a bearde: and the manners of Peter and
Paul, and all the appostels, may be judged a sufficient defense for beardes.
And there be certain men, which so descriue the face of Christ by knowledge of
their fore fathers, that they affirm, he had a long and a yelowe berde:
neither he is none otherwise peynted nor caruen of the greeks, the latins, nor
none other nations, as it is openly known. Peter to whom chiefly was given by
Christ the authority of our christen feythe, we picture him in our temples
ever with a bearde, both in brass, in marbull, and with colors. Nor we se no
man pictured with a greater berde, than Paul, which was a master of our
living: to whose most wise instructions we are ever obedient. Andrewe,
Thomas, and all the felowshyppe of them, are gloriously set forth with great
beardes.

To this they woll make answer, that it is but a light argument, to divine by
pictures, what manner of face Christ and his apostils had, saying it has ever
ben granted to poetis and peynters to feyne what they list. Well let us
grant to that, yet never the less ye can not deny, but it is the generalle
agreemente of all men, that Christ him self and his apostels, which are
the chief auctours of our priestis, shall be peynted and caruen with beardes: by
the which common consent it may easily be perceived, that a bearde has some
good propretie perteyning to holiness, and does bring preyse to every holy man.

The gentyles used a custom, to show by the habyte of their goddis, what
things they esteemed most precious amongst them. And for this cause the
Lacedaemonians did not only picture Mars like a man of arms, but also for
the most part all other goddis and goddessis: for because they esteemed
nothing more precious than armor, they thought it behooved the goddis to be
garnyshed with armor.

The Phenices, which were only given to merchandise, did appareyle their
goddis with pursis full of money: because they judged him most blessed, that
had most money. So in like manner because we thynk nothing more honorable tha^ a
berd, we judge it best to picture our god, and his disciples with beardis.

Verily we can not prove, that ever sayncte John^, the messanger of Christ,
was shaven, nor yet sayncte James, who amongst other good gifts of a virtuous
mind was greatly preysed for this, that he would never suffer him self to be
shaven. And shall we unhappy people, blame in any man, or forbid under pain of
cursynge, that thing, which was by the allowance of all people suffered in
those holy men, taught by Christ our savior, and very son of god, and
rekened among the warkes of virtue, as an example of a perfect and a moderate
life? But now of late, we have not only left the name of good manners, but
also the very right patheway of the same.

Iamis, which opteyned his name by the continual keeping of Justice, was
much preysed, because he never used shauynge nor annoyntyng, another yet
washyng in baynes. etc. And shall we sclander them as yuel people, which despise
shauing, and such other fond delites? Thus if our lord god ware a beerd in
token of manhod, if Peter, if Paul, and all the apostels did the same, and
finally if there be no there saying nor monition found of the chief auctours
of our feythe ageynste beardes: for what cause then should we regard the
condemnynge of beardes by any law, or fear the thretnynges of any man, seeing
god is on our side, whose son we follow in that habyte?

The fourth part of our matter is, that we shall search, whether this
disanullyng of beardis be commended or not in the third kind of written
laws, which were made by the inspiration of the holy ghost.

Of truth the gides of our virtuous living, called holy men, have ordained
some constitutions, without any mention made before of god or his disciples,
or any example showed, but only styred up (as they say) by that same godly
inspiration, the which things need not here to be rehearsed. Of this sort are
the decrees of the counsels, I mean those, which we are bound to believe. For
I believe this, that a general counsel truly gethered, determyneth nothing
concerning our feyth, without the inspiration of the holy ghost, and them we
ought always to allow and firmly believe. But the law of manners and customs,
varienge often times by the means of the place, time, or conditions of the
persons, sauer more humayn tha^ godly: yet our accusers prepared of these
wepons, taken out of old vulgar books, and put against our army the
counsel of Carthage, under whose help and defense, they make war ageynste
beardes, despisynge them, and thretnynge their utter destruction: like as
though the distroyeng of that same beautyfull warke of nature, were done by the
inspiration of the holy gooste: and as though he, which in time paste did
not without a cause show him self merciful to those, that made vows to let
their beardes grow, should now be against him self in the counselle of
Carthage, and begin to despise beardes. The which things truly how
unworthy they are to be counted the actis of god, the most innocent child in
the world may perceive: yet those fellows are not ashamed to make god the
auctour of such abiecte and filthy busynesses. But though their feebleness of
brain ought to be forgyuen, because they can not frame their wits to
conceive higher things: yet it is wysedom to take heed, lest under the color
of goodness, they should deceive other men. Therefore now let us here what law
they allege for them, and that is this.

Clerici neque comam nutriant, neque barba^. Clerks shall neither let grow
their busshes nor beardes. They sey, this law was first made by the counsel
of Carthage, and renewed by Alexander the third, and strengthed by many of
later time: and that it ought not to be despised of us. As though we were such
manner of people, that we would enforce some thing ageynste the laws: or else
that we did not understand, if men should begin to despise the laws, that
soon after every thing would be brought out of frame: and than should we see
holy and unholy things mixed to gether, nothing holy, nothing honest, nor
nothing laudably done. For when the laws are ones broken, the recourse of
marcha^dyse between city and city shall be lost, the leege of the people shall
not be kept, no good order shall be regarded, no reason, no Justice, nor no
right shall remain. It should be leful than for every man to lead his life
after his own lust: than should we see such trouble among all sortis of
people, that we should be constreyned to hyde us in the woddes, to crepe in to
dens and deserte places of the earth, to be kept safe from the invasions of
them that are of greatter power. Wherefore I thynk that a law made, allowed of
the reulers, and strengthed by the use of the people, ought to be kept of al
men. What shall we do therefore in this case? There is a law laid against all
our resons, our matter is at a point, we are ouercomen, we are shatered
abroad, and put to flight, the sectis of delycate persons bear all the rule,
and they bind us to trifelynge manners. The sobre and ernest facion of the
Romans is decaid, we must now wax wanton by a new law, we must be shaven,
there may no here grow on our facis, and to speak one word for all, ye and
that a new word, we must become womanlyke. This is even the very thing,
that our accusers have chosen only for the defense of their delycatenes. With
this they strive against us, with this they wound us euerychone, with this
thing alone, they think to distroye us: So that except men of holy orders
have smothe and shynyng facis, they shall be pulled away from the aulters, they
shall be put out of the churches, there shall be no place, where people
resort, left free for them to abide in. But we have to long kept silence.

Therefore now go to, let us bring forth our army against them, and
first of all, let us wind away from them that same ingyn that is the
chief ground of our war, and thereby we shall overthrow all their holle
power.

I deny it plainly, I say it is not made in the counsel of Carthage. For we
may lightly prove, that certain years before time, for lack of a true copy,
their books were falsely printed, and this word radant, shaven away: which
changes the holle sentence, For the most ancient, most holy, and most
wysest men do agree, that it is read in Gracian after this manner. Clerici
neque comam nutriant, neque barbam radant, Clerks shall another let grow
their busshes, nor shave their beardes. There is no man can deny, but these
words are written of the counsel of Carthage. It was happy, that this same
storye of counsels was of late brought to light: wherein without doubt the
counsel of Carthage does agree in this sentence, with the old written books,
which are in the library of Palatine: and there of truth we find it written
thus: Clericus nec comam nutriat, nec barbam radat, A clerk shall another let
grow his busshe, nor shave his beard.

At this our enemies wax pale, therefore let us stycke to it like men we shall
set upon them with an other wyng^, which shall constreyne them to give over
incontinent.

They allege these words following, to be read in a pistil of Alexander the
third, written to the archbysshoppe of Canturburye. Clerici qui comam et
barbam nutriunt, etiam inuiti a suis archidiaconis tondiantur, Clerks that
let grow their busshes and beardes, shall be shorn of their archedeacons,
whether they will or not. But like as in the sentence before, some unclean
shauer has shaven away a word, so by like, here in this pistyll of Alexander,
some brayneles fellow has added to a word. For by the agreement both of well
learned and approved auctours, it should be read thus: Clerici qui comam
nutriunt, ab archidiacono, etiam si noluerint tondiantur, Clerks that let
grow their busshes, shall be shorn of their archedecon, whether they will or
not. And this appears plainly to be the true redyng, because the interpreters
say, this sentence was taken out of a law, made in the counsel of Agathense.
And therein without doubt it is so written: Clerici qui comam nutriunt, ab
archidiacono, etiam si noluerint, tondiantur. without any mention making of
barba the bearde.

Also in the fourth counsel of Toletan, it was commanded, that the doctors
and chief prelates should shave all the upper partis of their heedes, and to
leave on the nether part a garland of hear above their ears: but as for the
bearde they never thought thereon.

Also of the busshe only, we find like commandment in many placis, in the
decrees of ancient bishops, to gether with other things concerning the life
of priestis: Finally Aniceius by the precepts of the apostels, decreed, that
the clergy should not nouryshe their busshes: and surely he would not have
passed over, without spekyng of the bearde, if he had esteemed it a thing
dishonest. For of truth to nourishe the bushes is the facion of women, or else of
such men as live delicatly and unchaste. For the long heared people were ever
esteemed both of the greeks and Latins for a token of foul lust and filthy
living. Wherefore the laws willing religious men not only to be with out
vycis, but also to eschew the occasyons of the same, do not without a cause
forbydde them to nourysshe their busshes. But again on the other side, hit
besemethe men to have long beardes, for chiefly by that token (as I have
often said) the vigorous strength of manhood is decerned from the tenderness
of women: so that women ought to nourysshe their busshes, and men their
beardes. And for this cause the priestis were commanded by the determination
of the solemn counsel of Carthage, not to shave their beardes, to the intent
that they might seem (like as they be) men, and show as it were a certain
majesty of their own kind, in their utter apperaunce.

But ye follow the Rodians, which had a law among them ageynste shauynge:
and yet commonly they were all shaven. Ye begin also now to countrefeyte
them of Bysance, whose manners Chrysippus did most hate for that same
cause. For they did not only make laws ageynste shauynge of berdes, but
also ordained extreme punysshementes for the same, and yet the most part of
them, like as ye do, loved to be shaven.

Thus may ye see, that in many places, the frowardenes of yuelle people,
distroye many times the good manners. And let no man marueylle, thowghe
false and corruptly written books have done much harm by the space of so many
years paste, so that by the means of that error, many decrees, punyshmentis
of the proud and stubborn, and cruel chastisinges have been brought up. O
good lord, how many things shall ye find in all old books here and there
most fautily read? How many words changed? how many clean left out?
how many stryken out? And I would to god, that there were fewer at this day,
which of their iniquity do peruerte many things.

But behold I beseech you, what harms rise by reason of depraved books. The
sentence of Gelasius the pope, in the xv. distinction, in our spiritual law
is thus: Venerabilis uiri Sedulij Pascale opus, quod heroicis descripsit
uersibus, insigni laud proferendum, The pascall work (says he) of that
honorable man Sedulius, which he wrote in heroical versis, is greattely to
be preysed: And yet hitherto ye shall find written in books, that go commonly
abroad, in the place of Heroicis uersibus, hereticis uersibus, which turns
the sentence after this manner: The pascal work of that honorable man
Sedulins, which he wrote in erroneous or heretical versis, is greattely to be
preysed. This one false word brought such a suspicion to certain men, which
were true professers of the laws, that they thought all poetis versis were
erroneous: and that they were not worthy to be accounted among good men,
though they entreated of holy matters: which thing we saw was also after
such a manner persuaded to the pope Adrian the.vi. that he hated no kind of
people worse then poets, thynkyng that no thing that they did, was well done.
And yet to this day there be some discrete prelates so disceyued with this
false redynge, and with that other error of shauing, that they think no man
worthy to be a priest, that either makes versis, or wears a bearde: such a
thing it is ones to taste an yuell opinion. But we shall let pass to bring
in any mo exaumples, saying we see daily how old auctours have been corrupted
by the means of false writers. Nor I wolle not rehearse how vngentilly the
old lawyers were intreted, by our lawyers that came after them. For after their
warkes were ones cut in pieces by Tribunianus, and such other bouchers, they
did not keep these pieces to gether, but suffered welnere every unlearned man to
add and minysshe at his pleasure: and yet the same scrappis evil and falsely
recited, be taken for laws, and they lack not a great sort of defenders.

Thus many things are daily brought to light, which give us warning of the
errors of our forefathers, wherein they have been ouersene this many years, or
deceived by the falsenes of books. Wherefore it is the less marvel, if the
decree of the counsel of Carthage, be found now otherwise written, than it
was put forth in time past.

Well go to, we have set here a sure fundation for our defense: A law is
recyted, which we have plainly proved no law. Another berdes are not forbidden
by the law of exaumples. It is also proved, that it besemeth every good and
honest man to wear a bearde. Nevertheless they bring forth one reason to
make them seem Romans, and yet they intend to follow the delycate manners of
the Sicilians. Many of them suppose, that beardis were disanulled by the popes
of Rome, because the Greeks used to wear them: For they sey it is not leful
for a priest of the Romans to follow them in habyte and manners, that have
forsaken the church of Rome. Therefore we must shave our berdes, except we wol
be heretics or rebels. To this what other answer shall I make, but that our
accusers be perauenture good men (I wol not call them inuious, vplandyshe, nor
unlearned) but may hap more simple than good men should be: which think that
beardes should be despised of the Romans, and that the people be accurste
that wears them, and also they think, where so ever they be, they make the
place unholy and void of all good luck, because the greeks wol not obey to
their constitutions, I maruayle from whense they gatte these opinions, which
how foolysshe and how chyldysshe they be, every manne perceyueth. For if they
will affirm it to be done because of the greeks: I beseech you let them tell
me to what Italian it has done good, or what has the pope gotten by it,
when the same discord has been the cause of so many euyls, which yet
abhors any man to remember.

I would to God our forefathers had not benne so wylfulle and fulle of
strife, sum being to extreme in keeping of certain ceremonies and laws,
which were but of small effect, sum in making of new, sum in breaking
and chaungynge of old customs and manners, the which had benne kept many
years.

(I speak only of customs, because those things that perteyne to the
feythe, are of an other kind) but if such busynes had not been, we had not
lost so many sortis of people, nor so many realms. The greeks had not
forsaken us, we had kept stylle the I Will of Aegei, we had not lost Thracia,
we had not lost the realm of Byzance, we had not lost all Asia, another
Jerusalem had not ben inhabyted with infidels, so greattely to our dishonor,
ye and to speak of later time, for such causes Boeme and Germany should not
have set so light by the pope. For in gouernynge many times some incidentis
happen, which are of so small weight, that they may be easily either
granted or else suffered: the which things if they be stubbornely denied,
they cause indignation among the unlearned people: And soon after indignation
comes chauffynge and murmouryng, after chauffyng daily increasing of malice,
and shortly after malice cruel enmities, and than mortal war. When our
forefathers commanded the Romayne priestis, to shave their beardes, in dispite
of the greeks, to the intent there might be a difference between the Romans
and them: they caused the Greeks to be so vexed with that same dissension, that
they bare even as great and like malice ageynste us than, as they did at
the time, when they having war among them self, were of so mischeuous a
mind, that they had lever make a leage with the Turks, and seek the
felowshyppe of them, than to ask help of us, or receive our aid, when it was
wyllyngly offered. And so they were deceived, and by the false faith of their
ennemies betrayed, and utterly distroyed.

They lost their kingdom, their country was spoiled, their aulters were
robbed, made unholy, and left desolate: and by and by we were brought in the
same peril by the means of their chance. To the which people if that thing
had been granted, that was of none effect, the name of christendom had been
spredde abroad both far and wide: neither that same coote of our lord, that
had no seame, had been rent in so many pieces as we se it now adays.

But what need we to make mention of other men's damages and fautis, when we
may se, as touching berdes, such variances at home at our doors, that it has
brought up a perpetual sclaunder to the high order of preesthode. In
continuance of time the delites of our forefathers came so far forth, that by
the means of shauynge, the people was so disguised, that men and women were
scant known a sonder: And by this it happened (if the tale be true that is in
enerye man's mouth) that a woman was chose^ pope of Rome, to the perpetual
rebuke of that same holy order. In remembrance of which deed, the Romans to
this day show the place, poyntynge with a finger, where that same high woman
priest, being in the popes stead, did travail of a child. And leeste such
an other chance might happen, many men believe, that ever after it was ordained
by a law, that the same folly of our forefathers should be openly declared at
the stallyng of every new pope. For at the Pulpit of saint John, where is
gethered to gether on that solemn feast day, a great multitude of people, of
all manner of nations: the new Poope is there constreyned, in the sight of them
all, to prove him self a man by many sufficient witnesses. And when the thing
is ones pronounced by the voice of the crier, by and by it is showed about in
every place: and than we believe surely, we have a laufull man to our pope, when
it might be evidently known, we had him that we ought to have, without any
such wo^derment. These I say be the things, which have comen up in time past
by the smothnes and delycatnes of shauynge, where on the other part it was
never found, that any such inconvenience came by the means of beardes. If
the manners of priestis are to be corrected or looked nere upon, it is best to
take heed, that they, which are chosen to that honest dignity to be
ministers to god almightye, should not be defiled with vile occupations or
offices. Let them keep no vittaylynge houses, let them be no maryners, let
them wear no long daggers, or such other weapons, let them weave none armor
nor pied garmentis, let them not fall to quaftynge or to dronkennes, finally
let them forbear al such things, which do show lyghtnes, folyshenes, or
uncleanliness. Truly if our accusers had taken head to these things, they had
not ben so little regarded of every man as they be. But when they devise with
so great diligence to condemn their berdes which does increce their dignite,
they do not only deserve to be dispreised, but also they bring them self in
to sclaunder of waywardenesse and superstition. I speak this for no malice,
but hit greuethe me to see sum men, very excellent otherwise both in
learning and perfectness of living (except I should belie them, which
being deceyuid by some fools, what so ever they be, under the color of
goodness, fall into such contention, and be so ernest for so light causes, ye
(if I might speak it) very foolyshe trifles, and when there be many higher
matters to be looked upon, to exercise their study, and to labor to put down
berdes, which hurt another god nor manne: nor yet there is any cause why they
should go about to defend their oppinion by certain new provincial laws,
the which though they were never so firmly strengthed by man, ye although
the pope agreed to the^ him self, yet if there be found a truer reason, they
be both broken, corrected, and changed. For the laws, the decrees, and
institutions, for cause made, as the need of matters requires, and as the time
asks, the pope by the counsel of his brethren, and of his high power,
does daily correct, for do, ordeyne, and stablyshe: and these things that
they agree upon, or he alone, be taken for laws. And it is most firmly
provided by precepte of the high ruler of the laws, that every last law
shall wype away the first.

But what more evident or more holy law shall we seek, for the wearynge of
beardes, than that same, which the high bishop Julius the second, and
Clement the.vii. did show in their time, by their own examples gyuynge? It
pleased Julius long time to wear a bearde, It pleased Clement also to wear a
bearde, It pleased the holy college of Cardinals to do the same, It pleased
both the other prelates and poor priestis in like wise: And shall we tarry to
look out an other counsel, when in deed there is none such at all? Or shall
we deuyse to renew weak laws, or those that be now worn out: when this
same lively law is to this day every where in strength, every where
observed, louyngely received, and put in use in every place, for a law made
and approved?

Among the Venetians, the Pisans, the Brutians, the Calabers, the Sicilians,
among them of Champayne, among the Romayne, the Etruscians, and many other
people of Italy, where as each city is instituted with right laudable laws
and most honest manners, it is esteemed and taken for a very greatte offense,
to kiss an other man's wife or his daughter. And yet in the chief part of the
same region, and between the fountain of Pady and Doria, and from thense by
all the mountains of Allobroges, and in every city, that is most populously
inhabyted with french men, and villages between Pyren and Reins, from the
east partis to the greatte occean see, the same license of kissing is so
much suffered, that when so ever thou shalt come to the house of thin ooste,
or of thy friend, except thou first of all kiss his wife, his daughters, and
al other women in the house, and beclyp them in thine arms, thou shalt be
judged churlysshe, or proud, or else to be their ennemie. And so that, that
among us here is thought to be a shamefulle thing, is taken among them for a
great gentylnes and a familiarity. Of such weight is the custom and manners
of people of long time used. Also in some cities and countries, some things
not so honest, are yet by reason of custom and use, and long and sure
consent of the people, grown into a law. And think ye than to take away
this same venerable manner, of gravity and sadness, that has been received and
allowed both by the examples of the high bishops, and also by the imitation
of all the people? Neither ye remember not the saying of the most wise prince,
being daily proved before your eyes: Eos qui aliter uiuere uolunt, quam se
habeant mores eorum, inter quos uiuunt, suspiciosos, aut intemperantes haberi,
They that live after an other sort, then the custom is of the people and
countreye, where they dwell, are taken for suspicious and unruly persons. And
if ye think it best to stycke to one law, what so ever it be, whether it be
weak, corrupt, or of small effect: do ye not see the most sad sentences
of men ageynste you, which have the high authority both to interpret and to
make the laws? For they, which by their high power have made laws to all the
world, what laws they have made of priestis beardes, it appears more
plainly by them self, thanne though they had graven it in a table of
brass. But admytte it be an offense: grant also (though it appear not) that
Alexander the third, was of the same mind, as printed books do show. More
over, grant it to be esteemed a lothly deed: and that a priest with a bearde
ought not to meddell with ministration of the holy sacramentis, nor be in
company among me^: but (after your judgment) to be exiled or kept in perpetual
prison. Well go to, let your orators begin to accuse us, let them do their
vttermoste, let them ley to our charges what so ever they can before the
judges, let them make us to forfayt our goods, and like as rebels and
murderers ar wont to be handled, let them mind to entreat us. But where?
Where shall the judges be? Before whom shall they plede their cause? Who shall
aknowledge this to be an offense? Who shall condemn us? I wolle have them go
to those that be most sad and best advised, and unto them, to whose
sentences and determinations not only all the common people, but also men of
great reputation and might will stand. This is the judgment of the twelve men,
which are ordained to sytte in the bishops palaice, to give sentence upon
matters in debate: Of the which manner there were some time certain men
among the Greeks (when they flourysshed) called Amphictyones, which
concerning the laws, did make answer to al manner of people. And these (I
seye) be the judges, which we had need to have to make an end of our matter.
Therefore behold us here ready at hand, we neither rebelle against you, nor we
are not about to flee, we be content to abide the judgment, ye shall not need
to attache us, and keep us in hold. Begin ye now to call for judgment.
Behold here before your eyes a holle college of chosen men, of good life, and
well skylled in the laws. Whervppon do ye tarry? For what cause are ye so
abashed? Me thinks your answers be very far to seek. Where is now the
beginning of your accusation? that horrible wounder, that priests should wear
beardis, which ye say is a new crime, that was never hard of before this
time? Verily ye may now perceive your own folly, and what tryfils ye have
gethered to gether among the thorns. For ye can find no iuges, but they give
sentence against you before ye begin to speak, except your selfs would be
both judges and accusers.

Do ye not see, if ye strive against beardes, there be so many good men that
wear berdes, that your busynes shall be laughed to scorn with every man?
Neither there is any cause why, that you being but three in nombre or four at
the most, should think to have the true knowledge. This is your will, and not
your judgment: and where as al men thought before, that it was but an error
in you for lack of knowledge, now saying ye stycke still in your opinion, the
truth apperyng so plein before your face, every man may know, ye do it not of
ignorance, but of a very proud and obstinate mind, lest your evil meninge
should be perceived. Stynte ye therefore now to make any further business,
and those manners of men, which ye se are mete to be used, allow ye them also,
or else if you be so tender and delycate, that ye can not abide to be seen like
men, yet be content at the leeste way, that other men use them self as they
should do.

Thus if ye intend to determyne your matter, by the laws, ye see to what
pass it will comme. If ye ground you upon honesty, ye can find no such
honesty in smothynge of a man's face. If ye wolle speak of custom and manners:
the same custom to wear a bearde is so used with princis and chief reulers,
that now it may be taken for a law.

Behold I beseech you the ancient doctors of our Senate house, which are men
so excellent in all mener sciences, which are not wont to do any thing out
of good order: ye se them wear beardes, which thing they would not do, except
they thought it mete for a priest, and for ever honest man. In conclusion
among all these excellent men, thou shalt find very few without beardes.
And those few, if thou would demand for what cause they were no beardes,
they woll make many other excuses, rather the^ sei, it is unseemly for a man of
holy orders, not doubting to prefer the truth before their own manners. What
should I here reherce any mo examples of other holy men, as archbyshops and
bysshoppes, that have worn beardes, which would not have worn them, except
they had known very well, it was not repugnant to the laws of Christ? and shall
any man be so bold to recite other laws before their examples? when it is
openly known, that they would not use a thing, which was not a patron of
perfect religion and honest manners. Me thinks our accusers should now wax
weary, to judge that thing yuel, which by the consent of al good men is allowed
to be both semely and laudable. Furthermore where they recyte a law for their
part, it appears there is no such: but (as I have said) by false writing,
that taken for a law, that never was so ordained: if it were let them
understand, that by the examples of the two high bishops, Julius and Clement,
it is clean abrogate and a^nulled. If any man wol sey, that they might not
break it, than let him deny all the laws made by them. What shall I sey to these
fellows, which wol believe nothing but their own fantasies, to them there is
nothing hard within an olyue, nor without a nutte. For if there be any
authority given to princis and to general counseiles, priestis ought to wear
beardes.

More over if they had not judged it semely for a religious man, they would
never have commanded that priests should be vnshauen, nor they would never have
suffered their own facis to be pictured with beardes.

The picture of Julius is made with a berde in the sight of all men, The face
of Clement is daily coined with a bearde both in gold and silver. But those
men (which so cruelly vex us) when they condemn beardes, they understand
not, that they blame the high bishop, prelates, and other sad men, and
that they mock the constitutions of holy men: they damn Peter and Paul, and
all the appostels, ye and they ley immodestie to Christ him self. There is no
man more unjust then he, which thinks nothing well done, but that that
he does him self.

But for what intent do they make all this busynes? For what cause go they so
busily about to move and put away all berded men from ministrynge of the
sacramentis, from the church, and from all men's companyes? I can not divise
what they shaulde mean, except they would have saint John^ Baptyste, saint
Iamis, and saint Ierom, with many other banyshed out of heaven. For it apperith
by our adversaries judgment, that those were froward persons, rebels, and
corrupters of good manners. For what other thing by their interpretation, makes
they him, that wears a bearde, but a proud and an yuell man, that lives not
after the laws? and he is wicked, that deserves to be banysshed out of the
church of Christ. O tha^ how miserable and unhappy were all these holy men
before named, to chose a life so peynfull and laborous, as to forsake all the
pleasures of this world, and to live in wilderness, to make their bodies
lean with fasting, watchynge, and prayenge: if they should only for their
beardes be judged before god for yuell lyuers. Who doubts, if they, which
now wear beardes, shall be judged for yuell lyuers, but that those holy men
before said, and other that have been auctours of that facion, shall be like wise
accused of our adversaries.

If we demand of our accusers, what affection they have to be made so smoth:
without doubt they will answer and seye, it is done because the hears should
not be dypped in the most holy bloudde of Christ: And they sey, and it is
very troth, that al honor and reverence ought to be done to this most blessed
sacrament. But I beseech you than, is there any thing the less reverence done
to this most high sacrament, if the minister show him self (as Alexis says)
more like a man than a woman? For Alexis says, that God is not offended with
hears, the which serve to express the perfect state of man. I beseech you,
be hears so fylthy, and so greatly to be despised, that they are not worthy
to come nere the blessed sacrament? But foul nails, scabby fyngers, a fylthy
face, with all the rest of the body beside may do it none irreverence: and
think those men then, that a bearde is so fylthy a thing, and so hateful to
god, that it may in no manner wise comme nere the blessed sacrament? And yet for
all this, the self same thing, the which they command so holily to be
done, they do hit not them selfs. For which of all these holy men (I woll
not call them dissemblers) shall you find, that is shaven every day, as the
priests of Egypt be? And except they do shave their berdes every day, or else
ones for all, pluck out the hears by the roots, they are not able to
perform their saying. For within a day after, or two at the most, when
they ministre again, they contaminate the blessed sacrament with hears, and
committee the same offense, for which they accused them that wear berades.
They woll sey, that the uncleanness of the hears, that have grown but a day or
a weke is not like to that that has grown a month, a year, or longer time:
as who would say, it were none offense for a man to break the fasting day
with a calfe of a weke or a month old, but he that should eat a great ox did
grievously offend. And so our most discrete accusers woll seye, that the most
blessed sacrament is not offended with a here of one day or a week is growing,
but he that touchethe it with a long hear, that has grown a month, or a
holle year, does irreverently use it. Trewely this sentence is of so small
effect, and so untrue, that it is not worthy to be tarried any longer upon.

Therefore let us pass over this, and we that be men, let us keep with all
diligence, the same sobre and honest custom of beardes, seeing it can be
proved by no reason, why a bearde should be despised.

On the other part smothynge and shauing (as I have said always) whether it
happen to a man by nature, or by handy craft, it does show an outward
appearance of sin, and wyckednes, or else of other things, which are not
worthy to be preysed.

Yet because they would have somewhat more to babble upon, they sey, it
besemeth not a priest to profess by his habyte, a sorrowful, or a heavy mind.
Behold these valyant defenders of our christen religion. Be hold the gravity
and wisdom of those, which would take upon them to be other men's gydes,
they would have priestis to show in their out ward semblance none other
thing but mirth and lyghtenes, as it were a scoffer (ye if I might sey the
truth) even like a baudy iester. Well let us grant to that. Admytte that a
berde is a token of sorrow and heaviness: mean ye than, that pristis should
neither mourn, nor be troubled in their minds, nor yet live after their own
pleasure? O stony hartis, O cruel minds, of the which sort there was never
none hard of before. Ought not priests most of all to mourn in this
miserable world, when there is no man that has any cause to laughe? We are
constreyned by Nature to mourn for the loss of every dear beloved thing.
There is no man except he be mad, that woll forbydde the mother to mourn at
the buryenge of her child. And would these delycate fellows of the court of
Rome, let and forbydde us to weep and wayle in our own funerals? Woll they
forbydde us to mourn and make sorrow, to behold how all Italy is ouerronne
and distroyed, to see the noble city of Rome subdued, spoiled, and robbed, and
the inhabitantis thereof murdered and slain, to see the great vexation of all
christendom, and in the dread and fear of so many fold great peryls, and
finally in beholdynge the confusion of the holle world, wol they warn us to
be heavy and sorrowful? And as much of Italy as remains, lies reked up in the
ashes of her burning: and no part thereof is more consumed by fire, than that
that longed to priestis. Under the ashes lain the hot glowyng cooles, which
seem to kendell up a far greatter fire (ere it be ought long) than is
passed. And is it not lefull for us, at leest wise to show a mourning chiere,
and with a heavy countenance to witness our great dread, and miserable fortune?
And we being forsaken of so many christen princis, and most unworthily
reputed, by whose counseyle and sufferaunce, we were cast out as a common
pray, and all taken, as many as were at Rome, and spoiled of all our goods
that we had, and are beggarde with intolerable tributis, and we suffer and
endure great cruelty, injury, and many fold miseries, and we be not yet like
to see an end of these great calamities: for not only our foes, but also our
friends do daily catch from us what so ever they can, and they spare not so
much as perteyne to the houses of religion. And yet our accusers in this
unlucky and most miserable time, in so great darkness of the common weal, in
so great perturbation of all things, goo about to forbydde us, with fear of
coursynge, that we in no wise should lament our vnluckynes of most wretched
chance.

All the world gapethe to devour Italye: They have sucked it as nere as they
can, and those scrappes that remain, they intend to swype clean away.

And these, our ydell accusers take thought for nothing, but give them selfs
only to slouthe, and they prepare to live in delight and ease, in lust and in
liking, and goo about to shave and to make smothe their facis, like as
thowghe thereby they should greattely help and succor the common welthe of
christendom, which is now in greatte ieoperdye and ruin. And they think
they have sufficientely provided for us, if they can persuade us to forsake
our mannely state, and to show our selfs like women. But I woll bydde them
fare well, and as men unworthy of honest company, to be sent away somewhyther,
where they may remain unknown, and lie and inioye their fond appetite. We
wolle judge them worthy of none other punysshement, nor we woll neither envy
their quietness, nor yet hate them, for that they be so delycate to them self,
in case that they dare not, nor be not able, to hurt or hinder the manners of
men, that have been well and discretely ordained.

But whereto should I strive or reason any further with you ageynste the
smothenes of shauynge, saying it has been proved to you both by the
institutions and holy preceptis of our forefathers in old time, that we ought
to let our beardes grow, to the intent we may follow the exaumple of Christ
and his disciples, and of so many other fathers that led a perfect good
life, and to the intent we moughte eschew and aduoyde the occasions of
reprofe and sclaunder, and to fle the suspicion and detraction of delycatnes,
and last of all to the intent we might be iuged rather men than women? For
what cause should we be ashamed of our beardes, if it be well showed, what a
bearde is, and how well it becomes a sad and an honest man. If it be well
proved, how greatly a berd in creseth the dignity of a prist? Why should we be
asshamed of a bearde, if we find that by the law of nature, it is necessary,
and by the law written, acceptable to god, and by the law of grace it is no
where discommended. If the error of them be overcome, that hold the contrary
opinion: If also the opinion, that the blessed sacrament should be polluted with
here is, be wyped awey, and that it is well proved, that a bearde does none
offense to the reverence of that most high divine mystery: If the high
princis of our christen religion have made a law ageynste shauynge, which as
appears by their own examples they would we should follow: If upon the same
law there has followed not a secret, nor a dark, but an open and a common
consent of the people, ye and welnere of all manner of nations, which every
where are seen to stand styffely in that oppinion: Wherefore then, I beseech
you, should not we stycke and lean to reason rather then to abusion? and rather
follow the examples of so many virtuous and noble men, than cleave to the
opinion of a few superstitious persons? If the judgment of this matter were
commyttted to me, I would give a perpetualle sentence, that from heneforthe no
man being professed into holy orders, should shave his bearde, according to
the use of those holy fathers: which knowing it a thankful thing to god,
made such vows, when they intended most to be reconciled again to him. Or
else I fear me, we shall ones again provoke the ire of god ageynste us, who
being displeased with such feminine delycatenes (as shauynge and smothynge of
our skynnes, and making soft our lyppes, and perfumynge, and such other) we
may very well believe, he did send al kinds of mischefe into the town of
Rome, which yet hitherto we feel: And therefore he commanded our goods to be
taken from us, and our sumptuous houses to be either over thrown or else
burned, and many other delytes of our wanton minds to be plucked awey from us.

But when he shall se us return to a better mind, and that we call to
remembrance, that we be me^, and entered into holy orders, and that we wol
chastise our lust and lyking, and set naught by delectations and pleasures of
this world, and clean forsake our soft and feminate affections, and wytnes by
our berdis, that we intend to lead a more constant and manly life: without
doubt he wol metigate his displeasure, and begin to turn these bitter and
cruel chastisinges into a more easy and more gentyl punishment, and at the
last grant us an end of our calamities and miseries, that have so long
continued. But in case we wol begin to use again our old facion of delicate
and sinful living, I am sore aferde, lest that he being more angry, and more
displesed toward us, than ever he was before, woll send so sharp
punysshement among us, that it will little avail us, to pray him of pity:
and that he wol withdraw aweye from us his grace, and suffer us to slide into
all calamities, and so, (which almighty god defend) the universal furye of
all the world, being stered up to cruelty, he shall turn into our mischefe, so
that in co^clution, what by the menes of our wicked living and the vngentyl
dealyng of the people, we shall be utterly distroyed.

FINIS.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THO. BERTHELETI. M.D.XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


