Aggeus and Abdias Prophets, the one corrected, the other newly added, and
both at large declared.

The earnest love that I bear to thy house has eaten me. Psalm. lxix. Joan.
ii. Phinees has turned away my anger because he was moved with love of me.
Number. xxv. Imprinted at London by Willyam Seres. 1562.

A Preface to all that love the earnest promotinge of Gods glory, in his
Church by true religion.
Although the commen usage of dedicating books, is to require the defense of
some woorthye personage of learning or authority for the thing that it is
written: yet the majesty of the matter in this book, is such, that it rather
defendes than sekes defense, and thexample of the Prophet, which wrytes it not
to one, but many, suffers me not to send it, to any one sort of men
particularly, but generallye to all that should unfeignedly promote the increase
of Gods glory, because all degrees of men do owe a duty to the buildinge, of
this gods house. And if any offense be taken (as God knows, none is
purposelye given) the defense of many is greater than of a few, and that
authority or credit, which one manne alone can not bring to pass, al jointly
together shall more easily obtain. The Prophet is sent from God to the Prince,
the high Priest and the people: so I speak to the rulers, the ministers and
comminalty. The cheef intent of his Prophecy, is to stir all to the spedye
buildinge of Gods house, which they had so long neglected: my labor is to
bring some of every sort (for all is not possible) to an earnest fortheringe of
gods true religion, of late most mercifullye restored unto us, which not long
ago, most cruellye was persecuted, of many yet hated, and of every man almost
now to coldlye followed and practiced. But if this Prophecy were read and
depelye considered, with such a hungry desire of gods glory, as the Prophet
spoke and wrote it, and I for my part and pore ability, have declared it: I
doubt not, but ye good should be stirred by gods spirit, more earnestly to seek
gods glory, and the froward should be afraid of gods plague, and ashamed
stubbernely to strive against ye truth continually.

The state of religion in these our miserable days, is much like to the
troublesome time that this Prophet lived in: God grant that after many grievous
storms it may take like root in us, as it did than in them. After the long
captivity of gods people in Babylon, god gave them gracyous king Cyrus, which
set them at liberty Esdra. i.
and sent them home to build Gods house: So after our long Romish slauerye,
God raised us up good kings which restored us gods book that long had bin
buried, and loused us from the bondage of strange gods, forreyn powers, cruel
hipocrites, and wicked Idols. And as after that short fredome under good Cirus,
ensued the crueltye of Hamman, for negligently handling gods buildinge: And not
long after mild Ester, Ester. iii.
came blouddy Antiochus for their falling from god: So for our talking gospel,
and not worthily walking nor following it, under our gracyous late Josias,
Macha. i.
crept out a swarm of Romish waspes, stinging to death all that would not
worship their Gods, nor believe their doctrine.

God for his mercies sake, grant that now for our unthankful coldness in gods
cause under our myld Ester, burst not out again bloody Antiochus with his
whelps, justly to avenge our cold slacknes in gods religion, and insensible
dulnes. ii. cor. ii.
Gods word is never offered and given in vain, or to use at our pleasure: but
it works either salvation in them that here believe and follow it, or else
condemnacion in them that proudely despise it, sturdely rebel, or forgetfully
do hear, and vnthankfullye receive his mercies. Therefore as after a storm
folowes a calm, and after winter comes summer: so now where God has given a
breathing time, (lest our weakness had not been able to have borne his heavy
displeasure any longer) let us earnestlye apply our work, when we have time,
for the night will come when no man shall be able to work.

If this be true (as it is most true in deed) that every deed of our savior
Christ, is our instruction: and also that what things soever are written, they
be written for our learning (as S. Paul teaches) let us call to remembrance,
Romans xv.
what zele and earnest love our savior Christ, especially showed in building
his fathers house, and restoringe the true understanding of the scriptures,
from the supersticious gloses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and also what a
fervent desire of promoting gods glory our fathers have showed before us, that
we may be good scolers of our schoolemaister Christ Jesus, and obedient
children, walking in the steps of our fathers. John. ii. Luke. xix.
Our Lord and savior christ, coming into the temple, and finding it full of
biers, sellers and chaungers, was grieved to see Gods house so misused, gate a
whippe and drove them al out, saying: My house is a house of prayer: but ye
have made it a den of thieves, so surely al Christians, which vnfeynedly^
bear the name of christ, and zelously love the building of his house, would
gladlye see sin punyshed, and lamente that the whip of Gods disciplyne is not
shaken in gods house, to the driving out and confusion of all gredy thieves,
which if they can not get in at the door, by lawful means, will climb in at
the wyndowe, and for a little money will sell the bodies and souls of Christ's
sheep, and make gods house the Popes market place. But as she that had so much
work to do, that she could^ not tell where to begin, sat her down and left
al undone: so I say, worldly wise men see so many things out of order in Gods
house, and so little hope of redress, that they can not tell which to correct
or amend first, and therefore let the whippe lie still, and every man to do what
him lust, and sin to be unpunished.

And not only this evil reigns, but the world is come to such a dissolute
liberty, and negligent forgetting of god, that men sleping in sin, need not
so much a whip to drive any out of the Church, so few come there, but they
need a great sort of whips, to drive some few thitherwarde. For come into a
Church on the Sabbath day, and ye shall see but few though there be a sermon:
but the alehouse is ever full. Well worth the Papists therefore in their kind,
for they be earnest, zealous and painful in their doings, they will build their
kingdom more in one year with fire and faggot, Zele in correcting sin is
godly.
than the cold gospellers will do in seven. A popish summoner, spy, or
promoter, will drive mo to the church with a word, to hear a latin mass,
than seven Preachers will bring in a wekes preaching, to hear a godly Sermon.
If this be not true, remember the late days of popery, and see who durst
offend him that weere a shaven crown. Who looked so high than, but he would
give place to a priests cappe: and now who regardes the best preacher ye have?
O what a condemnacion shall this be to al such, as have the whip of gods
correction in their hand, to se the wicked so dilligent, and earnest in their
doings, to set up Antichrist: and Christian rulers and officers of al sorts,
having the whip of correction in their hand, both by gods law, and the
Princes, so coldely behave them selves, in settinge up the kingdom of Christ,
that neither they give good example them selves in diligente prayinge, and
resorting to the church, nor by the whippe of dyscipline drive others
thitherward. Where apperes in any christians, in these our days this earnest
zele of Christ, to promote gods glory by such correction, that we may say we
be his folowers. I fear rather that Christ, of who^ we more talk, than
diligently follow, or earnestly love, for this cold slacknes that he sees in
us, will say unto us. Revel. iii
Because ye be neither hot nor cold, I will spue you out of my mouth. Woe be
to that Realm where god is compelled to take the whip in hand to punish sin
because the rulers will not: great shall be the plage thereof. Phinees turned
away gods anger from his people, Number. xxv
because so zelously he avenged gods quarrel and punished that wickedness,
which other wincked at. David seeing gods glory defaced, and his enemies so
contemptuouslye to forget the law of the lord, was so grieved that he said.
Psalm. c.xix
The earnest love that he bare toward God, made him to pine away, because
his ennemies had forgotten the word of God. Elias fleing from cruel Iesabell,
thretninge to kill him, because he had destroyed Baals priests, lived in
wilderness, desired he might die, iii. king. xix.
for he was weary of his life to see how many were fallen to Idolatrye, and how
few (or none as he thought) worshipped truly the living god. Though Iehu was a
evil man otherways, yet god gave him a worldly blessing, and commended him for
his earnest zele in rooting out the posterity of Achab, ^^ii. kin. x
pulling down Baall, and his sacrificinge priests, making a common Iakes of
the house, where they worshipped him. S. Paul seeing the Corinthians, rather
reioysinge then lamentinge or punishinge that filthiness committed among
them: that one of them had defiled his stepmother, i. corin. v.
wrytes unto them, rebukes al the^ sharply, because they did not correct him,
and wills them al to assemble them selves in the name of god, to excomminicate
and give him to Satan that had done this wickedness, not to eat and drink with
him, that he might be ashamed, repent, and amend. So whereas this great zele
and love toward god and his house buildinge, stands either in correcting
evil and lamenting the defacing of gods glory, or else in wisshinge and doing
good thereto, and fortheringe it to our powers: for the first part to be
earnestlye followed, these few examples shall serve: for the other, there be so
many that it is harder to tell where to end, then where to begin.

Moses in the wilderness, wyllinge to make a Tabernacle and place where the
people should resort to worship their god, had the Princes and people so
liberal to offer and bring to the making thereof, Zele to promote gods
glory pleases him. Exo. xxxv
gold, silver, precious stones, silk, purple, hear, iron, brass and timber,
of all sorts such plentye, that they would have given more then neded. David
earnestly desiringe to build a house for the Lord (if god would have suffered
him) left his son Solomon so great plenty of al things necessary to that
buildinge in a readiness, i. Chro. xxix.
that he finished that costly building in seven years. Good king Cirus
restored again to Gods people all that covetous Nabucho had robbed from them:
Cirus, Darius, Artaxerxes, and his Princes gave out of their treasures to the
buildinge of the temple, and maintenance of their sacrifices according to the
law of Moses, Esdr. 6.7.
sufficientlye that they might pray for the king, his children, and the common
wealth. Constantinus the first, worthelye called magnus, a Chrystyan Emperor
gave great liberty ^^ the Bishops, and other ministers. Iustinianus,
Theodosius, Carolus magnus, Ludouicus Pius. etc. augmented and increased the
same with lands and laws. This zeal and earnest love to build gods house, We
are unlike our fathers.
and punish sin was in our fathers: this liberality was in Princes and rulers
that understood not gods benefits and mercies so plentifully as we do. They
pacified gods wrath, in correcting sin, and we provoke his plages with
heapinge up of sin: They were grieved and weary of their lives when they see
Gods enemies despise his word, we wink and cloak it, we laugh and smile at
it, and think it not to be a fault. They were offended if wickedness were
unpunished, and the party not ashamed that sinned, and we be offended if any
man go about to see it punished, or the offendour ashamed. They were liberal
in geuinge, relieuinge and maintaining the ministry, we are greedy in
snatching and plucking away from them: They were ready to defend with
privileges the ministers, that they should not be withdrawn from doing their
duty, and we bind them to such clogges, that they can not do their duty: They
restored all that was taken from them, and we study daily how to get more from
them. When I compare these doings together, and see how good success the one
had, and gods Church was gloriouslye builded that way both under the law and
the gospel, it makes me to quake when I look what shall fall upon us, going so
far clean contraryway. Surely both they and we go not in the right way. The
lord for his crucified Christ's sake, which came down from the bosom of his
father, to teach us to build him a house here, that afterward we might reign
in glory with him there: grant us all, in all degrees from the higheste to the
lowest, such an earneste simple love to the true buildinge of his house, as
the Prophet here teaches us, that uprightly we might walk the right way that
he has gone before us.

If the Prince and nobylitye will maintain that honorable estate that god has
called them to, and avoid the bondage of foreign powers: If the Bishops and
clergy will feed Gods people with the lively food of our souls, gods
doctrine and discipline, and not with man's inventions: If the people will
truly serve God and obey their prince, flee from Idolatrye, and escape gods
plagues: let us jointly together earnestly abhor popery, correct sin,
turn unto the Lord, delight in his word, reverence his ministers, be diligent
in prayer, that we may be liuelye stones, mete for his building, and become
the temples of the holy ghost, where he with the father and the son.iii.
persons and one god, may dwell and be praised.

I. P. L. C. D.

My earnest love to God has pined me away, because my enemies have forgotten
thy words. Psalm. 119.

I have been earnestlye zealous for the Lord god of hosts: because they have
forsaken thy covenant.3. king. 19.

The Prophet Aggeus.
IN the second year of King Darius, in the vi. month and the first day of
the month, the word of the Lord was sent by the hand of Aggeus the Prophet,
unto Zerubabell the son of Salathiel, ruler of Judah and unto Joshua the Son of
Iosedec the chief Priest, saying.

In as much that the year, Notinge of circumstances, is a toke^ that the thing
is true which is telled.
month and day, when this Prophecy was spoken, be so diligently noted of the
Prophet: and also that in which kings days, by whom and to whom it was
preached, is so diligently mentioned, it makes much for proving the truth
of the prophecy, and that we should the rather believe it. For they that will
teach lies, use not so exactly to declare the circumstances, wherein things
were done, least in examynation of the same, things be proved contrary, and
they found liers.

But chiefly this long time here appointed of xl. years, The differrynge of
Gods punyshement* declares his long sufferinge and our slouthfulnes in well
doing
teaches us the patience and long sufferaunce of god, who will not punish so
sone as we do a fault, but tarry and look for our repentance and amendmente
as he did here so long bear the Jews. And also it sets before us the
unthankful disobedience, and slothful negligence of gods people, which after
so merciful a deliverance, and bringing them home again from Babylon to
their own country (from whence they were led prisoners by Nabuchodonozor) had
so long and many years left of the building of that house, which God willed
them so straightly to restore, and the good King Cirus had given them liberty
to do the same,.i. Esder. i.
and restored their old ornaments to do it withal. And in them also we
learn our own slouthfullnes to the fulfillinge of gods laws: For of our
selves we be no better then they, nor more dilligent in well doing, except God
stir us up by his undeserved grace.

The Jews for their disobedience to god and his Prophets preachinge his
word, Iere. ii.^.
according to the Prophecy of Jeremy, had their country spoiled, their City
Jerusalem burned, their Temple destroyed, they them selves were many killed,
Jerusalem was destroyed for not obeyinge the Prophet, but after returned.
some for hunger in the besiege of the City, did eat their own children or
donge, and the rest were led prisoners to Babylon by Nabuchodonozor, and there
kept three score and ten years in great bondage. After these years ended, by
ye good king Cirus, they had license in the first year of his reign to go
home and build their temple as many as would, and all other might freelye aid
them with money toward that great costly work. Some good amongst them (but
few in comparison) as Zorobabell, Joshua, Nehemia, Mardocheus and other, whose
names are rekened in Esdras,.i. Esdra. ii.
took in hand to be Captains of this worthy work: and after they came to
Jerusalem, they builded an altar to serve for to make their offeringes and
their sacrifices on, until the time that the Temple was builded. The first and
second years of their coming home to Jerusalem,.i. Esdra* iii.iiii. and.v.
they were some thing diligent about their building, and laid the ground work
of the temple: But after, partlye for complaints of the rulers in the country
(which were strangers and placed there long before by Salmanasar, and had
accused them to the king, iiii. king xvii
saying: if they were suffered to build their City, they would rebel, as
they were wont, and pay no more taxes) and partly for slothful negligence of
them selves, Because we can not stir up our selves to do good, preachinge
is too be esteemed.
they left of buildinge unto now this second year of Darius, God sent this
his Prophet to stir them up to their work. By this we may learn that when
we lie long on sleep in sin, we can not wake up our selves until God stir
us up by his Prophets, his word, or holy spirit. For David after he had
committed adultery with Urias wife, ii. King ii.
and caused her husband to be slain, lay without remorse of conscience,
without repenting for his eull doings, or asking mercy, until the Prophet
Nathan came and rebuked him for the same. Therefore let us not lightly regard
the warninges of God sent unto us by his preachers, but thankfully embrace
them, praisinge his holy name, that not only he has so patiently borne us so
long and not suddenly destroyed us walowing in sin, and forgettinge him
without repentance: but now lastly has called us by the preachinge of his
word, and restoring his gospel by our gracious Queen, to a new life, which
god grant us for his Christ's sake.

The Jews had now lain after their coming home almost, xl. years not
regardi^g the building of the temple, wherefore God most louinglye sent his
Prophet to warn them of their duty, rebuke them of their negligences, and
stir them up earnestly to go about that work. And although the counting of
these years be hard to count, and are diversely reckened of diuerrs men,
because they would make the greek Histories to agree with the scriptures: I
shall let all other Histories pass, because they be to troublesome, and follow
that only which the scripture teaches, for that is the easiest and plainest
to understand, and without al doubt true. In John we read that the Jews
asked our savior Christ what marvelous sign he would work to persuade them,
Ihon. ii.
that he might do such things as he did. This temple was.xlvi. years in
buyldinge.
And he said to them: distroye ye this temple, and in three days I will build it
again. He spoke of his own body, which he would raise up the third day after
they had put him to death: but they understood him of that great costlye
solemn Temple of lyme and stone, which now they were building, and therefore
said: Forty and six years was this temple in buildinge. And will thou build
it in three days? Here we se how long this temple was in building?
although some expound this place otherwise: yet this is not meant that they
were contynuallye workynge on the same, so long (for partly they were
forbidden and stopped by the Kings that ruled after Cyrus,.i. Esdra. iiii.
and partlye they were negligent and careless for it) but that there were so
many years from the beginning of that work, unto the finishing of the same.
In the second year of King Cyrus, which was also the second year of their
returninge home to Jerusalem from Babylon, they laid the foundacions of the
temple: In the second year Darius, as this present place teaches, they are
willed by Aggeus to take in hand their work again* And in the sixth year of
this same Darius they finyshe it:.i. Esdra. vi.
so that from the second year of Cyrus, unto the sixte year of Darius, must
be.xlvi. years wherein they were building, as S. John says. This was a great
negligence of Gods people and unthankfulness, so long forgetting the building
of the temple, and their duty to god, after so merciful and late restoring
them to their country: If god rule us not every minute we forget him and our
selves. Philip. ii.
but this all our crooked nature bent unto, except God do not only begin the
good work in us, but also continuallye lead us in the same to the end.
Therefore have we need to look diligently unto our selves, and pray that god
would not turn his merciful eyes from us: for if he never so little withdraw
his hand^ from us, and do not every minute guide all our doyinges, we fall
into a forgetfulness of him and our duties.

Many doubt also which Darius this was, that is here named of the Prophet,
because the Greek hystories make mention of diverse of that name, as Darius
Histaspis, and Darius Longimanus with other mo. But because the Scripture makes
mention of none after Cirus time, but this one: I will seek no further, nor
trouble you with such hard shyftes as many do, to make the Scripture and
those historyes to agree. Under what kings thy^ temple was builded.
The Scriptures make mention of no mo Kings for this building time, but of
Cyrus, Assuerus, Darius, and ^rtaxerces: Therefore in their days must this
whole history, and those six and forty years mentioned of Saint John, be
fulfilled. Assuerus I take to be husband to queen Ester, and this Darius to
be her Son, whereunto also the Hebrewe commentaries agree. And although
other think other wise, yet I see no Scripture that they bring. Cyrus gave
first license to the Jews to go home and build this temple. i Esdra* iiii.
Assuerus moved by the accusations of the rulers, did forbid them to build
any more. Darius brought up in the fear of God by his Mother Ester, and
saying the wickedness of his father, iii. Esdra. iiii.
made a vow, that if he ever reigned after his father, he would buyld the
temple, and so in his second year he gave the Jews free liberty to go home
and build their temple, renewed their Commission, and gave them money
liberallye to do it withal. Artaxerxes in his seventh year sent Esdras home
again with geate gifts, i. Esdra. vii.
and gave lyberty to as many as would go with him, and so the work was
fynished.

Many do think probablye, and to who^ I can well agree, that the.vii. year of
Artaxerxes was the seventh year of this same Darius here named, and that
Artaxarxes and Darius is both one man. For Artaxerxes was a common name to all the kings of Persia, Artaxerxes.
as all the kings of Egypt were called Pharao first, Pharao. Ptolomeus.
Caesar.
and Ptolomeus afterward, what time soever they lived in. And as all the
Emperors are called Caesar, although they have proper names of their own
beside. But I will not enter further in this matter, for it is more subtle
then profitable, and little edification is in the searching of it: every one
judge as the scripture will best bear, and as God shall teach him.

The Jews in reckeninge their years and months, have diverse soortes. For
sometime March is their first month, and the beginning of their year, and
specially when they count their solemn feasts, as God bad Moses, that,
Exodi. xii.
ye Moon wherein they came out of Egipte, should be the first Moon in the
year. Sometime was September when all the fruits of ye earth was gathered into
their barnes. Diverse sorts of reckening years and months and names of days
and months
Sometime they reckon from the day of the coronation of their Kings, as we
use diversely to reckon also, and sometime to begin at Newyears day, sometime
at ye Annunciation of the virgin Marie, commonly called the Lady day in Lent,
Sometime from the day of Coronation of our Kings, and sometime when they
pay their rentes, as Mighelmas, Martinmas, Helenes day. etc. But their moons
were reckened to begin ever from the change of the moon; what day soever of
our moon it changed, and not by the Calendar (for than there was none made)
as we do. So that the first dai with us in the Calendar might be far from
the change of ye moon with them, as the.xii.xiiii.xix xxiiii. or so forth.
Their months for a long time, and their days always, had not proper names
given them by men as we have now, to call them Mondaie, Sondai, Wednesdaie,
Fridaie* And January, March, August, Iulye, but they reckened both their
months and days thus: the first, the second, the third, fourth. etc. Nor we
read in the scriptur any names given to months unto the time of Moses, and
than had they no Heathen names, as our days and months have now. So by
this reckning, this Prophecy was spoken in the second year of Darius reign,
beginning the year of the time of his coronation, when soever it was. And in
the sixth month from March, which is our August, and the first dai, which is
not La^mas as we count, but the first of ye change of the moon, what time
soever it changed. The marking of this reckening shall help you too understand
diverse places of scriptur, if they be remembered, for because they use another
manner of reckening the^ we do.

And although it seem too many but a small matter, by what names the days and
months ^e called: yet if we consider it well, there is a great thing in it.
The Latin men and many other more, give names to every day in the week of
some one of the Stars, commonly called the Planetes, as though the Stars
ruled al things. As Sundai of the Sun, It is hurtful to call days by Heathen
names.
Mo^daie of the moon, Saterdai of Saturn: and the months many have their
names of Emperors, as July, August, for a vain glory that their name should
not dye with the^, and diverse other have their names of as light causes.

If we remember the beginning of the names of two most solemn days in our
week, Wednesdaie and Fridai, we shall better perceive the rest. Fabian and
other Chronicles tell, that when the Saxons invaded this Realm, and there were
seven Kings ruling here at once, they brought with them two Idols, ye one
called Woden, and the other Fria: Or else as other write, it was a noble Captain
and his wife, which for their worthiness were made Gods, and when they had
overcome the English men, they made two days in the week to be called
Wednesdai and Fridaie by the names of their false gods or Captains, and so to
be worshipped, wednesday. Friday.
and those names we keep still. Why than may it not be thought to be in
remembrance of those Idols or Captains, if every thing have their name after
their beginning? And this may be thought the beginning of ye Wednesdaies and
Fridaies to be^ holier then the rest, what pretense soever was found after to
fast or halow them. So this good can come by using ye names of strange gods,
that Idolles with false worshipping of God were set up.

We never readde in the scripture, nor in any aunciente writer on the
scripture (that I remember) that either moonethes or days were called by names
of Stars, men, Idolles, or false gods, but Feries, as Augustine often does
use too call them: yea, the Popes Portues, calls the days in the week^
thus: the second and the third Fery. etc.

But now in time it is come too pass that every day in the year is called
by that name of some saint, and not in all Countries a like, but as every
Country is disposed too worship their saints.

In the new Testamente I find no days named, Reuela. i.
but the first of the Sabbath etc. and the Lords day, which I take too be the
Sundaie, when Ihon saw his Revelation. Thus superstition crepte intoo the
world, when men began too forgette calling on the true and only God, and
made them gods of every deadde saint as they list.

Astronomers do evil in calling some days unfortunate.
What can we say for our selfs, but that we put great superstition in days
when we put openly in Kale^ders and Almanacks and say: these days be
unfortunate, and great matters are not to be taken in hand these days, as
though we were of gods privy counsel.

But why are they unfortunate? Is God a sleep on those days? or does he not
rule the woorlde and all things those days, as well as on other days? Is he
weary that he must rest him in those days? Or does he give the ruling of
those days to some evil spirit or planete? if God give to Stars such
power that things ca^ not prosper on those days, than God is the author of
evil. If Stars do rule men those days, than man is their servant. But God
made man to rule, and not be ruled, and all creatures should serve him.

What shall be the cause? If Astronomers say true, every man at his birth by
his constellation, have diverse things and desires appointed him. Why than, how
can so many diverse constellations in so many men at your birth agree* to
make one day unlucky in your life to all men? Either let him prove it by
learning, or for shame and sin hold your^ tongue. Stars may have some
power on the natural qualities and actions of ye body and for physic: But
on the Ciuyll voluntary actions of Christians minds none. Saint Paul says,
the children of god be led with the sprite of god, why tha^ not by Stars. It
is faithles superstition to teach or believe such things: that either at the
birth or after we be ruled by Stars. All Astronomers could never tell why
Jacob and Esau brother twynnes, borne in one moment, should have so contrary
natures. What Star ruled when Sodom and Gomorre were burned, and the next
towns escaped? were all born under one star, that then perisshed, or all Noes
floudde? was not tha^ diverse sorts, men and women, young and old, good and
badde. Does not the scripture say yt god made seven days, and when he had
made all things, he did behold them all, and they were very good. Why shall
we then be hold to call them evil, unfortunate, and dismal days? If god
rule our doings continually, why shall they not prosper on those days, as well
as on other? God blessed the seventh day: and yet we dare call that
unfortunate, evil, and cursed, which he blessed.

Although it be impossible to redress this old common error, so depely
rooted in all tunges and countries, yet it is not unprofitable to note the
begi^ning of these things, that this superstition may be some thing known.
When god made seven days, he called them the first, the second, third,
fourth. etc. But the last day he called the Sabbath, which betokens rest, and
has not the name given too be called of any other creature, man, saint,
star or Idol, but as the name soundes, so should we on the seventh day
rest from all bodily labor, except need compel, but specially from all filthy
sin. Holy men are better remembered by writing, than calling days by their
names. Boniface. 8.
This is not the right way to make holy men too be remembered, nor surest to
avoid Idolatry. It were better to be done by writing the Chronicles, lives,
and deaths, of such as were godly in deed, and not every Rascal, as Legenda
aurea, the Legend of Lies does. Pope Boniface the.viii finding the^ of Farrare
worshippinge.xx, years, one Hermanius as a saint, dug him out of the
ground, and burned him for an Heretic and author of the sect called
Fratricelli, and forbad to worship such evil men. So I think we scraping
together a number of saints as we list, worship many evil persons. What
holiness was in Thomas Becket, Thomas
which had gotten two days in the Calendar called by his name, Becket of of
Caterbury.
and Priests must evermore mumble him one wicked memory in Ma^tins ^ Euensong.
If papists, rebels, and traitors to their kings, as this stout Champion of
the Popes was, This sign notes the text expounded.
may be thus rewarded, it is no marueyle if many rebel against their kings
as he did.

In that, yt he says: the word of ye Lord was sent by the hand of Aggeus the
Prophet: it teaches the duty both of the hearer and the preacher. For neither
must we teach any thing of man's devises, The word of God is only too be
taught* and believed.
nor the hearer must regard him so much which preaches, yt for his cause we
must either more or less believe the thing which is taughr (for the preacher
takes his authority of the word of God, and not ye woord^ takes his
authority of the preacher) but only because it is the word of God, of whose
truth we must not doubt, but with obedience receive it. Untoo the preacher
says saint Peter, he that speaks, let him speak as the words of God:
i. Pet. iiii.
and Aggeus being but a poor Leuite, kepinge this rule, was not to be despised
more the^ the priest And where as preaching and believing the things preached,
is the highest and most pleasant service and worship of god, what thing
should be taught and what punishment is for them which do it not, the
scripture teaches plain. Saint Matthew says: they worship me in vain,
teaching learninges, which are the commandments of men. Deuteronomy. xviii.
And the false Prophet which runs before he be sent and deceiues the people,
speakinge in the name of God, that which he was not commanded, or else
speaking in the name of false gods, shall be put to death* Therefore let the
pratinge pardoner, or the Popish priests take heed in whose names they
speak, and what they teach, when for the gredy gayning of a little money, they
condemn them selves, and set out to sell Heaven* Purgatory, and Hell, as they
were al in their power to give at their pleasur. In the Popes name they
promise.xl.lx. an hundredth days of pardon, and for a Trental they may be
brought from Hell. The true Prophets of God, as appears in their writings,
always use to say: thus says the Lord: the word of God was spoken to me.
etc. but the Popes creaturs, as Pardoners, priests, friars. etc. say: thus
says Pope Alexander, Gregory, Ihon, Clement or some such other like, and
nothing will they do without money. Ihon. ^iii.
Let the true preacher teach the mercies of god, that God has so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten son, yt every one which beleues in
him, shall not be damned, but have life everlasting: and yet shall the dronken
pardoner and sir Ihon Lacklatin be better believed, then Christ which spoke
these words, and promised it: yea rather ye people will ^ye forgeuenes of their
sins at the Pope and such his messengers hands then take it freely at christ
paying nothing therefore, such as the brutishe blind unthankfulness of the
world. Esaias. lv.xliii.
Come and bye freely without money, says the prophet and again: It is I, it
is I that put away thy sins, for mine own sake, than it is not for thy
money, Math. xv.
nor the Popes bulls nor pardons. Let the world therefore take heed, for if the
blind lead the blind, both fall in the diche. Vayn excuses
This miserable common excuse, which is so often in their mouths, shall not
excuse them, when they say: thus we are taught, our ghostly fathers says so,
and our fathers before us have so believed Christ says ye shall both fall in the
pytte. Believe no doctrine that teaches to go too heaven other ways then by
Christ freely, or which is not written and contained in the Bible: for that
only is the perfect word of God, and which only teaches true salvation.
Look the Popes testame^ts throughout, called his decrees and decretals and you
shall not once there be taught too seek comfort at Christ in any trouble of
mind, but only to set out his vain glory, and that he is Lord of heaven and
earth, Purgatory and Hell, and if thou live never so wickedly he and his
Chaplains have full authority to bring thee from Purgatory, Priests pray not
without money, nor hire any for them self.
so that thou bring them money. I think it has not ben often heard tell of,
that any priest ever said Tretal without money, or hired any said for the^
selfs: but if they were good, why should they not have them for the^ selves?
If they had charity, they would say them for the poor as well as for ye rich:
they would not suffer so many poor souls to lie broyling in Purgatory, as
they think do, no they would do nothing night nor day all their lives but say
Masses, if they had such love toward their brethren as they should, and if
they were able so to deliver them For what charity is in him that may help
his brother and will not by all means possible? But they show by their doings
their meaning well enough when they turn the^ to the people and say: of your
devotion and charity pray ye for ye soul of N. as though they should say: we
pray for money without charity, but ye must do freely of devotion without
money. These false Prophets, Papists, and members of Antechrist, came not in
ye Lords name, nor speak his word, therefore they be accursed.

Also in that he says, the word was sent by the hand of Aggeus, we are
taught how to esteem preaching, Ministers by this Hebrew kind of speaking. For
as the hand serves to do mo things withal, then any part of the body, so when
they will signify any thing too be done by the ministry and service of any
man, they use to say: it was done by the hand of such a man. Therefore the
word and message which he brought was the Lords, and Aggeus was but the
servant that brought it. Preachers are but seruau^ts, and must not go before
they be sent: but their word is Gods Math^ x.
So must we think of the preachers, they be but servant, though they be
never so good and learned preachers, and their message is the word of the
Lord. Thus says Christ: it is not you yt speak, but it is ye spirit of your
father, which speaks in you. Saint Paul also teaches how we should think
upon him and others such preachers, when he says: let a man judge and think
thus of us, ^. Cor. iiii.
that we be ye servants of Christ, and dispensers of gods secret mysteries.
Therefore they which seek rather to be lords then servant, and be hinderers
of preachinge gods word, rather then faithful teachers of gods holy will to
his people: are not to be counted among the servant and ministers of
Christ, but rather enemies, sekinge their own glory more then gods.

And as Aggeus did not go this message before he was commanded and sent by
god, and therefore was a true Prophet: so they which thrust in them selves to
teach not called by god, nor sent by man ordinarely, come often before they be
welcome, and are not true Prophets. For it is written: Heb. v.
let no man take honor unto him, but he which is called of god, as Aaron was.
And if the worser learned be preferred before the better, to the ministry (if
they be both true teachers) let not the better disdain him, but know god to se
further the^ he does, and that there be just causes why the other is preferred
before him.

Whereas Zerubabell is first named here, and set in order before Joshua the high
priest, The Ciuyll ruler is above the priest.
and the prophet Aggeus was sent by commission from god to the ciuyll
magistrate first: it teaches the preeminence ye Temporal rulers have before
priests, by what name so ever they be called. If the Pope should have received
such letters, as these be and seen a layman preferred and named before him, he
would not have been well content, and specially such a man as Zerubabel was,
being neither king nor Emperor. What a railing letter wrote pope Adriane the
fourth, Adrian, iiii.
an English man, to Frederic the Emperor* because ye Emperor in his letters
had set his nam^ before the Popes, writing thus his superscription of his
letters: Frederick by the grace of God Emperor. etc. unto the holy father
Adriane Pope. If he had written thus: to the most reverent and holy father the
pope Adriane, gods vycar here in earth etc. your poor and humble servant
Frederick by the grace of god Emperor of Almaine. etc. and had placed the
Popes name before his own, al had been well. Because he did not, he called the
Emperor traitor and rebel against god and saint Peter. etc.

The commonwealth of the Jews was ruled first by Judges from Moses unto
Saul, then by Kings, from David too their captivity in Babylon, and now
last from their returning home, unto Christ* by princes of the stock of Judah.
Their Judges were raised up of god too deliver the people, Judges.
sometime of one tribe or kindred, sometime of other as pleased god, ^ the
children did not succeed the father lo such authority. Kings were always of
the stock of Judah only, Kings.
^ the son was King after the father, but these princes, Princes.
although they were for the most part of the stock of Judah, and the
succession, was by heritage (except ye Machabees) yet they had not a kingly
maiesti, croune and power: for they were but as mayres or Dukes, and head men
amongst the people, as the Hebrew word signifies, Pachath, and yet they be
preferred before the high priest. By which we must learn chief power in
all common wealths, to be joined with the temporal swoorde, though he be but
a mean man, and that every man as S. Paul says must be subject under him.
Roma* ^.
Chrysostom notes well, writing on that place, that every man must obey the
Civil power, whether he be Apostle, Evangelist, prophet, or by what name so
ever he be called. Saint Peter him self (being Bishop as they say at Rome,
and of whom they claim all their authority too be above princes, Kings,
and Emperoures) was not only obediente too the Civil rulers him self, but
left written in his Epistle, that we should all obey the king as chief and
highest ruler above all other. And although Kings and rulers in common welthes
were then Infideles, and not Christened, yet he biddes obey them as ye chief
and highest, and neither wills any too be disobedient, too pull the sword
out (...) their hands, nor to set up him self above them, but humbly to obei
them in all things, not co^trari to gods truth and religion. But if they
command any thing co^trari to gods word, Obey God rather than man.
we must answer with the Apostles: we must rather obey god the^ man. And let
no man think that in dyspleasinge god, he can please man. For god who has all
men's hearts in his hand, will turn his heart to hurt thee, whom thou would
please and flatter, by displeasing and disobeing god: nor we owe any obedience
to any man in such things where in god is offended and disobeyed. If England
had learned this lesson in the time of persecution, we should neither for fear
at the voice of a woman have denied our^ master with Peter, nor for flattery
have worshipped Baal, nor rashly rebelled, but humbly have suffered gods
scourge, until it had pleased god to have cast the rod in the fire: the
which he would sooner have done, if our unthankful sturdines had not
deserved a longer plague. The Lord for his mercies sake grant, that both we
and all other, may here after beware from like pulling on our headdes the
righteous scourge of god for our wickedness, and the impatient bearing of the
same when it comes.

The Text.
The Prophet dare speak nothing in his own name, or of his own devise, The
scriptur is only to be thaught. Gala. i.
but always names the Lord who sent him, and whose message he brought:
which thing all preachers must follow most diligently, or else they are not to
be believed. Saint Paul says: if I, or an aungel from heaven should teach you
any other gospel, beside that which you have received, cursed be he. And
mark that he says not, if he teach contrary to that which ye have received,
but besides and more then that which ye received: For the Pope and his
clergy, think that they may for our salvation add more to the gospel, so
that it be not contrary to the gospel: But saint Paul says, besides or more
then ye which ye received. And Moses says: Thou shall neither put to, nor
take away any thing from the word of god, but content thy self only with
that which he teaches, for he only is true and all men be liars, and no man is
of his counsel, to teach thee what pleases or displeases him, Deuteronomy. iiii.
except he speak him self. And although rulers may ordain some things for an
order in the Church, yet none of their decrees are articles of our faith, but
they may and ought to be changed, when they be hurtful or turn to any misuse
or superstition.

And for all that, that the people had greuousli sinned in not building the
lords house so many years, yet while God did vouchesafe too speak unto them
by his prophets, and rebuke their sin, there was hope enoughe of forgeuenes,
so that they would amend and turn unto God. For like as long as the
physician does apoynte the sick man what he shall do, how to diet him
self, and what medicines to take, there is hope of life, but if he forsake
him, and will not speak unto him, we look for present death: So as long as
God of his goodness lettes his word be among us, While God lets us have his
word it is a token of his love, and the taking it away, of his displeasure. i.
King. xxviii
there is good hope of forgeuenes, but if he take away his word, there is no
comfort left.

Saul when Samuel was deadde, asked counsayll of god, but he would not speak
too him, neither by dreams, nor at the Ark of god, nor by visions or
prophets, and than he runs to Wytches: So we when god teaches not, but are
left too our selves, seek such unlawful means.

The Jews had lain almost.xl. years in this negligence of buylding gods house:
It is almost as many years, since we under pretense of receyuinge the
gospel, and buyldinge Gods house, have pulled it down: and to root out all
the rabble of Monks, Friars, Nuns, Chanons. etc. we for the most part have
sought too enriche our selves, and one like theefes robbed an other, and have
not of pure love destroyed Gods enemies, nor provided for the poor, and
furthered learning nor placed preachinge Ministers in place of dumme Dogs,
after the rule of his word as we should have done, and builded his house.

And what remedy do the wicked papists find too redress this with all? They
pull away Gods word, and say it was never good world since it came
abroad, and that it is not meet for the people to have or read it, but they
must receive it at their mouths. They are the Nurces they say, and must
chowe the meat before the children eat it. Woo be unto such dissemblers, as
under pretense of chowinge, eat all up, or else that little which they give
(for they say it is not necessary to preach often by the example of Pa^bo,
Pambo.
which wha^ he had heard one lesson, the first verse of the.39. Ps. which
begins thus: I thought with mi self I wi^ keep my ways, yt I offe^de not in my
tu^g* would hear no mo until he had in man^ years learned to practice that
one: which example rather proves that we should dyligently learn, than seldom
preach) It is I say so poisoned in their filthy mouth^ and stinking breathes
that it poisons and feeds not the hearer. Psalm. ^xix.
David says: by what thing shall a young man amend his evil ways, and he
aunswers: by keeping the sayings of god. And how shall we see to do this: thy
word O Lord he says is a lantarne for my feet, and a light to my paths.
But these theefes that take away the word of god from the people, which is
the lantarne and light, to teach them to go a right, would have them in
darkness still, that they should neither se their own faults nor others.
When the fault is not seen, how can it be amended? and how can it be seen,
saying it is in darkness, except the light of gods truth do open it unto us.
Deuteronomy. vi.
Moses biddes the fathers tell their children the law of god often times,
Psalm. lxxviii. Ephesi. vi. i. Cor. xiiii.
and to study on it in their houses, in goinge by the way. David bids the
same, and the children too ask the fathers. Paul bids fathers bring up their
children in the nurture and learning of god: All sons must learn the
scriptures.
And wives if they will learn any thing, ask their husbands at home. Than
if the father must teach the son, and the son must ask the father, and the
wife must learn of the husband: How shall those fathers and husbands teach,
except they be learned? and how can they be learned, having none to teach
them, but sir Ihon mumble matins, nor ca^ not be suffered to read them selves?
But it is true that saint Ihon says: he that does evil hates the light,
Ihon. iii.
and will not come to the light, least his evil doings be reproved. And this
too be true their common sayings declare when they said: it was never good
world since every shoemaker could tell the priests duty. They were ashamed
of their faults, and therefore would have you in blindness still, that ye
should see neither your own faults, nor tell them of theirs, for that
specially they can not abide. But our good God when he blessed his people and
offers his pardons, he sendes many teachers and open diverse ways to learn,
and (...) he is most angry, he takes away his wor^ that they shall not see how
to amend, a^ Amos says: Amos. viii.
I will send a hunger vnt^ the earth, not a hunger of bread, but of the word
of God, that they shall seek it (...) East to West, and not find it. Therefore
they which take away his word, or be hinderers thereof, are nothing else but
in^struments of his wrath and gods (...) to his people.

And that they should the more diligently mark the message which he brought,
(...) tells them in whose name he spoke and says the Lord of hosts spoke those
words, (...) as the Hebrewe is Iehoua: What Iehoua signifies.
which is a^ much to say, as that god of might, majesty and power, which
has his being ^ substance of him self, Exodus iii. Acts. xvii. Psalm. ciiii.
and by whom a^ other things stand and be, and without whom all things
fall to nothing, if he do not uphold them, he speaks these words. The other
word joined with all, when he calls him ye god of hosts, is a word of fear
and reverence, as Iehoua is a name of love and power: so that if either they
loved him as a father and God of power, or else feared him as a Lord and
master, and one that had many hosts of soldiers (...) conquer them with
all, if they did rebel against him still, they should receive and obey this
message. In like manner God by Malachy rebukes the people which called him
father and master in words, Malach. i.
but in deeds would nothing do as he taught them, and says: if I be your
father, where is my love that you owe me, if I be your master, where is the
fear that is due too me. This word and name is seldon red in the new
Testamente, too call him the god of Hosts, because it is a word of fear more
then love, and rather threatens the^ comfortes, which the new Testamente
does not commonly. Saint James says: James. v.
the withholden wages of them that have reaped your fields, cries vengeance
in the ears of the Lord of hosts. Why God is called the Lord of hosts, and
how he uses his weakest creatures, to pull down the proud withal.
It is as much to say in this place: as thus says that mighty Lord of
hosts, whom if ye hear and obey, he will make all his creatures to serve and
obey you: but if you be disobedient to him still, he has many armies and
hosts to fight with against you and all his creatures from the highest to the
lest, shall be harnised against you. Think not, that if ye escape one plague,
that ye shall escape the rest: for differring or escapinge one, is but to see
whether ye will amend before the next come. His arowes and thu^derboltes are
never spent, but he has new in store: and in the end the victory shall be
his, and all disobedient shall perish. And for the better understanding of
this to be true, the scripture has set out diverse examples, where Go^ has
fought against man with all his creatures, to let him see how diverse kinds of
hosts he has to beat him down with all. Gene. xix. ii. Reg. xxiiii
The Angels destroyed Sodom and Gomorre with fire and brymstone, and killed
with pestilence in three days space lxx. thousand for David's offense: iiii.
Reg. xjx.
and als^^ in one night destroyed in the tents of Sennacherib.clxxxv.
thousand. The Sun at the commandment of Joshua stood still, giving him
light, until Gods enemies the Amorites in the chase were killed by him,
Joshua. x.
so that one day was as long as two. In Egypt the Stars and Sun gave no
light too the Egiptians, but the darkness was so great, Exodus x.
gross and thycke mystes, that no man sturred out of his place, and men
might grope the mystes, and feel them with their hand: but where the children
of Israel were, the Su^ne shone bright and pleasauntly. Against Sisara Bod
fought out of heaven. Judge, v.
The water drouned the whole world save.viii. persons under Noe. Gene. vii.
Exodi. xiiii.
The red Sea suffered Gods people to pass, but it drouned Pharao and all his
host. Number. xvj.
The earth swalowed my quick Dathan, Corah, and Abi^^n, and all those rebels
with them. Exodi. ix.
In Egypt storms of ba^^e killed the Egiptians (...) after and destroyed their
corn, but harmed not the Israelites. So the Tower (...) Siloe fell and killed
(...) within it. Luke. xiii.
Such a drought was in the time of Elias, that it rained not for the space of
iii years and a half. i. Regum. xvii
Such hunger in all countries, that Jacob with all his house went intoo Egypt,
and there also the Egiptians for hunger sold their land, their cattle, wyves,
children, and themselves to be bond men and slaves to their king. Gene. xlvii.


In the besiege of Samaria for hunger an Asses head and Doves dung was sold
dear, and women did eat their own children. iiii. Reg. vi.
Joel threatens that God will send four ho^^e^, one Grasshoppers, an other of
Caterpillars, Blastinge and Locustes, to devour all the fruiteof the ground:
and all that, which one of these left, the next should destroy. Joel. i.
In Egypt, mark what mighty men of war God chose to fight (...) frogs eue^
into yt kings (...) and his hedde, and flees (...) Pharao and the whole (...)
and made them weary, (...) the heads, Exodus, viii.
but by these means ^ob got the vi^ry^, (...) ten tribes were led away (...)
wild beasts increased, so that the ^^uoured the dwellers in ye country,
because they feared not God. iiii. Reg. xvii
God closed by y^ (...) bes of at Ab^milleths women Gene. II.
yt they (...) not bear children, because he did (...) Abraham's wife. i. Reg.
v.
When the Ph^^^^^ had taken the (...) of God and (...) God smote the^ with
^mperours (...) ^^^erses. Act. xii.
Herod and ^iuers Emperors (...) woryed with Life. Arrius ^ittinge (...)
priuye, avoided all his gu^s, (...) of a king was more a (...) and lived in
woods. Daniel. iiii.


Judge. vij.
Gedeon with (...) men, knock^nge that po^^^erdes together, made his eternal
(which were so many yt they lay as thick as gresho^pers use to lie on the
ground to afraid, ye they ^roue who ^^ghte (...) away (...) if his fellow stood
in his (...) he killed him straight: Iosu^. vi.
The walls of ^^richo fell wont violence or hi^ (...) off (...) Syria^s
thinking they hea^^ (...) n^^ght, iiii. Reg. vii.
(...) their enemies came (...) (where^^^re was none such (...)) (...) all
away. Judith. xv.
^udith a weak (...) ii^ Reg. xiiii.
prise in buildinge ye tower of Babell was stopped by co^fou^ding their
language, ye one could not understand an other. i Reg. xvii.
David a yo^g man with a sling and a stone, kylles Golias so strongly harnised.
A bishop of Me^tz, being persecuted with rats from house to house, fled into a
tower, he hais sta^di^g in ye mids of ye river, lying a mile from any la^d: but
ye rats followed him and swa^me over, neither doors nor stoone walls could
keep the^ out, but they woried hi^ for his unmercifulness to ye people in a year
of dearth. Thus our God may well be called (...) Lord of hosts, which has so
many weapons and diverse to punish us withal, as fire, water, earth, darkness
frogs, lyse, greshoppers, catterpillers, pestilence, hayle, drought. etc. so
yt there is no help to be disobedient and strive against hi^* for he will have ye
victory. There is ways above and beneth us, within us and without us, to throw
us down at his pleasur, there is no remedy but to obey him either willingly and
be rewarded, or else against our wills and be punished. His power is not yet
minished, but he fights still with his enemies, yt al glory may be his. He has
foughte^ sore of late with his utter enemy the Pope, and with what weapons* with a
goose feather, and old clout^ (whereof be made pe^ne and paper) and such (...)
has he used to do this feate as ye world: hates and despises. But he has so
shaken his ^eat, that his fall is begun, and every man which is not wilfully
blind sees it. His abominations and his wickedness is (...) to the world as
the Prophet says: ^ will show thy filthy parts in thy fac^* Naum. iii.
and will set forth thy nakedness to people.

These be the ordinances, great Gu^nes, and Bulwerkes that he will set by
his Church with, and pull down Anti^christ, that all victory may be his,
which by such small and weak things, (...) down ^he glor^ (...) the world.
(...) although their faltes were grievous, To be rebuked of vntha^kefulnes is
the greatest grefe to a loving heart.
yet our good God is content with a little rebukinge of them, and does no
more but cast in their ^eeth their unthankfulness and says: this people
says, it is not yet time to buyld the house of God, as though he should say:
this people whom I chose amongst all the world, and in respect of whom I
seem to regard no other people bu^ them, bestowinge winge on them only ^^
chiefly any blessings, whose fathers I brought out of slavery in Egypt, and
made them lords of this plenteous land, destroyinge the dwellers of it, and
subduing^ their enemies round about the^, to whom^ I send my Prophets in all
(...) will and pleasur^, and whom^ now of late when they were led prisoners to
Babylon, I brought home again and restored to them their land^^^* and willed
nothing of them but to build my house and keep my laws, this unkind people
I say, says it is not yet time to build gods house. This stifnecked people,
that will neither be ouercome^ and moved with ge^telnes to do their duties, nor
yet fear my plagues and threatninges, will not diligently go about to do, that
which I willed them so straightly to do. The rod is sharp to the flesh, when we
be beaten, but too a gentle heart there can be no sharper rebuke then to have
his unkindness cast in his teeth. Mich. vi.
My people says god by his prophet, in what thing have I offended thee, yt
thou do so disobeye me, or what have I done to thee, tell me? And that we
should better consider our unthankfulness, he co^pares us to beasts and says:
Esaias. i.
the Ox knows his master, and the Ass knows his master stable and manger,
but my people will not know me. So says Jeremy, the Turtel, Iere. viii.
swalow and the Storke knows their times of the year to come, but my people
know not the judgment of ye lord. If a king should mary a poor woman* and
make her Queen, and when she displeased him, should say unto her: where thou
wast but a poor woman, and never looked to have been married to me, I forsake all
other women for thy sake, and made thee my wife and fellow, has it becomen yt
to do this fault against me? If she have any honest heart in her, it will make
her burst out into tears, and ask forgeuenes: so will it move any christian
heart yt fears god, when he hears his unthankful disobedience lai^d to his
charge, and specialli if he consider what goodness and how often he has reciue^
a^ gods hands, and how forgetful he has been again to so loving a Lord god. The
lord for his mercies sake grant us such tender hart^ yt we may burst out into
tears, when we consider his goodness and our wickedness his undeserved mercy,
and our great vntha^kefulnes. What a bitter grief shall this be to^ hear him
lay our vnki^dnes to our charge? I gave you a good king, many true preachers,
my word ple^teously, my sacraments purely, rooted out Idolatri, delivered you
from strangers, with all wealth, and yet you would not fear me, what can we
say for shame, but conde^pne our selfs? God grant we may, for tha^ he will not
condemn us. I do not doubt but many of the^ had great excuses to lay for the^
selfs, if they had been asked why they did not buyld gods house, as well as we
have for our negligence in the same doing. Excuses of our negligence be vain.
i. Esdra. iiii.
Some would say we are forbidden by the king and his officers (and so they were
in deed, as apperes in Esdras.) Some, we must first provide a house for our
selves to dwell in, for our wives and children: Other we are unlearned, we know
not how to do it: Other we be poor and not able to take in hand such a costly
work: Other, let ye rulers begi^ and we will help: Other, we shall not lose our
life and goods if we disobey the Kings commandment. But god would allow no
such excuse, but castes in all their teethes their disobedient unkindness and
says: This people say, it is not yet time too build gods house. i. Chro.
xxiii.
The priests would say it is not our duty to buyld, but to offer sacrifices,
and sing Psalms as we be appointed. The rulers might say their office was to
see the common wealth well ruled, and not too meddle in such matters. The
people might say it belonged not to them, being such a costly thing, that
required wisdom, learning, riches* and power, but they must apply their
husbandrye, marchaundise. etc. Even as they said in the Gospel: I have boughte
a Farm, or, v. yoke of Oxen, Luke. xiiii.
yt I will not come, hold me excused. Or I have married a wife, that I can not
come: so none could or would take gods work in hand. thereto ^et that one
sort should not (...) them selves blameless, and the wher^^^^ fault, or that
one should not (...) other, because the^ the^^ were (...) men the rest, and
would have (...) Gods house more gladlye than other (...) prophets sent to
rebuke them all, (...) were gylty in not buylding. And (...) not the rulers
say, it is not (...) build gods house, or the (...) or the (...), or (...)
men: generally all this people of (...) it is not yet time too build gods
(...). And so because the rebuke is general (...) all sorts, young and old,
(...) learned and unlearned, they may (...) stand that it is their duties to
build go^^ house, what manner of men so ever they be.

God acceptes and requires the service of the simplest.
What a comfort is this for the poor unlearned man when he hears that (...)
refses not, but requires and takes in good woorthe that little service which he
(...), and wills him to build his house (...) wel^ as the ^yche, that he
should not (...) god loves not poor men, nor (...) are not able to serve him,
but he love (...) only the ^yths and learned, and they mu^^^ serve him. Nor
again, he most not think, I may do what I will, God cares not for me, no^
he has no work for me to do in his house.

It is in buyldinge Gods spiritual house, as it is here with us in our
buyldinges. In buyldinges there be master Masons, and Carpe^ters, which do
devise the work, draw out the facion of it and set their men on work? there
be also some that fell trees, carry stones, bring mortar, and make clean the
place. etc. So in buyldinge gods house there be rich and learned, there be
poor and meaner learned, but ye lowest and meanest of al, as he is the
creature of God, and made not him self, so god has some work for him to
do and requires his service. If he be not a ruler or a preacher, yet he has
wife and children, whom he must se live in the fear of god, and that god will
require of his hand: and though he be not married, but both lame and blind, yet
he has a body and soul, which Christ dyed for, and they be the house of God,
and temple of the holy Ghost, which we should build, and of that thou shalt
make accoumpt. He that has received greater gifts, has a greater charge, and
more work shall be looked for of him: but if he have no more but life in him,
and be not able to stir any part of him, neither hand nor foot, yet god
will look that his mind shall be continually occupied (...) prayer for him
self and others, that he (...) no dronkard, glutton. etc. and think no^ but
this is the highest service that ye (...) man living can do to god. Such a
louin^e god is our god even to the poorest man l^uing, that he geues him as well
as ye ryc^^ all things indifferently, which should bring him to heaven, as
baptism, faith* hoope, All things to salvation are given indifferently to the
poor and rich.
and charity, repentance, prayer, fasting, avoiding whoredom, theft, murder,
anger. etc. all are as common and as eas^^ to come by (or rather more easy) for
ye poor then the rich. He disdaynes not, but tha^kefully takes the poorest
service that (...) least creature he has can do, so that he (...) it
diligently and willingly, and will reward that little so done as liberallye, as
he does the greater. He that has received much shall make a count of much,
and he that has but little, yet shall make a count (...) that little.

But this is marvelous, that where all sorts of the people were in fault,
(...) Prophet is sent by commission from god* namely to Zerubabel the chief
ruler i^ the common wealth, and to Joshua the hye Priest, as though they had
only sinned, or they could or should remedy this matter.

What reason seems this, that when many do offend, a few shall be rebuked? and
when all the people be negligent, ye chief rulers, both in Civil matters of
the common wealth, and the chief Priest and highest in matters of religion are
blamed. This is the hye wisdom of god, ye man's wit can not attain unto: and
there is great reason, if it be well considered, why it should be so. God our
heavenly father knowinge the crookednes of man's heart, and how ready we be all
to evil, has appoi^ted rulers in the common wealth too minister justice,
punish sin, defend the right, and cause me^ to do their duties. And in his
church he has placed Preachers to teach his law, to pull down superstition
and Idolatry, and too stir up the slouthful and negligent, to serve and fear
him. The rulers and ministers are to be blamed if the people offend through
their negligence.

For as brethren they must agree to promot Gods glory.


If either the one or both of these rulers be negligent in their office, the
people (which be alwais readi to seek their own ease and pleasurs) fall from
god: but god will punish the ruler for their negligence, that neither they did
their duties the^ selfs nor see the people do theirs, and they shall be gilty
of the sins of the people, and partakers of their wickedness, because it was
done through their negligence, in not punishing, and seeing the people do their
duties, both to god and man.

Speak to Zerubabell, y^ son of Salathiel, ruler of Iehuda and to Joshua When
God gathered his church (...)* he appointed Moses and Aaron, Exodus iiii.
two ^^^thren to be the chief rulers of the people, the one in religion; and
the other in Civil matters: to teach us that these two kin^^ of rulers be
lawful and necessary in a common wealth, that they should love and stick
together like brethren* and that the one with the word, and the other with
the sword should ioyntely build gods house, pull down Antichrist the Pope,
and set up the kingdom of Christ. When the children of Israel had committed
idolatry in Baal Peor, Number. xxv.
and fallen to adultry with the wo^men of Moab.

Moses in the name of god commau^des all the Rulers of the people to be hanged
on gallows against the Sun, be^cause they did not their duties, in keeping
the people from such mischief. To ye preachers, says Ezechiel, thou son of
man I have made thee a watch manne to the house of Israel: Ezechiel.
iii.xxxiii.
thou shall hear words of my mouth, and show them from me. If I say to the
wicked: thou wicked thou shall dye the death, and thou will not speak to him
that he may keep him from his wickedness, the wicked shall dye in his
wickedness, but I will require his bloudde of thy hands: but if he will not leave
his wickedness when thou tell best him, he shall dye in his wickedness* and thou
have saved thine own soul, because you have done thy duty in warning him. By
these punishementes we may se that it is neither the duty of Ciuyll rulers,
by what name so ever they be called, to be negligent in their duty, or to set
in an evil deputy for them to gather up the profits that they may go hawke,
or hunte, game, or keep whores: for god that gave them that authoritiye, will
look* for a count for it of them: nor yt it is lawful for Bishop, Deane*
Archedeacon* Prebendarie or Parson to set in a parish priest to make co^iured
water, and serve the people in a strange tunge, which neither he nor they
understand: for by these means the people be not amended.

Hely having complayntes made to him of the unhappiness of his children fell and
brake his neck, i. Reg. iiii.
because he would not punish them: and they them selves were killed in
battle: and the Ark of god was taken by gods enemies: so shall the fathers of
ye people perish, if they punish not faults of the people.

He that desires a Bishops office says saint Paul, desires a good labor: i.
Timo. iii.
he calls it not a good Lordshippe nor idleness and wealth, but labor. What a man the labourer should be, Ezech. xxxiiii
Ezechiel tells particulerly, saying: woo to the Sheptheardes (...) Israel,
which feed them selves, and not (...) flock: ye have eaten the fat, and ben
clothe^ with the wol, but ye have not stre^gthne^ the weak, nor healed ye
sick, nor brou^^^ home the straye, nor sought the lost, but ye have ruled
over them with sharpness* These be the duties of good Shepeheardes and their
labors, and not maskyng^ Masses, mumming mattyns, and babb^^ they know not
what: and he that either can not or will not do these things, seekinge his
own ease and wealth, and not bring the people to god, is a thief and
murderer. To admit an unable minister, is too be partaker of the evil that he
does. i. Timo. v.
Also the Patro^ of a benefice or Bishop, which admit any such, as can not
do these duties to have cure of souls, are partakers of his wickedness, and
as much as in them lies, murder so many souls, as perish this ways for
want of wholesome doctrine. Saint Paul says to Timothy: lay not thy hand
rashly on any man, nor without good trial, apoint him a Minister, least thou
be partaker of of other men's sinnes^ We must neither do evil our selves, nor
consent to other to do it, but as much as in us lies, stop it: for both the
doer and he which agrees to it, are woorthye death, as saint Paul says.
Roma. i.
But he that places an unworthy or unable minister wittingly in a benefi^e,
consentes to the evil which he does, because he might stop him from it if
he would, and therefore is he woorthye death also.

A Tailor that is not cunninge to make a gown, may mende hose, a Cobbler that
can not make shoes, may mende them, a Carpenter which is not cunninge too
make ye house, yet may he square trees or fell them: but an unable priest to
teach, is good to nothing in that kind of life or ministerye, ye are the
salt of the earth (says our savior Christ) but if the salt have lost his
saltnes, Math. v.
wherewith shall it be salted? An unlearned minister is not to be suffered in
the ministry.
it is not good enough to be cast on the dunghill (for so it would do good
in dunginge the field) but it is mete for nothing but to be cast in ways to
be trodden under our feet.

So these priests which have not the salt of gods word to season man's soul
with all, are mete for nothing in ye kind of life, but to be put to some
occupation, which they can do, and get their living with the sweat of their
face, and not occupye a place among gods Shepeherdes, saying they be rather
dum and devouring dogs than good Preachers.

We are like the Jews in long negligence.
Are not we in England (...) like fault? When god s^^rred up our (...) as
chief in the realm, and (...) Cranmer: Archebishoppe of Canterb^^^ with
others, for matters in religion (...) drive the buyers and sellers of Masses*
(...), Trenta^s. etc. out of gods (...) (which they had made a den of
(...)) was not this in all our mouths? it is (...) yet time to build gods
house* the (...) can not bear it: we fear strange prin^^^ and rebellions, as
though god were (...) to suffer Idolatry for a time, and (...) not or could
not promote his own ma^^ters without our politic devises. (...) almost as
many years have we lain (...) as these men did, and not buyl^^^ gods house, but
pulled it down, buyld^^ our own houses goodly without any stop or fear,
where rebellion (...) should have been feared, because it (...) done often with
the injury of others, as by extreme raising of rents, taking (...) incomes
and fines. etc. by these means ^^^king our own rest and profit. It wa^t^ not
much of so many years since kyn^^ Henry began to espy the Pope, and yet go^^
house is not buylt. What marvel is it then if we have been thus greuouslye
pl^^ged for our negligence in thus doing (...) that every one has been sought
out too death, yt was judged to love gods word? When the good king Cyrus
had given free liberty to the Jews every one to go home that would, i. Esdre.
ii.
the most part had so well placed them selves in strange countries and waxed
so wealthye, that they would not go home when they might to build gods
house. What maruayll was it tha^, if god to punish this great wickedness,
sturred up king Assuerus by the means of Hama^, Ester. iii.
to make proclamation thorough all countries, that it should be lawful for any
man too kyl all the Jews he could, to take their goods, and order the^ at
their pleasur: that if gentleness could not drive them home too serve God, yet
sharpenes should compel them to go build gods house.

And has it not ben so in England taught, that all Gospelers should be
destroyed, and should not leave one to piss against the wall? And this
thing god of love and mercy did unto us, that where we would not know him by
gentleness, we should be compelled by the rod and sharpenes to seek him. All
faults in our late Popery (were they never so great) might be pardoned, save
this, to love gods word. But as God took Haman in his own devise, and the
vengeance light on him and his: so god has mercifullye deliuere^ many in
England from the persecuters, gloriously called many too be his witnesses in
the fire, and turned the devises of his enemies on their own headdes, and
sharply destroyed them, which murdered his saints, when they thought most
to have enjoyed the world at their will. Therefore let us think that God
speaks to us by his Prophet saying: this people of England, to whom I have
given so plentiful a land, delivered them so often, and sent them my preachers,
and whom when they forgot me and their duty I pu: nished, sometimes sharpelye
of fatherlye love, and sometime gently that they might turn to me: yet they
say it is not yet time to buyld gods house, for fear of their own shadows:
they would lie loytering still and not be waked out of this sleep. Let us
consider what benefits we have received daily of our good god, and se what a
grefe it is to be vntha^keful, and have our unkindness thus cast in our teeth.
Poor cities in Germany compassed about with their enemies, dare reform
religion through without any fear, and god prospers the^: and yet this noble
realm, which all princes have feared, dare not, We will do it by our own
polycies and not by committinge the success to God, and so we shall overthrow
all.

The Text.




This is most worthy to be noted yt the Prophet dare speak nothing of his
own head, but always in the name of God, and as he received it of gods mouth
and for our example most diligently it is to be followed, seeing he durst not so
much as rebuke sin, but as God taught him, but of this enough is spoken
before in the first and second verses.

This Prophet having a gentiller spirit then many of the other Prophets
does not so sharpelye threaten utter destruction of them and their country,
for their disobedience: but chiefelye settes before them their slothfulness
toowardes the building of Gods house, and their shameful and shameless
scrapinge and scratchinge together of goods their polling and pillinge, their
labor diligence, and pains taken to buyld costly gorgious houses for the^
selves. As though he would say: It is not a shame for you to take so much
labor, and spend so much money in making your selves seled and karued houses,
Gods house is to be bylt before our own
and can find no time nor money to spend on gods house? Do you love your selves
better then your god? Do ye set more by your own pleasur, the^ gods honor?
Will you first satisfy your own lusts, and then when ye can find any leisure,
peraduentur god and his house shall have a piece bestowed on him? Is not this to
set the carte before the horse? ye should first serve God seek his will, and
after look^ to your own necessities, and not vain pleasures. The Heathen
poet could reprove this in Heathen people saying: O citiezens citiezens, is
money to be sought first, and than virtue after riches? as though he should
say, nay not so. This is spoken to all: first seek the kingdom of god, and
the righteousness thereof, Math. vi.
and al other things necessary shall be given you.

But was this so grievous a fault in gods sight too build their own houses
before gods house, that they were so plaged for, as aperes in the second verse
following? Or was there not other as great sins as this amongst them? yes
truly there was other heinous sins amongst them, and which god abhorres as
well as this. Usury unlawful.
They had gotten into their hands all the lands and goods of their poor
brethren by vsery, and not content with yt, they had so handled the matter,
that the poor sort had sold them selves, their wives and children to be
bondemen and slaves to the rich. And yet their usury was but little in
comparison of ours, which we can more wisely and worldly tha^ wisely and godly
defend to be lawful. Nemi. v.
They take but one at the.c. of an.c. shillings one of an.c. pound one, and yet
Nehemias makes them to restore all again. But we ca^ defend.x. at the.c. to be
charitable and godli. Surely if they could not keep it, but were compelled to
restore it again, it was theft and robbery so to get it, or yet too keep it:
for he is as well a thief that kepes yt which is evil got, as he that got it or
took it. And if they did make restitucion, taking but one at the.c. I see no
cause why our vserers should not be compelled by authority to restore, that
which was so gotten by.x. or.xvi. at the.c. This was our gospelinge in
England, when we should have builded gods house, as they should have done
here.

The prophet speaks here of buylding houses namely, but under that one sin
he rebukes all such like: All sin is forbidden a like, if it let Gods
house. Dronkards.
as when we say give us our daily bread, we desire under the name of bread as
well drink and cloth, as all other things necessary to live withal. And he
says as well to ye dronkards: is it time for you to drink until ye be
thriftles and witles, and gods house lie vnbuylded? It is written by the
prophet, woe be to you yt rise early in the morning to drink and to follow
drinking till it be evening. Esaias. v.
He says likewise to the dayntye sluggarde yt lies walowi^g in his costly
beds and soft pillows* Sluggards.
It is time for you to lie slouening in your couches night and day, and Gods
house vnbuylded? Is it not written: woo be vnto^ you which sleep in your
costly beds, Amos. vi
and play the wantons in your couches.

And he says likewise to ye gredy care and proulinge poller, that is never
filled, but always heaping together: Prollers.
it is time for you that ye scrape and scratche together, all ye can lay your
hands on, and Gods house lie vnbuylded? Do ye not know it to be written:
Esaye. v
woo be too you which join house to house, and land to land, and never
cease. Thus must every man think that God speaks to him still by this his
Prophet and says to the ambicious Prelate: Is it time for thee, which should
chiefly build my house too gape for promocion, Ambitious.
to join benefice too benefice, prebend to dencry. etc. and my house lie
vnbuylte. i. Timo. vi
Remember thou not Paul's saying: If we have meat, drink and clothes let us be
content therewith? Thou that chiefly should further this work, do hinder
and pull down my house as much as in thee is. Let the merchant that spares
not to sail through all ieopardies on the sea and travail by land, Marchaunts.
so that he get much gaynes, think that god says to him still: Is it time for
thee too run and ride, bye and sell, and my house ly vnbilt? Let the unthrift
think that god speaks to him saying: Unthrifts.
Is it time for to hawke and hunt, card and dyce, and follow whores, and Gods
house lie vnbuylt? Think not it is enough to say, I am a gentle man, what
should I do but take my pleasure, it becomes not me to take such pains: yes
truly, for God has no more allowed thee to wast vnthriftely thy goods, God
allows the rich nothing more to misuse tha^ the poor. Ephe. iiii*
nor to mispende thy time, than the poor man. For like as thou haste the same
baptism, faith Lord, God, and father in heaven with him, and hopest for
the same kingdom yt the poor man does: so have you the same law given thee to
live after, and by the same shall we all be judged.

Why, will no excuse serve, but yt every man must lay his helping hand to ye
buylding of gods house? No verily: remember them which were called to the
feast, and one excused him self sayng: I have bought a farm, an other: I have
bought.v. yocke of Oxen, Luke. xiii.
and both said: I pray thee hold^ me excused, and the third had married a
wife, making no excuse, but flatly denyinge he could not come. But it fkyls
not whether he make excuse or not, No excuse is allowed in not byldinge Gods
house.
all were shytte out and had no part of the feast.

And so shall all that build not god^ house, though they seem to them
selves to have good excuses: God alowes none at all. Why, they were forbidden
by ye king to buyld any more, as appears in Esdras and must they not obey? i
Esdre. iiii.
they should have run in the kings displeasur, ben in ieopardye to have lost
life, land and goods: Should they have been rebels and traitors to the
King? No surely, this is not treason to Kings to do that which God
commaundes. When Daniel did pray thryse a day to God, Daniel vi. Acts. iiii.
contrary to ye Kings commandment: And the Apostles did preach contrary to
the wills and commandments of the Rulers, it was neither treason nor
rebellion. So must we do always that which god commau^des: and if the rage
of the rulers go so far as too kill or cast us into Lions dens as Daniell
was, God is rather to be obeyed then man.
or whip and scourge us as the Apostles were: we must suffer with Daniel, and
say with the Apostles: we must rather obey god in doing our duty, than
man forbiddinge the same, knowinge always that god has ever ways enough to
deliver us out of their dangers, if he will, as he did Daniel and the
Apostles, or else will strengthen us to dye in his quarrel, whether so ever
shall be more for his glory, and the edifiynge of his Church. If the Shyrife
should bid thee one thing, and the King command thee an other, will you
obey the lower officer before the higher* So is the King gods under officer, and
not to be obeyed before him.

It is written, that if any man come to Christ and hate not father and mother
wife and children, brother and sister, Luke. xiiii.
yea even his own life rather, than forsake and offend God, he can be none of
Christ's scholars. Math. v.
Christ takes all excuses from us when he says: If thy right eye let thee,
pull it out, if thy hand offend thee, cut it of, for it is better to go
into life with one eye and one hand, than to be cast into Hell with both thine
eyes and hands. In the.ix. of Luke, when Christ called two disciples to
follow him, the one sa^^^ let me go and bid them farewell at home, and the other
said: let me go and bury my father, and than I will come. But our savior christ
would suffer neither of the^ both to go too do so little things and honest as
reason (...) judge, but says: let the dead bury ye dead, and he yt puts his
hand to the plough and lokes back, is not meet for the kingdom of God. Luke
xvii.
Remember he says Lots wife how she for lokinge back, was turned into a
pyller of salt: therefore there is no excusers admitted in not buyldinge God^
house, and that earnestly.

Yet is not this so spoken of ye prophet that it is unlawful for noble men to
have costly houses, Princes may have houses to their degree so they build Gods
house first.
so it be not above their degree, nor bylte with oppressinge the poor, or that
they take not more pleasure and pains in buylding their own houses, then
gods: but that they should study and take more pains too build Gods house,
then their own. For David, Solomon, and other good kings had gorgious houses,
according to their estate: ii. Reg. vii
but when David had builded him a goodly house, he sat down, looked on it, and
remembered how the Ark of God, and the treasures that God had given them, were
but in te^tes covered with sack clothe, Psalm. cxxxii
made of Goats heir, he was sorry, swear an oath and made a vow to the god of
Jacob, yt he would not go into his house nor his bed, and yt he would neither
nap nor sleep, nor take rest, until he had a place for the Lord to dwell in,
and builded his house. Such a desire have all good men to the buyldinge of gods
house in all ages that they will prefer Gods matters and the common profit of
many before their own.

But here in this people, as among us also the rychemen would not, the poor
could not, the Priests had forgotten the law, and followed their own
fantasies, the unlearned knew not how to do it, yo^g me^ were given to
pastimes, old men to gredynes, noble men gredili to get, and unprofitable to
spnd it, the common sort as men without guydes followed their own wills. Summer
was to hot, and Winter was to cold, so yt no sort of men nor time was given
to ye building of gods house, but every man followed his own will, and either
they could not, would not, or durst not go about ye building of gods house.
Thus we in England while we have li^n following our own fantasies, and seking
vayn excuses under pretense of religion have destroyed religion, and in pulling
away supersticion did seek our own profit and promocion. To pull down
Abbeis, Collegies, Cha^^tries, and such dens of theefes, we are ready
enough, Vain excuses in not byldinge Gods house be not allowed.
because we hoped too ha^^ part of the spoil our selves: but to maintain
schools and Hospitals was not for our profit, to take away Masses, Idols,
unpreaching prelates, we durst not, sometime for fear of the kings
displeasure, sometime for rebellion or insurrectio^s of the commons, other
whiles to bear with the weakness of the people, or for loss of life or
goods, or some such like excus^ we would not. But Solomon to pull away all
fond feigned excuses, teaches diverse good lessons and worthy to be noted.
Fearful.
Too the sluggyshe fearful man, that fears and casts peryls to do that
which God commands him, he says, mocking and rebuking him thus: There is a
Lion in the way, says the slouthful man (when he is willed to do his duty)
^ he will woorye me if I goo, Prouer. xxii.
which is as much to say: cast no perilles in serving God, go diligently
about to do thy duty, and God will defend thee, though thou go through Lions,
Wolves, Bears, Bisshoppes, and all wild beasts. And that we should more
boldly do our duties to God without fear of man. Saint Ihon in his Reuela.
xxi. saw the fearful, unbelievers, abominable murderers. etc. shall have their
part in the lake that burns with fire and brymstone, which is the second death.

To the slouthful delicate man, which will not forgo his pleasures he says:
Prouer. xxvi. Slothful.
as the door is turned in and out upon the henges and ginnes, so is the
sluggard rolled about in his bed from one side to an other, as though he
should say: as ye door when it is opened or shyt, it styrres in and out, but
it styrres not out of his place but is on the henges still: and the sluggarde
ye roles him self from one side of the bed to an other, is a slouen still and
lies sloueninge in his bed, taking no pains to do good: so they that begeuen
to any kind of pleasure, if they stir to any thing, it is so little that it
does no good, they role but from one side too an other, from one pleasure to
an other, too seek where they may find most ease. They move as the Snaile
does, always creping and never the further. Worldlings.
Unto them that seek excuses that either they dare not, or can not he says:
he that watches the wyndes does not sow, and he that marks the clouds shall
never mow. As if he should say: Prec. xi.
as he that waits for a good wind too sow in, or whether any clouds arise
betokeni^g rain, or there be none at all but great^ drought toward that he
may mow, sh^^ never sow nor mow: for either blows (...) North wind, and that
is to cold, or the South, and that is to hoote, or the East, (...) that is to
dry, or the West, and that is (...) wete, and the wind is ever in one of
these corners, and ever is it droughe or clouds like to rain when the wind
is so: So (...) that waytes when he may build God^ house, and have the world
with him without displeasure of the rulers, the people, the clergy, or the
layty, shall never do his duty, for ever the gospel has some enemies.
Therefore he concludes saying: Sow thy seed in the morninge and in ye
eueninge, Prec. xi
and let not thine hand cease: meaning that eueninge and morninge, early and
late, fair weather and foul, with favor or with displeasur, we should not
cease to build Gods house. Do ye not know that god and the world are enemies,
and he yt will please the one, The Gospel is never without enemies. James. iiii
Math. vi
shall displease the other, and impossible it is too please both. Never look
to have the world too favor thee, when thou go about to serve God: and if
thou will seek the friendship of the world, thou shall be an enemy too God. So
says saint Paul to Timothy: preach the word, ii. Timo. iiii.
be earnest, reprove, rebuke in season and out of season, spare no time,
place, labor, nor person, lay it amongst them, tell them their duty, let it
work as God will. Do thou thy duty, and as much as in thee lies, and let God
alone with the rest. God requires nothing of the but thy labor: the increase
belonges too God alone to give as he thinks good. Saint Paul comparinge him
self with the other apostles, says: i. Cor. xv. Roma. xv.
he labored more then any of the rest, and filled all places and countries
with the gospel, betwixt Jerusalem and Illyricum, but he never tells how many he
converted to the faith, i. Cor iii
for that is the work of God, and neither he which graftes, nor he which
waters is any thing, but god which geues the increase. And although the
scripture require, that a preacher which is a steward of gods house must be
ware as a Serpent, and simple as a Dove, and the weakness of our brethren that
have not learned their liberty must be borne with for a time: yet are we not
bidden always to do it, nor be so wise yt to please man, we displeased God.

When our savior Christ had taught that it was laweful too eat all kind of
meats at all times, for all men, How far the weak is too be born with all.
Math. xv
in all places: the Phariseis were angry with him, and his disciples told him
of their anger, but he answered let them alone they be blind guydes of the
blind, he passed not for the offending of them, for they might have learned
the truth if they had lust. So must we bear with the weak until they be
taught sufficiently: and if they will not learn, we must not loose our liberty
for their folishnes, but answer them as Christ did. i. Cor. vii.
And as the faithful husband is not bound to the unfaithful wife, if she
will not abide with him: so is not our liberty bound to the froward
supers^^c^ous Papists that will not learn. It is better to offend says
Gregory, than too forsake a truth: and Chrisost. teaches that when more
commodite commes by offendinge than hurt, we must not care for the offense: but
this commodite that he means is not worldly but godly, and bringinge many to
Christ. I had rather never eat flesh says saint Paul, i. Cor. viii.
then offend my brother: but that is spoken for the weak that have not ben
sufficiently taught and all doutes they can lay, taken away: but to the
stubborn, sturdye stifnecked Papists (which teach that some meats at some
times are unclean and unholy for some men to eat, and so makes man too serve
creatures in conscience, that he dare not handle that, over which God made him
Lord) he never said so, but contrarely, let them alone they be blind guides
of the blind. Like is to be said in marriage of Priests, handelinge their
chalice corporas and such other burdens as they lay not only on the bodies,
but miserably on the consciences, of them which will believe them. Stand in the
liberty, to the which ye be called says saint Paul, Gala. v.
and be not subject to such yokes and beggarly ceremonies: Let not such Cayphas
tread you down, but keep your consciences in knowledge free too use freely
all the good creatures of God made for your use, according to the scripture
with sobernes and thankesgeuinge.

Thus all the people is chyde here for their disobedience that they builded not
Gods house, although they were forbidden by thy king, or could make like
excuses. God sent them all home to do this work, and required it of them all,
All sorts have work in Gods house to do.
and yet they were all so far from doing it, that they let it lie, not only
vnbuylded, but waste, deserte, never regarding it. There was work for all
sorts of men, the costly pieces for the rich, the meaner for the common sort,
and the fellinge of trees, caryinge mortar. etc. for the poorest and simplest.
When Moses should make ye Tabernacle Exodus xxxv.
and Tente, wherein they should resort to serve God until the Temple was
builded, the rich sort offered gold, silver, brass, iron, silk, and such
like: but the poorest when they came and brought but Goats heir, it was
thankefully taken, and did good service in that work, for the uppermost cloth
that covered the Tente, was made thereof to keep away rain and storms. And to
the younger sort that they should not think them selves unmeet, says
saint Paul, i. Timo. iiii.
let no man despise thy youth: and generally to every man he says: It is now
time to rise out of sleep. Bring so much to this buyldinge as you can, let no
fault be found in you for lack of good will, God will take in good part ye
little ye can do. Let not the simplest think, I am unworthy to do such things,
Roma. xiii He that thinks lowlest of himself, is metest before God to build
God needs not my labor, I am to vile too serve him, or it belonges not to me,
for he only is worthy whom God makes worthy, and he only is welcome, whom
he will vouchsafe to take in good woorthe. Of our selves the best man living is
unworthy, and the more unworthy that thou think thy self unfeignedly, the
more worthy y^ art before him. Gedeon wha^ he was taken from threshinge his
corn, Judge. vi
and made a Captayn to deliver Gods people, said: who am I? the youngest and
least of all my brethren: or what is my fathers house, that his stock before all
the rest, should be taken to this honor: i. Reg. ix.
So said Saul also taken from the Ploughe following his Oxen, and made a King:
and as long as he continued in this lowlines of mind, and did his duty, he
was a good king. Amos. vii
So Amos keeping beasts an heardman, and pullinge Mulberies of the trees, when
he was called to be a Prophet wondered that God would call such a simple man as
he was to that high office. So the virgin Mary when the Aungel saluted her,
Luke i
wo^dred that God would call such a poor maiden and virgyn to be the mother of
his son. But ever he that thinks him self unworthy, God takes him as worthy:
and those that think so highly of the^ selves that they be worthy, God
refuses, and makes unworthy. Therefore let every man that feels him self in
conscience withdrawe^ from doing his duty to god, by any kind of sin, Every man
think this to be spoken to him self.
say thus to him self: Is it time for thee to delight thy self in this or y^
kind of sin, and gods house vnbylt? Think y^ god has left this in writing to
rebuke hi^, and stir him up to be more dilligent in repairi^g his house wherein
god dwells. And let eueri man comfort him self yt god not only requires, but
takes in good part, ye least service yt ye poorest man living ca^ do.

And as he said before in the second verse: this people says it is not time
to build. etc. nothing the unkindness of that people, to whom he had so
often and long ben so louinge a Lord and master: So he says now: The
worthynes of the place makes the faut greater being neglected. iii. Reg. viii
this house lies waste, to set out before them y^ greatness of their
disobedience that they did not neglect and leave vnbuylt a common house, a
Bishop^ palaice, or an Abbey, but that house wherein God him self said he
would dwell, where only they should offer their sacrifices, which only not
out of the whole world, but among the places, towns and cytyes in all
Iewry, he chose by name too be worshipped in, in which only he was most
delited, and made promys to Solomon in the dedicacion of the same, that he
would hear the prayers of the that there called upon him in faith. That house
they did not only suffer it to decay, but were so forgetful of it, that they
let it lie waste desolate, laid no hand to it, as thought it belonged not to
them, nor it were their duty: they had so far forgotten God, which willed
them so straightely to do it. The Lord for his mercy sake, grant that the same
unkindness may not be laid justly against us, which leave that house vnhuylt,
yea tread under our feet like filthy swyne, wherein not the sacrifices of
Moses are offered, but for the salvation of which Christ offered his body a
sacrifice to be killed, and his blood shed, and in which his holy spirit
dwelles, if thorough unthankfulness we drive him not away. This house is the
holy church of Christ generally, Cods house
and our own bodies and souls particulerly, which be not only members and
parts of his mystical body but the temple and house where the holy Ghost
dwelles, and where in he will chiefly be worshipped. The Text.




Although ye have lien long without consideration of your duty toward God, and
his house buylding, and have been sore punished of god, and not known the cause
of it, and have sought your pleasur and profit, but not obtained them, being so
blinded in fulfillinge your worldly lusts: yet now the mighty Lord of hosts
and power, whom all other creaturs (except you) obey, gives you warning now to
consider better in your heart your time past, i. Ihon. ii Si^ne makes us
without feling of God and his plages
and not so neglige^tly wey ye working of god with you, for he has long punished
you to have had you to amend, and ye regard it not at all. Sin of it self is
darkness, and whosoever walks in sin* walks in darkness, and knows not
what he does: and if a man give him self to be ruled by sin, it makes of
fools mad men, and darkness so the reason, yt it knows not what to do or
say. They had thus many years ben plaged, and knew not ye cause why, but laid
it on some other chance, then not building gods house, which was ye chief
cause: or else like insensible beasts without the fear of God, regarded it not
as though it had come of some natural cause and god had not plaged their sin.
But as his disease is most perilous, which lies sick and feels not his
sickness, nor can not compain of one part more than an other (for tha^ the
disease has equally troubled the whole body) so they which lie walowing in
syn, so forgetting God and al goodness, yt they fel^ no remorse of conscience,
are desperate and almost past all recovery, yet God most mercifully dealing
with this people, sendes his Prophet to warn them, and stir the^ out of
their sleep, yt their they should no longer so lightly wey Gods displeasure
toward them, but depely wey why, and wherefore these plages were thus poured
upon them, The scholemaister correctes not his scoler nor the father his child,
but for some fauts and for their amendment: no more has God sent these plages
to you so many years, but to remember you of your disobedience toward him,
and that ye should turn to him. But if the leude scoler, or unthrifty son do
not regard the correction, laid upon him nor consider not the greatness of his
fault, nor the displeasure of his father or scholemaster, there is no goodness
to be hoped for of him: so is it we you, if ye thus lightly or else not at all
consider your life paste, Gods dealing with you, and how evil things have
prospered with you all ye time ye thus have disobeyed god. When the life of man
pleases god says Salomo^, all things prosper and go forwards with him: Pro.
xvi.
but wha^ he offendes his god, all creaturs turn to his hurt and hinderaunce.
If thou hear the voice of the Lord thy God (says Moses) and keep all ye
commandments, which I teach thee, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.
the Lord will make thee greater than al other people: thou shall be blessed in
ye city and in the field, thy children, the fruit^ of the earth, and all thy
cattle, thy shep^* Oxen shall be blessed, and increase: but if thou hear not the
voice of the Lord thy God, and keep his commandments, thou shall be cursed
in the town and in the field^ thy children shall be cursed, and the fruit^ of
the earth, and the fruit of thy cattle, thy sheep and thy Oxen, the Lord will
send upon thee need and trouble and destruction on every thing, thou go
about until he destroy thee. etc. These plagues when they fall in any
country, The cause of Gods plage is diligently to be searched.
are not lightlye to be considered.

But as the Physician, seeing in a glass by the water, the disease within the
body, by the learning searches out the cause of the disease, and ministers
good things for the same: so in lokinge in ye glass of gods word, the diseases
and sins, which are in common wealths, we shall soon perceive the cause of
these plagues, and wholsomely minister, some profitable and comfortable
remedies for the same. God is here so good to his people, that he makes them
Judges them selves, and mistrustes not the cause, but if they would consider
it well, it would move their hard hertes, therefore he sendes the^ not to any
strange Judges, but biddes them be Judges them selves, way it well first, and
than judge: for the thing of it self is so plain, that if they had not
altogether ben blind, they should in the midst of these plages have perceived
gods anger and their own wickedness, neither of which they had yet worthily
considered.

Ye have sown much says ye Prophet, and brought into your barens but
little: ye have wrought and toyled, ye have spared no labor, thinkinge to have
enriched your selves thereby and filled your barens: but all was in vayn, Psalm.
xxiiii.
for ye sought not first to be reconsiled with God, which ye ought to have
done, and fulfilled his will and not your own.

The earth is the Lords, and all the plenty on it, and it obeyes the will of
God in seruinge him, and giving her fruits to them that love the Lord their
God, and not to them which disobey God, that made and rules both man and the
whole earth. Let the gredy charle think than, that though he be the own of
the land and field by man's law, yet he is not ye Lord and master over him,
whom the earth will obey in bringinge forth her fruit. Let him dygge,
dyche, and velue, weed, stone, Our labor is in vain except God bless us.
harowe, plowe, sow, mow, clot and role, root up trees and busshes, water,
hedge* and waterforow, or what other thing so ever he can devise to make the
ground fruitful: yet there can no fruit grow, nor increase come, but by the
gift and blessinge of the living Lord. It is written of king Kauntus, Kauntus.
king of this Realm, that as he was standinge by the water side after a great
rain, marking how the water did rise, by leasur so it increased that it wette
his foot where he stood: and he being so proud in his heart, that he thought
what soever he said every thing would obey, straight commanded the water yt
it should rise no further, nor wet his masters fet^ any more: But when he saw
that ye water rose still, and would not obey him, but ra^ne into his shoes, he
perceived his folishnes, and confessed there was an other God and king above
him, whom the waters would obey: so shall all gredy churles well perceive when
they have wrought the^ selves weary, and gotten little, y^ all increase comes
from the Lord, and not of them selves. For David says ye promocion comes
neither from the East nor the West, Psalm. lxxv
but the Lord is judge. It is not the way to ware rich, to get much, but too
get it rightlye: Psalm. xxxvii
for it is better says David to have a little righteously gotten, tha^ to have
the great riches of sinners: nor it is not ye wai to be filled, to gather much
together, but tha^kefully to take and use that little which thou haste, and be
content therewith.

These rich gluttons, which ye Prophet rebukes here, did eat and drink so
well* so costly, so finely, and so much as they could devise, and yet they were
never full, but the more they drank, the dryer they were, No desire ca^ be
ruled but by grace, and keeping it under.
and one good feast provoked an other, and their study was how to fyl their
gredy stomakes. A dronken man is always dry, according to the Proverb: and
a glottonous appetite is never filled, but ye more daintely he is fed at one
meal, the more desirous is he at the next. All gredy affections of man's heart
are insatiable, if they be not brydeled with the fear of God. And the wai to
rule them, is not to follow their lusts and desires, but to keep them under and
not let the^ have their full desire. The Dropsy desires drink and drink
increases it: so evil desires if they be followed, they increase and in
refraining the^, they decay. Crescit amor nu^mi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit.
that is to say: as thy money increases, Ouidius.
so does the love of it. Therefore if thou will have thy meat to do thee good,
and thy dri^k to slake thy thirst, take it soberlye with thankesgeuinge at
gods hand, acknowledge it to be the good creature of god, g^^uen to noorishe
thy necessity, and not too fill thy beastly appetite. i Cor. x.
So saint Paul^ says: whether ye eat or drink, or what soever ye do, do
all to the glory of God: as though he should appointe how (...) a man should
eat and drink, that is (...) say: so much that the mind be not ma^^
sluggish by cromminge in meat, or pouringe in drink, that it can not lift up
him self to the praysinge of God.

Eat not so that it make the unlusty to serve God.
Therefore he that eats until his bellye ache, or that he lie down to slep^ yt
he can not praise God, which has (...) him: or he that drinks till his eyes
water or his tunge begin to swerve, swea^e, stut or prate, he does it not
too the glory of God, which is his duty, nor to the nourishinge of his weak
body, which is lawful and necessari: but he kindles such an unnatural heat
in his body that it sturres up his appetite to desire more than it should,
and is not content with inoughe (and that he called here not to be filled nor
satisfied in eatinge and drinkinge) or else it ouercomes the stomach and is
undigested, and fylles the body full of sluggishenes, makes it vnlustye and
unmeet too serve God or man, not noorishing the body, but hurtinge it, and
last of all castes him into many kinds of incurable diseases and desperate
deaths.

Look the end of the rich glutton in the Gospel, Luke. xvi.
feastinge every day with his brethren, and at length cast into hell fire
without hope: A ^hinne diet with the fear of God, is better than feastinge.
Daniel..i
but the poor beggar Lazarus, that was content to gather up ye cro^mes if he
might have had them which fell from the gluttons table, was carried up by
Angels to the bosom of Abraham to joy without end. Daniel taken prisoner to
Babel, being but a boy, and having a fine diet and costly meats appointed for
him by Nabuchodonozor the king from his own table, because he was born of ye
kings stock, desired his Tutour to give him course meat, brown bread,
potag^ and water: but when his Tutour said he durst not, because the king had
given co^trari commandment, and if he through eatinge such course meat,
should not be so well liking as his fellows, than the king would be angry with
him. Well said Daniel, prove me but.x. days, and if I lok^ not so well and
lusty as my fellows, than I will desire no more: but god blessed him and his
meat, so that he was so well fed, as they which had all daynties, as lusty,
as healthful and well liking as his fellows. For except God bless thy meat and
give it strength to feed thee: If God bless them and thy meat, it skyls not
how course it be: if no the best can not feed thee.
and except God stre^gthen thy nature to digest thy meat, and thee to take
profit of it: either it shall lie walowing in thy stomach, and thou shalt vo^^^
it up again, or else it shall lie within (...) body unprofitable, stinking as
in a sy^^^ or cannel, and engender infinite diseases w ^ in thee. But if God
bless thee and thy meat; though it be never so course and thou (...) hongry:
thou shall digest it, and it shall feed thee, and make thee as lusty, as
strong, as helthfull, as well likinge, as he which is fed with Capen,
Partriche, Quayle, Feason, or the finest disshes he ca^ devise. And as God here
by this Prephete wills them to consider well in their own heart whether
these things were true in deed so God biddes us now look our selves and judge
whether it be not so amongst us to this day.

Look how many of your poor neighbors eat broune bread, drink thin drink
have little flesh, live with milk, butter. and cheese, lie on the straw without
mattres, or fetherbed, and judges your selves whether they be not more lusty,
strong, healthful and well liking tha^ thou, when thou art cro^med full of all
dainties, which thou ca^ invent or desire. Thus we may see what it is to eat
and drink, and not be filled therewith as the Prophet says in this place.

We wonder much at the great miracles of God, when he changed water into
blood and plaged Egypt, Exodus vii,
wha^ he turned water into wine at the wedding in Cana of Galile, and such
other, Ihon. ii To feed our bodies is as great a miracle as any.
because they were done but seldom. But surely to feed our bodies with meat,
is as great a miracle if it be well considered, as any other such thing ye God
works. What is more marvelous then to se the flesh of ye sheep or Ox,
beast, fish, or foul which thou did se yesterday running in the fields,
flieng in the air, or swimming in the water, this day to be changed into thy
flesh and blood, and the substance of thy body. We are not norished only with
accide^tes and qualities of things as smells and tastinges: but with ye
substance of that thing which we eat and drink. Norishing^.
Norishing is defined of the Phisi^ions to be a changing of the norishment
into the substance of the body which is norrished. All ye works of God, The
commons of Gods works makes them to seem no miracles, which of the^ selves be
wonderful.
if they be well considered in their own nature, are miracles and above all
reason: but our dull blindenes is so great, that because we se them daily, we
regard them not, and because we be cloyed with them, and plenty is no dainty,
we consider them not woorthelye. But surely if we had this great miracles of
God before our eyes, as we ought too have, how by his mighty power he chaunges
the substance of that which we eat and drink in to the substance of our
flesh and blood: we should eat and drink with more reverence than we do,
more diligently thank him that he would vouchsafe to feed us, and wonder at
his mighty power that he can, and praise his mercy^full goodness that he will
work such^ ^ miracle so often and so wonderful a work^ upon such vile worms,
gredy glutto^^ and unthankful creatures as we be, and sustain our sinful
nature, by feding with so meruelously and chaunginge the goo^ nature of his other
creatures, which never sinned, and yet are killed for us too feed us,
chaunginge them. I say into the substance of our bodies, which can do
nothing of them selves but sin. i. Reg. xix.
Elias fleinge from Iezabel, found a therse calm baked in the ashes, and a
dishe full of water at his head, wha^ he waked out of slep^ and was commanded
by the Angel to rise and eat, for he had a long journey to go. And when he
had eaten he walked in the strength of that bread.xl. days and.^^. nights
eatinge nothing else. So shall all they which fear the Lord as Elias did* in
their persecution, be able and strong to do great things by sclender meat and
drink (as we this day have proved) God blessing them and their meat, be it
never so course and simple: and they that seek to strengthen them selves by
dainty meats forgetting God, shall not be filled in eatinge and drinkinge, nor
have profit of that which they receive: but the more they have the more they
shall desire, and never think they have enough as the Prophet here says.

Such is the stinkinge nature of syn, Si^^^^aining in a man, will le^^ nothing
that he ha^the, do him good
that while it lies lurkinge in the heart of man ruling him, and not ruled of
him by grace, but sturringe him too a further forgettinge of God and his duty:
that it will not let the corn grow in the field and increase, it will not
suffer the meat and drink to feed thee, but it shall go through thee
unprofitably as through a sink (which as it auoydes one filthe is ready
gapinge to receive more) it does not quentch, but rather increase thy
appetite. God will not bless any thing thou go about, thy clothes will not
keep ye warm, nor thy money will abide in thy purse, but shall wast away, thou
not weeting how nor when, as if there were a hole in the bottom. To a good man
every thing shall serve and prosper, but to an evil man, nothing shall do
good. What a wonderful thing is thi^ that the more a man eats and drinks,
the more he shall desire and not be filled: the more clothes he puts on, ye
colder he is: yea, if he have never so warm a fire n^ soft fether bed, he
shall be more grieved (...) cold, then they which fare courselye, be homely
apparaled, and lie hard. Let every man judge how true this saying of God is.
These fine fingered Rufflers with their Sables about their necks, their fine
f^^red gounes, corked slippers, trimmed bu^ kyns, and warm myttons, they chyl
for co^^ and tremble when they come abroad, they can not abide the wind to
blow on them: yea, and always the more tenderly they keep them selves, hurting
or not helping the poor, by the just punishmente of god, the more are they
pierced with cold them selves: Contrariwise, the laboring man can abide in
the field all the long dai wh^ the Northwynd blows with few clothes on him,
and never grieved with cold: he has his health, fedes sauerly on brown bread,
thin drink, and a poor supper: yea, many poor beggars run from door to
door with few clothes on the^ and torn, dyuing with ^ piece of bread under a
hedge, when they can get it, and at night lappi^g the^ selfs in a little straw,
not once in a weke filli^g their ^e^lies, yet they look more lustye,
healthful, strong, then y^, which have thy celed chamber, furred stomacher,
long goune and good chere. And what can be ye ^ause of this, but that God
blessed ye one which is content with his poor kind of life, and thanks God
for it, thinking it better then he is worthy: Costly apparel. and above their
d^grees.
and the other which thinks so highly of him self, that nothing is good
enough for him, taking no care, but how to cherish hi^ self most tenderly, God
does not bles him nor those things, on which his pleasure is set. Exodus xvi.
The Israelites in wilderness desiri^g flesh had Quails great ple^ti. given
the^: but when the meat was in their mouths, Deuter. xxix.
ye plage fell on the^. And after repenting, they were so blessed of God, that
their shoes and clothes lasted them.xl. years, and those clothes, which the
fathers had worn, the children were content to use afterward. But these tender
Pernels must have one gown for the day, an other for the night, one long an
other short, one for winter, an other for summer, one furred through an other
but faced, one for the work day, an other for the holy day, one of this
color, an other of that, one of clothe, an other of silk or damask, change
of apparel, one before dinner, an other at after, one of Spa^ish facion, an
other Turkey, and to be brief, never content with enough, but always deuisinge
new facions and strange: yea a Ruffin will have more in a ruff and his
hoose, then he should spend in a year. I read of a Paynter that would
paynt^ every country man in his accustomed apparel, the Dutche, the
Spanyarde, ye Italian, the Frencheman: but when he came to the Englishema^, he
painted him naked and gave him clothe, English apparel.
and bad him make it him self, for he changed his facion so often, that he
knew not how to make it: such be our fikle and unstable heads, ever devising
and desiring new toys. But what, would ye have all apparel alyke? There be
diverse degrees of authority, and so better apparel for them. I do not wish
all alike, but every one according too his degree.

Give a King clothe of gold and silver. a Duke velvet and silk, a Marquis
satyn and damask, than an Earl, a Lord, a Baron, a Knight, an Esquire, a
Gentleman, a yeman, according to their degrees and see whether those shall not
be compelled to go in a russet coat, which now spe^ as much on apparel for
him and his wife, as his father would have kept a good house with.

God grant every one might be brought to his degree. Math. ^.
Our savior Christ bad his disciples, they should not have two coats,
but we because we will be most unlike his scholars, have our presses so
full of apparel ye many knows not how many sorts and change of raiment they
have. We are in the number of those rych men, to whom saint James says:
woo, James. v.
because they had so great plenty of apparel, that the mothes did eat them,
and their poor neighbors went cold and naked, wantinge them.

And although those be wonderful and strange kinds of plagues that God
laid upon them for their sins, ye neither the corn nor the fruit of the
earth could increase, their meat would not feed the^. nor drink fyl them,
nor their clothes keep them warm: yet this is most merueylous, that the
money which they had in their purses, would not abide with the^, but wasted
away they could not tell how, not profiting them, but even as though it had
fallen out at the botome of their purses, or that their purses had been torn
so fast, it went from them as they gat it, they did not thrive by it. But
such is ye wisdom of God, that which way we think to enryche our selves,
displeasing him, the same is turned to our own hurt, and we be catched in our
own snares. ^ail gotten gooddes never thriue^
A man (...) think his money sure enough when it were in his purse: but lay it
where thou will under lock and key, yea, in stone houses if ye wilt, if it be
wrongfully gotten, or nigardly laid up, and not bestowed to releue the need of
other as occasion requires, rather then y^ shall enjoy that wicked ma^mon, the
ruste and canker shall eat it, thieves shall steal it, or fire shall come from
heaven, if it can not some other ways, and destroy thee and it, rather than
thou shall continue wealthy, contrary to Gods will disobeinge him. It is with
money as in corn and other fruits: for as he that sowes much, and that in
good ground, reapes much, so he that liberally bestows much of his truly
gotten goods on the nedy members of Jesus Christ, shall be enriched much of
Christ: for the poor are the good ground y^ bringes thee forth much increase
by the blessinge of God. I have seen says Solomon, some give their own
goods, Prove. xi.
and they waxed rycher: other scrape that which is not their own, and are ever
in need. So he that will thryue, must first get it righteously, and after spend
it liberally: for that which is evil gotten, though it be after dealte in
alms, displeases God. When blind father Toby^ hard a Kid blea in his house,
he biddes the^ take heed that it be not stolen. He says also t^o his son:
Toby. i^
Of thine own substance give alms (but that which is evil gotten, Toby. iiii*
is not thine own) and if thou have much, give much, and if thou have but a
little, yet give it willingly. These men whom the Prophet here rebukes, did
none of al these things: for neither it was well gotten, nor liberally spent.
What marvel was it then, though it fell out of the purse botome, and consumed
away they wist not how, nor yet did them any good?

This gredines was so far grown into all sorts of men, that the poor
laboring man, which wroughte for his days wage, was not co^te^t to work a
true dais work, but would loyter and be idle, make his work subtle and
full of craft and deceyt, have a greater wage than his work was worth.
Iere. vi.
It was true now also that Jeremy complained on in his time, saying: from
the highest to the lowest, from the Prophet to the Priest, Evil gotten
gooddes waste^ that which is truly come by.
al study for covetousness and deceit. But I would wish all such gredy guts to
mark this similitude of Chrysostom, where he co^pares a penny evil gotten,
and laid amongst the other silver, which is truly come^ by, to a worm yt lies
at the heart of an Aple. For as she first corrupts y^ heart of ye Aple, and
that once being rotten, it rottes the next piece unto him, and so forth
every piece that which is next unto him until ye whole Apple be rotten (though
for a great space it seem on the out side to be a fair hard Apple and
sound) so that evil gotten penye, says Chrysostom, shall infect that
which lies next him, and so forth every own his fellow, until all be
wasted. Thus the plage being general, that all sorts of me^ were punished,
and nothing did go forward with any kind of men, because generally all sorts
had sinned: and God requiringe generallye of all sorts yt his house should be
buylte: it proves that every one had a portion to do in the buyldinge of Gods
house, and that none could^ be excused from this work. So we in England, all
be gyltye, all have been punished, because every sort of men should have laid
his helpinge hand to the buyldinge of Gods house, refourming his religion,
restoringe and maintaininge his Gospel, which none or very few have
earnestly done: and therefore all these plages have fallen upon us that these
people felt: yea, and more to, for all that would hold fast their profession,
either were cast into the fire, or banished.

No country hays more belly chere tha^ we, and we eat as though we were
hu^gry. stylle. None hais more store of apparel, and yet we be a cold. How
our money hais waisted, if I seek but only of ye sundry falls of money,
many can remember, and yet feel ye smart of it, though I trust much good
shall follow on it. The Lord for his mercy open our eyes that we may see and
consider the cause of these plages, which he has laid on us so long, and
spedely turn us to amend those faults, for which we be punished. For even
from the highest, unto the poor laboringe man we have all sinned, and one
plaged an other: yea, seruau^ts have thought to wax wealthy by great wages
taking and little workinge: but as this Prophet says, their wages was put
into a bottomless purse* and they have not thryue^ by it. What has been the end
of ambicious and covetous men from the highest to the lowest: which never
being contentente with inoughe desired more. He which is not blind may se it
more among us then all Christendom. The Text.


Targ. dwell in it with glory.
and I will be glorified says the Lord.

The Prophet has never done enough in bearinge in the authorite and majesty
of his God that sent him with his commission to his people, and never speaks
thing in his own name, but in the beginning and ending of these short
verses, adds ye glorious name of God Iehoua, calling him the Lord of hosts,
at whose commandment all creatures be, and who will arm all his creaturs to
fight against all such, as either do not build his house and hinder his
glory, or else stop them which would further it. With such words of fear
and power must all stubborn stomakes be pulled down: and they which will not
be overcome by ge^tlenes to do their duty, must be feared with authorite. Thus
must preachers learn to te^per their tu^gs, An example for prechers.
never to speak but that which they find in Gods book: and where the people
be hard hearted to believe and stifnecked to hear, they must use such words
of gods majesty and power, which will make stony hearts to tremble: and where
fear reigns, there to comfort and raise the^ up by ye gentle loui^g mercies of
god, offered to ye world in his son Jesus christ our Lord. And yet once again
he referres the^ to their own judgment, and bids them consider in their own
hearts, their own ways, and be judges them selves. As if he should say:
hitherto have ye followed your own desires, and have had no profit in so doing,
but being sundry wise plaged ye have not considered it. Nothing yt ye have gone
about has prospered with you: your fruit of the earth has not increased,
your meat and drink has not fed you, your clothes has not kept you warm,
your money wasted in your purse, ye could not tell how. But now buyld my house,
and mark your own doings well, whether every thing shall not be blessed and
increase that ye go about: I will be delited in your buylding, and I will show
my glory to the whole world among you, in defending you, and that my house
and worship there. I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and no enemies
shall overcome you: ye earth shall be fruitful unto you, your meat drink,
clothes, and money shall feed and norish you: choose you whether ye will let my
house lie vnbuylded still, and still be plaged, or ye will repare it diligently,
and be blessed.

Go up to the hyl, bring home tymbr^ and build this house: these three
things God requires of them, and he promises them two blessings for them:
first that he will be delited in that house buylding, than that he will show
his glory amongst them. For these causes, rather than for worldly profit, they
should be more earnestly stirred to do their duty: when they were certain
that they pleased God in so doing. The hill that he wills them to go too is
Libanus, i. Esdras. iii.
as appears in Esdras, which is not within the bonds of Iewry, but of Tyrus
and Sidon: for there grew the fairest trees of any country. From thence had
Salomo^ trees in his time also for the same buyldinge. iii Reg. v.
This figure does teach us, The Heathen be called too be members of Christ's
church.
that as Gods temple was than builded of trees that grew among the Heathen
people: so wha^ the full time was comen, Christ's church should be builded of
the Gentiles and Heathen people, when the gospel should be preached thorough
all the world. And this is confortable for us, ye although we be not born of
Jews, yet we be trees meet too build gods house on: and god wills us to be
brought home to him by the preaching of his word that we may be partakers of
that house, wherein he will dwell, and he delited in us* and among whom he will
show his glory. He bids them climb up the hill, The painful labor must be
borne without respect.
draw home trees, and buyld the house, which al be words of great labor and
pains, and speaks nothing of ye easier sort of work, as deuisinge, casting
the work, framing the posts. etc. But wills them not to refuse the greatest
labor that belonges theretoo, and that nothing should be thought painful
that God commaundes. And he bids them not look for any great worldly wealth
when they had done (although God of his goodness would give them that beside)
but think this a sufficient reward, that God was pleased in their doings,
and would show his glory among them.

This is the greatest reward that we can look for, when God is delited with
us: and happy is that people to whom it falls. What have the Aungelles in
heaven more than that God is delited to be among them, and show his glorious
majesty too them? Thus in buyldinge gods house, we may make of earth heaven,
and of men Angels. For where God shows him self glorious, there is heaven:
and we shall be like Angels, delightinge our selves in praising our God, and
god will be delited and dwell with us, shewinge his glorious majesty to us, be
our god and bless us.

When they had fallen these trees and carried them home, least they should turn
them to their own use, and build their own houses with them, he says:
build this house, meaning the house of God, and temple which god had chosen
among all other places, and where only he wille^ them to offer their
sacrifices. In which we are taught that we should not turn to our own
pleasure, those things which God will have dedicate to him self and to the
buyldinge of his house. If England^ had not ben so gredye to turn to their
own use church goods, Necessary church goods are not to be (...) away.
which should have necessarely ben bestowed to the buyldinge of gods house:
we should not have felt gods rod so sharpeli, but God would have been
pleased, and showed his glory among us.

But when men would not give la^d^ fast enough to Abbeys, than the Pope rather
than his chaple^s should want, would rob many Parisshes to feed his monks.
God grant that the gospel may restore that justly, which the Pope took
wrongfully away, and gave them yet a right^ name of impropriations, because
improperly they be taken away and properly belong to the parishes. The workema^
is worthy his byre, he that serves the gospel, must live of the gospel.
Therefore those impropriacions, which take away the Preachers living, be
against the word of God.

But what, does this belong to us or our time? does goo require of us to
build him Abbeis, Nunries, Chauntries. etc. no surely, Gods house generallye
is the whole church, or every particular person.
but this was an outward exercise for that gross, hard hearted people for a
time to be excused in, that they should not build temples to Idols* and
teaches us to build god spiritual house, wherein we may offer spiritual
sacrifices and prayers to him, where in he is well delited, and will show his
Majesty. This house is now for us to be understand generallye ye hole
church and company of Christians, and the body and soul, the heart, mind,
or conscience of all Christians particularly, wherein god dwells by his holy
spirit, as saint Paul says to the Corinthians. Do ye not know that your
bodies be the temples of the holy ghost, i. Cor^. x^^
and which he has sanctified to be kept holy for him self alone by Baptism,
and for the which Christ has died that we might live by (...), whom he
has redeemed with his (...), and washed clean from all sin (...) should
live no more to our own lusts and desires, but to him that has redeemed us.
It is written that God dwells not in Tempels made with hands, Acts. vii.
nor is worshipped with any work of man's hands: Ihon. iiii
but he is a spirit, an invisible substance, and will be worshipped in spirit
and truth, not in outward words only of the lips, but with the deep
sighs and gr^ninges of the heart, and the hole power of the mind, and earnest
hearty calling on him in prayer by faith. And therefore he does not so much
require of us to ^uyld him a house of stone and timber; ^. Timo. ij
but has willed us to pray in all places, and has taken away that Jewish
and Popish holiness, which is thought too be more in one place than an
other. God is worshipped in spirit and all places.
All the earth is the Lords, and he is present in all places* hearing the
peticions of them which call on him in faith.

Therefore those Bishops, which think with their coniured water too make one
place more holy than the rest, are no better than Jews, deceyuinge the people
and teachinge that only to be holy which they have censed, crossed, oyled, and
breathed upon. For as Christ said to the woman thinkinge one place to be
holier to (...) than an other: Ihon. ii^i.
Woman believe (...) time is come wha^ ye shall worship (...) ^t Jerusalem nor in
this byl, but the true worshippers shall worship God in spirit and truth: so
is it now said the place makes not the man holy, but the man makes the place
holy, and ye shall do worship your Idols, stocks, and stones, neither at
Walsingham, Ipswich, Canterbury nor Shene for God chooses not ye people for ye
place sake but the place for the people sake. ii. Macha. v.
But if ye be in the midst of the field, God is as ready to hear your
faithful prayers, as in any Abbey or Nunrye, yea, a thousand times more: for
the one place he hates, as defiled with Idolatry, and the other he loves as
undefiled and clean. If the good man lie in prison, tied in chains, or at the
stake to be burned for Gods cause: that place is holy, for the holiness of the
man, and the presence of the holy Ghooste in him, as Tertullian says.

Yet there should be common places appointed for the people too assemble and
come together in, to praise our God. Common places of prayer are to be
appointed. Heb. x.
For where the Apostle rebuked them, which would not resort with the rest of
ye Christians to make their common prayers together, to hear his word and
receive his sacraments: it proves they had some common place to resort to. And
where saint Paul requires that all things should be i. Cor. xiii^*
done in a comely order: what can be more comely or agreing to good order, then
(...) have a time appointed, and a place too resort unto together, to worship
our only God. Nay how shall they come together, ^^cept place and time be
appointed? How shall they know when and whither to resort, vnappointed? How
can the sheepehearde teach his sheep, if he have not a fold to gather them
together in? In the Apostles time when the rulers were not christened, Acts
xvii.
they resorted into private houses and chau^bers, and by the water side (...)
worship their God: but when princes became christened, they had churches
appo^^^ted for them: yet all these prayers and preachinges that were privily in
parlers, and by the waterside, were as pleasant too God (yea better
peradventure for commonly they came of a greater and better l^ue (...) faith)
as ours be now. Those also which than were buried in no hallowed church nor
churcheyarde, nor christian moldes, as they be called (when it is no better then
other earth, but rather worse for ye co^m^^^^ that Bishops use about it) were
no worse then they which were buried with all sole^nitie. It appears in the
gospel, Mark v
by the Legion living in graves, the widows some going to burial, Luke vii
Christ buried without (...) City. etc. that then they buried not in hallowed
Churchyeardes by any Bishops, Burials out of church or the yard.
but in a several place appointed for the same purpose without the City, which
custom remains to this day in many godli places. As that the^ was lawful and
no hurt to ye ded so is it now, Hebru. ix.
and one place is as holy as an other to be buried in, sauinge that co^ly order
requires the bodies not to be cast away because they were the temples of the
holy ghost, and shall be glorifed at ye last dai again, but semely to be buried,
and an honest place to be kept several from beasts, and vnreuere^t using
the same, for the same use. It is Popish to believe that which the bishops do
teach: that place to be more holy then ye rest which they have hallowed as they
sai, Bishops blessings make nor places more holy nor god too hear us sooner
there then else where.
with washing it with their co^iured water, crossing, ce^sings, processio^s.
etc. and that God will hear our prayers before one Idol or Image rather then an
other, or in one Abbey, as pleases the^ to apoint him, rather than an other.
Where it pleases the^ to grant mani days of pardon, there God must hear their
prayers sooner, and work mo miracles: so God is become their servant, and
shall be where they will apoint him. But blessed be ye God our lord, which by ye
light of his word does co^fou^d all such wicked and fo^d fa^tasies as they can
devise to fill their bellies and maintain their authority.

The use of churches.
Churches be Gods school house, the preacher is a school master, sent from
God is teach us his word, we be his scholars, and thither must resort to
learn our lessons and his holy will, to amend our lives* to make our prayers to
him, desiring mercy for our wickedness past, and beg gra^e and strength for
that which is to come, to thank him for all his goodness so mercifully poured
upon us, to receive his Sacra^mentes, and profess our faith which w^ have in
him. For these causes must we have churches as common places to res^^ unto, and
use the^ with such comelines as be^comes men professing Christ: and not (...)
bind any holiness to this church or the church, as though it lay in us too
ma^^ holy or unholy, when and what we lust. As saint Mary's in Cambridge was
had enough to say mass in for three yea^^ space, and all that would not
hear it mus^^ be prisoned, although Bucer was the^ burried: but when it
pleased the Carnal^ commissioners to say it was not holy, be^cause he lay
buried there: than the Heretic must be dug up and burned, (...) their
masses were worth nothing. A^ other might lie still, and not hurt the^^
masses, though they were of his opinion.

The house of God now for us left (...) build: Gods house general.
particular. i. Timo. iii. Hebru.
is sometime called in scripture generally the whole company of Christians, and
sometime every particular man, as saint Paul teaches Timothe how to live in
the house of God, which is the church and congregation of God, the pillar and
seat of truth. And to the Hebrews it is written: you be the house of God
perticularly also, it is said to every man, i. Cor. vi.
do ye not know that your bodies be the temple of the holy ghosts? and he that
defiles the temple of God, him will God destroy. Again ye be the husbandry of
God and the building of god. And saint Peter says: i. Pet. ii.
ye are buylt like lively stones for a spiritual house of God. This spiritual
house must be diligently builded of us, and the buyldinge of this house of
wood and stone among the Jews, was a figure of this spiritual house buyldinge
for our days. This is that which saint Paul calls so often edifiynge or
buyldinge one an other, Edifiynge.
and that edification which he speaks so much of in all his Epistles, that
is as much to say as one to stir up an other to virtue and godliness. For as
the buyldinge goes forward and increases by laying to one stone after an other,
and one post or tree after an other, until the house be finished: So we by
goinge forward daily in the fear of God and godliness, shall at length be ^
meet house for God too dwell in. This house is the body and soul of man, The
spiritual house of God.
which must be buylt with daily hearing God^ word, prayer, mercy and
faith, with godly exercises, as s. Paul says ye be cytezens with saints,
Ephe. ii.
and of Gods house, builded in the fou^dacion of the Apostles and the
prophets. God, because he would have us always praying and calling on hi^ for
his help, has so ordered the matter, that this eart^^ house of ours wherein he
dwells, This house needs continual repayringe and help of al degrees.
should always be in building or repairinge, and that we should not be idle,
and think we ha^ done our duty, but ever desiringe him (...) help forward ye
building of this his (...) If we overcome one evil affection, straight ways
rises an other, and after one te^pta^^ comes an other, and the devil never
ceases to throw down our house. Psalm. cxxvii.
David sa^^th: except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vayn which
build it. Let us do all we can therefore, and pray the lord to further our
work, ye rulers with the sword defend the good and punish the evil, ye preachers
with y^ word, the scholemasters by their teaching the fathers by bringing up
their children, ye masters by correction of their servants, the people in
obeyi^g their heads, and neighborly love: and every one defend true religion to
the uttermost of his power, drive away ye Pope and his baggage: and as occasion
requires guide the ignorant, rebuke crooked stomaks amend fautes in the fear of
ye Lord, and bring into the right way all such as run astrai yt they may be
mete houses for God to dwell in. Thus has every man a part in bylding gods
house: but the greatest porcio^ is left to every man which is his own
conscience, to amend that he finds amiss in him self, because every man knows
him self best. Great faults only do appear unto the world, and by rulers
must be punished: but the privy hid faults which every man knows in him self,
for the most part (for no man knows all that be within him self) must be
corrected within him self, by prayer, sighinge, repentance and asking
forgiveness. David says: Psalm. xix.
who knows his own faults: Lord cleanse me from my privy hid and secret sins,
and spare thy servant from other men's sins. Thus must every one him self
severally, and iontly altogether clime up to the hills, that is our lofty
minds, and cut down the penishe desires of our hearts, though it be
painful: and also correct the hye minded, which are called often in the
scripture hills, and cut down the high trees, growinge on the tops of
them.

All offenders must be corrected indiffirently.
That is to say to bring into good (...) the high men of the world, which
should give good example for the people to follow and to punish their fautes,
and rebuke them as well as the lower sort. They must neither for fear nor
flattery leave them unpunished, nor say that is good which is evil before God.
For as God ha^^ given one law for all men, high and low to live after, and
like a righteous judge will punish all that break it: So must al indifferently
be punished here (if rulers ^ ministers do their duty) that break hy^ laws.
God has given no more liberty^ to sin to the rich than to the poor, (...)
has not willed the one to be punished, and the other to escape, but generally
and indifferently has said to all: Ezech. xvii^
that soul whi^^ sins, it shall dye: and in judgment ye shall regard no
person, Deuteronomy i.
but justly judge y^ which is just, neither conde^yne the poor^ because he is
poor, Exodus xxiii.
nor deliver the rich, because he is rich. So must the preacher tell every
man his duetye, spare neither high nor low, neither flatter the rich for
rewards, Math. v.
nor fear the mighty for high lokes or bitter words: for when he does his
worst he can not hurt thy soul but a little punish thy body. These are hard
hyls to clim, and crooked trees to fraine meet for any work: yet it must be
done, and God requires this of every man's hand too bring some thing to the
buylding of his house, and according to his power.

And if we mark these words well, We are like to trees.
we shall see our own nature set before us. For as trees growing on ye top of
hills, have a rough bark, crooked knots, long bows, and therefore unmeet for
any buildinge, until they be fallen, pylled, squared, drawn home, and can do
nothing of all these them selves: so we as long as we be wanderinge in the
mountains and wild woods of this world, being highly minded and in great
wealth or authority above others, as on an hyl: We have froward proud
minds, and not meet for Gods house, until we be made lowlye in our own
sightes, and fall flat down at Christ's feet, and have the rough bark of
our old Adam pulled of, and our crooked affections cut away, be mortified,
and drawn home by the learning of his word and working of his holy spirit.
For that which is high and set by amongst men is abominable before God, ii.
Cor. iii.
and as s. Paul says: we are not able of our selves, as of our selves too
think a good thought: much less than to cast away all this frowardnes of
our corrupt nature, until god bring us home, and make us mete for the buyldinge
of his house, which he does by preachinge as it is written: how shall they
bear without a preacher: Roma. x
for faith, come^ by bearing, and hearing comes by ye wor^ of God, and our
savior Christ says by saint Ihon: No man comes to me except my father
draw him. John. vi.
As the scriptur cal^ a good man the good tree yt bringes forth good fruit,
and the evil man the evil tree with evil fruit: so the Philosopher desines a
man to be a tree with the root upward. For as a man receives at ye mouth
norishmente for the hole body, and hai^ his head decked with heir: so the
tree by the root draws norishing to it and decke^ his bows with leaves, and
as the head of man is upward: so is the rote to the tree, though the unlearned
believe it not. Many other things there be wherein they be, like the one the
other: but I will not stand to rehearse all.

God grant us such preachers that we may hear, and so too bear that we
may believe, and so to believe that we may bear good fruit and be drawn home
like good trees, all frowardnes cut of, and we made mete for ye buyldinge of
gods house.

Now briefly to consider how God performed his promises, in being delited in
that house, and showing them his glory: tho hole historye of the Machabees and
other like do declare and tell the great glory which appeared in them, the
king sent Heliodorus to bring him the treasure of the temple: Heliodorus
but Onias the good high priest would not deliver it, but with his fellows
stood still loking for help from God, in their priestly apparel according to the
law and that was delited in their doing, ii. Macha. iii.
trustinge and calling on him, it appeared than: God is much delited in the
buildinge of his house.
for he showed his mighti glory in defendinge them that maintained his
religion, not yelding to tyrants: and punished Heliodorus for layinge violent
hands on ye money, which was laid up there, for the fatherles and wydowes.
Likewise Alexander the great, Alexander.
which conquered al countries about him, after he had gotten Tyrus and Sido^,
sent to Jerusalem for a tribute, thinkinge it to small a thing, and not worthy
the cost and labor to carry his host thither for the winning of it, and that
they would yield unto him for a word: yet when the high Priest fearing God
more than him, denied to be his subject and tributary, Alexander came with all
his power, purposinge to have destroyed all, but the Priests meting him in
their Priestly apparel, not to fight, but to see how God would defend his
people: Alexander light of his horse, worshipped the high Priest, and
confessed him to be the only God, whose Priest he was, and that in his
country before he came forth, he saw a like vision bidding him do no wrong to
such men: and afterward he granted them great liberty, and did them no
harm. But most wonderfully this glory appeared, Exodus xxxiiii.
that where every man must go thrice a year to Jerusalem too worship and
sacrifice God, promised and performed it, that he would defend their land
until they came again. Their land was compassed round with their enemies,
they left no^^ at home but women and children: yet God was so well delited in
this their doing, y^ as long as they did it, they prospered, and no enemies
durst invade their land, while they were worshippinge God: But when they did it
not, they were overcome, and lost their land.

If all men in England should go thrice in the year to London, leaving none
at home but women and children as they did to Jerusalem, and tarry there eight
days (for so long continued their feast) w^^ would think the Scots and
all round about us, would invade our country: but if we were as ernest in
religion as they were, God would defend us as he did them, and no enemy
should hurt us, when we kept religion, we wanne Bulle^, when we fell from it,
we lost Calis.

But the great glory of all was showed in this temple, and God declared himself
to be well delighted in it, first when our Savior Christ came and sat
disputinge with the doctors in it, healed the sick, Luke. ii.
preached the will of his father, and drove out the biers and sellers. After
also when the Apostles did the like, Acts. viii.
and when the Eunuche of Queen Candace, moved with the glory of God and that
temple, came so far of to worship there: which al and other like, do declare
sufficiently what opinion of Gods glory was there commonly judged to be. And
how God is now delited with our assembles, i. Corin. iiii.
when we come too pray unto him, and hear his word: Saint Paul teaches
saying: If ye speak in a strange tunge, and an unlearned man come in amongst
you, he will say ye are mad: but if ye expound that which is read, he is
rebuked of all, and he will fall down, worship God, and say God is amongst
you. Such an earneste defender of his glory is God, that he will give it too no
other: and so loves he buyldinge of this his house, Math. xviii.
that if there be but two or three gathered in his flame with fear and
reverence of his majesty, sekinge his glory and not their own, he will be
amongst them.

How God has been delited in all aged, in the buylding of this his spiritual
house, by the preaching of his gospel, ye glorious deaths of all his holy
Martirs from time to time do declare: but now latel^ in England by the cruel
persecution of the bloody bisshops, for the maintaininge of their wealth, their
ydolatry, and their Antichrist the Pope, whose ha^gme^ they were, we al have
seen it, yea and al good consciences has abhorred their madness in burning the
in^^centes, pullinge up the dead, and have praised God for strengthninge his
poor creatures against all their mad rages and furious rebelling against God
and man. The almighty god grant us like grace, strength^ and boldness to offer
our bodies to death without fear for the buildinge of Gods house rather
then to see it lie waste and trodden under fete. Most happiness is to have God
delited (...) us, though we suffer death for it.
What greater comfort ca^ any Christians have, than in giving their bodies to
death, for the buildinge of this house when he hears God say, that he is
delited in their so doi^g, and that he will show his glory in them? What
greater promocion can a man come to than, to be one such instrument wherein God
will be delited, and show his glory? Death of the body is grievous to the flesh,
but death of the soul is a thousand times more fearful too a good man: the one
is a little painful for a time, the other has grefe without end. Therefore
Christ says: Math. x.
fear not them which kill the body, and can not hurt the soul, but fear
him, which can cast both body and soul into hell fire. Such an earnest love
should we have to the buildinge of Gods house, both the hearers and teachers,
both to build and be builded by all means possible because he is so well
delighted in it: that we should fear neither loss of goods, nor yet death of
body, no nor displeasur of man so that we may please God, and have him
delighted in our doings. To please man is but a small thing, but to please God
is the greatest good thing that can be, he ye honors me says God, I will
glorifi him and he that confesses me before men, i. King. ii.
I will confess him before my father: and he that is ashamed of me, Math. ^.
I will be ashamed of him, and he that denies me before men, I will deny him
before my father in heaven.

The Text.
I have blowe^ on it. And why so? says the Lord of hosts* because this is my
house which lies waste, and (...) run every one to his ow^^ house. The
chiefest reasons too persuade (...) evil man to leave any wicked ways, (...)
to set before him, and often to put him (...) remembrance how God has been
angry^ with him, The evil be rather moved with threate t^^nges.
when he did such things, and punished him as long as he lay in such
forgettinge of his Lord God: and also to threaten him with greater plagues, if
he do continue in them still. Both these kinds of counsel does the
Prophet here use, to stir them up to buylding of this house of God. He,
both sundry (...) calls to their remembrance the great p^^^ges, which they
suffered often and long before time, for not buyldinge Gods house: and also
biddes them not think that all their sorrow was at an end, but more and
greater scourges was hanging over their heads, if they would not build his
house earnestly: and if they ceased not to sin, God would not cease to
punish them, and if they continued still, not regardinge the buyldinge of his
house, God would continue still encreasinge his curses on the^. Ye have been
gredy desiringe much says" the prophet, ye have scraped and scratched
together all ye could lay your hands on, ye have spent your money, and
wroughte your selves weary, thinkinge to enriche your selves by such means:
but behold and mark it well, and it is come but too little. Where the
scripture uses to say behold, Behold:
there it tells some notable strange thing as this is here: that their labor
wasted away unprofitably, they could not tell how. That way whereby all other
wax wealthy: has done you no good, and those means which God uses to
work by in other and bless them, in you it has not gone forwards,
according to your expectation and lokinge for: yea, and that which is most
merueilous, your corn and other fruits has not only not increased in the
field, but when it has been brought into the barnes, it has consumed there,
you could not tell how. A man would think his corn were sure inoughe when
it is in the barn (for whilst it is in the field, it is subject to many
dangers, as blassinge, myldews, frost biting, thunder beating, laid with a
rain, or shaken with the wind, stole^ or eaten with beasts. etc.) but even in
your varnes says God. No strength can put away the plage of God.
I have blown on it. It is as easy for me (says God) to waste it in the
house, as in the field: For if I but blow on it, it is not able to stand in my
sight. And as before he said: their money fell out of the purse botome, so now
in their houses their fruits were not sure. No, lock up in stoone houses if
ye will, it is as easy for God too consume it there, as to blow a blast with his
mouth: yea, nothing shall withstand him whatsoever ye devise, but he will take
it from you: ye shall not have your pleasure, by displeasing God, nor any thing
shall prosper with you until ye build him his house that is to say, maintain
his pure religion, defend his honor, forsake your vain pleasures, and refrain
your gredy coueteousnes. The defe^ding of true religion with a good and godly
life is now the true buyldinge of Gods house: now commanded unto us: and
that man, God^ house.
City, or country, which does not build this house so, has and shall have
the like plages fall on them, until they ernestly build this house of ye
Lords. For as a king is stablished in his kingedome, when his godly laws are
taught and kept, and that realm is strongly builded and blessed of God, where
good order is maintained: so is Gods church and congregation well and surely
builded, where gods word and religion is purely taught, sin punished, and
virtue embraced. God can no more suffer his laws to be conte^ned, or his honor
given to Idols, tha^ kings can suffer their kingdoms to be betrayed to their
enemies. For as in the hole history of the Jews common wealth, False religion
is the common cause of plages.
in the book of the Judges and the kings, while the people lived in ye fear of
the Lord, kept his religion, given the^ from God, they were defended by god
from all enemies round about the^, were they never so many and so strong: But
when they would worship God, either as they lust the^ selves, or not at al, or
else as he did not appoint them, tha^ they were given into the hand of the
Philistines, Ammonites, Chaldees, Egiptians, etc. sometime for the space of.40.
years, sometime.18. sometime. 70. and when they were least three years: So
shall all they, that build not, or pull down Gods true religion, and set up
ye Popes taught by manne, and not of God, likewise be punished or worse,
either with hunger, pestilence, swoorde, or blind ignorance, not knowing
God, and be given up too their own lusts, without remorse of conscience, or
any fear of God, which is the greatest plague that can be. Mark out of
our own Chronicles, what was the estate of th^^ our Realm, when we were
made Tributaries to the Romans by Julius Ceasar, Romans.
and so continued.400. years and more: Or afterward when the Saxons divided
this Realm into.7. kingdoms, Saxons.
drove out all or most and best of the Englishmen, and ruled as long: Or when
William Conqueror subdued all too him self at his pleasure: Normannes.
and ye shall find that the same wickedness reigned then, that was now like to
have made us slaves too the Pope and strangers.

The rulers were ambicious dissemblers, the bishops lordly and vnpreachinge
Prelates, the people covetous, Gods word unknown, and in no degree of men
was there any truth. Thus for our sinful disobeyinge of God, not defendinge
his true religion, have we ben given in to the hands of all countries round
about (...) to the Romans and Normains from the South, to the Saxons from the
East, too the Danes and Scots from the North: What danger was of late from
the West. he that would not see, should have felt, if God had not helped in
time.

And least they should think these plages to be laid on them for some other
causes, the Prophet tells them in gods name here, what was the cause of al
these sorrows, and should provoke also these other, which follow to be poured
on the^, if they did not amend. Because this my house (says God) lies waste
vnbuilded, not regarded of you, and ye run every one into his own house,
sekinge his own pleasure and profit. God will not suffer his honor to be given
to any other: or any other (no not our selves) too be preferred before him.
The Lawier in the gospel askinge our master Christ, Mat. xxii.
which was the first and greatest commandment, when he heard this answer:
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, he did allow it, and said that was
the chiefest in deed: and shall we Christen men, think other things to be
preferred before gods will, or our own desires to be more loved, and more
earnestly fulfilled then gods? Nay, mark what great plages fell on any
country, False religion has caused al Countries to be plaged.
and we shall see and find this to be true in all ages, that forgettinge gods
true religion has pulled Gods anger always most grievously upon the people.
What causes the Jews at this day too be driven out of their country, their
City and Temple utterly destroyed, and they the^ selves abhorred of all men:
but denying Christ to be their savior, and not receiuinge his gospel, nor
buyldinge his house? What causes most part of those people, to wh^^ saint Paul
wrote his Epistles, which w^ have to this day, and many other countries to,
among whom the other Apostles preached, to be given up now intoo the Turks
and Heathens hands: but that they fell from their faith, which they first
received by the Apostles preaching, and forsaken their christian religion? What
caused those grievous plages in Egipte, Exo. viii.ix.x
but that Pharao would not let the people worship God, as Moses sent from God
did will him? What caused Nabuchodonozor of a mighty king to be made a vile
beast* Daniel. iiii.
and eat hay as Oxen do, but that he would not know God and his own
wickedness, and set up Idols, and kylde them which would not worship them?
What caused the children of Israel to have such wealth for the most part under
David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, which were good kings and
restored religion, and other times to be plaged under Ieroboa^, Athalia, Acha^
Manasses, and other wicked kings, of whom it is so often written, and of every
king in Israel that they walked in the way of Jeroboam, maintaining Idolatry?
Nothing surely: but the good kings defended Gods true religion, set forth his
word, builded his house, and God blessed the^ therefore: the other pulled it
down, set up Idolles, persecuted his Prophets, burned or hyd up his scripturs
and holy word, folowinge their own fantasies, and the teachinges of the
false Prophets and preachers, and God plaged them therefore.

And if ye mark the history of the Pope and Mahomet, Mahomet and the Pope
began their authority at one time.
ye shall find that at the sametime that the Pope in the West part of the
world began to get authority over Kings and countries, too set abroad his
superstition, and the people received it, forsaking Gods religion: Mahomet then
began in the East part too grow in authority, and conquer Countries, and
has evermore so done since that time, because the people fell from true
religion and the more that Countries have fallen to folowinge of supersticion
and forsakinge Christ, his word and religion: the stronger waxed the Turk
and Pope, as Gods plagues too punish us, and ^e like too do every day more
and more, until they be driven out of Gods church, and Christ's word,
religion and Sacraments be restored to their simplicity, as Christ did
ordeyne them.

Gregory
When Gregory the first Pope of that name, had denied Ihon archbishop of
Constantinople, He that desires to be above all Bisshops is Antichrist.
striving with him before the Emperor Mauritius, that Constantinople should be
the chief church, and that the Bishop there should be the chiefest Bishop,
in authority above al other Bisshops, and said that wosoeuer desired ye
blasphemous name or authority, was the forerunner of Antichrist: The Bishop of
Rome is granted to be above al other bishops
Phocas the next Emperor following, granted by much suit Boniface the third,
about the year of our Lord. 607. that the bishop of Rome should be the
chiefest bishop of all other, and therefore is he the blasphemous forerunner of
Antichrist, as Gregory said full well: It was a worthy grant of such a
wicked Emperor, to set up a Bishop like him self. Phocas murdered his lord
and master Maurice the Emperor, killed his wife and children in his own
sight* and made him self Emperor. Afterward he made Boniface the Pope,
head Bishop over all, and in Rome the chief. Thus our holy father gat his
suprimaci by a wicked Emperor, and not from Peter as he sais, but one thief
set up an other. Peter, Act. iii, sais gold and silver I have none: but the
Pope sais as the Devil said to Christ when he tempted him, and showed him all
the kingdoms and riches of the earth. All these are mine, and I give the^ to
whom I lust, I will give thee the^, if thou will fall down and worship me. So
sais the Pope: but he lies as his father the devil did.

This thing once granted, the.xii. year of Heraclius the next Emperor
after Phocas: Machomet the great Prophet of the Turks invaded Christe^dom the
year of the Lord. 623. Honorius being Pope, and almost drove the Emperor
out of his Empire, and made him glad with money to bye peace vnhonorably. And
since the time the Turk has grown bygger and bygger in the East countries,
subduing al to him self, but the Emperor weaker and weaker: and the Pope has
taken from him most part of his Empire, and rules in the West parts, and is
Emperor in deed, the other having only the name of an Emperor.

The religion and authority of Machomet the Turks great prophet, and the
Popes religion, or rather superstition and suprimaci began thus in one age
within xvi. years together: and as it were diuidinge the whole world betwixt
them, the one in the East, the other in the West have waxen great Rulers,
that a man could scarce tell whether was the mightier, as just scourges sent
of God to punish the world for, not maintaining his word. But now the Popes
wickedness and sutteltye by Gods word, being declared and opened to the world,
his power waxes less, and the Turks power increases, because he kepes his
people in ignorance: so that if Gods mercy be not much more then our
deseruinges, it is to be feared that be shall ouecome Christe^dom. For the cold
slackenes of the people and princes to build Gods house and true religion,
will care for no religion at all, if they may not have the old ^urty dregs
of popery. So God gives up in to all blindness, them that forsake his light: and
forsakes them that forsake him and cast him of.

But many would have not long ago said, what need we to fear these plagues,
are not we come home again to our holy father the Pope and to our holy mother
the church, is not our old little god come home again to us? have we not our
aulters, copes, masses and trentais, ye will bring us thorough purgatory for a
little money, how wickedly so ever we had lived? our holy father the Pope by
his legate the Cardinal or by his pardons will absolve us, Carnal fool and the
Popes* church.
a paena et culpa, that is, from all punishment, from sin, yea, and from al
fault, or giltines of syn, and give us as many days and years of pardon, as we
list. What should grieve our conscience having thus many ways to heaven? Are not
we much better then our holy brethren, which will none of all these to save
them, but only Christ, and think him only sufficient for the sins of the
whole world? Is not this house well builded that has so many strong pyllers?
Can God be angry with us that have bought and brought him so many things into
the church to delight hi^ withal? We have gylded many goodly images, pleasant
to look at: and delight the eyes if he will have any mirthe, we have goodly
singing and striving, who can fet the highest note: we have sweet Organes for
the ear, and sweet frankencense for the nose, what would God have more?
Where not the churches before like barnes, bare and naked, and now are they
trymme, that any God would dwell in them?

Have we not done God good service trow ye? No surely, for God dwells not in
Temples made with hands of wood and stone but in the heart of man: Acts. vii
nor yet is worshipped with man's inuentio^s, but as he willed and taught him
self. And this is it that pulles all these plages on our headdes. For as the
Jew is most styffe in his religion* so the Turk defe^des his by might and
power, the Pope maintaynes his with fire and faggot, the Anabaptist, Arian, and
Libertine, are as busye in corners to turn many unto them, and yet all these be
enemies to Christ, sekinge to serve God an other way than he thaught them,
and to save them selves by some other means, then by only faith in him,
which was sent to teach us his fathers will (which none knew but only he,
Math. xi
and they to whom he has taught it) and too save them all which shall be
saved: so these and all other which build their religion other ways than God
appointed, are traitors unto him, and procure his vengeance. For he there is
not with me (says Christ) is agaynst^ me, No religion is to be had, but that
which Christ taught. Exodus xxv.
and he that gathered not with me, scateres abroad.

Moses when he was in the hill with God, had the facion of the tabernacle and
tent showed unto him, like unto ye which God willed him to make an other,
where the people should re^orte to worship him until the temple was builded by
Salamo^. And least he should devise any thing of his one head, or inuente an
other facion: God geues him warninge saying: See that thou make it like unto
that facion, which was showed thee in the hyl, devise nothing of thy self,
neither put to, take away, nor change any thing, but only content thy self
with that which I showed thee. This is so notable a lesson that it is repeated
in the.vii. of the Acts, and the.viii. to the Hebrews, because it should be
kept in memory, and diligently observed of all men in all ages, that they
should not be curious in deuisinge a new way to serve God of their own
imaginacion, but submit their wit to Gods wisdom, and be content with that
which he has appointed: for that only is good, and all inuencions of man (as
they be of man) displease him. Likewise David when he woudle have builded God
a house to have been worshipped in: God appeared unto hi^ and told him he
should not do it, but Solomon his son should build it. God showed him also
the facion that he should build it after (which facio^ David taught Solomon,
and prepared all metals necessary to do it withal in his life time) least
they should have devised some facion of their own: as man's brain is never
content too be ruled by Gods wisdom, but pleases him self in his own
inventions better then in ye which God teaches him. And this Temple also that
the Prophet^ speaks of here, which they were sent home too build by king
Cyrus (whose mind God moved to restore them to their country, Esdras. vi.
and so liberally to help them to the buyldeng of so costly a work) is
appointed to them by commission, how broad wide, long, high, and thick it
should be, as it was unto Solomon before. If none of these, Moses, David,
Salomo^, Esdras nor none of the people might build these temples and houses of
wood and stoone, so high, wide, long, thick, broad, or any other facion as
they lust them selves, but must follow (and are straightly charge^ often and
sundry times so to do) that Patarne, copy, example and facion precisely, which
God appointed them: much less in this spiritual house of Gods buildinge,
which is chiefly by the preachinge of his word, may we devise any thing of
our selves, but exactly follow, that which God has taught us, and content our
selves therewith, thinking that most sufficient learning, able to save our
souls, most true and holy, and all other too be dreams, lies, fantasies,
and vanity in comparison of this. The law of the Lord (says David) is pure,
Psalm. xix. xii
turning souls) the witness of the Lord is true, and geues wisdom to little
ones. etc. And again: the words of the Lord are pure as silver, which is
tried seven times.

But how many ways has the Pope devised to buyld his house and authority,
that a man may chose which him lust too follow, so that he follow not Christ.
For (says he in his heart) every one is as good or better than that which
Christ ordained. This to be true a man may easily prove him to think: The
Pope thinks his laws better then Christ's
because he persuades men to follow his devises, and persecutes them that love
Christ and his word, or will not believe him and his doings, to be above the
scripture, all these things he would not do, except he thought his wais the
better. How many orders of monks, Freeres, Nuns, Chanons, Heremites,
Pylgrymages, Pardonnes, Relics, Saints, Masses, Holy water, has he set
in his Church (which all the scripture castes away as naught, because they
be not taught us by God, but invented by the Pope)for his vantage and vain
glory. What diversity is among them (although they charge the gospelers with
ye falselye) when they put their holiness in their coats, Papists differ among
them selves in opinions of holiest things.
and some say a white Coule is more holy, some say a black, an other sort
a graye: Some say mass of Requiem is best, other say of Scala coeli.

Some of the five wounds, some of (...) Lady. Some pray to one saint, as
(...) in gods favor, and some to other: Some use trinite knots, and other
saint Kat^^^rins. Some have saint Tronions (...), other our Ladies, and
many the gol^^^ Fridayes: In the schools, some hold (...) saint Thomas, some
of Duns, and (...) of Gabriel or Bacon: Some hold of Fra^^^ces in religion:
some of Dominike, (...) of Augustine: but the holiest was s. (...) For as
Fasciculus temporum says: he was (...) holy that he brought too heaven (...)
5555. Popes.24. Cardinals.2000. Archebishops.7000. Bishops.15000. Deanes, 5000.
Abbots.74. beside many Nuns and holy Sisters and Priests. O holy ^ Benet,
that was more holy than so many Popes, Freeres, Cardinals. etc. And wr^^ched
Popes that can bring other to heaven, and not them selves. Some priests say
matins, mass, and after Yorkes use, some of Sarum, some Bangor and other of
common sanctorum. But never one seeks Christ as he should, according too the
scripture.

Christ is only scholemaister of his scolers, and the Papists agree not in
themselves Mat. xvii. Deu. xviii.
They have made them schoolemaysters, whom they will follow of their own
deuisinge, where as God the father has appointed his son Christ and said:
this is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well delited, hear him. And he is
that Prophet of whom Moses wrote saying: the Lord your God will raise a
Prophet from among your brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear, and that
soul which will not hear him, shall perish. He is the wisdom of God the
father, Acts. iii
by whom he has showed his mercy and power to the whole world, i. corinth.
i,
and by whom he has confounded the mighty and wise of ye world: and he is
God without beginning. These other which they call saints, or rather make
them their Gods, are found of late, and it is not many years since they
lived. It is not since Fraunces, Augustine, and Dominic lived, Frauncis.
Dominic.
much above.^00. years: and if those be the pillars of Gods church now, how
did it stand before their days? If these be the means to bring us to heaven
now, how do they that died before that these men were born and known? Apoc.
xiii.
God witnesses of his son Christ, that he is the Lamb which was slain from
the beginning of ye world, and that by his death, the sins of the whole
world are forgeuen, and that whatsoever we ask him in his name, John. xviii.
he will give us.

We have no such promise made us Salvation only by Christ.
in any other creature: and therefore if we ask any thing in their names, God
needs not to give it us, for he has not bound him self by any promise, as he
has to his son Christ. God has not found a new way of late for us to be saved
by, but has appointed one means for all ages, by which only we shall please him:
that is the merits and death of his dear son Christ Jesus (...) Lord. He is
the strong rock, upon whom, what house soever is builded, shall stand all
other be builded on the sand, and therefore shall fall.

England repent
Therefore England how can thou escape the great plages written in this
book, that had banished the word of God that the people might not have it nor
read it: the sheep heard not the voice of the true shepeheard, but the strange
language of Wolves, Hierelinges and thefes: yea, thou wast come to such a
shamelesnes and hatred of Gods word, that thou could not suffer the clear
light of the gospel to shine nor the shryl trumpet of Gods most holy word
to sound in thine ears, which would confound all such enemies of God to have
any place at al in thee. Mark well England, in how miserable an estate thou
wast, yt thou might not hear God speak to thee by his word, nor believe
what he teaches thee, but whatsoever pleases the Pope to command thee, or the
parliament to decree. What are those bishops woorthye to have, which in one
year space confirmed the preaching of the gospel of christ and pure
minestringe of Gods sacraments, and the same men within the same year, with
the same impudent mouths, and blasphemous tunges brought in the Pope, set by
Idols, banished Christ and his holy supper appointed for all men that will, to
receive it together, took away his holy gospel and sacraments: and placed by
their authority, the mass for one shaueling to eat up all, and bless the
people with the empty Chalice, and burned his preachers to fill their bellies.
Moses commanded such blasphemers of gods name to be stoned: and yet they
bear the name and title of ministers in Christ's church.

If the Jews deserved all these vengeaunces, because they did not build
gods house, what had thou, O England deserved, in this defacinge and
pulling^-doune: and haste thus changed gods house into a den of thieves, and
made it the Popes market place, to bye and sell Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory,
to deceive christen souls, and deface the death and passion of our savior
Christ.

Thou did set up Idols to be (...) and sought help at stocks and stones:
therefore how much need haste thou (...) unto God that he would give thee
(...) rulers, for thou must believe as they (...) and if they love not God, thou
shalt hear him speak unto thee by his word, if (...) will not worship God
arighte, thou (...) not be suffered to do it if thou would. Can any people
escape unpunished, (...) thus mockes God? Or if Gods mercy (...) not
unspeakable, could he have (...) his hands thus long, but have (...) out
his vengeance, and thrown his th^^^derbolts in every corner of thee, to (...)
thee before these days?

If thou will not glorify God in repentinge, he will glorify him self in
dest^^nge thee. Mark how many days (...) has forborne to punish thee, and
so many days haste thou had of his endless merci* granted thee to repent
in: and if thou (...) it not by times, look not for the contrary, but thou
shall be made an example to the whole world, a laughinge stock too thy
enemies, a pray and slave to all countries round about thee.

What can be thought of those, which will ever follow that which the prince
desires: but that they seek their own pleasure and profit with all
diligence, which the prophet calls here to run to their own houses: Al
build their own houses rather then gods.
that is as much to sai as with all their wit and power they do satisfye their
own lusts, seek their pleasures, hunt and gape for their own profit* to
enryche them selves, build costly houses, and lay land too land, and never
think they have enough. Would to God they which preach Christ, were not
gyltye in not buyldinge Gods house as they should, as well as others be. If
it be taught of contencion, ambicion, Phillip. i
or vain glory. Paul says: he is glad that Christ is preached, but woo be
to him that teaches for such causes, and preaches not for pure love and duty
to his Lord God, seekinge his own glory. All preachers must say (be their
gifts never so great) not unto us Lord, not unto us, Psalm. cxix.
but to thy name give all praise and glory. And all the bearers must say:
we do not believe the word, because such a man teaches it, but because God
spoke it: The praise is gods,
for the authority of the gospel hanges not on the messenger which bringes
it, but on gods majesty, which sendes it. For as Peter and Ihon (when they
had healed the blind beggar, and the people maruayled) said: Acts. iii
why do ye wonder as though we had done this by our own power and holiness: so
(...) all Preachers say, wonder not at us (...) praise God whose messengers we
be, (...) him whose spirit he has given to speak in us. For it is not we yt
speak, when we speak any truth: but it is the holy spirit of God yt speaks in
us, whose instruments (...) be. Thus have all parts ben guilty of (...)
building Gods house: ye Lord for (...) sake forgive us all that which (...) and
stir up our minds to do our (...) more diligently from henceforth, (...)
we may escape the plagues which ^^^lowe.

The Text.


upon all the labor of your hands.

Now folowes the other kind of persuading, which the Prophet uses: that is of
the great plages that hang over their heads, if they did continue in t^is
stubbornes, and would not build gods house. For although they had suffered
great things, yet these were much greater which were to come: and God would
not hold his hand until they went earnestly about to build his house, as they
were commanded. It is profitable to repeat one thing often
In the further verse he repeates the plages in other words, which he spoke
of before: and more plainly took the cause of all the scarcenes that was
among them, and why of so great labor they had so little fruit and increase.
Here we may see how necessary it is often to repeat and beat in one lesson,
because we be so dull to learn. And although many be wearye to hear one thing
often, yet saint Paul says to the Philippians: I am not w^arye, Phili. iii.
and it is profitable for you to repeat one thing often. The heavens says
he, have been locked up from giving any dew or rayn to you, and the earth has been so hard and dry by that means, that no fruit could grow. Maruayle not
if the earth be barren when moisture comes not from heaven: for nothing can
multiply here, except it be blessed from heaven. Al good things from heaven.
And this is true, not only in worldely things, but also in spiritual gifts
of the soul: to teach us (...) look up to heaven, and from thence to (...)
and look for all goodness from gods ha^d^^.

i. Cor. iiii.
What have thou (says saint Paul) which thou haste not received of God? and
saint James says: James. i.
every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, coming from the father
of light. For as the ray^^ and dew from above, watering ye gr^^^ makes it
fruitful: so the grace of the holy Ghost, coming from God the father, for
his son Christ's sake, styrres up (...) minds to al goodness. Thus by outw^^^
blessings, God will teach us to look ^p to him for all goodness. For as it is
betwixt the earth and the clouds, so (...) betwixt God and our hearts:
both (...) unfruitful, except they receive blessinge from above.

But it had been among them now, (...) it was in the time of Achab, when
Iesabel did so persecute the true Prophets, (...) they were compelled to hyde
them selves in Caves, False religion will not let the heavens rain, nor the
earth be fruitful.
and De^nes of the earth. Eli^^ told the king that there should be (...)
dew nor rain in all the country, but at his word when he said it should
be (for God had given that privilege too the Prophet, to set forth his
doctrine) and it rained not of three years and a half, iij. king* xvii.
nor was any dew, but great hunger, famine and ^^arcenes of all fruits in
the country. So now when Gods house lay vnbuilded, James v.
the heavens did not water the earth, but great barennes was of all things.
This is one of the plages that God threatens to send on all countries, for
contemninge his word saying: I will make hea^^n as hard as brass over your
heads, (...) ye shall not wringe out of it a drop (...) or rain to comfort
the earth, Deuteronomy. xxviii.
and I will make the earth as hard as iron, that it shall not give her
fruit: and so for false worshippinge of God, all countries have been diverse
times thus punished.

England has had many great droughtes and dearthes, both in the time of
Pop^ri and the gospel: but if ye mark it well, you shall find great
diversity betwixt (...). In the dearthes under the gospel it was not for
want of things that God (...) not send them ple^teously, The diversity of
plages under the gospel and poperye.
but through the wickedness of man, which in so great plenty and blessings of
God, made a ne^^^es dearth. For farms were raised, that farmers might not
forth to sell (...) they were wont. Many things were gotten into few men's
hands, and they would sell as they list, and not as things were worth*
according to charity, being content with a reasonable gains. Corn was
cari^^ out of the realm, or sold through many hands or it came to the
markets, and every one would raise the price, and have some part of gains:
some would feed their Hogs with it, else let it foist in their barnes, and be
eaten with myse, rather then they would bring it to the market to pull do^^ the
price. Men of honor and worship were (...) come shepemaisters and grasiers,
tyll^^^ was turned into pastur, and towns (...) graunges, and all not: to make
things ^^^per, which might have suffered, but ^^^rer, which was and is
hurtful and not tolerable. But since the Pope was restored, (...) have had
unseasonable weather, both (...) weate and droughte, the earth has (...)
brought forth her fruit, and strangers (...) devoured much of that which ye
had. All your latin processions and singing of gospel^ under busshes, nor yet
your Or^ pro (...) his could get you Gods blessings, but ^^ther increased his
anger* When were^^ compelled to eat acornes for bread, but (...) your popery
and falling from God? When (...) Calys lost, but in popery? When was Bullen
gotten, and the Scots vanquished so ma^fully, as under the gospel? But this is
the greatest plage of all and lest regarded of you: that the heavenly comfort
of Gods word was locked up from you, and comfortable dew of Gods favor did
not fall on you, nor your earthly hearts could bring forth good fruit and work
of repentance. And so that curse was fulfilled on you which is written: I will
send a hunger into the earth, not a hunger of bread, Amos. viii.
but a hunger too ^eare the word of God, that ye shall go from the East unto
the West to hear it, and shall not find it. The good men and true Prophets of
God, feling what a grief it was to want this dew of Gods word, and seeing
heaven locked up from the ple^tifull preaching of the same, and desiring the
coming of Christ and comfortable promises of his gospel, cry out: Esaias. xlv.
O ye heavens send done your dew from above, and let the clouds rain
righteousness, let the earth be opened and bringfoorth the savior. But God be
merciful unto us, and soften our hearts: we are come to such a hardness of heart*
that those things, which good me^ most desired, we most abhor, and ye
gospel which they thought most happiness and treasur, we are weary of it, and
would not have it.

The second verse the Hebrew (...) reads thus: I have called a drought upon
the earth and the hyls. etc. and than it should be nothing but a repeatinge,
or an exp^sition in mo words of that dearth^ and scarcenes that was among
them, and so often spoken of before: but the Greek which I had rather follow,
reads thus: I will bring the sword upon the earth and hyls* etc. If our
Hebrew books were without^ points as theirs were, which turned it into
Greek, these points might be will joined to, Choreb drougth Chereb sword.
which signify so as the Greek is: or else these points a little changed,
(...) may be so translated also as the Greek reads it. I think it better to
be an (...) singe of the plage, which God threaten^ them withal, to stir
the^ up to this buildinge, rather then an often rehearsing (...) these plages,
which were past. And when he names here the hyls, if we read it a drought,
as the Hebrew now pointed is, it is not so great plage or marvel to see (...)
hyls barren and dry: but if with ye Grek^ we read the swoorde, that is to
say th^^ enemies should come and utterly destroy all, and they which fled
to the hyls (...) save them selves, should not escape, (...) their Castles and
Towers, which they had builded in the top of Mountains should defend
them: it were more wonderful, and would strike a greater fear into them, and
stir them up sooner to buyld this house, that they might avoid these great
dangers ensuing. Thus he would pull them from trustinge in their strong
holds on the mountains, or else from that holiness, which they put in those
hills within Jerusalem, where they thought no enemies could prevail.

In Jerusalem were two hills Moria, ^n which was builded the temple, Moria Sion*
and Sio^ where was the kings palace, unto which both God had promised many
blessings: and therefore they might think the^ selves sure there.

The City was compassed before time about with three walls: with in the
innermoste was the temple and the priests lodginges: within the second wall
were the Levites houses, the Kings palace, and the University, houses of
learning.300. or mo: within ye vttermoste were the marcha^unts and the people:
and yet their enemies with the sword should destroy all these.

There is no place so holy, as to defend a wicked man: No place so holy as to
defend the wicked.
nor the place makes ye man holy, but a good man makes every place whersoeuer
he be holy. When Ieremye preached that God would destroi the temple for the
wickedness of the priests, the priests could not abide too hear that but
cried out, Jeremy. vii
the temple of God: the temple of God: yet Jeremy said still, he would do
unto the house as he did unto Silo and destroy it. There is no creatur of God
so holy but if a man do abuse it, God will ge^e both him and it to his enemies
power, if they do not amend. God suffered his holy Arc wherein were the tables
written with his own finger, and Aarons rod and a pot full of Manna with other
reliquies, to be given into the Philistines hands for the wickedness of the
people, and the priests which bare it Ophni and Phinees Elies sons. (...)
likewise should these holy hyls and all of the^ be devoured with the sword, i,
King. iiii.
if they builded not this house of God. As long as th^^ kept gods true
religion, God defend them and his temple after it was builded: but when they
forsaked Gods word and religion. God forsaked them, and gave them into the
hands of Antiochus which defiled the temple, i. Match. i
set up Idolles in it, made a school of fence and Heathen learning of it, and
killed all those yt would not follow him. So was this prophecy and curse than
fulfilled, and they destroyed: but specially when Titus and Uespacian with ye
Romans destroyed it, according as Christ said, there should not be one stone
left standing upon an other, so there should nothing save them, Math. xxiiii.
except they would not only build this house, but also defend and maintain
his word and true religion. Those with all other like are written for us, to
keep us in dew fear and reverence to God and his word, least we suffer the
like plages as they did for falling from his holy word.

But here let us chiefly mark ye goodness of God in this and all his other
threatninges: for he does not tell us this, God threate^s that we may avoid
them.
because there is no remedy to escape it, but that in hearing this we should
repent and so escape it. Gods threatninges have in them a condition ever Jonas.
iij Jeremy. xviii
All the threatenings of god are to be understand with this condition, if ye do
not repent and amend, as Jonas coming unto Niniue said: yet. xi. days and
Niniue shall be destroyed: presupposing if they did not ask merci, but they
asked it and escaped.

Jeremy says, if this people repent the^ of their evil, I will repent also
says God of that evil, which I purposed to send upon them. If God were
disposed to plage as often as he threatens, he would never give warninge nor
time too repents in, nor promise mercy to them that repent, but would
suddenly come and destroy without all mercy.

And where he works all for our (...), it were a double sorrow, both to be
(...) and know it so certainly afore^^^^ that it ca^ not be escaped: but he
geues the^ and us this warning, that we might (...) and by repentance obtain
mercy in (...) God never sendes plage into the wor^^^, God geues warning before
he plages
but he geues warninge before it come, that they may repent and escape as (...)
says: Amos. iii
the Lord will do nothing, but ^^ shows it first by his servant the
Prophets. Before he drouned the world, ^^ styrred up Noe, whom Peter calls
(...) eyghte preacher of righteousness: ii. Peter. ii
wh^^ he was making his Arc a hundredth and twenty years, and told them the
(...) of god toward the^ for their sins (...) they might amend and avoid
the da^^^ger coming by repentance, so (...) laughed at him, and few cared
for hym^ therefore were al drowned save eight p^^sons. Gene. xix
Lot preached in Sodom, and (...) they would not amend, fire from heaven
destroyed them. Before the destruction of Jerusalem by Nabuchodonozer, God
(...) many prophets many years to war^^ them before hand, whose writings
also we have, as Esaias, Jeremy, Osee etc. and before the last destruction by
the Rom^^nes, Christ himself came, and also (...) his Apostles too teach
repentance: but when all was in vain, then they utterly perished. Have not we
in England ben as diligently warned by our preachers, and almost all in vain?
What shall we look forthen, but destruction, if we amend not? Thus God of his
endless mercy, never comes suddenly upon us, to destroy us: but mercifully
warnes us that we be not taken in our sins, and so perish, and ever he
stirs up the sluggish, either by his spirit, word, minister, or else his
gentle correction to call for his mercy.

And where he says: I will call a ^rought or the swoorde upon the earth.
Calling.
etc. this kind of speaking is often used in the scripture, and betokens
nothing but ye power of God, that he is able too do it so easily, as to
speak a word, or call for it: As soon as God calls, all things obey
and that as soon as he spoke it, so soon it should be done, as when one of
us, comes at another calling. God does all by his word: and to say a
thing, is too do it with him, and as soon as he says the word, so soon
it is done with him. Saying and doing are two diverse things with us, and
much pain we take to do a thing after it be spoken: but with God it is not
so, but as the Psalm says: Psalm. cxlviii.
he spoke, and al things were made, he commanded, and they were created. Genesis
i.
Moses speaks more plainly in the making of the world and says: God
said, let there be light made, and let there be made the Sun and stars,
beasts and fysshes, and they were made straight ways. So when God brought
Nabuchodonozor to destroy Ier^salem and the country, ^say v.
he said he would call and hysse or whistle him from the North and he should
come: God called and he came. So all other things, drought, hunger, plage
sword, do tarry and wait for Gods c^^linge: and as soon as he whystles, they
come straighte, and nothing dare or can withstand his calling, as David
says, fire, hayle, snow, yse, and tempests which do his commandment.
Seeing therefore his threatninge is not to destroy, but too save and bring us
to repentance, let us turn by time that he be not weary of calling, and
desire him not to order us, according to his justice, but after his endelesse
mercies: for else shall that be true of Solomon, I called, and ye refused, and
therefore I will laugh at your destruction, Pro^ ^.
says the Lord.

"And where God threatens to destroy wheat, The horrible^e^ of this sin not
to build gods bouse is procured by the plages.
wine, oil, all fruits of the earth* and labor of man, yea, man him self, and
beast, for not building his house: Let ^s consider the horrible filthiness of
this sin especially in not buildinge his house, that it will not let any
creature of God serve man, so long as he thus displeases God. This sin does
not only stop the fruits of the earth, but it flies up to heaven, and
locks it up, and so harde^s the clouds that no rain nor dew can be wrong
out to moysten the ground withal. Such is the just judgment of God, that
where God of his mercy made all things in heaven and earth, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Cattle, Fish, foul, corn, herbs and trees, too serve man, (so
that man would serve him reverence, fear and worship him as his only Lord and
God, maker and savior) so when he did disobeye him and served God of his own
devising, Through sin no creature would willingly serve man.
or brake his commandments, he should have those creaturs which God
appointed to serve him at the first, to disobey him, to rebel against him, and
as it were to avenge Gods quarrel upon that man, which disobeyed the living God
their Lord and master, and they would not willingly serve him, which would
not willingly serve and obey their God and king. When Ada^ was in Paradise, as
long as he obeyed God, so long all creatures obeyed him, as apoi^ted of God to
be their lord and ruler, as the Psalm says: Psalm. viii.
you haste made all things subject under his feet, sheep and oxen, and all
beasts of the field, birds of the air, and fishes of the sea: but so soon
as he brake Gods commandment, and eat of the fruit which God forbad him,
all things began to disobey him, and as it were; would avenge that
disobedience done against God their maker.

The earth would not bring forth her good fruit willingly, but weede^s,
bra^ble^ and briars: no kind of beasts would obey him, but waxed wild, and
rebelled against him. The tokens of this just punishment, remains on us to
this day, and shall to the worlds end. The earth will bring forth no good
fruit willingly, but with much labor, toylinge, tillinge, du^ginge,
barowinge, sowinge. etc. as though it should say too man: I will not serve
thee, nor yet willingli give thee any fruit at all. So neither horse, dog, ox,
nor sheep nor any other living thing is tame at the first to obey man, but it
must have many stripes, or it will be brought to any good order to serve him.
And many beasts, as Lions, The disobedience of creatures should remember us
^f our fall, and gods anger toward sin.
Bears, Wolves, be so wild that they will not serve man at all, but still
remain his continual enemies, always ready to devour him. As often as we see
any of these ferce beasts, which are for cruel, we should remember the
first cause why they were so turned, and be so ferce against us: and we
should then lamente our sin, which was the only cause of this so great a
plage and change. God has left them amongst us to be our scholemaisters, that
when we se and consider them to be so ready too take vengeance upon us for
our disobedience to God, we should much more fear God him self which is
a more righteous judge, and both is able, and will punish us more grievously
then they do or can, if we repent not and ask mercy by time. These cruel
beasts are set before us for examples of greater things: that as we fear to
fall intoo the danger of these raueninge beasts* so we should much more
fear too fall into the hands of the almighty and living God, whose anger is
a thousand times more grievous than the cruelnes of any beast. Roma. vii.
And it is not the only with one creature or two that they disdayn to serve
us willingly, but every one as saint Paul says: The creature is subject too
vanity not willingly, but for his cause which has made it subject under
hope. Here we see that no creatur would serve us willingly but for Gods cause
who has so pointed them to do. So that of them selves we can get no profit
nor service of those that have no life without much labor, and taminge them
by strength and violence which have life: yet for the hope they both have to
be delivered from this service, for the time they do obey us according too
Gods ordinance.

Also in the destruction of these his creatures, Gods majesty is declared in
his creatures and saints do not rule them
that they should not serve such evil men, God declares him self not only
(...) be the mighty Lord in making and creatinge them: but also a merciful god
in blessinge them with fruitful increase, when his people served him rightly:
and also a righteous judge in taking them away for our sins, when they be not
so plentiful as they have been to us. For as plenty of them is a token of his
mercy and favor, and that it is he only which regardes, loves, feeds,
noorishes and increases the least creatures which he has made: So the taking
them away, or the baren unfruitfulness of them, is a sign of his anger and
displeasur. It is not as ye commonly say, S. Antonie save my Hog, saint Loy
my Horse, saint Blase my house, saint Appollony help in the tooth ache,
saint Roche for the plage. etc. But he that made all saues all, guides all,
rules all, feeds all, blesses all, and increases all, and takes the^ from us
at his will and pleasure, as Job says: Job. i.
the Lord gave it, the Lord took it away. etc. These were lessons that the
Heathen people and we also might and should have learned by the making and
ruling of ye world, that God did rule all things: and because they did not,
they were iusty punished. Shall then we Christian men think God to be weary of
ruling his creatures, and put them to some Romish saints hands that are more
able and willing to rule the^ better then he can and will? If this were true
saints should be more merciful, able and willing to help, then God him self,
which can do nothing but love, and hates nothing that he made, but so to
think, were most horrible blasphemy against his majesty: for he should be an
evil lord and master, if he so lightly regarded his servant, his creatures
that he would put them too other men's rulinge. God has not left him self
without witnesses, says saint Luke, geuinge rain and fruitful times. As
these works were sufficient witnesses to the Heathen of Gods goodness, Act.
xiii.
and that he ruled all, and that their just condempnation followed, if they
did not believe: So is unseasonable weather, with taking away his fruits,
just tokens of his anger for our sins.

Therefore where we have the same works sufficient witnesses unto us both of
his anger and good will, and also his wonderful works written in the script^^^^
to teach us: what can we say for our selves, if we do not worship him our
only God, sekinge help at his only hand, in whom only it is to be found
and received. God does not only make all things, but rules them also,
according too his good will and pleasure: he is not weary of well doing, but
guydes even the least of his creatures.

Psa. cxlvii.
He makes grass to grow on the hills and herbs to serve men, he gives meat
to the cattle, and to the young ravens, yea, he fedes the birds of the air,
which work not nor spynne, sow, nor mow, reap, nor carry into ye barnes. And
briefly to speak: all things does look, says David, Psalm. cxlv and ciiii.
that thou should give the^ meat in due season: if thou open thy hand and
feed them, they are full of goodness, but if thou withdraw thy hand, they
fall, vade away, perish, and turn into earth, when of they were made. Thus
must al wheat, wine, oil, fruits of the earth, and beasts perish for the
sin of man, and not buildinge Gods house: but they prosper and increase to
them which love him, maintain his true religion, and fear him.

The two last words where he says: Man and al handy labor shall be destroyed
also, they be more notable in the Hebrew,then can be well expressed in one
word in English. For where the Hebrew has diverse words to signify a man,
as Isch, and those be noblemen: Aenosch, Isch. Aenosch
and they be so called of their sorrows and infirmities they be subject to:
Here is written Adam, Adam*
which betokens the common sort of people.

The word that here signifies labor, betokens not every kind of labor, as
that which is easy or for pleasur: but it signifies that labor, which the
poor man does until he be weary, eue^ the vylest and sorest drudginge
labor. None is excused from building gods house.
By the which both we are taught, that God would not spare the simplest
and basest man living, but as they had sinned in not buildinge his house, so
should they perish, least they should think or say: we did not this fault,
but our rulers, or we were not able to take it in hand, or if they had begone
we would have followed, or such like fond excuses. God requires his house to
be builded, his word and religion to be kept and maintained as well of the
lowest as the highest: and they which do not, shall not escape unpunished.
Therefore wicked is that saying: under persecution: let the Preacher stand too
it, what does it belong to me? If the master (...) teach, ought not the
scholar too learn* May the scholar deny or dissemble with God, and the
master must not? What privilege hays the scholar more too do evil than the
master? That is sin to the one and the other. He yt denies me before me^
(says Christ) I will deny him before my father.

Man has this general name given him too be called Adam, of an other Hebrew
word that signifies the earth Adama, which word was placed before when he
said he would destroy all that the earth brings forth: and in latin Man
is also called Homo. ex humo, which allusion and likeness in words, Homo.
we can not well speak in English, but it is as much to say: Man is called
earth, because he is made of earth as Jeremy says: Earth, Ier. xxii. Genesis
xviii.
earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. And Abraham talkinge with the
Aungel of God, and demanding diverse questions said: let not my Lord be greu^^
if I yet once again ask my lord, saying I am earth and ashes. It is
profitable to remember whereof we be.
This should put us in remembrance, that is as often as we hear this name
Ada^, that we are earth and ashes* and are come of the sinful seed of Adam
our first father, who was made of ye earth and for breaking Gods commandment,
returned into earth again from whence he came, as we shall al at our appointed
time. If this were well considered, it would make our proud Peacockes
feathers too fall, when we remember from whence we come, and whither we shall,
and how we be not able too think of our selves a good thought, but that all
our goodness is given us of God, and unto him we be traitors and thieves, if
we be proud of his gifts, and give not him worthy thanks for them, but take
the praise to our selves.

Thus by degrees does God increase his plages, and threatening, not destroying
us at the first, but by layinge on us one little rod at the first, he bids
and warns us to beware of the next, for that will be greater if we amend not,
this he does by his other Prophets also. In Osee he co^pares him self to ye
mothe and Lion in punishing: Osee. v.
for the mothe does not eat up clothes hastily, but by leasur, and by little
and little, but the Lion deuoureth up all at once.

So says God, I will be no more only as a mothe in clothes in punishing you
so gently, and by leisure (for by that gentle kind of punishinge ye wax wors^
(...) worse) but I will come now as a Lio^ and destroy you quickly, for ye
abuse my ge^tlenes, and I can not hold my hands any longer beside you. Lord
soften our har^ hearts, that where we be gilty in the same fault of negligent,
buyldinge thy house, we may hear and fear those great (...) teninges toward
us, we may dri^^^ thee, and obtain mercy for our sins pa^^, and here after
be more diligente too serve thee.

The Text.


Angel.
13 And Aggeus the messenger of the Lord, said in the messages of the Lord to
the people saying: I am with you says the Lord.

Hitherto from the beginning has been nothing but chydinge and threateninge
for their great negligence in buyldinge Gods house: now folowes the profit
and commodity that came by such a sharp kind of rebukinge. They began to
give ear unto it, mark it, and were afraid too hear and consider those
plages, which yet hanged over their heads: they believed those sayings too be
true, which Aggeus said unto them, and they ^eared God. This is ye ordinary
way that God uses to teach by, and which the scripture sets before us to
learn too believe in God and fear him. First, to rebuke sin and declare the
anger of God toward sinners, and preach repentance as Ihon Baptist and our
savior Christ began to preach: Math. iii
Roma. x.
repent the kingdom of God is at hand. Faith comes by hearing, says saint
Paul, and hearing by the word of God: therefore he that will believe, and
have his faith increased, must be diligent in the scriptures, too hear
sermons, and mark what God says unto us there. What maruayl is it if the
Papists have so little faith, seeing they read not the scripture, and hold
opinion that it is not necessary, yea, not to be suffered that the scripture
should be much read or taught but the Popes laws, customs and decr^es. The
whole scripture has these.ii. chief parts, Law. Gospel,
into the which it is divided, the law and the Gospel: the law contaynes
properly the setting forth of sin, threatninges, curses, Gods anger toward
sin^^ remorse of conscience for the same, damnation, hell, despair: the Gospel
contains comfort, hope, forgiveness, mercies in Christ heaven, salvation,
agreement with God. Thus teaches s. Paul saying: Romans iiii.
the law works anger, within a man in conscience toward him self, for
displeasing his (...) God, and also declares what is sin, and the anger and
just judgment of God for sin. By the law comes the knowledge of syn. Again he
says: Romans iii
I had not known coveting, Romans vii.
lusting, and desiring for any unlawful thing to have been sin, except ye law
had said, thou shall not lust nor covet. The gospel is the power of God to save
all that believe in Christ which says: Roma. i.
come to me all ye that labor and are laden, Math. xi.
and I will refreshe you, and thus God loved the world, John. v
that he gave his only begotten son. etc. with many such like promises: as
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, etc. this profit came
here to this people, by preaching the law of God, i. Ioh. ii.
and threatninges unto them, that they which were before so forgetful of their
duties, now hearing the great anger and vengeance of God that hanged over
their heads ready to fall on them, it styrred them up to do their duties and
fear God. Thus may we here se the fond and tender ears of them, which would
not hear nor have the law preached, but all together ye sweet comfortable
promises and mercies in Christ nor can not abide the anger of God, and just
judgment for sin to be taught, saying: it bringes a man into despair, and
that it is not now in the time of grace mete too be preached.

A man as he is made of body and soul, so has he the law given him, Law.
too beat down the lusts of the flesh, and keep him in due fear to his
Lord and God: and least the soul should despair when it co^siders the
greatness of the sin, which ye flesh and mind draws him to, he has the
comfort of Christ offered unto him in ye gospel. Gospel
So least we be proud and forget God we have the law given too set before us,
the righteousness of those things which God requires of us, and our weak
vnable^nes to fulfill the same, and the righteous sentence of death and Gods
anger pro^nounced upon all that fulfill not the same law. Cala. iii.
But least we should despair, (...) have the unspeakable mercies of God
^^^fered unto us in his son, which by his death has conquered death, and
paid the full price for the sins of the whole world. He bids us when we
feel our own weakness and unableness to fulfill his law, to come unto him,
ask help and mercy at his hands, and doubt not thereof, but it shall be
granted. For as we see in judgments here amongst us, there is a royal seat
set where the judge sittes, he that is accused stands at the bar, holds up
his hand, hears his enditement read, witness is brought in against him, and
^^ justly condemned to death: so we shall see Jesus Christ the righteous judge
of the world, that will not be brybed, sit in his seat of majesty at the
last day, and all the company of Angels about him, and we shall stand at
the bar, as accused and en^yted for breakinge that righteous law of his
word: the devil which entised us so to do, shall bear witness that to be
true, yea, and our own conscience also: the fea^ of that fearful sentence (go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, Math. ii.
which is prepared for the Devil and his angels) shall make us to tremble.
And of mercy there is no hope at all, except we do as we read of a woman
which when she stood before Alexander the great, and was condemned, she
said: Alexander.
I appeal from thee o King. Alexander wonderinge at her said: thou art a
mad woman, do thou not know that every appellacion is from a lower judge
to a higher, but who is above me? Then said she: I know thee too be above
thy laws, and that thou may give pardon, and therefore I appeal from justice
to mercy, and for my faults desire pardon.

So we when we look into the righteous law of Gods word, and see him ready
to condemn us, and our conscience witness that we have deserved death: we must
appeal from justice and our deseruings, unto his pardon and forgeuenes, and
both call and trust to be partakers of that salvation, which he has
purchased and offered to the whole world. His mercies do pass all our
miseries, as far as God is greater than man, and his pardon can forgive all
that call on him.

This is not too be lightely considered that it is said: they heard the voice
of the Lord their God, and the word of ^^gues geus the Prophet. What neded
both to have been written, saying they were both one? for the words of
Aggeus were the same that the Lord badde him speak, (...) he has said
diverse times before. He be in this example we shall learn two g^^ lessons:
one for the preacher, and all other for the hearer. The Preacher must (...)
be afraid to rebuke sin, in all (...) and degrees of men, Sin must be
rebuked in all estates.
as here Aggeus did rebuke both Zerubabel the chief civil r^ler in the common
wealth, and Joshua the hye Priest, and chief in religion, and also the whoole
people beside, and threatens the plages indifferentlye to all without any
flattery or respect of person. So do all the Prophets: as Esaye; calls the
rulers fellows with thieves, and princes of Sodom and Gomorrha, Esaias. i.
because they followed their wickedness. And when Achab, a king asked Elias,
iii. king. xvii.
whether it was he that troubled all the country (because it was so long a
droughte, for the space of three years and a half without any rain or dew)
he answered the king boldly and said: nay, it is thou and thy fathers
house yt have pulled this righteous plag^^ ^^on thee and thy whole realm.
Where (...) have sinned, all must be rebuked, for as God a most righteous
Judge will punish all sin, so must his Preachers indifferently warn and
rebuke al sorts of sinners, or else God will require their blud at their hands
if they perish without their warning as Ezechiel says. Ezech. iii.
The hearer must disdain to learn of the simplest preacher that he hears,
as Joshua ye high Priest here does not disdain to hear the rebuking of Aggeus,
being but a poor Leuite and a simple man in comparison of him: no nor yet
Zerubabel the chief ruler, and borne of the stock of Judah the kings stock,
disdaynes him.

If a preacher should rebuke the Pope, Disdain not to hear and learn of the
simplest.
a Cardinal, an Archbishop or Bishop, a Doctor, or a babbler in Divinity,
would they not disdain too hear such simple men? Would they not say as
has been said of late to many when they were examined before Annas and
Cayphas: becomes it thee to speak thus to my Lord Bishop? art thou wyser or
better learned then he? Shall he become thy scholar? Was not the like said to
our Savior Christ: John. xviii.
do thou answer the high Bishop so? What would the Pope or Cardinal
say, if a man should threaten such vengeance of God toward him, as Aggeus
does here to the high Priest?

paul. ii.
Paul the second Pope of that (...) when he had wrongfully taken lande^ ^
offices from diverse, and cast them all (...) prison, and would not hear any
(...) speak for them: At length by much (...) when Platina him self came to
him, (...) could get no help, at the last he (...) of the Pope that he might
be heard and (...) by his own law. Then the (...) lokinge cruelly on him
said: what (...) thou me of the law? do thou not (...) that whatsoever I
say, is law? Am not (...) saint Peter's Uicar, and all laws are (...) in my
breast, and I can not err whatsoever I say? Am I not Pope, and may disanull
the decrees of my predecessors (...) do what me lust? Thus it shall be, thus I
am determined. Thus speak holy Popes when simple men ask their right, or tell
them of any faults: their proud stomachs can not abide too be rebuked of
any man.

Was not this common also in England in the Papists mouths when the Gospel
was preached, to deface the (...) Who are your Preachers now, but yo^g men,
unlearned and not skilled in the Doctors? And who teaches the other old
learning, but my lord Bishop, master Doctor, ancient Batchelers in
Divinity, and prove it by the ancient writers. These are gay glorious words
in deed if they had been true: but although young men did teach, yet their
doctrine was most wholesome and approved by the scriptures and all good
writers, which is most to Gods glory, that opened the mouths of yonglinges,
to confound the dotinge of old fools. Simple men confirmed with their blood
and constant deaths, Papists change wit^ the world.
that which before both master, doctor and my lord Bishop also allowed
and taught with mouth and hands subscribinge, until contrary rulers arose:
but than for flattery and their belly, they destroyed the same with all their
might and power that they taught before.

So when and how often soever ye world shall change the most of the^, as me^
without conscience, will be ready to do the like and make a face as though
they believed the same to be true: but not one of them will adventure his body
to be burned for the dirty dregs of Poperye, and yet are they not ashamed to
teach and maintain the same with fire and swoorde, so long as the world is on
their side. The elder must not disdain to learn and hear his fault of the
younger.
There is scarce a more certain argument of an obstinate Papist, then to look
how simple a man he is that preaches, and not to believe his doctrine for the
simplenes of the man, nor too look at the thing which he teaches how true it
is, and spoken by God. Let all Christians hear and be content^ with Christ's
holy word, as most and only sufficient doctrine to save our souls, and
disdayn none that bringes it, Romans iiii.
be he (...) so simple. Saint Paul says: Christ died for our sins, and
rose for our righteousness: and where this is one of the greatest treasures that
we have by Christ, to be made righteous by him, mark who^ were the first
preachers of it. Mary Magdalene and the other women, Luke xxiiii
which went early in the morning with ointments to the Sepulcher, they se
Christ first of all other after his Resurrection, and were sent to teach it to
the Apostles and Peter. Should we not believe this resurrection, because that
weme^ taught it first? Apollo a mighty learned man in the scriptures,
submitted him self to be further taught in true religion of Priscilla and
Aquila^ simple man and his wife. Act xviii.
Timothy and Ihon the Euangeliste were both very young when they were called
to be preachers. i. Timo. 4.
Peter the elder Apostle is content to be rebuked of Paull his younger. Galath.
ii.
Judith that good woman corrected the Elders, Judith. 8.
Priests and Rulers in Bethulia, mistrusting Gods help and providence for
them, when they would yield up the City.

David a man according to Gods own heart, ii. Reg. xii
hears most willingly the Prophet Nathan rebuke him, 4. Reg. xx
who was of much less estimation then he. And king Ezechias hears Esai
rebuke him of his faults. These and such other examples be written to teach
us, that the elder in what authority so ever he be, or by what name so ever he
be called, should willingly suffer the just rebuke of the younger, bringinge
the word of God for him.

Further where he adds this twyse, saying: the Lord their God, the Lord
their God, it is very comfortable for all sinners that have long lain in
sin, that they should not despair of Gods mercy, but spedely turn by
repentance. The long sufferinge of God is far above our deserts, and had
suffered this people thus long to lie in sin, and yet had not cast them of,
but does vouchesafe to send his Prophet to the^ to rebuke them, and stir them
up to their duties, calling him self their God, Mercy is ready to al repentant.
which had forgotten and forgeuen all their former disobedience, who now was
and would continue their good, gracious and merciful Lord and God still. Who
can despair too obtain grace and pardon for all his great offenses, saying
set before him ye louinge ge^tlenes of our good God and master, which
offers undesired his mercies so ple^tifully, to so hard a hearted and
disobedient people, his free pardon A poena et culpa, from all pain due to
sin or the gylte thereof, which alsoo calls him self their God, and by
continual earnest cryinge of this his Prophet awakes them out of this deadde
sleep of sin, wherein they had lain so long, and left his house vnbuylded.
It is commonly said (says Ieremye) if a man put away^ his wife for
adulterye, Ierem. iii.
will he take her again? yet thou says God to his people, although thou have
played the harlot with many hoores, yet turn unto me, and I will receive thee
again says the Lord thy God. O merciful Lord, praised be thy holy name
for thy gentle offers, and liberal promises offered unto us in thy son
Christ Jesus our Lord. Revel. iii.


Thou stand at the door of our conscience, knockinge too be let in,
offeringe thy self to dwell with us if we would receive thee. There is no time
so long that a man has run from God in, nor any time so short to ask
forgeuenes, but if he will turn, God is ready to forgive him. The Gentiles
had lien in sin above four thousand years from the beginning of the
world to the death of Christ, without any true teachinge or knowledge of
God: and yet when they received the Gospel by the preaching of the Apostles,
they were most gently received of Christ into the number of his people. The
thief hanginge on Christ's right hand on the cross askinge mercy in the hour
of death, obtained it. So that neither the greatness of sin, nor the long
time that man has continued in it, nor the shortness of time to ask
forgeuenes in, can stop the great unspeakable mercies of God, to pardon the
sins of the whole world. Why should we than mistrust the goodness of our God
saying he is the maker of the same law, whereby we shall be judged: and also able
to dispense withal, and pardon the breakers of the same law, if he will: who
also shall be Judge and Executer of the same law as pleases him?

But that the people should rather believe his word, he says the Lord their
God sent him: no strange God, but the mighty God of hosts, and the living
God of Israel: nor he ran not before he was sent, but soberly looked for the
calling of God, and then did his message faithfullye. This is an example for
all ministers too follow, that they do not with bribery or flattery thrust
them selves into any office but patiently tarry the calling of the Lord their
God, which can and will call them at such time as he judges them necessary to
serve him. Ministers must not thrust themselves in office.
Who would be so bold to bye a Benefice, or flatter for a Bishoprike if he
did think them to be offices in Gods house, and that they must make a count to
God for his people. He that comes before he be sent for, oftentimes comes
before he be welcome: and he that climbes in at the wyndowe is a thief, for the
door is made to come in by. But because these Popish prollers, seek not the
profit of the flock, but to fill their bellies, they care not how they come by
it, so they may have it, and think they have done God good service, and the
people well content when they teach them never a word of scripture but have
said Mass, made co^iured water, or song an Antiphone of our Lady. If they
had this true steadfast opinion of God as they ought to have, that he were a
louinge father to his household, and a wise master that could and would set
wise Stuardes over his house, and that whosoever presumed to take any office in
his house uncalled, were a thief, and should be sharpelye punished: A man
could not hire them for money, to take any cure of teaching Gods people until
they were inward moved of God to do it for love to the people, and not for
their own gain. They would also provide to be ordinarely called by man,
least he which should teach and se others keep good order, should be proved
the first breaker of all good laws and orders. If a stranger should
violently thrust in him self to be the Shepeheard of thy sheep, thou would
ask him whoo sent for him, what he had to do there, and thou would rather
think him to be a thief and a murderer of thy Sheep, then a trusty servant:
So surely if thou come to take charge of gods people, before he inwardly move
thy conscience to pity his people, and outwardly by order call and place thee
where he thinks good, he will judge thee a thief, a Wolf, a deuourer, and
not a feeder.

After they heard that the word of God was sent unto them by Aggeus, and had
wayed and considered diligently how true his sayings were, that so many years
they had suffered so great plagues, they began so fear, and believe that
the threateninges folowinge, would alsoo prove true: and than they humbled
them selves in the sight of God, and were afraid in deed.

This profit had they by hearing the word of God, that they knowledged their
own sins, that they had offended the gracious goodness and majesty of God, in
not regardinge his house so many years: and for fear, than they began to
take in hand again that work wherewith they were so straightly charged.

Thus faith comes by hearing the word of God: and by hearing and giving
ear to his threatenings, our slow and sluggishe dulnes is raised up to take in
hand Gods work, and build his house. How necessary fear is, Psalm. cxi.
David teaches saying: fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. So now
when they feared these threatninges, they waxed wise, and turned to the Lord.
Truth it is that the anger of God is not always to be taught, and that it
bringes not a man to perfection: for David calls the fear of the God but the
beginning of wisdom, and not the perfection thereof, and saint Ihon says:
perfect charity castes out fear. i. Ihon iiii
But yet it is the ordinary way to pull down proud stomachs, The Law is to
be preached.
and to bring them to know their own vileness: and it also stirs up
slothful minds to be more diligent to do their duties. Saint Paull says,
the Gala iii.
law is a scholemaster to bring us to Christ that where we see our selves
justly condemned by gods righteous law, and that we be not able to stand in
judgment with him, Job ix.
nor answer one thing for a thousand that shall be laid against us: we
should run to Christ for pardon, co^fessinge our faults and ask mercy.
Thus they had the right use of the law, not bringinge them too despair with
all these threateninges, but comfortinge the^ to go to God and confess their
sins, and hope for merci in Christ. Fear goes before, and love folowe^
Saint Augustine compares fear to the bristel, which is on the shomakers
third, the bristle goes through the hole first, but it draws alonge and a
strong thread after it: so the fear of gods vengeance first goes before,
and throws down a man in his own sight, and then follows the long thread of
gods mercies in Christ offered too the hole world.

The scripture teaches two sorts of fear: The one which is godly when we
fear our God with love and reverence, and would not displease him for the
love we bear him: and this remains for ever, as David says. Psalm. xix. Fear
for love, and fear to escape pain.
The holy fear of the Lord continues for ever. On other kind of fear is, not
to do well for the love of God and goodness it self: but that we may escape
punishment, as the thief will not steal, not for love of any righteousness or
reverence to God, but to escape the galowes. This is that fear which can not
stand with perfect charity, but (...) cast out. Fear in a man's mind is like
to the thunder in the air: Fear is like the thunder.
For as when the air is covered with clouds, the Sun darkened, tempests
begin too arise, lighteninges and fyr^ fly from heaven, rumblinge and noise is
in the air, the clouds burstes, and the thu^der crack comes, ye rain
falls, and straight folowes Sun shine and fair weather: So when a man for
fear of his sins, in conscience lies flat down in the sight of God,
confessinge his sin, as one oppressed with the burden and vylenes thereof,
complains to God, accuses him self, gr^nes, sobbes, and sighs like the
thunder crack, dare not look up toward hea^^^ for his wickedness, but
condemns him self, at the last, burstes out on wepinge, and the tears like
rayn drops come tricklinge down his cheeks: straighte ways folowes
quietness of mind, God offers him pardon and clerenes of conscience, with
wondering and praysinge the unspeakable goodness of God for his mercies and
comfort in Christ his son offered to such and troubled conscience.

In the latter verse is first declared the worthiness, authority, hye title and
rule given to the preachers, for the commendation of their office. Aggeus here
is called ye Angel of the Lord, as some in English do translate it, or the
messenger, or Ambassador, which signify all one thing unto: us. So these
names with such like are given to preachers in ye scriptur, to set forth the
highness of their vocation and authority that God calls them to. The worldly
wise men considering the decay of the living of Bishops and Priests,
Worldlines decays the mynistery.
and that they be not so much esteemed and as wealthye as when they were
loytering, lordely, unpreaching Prelates, and ruled all, would say: Shall I
make my son a minister, and when I have spente all that I have on him, he
shall neither be able too help my other children, nor yet scarce able too
live him self, but shall be disdayned of all sorts of men, and if he
preach the truth, he shall be in ieopardye of his life. Or shall I marry my
daughter to a priest? with such like uncomely sayings: nay I trow not,
there is more profit by the law or Physic, yea, if he be but a penclarke,
an Auditoure or Deceiuer. I will provide for him better any of these ways. The
goods of the Church are the (...) of the poor: woo therefore be to them (...)
rob the church so by impropriacio^s, th^^ neither the minister nor the poor
can he releued. For by that means, the necess^^^ food of the preacher is
given to idle b^^lyes: and these worldlinges declare them selves too desire
nothing but worldely^ wealth, in thus doing, or so saying. But i^ they mark
this and other places of the scriptures, and would have their children made
worshipful, they shall find mo worshipful names given too the preachinge
minister, The preachers office is worshipful.
then to any one forte of men.

The noblest creatures that God has made, be the heavenly spirits and
Angels, which be always in heaven, most happy for the continual beholdinge
of his glory, and for their office sake are chose^ and called Angels, because
they be sent on his message, and do most willingly (...) at his commandment.
Aungel.
This word Angel betokens not the substance of the creature, but the
office: and is a Greek word, signifyinge a messenger, or E^bassadour, this
name: Angel was commonly used to be given to these heavenly messengers, whom
God se^des his message from his holy place of majesty: as Gabriel the Angel
was sent to the virgin Marye, and other to Joseph, Daniel, Moises, etc. This
name is also given to the preachers for the heavenly comfort that they bring to
man from God, whose messengers they be. Preachers be angels.


In the Revelation of saint Ihon writes to the seven aungls, Reave. i.ii.
that is to say to the seven ministers of the seven congregagations or
^hurches in Asia. Ihon Beptist was called the aungel of the Lord or
Ambassador sent to prepare his ways. Mark. i.
And whom do kings use to send Ambassadors, but such as be faithful and
trusty whom they love, and to whom they dare commit secret and waightye
matters unto? What can be more worshipful, then to be Gods Ambassador, and in
such trust with him, that God will vouchesafe too send him on his message.

Saint Paul desires the Ephesians to pray for him, Fphe. vi.
that he might have vtteraunce given him to speak and preach the Gospel
freelye, for the which he was sent Embassadoure.ii. Corinthians. v. he says
his Embassage stood chiefelye in this point to reconsile us to God. Is not ye
Stuardes office an high office, and of greatest credit in great men's houses,
Stuardes.
and at their commandment and appointinge all things be done? They provide
and give all in their masters house, meat in due season. etc. Saint Paul
therefore says: let a man think thus of us that we be the servants of God
and Stuardes of his secret mysteries, i. Corin iiii.
which be meat for (...) souls. Saint Matthew in a parable calls the
preachers Stuardes, Math. xxiiii.
appointed (...) Gods house, to give their fellow servants meat in due season.
Saint Mark called them porters in Gods house, Mark. xiii.
having in ^^^maundement too watch that no thieves nor unruly persons come
in too trouble the house. Porters.


They be called the light of the world to lead other the right way: Light,
Salt.
they be the salt of the earth to season us that by corruption we do not smell
evil before God: They be Gods soldiers to fight for his people, Math. v.
as s. Paul sais. No man goes to war on his own wages. They be watchemen to
give warning when ennemies come. watchmen.
They be Dogs to bark and awake us out of our deadly sleep when we forget
God. Dogs.
They be the mouth of God, that where we were not able too stand in the
sight of God, Esaias. lvi.
if he should speak unto us in his glorious majesty: he does vouchesafe to
speak unto us by the mouth of his minister, being a man as we be, and whom
we should believe to be sent from God as long as he teaches Christ and his
word. These names of trust and credit are given to preachers for the
comme^dation and settinge forth of their office, which they bear in Gods
house, and that they should not think it a vile, but a most worshipful
room. And to make them more regarded, the Lord countes those injuries done
to him self, which be done to his preachers saying: he that despises you,
despises me, Matthew.
and in what rowme soever ye come, if they will not receive you, shake the dust
of your feet, and it shall hear witness against them in the day of
judgment.

And because he ioynes too the next saying: In the messages of ye Lord: it
does" us to weete, the faithfulness of this Prophet in his duty yt he spekes
nothing* but the words of ye Lord truly, which sent him, which rule al true
preachers should follow. But of this is enough spoken in the verses before. Now
folowes the glad tidings of the Gospel to comfort this people with all after the
great threateni^gs of God, which the Prophet here pronounced in the former
verses, For as God works in his creaturs that after winter comes summer, and
after a storm fair weather: So in ye spiritual doctrine of our souls, first he
teaches repe^ta^ce preaches ye law, threate^s ve^geau^ce for sin, castes down
man in his own sight, and lettes him look even into hell with fear of
conscience for his disobedience: but afterward he comforts him, rayses him
up, and heales him, that this may be found true that is said of our savior
Christ: I came not to call the righteous, Math ix.
but sinners to repentance: The law is first to be taught and then the
gospel.
and they that be whole need not the Physician, but the sick.

All the Prophets use the same trade in teachinge, as Esays in his first
Chapter calls the Jews worse then beasts: for the Ox would know his
master, and the Ass his master ma^ger, but they would not know their God.
And the rulers he calls the princes of Sodom, and fellows with theefes.

Jonas also in the beginning of his prophecy says: within.xl. days Niniue
shall be destroyed: Sophones first words be that God will destroy man, beast,
fool, corn and fruit of the earth: but afterward every one of them
prophecies of Christ, promises blessinge from God, with increase of all wealth
and goodness. Likewise Ihon Baptiste began his preaching: repent, for the
kingedome of heaven is at hand. Math. i i.
And our savior Christ began his preachinge with the self same words.
Peter in his first sermon, after they received the holy Ghost, rebuked the
Jews sharply for crucifyinge Christ the geuer of life, Acts. iii.
and for askinge Barrabas a murderer to be delivered unto them: but when their
conscience pricked them, they asked what they should do, and he comfortes
them, biddes them repent, and be baptized every one of them in the name of
Christ. So here, after the sharp preaching of the law, and threateninge of
Gods plages, follows the sweet comfort of the Gospel, for he says: I am
with you says the Lord, as though he should say, let" nothing grieve
you, neither the greatness of the sin, that ye have been so neglige^te in
forgettinge the buildinge of this house so long, nor the great cost, as
though ye were not able to bear and perform it, nor be not afraid of the
kings officers which stopped you, for I am with you (says the Lord) whose
power they can not withsta^de, whose mercy passes your misery, and who can
pardon and forgive more than you can sin, and who shall be judge of your
doings, and am able too forgive all things trespassed against me. All the
riches of the earth is mine, and I bestow it as pleases me: the hearts of
kings and rulers be in my hand, and I rule them as I think good, when I will
they shall show you favor and friendship, and when they lust they shall not
stop, hurt, nor hinder my work, according to their desire or pleasure as
much as they would: but those that fear and love me, I will bless, and they
shall not have any harm, and my works shall prosper and go forwards in
their hands as I think good* in despite of all their foes, therefore let
nothing fear nor trouble you: for I whom all things do obey, am with you
says the Lord. These are but few words in number, but they are mighty in
operation and working, where they be received with an earnest faith: and so
mighty that whosoever hears and beleues them to be spoken of God, is not
afraid too attempt any thing, be it never so great and hard.

When Jacob was doubting and afraid, whether he should go into Egypt too his
son Joseph or no, Gene. xlvi.
God spoke too him and said: Jacob be not afraid, for I will go down into
Egypt with thee, and I will bring thee out again also. Then Jacob fearinge
neither the death of his son Joseph, Gods help promised stireth us up to
enterprise great things
nor the displeasure that might come to him and his, if either he or yet
Joseph offended the king, nor yet least Joseph should lose his authority by a
new king, as it is commonly seen, nor the ieopardy of the iourneye, no nor yet
any other worldly thing yt could or might chance, but went into Egipte
boldly with all his children and substance, and was defended by God. When
Moises keeping sheep, saw the fire in the bushe, Exodus iiii.
and God said unto him, that he would send him to king Pharao to deliver
his people, he was afraid and merueyled y^, he being but a shepeheard, should
be sent on such a message, to so mighty a prince. But after that God had
promised him that he would be with him, he was encouraged, and took in hand
to go to Pharao, on his embassage, and to lead Gods people out of Egypt. Judge.
vi.
When God sent his Angel too Gedeon threashing his corn, and said he should
deliver the people from their enemies, which invaded their country, and lay
as thick in number as Greshoppers do in the field: Gedeon doubted at the
matter, until such time as God said unto him that he would be with him. And
after trial of his faith in ye promise made unto him, he durst, with.100.
naked men, having no weapons, but earthen pottes, a fire bra^d, and horns in
their hands, set on their enemies which fled all away, as soon as they
heard the p^t sheardes knocked together.

Our savior Christ after his Ascencion, Math. xxviii^
sending his Apostles into ye whole world to preach and baptize, adds no
greater thing to comfort them with all in this great and dangerous
enterprise, that so few unlearned men should conquer the whole world, but
says: behold I am with you, even too the end of the world.

What good success their preachinge had, we at this present day yet feel and
see: and also how he is present always with his, even too the end: and how
true his prayer is, that he did not pray only for his Apostles, John. xvii.
but for all yt should believe on him by their preachinge. Wha^ saint Paul
says that he was persuaded, Romans viii.
that neither nakedness, prison, hunger, persecution, nor life: neither death,
angels, Acts. xvii.
nor powers could pull him from the love in Christ Jesus: He had nothing is
strengthen him self withal, but that God promised that he was with him, and
then he boldly said: if God be with us, whoo can be against us? All be but
dust, worms and vylenes in his sight: nothing can prevail against those,
whom he does assist with his grace.

Therefore when we doubt to take in hand any good work, which agrees with
the word of God, for any worldly reasons or carnal fear: let us stir up
our faith, and hear God speaking and saying unto us: I am with you, be ye not
afraid. If thy conscience bear thee sure witness that thou sekest nothing but
the glory of God, and the profit of his people: no doubt God will asist thee
in such enterprises, and offers this his promise to thee also, saying: I am
with thee, be not afraid, but go on forwards, and I will bless thy doings,
seem it never so hard or impossible to thee.

The text


In the.xxiiij. day of the sixth month in the second year of king Darius.

This is a notable Metaphore, and worthily sets forth the nature of sin in
that he says, the Lord waked up the spirit of all this people: for sin is
a sleep of the soul, having no fear nor feling of God, so long as a man lies
in it. It is now time says saint Paul to awake out of sleep, Roma. xiii
meaning sin. God in his word, by such outward bodily things declares unto
us the nature of spiritual things, Sin is a sleep and death of the Soul.
both good and evil, As the dead body lies rottinge and stinking in the grave
fearful to look on, and grievous too remember: so when we lie buried in
sin, we stink in the sight of God, he can not abide to look at us, nor will
remember us. And as we, when the body lies on sleep in the bed (which is an
image of our grave) can neither se, feel hear, taste, smell, understand, nor
yet move out of ye place, until we be awaked, nor can take any pleasure at al
in any one creature of God: So when we lie walowinge in sin, we neither see
the majesty of God, with the eyes of our faith, nor feel his mercies
offered unto us in his dear son and our only Savior Christ Jesus, nor
yet can we taste at al how sweet the Lord is.

Our ears are stopped from hearing good counsayll, we perceive nothing at
all of Gods goodness toward us, his word is not sauery unto us, neither yet be
we moved or stirred up too do any one good work of charity. But now it
pleased the Lord, pitying their misery, too wake them up out of this dead
sleep, and set them in hand with buylding of his house again.

But where he had preached too them both the law and the gospel, threatenings
and co^fortes with the plages, they were moved to nothing but fear as is said
in the verses before: but after they heard the glad tidinges of the gospel
that God promised to be with them: then they were awaked out of their sleep,
and wroughte lustely. The law kills, the Gospel quickens.
So it is the gospel that quickenes and geues life: but the law kylles,
fears, and threatens. For as after sleep the body, being awaked, it is
fresh, lustye, strong, and courageous to do his work: so after the fearful
threatninges of ye law when we hear the glad tidinges of the gospel (that
God will be our Lord and dwell with us) the mind is comforted, strengthened,
and moved up to do his duty. And as a man is judged too be wakinge when he
can do the office of a man, as talk, work, write, or such like: so is
manne awaked out of the sleep of sins, when he lives in charity, fears God,
and walks according to his law in his vocation.

Further as when a man lies in his dead sleep, he can not awake except some
noise awaken him, or some other call him: (...) can we not arise out of sin,
except the spirit of God or his preacher, which is his watcheman, with often
cryinge unto us, awake us. Cry therefore, and fear not says Esaye the
prophet, Esaias. lviii,
lift up thy voice like a trumpette, and tell my people their wickedness. So
that it is the trumpet of Gods word continually sounding in our ears,
which is the only way too awake us out of this sinful sleep. But the
Papists turn thorder and say, cease and cry not, hold thee peace and sai
naught, live in rest and be still, and so let all go to hauoc, and the people
perish.

Thus we may learn here the necessity of preaching, and what inconuenie^ce
folowes where it is not used. Where preachinge fayles says Solomon, the
people perish: Pro. xxix.
therefore let every man keep him self in Gods schoolehouse, and learn his
lesson diligently, Preching is most necessary. Math. iiii.
for as the body is norisshed with meat, so is the soul with the word of
God, as saint Matthew says: A man does not live by bread only, but in every
word that comes from ye mouth of God. This is then the ordinary way to keep
us in the fear of God, and continual remembrance of the last day: often and
diligently to read and hear Gods word preached unto us: for that is it which
does and will kill sin in us, as it is written: Eccle. vii.
remember the last end, and thou will not sin.

Faith is kept and increased by the same means that it is gotten: Roma. x.
it is gotten by hearing, and hearing comes of the word: let us therefore hear
and read it dilige^tli. What is the cause that the Papists lie so sound on
sleep in their abhominatio^s but that they care not for preachinge, nor think
it so necessary, and because they would not be told of their faults, that
they might amend them? Where sin is not rebuked, it is not known to be
sin: nor it will not be amended, without much cryinge on. David the good king
and true Prophet of God, after he had gotten with child Urias wife, could
not awake out of that sleep of sin, until he was warned by the Prophet
Nathan, notwithstanding all and singular such great gifts, which God has
endued him with all, but invented one policy after another to cloak his
whoredom and noughtines withal. First he sends for Urias home, being his
faithful soldier in his wars, ii. king. xii.
willinge him to go home too his wife, thynkinge that if he had lain by her,
the child might have been called his. But when he saw that Urias would not go
home too his wife, he devised to send him with letters unto Ioab the captain,
that he should be set in the fore frount, when the town should be essaulted,
and that his fellows should flee from him, that he might be slain. This
policy David wroughte so priuelye, that he thought no man should epsy it:
for who durst open the kings letters? But at length comes Nathan the
Prophet, and tells him a parable, how there was a rich man that had many
sheep, and a poor man his neighbor had but one, which he loved most
dearly: the rich man took this one sheep from the poor man, and Nathan asked
what this man had deserved. Then answered David in anger and said, he
deserved death: then said Nathan, thou have given a very good sentence, it is
eue^ thou thy self that haste done this deed, thou shall dye. For thou haste
many wives, and could not be content with them, but have taken thy poor
neighbors Urias wife. Then cried David: I have sinned, and made that worthy
Psalm fifty and one: O God have mercy on me, according to thy great mercy,
and according to thy many mercies wash away my wickedness. And yet more
wash me from my wickedness. etc. But before Nathan came, he lay without
feelinge of his sin, or yet any remorse of conscience at all knowinge that
he had done evil.

So when the good king Ezechias, being restoreo to his former health, iiii.
Kin. xxii.
had letten the Ambassadors of the king of Babel, which came to rejoice
for his recouerye, see all his treasure and jewels, being very proud of them:
Esaye the Prophet comes unto him, and asks what they had seen, he told
him: well (says Esaye) even from thence a king shall come to rob and spoil
all these treasurs that thou have ben proud of. Than the king knowledged his
fault, but not before he was rebuked by the Prophet. Peter, Galath. ii.
until he was rebuked of Paul for his dissimulation with the Gentiles, did
not leave it.

Ioas was a good king as long as Ioiada the high priest lived, ii, Chro.
xiiii.
for he followed his good counsel: but after he fell from God, when he would
hear no good counsel at all.

Thus we see how necessari it is for us to be kept in Gods school, and hear
the trumpet of his word soundinge continually in our ears, to awake us up
out of this deadly sleep of sin, and stir us forward to a diligent doing
of our duties.

What a pride is this for us, to think so highly of our selves, that we be so
far more holy, strong, wise, learned, more able to stand, then these good
men were: and that we need not such continual teachinge and counsel, but
that we may well enough want it. These men fell when they heard not the voice
of the Prophets: and yet we that are not so much worthy as once to be
compared unto them in the gifts of God, think we shall stand of our selves.

Many will say, what should I do at the sermon? To hear preaching all men
ought.
I know as much before I go, as I shall learn there, I can read the
scripture at home, and comfort my self sufficiently. These are better then
they, that will neither hear nor read, but say: I know there is no more but
do well, and have well. I know this is all that can be said: love God above
all things, and thy neighbor as thy self. I can say my Pater noster and my
Creed, as well as he: and further I know yt in the one is contained all
things necessary to be asked at Gods hand, and in the other all that is to
be believed: and what can or should a man have more than this? These sayings,
although they be true, yet are they most brutishe, and nothing else in very
deed, but noughtye excuses to cloak our slouthful wickedness withal: and
signify plain that we would not in any wise have preachinge, because we
would not hear our faults rebuked, nor yet our minds exercised in
meditation of God and his goodness, of our own sin and misery. Philip. iii.
Saint Paul to the Philippians says: that he was not ashamed to write one
thing often to the^, Math, xxv
and it was for their safetye. The parable of the.v. foolish virgins and
the.v. wise, teaches plainly that both the wise and the foolish did both
nap, slumber, yea, and fall hard on sleep: where in is set before us all our
natures, whether we be foolish or wise (we fall on sleep forgetting God, when
we should watch for his coming, though we think never so hyghly of our
selves) if we have not the light and burning lamp of Gods eternal word,
burning in our hearts.

What a foolishnes is it to think yt we can or shall stand, where as every
one has fallen that is gone before us? or that we shall escape, where every
one else has been taken?

There is not the best learned man, but he needs often too hear the
preachinges and counsel of others, although he can comfort him self in his
private studies, and in readinge the scriptures never so well. For as the
Physician when he is sick, can not heal him self, nor has not his
judgment so perfectelye as he had before he was sick, but seeks help
at an other Phisicions hand: So^ the learned man living, as long as he
lives, and bears sinful flesh about with him, shall have sinful and
fro^warde lusts and affections rayninge (...) him, which blyndeth his sight,
that he ^eeth not his own sins, until he be warned of them by others.

^
Saint Peter says he would put them in remembrance of their duty, as long
as he lived, although they knew it well. What should move Paul so often and
so earnestly to write unto Timothee and to Titus, i Tim. iiii. Titus iii.
having such worthy gifts as they had, if they need not to be warned of their
duties? For what cause should either David have had ye Prophet of God Natha^,
sent of God him self unto him, ^ King. xii
or yet Ezechias the prophet Esaye, either the Apostles to be sent forth by
couples together, Acts* xv.
or yet to mete in counsayll at Jerusalem, and there to decree hard matters, if
one should not learn at an other?

And mark here that he says, all were fallen on sleep, and lay still on
sleep, until the Lord awaked them up by this his prophet Aggeus: both
Zerubabel the prince and chief ruler in the common wealth* Joshua the hye
priest and chief in religion, and all the people also: not so much as one
from the highest to the lowest that did his duty here in, but were all fallen
on sleep. What would the Pope say, The Pope erres.
if a man should tell him he were on sleep, and fallen from God? Would he not
straight ways rage, freat and fume, and say that he was Gods Uicar, or at
least Peter's successoure here in earth, and that he could not err, but every
thing which he did or said, was both good and also godly? Surely this high
Priest, otherwise a very good man, bearinge the figure of Christ, and much
commended in Zachary the prophet, and having his authority given him of
God, and coming unto it by discente also, according to the law of Moses,
had thus foulye fallen on sleep, and forgotten God: and shall we think that
the Pope living in the puddle of sin, given too follow all pleasure, and
vsurpinge authority against God and his saints, can not do or say amiss?

And as I noted before, so it is not too be lightly considered, that where so
often the Prophet here rehearses the names of Zerubabel and Joshua the two
chiefest rulers: The civil ruler is above the Priests.
yet he evermore sets in order the civil Magistrate and power, before ye
chief priest, to signify the preeminence and preferment that he has in the
common wealth, and other matters more the^ ye chief priest, by what name so
ever he be called, whether he be the Poope, Archbishop, or Metropolitan.

When they were thus awaked, they went and wrought in the house of ye Lord
their God. They that buyld not the Lords house, sleep in sin.
This is a sure argument, that a man is awaked and not still on sleep, when he
can and will go work about his business. It is not enough to say, he is
awaked and will work, but to work in deed. So differs the hypocrite and
dissembler from the true charitable man: that the one has noothinge but
fair glosing words, and the other as often as he has occasion offered, does
it in deed, without boastinge or crakinge of it: For he that does not work
in very deed, is on sleep still, what fair face so ever he make on it.
Math. vii and.xx^.
The gospel says playnelye that by their fruits ye shall know them. And the
two sons, whereof the one, when his father bad him go work in his
Uyneyarde, said he would and did not, the other said nay and went, only
he that wrought did his fathers will: So only be they awaked, which work in the
lords house: the other either slumber, dream, or else be hard on sleep, an
do not their due work in buyldinge the house of the Lord our good God.

When they began to lay the foundation of this temple, the people of the
country, which were placed there by Salmanasar, would have helped them to
build, and said they worshipped the same God that they did (because they
perceived that the good king Cyrus favored them at that present) but after
that Assuerus the next king folowinge, iiii. Kin. xviii.
had stopped them from buildinge any more, they were most earnestly against
them.

The good men that were amongst them, perceived their dissembling, and would
not suffer them to work with them: So many amongst us, which be papists in
deed, when they see that they shall please the rulers, will cry most
earnestly for the buyldinge of Gods house, and prete^de as though they would
work most stoutly: but if they se the world turn, they will be the first and
most earnest destroiers of the same. Such false brethren must be most
diligently taken head of, and not be suffered to join them selves with the true
work men, least they betraye all the good, as we both feel and see our
Papists to have done, to the slander of God and his word, our hurt and shame.
Saint Paul tells often how great dangers he was in: ^i. Cor. ii
but he complains of none more tha^ of false brethren, which make a show of
godliness, and yet are most wicked within, even very Wolves in Lambs skynnes.

But these men after they were thus awaked, by the preaching of Aggeus, went
and wrought, now no longer about their own houses, as before seking their
own profit and commodity: but in the house of the Lord of hosts, whose
power now they feared, and mighty hand they had felt so long, and yet not
worthily regarded the heaviness of his displeasur, nor his great plages that he
had laid upon them so many years. It was noted in the verses before, why God
is called the Lord of hosts, which is for the great, mighty, sundry, and
diverse ways, that he has conquered and uses to conquer, those which rebel
against him? This is the strength and power that comes by the word of God:
that where it is diligently heard, Preaching^ makes us new me^ and of coward^
(...)
and faithfully believed, it makes us altogether new me^, of loiterers workers,
and all together lustye and courageous, and afraid of no displeasure, so that
we may work in the Lords house.

If we mark in what sort and case these people were, we shall better perceive
what effect this little short preaching took in the^. They had lien many
years, not regardinge the building of Gods house, for fear of the kings
displeasure, who had commanded the rulers in the country too stop ye buylding
of that house: but now partly for fear of the plages, which the mighty Lord
of hosts had threatened too lay on them, and chiefly that God had promised
that he would be with them: they were so stirred up yt they regarded not now,
their own gain and pleasure, nor they feared not the Kings officers
displeasure, which had forbidden them to build any more: but straight without
sui^g for a new commission, or license of the king, or speaki^g with the kings
officers, they set up their work, knowgi^ yt he which promised, would be with
them, and that they should prosper well in it, for he was able and would
perform it. In Esdras it appears what bold answer they make when the kings
officers asked them by what authority they began to renew their old work,
Esdre. v
and that letters were sent to king Darius, to know whether they should be
suffered to go forward in their buylding or not. But God so moved the kings
heart, that he gave the^ not only liberty to build, but money alsoo to do it
with all: and by the strength of God, they had not only given the enterprise,
but also went forward in their building, askinge no license at all of any
man, before they were complained on.

This strength has Gods word when it is worthelye received, that it makes a
man to forget his own profit, yea lands wife, children, goods and life, and
ma^fully to bear death, pryione, fire, and displeasure of princes, so that he
may do his duty to his Lord God, and escape his displeasure. Peter, who
denied his master at the voice af a handmayde, after he had received the holy
Ghost, was bold to confess him before lords and princes, even to the death.

Acts ix.
Paul in furious rage of his persecution was stricken down, and of a wolf rose
up a lamb. John iii and xix:
Nicodemus, that before durst not be known to be Christ's disciple or bear him
any good will: after durst ask the body of Pylate, and bou^dly buried it. Thus
where true faith is given to God, commaundinge any thing to be don, or to the
preachinge of his word: it makes of haters lovers, of fearful bold, of
persecuters preachers, and does wholye change the nature of man, Psalm. xix
as David says: The law of the Lord is without spot, turninge the minds of
men. This was neither treason nor rebellion against the king to do that which
God by his prophet so straightly commanded, as was declared and noted before:
but they were rather traitors to God, that had not of so many years gone
more earnestly about that buildinge of Gods house, as God willed them to do.

And where he calls God their God, yet after so great and long disobedience:"
it commendes unto us the long suffering and merciful goodness of our God, that
will not forsake us for a fault or two, nor in a year or two, God is long
suffering.
but continually bears with us, calling us to him by all means possible, and
would not one of the least too perish. All the day long says God by his
prophet Esaias, Esaias lxv.
I have stretched out my hands to a people yt speaks against me, and
faytheles. But of this is enough spoken before.

And where he adds this and says: they went and wrought in the Lords house,
the.xxiiii. day of the.vi. month, and the* same second year of Darius: it
teaches us the earnestnes of them toward their work, now after they were
thus awaked and sturred up out of their sleep. They had but three wekes
and.iii. days, both to hear this preaching of Aggeus, and to make ready
their tools to work withal: which time had been little enough to have
prepared their tools in, although they had not had any other business too
have been occupied withal. The prophet was sent from God the first day of
the.vi. month, as appears in the first verse, and now the.xxiiii. day of
the same month, they began to renew their work with a lusty courage: so the
whole time both too hear the preaching, and prepare all things necessary.
For their great work, was but three weeks and three days. So earnestly
does true ^aithe work, Faithful love seeks no delays.
where God is truly feared, and his commandment reverently obeyed: that they
can not be quiet until they have done that which God commaundes. There is
nothing now that can hinder them from this work, neither the fear of the
kings displeasure, nor the costlines of the great work nor the gredines of
their own profit, which they sought so much before, neither the greatness of
their disobedience in so long forgetting their lord God: but with one mind
and courage they set up this great costly work, manfully continuinge in it,
and happily finish it in. 4. years space, notwithstanding the great lets,
hinderaunce and accusations that were made against them to the king, and
other diverse ways many. This promise that God had made the^ that he would be
with them, had so encouraged them, ye nothing could stop them from their
work, but as David goinge to fight with Golias, i. King. xvii.
was not afraid of al his strength, harnes, nor yet his power and might, but
said: thou come against me, trustinge in thine own strength, and I come
to fight with thee with this little slinge and few stoones in the name of the
living God of Israel: so they were bold in him only to set on this great
work.

If they were thus sturred up by this little preaching: what dulnes shall we
think too be in our selves, that after such continual cryinge and calling
can not be awaked to do our duties? Is it any maruayle that God does so often
and so greuouslye plague us, saying we should without all excuses do it,
which he commands us: and yet in so long time we can not be brought too
fear him as we should do. We may also learn what a treasure it is to have
Gods word amongst us (saying it is the ordinary way that he has ordained to
bring us unto him by) and what a grefe it is too want the continual preachinge
of the same: Scripture is necessary for all men and no cause of evil.
and also the wickedness of the Papists that thus do rob the people of it,
and would make them to believe that it were not necessary for the^, but bringes
them in to heresies, and that it is the mother of all heresy and mischief and
that there was never good world since the scripture was in English, with such
like blasphemies.

But if we mark the scriptur thoroughly in all ages, we shall find y^ in good
kings days, which maintained Gods word and his true religion, as David,
Solomon, Iosaphat, Ioas, Ezechias, Josias, in Judah only there was more plenty
of all worldly blessings, then there was in all Israel beside, where as the
scripture was not regarded. Again if ye mark well all the ancient heretics,
eue^ from the beginning, as Arrius, Pelagius, Uale^tinus, Marcio^, Sabellius,
Donatus, Eutyches. etc. You shall find none at all or very few that were
unlearned, but all for the most part were great clerks: and by this reason
the^ the learned rather then ye unlearned should be kept from the scriptures, if
reading the scripture make heretics. For men fail chiefly into heresies, when
they trust too their own wits and learning, forsakinge or not submitting
their wits unto gods wisdom, contained in his infallible word and truth. If
they will let the people hear the scripture in sermons, I can not tell why
they should not be suffered to read it. Why should rather heresy come by
readinge then by hearing? Nay, this is their meaning, they would have no
preachinge, nor yet readinge, sauinge of their dirty dragges of popery, which
maintains their idle lordelines: where as the scripture sets out their
wickedness, which they will not have known, nor yet once touched. The Lord
for his mercy sake defend us from their tira^ny. Amen.

A prayer.
MOst mighty Lord and merciful father, which did stir up the Jews too the
buyldinge of thy house by the preachinge of thy Prophet Aggeus: we thy
miserable creatures, oppressed with sin, and living in blindenes, beseech
thee for thy mercy sake have mercy upon us and thrust out dilligent work men
intoo thy harvest, send out faithful preachers, which may by the hard
threateninges of thy law, and comfortable promises of thy gospel, awake all
thy people out of their dead sleep, wherein they lie walowing, forgetting thee
and their duty. We have all sinned from the highest to the lowest, in not
earnestly professinge thy holy word and religion. Both the princes, rulers,
and magistrates, bisshops, ministers of all sorts, and all ye people, no state
nor condition of men has done their duty herein unto thee our only Lord
and God, Therefore we all with heavy hearts fall down flat before thy throne of
grace and majesty we beg, crave and ask thee forgeuenes of our great
sins: open our eyes O good God, that we may consider the plagues, which
thou haste laid on us so long for our great disobedience toward thee and
thy word. Give us new hearts, and renew thy holy spirit wtin us O Lord,
that both the rulers may faithfully minister justice, punish sin, defend
and maintain the preachinge of thy word, and that all ministers may
diligently teach thy dearly beloved flock purchased by the blood and death
of thine own and only dear son our Lord, and that all people may
obediently learn and follow thy law, too the glory of thy holy name, for
Christ's sake our only Lord and Savior.

The.ii. Chapter.
IN the.vii. month and the.xxi day of the month, was the word of the Lord
sent by the hand of Aggeus the Prophet saying: The Text
the remnaunte of the people saying.



As concerning the rekening of years, months, and days enough was spoken in
the first chapter: and what it is too be sent by the hand of a Prophet, who
so lust, there he may read. This message sent now in the.7. month, and the
next that comes in the.9. declare the good will of God toward the^ that
build his house and how ready God is to further all their doings. They began
to work the.xxiiii. day of the sixth month, and had continued to the.21. day
of the.7. month, and then least the fear of the king or the rulers should
discourage them, they had need to be comforted: therefore Aggeus is sent unto
them again too encourage them, least they should have fainted or left of
workinge. Again in the.8. month is the Prophet Zachary sent unto them, and
in the.9. month Aggeus is sent twice, God sende^ preachers to them that serve
him*
and all because they should not let their work slip, but with a courage
finish it: and that also they might see how true it is, that to every one that
has, it shall be given, and for them, which work courageously in the Lords
vyneyarde, how well the Lord is delited with them and blesses them. Thus God
knowinge the weakness of this people, every mooneth sendes new messages unto
them, that they may understand what a care he has over them: and that they
should trust in him, which had al things in his hands to rule at his
pleasure, and not to trust in them selves, which of them selves could do
nothing. Let us therefore work in the Lords house and no doubt he will send us
comfoorte enough.

Now where he is bidden speak to Zerubabel the prince, to Joshua the chief
Priest, and to the remnaunt of the people* and so often reherses them in this
same order in this prophecy: it does us too understand that there is one
doctrine of salvation to be taught unto all sorts of me^ and that all sorts
are bound to hear and learn the same: and besides that it teaches the
prefermente of the civil magistrate or ruler to the priest, as was noted
before. And herein we shall chiefly learn the wickedness of them that withholde
the scriptures from the lay people, saying it is not mete for them too be so
much occupied in hearing the same. For the Prophet says here sundry times
that he was sent to all the people as well as to the rulers: and therefore it
was their duty to learn and hear his message as diligently, as it was the
rulers. And this is a great occasion, why yt all rulers should behave the^
selves lowly toward the people, Al things to salvation are given to al sorts
of men ^n like. Ephe. iiii
seeing God has made all things, as concerning salvation common and of one
sort, both too poor and rich, that by this means he might increase
brotherly love betwixt both parts. There is one Lord god says s. Paul of
all, both poor and rich, one holy Ghost that makes us all holy, one
baptism, one faith that we believe, one savior Jesus Christ, one father in
heaven, unto whom we pray, one everlasting kyngedome which we all look for,
one scripture and woorte to teach us, one sacrament for us all, we be borne,
gotten, dye and buried all in like, and a great knottell is of love amongst
us, saying we speak one language, being of one country or town, and one
air which we receive, one fire, Sun, Moon, Stars, earth, herbs, trees,
corn, cattle, fish, fool, that we be feed on. We go, stand, sleep, work
all alike. etc.

All the difference that is betwixt us is this: that one is higher in
authority, better clad or fed, has a prouder coat or a softer bed, or more
store of money, lands or servants then an other has, which thing help
not to salvation. But what vain things these be to rejoice in, or to despise
one another for that wa^tes them, the things them selves do declare. For he
that wantes all these, not necessary things to salvation, is commonly better
man, more lustye, strong and healthful then the other, as is said in the
verses before. And to rejoice is ancient blood, what can be more vain? Do we
not all come of Adam our earthly father? and say we not all, Our father which
art in heaven, hallowed. etc. How can we crake then of our ancient stock,
saying we came all both o^ on earthelye and heavenly father. If ye mark the
common saying, how gentle blood came up, ye shall see how true it is.

When Adam dalue, and Eve span, Who was than a gentle man?

And although no nation hais any thing to rejoice in of them selves, yet
England hais less than other, we glory much to be called Britans, but if we
consider what a vacabunde Brutus was, and what a company he brought with him,
there is small cause of glory. For ye Saxons of whom we come also, there is
less cause to crake. So that of Brutus we may well be called Brutes for our
brutish conditions, and of the Saxons saxi. i: stout and hard hearted, but if
we go up to Cain, Iaphet, and such other fathers of us Gentiles, we may be
ashamed of our auncetors: for of all these we come that knew no God.

Tully a Heathen philosopher tells how many ways men came first to have
great possessions, How authority began.
and waxed more wealthy and mighty in the earth then others did: either by
coming in to void places (says he) where as none did dwell, and then every
man took to him self, as much ground as he would, or else they got it in the
wars by power from others, or bought it, or else by gift or descent. So that
at the first we were all alike, not one better the^ an other: and we shall be
also all alike angels at the last. For in heaven there is no higher place for
rich men, nor lower for the poor, but every man according as he has d^ne,
so shall he receive. If the poor and rich man's blood were both in one
basen, how should the one be known to be better then the other, saying we
crake so much of it. Yet does this derogate nothing from that honor and
dignity, which is dew to all Princes and Magistrates in this life of all
sorts of men: but it is only spoken how all sorts shall obtain the life to
come, and that we should not ouermuche rejoice in worledlye vanities, but in
God alone, that we have him for our God. And where as the prince, Priest, and
people have all one lesson taught them, and no difference at all is made
betwixt them how to please God, we may see the wickedness of our priests, but
that by their Tre^tals and other masses can healpe as they sai others to
heaven, but they them selves care not for such baggage, and bye none of the^
for their selves (because they think them unprofitable, or else they see there
is another way to heaven than this, and therefore will not use this at al for
them selfs, but deceive others therewith:) or rather they care not for heaven,
but will hear live at ease and enriche them selves, they care not how, not
hoping for an other life. But the prophet here, and all the scripture
thoroughoute teaches one way of salvation for all sorts of men whatsoever they
be, how to live and dye, and enjoy heaven.

The effect of this message now, is to comfort them that they should not
fainte in their work, but manfully go on forwards, and luckely finish the
buyldinge of Gods house, being discouraged at nothing. Many there were that
beside the fear of the kings displeasur, which had forbidden them, to build
any more, saying the gorgiousnes of the old temple, builded by Solomon, and
how sclender a house this would be in comparison of that, were sore grieved
at it, and discouraged.

Esdra. iii.
Esdras writes that when the ground work, and foundation was laid, some
which had seen the old temple how costly, great, and solemn it was, were
very sorye to see this, how sclender a work it would be in comparison of
the old, and therefore they fell on wepinge, when as they considered it.

The younger sort, which had not seen the old Temple, that was destroyed by
Nabuchodonozor, and now seeing this go so well forward took their instruments,
sange Psalms, and praised God that had given them so good and prosperous
success, and were right glad that they might have such a house to resort
unto, to make their prayers and sacrifices in, although it were not so costly
and pleasant, as the^ would wish. In which two sorts of men, the one as
Esdras says, wept because this house was not costlye inoughe, nor be coming
the majesty of God their Lord: the other did singe and rejoice that they had
one so good a house as this was: We may learn the sorrow, which good christen
hearts take when they see Gods true religion, Diverse good affections in
religion.
not only coldly set forth and negligently followed, but also if it be not in
such perfection as it ought to be, and as they have seen or yet would wish.
Also we be taught how we should rejoice when we have any honest little house
and religion granted unto us to serve and worship our Lord and God in, so
that it be according to his word: for the primative church was glad if
they could get private houses to teach in. The noise was so great as Esdras
says: that a (...) could not diserne whether was greater the noise of them
that song, or of them which wept: therefore the Prophet says to them,
which were so sorry and heavy for the sclendernes of this buyldinge: that
although this house seemed nothing in comparison of the other in beauty in
their sight, yet it should appear a more glorious house before God then the
first. And so it came to pass, as afterward it shall appear.

Let us note also where he says: which of you has seen this house in his
former glory. ^he cross must be born strongly though it seem long.
etc. the strong patience and long sufferinge of the people of God that had
borne their cross so long, and were not weary of it, but were very sorye that
they could not have God worshipped so sole^ly as they would: There was none
yt could have seen the first temple of Solomon, standinge in his glory, and
now this second temple beginning too be renewed, but he must at the least be
fourscore year old, and yet be not past.x. years old wha^ it was destroyed
by Nabuchodonozor. The years of ye captivity in Babilo^ were 70. as Jeremy
promised, and the foundation of this temple was said under Cyrus the second
year of their returning: so that if we take these years besides those. 70.
years of captivity, they must have so many also after they were borne, that
they might be able to remember the temple standinge, which can be no less then
ten years, or twelve: so that all counted, they could be no less, but rather
more then fourscore year old, but if we token to this second of Darius, they
must be anno 130. year old at the least. This I speak too note how
manfullye they had borne their banishment under Heathen kings, where they were
prisoners, mocked and evil entreated: where as we are so tender that we can
not abide a little sorrow for Christ's sake under Christian rulers, nor can not
depart from our flesh pots and bellye cheer. We call the Jews sturdye and
stifnecked people: but if we compare our selves to them in many points, we
shall find our selves much worse. They satte on the water banks of Babylon,
70. years weepinge, Psalm c.xxxvii.
and hanged their harpes in the willowes, in steed of ye temple, when they had
song their Psalms, they were mocked, and yet manfullye did they bear all
sorrows: we being banisshed or punished under Christian rulers, yet can not
be content with necessaries, but grudginge that we want our old flesh
pots of Egipte, and our superfluous daynties, murmour and grudge at Gods
doings and provoke his vengeance upon us.

The Apostles coming to our Savior Christ, Math. xxiiii
and showing him the goodly buylding and workmanship of this temple, which
they now builded, wondered at the costly fines of it: but these old men which
had seen the first temple of Salomo^s buyldinge, wept because it was not good
inoughe, nor too be compared to the first. Notwithstanding all the fines of
it our^ savior Christ told the^ that the dais would come, when their enemies
should come, besiege it, destroy it, and not leave one stoone standinge upon
an other: and so it came afterward to pass by the Romans. iii. King. vi.
The first house if ye mark in the life of Solomon, where is described all the
facion of it, length, breathe, thyckenes, and heighte of the walls, the
wydenes of the house, and what things and Jewels were in the house, it is
much more gorgious, costely, and pleasant, than this second temple is, whose
greatenes Esdras tells in the.vi. Chapter: but the things that were done in
this second house by Christ and his Apostles, were much more wo^derous then
those, which were done in the first. It was great glory that ye Queen of Saba
came from the vnmost part of the earth to see the first temple: iii. King x.
but it was much more glorious that into the second temple came the son of
God from heaven to preach his fathers will, and the glad rydinges of the
Gospel. As in the restoringe of this second temple, many old men did weep,
because it was not so great, gorgious, costely and glorious as the first
was: so now in the restoringe of the Gospel many weep, when they see not the
Churches so well decked and furnished as before. The diversity of the Popes
Church and Christ's.
The Popes church has al things pleasant in it to delight the people
withal: as for the eyes their God hanges in a roope, images gylded, painted,
carved most fynely, copes, chalice, crosses of gold and silver, banners. etc.
with relics and altars for the ears, singing, rynging, and organes pipinge:
for the noose frankensence sweet, too wash away sins as they say, holy
water of their own halowing, and making. Priests an infinite sort, masses,
trentals, diriges, and pardons. etc. But where the Gospel is preached, they
knowinge ye God is not pleased, but only with a pure heart, they are content
with an honest place appointed, to resort together in, though it were never
hallowed by bishop at all, but have only a pulpit, a preacher too the people,
a Deacon for the poor, a table for the communion, with bare walls, or else
written with scripturs, having Gods eternal word, sounding always amongst
them in their sight and ears: and last of all they should have good
discipline, correct fautes and keep good order in all their meetinges. But as
they wept too see this second house no more costly nor pleasant too the
eye: So our poor Papists weep to see our churches so bare, saying: they be
like barnes, there is nothing in them to make curtsey unto neither Saints
nor yet their old little God. But hereafter it appears, whether of these
churches god is more delited with all. ceremonies.
For although these ceremonies in the old law were given by Moses for the
hardness of the people to keep them exercised that they fall not to Idolatry of
ye Gentiles: yet is there no mention of any of these in the new Testament, nor
yet commandment now, neither to us nor the^, but forbidden to be used of all,
both of us and them. We be no longer under shadows, but under the truth.
Christ has fulfilled all, and taken away all such dark kind of ceremonies,
and has placed the clear light of his Gospel in his church to continue to
the end.

But the Pope has thrust the church full of more blind and wicked
ceremonies, then ever Moses did: and where Peter said (when the Apostles were
consulting how many ceremonies should continue for a time) that it was not
mete to lay on ye Ge^tils necks the yoke of Moises law, Acts xv.
which neither they nor their fathers could bear: yet the Pope with crakes to
be s. Peter's vicar, contrary to s. Peter's saying, will lay on all people such
a heap of his own ceremonies, and that under pain of cursing as the Jews had
never the like in folishe blindness nor mo in number. S. Augustine says that
Christ in the new Testament was content with few Sacraments in number, but
which were in signification most worthy, as baptism and the Lords supper: but
the Pope has made so many as pleased him, and that such as no scripture can
allow. Thus we are taught here, not to esteem the goodness of things by an
outward and glorious show, but to be content with the Homely simplenes that
Christ taught us in his church, and used him self: for that is more pleasant
than all the gorgious devise of man's brain. The wit of man is never content to
submit it self to ye wisedo^ of God, but pleases it self more in his own
inue^cions, than in that which God co^mau^des:: But ye gospel says plainly
that, that which is so excellent in the sight of man is abominable in the
sight of God. Luke xvi.


The text,
and pluck up your courage all people of the earth says the Lord, and
work for I am with you, says ye Lord of hosts.



Least we fainte in the midst of our work, where dangers be great, and
lets many, there is need of great comfort. The kings officers asked them
often times, who give the^ leave to renew this buyldinge, and what commission
they had: the work was great and costly, and their own rulers and breihren,
by brybinge and usury had polled them so sore that they might well think
they were not able to finish it accordingly? their sins and negligence were
great, that they had deserved such plagues. therefore too comfort them
withal, God sendes his Prophet to encourage them all generally* They that have
fallen most ar most to be comforted.
and particulerlye those by name, which were chief in the common wealth and
religion, as Zerubabel and Joshua, which had offended most, because they being
rulers, did neither their duty them selves, nor yet caused others to do
theirs, which both they should have done: First in geuinge good example
them selves, and after in saying others to have done their duties in this
buyldinge. But as our savior Christ, after that he arose from death sent
Mary Magdalene and the other women to the disciples generallye, and too Peter
chiefly by name, both to comfort them altogether (because they all had
forsaken him) and to encourage namely Peter, because he craked most that he
would never betraye him, but afterward fell the foulest of them all, and
therefore had need to be comforted more then all: So now Zerubabel and Joshua
by name are comforted of the Prophet, because they had been more negligent than
the rest, and should have been better then the rest.

Tell my disciples (says our savior Christ to the women) and tell Peter
that they go into Galile, Mark. xv^*
and there they shall se me as I t^lde them before: Such a loving God is our
Lord and master, that least weak consciences should despair, except they
have comfort of forgeuenes, he sendes unto them by name, he speaks too some
by name. The rest of the people are bidden be of good courage, for ye Lord God
would be with them, pardon and forgive them, aid them, and further their
doings: but not by name as these other were, because their offenses were not
so great as the rest were.

Absolution.
So God has yet in his church both general absolution, and forgeuenes of
sins offered unto all ^y preachinge his word, and promise made in Christ
too the beleuers: and also particular to comfort the weak conscience withal,
when as he applies to him self, the promise declared unto him: and beleues
the same.

Work on still (says the Lord) and be not disamayde of any trouble, which
ye see toward: For although ye think that many hosts of men be against
you, yet fear ye not, for I the Lord of hosts, which have all my creatures
ready harnessed to fight against them that strive against you my people, I
say: I am with you Who can prevail against you, wha^ I am on your side? How
can any creature that is but vile worms and ashes in comparison of me the
everlasting God, prevail against me their and God creator? Mark before, and
ye shall better perceive here, why he does so often call him self the Lord
of hosts: which is chiefly, because in such dangerous enterprises they had
need of some strong man to take their part, and where he had so many hosts
ready to defend them as all his creatures, from the highest to the lowest,
they should not fear, for they had one stronger on their side to fight for
them then all others could be, that should fight against them.

The self same words of comfort that were given them at the beginning to
enterprise the buyldinge withal, are now repeated again, that they should
more manfully continue in the same: Eue^ so is it the self same doctrine,
faith and belief, by the which we are received into the number of Gods
people, first by baptism, by the which we increase and go^ forwards in
the same faith, and by the which also we shall enjoy heaven at the last. For
even as in a child he grows to be a man, remaynes the same substance that was
in the child before, It is one faith by which w^ are received (...) gods
peo^^^ which (...) grow (...) of (...) by (...) we be (...) and (...) in all
^or^^^ men.
but now is made stronger by age and castes away all chyldishe toys: So in
the same faith which we profess in our baptism must we grow and learn the
full understanding of it, yt it may be felt sweter unto us daily more and
more while we live even to our last end. And as the words are all one here,
to comfort the rulers and people with all: So that faith is one also by the
which we shall all be saved. God has not appointed one way nor Gospel for the
rich, and an other for the poor, but all have one as is said before: and so
is he with all alike as well with the people as with the rulers. He is not a
partial God, but to is with all and defend all alike, prouidi^g for all
indifferently and will defend the simplest as well as the highest, the people
and subjects, even as well as the prince. For as a natural father prouides
for, and loves every child, and a good prince will not so look to one piece of
his realm, that he neglecte the rest: So God our heavenly king and father,
will not so love some of his people that he will hate the rest, nor so provide
for a few that the other shall want, but most lovingly provide for all and
says he will be with them all that work his work.

With whom soever God dwelles, he can want nothing, no more than he that
stands in the Su^ne can want light: for in God is the well of all goodness,
and he geues part thereof to all them that be his, and that he takes into his
tuicion. What comfort is in these words, and what it has caused all
faithful men too take in hand when God so promised the^, enough was said
before. Almost all the notable things in the scripture were taken in hand by
the comfort that was tak^ in these few words: I am with thee, and by the sure
faith that was given to God by them.

And as God requires nothing here of them but to work, and other things he
him self would care for: So in all other our doings, he reserues to him self
ye success and goinge forward of things, and nothing shall be ours, but
the work. He will give increase to all good things that are taken in hand,
Let us work^ and the profit commit to God.
in his name as he thinks best. Let not us therefore be so careful for
that: only let us work as he bids us, and he will bless it too his
pleasure. Neither he that plants, nor he that waters is any thing, but God
that geues the increase, says saint Paul. And again, i. Cori. iii.xv^
your labor was not in vain in the Lord.

He geues increase to some thirtye, sixtye, Math* xiii.
or an hundred, as his heavenly wisdom thinks good: yet all must work
most earnestly in his vyneyarde, referring the end of their labor and
profit too him, whose work it is, who will see no necessary thing fail
them, which be not loyterers in his buyldinge. Little things yt are taken in
hand in the Lords name, shall grow to great things, too them which
work diligently as the scripture says: that which is weak before God, is
stronger than men's: and that which is most glorious before men is abominable
before God. ^. Cor. i. Luke. xvi.


Jonathan and his page, discomfited all the hooste of the Philistians, i. To.
xi^^i.
and than Saul folowinge the chase destroyed the^. Eliseus and his boy being
in the City, iiii Reg* vi.
when his boy was afraid, he desired God to open his boys eyes, that he might
perceive how many more were with them, then against them: and then the boy
saw the hill full of Angels harnessed to defend them both, and God so blinded
his ennemies yt they followed the Prophet, whom they sought to kill, into the
mids of his country, where he might have destroyed them if he had lust.

God made diverse promises to them, after they came out of Egypt: But because
he begins to entreat of Christ in these sentences folowinge, I think he
means that promise chiefly, where Moses said: The Lord would raise up
unto you a Prophet like unto me, him shall you hear. Deuteronomy. xviii
This Prophet was Christ Jesus like to Moses in many points, being borne
amongst them and of their brethren of the stock of Judah and David, of whom
afterward the father said with a voice heard from heaven: Math. iii.
This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Or else it
may well be taken for the promise, Christ promised was present With our
fathers before he was borne. Esaias. ix.
which is written in the.22. of Exodus, where it is said, behold, I will
send my au^gel, or messenger before thee, and he shall lead thee in the way,
and shall drive all thy ennemies out before thee, whose land thou shalt
posses. This Angel was Christ Jesus, who is called the Angel of the great
counsel, because he brought from the bosom of his father the secret
counsel of God, and preached his great love to the world. An angel is no
more but a messenger or Embassadoure from God, to declare and preach his will
and pleasure to the world. And that Christ was present with the Israelites,
i. Cor. x.
and guided the^ in the wilderness. Saint Paul tells plain that they
tempted Christ, and murmured against him: and Christ was the rock. The
meaning and effect of this promise is no more, but that as God was present
with their fathers when he brought them out of Egypt, and delivered them out
of al dangers, were they never so many nor so great, and brought them in to
the land that he promised the^: So he would now be present with them deliver
them and finishe their work if they would work earnestlye, neither
mistrusting his mercy, but that he would be with them, and defend them
against the rulers which hated them, nor fearing his power, but that he was
able too perform his promise unto them. If we mistruste either his good will
toward us, that he will not, or his power that he can not deliver us, we
provoke his anger too devour us, and can not look for help at his hands to
save us: for nothing offendes his majesty more then mistrust unfaithfulness or
doubtinge, as saint James says: ^
he that doubts, is like a wave of water driven with wind too and fro, and
that man which so doubts, can lok^ too obtain nothing at Gods hands, he
gyues all his gifts too them that be faythefull and believe that he is both
a true God, perfourmyng all that he promyses, merciful and willing to help al
which in their need call upon him, and able too fulfill all that he says.
They that either doubt or deny his offered mercy or power to help: deny
him to be a God. Therefore fear not, but believe me too be your God, and I will
deliver you, and defend you, as I did your fathers: and ye shall finish this
temple by my protection. As I did bring them into the land which I promised
them* drove out their enemies and gave them the land to dwell in: So according
to this promise it came to pass, to this people now, for in.4. years space
next following they finished that temple as Esdras teaches. Esdras vi.
So good speed had they after that they believed his promise and that he would
be with them.

But here may be moved a great question how this is true that God says by
this Prophet, here that he brought them out of Egypt wha^ this people never
came there but about a.1000. years before Moses brought out their fathers
through the read sea, That which the father had is (...) said to (...) the
children.
where Pharao was drouned after yt he would not believe the great wonders
wrought in his sight, nor fear ye Lord that had so often and grievously plaged
him, for ha^dling his people so cruelly. The scripture uses often to give yt which
was done to ye fathers, as though it were done to the children.

As when Melchisedecke took tithes of Abraham he is said also to have taken
tithes of Leui, Heb^^. vii.
which was not borne of many years after, because he was contained in the
loins of Abraham, and afterward borne of his stock and sede: So likewise
says saint Paul: Roma. v.
By one man sin entered into the world, and by syn, death, and has gone
through all, in who^ all have sinned. So we all that now live or hereafter
shall do, and all before us, have sinned in Adam, and broken Gods
commandment, as well as Adam did, because we were contained in his loins,
and as it were part of him, and took our sinful nature of him in his sede and
posterity. As we see those ryuers, which spring out of littel wells, are of
the same nature yt the head and spring is whereof they come though they
run.2, or, 300. mile of thorough diverse countries: and as those crabbes are
sour this day that grow on the crabbe tree, which is.200. or.300. years
old, because the first root and pla^te was sower: So we all be sinful that
be borne of Adam, and sour as he was, because he the first tree was such a
one, and the spring whereof we come, was corrupt and filthye. So likewise God
says: he brought this people out of Egypt, which never had been there,
because he delivered their fathers thence, in whose loins they were contained,
and should have been born there, and subject to the same slavery that their
fathers were, if God of his great mercy and mighty power had not delivered
their fathers thence, and brought them into the land which he promised them.
And as ye mercy which had been received in times paste, Mercy received before
time is an argument of like to be showed in trouble to come or present.
is a token and argument of like merci and grace, to be showed when soever we
stand in the like need and distress: so here that they should look for a
sure help at Gods hand, now in these dangers that they were in, he
puts them in remembrance of that great deliverance, which not their
fathers only, but they also had before out of Egypt, yt they should not be
afraid now, but look for sure help. The danger was greater before, out of
which they were delivered, and yet they escaped it: So now Gods power and good
will, being no less toward them then before, they should look for the like
help of God as before.

He promises them here that his spirit should dwell with them, and therefore
they should not be afraid. For as before he sent his Angel to guide them in
the wilderness: so now he would send his holy spirit unto them, to dwell
with the^, which should teach them all things yt they doubted of, or were
ignoraunte in: should comfort them in all dangers and distress, and
deliver them from al perilles that were toward them, and therefore they should
not fear.

But as the other part of the promise concerns Christ, which should come to
deliver them out of spiritual bondage and slauerye of sin and the spiritual
Egypt: So this part here concerns the sendinge of the holy Ghost, whom
Christ said he would send to dwell with us, and be our comfortour to the end.

And as the buylding of this second temple betokens the church of Christ
builded by the preaching of the Gospel: The holy ghost is promised to the
builders. John. vi.
So here is the holy Ghost promised, which he said should not come except
he went away from them. This spirit is called a comforter, because he
strengthe^s us in all our trouble: he is the spirit of truth, because he
leads us into all truth, and puts us in remembrance of all things, which
Christ him self caught before, John. xiiii.
but no new doctrine he bringes of his own. And because our savior Christ is
taken from us in his bodily presence, he promises us yt this spirit shall
dwell with us, not for a time, but too the end, and therefore we should not
fear.

But is this a sufficient cause too persuade a man yt he should not fear the
power of kings or worldly trouble, because the spirit of God dwelles with
him? yea" truly: For what spirit can prevail against the holy spirit, which
is the power of God. It is written of Gedeon when he enterprised that venterous
act to fight against Gods enemies, that the spirit of the Lord bid clothe
and defend Gedeon as our clothes do us: Jude. vi.
and so he obtained that noble victory with so few against so many.

And not to be afraid in such trouble is the work of the holy Ghost, Esaias.
xi.
as Esaie called him the spirit of boldness strength and wisdom. i. Tim. i.
Peter when he denied his master for the words of an handmaide, after he
received the holy Ghost, did and durst confess him too the death before
princes and rulers. Math. x.
So said our savior Christ to his Apostles: when ye shall stand before Kings
and rulers, take no thought what or how ye shall speak, for in that hour it
shall be given unto you what you shall speak: For it is not you that speak but
the spirit of your father which speaks in you.

And although to worldly wisdom this spirit seems but a small thing, yet
it is most true that s* Paul says: i. Cor. i.
that which is folishnes before God, is wyser then me, and that which is weak
before God, is stronger then men. And he that has this spirit dwellinge in
him, needs not too fear any power, be it never so great: for if God be for
us, who shall be against us? and if he take his breath and spirit, from the
mightiest princes, Psalm* c.iiii. Romans x,
they are troubled and vade away.

The text.




The Prophet goes on forth with this comforth to all people, and promises not
only that God would be with them in his buyldinge, which they should
finish in few years folowinge: but into^ the temple also, which they did now
build, God would send his son Christ Jesus to preach his fathers will,
whom all people looked for and desired his coming, and he would fill that
house with glory, that they should not need to care for the smalnes of it: if
they would only with courage work, God would fulfill the rest. And that
they should know him too be able to fulfill his promise, he calls him self by
the glorious name of the Lord of hosts so often here in these verses, yt they
may understand all creatures too be at his commandment, and that none
could prevail against that which he would have done, as is said before.

But this is a strange kind of comfort too tell them of such a trouble as
should trouble heaven and earth, sea, la^d, and all people, and yet they
should be glad of it, and that it should come not long after. The time when
this trouble chanced was about.500. years after that this prophet had thus
spoken, and yet he calls it but one little time. And this may well be called a
little time in respect of God, with whom all things are present before his
sight without time, and a.1000* years with him is as yesterdaye which is
paste, and he him self is before all times, not contained in time, but living
for ever without time. Or else it is called a little time, in respect of that
long time, wherein their fathers had so long looked for the coming of Christ,
and so much desired him, and yet see him not. It was now above 3000. year
since he was promised to Ada^: Great trouble for christ is joy to the good and
though it be long it semes short: but the evil be vexed sore at it.
about 2000. since he was so often spoken of too Abraham: and.1000, since it
was renewed to Moses, and after to all the Prophets from time too time: in
respect of which 500. may well be called a little time. This trouble which
he says should trouble heaven, earth, sea, land and all people, is
described by these mighty words, to set out the greatness of the trouble by
the figure called Hyperbole: and not the trouble was such that heaven, earth,
sea, and land should feel it, and be troubled therewith, which are
insensible creatures, and can feel nothing that troubles them: but thus by
these words the scripture uses too tell the greatness of any thing that it
speaks of.

Deu. xxxii. Esaias. i.
Moses and Esaye, because the people were hard hearted, and would not hear
their sayings, to set forth their hardness of heart, and the greatness of that
message which they had from God to speak say thus* Hear ye heavens, and give
care thou earth. etc.

Saint Paul says by the like figure, every creature groans and trauayles,
Roma* viii*
lookinge for the last day, wherein they shall be delivered from this vayn
corruption wherein they serve: not because dead creatures can groan or
travail, but for the great desire that they have to see that day of our
redemption fulfilled, as the woman which travels, groans, and desires too be
delivered out of her pain, and to be restored to her former quietness, or else it
may be taken that all creatures in all these places should be troubled. But if
this trouble should be so great, how can it be a promise of joy and comfort?
Who can be merye to hear tell of such a great trouble? Surely this is not
promised to the evil, but to ye good. For as our Lord and master Christ
says, speaking of the trouble yt should be in the destruction of Jerusalem
and the latter end of ye world: Luc. ^^^*
woo be to the^ yt be with child, and give suck in those days, and the wicked
shall wish the hyls to fall on the^ and hide the^* they should seek for death*
and it should flee from the^: So he says to the good in ye midst of all ye
desperate ^orow Mat. xxiiii*
wherein ye evil man cannot tell what to Lift ye up your heads and be merye
for your redemption, and deliverance is at hand. So after this short time
that he speaks of, this great trouble which shall be at the birth,
preachinge, miracles, and death of our savior Christ should be but only
to the wicked. For the good men should as much and more rejoice, because of
that day of salvation and redemption was comen: and he whom all people looked
for, had now appeared to the comfort of all good men. And this trouble should
not be so much to the bodies and goods of the wicked men, as to the mind and
conscience: nor this joy should not be so much worldly and outward to the
good, as too the soul and inward.

Luke. ii.
Great worldly peace was in all the world, when our savior Christ was
borne, but that peace which the Angels sange: glory be to God in high, and
in earth peace, is rather the peace of conscience, because God and man were now
reconciled, and peace was made betwixt us and God, because his son had taken
our nature upon him, and was made man: but unto the wicked it may always
well be said: ^say. xlviii.
there is no peace too the wicked says the Lord. What a trouble was Herod
in when the wise men came and asked where was he that was born king of the
Jews? The scripture says that Herod and all Jerusalem was troubled at this
question. Herod thought he should lose his kingdom, Math i^
and the scribes and Phariseis thought that their authority was gone: which
thing grieved them so much that they had rather have had no Christ, then
lost that authority. But Herod devises a policy to save him self withal,
and kylles all the children that were two year old^ and under, thinkinge
amongst them all he should have killed Christ: and he had rather have
killed all, then ye only Christ should escape. What a trouble was he in wha^
he caused such a murder, for fear or a young child? What reason is it that
such a king should so much fear a yo^g child? But God provided well
enough for his son, and was as wise, ready and merciful to save and
deliver his son christ, as the other was subtle and cruel to murder him: for
Herod had rather slay all y^ children then that one Christ should escape.
God had Joseph take Marie and the child Jesus, and ^lee into Egypt, and tarry
there until he gave him contrary word. What trouble were the Scribes and
Phariseis in, when for his doctrine, preachinge and miracles, which were so
wonderful that they could not tell what to say, but sometimes said: hon. vii
Do we not say well that thou art a Samaritan, and haste a devil: another time
they would have thrown him down of the hill: and again they say it has not
ben heard of from the beginning, Acts. iiii.
that any man has opened the eyes of him that was born blind: and again, a
manifest wonderful sign they have wrought, we can not deny it: and also if
we let him alone thus, the whole world will follow him. How was the other
Herod (which beheaded Ihon Baptist) troubled when he heard of his miracles,
Math xiiii.
and would have had him to have wrought some in his sight. How was Pilates
wife troubled in her dream for him, and sent her husband word that he
should not meddle with him: how gladly would Pilate him self have delivered
him, Luke. ^xii.
washed his hands to declare his innocence, and said he found nothing
woorthye of death in him.

How were all the Priests afearde, when they heard tell that he was risen from
death, and gave money to the watchemen to ^aye his Disciples came and stole him
a^^ ye when they slept. ^^h. xxviii.
Why should they fear a dead man? ^f we were a man only, he could not hurt
them: if a God, they could not withstand him* What trouble were the priests
in when they forbad the Apostles to preach any more in Christ's name, Acts.
iiii.
and followed the counsel of Gamaliel, saying: if it were of God they could
not abolishe it. Why should they be afraid of a deadde man? How was king
Agrippa troubled wha^ Paul had defended his cause, and said to him, thy
great learning O Paul, makes thee mad. Act. xxvi xv^^*
How were the great learned Philosophers in Athe^s troubled, when Paul
preached the resurrection of the dead, and of Christ, and said: What means
this sawer of new doctrine? he seems too teach new Gods. What a trouble
was the Emperor Tiberius in, when Pilate wrote to him of the preachinge and
miracles of Christ, and he demanded that ye whole parliament of Rome would
worship him as a God. But they consideringe that he is a gelous God, and that
he will have no other worshipped with him, but all honor must be given to him
only: denied him to be a God, or yet to be worshipped there as God. Papists
fear the Gospel* and in deeds deny Christ*
What caused Pope Leo the x. to be so afraid when Zuinglius began too
preach the Gospel, but that he perceived the light of Gods word would
deface his pomp and pride, and set abroad all his wickedness too the world
to be laughed at: and least he should go forward in preachinge and rebuking his
abomination, he sent his letters too him sealed under his bull of lead,
willing him too hold his peace, and preach no more such of things, and he
would give him what living, and as many bishoprikes as he would, yea, to be
a Cardinal, and whatsoever he would ask, except his own seat to be Pope.
But be like a true Preacher went on forwards in his business, settinge up
Christ, and pulling down Popery.

What makes the Pope at this day and his Clergy too burn, persecute and
empryson all that love the Gospel, but that they fear to loose their
lordlines, make their bellyes their God, and would live at ease like lords of
the land? What makes the^ to deny Christ to be a Go^, not so much in plain
words, as in doctrine and deeds covertly? but that they se they get much
riches by relics, pylgrimages, saints masses, pardons etc. which do as
much in effect as deny Christ's too be God, because they seek help by these
means in their troubles, and forgeuenes of sins, with comfort of
conscience, which all belong so unto Christ, that whosoever sekes them other
ways, or else where, then at his hands only, do as much as in them lies as
to make Christ no God, rob him of that honor, which is due to him only and
give it to Gods of their own making. What maruayle is it if they follow ye old
decree of the Romans in their parliament where they denied Christ to be
received, and worshipped for a God, because he should not have all honor
alone, as it is due to him only. Thus we se what great trouble it is to the
wicked to have Christ and his doctrine to come abroad: and how true this was
that the Prophet says here and what trouble has been, and shall be too the end,
where the Gospel is preached. The father shall deliver the son to death, and
the son shall rise against the father, so shall the mother against the
daughter, and the daughter against the mother, brother against brother. Math.
x.
etc. which things we all see at this day to have comen to pass.

How many wives, rather then they would forsake God, have suffered death,
forsaken husband, children, goods, and country, and willinglye banished
them selves, and so have many good husbands also. How has one brother
persecuted another? One friend and familiar an other even to the death? How
has one Bishop deposed and burned an other? not to be an earnester preacher
then the other was, but more lordely and cruel persecutour. But this is ever
true that Christ our savior said should follow the preachinge of his
word: that who so will be his disciple, must forsake him self and all
pleasurs of the flesh, and those which be of his own house shall be his
enemies.

Although this is marvelous that in such trouble there should be joy and
comfort, yet this is more marvelous, that after all people were thus troubled
for y^ Gospel, they should come unto it, believe it* and receive it, not
regardinge any sorrow which was joined therewith, no not fearinge the loss of
their lives so they might enjoy it. Fear makes a man too run away, and
not to come: But this is the nature of the Gospel, that the more it is
persecuted, the more it florishes, as David says: Psalm. x^^^*
the righteous man florishes like a palm tree. The palm tree is such, that
if a great waighte be laid on it, the brother it spreads and florishes. And as
camomylle with treadinge on it, and walkinge, waxes thicker: So the good man,
the more he suffers for his Christ, the more is his faith increased. And as
the husband manne that will reap much, must sow much: so the more that dye
for the word of God, the more increase too follow the same. As we commonly
say of the ashes of heretics rise up a new sort. It can not be,
Persecution increases the Gospel and boldeneth men
but when men see one so constantly stand in defense of his opinion, that he
geues him self to the death for it, they will begin too consider what a thing
it was that he died for, and that no man will rashly cast him self away: When
they see the truth of it, and God opens their eyes to perceive they are moved
to offer them selves to the same death and ieopardy also.

Cypriane writes that the blood of martirs is the seed of the Church, whereof
rise and increase mo, as of the sede in the field springes new corn.
Augustine likewise says of the^ yt were persecuted for Christ and his word:
Ciuitate liber xxii. cap. vi.
they were tied in chains and ^orments, they were whypped, slain and burned,
they were imprisoned, they were killed and torn in pieces, and yet they
increased. They were so far from fear, ye not only they denied hi^ not: but ye
more sorrow they had, the mo believed on him. And when saint Laurence se his
bishop Xistus being than Pope, to be drawn to death, he said: Quo is pat^^
sine Diacono quod non soles. That is to say: Father, whither go thou
without thy Diacon, which thou waste not wont to do. Well says he, thou
shall follow me not long after: and so it came to pass in deed, for he died
for Christ to. It is written of one notable woman, which when she heard tell
of the day of execution, and that many should be put too death for
Christ's sake: she took her child in her arms, uncalled for, and runs
thither that she might profess her faith, and be put to death with them: As
she was ^u^ninge, she met the officer goinge too see them put to death: he
seeing her make such haste, asked her whether she went, and she told him, why
(says he) know thou not that there shall be a great number put to death,
and that I go to see it done? yes says she, I know it well, and therefore
I go that I may dye with them. Then said the officer, why do thou carye thy
child with thee, and she said, that it may be a martyr to dye for Christ. The
officer meruaylinge that the Christians did not fear death, sent the Emperor
word that he would not go to put them too death, but he should send
another if he would have it done.

Acts. v. ii^^.
Likewise in the Acts, when the priests for bad the Apostles too preach any
more in Christ's name and whypped the^, the more they preached, and thought
the^ selves happy yt they were thought woorthye to suffer such things for
his names sake. And for all ye cruelnes of the rulers, Peter turned two
thousand at one sermon, and three thousand at an other, which came saying:
Brother what shall we do, Acts. ii. iiii.
and being pricked in conscience ran not away, but came as the child to
the father when he is afraid.

When Paul and Silas had been whypped all day, Acts. xvi.
and locked in the stocks at night in the deep dungeon, and were watched
with soldiers: The chains fell of them, the keeper perceiuinge the prison door
open by it self, and thinking the prisoners were escaped, would have killed
him self: But after that he see they were all there, and perceived the great
work of God, he fell down desired them to go in to his house, washed their
stripes, believed in Christ and was baptized.

There is no people under heaven, Psalm. x. No doctrine has been generally
received but the Gospel.
but they have once received the Gospel, and that can not be said truly of
any other kind of learning in the world. Their sound has gone through the
whole world says the Psalm. The Philosophers never agreed all in one kind of
learning, but had many sects amongst them, nor the whole world never
received thym: nor any heresye was generally received, but only the scripture
has been universally taught and received, which is a sure argument of the
truth of it.

Psalm. ii.
Ask of me (^aieth God the father to his son Christ) and I will give the
people for thy heritage and the vttermoste parts of the earth for thy
possession. Many such general promises there be, wherein the turninge of all
people on the earth too the Gospel is contained, and since the coming of
Christ perfectly fulfilled.

The heresye of Transubstanciation, Purgatory, Priests not too mary,
ministringe the Lords supper in one kind, the Popes supremicie, and the Greek
church never received nor yet do. And although at the counsel at Florence, a
few seemed to agree to it, yet were they shente for so doing, when they came
home, and it would not be received. Before the death of our savior Christ,
God has chosen to him but only the Jews to be his people, but after they had
refused too receive him for their redemer, he had his Apostles go into the
whole world, and preach to all creatures. Now was the time come that al were
called and of all sorts, degrees, countries, and states, many were turned unto
God.

There is no people under heaven that can excuse them self by ignorance, None
can be excused by ignorans.
but they have been sufficiently taught: For s. Paul says, yt the Heathen
before Christ was borne, were without excuse, for where they knew God, and
worshipped him not as God, Roma. i.
therefore god gave them up to their own lusts. By the creature his invisible
power, and majesty, may be known that he is a God. And therefore the most
unlearned is without excuse: for this is sufficient to teach them to know,
there is but one God, and too worship him as a God, though they never read
scripture: and who so ever does not worship him by this natural knowledge, is
justly conde^pned. We read of Anthony that holy father, Anthony.
which lived in wilderness, and being so far unlearned ye he could not
read, was asked of his fre^d how he passed the time away, seeing he lived alone
and had no books: yes says Anthony I want no books, for all the creatur^ of
God are my books, The creatures of God are rather lay m^^ books the images.
and I read and learn his majesty out of his creatures, as you do out of your
books. And surely they be goodly books to be looked on and to be hold, ye
Su^ne, ye Moon, stars, birds, fishes, beasts, herbs, corn and grass,
trees, hyls, ryuers. etc.

And he is worse then a beast that can go look at all these, and not love,
praise, and wonder at his strength, power, wisdom, and goodness, which has
made all these to serve us.

The stars keep so good an order and course in their mouinges, the virtue of
herbs help diseases, and all fish, foul, and beasts feed and serve man:
which things come from him, who is Lord of nature, and not of them selves.
These may better be called lay men's, and the unlearned peoples books than
images and idols, which be like unto whom soever it pleases ye painter to
make them like. If all the images of any one saint were laid together, they
would all be unlike one too another in many points: and what a Monster should
he be that should be like all these. If the relics, as arms, head, legs,
scalp, heir, teeth* etc. were together in one place that are said too be
worshipped in many* some should have two or three heads, more legs and arms
than a horse would carry, their gylded cootes and painted faces should teach
rather to be proud and to play the harlot, than sobernes, simplicity,
holiness and lowlines as becommes the godly and saints in deed.

After when he adds: the desire of all people shall come: there is prophesied
thecomminge of Christ in our flesh and nature to redeem us from the bondage of
hell, syn and death, which thing al good men from the beginning have desired.
It was a joyful thing to perceive Christ to come by the eyes of faith, and
happy was he, Christ is desired of al good men.
to whom it was given to understand, and believe in him to come: but more
happy did they think them selves, which did not only believe in him to come,
but see him present in flesh. Luke. ii.
Simeon a righteous man always occupied in prayer, desired to live till the
day when he might see the Lord, which request God granted him: and when the
child Jesus was presented in the temple by his mother, he took the child
Jesus in his arms, praised God and said: Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace, according too thy word: For mine eyes have seen
thy saui^g health: and so was well contented to dye after he had his desire.

Ihon Baptist, being young in his mothers womb, Luke. i.
leaped for joy as soon as his mother heard the salutation of ye virgin
Marie, coming unto her. Anna the Prophetess a widow, living in fasting and
prayer continuallye, chiefly desired to see the day of his coming. Many
kings and Prophets says saint Luke have desired to see that day and have
not seen it. Luke. ^.
Such a great desire for the increase of their faith, have all good men had
to see Christ in our flesh and nature, that we might by his death be
delivered from the slavery of hell, sin and death. What a misery is it too be
in bondage of consciences for our sins, and Gods righteous judgment: and
what a comfort is it to know, that God is reconciled to us by the death of
his son: This is the desire of all good men, which is fulfilled too us in
Christ. And he is called the desire of all people, by the Hebrew phrase, which
is as much to say, as most desired. So saint Paul calls him not only
righteous and peace maker, i. Corin. i
but righteousness and peace it self: for so have such words more strength
when they be pronounced like substantives, then the adjectives have. What a
desire had Esaye the Prophet when he cried, would to God thou would burst
the heavens and come down.

For this peace that God says, he will fill this house with glory, much was
said before: But there he said only he would show his glory, and now he
says he will fyl it with glory: And this is to comfort them that were so
sorry, because this house was litell in comparison of the other old one, and
nothing so costli and glorious. The fulness of this glory appeared when Christ
preached his Fathers will, healed diseases, wroughte miracles, rebuked the
Scribes with their tradicions. etc. as was said before. What greater glory
can be, than to do good too them which be his enemies, to help the^ which
can not help them selves, and too do it so freely that he look for no reward
in so doing, but even of free pity, which he had on us, saying us lie in such
misery, The glory of Christ in his Church.
did show such mercy as to redeem us, to take us for his children, lovers,
and friends to teach us, help us, and give us grace too do his will,
worship his majesty, fear him, and love him, know our own weakness, and
pardon our negligence, our infirmity, our forgetful and unthankful
disobedience.

Great glory was showed in this house, when as Alexander the great called
Magnus, submitted him self too the high Priest Gods minister, confessinge
his God to be the true God, where before he was purposed too have destroyed
Jerusalem: and also when Judas Machabeus with his brethren after many noble
victories restored Gods religion. But none of these filled this house with
glory, but some part of it: Only Christ our Lord, in whom is the fullness
of the Godhead, fills this house with glory. Christ filled this temple, so
full of his doctrine and miracles, by him self and his Apostles, that ye fulness
thereof ran through the whole world: for there it began as in a spring,
and now has filled the whole world therewith. So liberal is he that he
gives not only a part, but full and heaped measure, even to the top that
it flows over.

Acts. ii.iiii.
What a glory of God was showed in this house, when out of all countries under
heaven were gathered devout men to worship God there: And after that the
Apostles received the holy Ghooste, when Peter in his sermons converted.5.
thousand. How far spread was this glory when the Eunuche of Queen Candace
moved with the great report of that gorgious Temple, Acts, viii.
came thither for too worship. But this wirkes the mighty Lord of hosts
works, which has all things at commandment and truly fulfilles all his
promises, even unto the end.

The Text.




There were two chief reasons, which discouraged them from this buyldinge,
which were meet, yea and necessary to be pulled out of their minds: And
therefore the Prophet chiefly touches these two. The first was the kings
before time, who had forbidden to build, and their officers, which were as
dilligent to stop them: The second was poverty, for that by the great
vsurye, bribery, and oppression of the rulers, they were so nedy, that they
were not able to finish it. For the first God sets him self against the king as
though be should say: though ye kings power be great, yet I am greater though
he forbid, yet I bid: though he be against you, yet am I with you, says the
Lord of hosts. What harm can they all do^ unto you, wha^ I am with you: Who
can hurt when I will defend? For their poverty they should not fear, for all
gold, silver, riches and treasure is mine, says the Lord, and I give as much
and as little, when, where, how long, and to whom I list. All be my stuardes,
and too me shall make an account: it is not their own to spend as they will,
but as I appoint. Although churles be nyggardes, and will not part with it,
unthrifts do waste and misspende that which they have, and neither of them will
further this my work: yet fear not ye, for I (in whose hands are all
hearts, God will not see his buylders want.
and all riches) will see move their minds, and bring the matter so too
pass, that my house shall not lie vnbuylded for lack of money. I ask no more
of you but too do as much as in you lies: Put your good wills to and
work, let me alone with the rest: although ye know not how to come by money,
I have ways enough, and will not see you want.

And although this promise be made to this particular people, in this present
matter of buyldinge Gods house: yet it serves not for that only case, but it
is a sufficient comfort for all them which take the lords work in hand
(what kind things so ever it be, so that it be too set forth his glory,
and not our own) that in such godly enterprises we shall not lack, but have
enough to finish it, and do it withal. If we believed all riches too be the
Lords we would neither get them wrongefullye nor spend the^ wastfully.
And besides that, if we believed this to be a true saying, that God did speak
it, and would perform it, it would work much goodness in us.

First, it will work such a fear in us toward God, that for no need or
vantage we would take, or yet get one pe^nye wrongfully, either by flatterye,
periurye, vsurye, briberye, lyinge, stealinge, disceit, false waightes and
measures, or by any other unlawful means. For who durst take one half
penny, if that he were persuaded that it were Gods his Lord and maker, who
hates and punishes all falsenesse? Who dare be a thief and a traytoure to God
that is in heaven, who made and rules all in earth? But because he thinks it
to be such a man's, and that God sees him not, and man shall not perceive it:
without all shame he deceyueth man, and robs his Lord God and heavenly
father.

Therefore when the devil puttes in thy hear to get any thing wrongfully,
thin^ with thy self: What shall I do, shall I be a thief to my lord God, who
made me and saved me? these goods be not this man's only, but they be my lord
Gods, who has made him his stuarde over them, and unto whom he must make
account of them. And although I can deceive man in gettinge of them, yet God
sees all things and nothing is hyd from him. If true faith considered these
things thus, no man would nor durst use any deceyte in any kind of thing.

Secondely, if this saying were duly considered that all gold and silver is
the Lords, who durst mispende or waste one farthing of it vnthriftly, upon
things not necessary? God has given man all his creatures to serve for his
necessary use: But too be a dronkarde, a hoar hunter, a gamner, a
swashebuckeler, a ruffin too waste his money in proud apparel, or in haukinge,
hunting, tennyes or in such other unprofitable pastimes, but only for
necessary refreshinge of the wit after great study or travail in weghty
affairs, he has I say not allowed thee one mite. Read the scriptures
through, and thou shall not find where gentelmen be allowed to waste their
money upon vain pastimes or unprofitable, more than the poor simple man is.
No degree by allowed vainti too waste his goods.
In all good common wealths there be no laws that geues more liberty to
sin to the rich then too the poor. God our heavenly father like a rich
wise stuarde deals his money abroad to us his servants, some more, some
less, as he thinks good: And says unto us al, work until I come and
increase this portion that is given you. Poor and rich has this said unto
him, and every one shall make an accounte unto him, and it shall be said to
every one: Make account of thy stuwardship. Luke xix. and.xvi.
Look in the law of God, and there shall thou find how too bestow thy
money: And if thou can not find it agreinge with Gods word, it is evil,
how soever thou bestow it. For as a rich man gives his man money, sendes
him too the market, and biddes him not bestow his money as he list, but
appointes him how too do it, thus much upon such things, and thus much
upon other: So God has given us his scripture as a rule to follow in
bestowinge his money or other gifts. And although men or things be not there
named, where on to bestow it: yet the degrees and sorts of both, as the
poor, and necessaries be often beaten into our heads. Gentlemen and young
ruffelers may not say as they commonly use: Is not my money mine own? May I
not spend it as me lust? who shall correct me? what would ye have me to do?
Shall I buyld Castles and Towers with it? I have more than I can get spente:
the next rent day is at hand. Shall I be a loute and sit in a corner? Nay it
becomes a gentleman to make merye and raffle it. Shall I not make good
cheer, that other may fare the better. Let me make merye when I am young, I
will wax sad, wise and thryue, when I am old.

But thou which think thus, remember the evil stuarde, which when he was
called to account, and could not discharge his rekeninge, L^ke. x.^.
gave away his masters goods that he might maintain his idleness. But he was
put out of office, as all they shall be cast from Gods face, which likewise
unprofitably spend that porcio^, which God has given them. Think thou
that God will allow this accounte if thou say: Thus much is spent upon
hoores, this at cards, this at dyce, this on maskinge, this on mumminge, this
at bearbytynge. etc. Nay, nor yet on massinge, gyldinge of saints, payntinge
of stocks and stoones, settinge up roodes, byinge of Popish pardons, geuinge
money too this cloister of Monks, and that house of Friars with such like.
Who would spend one pennye so evil, if he thought yt it should bear witness
against him, and condemn him at the last day? It is for lack of faith that
such unthrifts do mispend Gods their masters monei: because they think it is
their own, and not the Lords, as the Prophet says here.

Thirdely, if this were believed as it ought too be, it would make us neither
to grudge against God that geues plentye many times to the evil men, and the
honester sort lives more barelye: nor we should not disdain to see one
preferred before our selves, in more wealth or authority. We should also
content our selves with that portion which God has given us, not murmuringe
nor sorowing that we have less then other. This thing has often grieved Job,
David, Ieremye, Psalm. lxxii^. Job. xxi. Iere. xi^. Abac. i.
Abacuk, and other holy men that they did see evil men in wealth, and good me^
in trouble and they could never satisfy the^ selves in this, what should be ye
cause o^ it until they entered into ye sa^ctuary of ye Lord and there they spied
yt the riches of ye earth is the Lords, to dispose at his holy will and pleasur.
And because it pleases God to bestow so much or so little, upon this man, or
that man: it is just, and I should content my self therewith, knowinge that
whatsoever he does, it is good because he does it, and no man must grudge or
disdain there at. The will of God is the rule of all justice and righteousness:
as because God will have it so, therefore it is good, just, and righteous. Gods
will is the first and chief cause of all things: so that when we see that
God will have it so, To refer al to Gods wysedom stays the mind in all
trouble.
we must not ask why he will have it so, but be content therewith, sit down
and quiet our selves, praysinge his goodness, and marueylinge at his wisdom,
that rules all things so well and wisely. And with that little portion that it
has pleased him to give us, we shall content our selves, when we consider that
he owes nothing to any man, but ye which he geues, he geues it freelye and
liberally: and so much as he knows better then thou thy self, what is meet
for thee to have.

Thou which haste little think thus with thy self: My good God and father who
has ruled and does rule all things at his own will and pleasure: whose
wisdom I am not able to perceive, and whose unspeakable love toward me, in
geuinge his only son to dye for me, I can not understand: He that loves
me better the^ I love my self: he I say knows that if I had more riches and
wealth, I should be to wanton, and so displease him, and if I had to litell, I
should deal untruly and blaspheme him. Therefore praised be his wisdom,
which does not ouerlode me with more than he will give me grace too
discharge, nor lets me want necessaries, that I fall not to any falshode or
untruth. How can I love him enough that geues me all necessaries, and does
not charge me with superfluities? The evil men which have such plenty of
all things, he would win them with gentleness, and by gentleness draw them
unto him: but in thee that haste less, he will let all the world know that
thou love him not for any great wealth, which he gives thee (as evil
flatterers many time do) but even as duty, and that thou will bear the cross
of poverty willingli, rather the^ forsake him.

What a misbeliefe is it, to think that God does not give and dispose his
goods so well and wisely, but that many can devise it better? And if we had
once this faith rooted in our hearts, that he does all for the best: it
would make us say, howsoever we our selves, i. King* iii.
or other have much or little: It is the Lord that does it, let him do ye
seems good in his sight. And if we loose it by fire or robbery, we shall
be content to say with Job: ye Lord gave it, Job. i.
and the Lord took it away, and as it pleases the Lord, so it is done, the
name of the Lord be praised.

What a pride is this in man to think that he could deal his goods better
then God has done? Esaias. lix.
Or that it were better for such men, and such to have more or less, then
they have: as though we were wiser then God, and if things lay in our hands,
we could do them better then he can or does. Math. vi
Our savior Christ calls it lack of faith, when we mistruste the power of
him that he can not, or the goodness of God that he will not provide necessaries
for us chiefly if we seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof)
and sayeth^ Mark the birds of the air how they neither sow nor mow, nor
gather intoo the barn, and yet your heavenly father feeds them: how much
more will he do you, ye of little faith?

There is nothing can grieve that faithful heart so, which constantly beleues
ye gold and silver is the Lords: but it would vndoutingly look and hope for all
necessaries by Gods provision to be given him: iii Reg. xvii
and if ordinary means did fail, that the Ravens should feed him as they
did Elias, Exodus xvii* Ihon. ii. iii. Reg. xvii.
the stoones should flow out water as in the wilderness, or water should be
turned into wine, as in Cana of Galile or that ^itle which they have should so
increase that it should be sufficient until plentye came, as the handful of
meal of the poor wydowes, The faithful can not lack necessares.
or else one sclender dynner should strengthen them so until they came where
they might have more sufficiently, as Elias walked in ye strength of one
therfe cake.xl. days, eatinge nothing else. For it is as easy for God to
provide for his people by some one of these ways or other like, iiii. King.
vii.
as by any other ordinary means: as in the beseeginge of Samaria, where they
eat their own children and dunge, and the next day such plenty, a bushel
for a grote. But this is ever most sure that those, which be of God can not
lack. Roma. viii.
For as saint Paul reasons he that has not spared his own son, but has
given him for us al: how can it be but with him he has given us all things?
and for his sake he will deny us nothing mete for us? How can he deny us a
piece of bread, meat, or a coo^e, yt has given his only son Christ Jesus to
dye for us? Can a worldly earthly father if he se his child want, weep and ask
him meat, deny him? will he not rather spare it from his own belly, then see
him weep or want? And shall we think that God has less pity and love
toward us, then one of us has toward another? Which things all
considered, they and all we, which have Gods house to build, should not
discourage our selves for poverty or lack of ability: For the Lord of
hosts says: all gold and silver is his* and he will give sufficient to his
own buyldinge.

And although many of them thought that this later house would be nothing so
pleasant, gorgious and costly as the first, and therefore they wept when ye
ground work was laid as was said before. yet to comfort them with that
they should with better courage and stomach go about it, he promises them
that the glory of this later house shall be more then the first, and they shall
not only have enough to build withal, but it shall be a more gorgious house
in the sight of God, then the first was.

The first temple had in it the golden candlestick, the golden censer, the
golden aultare, the Cherubins, the golden Ark of the Lord, wherein was the
tables of Moses, the rod of Aaron, and the pot of Manna, the golden Table:
it had alsoo Urim and Thummin, with diverse other relickes, which all or many
of them were destroyed by Nabuchodonozor and others which spoiled the temple?
what things make a temple to please God best.
So that although other jewels and ornaments were restored by the good king
Cyrus: yet we do not read, (and the Rabbyns also think) that these were not
in the second temple, and of Urim, and Thummin, Esdras semes to speak plain
that they were not there. Esdras. ii.
What should make then this house more glorious than the first, saying it
wanted these outward, glorious and pleasant things too the eye, and in such
ornaments was nothing to be compared with the first? Surely nothing, but
this that we speak of before. That our savior Christ presented him self
therein, preached his fathers will, and the glad tidinges of the Gospel,
rebuked the tradicions and ceremonies of the Scribes and Phariseis, healed all
diseases. Therefore may we gather here this necessary argument upon these
words of the Prophet: that the church is more pleasant in the sight of God,
where the Gospel is preached Gods majesty and his merci declared: then where
all the ceremonies of Moses, or ye Pope do shine so gloriously, to the sight
of the world. Let the papists examyne well by these words, whether their
Copes, Chalices, Uestiments, crosses of gold and silver, their singing,
ringing, sencing their Images, relics, pardons, coniured waters. etc. be more
pleasant service to the lord our God, then where the tro^pet of Gods word
sounds in our ears, to stir us up to the praising of God, and pullinge down of
our own crooked froward nature and stomakes. There can be nothing found in this
second house, but it was all and much more to be had in the first, save the
preachinge and miracles of Christ and his Apostles: For this point only
therefore, where in it did excel the first, it did please God more then the
first, therefore must it needs follow that those companies and churches please
God better, where his lively word is preached and the Sacraments without
great pomp comenly and purely ministered* then where they go about with dead
ceremonies to serve him, though they be never so glorious outwardly. Let us be
ashamed then of these ^ewd sayings: what should I do at the church? I may
not have my beads: the Church is like a waste bearn: there is no Images nor
saints too worship and make cursy unto, littell God in the box is gone:
there is nothing but a littel redinge and preaching, that I can not tell
what it means, I had as lief^ keep me at home.

This is a woeful saying, that because we may not worship God as we lust our
selves, we will not worship him at all. This is Idolatry to leave that kind of
worship which he has appointed us in his word, and devise a new sort of our
own, which God shall either be content withal, or else be without. The Heathen
people would say when they see the people so foolish, to think that God
would be worshipped we gold and silver: dicite pontifices in templo quid
facit aurum? which is to say, tell us O ye bisshops, what good does gold in the
temple? Ambrose says: the Sacraments look not for gold: and those things
which are not boughte with gold, can not please with gold. And the best
writers do witness that it was better when the Lords supper was ministered in
wood and glass, and the Priests were pure as gold, and did preach: tha^
when the Priests were wood, and the cups gold, that is to say dumme,
unlearned, unpreaching prelates, and yet would minister the Sacrament in cups
of gold and silver. The riches and treasures of the church belong to the
poor, and upon them should all the goods o^ the church be bestowed, which is
remaining of the preachers livings, and not to feed idle bellygods withal, as
monks, friars, priests. etc. Such a godly answer made the godly and true
deacon Laurence, when as the Emperor sent his man to spoil the church of the
treasure that there was. He commanded Laurence in the Emperors name to
deliver him all the treasure in the church. Laurence required a few days
respite to gather all the goods together: which being granted, at the day
appointed, he gathered all the poor folks in Rome together. When the
Emperor servant came, thinking to have received the whole treasure, and
calling for Laurence, asked where the treasure was: Laurence showed all the
poor people, and said behold the treasure of the church. Thus was the goods
of the church than bestowed, and not too maintain the Pope, nor yet his
carnal Cardinals in their ruffian rowte and idleness. etc.

The peace which he promises to send in this place, is not so much an outward
peace, although they had that peace as long as they feared the Lord: but here
is meant the peace of conscience, which Christ brought from heaven as the
Angels song at his birth: Luke. ii
Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace. etc. and he is not only the
peace maker betwixt God and man, but Ephesians. ii.
peace it self as saint Paul calls him saying: he is our peace, which has
made of both one, as was noted before. It is more to call him the peace it
self, than to call him the peace maker betwixt God and man, pacifying the
fathers wrath for our sins, and purchasinge pardon for all our wickedned. The
peace of conscience when we believe God to be our father for Christ's sake, for
geuinge all our sins, and bestowinge all his goodness on us, is the greatest
comfort that can be, though the world rage never so much against us, as
our Savior Christ says: Ihon. xvi.
in the world you shall have affliction and trouble, but in me you shall have
peace. And again* I leave my peace among you, Ihon. xiiii
and I give my peace unto you. etc. And although the church of God is often
more forgetful of his goodness received, when they have worldely peace (as the
Prophet says: Esaias. xxxviii.
In this outward worldly peace, my bitterness is most bitter, and therefore
necessari it is to be tried by adversity, heresies imprisonments, death,
worldly peace is most grievous* and in persecution the conscience quiet.
and other cruelties) yet in the midst of all trouble they shall find
present comfort and peace patiently to bear all such sorrow as shall be laid on
them.

When as Emperors were not Christened, great was the persecution, and yet
could they not prevail. When heresies began to spring in the Church, than
God raised up Augustine and others to withstand them, and the mo that they
were, the more was the truth tried out and flourished: but after that the Pope
had conquered all, good learning decayed, and the deuell thereby had lulled all
on sleep, then came this outward worldly peace, where the most part
submitted them selves to the beast, and his peace was the bitterest thing that
could be before God, and greatest trouble to all good consciences. For then
outward peace brought in Lordely pride, which harmed more then any
persecution, as Bernarde says. But now after that the light appears again,
with what peace of conscience can and do men offer them selves to the fire,
though the Pope and his clergy rage like Lions or mad dogs? What great
learning has God reveled in our time more then before: and chiefly it has been done because of errors, heresies, sects, and controversies that be
abroad, that Gods chosen people should not live in blindness still, and that his
goodness may be known. And although persecution be great, yet God strengthens
his to dye for his truth in most quiet peace to the shame of their
persecutours. Where there is no striuinge, there is no victory: where there is
no victory, there is no praise nor reward: Therefore God of his great love that
his people may have most noble victories, and greatest reward, suffers them to
be troubled by the devil and his ministers, but not to be ouercomen. Where the
tormentours rage, because they can not overcome the simple souls, holding fast
ye faith which they would pull from them, and for the which they strive: God so
strengthens his that they suffer all torments with more peace of conscience,
then the tormentours delay it on the^, which devise the deaths for them. But
not only this inward peace, but an outward alsoo was given them, as long as
they displeased not the Lord. God commanded that every man amongst the
Israelites should come thryse a year to Jerusalem to worship him there: Exo.
xxxi^ii.
and least they should grudge saying: who shall defend our country when we are
gone so far from home, our enemies will invade and destroy us: God promises yt
he will defend their country in ye mean time, and yt they should have no harm.
Thus they believing God, were bold to go to Jerusalem to serve God, leuing none
at home to keep their goods and lands, but a few women and children. So we if
we would serve the Lord a right and maintain his true religion, our enemies
should not hurt us, but women and children should be able to defend us: if
we will not serve him as he has appointed, there is no worldly power able to
defend us, but we and they shall perish altogether. The Text.






is defiled in soul, do touch any of these, whether shall it be defiled? the
Priests answered and said: it is defiled.



For the rekeninge of months, years, days, and such other particular words*
we said enough before: Now is the Prophet sent to appose the priests in the
law of God, and make them give sentence against them selves. The lips of
the Priest keep knowledge, and they shall ask the law of his mouth says
Malachy: Mala. ii
And therefore to see what knowledge they had in the law of the Lord, and what
answer they would make, he was sent to examine them: and he puts forth his
question so wisely that he makes them to condemn them selves by their own
judgment. He is bidden them ask the^ out of the law of God, and not out of
the Popes law, nor yet any man's law, which often through bribes is ended as
a man is frended, but out of Gods book, which with out parcialitie speaks
indifferentlye on all parts, and neither fears the rich for his might and
authority, nor has foolish pity on the poor for his poverty, but uprightly
judges right, and condemns sin, wheresoever it is found. If the priests in
Moses law had this charge given the^, to be so cunninge in the scriptures,
Priests should be learned in the scripture.
y^ they should be able to answer all doubts, which could be asked them:
How much more should our Priests now be able by the scripture to teach all
which be ignoraunte, and answer all doubts that can be moved. for saint
Paul says: a minister should be able too exhort with wholesome doctrine,
Timo. i.
and confute false. But if ye want one too keep a Curre rather then a Cure,
to be a Hunter, or a Fawkener, to be an ouer^ear of your workmen, to be your
stuarde, or look to your sheep and cattle, too be your Gardener, keep your
Orcharde or write your business, who is meter for any of these businesses then
sir Ihon lackelatine?

What a wickedness is this that they should take such pains to be so cu^ninge
in these things that God looks not for o^ them: and in those things that God
has charged them withal, they can say nothing at all, they be dumme
Dogs, not able to bark in rebukinge sin, and blind guides, not able to
rule their flock, but if the world be on their side, they can the^ play the
wood Dogs, bytinge and snatching at every man near them, and let no honest
man dwell in rest by the^, but accuse burn and condemn all yt speak against
their mischiefs. If there be a tre^tall to be saiee, or any money to be gotten
for masses. Diriges, Relikes, pardons. etc. then who is so ready as they? they
can smell it out a great sort of miles of. But if a man want comfort in
conscience, would understand his duty toward God, or Gods goodness toward
us, they be blind beasts, ignorant doltes, unlearned asses, and can say
nothing but make holy water, and bid them say a Ladies psalter.

The questions which he puts forth here, te^d to this purpose, that by one
thing which is like, he may prove an other like. For look as hallowed flesh did
not halow these things which it touched: so did not the goodness which was in
some of them make the rest holy. But like as he who is defiled in soul, did
defile all the works yt he takes in hand, even his prayer and sacrifices.
etc. so they did also defile al which kept company with them, by their evil
example. This kind of teaching by parables and similitudes, which be like in
matter consequence and truth (although diverse in words) is pithy too
persuade, Similitudes be a good ki^d of teaching ii. Reg. xii.
and is used sundry times in the scipturs, to bring a man to give sentence
against him self. As when Nathan told David the similitude of the rich man
that had many sheep, and the poor man that had but one: and that the rich
man had taken the poor man's one sheep. David sayd^ he had deserved death, not
understanding that Nathan did mean David him self to have done this thing:
who gave this sentence of death against him self, because he had so many wives
of his own, and yet could not be content with them, but took Urias wife also.

ii. Reg. xiiii
So when the woman of Thecua feigned her self to be a poor widow, and her two
sons has the one killed the other and the officers would have put y^ other
too death for murtheringe his brother: she makes supplication to the king
David, desiring that her other son might not be put to death, for she had
rather lose the one son which was killed, the^ have the other now put to
death also: For then all her comfort was gone. When David had granted her
request, that her son should not dye for this murder, the^ said she: Why
should not the king bring home again his son Absalon, which killed his
brother Ammon, but suffer him to dye also banished. Thus David was deceived by
the woman, which under the names of her own sons made suit for Absalo^ the
kings son by the cou^sayll of Ioab: and David thought in reason he should
be as ready to show pity to his own son Absalon, as to another, and gave
sentence so against him self. So the priests here granting, that whatsoever
touches him who is defiled in soul, that thing is also defiled to, prove and
give sentence against them selves, condemninge all their own deeds too be
naught and defiled, because they them selfs were wicked and defiled^ What
wickedness were in this people, Esdras tells when he divorces such a number as
had married Heathen wives contrary to the law: i. Esdras. x
Nehem. v
and Nehemias when he tells how by bribery and vsurye they had polled their
poor brethren, and gotten their goods and lands into their hands: and how
they had all offended God, in not byldinge this temple, this Prophet teaches
here plain. These with diverse other gross sins, had defiled this people: and
therefore all that they did and touched was defiled* Sin defiles those things
that God him self commaundes. Esaias. lxvi
Sin is so vile and filthy that it defiles even those things which God him
self has commanded. Esaias says: your sabbath days and other feasts, my
soul abhorres^ and yet God had commanded them his own mouth to observe such
feasts. Esaye says also: he yt offers an Ox, is as if he killed a man, and
he that sacrifices a sheep, is as though he brained a Dog. And again,
sacrifice and offeri^g for sin thou have not required. Psalm. xl
But Esaias adds a reason why God should hate that which he once commanded,
and says: your hands are full of blood, ye do not hear ye widows and ye
fatherles. etc. Seeing then sin has such a strength in it, yt it makes God to
hate those things which he ordained him self: how much need have we to take heed what we do, least in thus offending God, we make him to forsake both us
and all that we should have good of?

That is called holy flesh, which was offered to the Lord, Holy flesh.
and whereof sometime the whole was burned, and sometime that part which
remained, was eaten of the Priests, and them that brought it to be sacrificed.
If that flesh then, which was thus hallowed by the commandment of God had not
this strength in it, to halow the lap of a garment wherein it was carried, and so
ye lap to halowe what thing so ever it should touch: how can the Popes
coniured water, which he calls holy, make the man or house where it is
sprinkled so holy, that no devils dare enter? The devil durst tempt our
Savior Christ: and yet they say he fears their co^iured water, as though it
were holier then Christ him self. Popes have no scripture for their halowing
of things.
Where has he any promise from God of such foolishnes? what ca^ their holy
ashes, holy palms, holy crosses holy belles, holy cream, relikes, moldes,
chalice, corporas, fire, candels, beads, or that which is their most holy
relike, their oil, wherewith they anointe their shauelinges, Priests, and
Bishops do? They would make me^ believe that the oil has such holiness in it,
that whosoever wants it, is no Priest nor minister. Therefore in the late
days of popery, our holy bishops called before them all such as were made
ministers without such greasinge, and blessed the^ with the Popes blessing,
anointed them, and then all was perfect they might sacrifice for quick and
dead: but not marry in no case, and yet keep hoores as many as they would. If
any of their such greased disciples were traitor, felo^ or heretic, yt he had
deserved death (in token yt their oil was so holy, and had entered so deep in
to the flesh, but bringing no holiness with it, for than their anointed should
not have fallen so sore as they did, and do before any such offender could
suffer death, he must first be deposed of all that he received from the Pope,
of his orders and apparel, and have all that skin of his croune and fingers
pared of or scraped, because they were greased with their oil. What oil used
the Apostles in making ministers, Nothing hallowed by the Popes tradidicion,
can halow an other thing.
or what scripture is for it? The holy flesh which was offered too God by his
own commandment, had not this power to halow the things which it touched:
and yet their holy water and grease must have it. Is this like to be true?
does not all their false feigned holiness, which they put in things made
holy by their own halowinge only, and not by God, fall by this one sentence
of Gods mouth? Can any thing be more plainly spoken against all their
iuglinge then this? For the same reason that is against flesh, is against all
their holy toies, by what name soever they be called. If they will not believe
God and his scripture, let the^ believe the Priests their elders and
prodecessours: yea, and that which they crake so much of, that is a general
counsel, which they think can not err. The Prophet here is sent to all
the Priests: and here is answered in all their names by general consent and
counsel, that holy flesh can not halow that thing which it touches. If it be
so in one hallowed thing, as it is in this flesh, why should it not be so in
all other likewise?

There is no creature which can give that holiness to an other which is in it
self: Christ only makes us holy, and only has the fulness of holiness. i.
Cor xii
this thing belonges to Christ alone, for of his fulness al we have received
as saint Ihon says. And where we have gifts of the holy spirit, by measure
so much as pleases god of his goodness to give: Christ our Lord and savior
had the fulness of ye spirit without all measure, Ihon* iii*
that of his fullness we all might receive part. Christ has the fullness of
the gifts of the spirit so much, that although he give part too us all, yet
he has nothing less him self. For as the Sun geues light plentiful to the
whole world, and yet kepes the self same light within it self: so our savior
Christ God and man has the perfect fulness of all goodness in him self, and
yet geues part to us as he thinks good, not losinge any piece of that he has
him self, but lightninge our darkness with that light which he has within
him self. Saint Paul says he is our wisdom, i. Corin. i.
righteousness, holiness and redemption, because he geues us all these things.

As it is in flesh, so is it in all other creatures: although a probable
objection to the contrari may be made out of the scriptures them selves: Our
savior Christ saying, Math. xxiii
woo to the Scribes and Pharise is which taught that he, which swore by the
temple or the altar, was nothing, but if he swore by the gold of the temple,
or the offering on the altar, he was in faut: semes to teach contrary, for
he ads unto more, saying that the temple makes the gold holy, and the altar
the offering: and that he which swears by ye altar, swears by it, and those
things which be on it, and he that swears by the temple, swears by it, and
him which is in it, as though the temple and the altar made other things
holy. i. Corin. ^ii
Saint Paul speakinge of the marriage of the faithful and the vnfaithefull,
says that ye unfaithful part is made holy by the faithful. But here you must
mark that this holiness which saint Paul speaks of, belo^ges nothing to the
salvation, or forgeuenes of sin of the unholy party but teaches that such
marriage to continue is not unlawful and whoredom, and the children so borne,
be not bastards, and Heathe^s. That other holiness in the temple and the altar,
is but such a holiness as Moses teaches in his law, which than was a ceremony,
but is now taken away, and therefore belo^gs not to unto us. Any thing is called
holy by the law of Moses, Holy.
which is dedicated to serve god in any kind of ceremoni or service in the
temple, and is no more turned to serve man in any kind of civil matter, or in
his house: or else which by his institution signifies some holy thing unto us.
But these be called holy, not because any holiness for salvation is in them, or
yt they can give holiness to other things: but because the end and use where
unto they be turned is holy. Nothing beside man ca^ receive this true holiness:
for faith is ye instrument and means whereby true holiness is received, which
profit to salvation, whereof the Prophet speaks here chiefly.

But it is not so with the euilnes and sin of man: for y^ does not only defile
the man: Sin defiles not only the man him self but every thing that he does,
and all that use hy^ company.
when it is in him, but all that the evil man does is evil also: as all ye
touches the thing which is defiled, is defiled also.

For as a car^on does not only smell evil it self, but infectes all that
come nere it: So that man which is defiled in soul, does defile all things
that he takes in hand. Ualentianus a christian man, turned from Idolatrye to
the knowledge of Christ, and afterward made Emperor, when other had cast upon
him such holy water as they made to their Idols: he was angrye with them
that they defiled his coat, and smote the priest that gave him the holy water,
and moved him to sacrifice. For he thought (as truth is) that whatsoever was
consecrated too Idols, was so^ filthye that it defiled whatsoever it touched,
if it was received with such opinion of holiness as they thought. Some read
here, if he that is defiled by the deadde do touch. etc. the sense is both
one of this and that.

Number. xiii
Many unclean things were in Moses law, that whosoever touched them,
should be unclean also: as he that touches a dead body, shall be unclean.7.
days: and he that has the flux of seed shall be unclean: Leuit. xiii
and he that touches the bed where such have lain, or sits where they have
sitten, shall be unclean also. But this is not so much for the uncleanness,
which is in the dead body or the sede by nature (for both be the good
creatures of God) as ye under this figure God would teach us that we should
not as much as touch sin, which is the death of the soul. Likewise the
evil lusts, which raygne wha^ the flux of the sede is, be the causes which
make them unclean, which suffer such diseases and affections. So that whether
we read, he that is defiled in soul, or he that is defiled by the dead, it is
sin that both do mean: For that not only defyles, but killes the soul
which does it. And sin is such that it defiles all that touch it as Strack
says, comparing it to pitch: Eccle xiii i. Cor. xv
He that touches pitche is defiled with it. Saint Paul says also: evil
communications corrupt good manners. David says: Psalm. cix
the sinners prayer is turned into sin. The good man therefore makes all his
works good: and the evil defiles every good thing he takes in hand.

This verse teaches plain that the hole life of an evil man, whatsoever he
does is defiled. i. Cor. x.
For as saint Paul requires, of a good man that whether he eat or drink, or
whatsoever he do, he should do all to the glory of God: So the evil man if he
eat, drink, sleep, wake, talk, work* or be Idle, all is defiled before the
Lord. For an evil tree can not bring forth good fruit, nor figs grow on
briars: yea, The life of the wicked is all holly d^fyled.
let him study, pray, fast, give almisse, bye ^rentals, give his body to be
burned, or do what he can devise, and it is defiled. If I had all faith says
saint Paul, so that I could make mountains to stir out of i. Cor. xiii.
their places: if I know all secrets, give my goods in alms, and my body to
be burned, I am nothing better: it profits me nothing if I lack charity.
All evil men lack charity: For by this shall ye be known too be good men,
Ihon. xiii
and so my scholars, if ye love one another (says our savior Christ)
therefore whatsoever they do, it is defiled. The good man if he eat or drink,
he does it with thanks giuinge to God, for such sustenaunce righteously
gotten, and soberly takes it, to refreshe his weak nature, that he may the
better serve his Lord God. If he work, use marchaundise, or any other kind
of life, he does it so much for his own, as for the comen profit: But the evil
man either geues not due thanks for his meat, or gettes it wrongfully, lays
it up nigardly or else spendes it vnthriftely: And in all his labor sekes his
own profitte, with the hurt of others, and therefore it is sin.

By this is also proved this great controversy, whether we be made righteous by
works or faith. For if works should make us righteous then the good works
which an evil man does, We be not mad^ righteous by woor^^^ properly.
should make him righteous. But the Prophet says here, that whatsoever the
evil man does it is defiled. Therefore the man must be good before the work be
good, as our savior Christ says: Either make the tree good and the fruit
good, or make the tree evil and the fruit evil. And as the fruit makes not the
tree good, but shows and geues it to be a good tree: So it is in the evil
fruit and the tree. The sour crabtree makes the crabbes bitter, and not the
crabbes makes the tree evil As the tree is, so is his fruit: and as the man
is, such is his life. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart,
bringes forth good things, Luke. vi
and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, bringes forth evil.
But the heart and ye man is evil, before the deed be evil, not in time, but
in the order of nature. For as in a well spring, look what taste ye water has
at the head of ye spring, the same it has when it runs forth: So if ye
heart of man be defiled, which is the spring whereof comes hordom, adultery,
murder, and all other our doings, the deeds must needs be naught, which
come out of such a defiled headde and spring. So that if we will do any good
deed, we must be good me^ and trees before, in Gods sight and election of
God, that our fruit and deeds may be good. For out of an evil root, can not
come good fruits. God loves the deeds for the ma^s sake* which does them,
rather than the man for the good works that he does.

Gene. iiii The work is good for the man's sake
As God looked first at Abel and then at his gifts: but to Cain and his
offeringes he looked not, because Abel was a choosen vessel of God, therefore
God received his offeringes: and Cains were not received, because he was not of
that number. For as a scholemayster will take in good part the diligence that
his scholars can do, and if he see them put their good wills theretoo, he will
bear with their faults, and teach them their lessons: But to stubburne and
froward, he will show no gentelnes, but cast them of: So God with those whom he
has chosen in Christ, before the world was made, will bear with their
infirmities, and wyncke at their littell faults, teach them to do better, and
praise their well doings and gentellye correct their faults: But his enemies
and outcastes, because whatsoever they do is hypocresye, he loves them not,
but even their prayer is turned to sin, and whatsoever they do is defiled,
because they be not graffed and chosen in Christ Jesus, as the wise man
says: (...) i.ii.
the wicked man and his wickedness are hated in like of God. Thus the man makes
the work good, rather then the work makes the man good in Gods sight and
judgment, be it never so godly to the outward show in ye eye. So if the
heart of man and conscience be defiled: it defiles the good creatures of God,
which otherwise be good and lawefull. Titus. i.
Saint Paul speakinge of meats says all be clean and laweful to them
which be clean: but to the unclean, nothing is clean, but their minds and
consciences be defiled. For ^f a man eat but a piece of bread, and think that
it is not lawful for him to do so, he sins, because he does it not of
faith: and so the conscience wantinge faith is defiled. For whatsoever is not
faith is sin: Rom^. xiiii.
and he wa^tinge true knowledge that God made all things to serve man, now
through supersticion and a defiled conscience, serves that creature which
should serve him, and so defiles that which of it self God has created
holy, clean, and mete to be eaten at al times, with thankesgeuing. All this
comes by reason of sinful superstition in the man, which not beleuinge the
scriptures that all meats be laweful for all men, at all times, wantes faith,
and so has his conscience defiled, which defiles the meat which he eats.

Where as they commonly reason, Sin conde^nes, but good works saues not.
our evil works condemn us, therefore our good works save us: this place
of the Prophet teaches the contrary reason: For all the Priests in their
general counsel, grant that he which is defiled in soul, defiles al
things which he does: yet they deny that if a holy thing touch an other
thing unholy, that it makes it holy also: So that sin has greater strength
to defile other things, then goodness has to make other things holy. Saint
Paul reasoninge of the same matter, Roma. vi.
teaches us how to conclude, saying: the reward of sin is death, and then
he says not: the reward of virtue and good works is everlasting life, but
he says: everlasting life is the free gift of God. Thus must we reason than,
both as the Prophet does here, and saint Paul in the same ease: that our
evil is more able too condemn us, then our goodness is to save us. This
should also be a sufficient warninge for us, too beware what company we
join our selves unto: For sin in one man is of so great force, that it
defiles all the company he is in. Thus teaches saint Paul: evil
communication corruptes good manners. i. Cor. xv ii. Timo. ii
The wickedness which is in these me^ it crepes like a ca^ker which infects
always the next part unto it, until it have run through and infected the whole
body: So ye wicked never cease, Evil compani is to he avoided.
until they have drawn unto them all such as keep their company.

What is a more dangerous thing than too keep company with unthrifts? Have
not many which before they knew such vnthriftynes, were sober and honest: but
after they have been tangled with such evil men, sold house and land, some
became beggars, and many hanged. Have not many honest young men by keeping
company with swearers and horehunters, become open blasphemers, and give them
selves to al unhappiness. So in companing with Papists, and to please the
world, many have forsaken the truth which they knew and professed, and are
become open enemies and persecuters of God and his people. Did not Solomon fall
too Idolatry with marriyng Heathen wives? iii. Reg. ^^i
Did not God forbid marriage with the Heathen, least they should entyse us to
Idolatry? Deutero* vii
Was not Sampson overcome in keeping company with Dalida? Judge. xvi


What a proud presumption then is this to think: I am strong enough, wise
enough to take heed to my self, in what company so ever I shall come? For except
you be wiser then Salomo^, or stronger then Sampson, thou shall be overcome as
they were. When thou shall sit among Papists and hear them blaspheme thy God
and praise their Idolatrye: how canste thou escape with a safe conscience
undefiled, if thou hold thy peace? yea, and if thou have not greater grace and
learning to judge good and evil, thou shalt hear some crooked reasons which
shall deceive thee, and peradventure entangle thee and bring thee from gods
truth. If thou sit by, hear the truth spoken against, and will not defend
it to thy power: thou art gylty to thy Lord God. Math. xii.
For Christ says: he that is not with me is against me. If thou speak in
Gods cause thou shall be in danger of thy life and goods, or both. These
things well considered would make them which have the fear of God in them,
too mark this lesson well, and fly evil company: for whatsoever the evil
man (who is defiled in soul) touches, it is defiled.

Where the Prophet^ says here that the people and the works of their hands
and all that they brought thither ^o offer, was defiled also, it moves this
hard question: whether the euilnes of the minister do defile his ministry,
and Gods Sacraments, which be ministers. First mark that the minister, if he
be a dronkarde, an adulterye, or covetous. etc. he does not hurt the strength
of the Sacrament which he ministers, An evil minister makes not the Sacrament
or word evil. i. Cor. xi
neither yet defiles any man that receives at his hands: but to him self he
ministers damnation, as saint Paul says he that eats and drinks
vnwoorthelye, eats and drinks his own damnation. But he says sibi ipsi to
him self (for so is the Greek, and not to thee) he receives judgment, If we
should flee ministers because of their sin, whom shall we than hear? for
who wantes sin? So in preachinge as long as they say true, hear them,
though their doctrine condemn them selves. For Christ says: Math. xxiii.
in Moses chair sit the Scribes and Phariseis, do as they bid and teach
you, but do not as they do. So he that is baptized of an evil minister, is
as well baptized, as he that receyues it of the good, and as much does it
profit him: for else so much difference should be betwixt their baptismes, as
is betwixt the goodness of ye ministers: and the baptism of the better
minister, should excel the baptism of the worse: and then might we well
say: I am Paul's, I am Apolloes, and I am Cephas, which Paul forbiddes. i.
Corin. i
The goodness of baptism hanges upon God, who did institute it, and not on the
minister which geues it.

Let them look therefore which (...) so holy, that rather they will sit at
home, than here pray or communicate with such a minister as pleases them not,
what scripture or example they follow? Esaias* Ieremi Aggeus, yea Christ and his
Apostles forsaked not Jerusalem, but diligently kept the feasts appointed by
God, and offered their sacrifices according too the law: though the temple
was full of Civil priests, Scribes and Phariseis. As long as Gods
institucion in his Sacraments and sacrafices was kept, they did not so much
respect the goodness or euylnes of the minister: no more ought thou to do.

We may not communicate at Popish masses.
Than if the euilnes of the minister do not hurt me, which receyues the
Sacrament: why am I forbidden too communicate with Papists at their mass?
Surely not so much for the euilnes of the men the^ selves, as the wickedness of
the order and thing which they minister. For when thou come to the
Communion with the Papists, and according to saint Paul would eat of
that bread, and drink of ye cup: they will neither give thee bread nor
wine, according to Christ's institution (for they say the substance is
changed, and there remaynes no bread) but they will give thee an Idol of their
own making, which they call their God. They come not together according to
Christ's rule, to break the bread: but they creep into a corner, as the Pope
teaches the^, too sacrifice for the quick and the dead, to ^el heaven, harow
hell, and swepe Purgatory of all such as will pay. They come not to
communicate with the people, but too eat up all alone. Therefore because they
have changed Christ's ordinance in his supper, broken his commandment, and
set up their own devise, we must not meddle with them in such things as they
have done contrary to God and his word. Their baptism, although it have
many evil things blend in among: Baptism of Papists is not so evil as the
mass, and yet faithful ministers are to be preferred to baptism.
yet because they keep the substance of the Sacrament the words and facion
that Christ him self used, it is nothing so evil as their mass is:
although it be as much too be abhorred of all good men as may be. And good
men ought to seek as much as may be, to have their children Christened in a
Christian congregation, and of a godly minister, where no such cuniuring nor
misuse is practiced. Yet if he can not come by such a one as he would wisshe,
let not the Christian parente think his child too be worse Baptized,
because the minyster is wicked: for every one shall sink in his own sin,
Ezech, xviii*
and the father shall not dye for the child, nor the child for the father,
nor the minister for him which receyues at him, nor he that receives for the
euilnes of the minister: although that minister, which so wickedly corruptes y^
good Sacraments? and holy ordinances of God, does minister the^ to his own
dampnation and judgment.

Than to conclude this place, the Prophet here exhortes the people to the
buildinge of the temple. For although they had an aultare to sacrifice on for
the time: yet because they left undone that building which God sent the^ home
to do, and willed them so straightly to do it: they brake his commandment in
not buylding, and so were defiled with sin of disobedience. And the heart
being ones so defiled, all their works which came from such a defiled
heart, must needs be defiled also. When Saul was commanded by God to
destroy all the Amelekites, i. Reg xv Disobedience to God defiles all our
doings.
and all that had life among them and to spare none: he was moved with a
foolish pity and covetousness, and saved the fairest and lattest cattle to
sacrifice unto God: But God because of his disobedience, cast him and all his
posterity from the kingdom, and Samuel tells him that obedience is better
then sacrifice. Some would think it cruelnes to kill the beasts which made
no fault: and other would think it holiness to save for Gods sacrifice, the
fattest and fairest: But that is not cruelnes which God biddes, neither is
that good which he forbiddes, whatsoever woorldly reason ca^ say to the
contrari. Therefore let us with out all e^cuse do that which God commau^des, and
seek no startinge holes: Gods commandment must be kept without excuse.
for than we deceive our selves.

These people might allege poverty, the kings authority who forbad them to
build: but nothing can defend us, where that is left undone which God
commands, but it is sin. And where this sin of disobedience raygnes, there
the man and all that he does, is defiled. Therefore if they would that any
thing which they did or took in hand, should please God: they must wash
away this filthy disobedience, build this temple, and all should be well. If
we would apply these things to our selves and our times, we should with
hearty repentance buyld Gods house much more diligently than we do: and
truly although we have had great plages, yet is there greater behind, if we
do it not thoroughly without halting: For the servant which knows his
masters will, and does it not, shall have many strypes.

The Text.






month, from that day wha^ the ground work of the temple was laid,
consider it (I say) in your heart.



The Prophet calls them here to an earnest and diligent consideration of the
years past, and the plages which they suffered so many, so diverse, so grievous
and strange. As though he should say unto them thus: ye are to negligent in
markinge Gods working toward you, which has wrought so wonderful great
things among you, to the intent that ye should return unto him, and be more
diligente in buyldinge his house, which so straightly charged you to do. Mark
the^ now more diligently, for God did it to teach you your duty, if ye
would have learned. God does not only teach us by his word and writing,
Gods doings should teach us whether they be good or plages.
by Prophets and preachinge, but by his deeds also and woorking. If they be
good, and blessings, to love and thank him for all his goodness bestowed on us
such mysers: and if they be sharp and painful, to bring us home again by
repentance, to ask forgeuenes of our faults, and beware that we no more
offend him. Therefore these strange plages which ye have suffered so many
years, that the earth did not yield her fruit, your meat and drink did not
feed you, your clothes did not keep you warm, your money wasted in your
purses, ye could not tell how, as though it fell out of the bottom, your
corn in the barnes consumed ye wiste not how, yea when it came to fanninge
and wyndowing a man thought in one heap he should have had.20. busshels, he
found but.10. the half: And in the wine press, where ye thought too have
had.50. gallons, almost.3. parts lacked and were consumed, and there was
but.20. gallons. A good husband that has much experience, when he comes too
an heap of corn, or a press of wine, will guess within a few bushels or
gallons, how much is contained in the whole: but here in the corn too be
deceived the half, and in the wine three parts was very strange, and could
not be but as God said before, that when it was brought into the house, he
did blow it away, and so it consumed. We can not worthily consider Gods
plages without a special grace.
What a negligence was this to suffer such plages so many years, and yet to
be so hard hearted that they wayed them not, but lightly let them pass, not
consideringe wherefore God sent them, nor what fault was in the^ to be amended,
which provoked Gods anger so grievously against them? But such blindenes is in
us all, that when we be under the rod, we feel it not, if God open not
our eyes to see his displeasure: yea, rather of nature we murmur against his
gentle corrections.

Or else if God withholde his heavy hand for a time to try whether we will
amend with litell correction, before he lay on us a greater: we fall to our
old facio^s and forget God, his rod, our duty, and his reverence, attributing
such plages to unseasonable wether, pestilent ayers, or some evil chance, as
though they came not from God. As when we had the sweat where so many dyed so
suddenly, that men were astoned at it, so many sick that there was not hole
folks inoughe too keep them: Then for that time we could call on God, repent,
restore evil gotten goods, give alms, and be sorry that we had not ben more
liberal before time: but as soon as it ceased; we were as evil or worse then
before. So in the late days of bloody persecution and cruel Popery, how often
with tears desired we God once again to restore us, and we would no more so
wickedly live? and yet we be worse then before. How many sweates, rebellio^s,
dearthes, unseasonable years have we had, and yet we have forgotten the^, as
though they came not from God, nor yet that God had not sent them to teach
us to turn to him by them.

Gods doyngs are diligently to be considered.
The workinges of God, whether they be in blessinge or plaging, present or past,
to our selves or others particularly, or to a whole country generally, are
depely to be considered: for he would teach us many things by them, if we had
that grace, wit and eyes to consider them. i. Cori^. ^.
Saint Paul teaches the Corinthians by examples past long before that they
should not murmur, be Idolatours, nor tempte Christ as their fathers did, least
they should be destroyed as their fathers were. How often does the scriptur
put the Jews in remembrance of their great deliverance out of ye vile
bondage in Egipte, (...). ^i.i^
and biddes them not trouble the stranger, for they were strangers in Egypt
them selves, and knew the greefes, which strangers suffered. In particular
examples and plages he says: Remember Lottes wife, Luc. xv^^
least in lokinge back, and desiringe your old lusts in Sodom, ye perish
as she did.

So in good things also, he teaches us by examples paste: ye see the
sufferinge of Job, and the end how the Lord rewarded him, says saint
James, James. v.
mouinge us too patience in trouble. And generally it is said to us all: Roma.
xv.
What things so ever are written before hand, they are written for our
learning, that by patience and comfort of the scripture we might have hope.

So in things done in our time, The plage of one is a warninge too the rest.
when we see Gods anger, poured upon the whole Realm, or one country, or
house, as war, plage, hunger, dearthe, sickness, fire, loss, of lands, or
goods, sweet, loss of friends, look what grievous and notable sins, then
reigned in such men or places, and learn to avoid the same, least the like
fall on thee. For by that plague God teaches all, which hear of it, too
avoid the like wickedness, least like plagues fall on them. If they will not
learn, what maruayle is it, if they sincke in their own sin?

So if thou see thy neighbor punished rejoice not at it* but pray for him,
comfort him, and learn the goodness of God toward thy self: that where thou
have deserved more too be punished then he, yet God spares thee, and geues the
warning by his punishment too amend betimes, least thy course be next, and
then shalt thou be more greuouslye plaged, because thou did not learn to
amend thy faults by his correction and punishment.

If thy neighbor be in wealth and thou in trouble: learn too amend thy
faults by his, that God may bestow his benefits on thee, as well as on him.
Disdain not his wealth, nor be not sorry for it, whether he be good man or evil:
for if he be evil, God would win him with gentleness: if he be good, follow
his doings, that God may bless thee also. Thus shall we learn of Gods
doings too comfort our selves, and amend our own lives.

How diligent we should be to search out for what cause God plages us, we
are taught by Joshua, in castinge lotte with ye people when they were plaged,
Joshua. vii.
who had angered God so greuous^y, that he punished them so sharply, and so
tried by the lotte that Acham was in the fault. So Saul tried by lo^^e,
(...). iiii.
that his son Ionatha^ had offended when God so sharpelye punished them.
Jonas runninge from God was tried by lotte, cast into the sea, and the tempest
ceased.

Thus must not Gods plages and works be lightly passed over, offe^ders must
be tri^d and punished that the plage man cease.
but depely considered wherefore he punishes, and the offenders tried out and
punished ye Gods plage may sease* for before, it will not. If the rulers be
negligente in punishinge sin, as their duetye requires, God must needs take
it in hand him self (for syn must needs be punished, and he is a righteous
God, and will as well punish ye sinner, as reward the good) but if man do
punish the fault, God will not, for he punishes not twyse for one fault.
Therefore let us no more be so negligent, in not regardinge Gods plages, least
in despising little gentle ones, we provoke him to pour his whole wrath on us,
as these men did.

He biddes them look backewarde, not at one year or two passed, but even
from the beginning whole forty years, since one stoone was laid on an other
in ye foundation of the Temple, and till all ye time that they left of their
buyldinge, and too remember how unfruitful and unseasonable years they had?
The corn did not yield the half that men looked for, or yet judged it to
be: ye wine not three parts, of that they hoped for in thus many years
together* therefore they should have known that all was for their disobedience
in not buylding the Lords house.

But how came all this to pass? who was the woorker of these plages? was it
wind, myldew, hayle, storms or tempests, which did all this? In deed they
had all these and many mo: but God says, I smote you with blastinge wyndes
and myldewe, and hayle, all the works of your hands. In which he teaches
that wynd, hayle, myldewe, storm and tempests be his servant, go his
messages, where he will, destroying so much and so little, wha^ and where as it
pleases him, Psalm. cxlviii.
as David says: fire, hayle, snow, yse and tempests, which do his
commandment. All though God use his creatures in punishinge, yet he calls it
his own deed
And because no such harm comes by chance, or by the rulinge of the Stars,
but all be his creatures, serve and obey his holy will and pleasure, he calls
it his own deed, and says I smote you. Therefore by his just judgment it
is done, whatsoever is destroyed: and murmr or grudge we must not at his
doings, thinking him too do us wrong, or deal like a tyranne with us, but
thankefullye bear it, knowing that by such light punishmente, Job. ^
he wills us co amend and escape a greater. We must say with Job, the
Lord gave it, and the Lord took it away, as the Lord wills so let it be,
blessed be the name of the Lord now and ever.

If we could thus with a reverent fear acknowledge Gods workinge, in all his
punishinge, we would not seek unlawful means in danger of fire as s. Agas
letters, the holy candell or a hawthorne in lighteninge, the hallowed bell to
ringe in thunder. etc: and it would be a great quietness to our minds that we
should patiently and willinglye bear all crosses ye he shall lay upon us,
least we seem too grudge at his doings, which were no small fault When Job
had lost all that he had, yet he accused neither devil, enemies, nor any
other man, but said: if we received good things at the Lords hands, why
should we not suffer evil also? The Lord gave it, and the Lord took it
away.

Though the devil of malice sturred up such men to commit such robbery against
Job, and they of coueteousnesse or envy did spoil and rob the good man,
and so both the devil and his members, in all their doings heap their own
condemnation, because they do it of such a wicked mind, and for so evil a
purpose and end: yet the good man in such plages, Gods love and justice, the
devils malice, and man's crueltye apeare in one deed.
has a further respect to God, thynkinge that he which rules all, and
suffers these things by such means tries his patience, and therefore he
thankefully takes it. So in one deed Gods love with just punishment for our
sins and trial of our faither and patience do appear: and also the malice
of the devil toward us, and the frowardness of us one toward an other.
But because the end and purpose wherefore it is done, be so far diverse, we
work our own dampnatio^ willingly, when we do any wickedness one toward
another: and God is not the cause nor yet the entiser of us too any evil, but
a just punisher of all sin.

Mark here diligently the merciful goodness of our good God, and father in
punishinge his people, how he destroys not utterly first their wives and
children, or plages them with extreme diseases, but begins gently with their
corn and other fruits, far of from them, whose loss they might better
bear: God begynnes first ge^tly to punish.
yet nevertheless by these little ones he gyues the^ warninge to amend, or
else he will punish them more grievously, and come nerer unto the^ in such
thingess a they love more dearly* and at length they and all theirs should
perish, if they would not amend. Thus says God, I will visit you in the
rod of men, that is to say gentillye: Psalm. xcix.
and David in Gods name says: I will visit their wickedness with a rod, and
their sins with a scourge, but my mercy I will not take away from them, nor
I will not hurt them, as I am a true God. Thus like a father, and not like a
tyranne he punishes to amend, and not too destroy, to save, and not to
condemn, for love, and not for envy, to pull us from our wickedness to him,
and not to make us too hate him, or run from him, first by little ones, that
we may avoid greater, and not in them utterly perish.

The end of Gods punishing, this people so long, appears here when he says:
you would not turn unto me says the Lord. For this cause then, God
punishes for our profit and suffers long.
that they should turn to him, did he send these plages, and not for hate or
harm to his people. But what a wickedness and hard hearts were these men of,
that among so many threateninges, so great plages, and in so many years, they
would not turn unto the Lord. Here appears how true it was that he said
before, that all were fallen on sleep, both prince, priest, and people
until the Lord awaked up all their spirits, to see their great
disobedience, and to goo about their buyldinge. And also this declares how
unable and unwilling we be to do good, until God stir us up by his grace.
God deals with us as the shepehearde does with his sheep: If a sheep run
from his fellows, the shepeherde settes his dog after it, not to devour it,
but too bring it in again: So our heavenly shepehearde, if any of us his
sheep disobey him, he settes his dog after us, not too hurt us, but too
bring us home to a consideration of our duty toward this our heavenly
father and louinge sheepehearde.

Gods dogs be pouertye, banishment, sickness, evil rulers, dearth, death,
war, ignorance, superstition, loss of goods, or friends. etc. Who could have
holden his hands beside such a sturdye people, and not utterly have destroyed
the^, where no sort of men among such a number, for so many plages in so
many years, would turn to their lord God. God suffers long,
Here therefore may appear the long suffering of God, who does not suddenly
in a rage take vengeance on us as soon as the fault is done: (as one of us
does toward an other) but taries so long too look for our amendment and
repentance. Roma. xi.
Also it is euidente how true that is which God says: all the day long I
stretched out my hands too an unfaithful and rebellious people. Reuela. iii.
Our savior Christ says he stands and knockes at the door, and would
come in, and we will not let him in.

The Lord for his mercies sake softe^ our hearts that we despise not such
gentill callinges, and be found in the number of such hard hearts, least we
be given up to our own lusts, and so perish in our own wickedness. When we
read and hear this sturdye disobedience toward God, we think this people
to be ye worste under heaven, and if we had been in their case we would not have been so disobediet: But if we look at our selves, and without flattery examine
our own consciences and behavior toward God, we shall find that we have been plaged no less then they and have had Gods long suffera^ce and benefits
showed toward us no less then they, and yet we have not learned so much, yea
less than they. God of his goodness amend it in us for Christ's sake.

And because they had been so negligent, in not considering Gods plages and
works among them so many years yet twyse again in this verse, he wills
them not lightly too consider it nor forget it any longer as they had done
before times, but depely to way why those plages had fall upon them. God works
nothing in vain but for our learning and great profit, that we may
remember our duty the better and more reuerentlye worship him hereafter. It is
no small fault so lightly to consider Gods works toward us: for that we might
the better do it, he has given man only reason as a chief treasure, that
we may do the same, and also taught us by his word to do so. Therefore if we
do it not, we are worse the^ beasts, which have not reason too consider such
his woorkinges.

No kind of fruit, corn, vynes, figs, pomegranates, olives, had
prosperously increased of all these years* which could not be but for some
great cause: and yet they passed but lightely on it, neither fearinge God, the
more least he should increase the plagues, nor amended their lives, that he
might hold his hand from plaginge them any longer. Reme^bringe our sins,
and plages, work good in us.
Often and earnest remembringe of our disobedience toward God, and
consideringe his scourges for the same, Luke. xv.
works in all good herts an earnest amendment of life. The unthrifty son in
the Gospel that had spent all his portion of goods vnthriftely, when he was
driven by hunger to remembrance of him self and his misbehauiour: Comes home to
his father, submittes him self, confesses his fault, saying: Father I have
sinned against heaven and thee, and am not worthy to be called thy son: and
so is received to mercy.

The Publican acknowledginge his sins, went home righteous. Saint Paul, i.
Timo. i.
remembringe how he was a persecuter, cruel, a blasphemer, is kept in an
humble and lowli knowledge of him self. Esdras and Daniel confessinge their
disobedience and sins of the hole people, Daniel. ix.
knowledge their misery, Gods justice in punishinge, and so obtain mercy.
Moses to teach the Jews too be pitiful too strangers, Exo. xxii.
biddes them remember how they were strangers in Egipte, and slaves to
Pharao: For in so consideringe their old estate and heavy case that they were
in before, they should learn the better to pity strangers and consider their
heaviness. This by remembringe diligently our case and state pass, with Gods
punishment for our sins, we shall learn our misery, call for help of God,
and be more ware hereafter that we fall not into the like sins, and so
procure Gods anger and heavier hand, heaping our own damnation. God sendes
such things to teach us our duty: and if we do not learn, he will cast us out
of his schole. No good scholemayster will suffer such lewd scholars in his
schole, as will not learn, wha^ they be sufficiently taught, both by
gentilnes and sharpnes, by things past and present, by example of others, and
experience of them selves.

And where these plages began to fall upon them, even after the ground work
of the temple was laid, and when they left of buylding: a man would think,
God dealt extremely with them, which would not spare them any thing at all,
but for the first fault punishes so sharply and continues so long. But as
the Machabees teach, ii. Macha. vi.
when he has rekened the cruelty and persecution of Antiochus, least a man
should think God hated his people for dealinge so sharply with them, he
says: God did it for love, and that he loved the^ more then al other
people, because by correction he would so soon call them back and not let
them live in sin still, as he did other nations. The Gentiles whom he
punished nothing so sharply, but let live at their pleasure, they knew him
not, worshipped him not, he gave them not his word, nor his Prophets, but
let them take their pleasure, as though he cared not for them, Psalm. cxix.
David considering the diverse plagues and sickness, which God laid on him,
said: Gods punisshing is a token of his love.
it is good for me that thou haste corrected and humbled me, for before I was
corrected, I sinned. For as the^^ man will suffer those beasts, which he
apointes to be killed, to go where they lust in the best pastures, and to
break his hedges, that in so doing the sooner they be fat, the sooner they
may be slain: So God, those people which he loves not in Christ his son, he
lets them take their pleasure, correctes them not for their ame^dement, but
lets them work their just condempnation, in geuinge them up too their own
lusts. Every father says the apostle, correctes his children, and those which
he correctes not be bastards. And although correction of God seem sharp and
bitter for the present time* and semes to come of hat^ and not of love, yet the
end is sweet loving and profitable that he may give us his holiness. A vessel
if it be foul, must be scoured before wine be put in it, and he yt will make
his ground fruitful, must first pull up the weeds, before he sow good seed:
So by these sharp medecines of Gods correction, must the body be purged,
that ye mind may bring forth his due fruit in fear and reverence.

Let us in England therefore remember Gods plagues, which we have suffered, of
Gods good will, so long and many, for our amendment: and let us lamente our
hardenes of heart, that have been so grievously and long punished, and yet have
not duly considered the heaviness of Gods hand, nor the greatness of our
sins, which have so provoked his anger upon us. We are sufficiently taught
by all examples before us, if we will learn, and by these present plages that
we feel, what a grievous thing and horrible sin it is in Gods sight, to
leave Gods house vnbuylte: and yet like unreasonable beasts and vnsensyble, we
neither fear our good God as ^ Lord, nor love him as a father, as Malachie
says: Malachie. i
If I be your Lord, where is the fear ye owe me? If I be your father, where
is the love that is due unto me?

From hence forth God promises too bless their fruit and works: and they
had not so great scarsenes before, but now they should have as great plentye.
God turns to us when we turn to him.
So that when man turns unto God, God turns unto him: when man amends, God
looks cherefully on him, where before he was angry: when man leaves sinninge,
God leaves plaginge: when man buyldes Gods house, and maintains his true
religion, God blesses his house, and all that is in it.

As Moses teaches: Deutre xxviii.
If thou hear the voice of the Lord thy God to do his commandment, thou
shalt be blessed in the City, in thy house, in the field. etc.

And how came all this to pass, Preaching moves more than plages.
that they were so amended? by preachinge rather then plaginge: for that which
could not be obtained in 40. years plagues, was gotten in three weeks
preachinge. Aggeus came the first day of the 6. month, and the 24. of
the same they began to work: so they had no more time too preach in, nor
too prepare their tools in, but three weeks and three days. Such a strong
thing is the word of God, sharper then a two edged swoorde, and pearcinge to
the division of the mind and soul: and where it is earnestly received, Hebre.
iiii.
it makes many to fear no death nor displeasure, nor to think any thing
painful, so that he may please his God. Therefore let us have it in reverence,
use it, hear it, read it, mark it, remember it, and practice it: for in it
is showed unto us all the counsel of God, and it is set for a sufficient
doctrine to us, to stir us up too the doing of our duty, Gentilnes is often
better tha^ sharpenes.
and salvation of our souls, to the worshipping of God, and understanding his
goodness offered unto us. Also a worthy example it is to be followed of all that
have correction of other, yt when the rod will not serve, to prove words and
counsel: For often, many be such, that they will do more for a word, then a
stripe, and often strokes harden the heart, when gentleness wynnes and persuades.

The Text.




of the Heathen: and I will throw down the Chariots and the ryders in them,
the Horses shall fall down, and the ryders on them, and the noblest shall be
slain by the swoorde of his brother.



The people of God now going diligently about to build the Lords house, God
bless^^ the^ that build his house, and sendes them preachers.
and woorkinge at it now three full months, did so well please the Lord, that
he sent his Prophet twyse on a day to comfort and encourage them in their
doings. least they should fainte, or be slack in goinge forward, as they
were before. Such a loving Lord is our good God unto his people, that he will
mayntayn and set forward all such as go about diligently to walk in their
vocation, and buyld his house to their power. Every month from the beginning
of the restoringe of this Temple, they had one message or other from God, by
his Prophet, too will them to continue and go forward in this well doing and
buylding Gods house.

In the syxte and seventh month came this Prophet Aggeus with gods message
unto them, as is said before: In the eight month comes Zacharias the
Prophet. Zacha. i
In the 9. month comes this Prophet again twyse on a day from God with
comfortable promises: in the 11. month comes Zachary again. So while they
were thus diligent to do their duty, God was as ready to show them mercy: and
will be to all which do the like, as he has promised that to every one that
has it shall be given. Luke* ix.
Therefore if we be desirous to have increase of the Lords blessings, let us
be diligent to increase that littel, which we have given us first, and it
shall be increased to much more. He bringes the Lords message and not his
own, like a true servant: not for money as the Popes pardoners and Priests
do, but freely and willinglye comes twice a day as the Lord appointes him.
Contrariwise, if the people follow not ye which they be taught, God takes his
word and Prophets from them.

It is written of a holy father called Felix, Felix.
which when certain desired him too preach, he said: In time past when men
did as they were taught, God opened many preachers mouths: now the people
will not learn, therefore God stoppes their mouths.

He is now sent to Zerubabel ye prince and chief ruler, specially by name: but
not as though this promise perteined to him only, and not to the rest of the
people, Promises made to rulers, pertayne too their successors.
but by him to the rest of the people. Under the name of Zerubabel is contained
here all his posterity and kyngedome: for too him it was never performed. As
what leage, truth or promise of favor so ever is made to any king, in the
same is his kyngedome contained, and his subjects are also pertakers of
the same. So the promises made too Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and David, belong not
to them only, but to their children also, successors, heirs, people, and
subjects. Amos. ix
I will restore the decayed houses of David (says the prophet) meaning the
kingdom of Christ and Christians, to the end whom he calls David by the
preaching of the gospel.

For this troubling of heaven and earth enough was said before, and this is
that which the Apostle says to the Hebrews: Hebre. xii.
yet once I trouble heaven and earth: meaning that those things which are
thus troubled, perish, and those which be not, continue: and that those
kingdoms that set up them selves against Christ, shall fall, but Christ's
kyngedome shall stand for ever, as David says: This kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom. It is as much to say: that he would fill the world with
war betwixt the Persians and the Grecians, that they shall trouble the earth.

This Prophet in the verse following tells of the destruction of the kingdom of
Persians, under whose dominion the Jews were now, and to whom they paid
great taxes, as Nehemias tells. He calls it the seat of kyngedomes, because
many kingdoms were subject unto them, and that all the greatest kings feared
them, served them, were in leage with them, or sought friendship at their
hands. And although this is now told, yet it was not fulfilled of a hundred,
forty, and five years afterward, or a hundred, thirtye, and four years as
some do count. It is spoken too comfort the Jews, and answer to two privy
objections, which they might have ^ayde against God and his Prophet.

After that they had now wroughte earnestly at the buyldinge of Gods house
three months, God was so well delyted with them, that where as heretofore he
had so long plaged and sharply punished them, he said? From this day forth
will I bless you and your Olives, vyneyardes, pomegranates, and other fruits
should increase and multiply, which all before had been unfruitful. But to
this the people might have said: what are we the better to have all these
fruytfull and plentious? Are we not Tributaries to the Persians, and what
plentye or profitte so ever we have, they take it from us by their great
taxes?

All is one matter whether we have much or little, plentye or scarcenes, good
cheap or dearthe: for if we have much, we pay much, and if we have but
little, we pay little, so all is one thing too us, except this could be
amended. Therefore our most merciful God, Gods promises, satisfy the
conscience in all doutes.
which will take all doutes from us, which we can object, and comfort us in all
points that we can fear, says thus unto the^ be not afraid of this great
power and kingdom of the Persians, under who^ ye now be, and pay tribute unto,
for rather the^ my people shall be still oppressed, I will pull down the whole
kingdom, and strength thereof, the Chariots, Horses, the ryders on them, and
horsemen, all shall fall, yea the chiefest man among the^, even the King him
self shall be slain by the swoorde, not of a stranger, but of his own
countreime^, brother and servant. And although this shall not come to pass nor
be done in your time and days, yet be ye sure it shall be done at the time
appointed when God shall think it best for his glory, and your commodity.

Daniel in his visions was often taught of 4. kings and Monarchies, which
should come. First of the image which had the head of gold, the arms and
breast of silver, Daniel. i^.vii.
the bealy of brass, the legs of iron: And again by the image of 4.
beasts, a Lion, a Bear, a Libarde, and the fourth for cruelnes wanted a name,
which with his teeth should tear all, and tread under his feet. etc. By
which all, were note^ first the kingdom of the Assirians, and Babilonians,
the second of the Medes and Persians, under which the Jews now were: The
third was the Grecians, and the fourth of the Romans, which all should
raygne in course a time, and should continue to the worlds end, but every
one more cruel and worse then the other, as is now ye Romish Pope, under whom
we be. He is Emperor in deed, usurping the fourth kyngedome, and rules like a
prince on earth above kings, and has driven the Emperor almost out of
Italy and taken the lands and possessions of the Empire from him, The Pope is
Emperor in deed, and his ruli^g is worse then the rest.
and makes him content with a corner of the world in Germany, where the
revenues of the Empire is not now so much as diverse lords have. Every one of
these kyngdoms was worse then the other before them, as these beasts and
mettalles were worse then the other. By the which we may learn that the
kingdom of the Pope is worse then the others were: and that it is worse to be
under him, than the other which were Heathen, and knew not God. God hates
them worse, which bear the name of Christen men, and make a show too love
God, and in deed do nothing else but hate and persecute the good men as the
Pope does. The servant which knows his masters will and does it not,
shall be worse beaten then he which offendes by ignorance.

The kingdom of the Assirians was now pulled down, and given to the
Persians: and this is that kingdom now which the Prophet says God would
destroy and give over to the Grecians.

This came to pass in the time of the last Darius, who in diverse battles
fought with Alexander the great, suffered ye worse and was ouercomen. Where
Alexander first taking Darius wife the queen, his mother and his chyldrn
prisoners, Darius. Alexander*
used them gently as his own. Darius saying such gentleness, and thinkinge to
find like favor for him self, sent Embassage to Alexander and said if he
would let him keep his kingdom still, all other things should be at his
pleasure. But Alexander answered that he could not suffer him so for the
world could no more abide two kings to raygne, then to have two Suns too
shine: therefore there was no remedy, but yield him self if he would live.
Then Darius seeing that, prepared him self to the field, where he was
traitorously slain by his servant Bessus. So is this true which the Prophet
says, the chiefest man by ye sword of his brother should be slain. So would
I translate the Hebrew word Isch, rather then every man as some do. For
every man was not slain by his brother, but the king namely as the history
tells.

This is common in the scripture, too put the word brother for one that is
of the same country, kindred, or religion, and not always for those which have
one father and mother. So it may well stand that he was slain of his
brother, Brother.
that is to say of his countryman, as the history calls Bessus his servant.
Alexander finding king Darius thus deadly wounded of his servant, for justice
sake to punish such traitors, Traitors.
bended down the tops of two young trees, and tied the legs of Bessus to
them, and let the^ swing up suddenly again, and so rent him in pieces. Likewise
David, ii. Reg. ^
when one came unto him, telling him how he had slain. Saul his enemy,
thinkinge thereby too pick a thank, and get a reward of David, he was by the
commandment of David slain: and so should all traitors which be false to
their masters be served. Thus the king being slain, the kingdom was
brought from the Persians too the Gretians, as the Prophet tells here.

Where God says by his Prophet that he will destroy the kingdom, throw
down the horses, and horsemen. etc. we be taught that God makes kings, E^cle
x Leuiti. xviii Princes stand not by their own power.
pulls down, and chaunges kingdoms, from one people too another, for the
sins of the people as Sirach says, and makes to rule whom pleases him.

The land spued out the rulers and people in it for their sins, and God gave
it to the Jews: Therefore let not princes trust in their great strength and
power, for it is the Lord God that gives victory as he thinks good, whether
they be good rulers or evil, they be set up of God, as Solomon says: Prove.
viii. Ihon. xix
in the name of God, by me kings do raygne: and our savior Christ said to
Pilate, thou should have no power over me, except it were given thee from
above. If they be good rulers, it is Gods good blessinge and free mercy: if
they be evil, it is of justice to punish our sins, as Job says: God makes
hypocrites to rule for the sins of the people. Job* xxxiiii.
What cause have we then in England to complain, that God deals so sharply
with us, that where we have been long hypocrites before him, he punished us of
late, a while, with hypocrites too be in authority over us? when the Saxons
invaded this realm, drove out the Englishemen, and ruled as kings, the state
of ye commonwealth was much like to these our days, and the like sins reigned
in all sorts of men, both high and low, nobility and people, rulers and
subjects, prelates and clergy: the most part were great hypocrites, and
superstitious, cruel, covetous, proud, gluttons, whorehunters, and ambitious.
Therefore let us amend, or we shall be given up, to the Spanyardes, Scotts,
Flemmynges, or Frenchmen, as we were then to the Saxons. God gave his people
into the hands of the Babilonia^s and other people round about them, which
were then the commen scourges of the world: and so will he do with us as he
has done to our fathers before us, if we do not amend, for he hates sin in
all ages, and will punish it.

But as God comfortes his people here now buyldinge his house, and says, he
will throw down that kingdom, which than troubled them: so he will be as
good unto us, if we worship him truly, and he will destroy them that
trouble us. His love too his people is greatest as he says: he that touches
you, touches the apple of my eye. So tender is our God over us as we be over
our eyes, Zacha. ii. Gods love in all ages is greatest to his people.
which be the tenderest parts of us: and he will (most assuredlye) revenge
all displeasure done unto us, for he can no more see his people take wrong,
and be oppressed now, then before times. He is no chaungelinge, nor his love
waxes not cold, nor old: we be his children and the members of his mystical
body, as they were now, to whom he promises this help, he is our Lord God
and father, louinge his children and members in all ages, and pouring his
blessings on them, for Christ's sake in whom he has chosen them: therefore he
will show the like mercies unto us, and of justice revenge all displeasures done
too us for his sake.

The last verse makes answer too an other objection, which the Jews might
have made against the Prophet saying: If this kyngedome shall be thrown down,
and so great war shall be, as though heaven and earth should go together: then
shall we be destroyed, we are but few in number, there is but few of us come
home again, and what shall we do then, how shall we escape being compassed about
with so strong and many enemies, we shall be devoured. To this God makes
answer, and bids them not be afraid: God delivers his in greatest
dangers.
for in ye day when this great trouble shall come, I will take the Zerubabel my
servant, whom I love says the Lord, and I will keep thee as my privy signet,
and thou shall not perish says ye mighty Lord of hosts, because I have
chose^ thee. So good a God and comfortable lord is our God to all his people
in all ages, that he will leave no doubt untaken away that can discomfort his
children: But he will satisfy all which can be said, and pull al fear from
us. Therefore Zurubabel is here promised too be delivered out of all dangers
of that great war, and tra^slating of the kingdom from the Persians to ye
Gretians, so that he should catch no harm.

But here ryseth a hard question, how this should be true that God would
deliver Zurubabell in that day of so great trouble, saying that he lived not
so long, but dyed within.14. years after his Prophecy. Zurubabel was the
first prince of Judah, which ruled the people after their returning home from
Babylon: he came home with the people, was their capitayn and had now ruled
a.40. years, he ruled in all but.52. years as the history says: and this
destruction of the kingdom of the Persians was not fulfilled of 145. years
afterward or nere hand so much. How could he then be delivered in that dai,
and died so long before? Promises made too the father, belong to the chyldes
unto this may be au^swered yt which was said before: that promises made to
kings, and that fathers are dot too be applied to the^ selves only, but they
be made also too their children and subjects, and shall be fulfilled in long
years afterward* rather the^ at ye prosent, so will God exercise our faith, in
patie^tly loki^g for his coming when his holy wisdom shall think good, and
not when our foolish rashness shall wish and desire him to come.

Promises made unto Abraham, Isaac, David, and Jacob. etc. were not fulfilled
in their days, but to their children long afterward: so God makes promise
here too these princes and rulers, that all the subjects may know that they
be contained also in the same truce and leage of God, and that the promise
concerns them also, and they shall be delivered in that day from all the
danger of war, and enemies that shall come upon them. And it is as much as
though the Prophet should say: thou Zerubabell and thy kyngedome, all thy
people and subjects, be not afraid: for in those troublesome days I will save
you and keep you as diligently as my ring and private seal.

And that they might the more earnestly "believe it, he called him servant:
whereby he might well assure him self, that if earthely lords and masters
will defend their servants, much more he that was king of heaven and earth,
and Lord of Lords, most tender and louinge of his subjects, would not see
his servants oppressed, violentlye trodden under foot, nor thrown down: but
he would be their mighty deliverer, and revenge their wro^gs. What can he
greater comfort to any people, God delivers his servant, if they will wear
his lyuerye.
than to hear God vouchesafe too call him self their Lord God and master,
and them his servants? If this be thought so great a promotion that an
earthelye lord will take us too his service, speak cherefully to us, set us
in some office or let us wear his lyuery: it is much more too be esteemed to
be servant to Jesus Christ, to bear his cross for that is his lyuery, to
fight under his ba^ner, and have him for our captain. Men do commonly sue
too be servants unto noble men, and wear their lyueryes, that whosoever
sees their coat, may fear them, and under their masters name they may rule
in their cou^trye like lords of the land, do wrong wha^ they lust, and every
man shall call it right: and though they were slaves before, yet now they shall be
every gentilmans fellow* but they which wear Christ's lyuerey, be obedient and
loving to all, do no wrong but suffer, pray for them which persecute them, and
do good for evil This lyuerye we must wear if we will be the lords
servants, and partakers of his promise and deliverance in the day of
trouble.

This similitude, which the Prophet uses of a ringe, that God would keep
him as safely as his ring, is taken of kings" and Princes, which among all
things keep their seal signet and ringe most surely, either them selves, or
betake it too some most trusty friend to keep. If the seal should be
counterfeated, stolen, or bla^ckes sealed with it: what hurt or treason might
be done thereby? their lands, offices, or treasure, might be given away: the
subjects sturred to rebellion, or the destruction of the hole common wealth
might follow thereon. Therefore that they might most certainly persuade them
selves, yt in that troubleso^ time of war and destruction of the kingdom of
the Persians they should be most safely kept: God saves his people in all
dangers.
he says he will keep them, as his ringe and seal, that is too say, most
safely. And as when a friend send his ringe or seal for a token to his
friend, it signifies that he loves him most derelye, too whom he sends
such a pledge of love and friendship: and also teaches him that where he sees
his friends ringe, he should not deny him his request, nor doubt of the
message that it should be counterfeated: so when he names his ringe here, they
should not doubt of his love toward them, The scripture is Gods inde^ture,
and the Sacraments be seals.
nor mistrust his promise. For as with us, when Doctors be created they have a
ring given them as a ceremony of honor and authority, and in marriage, the
husband gives his wife a ringe for a sure pledge of love: so God our savior
under this similitude of a ringe commendes his honor that he has called us
unto, to be his servants and children, the love he bears unto us, in that
he has married us unto him in his son Christ, by the weddinge ring of
says. And the wedding apparel appears when Osee says: Osee. ii.
I will marye the to me in faith, justice, judgment, mercy, and many mercies.

Under this name of a seal, he comme^deth unto us also, Seal.
both his outward visible sacraments, and the inward grace of the holy
Ghost, working in our consciences by them. Saint Paul.iiii. to the Romans
called Circumcision (a Sacrament of the old law) the seal of the
righteousness of faith: and as that was a seal in that time to our fathers of
righteousness, so be our sacraments too us in these days, seals of Gods
promises unto us, and al have one strength and virtue. The scriptur of God is
the indentur betwixt God and us, wherein is contained both the promises, grace,
and mercy, ye God offers to the world in his son Christ, and also the
conditions which he requires to be fulfilled in our behalf: ye sacraments are
ye seals set to his inde^ture, to strengthen our faith yt we do not doubt. For
as it is not enough to write the conditions of a bargain in an indenture,
except it be sealed: so God for our weakness thought it not sufficient too
make us promise of his blessings in writing in his scripture, but he would
seal it with his own blood, and institute his sacraments as seals of
the same truth to remain too be received of us in remembrance of him and
strengthening our faith.

Baptism is a sacrament sealed by God, and sealinge our consciences that God
takes us for his children and servants: and we offer and bind our selves to
serve him only as a lord and father. The supper is also a sacrament, wherein
he fedes us spiritually, (thus taken into his service) with his own precious
body and blood: and we rekening with our selves, where in we have offended
him, ask mercy, nothing doubtinge to obtain it, and renew our bond to
him which we have so often broken, and promise too do so^^ more. So that when
God gives these his sacraments to us by his ministers, and we receive
the same, the bargayn is full made betwixt God and us, the writing sealed and
delivered: we are become his people, and he our God, we to serve, love, honor
and worship him, and he too help, deliver, defend, and provide for us al
necessaries. This inward sealinge of the conscience, which is the second
sort of sealinge, is where God pours his love so plentifully into our
hearts by the holy Ghost, Roma. v.viii.
which is given us, that he bears witness too our spirit, that we be the
children of God, and sturreth up our minds to call him father, father: we
have a taste and felinge that God has chosen and sealed us for his people with
the holy Ghost promised, as saint Paul says. Ephe. i.
This is a sure toke^ to a faithful heart, that he is the child of God, and
God his father: God seals the con^^^ences of hi^ people with the holy Ghost.
and of this he takes so great comfort yt in what trouble soever he fall, he
knows that God does it not of hate but of love, tries his faith that other
may know the same how earnestly he loves his God, and that nothing can be so
strong to pull him out of his Gods hands, not for his own strength, but
that God which holds him, is stronger then all. Of such as were thus
sealed, saint Ihon in his Revelation speaks when he says: Reuele. vii.
That of every tribe^, there were.12. thousand sealed: ii. Timo. i^
and saint Paul teaches Timothee, that this ground work stand strong
having this seal: the Lord knows who be his. For as noble men and princes
bear a love to their servants, and for a witness of the same, will give
their outward Coignessance, Badge and livery, whereby they may be known from
others, and sturreth up their minds to love him again by such tokens: So God
will both by his spirit pour his love into our hearts, and let us se the
care that be takes for us, and will also by outward sacraments, as badges
mark us for his people, and by the same seal us surely too him self, and
stir us up to love him again, and look diligently to our duty. If earthely
lords and princes will so safelye defend their servants: let them not
doubt, but God that is Lord of lords will defend his people from all
dangers and wrongs, be they never so many and so great, if they would
earnestly in faith call upon him in the day of their trouble, forsake their
own strength wit and polic^e, and trust in him only. ^^al c^lvii
David says well: the Lord is not delited in ye strength of an horse nor the
strong legs of man, but ye Lord is well pleased with them the which fear
him, and with them that trust in his mercy.

There is no way sooner to provoke Gods anger, and make him to forsake us in
trouble, than to trust to our selves, and in our own wit, strength and
policy: for that is as much to take the praise to our selves from him, and
mistrust God that he can not or will not defend us. Although we must use all
lawful means, yet trust only in God. Luke. xvii. Psalm. cxxiiii
And although we must not trust in our selves: yet we must use all means,
which he has ordained for our defense. For as we must be diligent to do
all good works, and not put our trust of salvation in them, but sai with
saint Luke, when ye have done all that I commanded you, say ye be
unprofitable servants: so we must use always lawefull, to defend our
selves, and yet say: our help is from the Lord, which has made both heaven
and earth, he has ordained such means to save us by, and works by the same
our deliverance when pleases him: and sometimes too show his power, he
delivers us without such ordinary means.

And why will God thus save them? for any goodness in them, which had so long
forgotten him and his house? or for their good works, who had so long ben so
disobedient? no, God helps us for his own sake and not for our goodness.
but even because I have chosen thee says the Lord. This is the first and
chiefest cause, why he bestows his goodness upon any people* eue^ because he
has chosen the^ in Christ, before ye world was made: and for this cause he
continues, bestowing his blessing to the end upon the^, whom he has once
chosen.

Saint Paul reasoninge of this matter puts two causes, wherefore God
should love, Romans ii*iiii
iustifye and chose us: either freely of grace and mercy says he, or for the
goodness of our works? If it should be for our works, than (says he)
it can not be of grace: and if it be of free grace, love and mercy, than is it
not for our works neither paste nor too come: for than grace should not be
grace says he, if it were not thus freely given. If God should chose us for
any goodness in us, than he should but do one good turn for another, and
freely without reward do nothing, which is most against his nature,
that does good for evil, yea and where he sees no possibility of goodness or
reward to be looked for. Who has given him any thing first, and he shall be
recompensed again says saint Paul? as though he should say: Roma xi John
xiii.
no. I have chosen you, and ye have not chosen me said Christ to his
disciples and Apostles. And as he thus chose them, so he chooses all which he
choosen: and so he will declare his fre grace, love, and mercy, to al which be
his freely, even because it pleased him to chose them, and they deserved not to
be chosen of him, but rather to be cast away from him. When God promised too
deliver his people in like distress, by his Prophet, he said: for mine own
sake, for mine own sake, I will do it. And not only thus in bodily
deliuerau^ce, but in forgeuenes of sins he says likewise: it is I: it is I:
Esai. xlviii. Esai. xliii
which forgeueth thy sins for mine own sake. Thus freely God our heavenly
father, for the love which he bears too us in his son Christ, in whom he
had chosen us from the beginning, and for whose sake he continues his favor
to us (he: I say) bestows all his blessings freely on us both in body and
soul, in this life and after.

The will of God is the first cause of doing all good things: Gods will is
the first cause of all.
and when he will all things work and they him: and when he will not, they
stay and cease: so because his chosing of us comes of his free will and
mercy, it is the first and chiefest cause of our salvation. If he should be
sturred too chose us for our goodness which he foresees in us, that is ever
imperfect: or if for any other cause within us or without us, than he should
not be the first cause and mouer of all things. Acts. xvii.
But saint Luke says: In him we live, be and are moved. That which moves an
other thing is in nature before that which is moved, and also it is better,
stronger and wyser; but to say that any ting is stronger, wyser, or better than
God, is treason and blasphemy too his majesty: therefore his will is the
first cause of all our goodness.

Thus our good God teaches us, and comfort his people, that all thing shall
turn to the best, to them which love him, be the troubles never so many and
great, ye ma^s wit can not tell how to escape. Let kings and princes fall
together by the ears, kyl, murder, show what crueltye they can, get or
lose kyngdoms, war, fight, or what they can devise: God deliueres his people
(...) of all dangers.
God will save and deliver his people, if it please him out of all their
hands. When Pharao persecuted the Jews thorough the read sea: God saved his
people, and drouned the Egiptians. In the wilderness wha^ Seon and Ogge, two
mighty kings denied them vitayles and passage: God destroyed them both,
(...). xxi
and gave their lands to his people. After they came to the land promised, he
drove out 7. mighty people, and delte it to the Jews: Acts vii
and when all the Heathen people, which dwelt round about them, made war
against his people, he destroyed them all. In Babylon, when they were
prisoners under Balthazar, king within the city, and Darius king of the
Medes, Daniel. v.
with Cyrus the king of ye Persians, beseginge the city round about that
none should escape: when the city was taken, God did not only deliver his
people from all the cruel hands of these three mighty kings, but gave them
such favor in the sight of Cyrus, that he not only hurt them not, but set
them at liberty, sent them home to their country, gave them licens too
build this temple, restored their Jewels, which Nabucadnezer took away, and
gave free licens to every man to help them with money as much as they
would. Who could have thought Gods people should have been now delivered out
of the hands of three Heathen kings, being all their ennemies, and might
have slain them like sheep? when Haman had gotten lycens of the king to
destroy the Jews, and made a galowes for Mardocheus: God sent queen Ester to
save his people, Ester. vii
and Hama^ was hanged on his own galowes. When Darius was slain by Alexander
and the kingdom brought to the Gretia^s: Alexander coming to destroy
Jerusalem: because they denied him tribute, God so turned his heart, ye he
entreated the^ well: submitted him self to the high priest, meting him with ye
other priests in their priestly apparel, and confessed their God, to be ye
true God. When the Romans conquered the ^^tians, and the Jews were under the
rule of the Romans: they did not greatly harm them until they crucified
Christ, and denied him too be their God: saying, his blood be upon us and
upon our children. In the cruel persecutions afterward, Math. xxvii
the more sorrow that was laid on Gods people, the more they increased.

Thus in all ages God delivered his out of trouble, or else takes them to him
self by some glorious death. In these our dais when the mightiest princes of
the world strive and fight cruellye, who shall be the greatest, rather then
godliest: God prouydeth always some corner for his too flee into, where they
may serve him. And if they be persecuted from one place, he prepares an other
to receive them. And although persecution was great among us: yet God showed
him self more glorious mighty, and merciful in strengthninge so many weak
once to dye for him, than in so mercifully providing for them which were
abroad, although both be wonderful. What glorious crakes made proud
persecutours, that they would make gods poor banished people, too eat
their syngers for hunger: but they had plentye for all the others cruelty:
Gods holy name be praised therefore. What a mercy of God is this, that where
we deserved to be cast from him for ever, because of our wickedness, he now
corrected us gentellye: and called us to this honor, that he punished us not
so much for our own sins, as that he called us to the promotion of
bearinge his cross, witnessinge to the world his truth, and vouchedsafe to
prove, teach and confirm others in this his truth, by our witness bearinge.
He called us too the same honor, that he called his own son Christ Jesus,
in suffering for his names sake: that where as we suffer with him, Roma. viii
we shall be glorified and reign with him. Let the cruel Papists consider
therefore how God has delivered his people out of their hands, fulfilled
this his promise, and kept us safely, like his privy signet, in these
miserable days of their persecution. Let the bloody Bishops void of all
religion, Gods people have the victory by sufferinge.
and changing with the world, to fill their filthy bellies, (although they
would now make men believe they would be constant, and stoutly confute that
which before they proved true by oaths and doctrine). Let them, I say,
consider whether they, or the simple souls which they tormented, have gotten
the victory. The simple soul offered him self to dye, rather then to offend
God by superstition or Idolatry: The proud Cayphas threatened fire and
faggotte, if he forsook not his true faith. Thus whylest they strive for
religion, and not for life: the poor members of christ hold fast their faith,
and the proud prelate with his torments can not overcome Gods simple sheep. They
strive not for life, but the simple man offeres it willingly, rather than
forsake ye truth: and so God ever confou^des the wisdom of the world, and is
glorified in ye fools and abiectes. God for his mercy sake grant all his
like boldness to witsta^d their cruelty, whansoeuer God shall try us.

A prayer.
MOst righteous judge and merciful father, which of love did punish sharply
thy people being negligent in buyldinge thy house, yt by such sharp
correction, they might be stirred up, to do their duty, and so have pleased
thee: we acknowledge and confess before the world and thy divine majesty yt we
have no less offended thee in this behalf than they have done, and that for
all the sharp plagues which thou laid upon us, we could not awake out of our
deadly sleep, and forgetting the earnest promotio^ of thy glory and true
religion, but rather consented to ye persecution of our brother, thy true and
faithful people, until now yt of thy infinite goodness, by giving us a
gracious Queen, and restoring the light of thy word, yt have letten us taste
the treasurs of thy mercies in our extreme and desperate miseries wha^ for our
wickedness we durst not, and for ye great power of thy enemies we could not hope
nor look for any such help or redress at al. We fall down flat therefore before
ye throne of grace, desiring pardon of this great negligence and of al our
former offenses. and prai thee that ye will not deal with us as we have deserved:
but as of thy own free will you promised thy people falling earnestly to thy work
and restoring of thy temple, yt from thence forward thou would bless al their
work and fruits, overthrow their enemies and save thy people, yt would make
ye house also more glorious tha^ the first, by the preaching of thy Gospel: so
we desire thee for Christ's sake thy son and our savior to be no less good
and gracious Lord unto us, yet once again going about to restore thy true
religion tr^den down and defaced by the cruel papists. Send forth O Lord
many such faithful preachers as will set out thy glory unfeignedly: open the
hearts of thy people yt they may se how far more acceptable unto the^ is the
lively preaching of thy holy word, than all the glittering ceremonies of
Popery: deliver us we beseech thee from all our enemies, save and preserve our
gracious Queen as thine own signet, indue her and her counsel with such reverent
fear of thee and thy word yt all policy which is contrary to thy word set
apart they may uprightly seek and ernestly maintain thy true glory minister
justice, punish sin, and defend the right. Co^fou^d most mighty God, and bring
to naught all ye devises of such as go about to overthrow thy word and true
worship: open our eyes yt we may se how derely thou have loved us in Jesus
Christ thy son our lord: hold us fast, O Lord of hosts, yt we fall no more
from thee: grant us tha^kful and obedient hearts yt we may increase daily in
ye love, knowledge, and fear of ye: increase our faith, and help our unbelief,
yt we being provided for, and releued in all our needs by thy fatherli care and
providence as you shall think good may live a godli life to ye praise and good
example of thy people, and after this life may reign with thee for ever,
through Christ our savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons
and one God, be praise and thanks giving in all congregations, for ever and
ever. Amen.

Here ends the prophet Aggeus.
A preface to all the Enemies of God, his word, people and Religion, to leave
their wickedness: and to comfort the good manfully too bear their madness, and
patiently to look for Gods goodness.
LIke as in Aggeus my endeavor and purpose was that those that fear the Lord
should be sturred up to an earnest buyldinge of Gods house, louinge of his
word, and maintaininge of true religion so in this short Prophet, my
trauall and meaning is, that the wicked understanding how vainly they strive
with all their wit, power and policy against the poor simple innocent,
crucified Christ Jesus the almighti son of the living God, the wisdom and
power of God his father, might cease their raginge madness: and not only that,
but also how they shall be overthrown in their own devises that they imagine
against true Christians, the mystical members of his body and church, or
against his word and religion, as all their fathers have been from the
beginning, whose steps they follow in hating and persecuting gods people.
Their stomachs be stout, their pollices great, their might is strong, their
wits are wile, yea, all the world is on their side: yet in the end they
shall serve dastards, Prouer. xxi.
ignorant, helples, witles and misers: for as the wise man sais, there is no
wisdom, polity, nor counsel against the Lord. The more wisdom, subtlety,
strength or power that a man hais, the more he hais it to his own
destruction, if he have it not, and use it too the glory of God and comfort of
his people. For as wild beasts, the more fearce and cruel that they be, the
more it harms them, and causes men to hunt and seek wais how too destroy them:
so the more that the wicked set up the^ selfs against the Lord, and oppress
his people, the readyer i^ God to help and deliver his, and overthrow the
other. Can they find any rebels against God, his word and people from the
beginning too this day, that hais prevailed against the Lord and his chosen
folk? If there be none (as it is most true none to be) how can they look to
be the first? Why may not true Christians, boldly say with David than: Why
do the Heathen freate and fume, and the people imagine vain things against
the Lord and his anointed? Psalm. ii.
saying* let us brust in sunder their bonds, and cast their yoke away from
us. But it folowes, he that dwells in the heavens will mock them, and the Lord
will laughe them too scorn.

In the two first sins of Adam and so orderly in all ages to these days, it
appears how the wicked continually malice and persecute the good, but to the
burt of them selves and the praise of the godly: Cain killed his brother Abel,
and thought he should have been blameles: but Abels innocent blood and such
like cried vengeance on Cain and his folowers from that day to this and the
righteous God reuenges it daily, Math. xxii^.
and at length will condemn the obstinate utterly. Cham mocked his father Noe
and his seed the Canaanites persecuted Gods people the Jews, Gene, ix.
that came of Sem his brother: therefore his posterity was accursed of God to
the worlds end. The proud Giants with their captain Nimrod buylding the tower
of Babell, to get them selves a name in earth, Gene. xi.
were overthrown in their own devise by God from heaven. Gene. xxvii
Carnal Ismael sought to destroy the promised Isaac, but in vain: Bloody Edo^
or Esau (whom this Prophet describes) sought the death of his brother Jacob,
but the God of Abraham their father saved them Joseph was sold into Egypt by
his brether, and by the false accusinge of his maysties, Gene. xli.
was wrongefully prysoned, yet he that sittes on high, looked down to the
low dungeon of the prison, and raised Joseph to be ruler and sauer of the
land. The Egiptians oppressed Gods people for a time: Exodus xiiii.
but the Lord of hosts drouned Fharao and his company for their crueltye
against them: the froward people murmuringe often against their captain
Moses, some were swalowed up with earth quick, some burned with fire. Nume xvi.
The Philistians and seven nations round about Gods flock, kept continual
war against them, yet they could never devour them, but were devoured at
the length. Saul and his flatterers banisshed and pursued poor David, whom
his God of a shepeherde made a king, mauger all his foes. The ten tribes of
Israel with their kings were enemies to Judah and Benjamin evermore: yet though
they were the stronger and mo in number, they were sooner rooted out. The
Chaldes, Assirians, Persia^s, Grecians and Romans, the mightiest princes on
the earth often subdued the Jews, forsakinge their God? but the Lord their old
savior ever restored them again when they fought him, unto they utterly
refused Christ their savior. The Jews crucified Christ Jesus our Lord,
thrust him to the heart with a spear, buried him, and laid a heavy stoone on
him thinkinge he should never rise again a conqueror, but in vain was all
their spite and their labor lost. The Emperor many years cruellye tormented all
that believed in the Lord fondly, thinkinge to have by that meane^ overthrown
them: The Pope in process of time conquered almost al princes, except the
Gretians, unto of late the Lord opening the eyes of some, brake his snares, and
delivered his folk. Monks and Ereres, by man's traditions would have
overwhelmed true religion: Papists of late have banisshed, burned and
persecuted many godly men, so cruelly as no history speaks of the like this
thousand year, willing to have feared all from ever acknowledging their Lord
and Christ: Many Heretics have labored to have defaced Gods truth: but al
is in vain. God (his name be praised therefore) hais overthrown them in their
highest ruff, laughed them to scorn, and raised up that which they would
most gladly have utterly oppressed* For as death and the grave could not
prevail against Christ our head: no more shall it against his body and
members. As Nimrod therefore, Pharao, Jeroboam, Nebucadnezar, Darius and
Alexander with all their kyngdoms and partakers be now vainquished and subdued
by the Turk, the Sophi and the Souldan, priester John and other Heathen
princes, their countries made wast, strangers possess them, their religion
altered from evil to wors, their cytyes, towns and temples (as the Prophets
did tell before) are made dens of wild beasts, owls and other filthy byrds:
so sense christ, that which Emperors ma^fullly conquered the pope by subtlety
devoured, made him self a prince of princes, but now by the power of Gods
word preached, he is made a laughing stock to al thos^ whose eyes the Lord
hais opened to see his abominations, and all realms that before feared him* now
God visiting his people, fall from him: For as the woodbinde leaning to a tree,
climbes up and spreades it self over all the branches, unto it have ouergrowen
and killed the hole tree: and as a strong ^eady stream, undermining great high
banks, at length makes all to tumble intoo the water, and wasshes it away: so
the Pope first seeking aid at princes hands and finding favor, overwhelmed the^
all at length as the wood bind and undermining them as the heady waters hais
thrown the^ down these many years, unto it pleased God to open the eyes of
some few to consider their estate and seek for remedy.

No kingdom, people nor religion that withstode god and his truth, can be
found, but it hais ben overthrown. Babylon the first and wurst continued
longest: yet it had an end by the Persians. The Persians, Grecia^s and Romans
can not altogether compare in time with Babylon, and yet they be vainquisshed
away. Poperi hais troubled gods church a long time: but now through godde^
mercy, it melts away like snow before the sun. But Christ says, our
religion and people professing the same, without all kind of Popish
superstition, have been from the beginning, continued in all ages from time to
time, and at these days, (the Lords name be praised therefore) hole countries
do abhor his abominations. In the mids of all mischief, when every kind
of flesh had so defiled him self that god of justice, drowned the hole world,
except eight persons: yet was there found kept undefiled, and calling upon the
living god with true faith, holy Seth, Enos, Enoch, Noe, etc. In Idolatrous
Chaldae, was faithful Abraham, Sarai, Nahor and Lot. etc. In superstitions
Egypt lived innocently Jacob and his sons, Moises, Aaron. etc In the
wilderness wandered in gods fear, Iosue, Caleb, Phines, Eleazar. etc when the
number of gods people increased in the time of the Judges and kings, there were
so many godly men found among the people (beside men of power, as Gedeo^,
Iephthe, David, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, that they can not be numbered.
Against Iesabel stood up Elias, Eliseus, Abdias etc. In the captivity were
Esdras, Daniel, Aggeus, Nehemias with many more. Against Haman and Holophernes
stood Ester, Mardocheus, Judith and Alier. What valiant warriors the Machabees
were against bloody Antiochus, the ancient father Eleazar and the manly mother
of the vii. brether so cruellye murdered, the history declares. From Christ's
time to consider gods stout soldiers, it is harder to tell where to begin,
than where to make an end. The Apostles and Martirs so cruelly tormented, be
so many, and so well known, that they need not to be rehearsed. What storms
than can the Pope devise with his clergy to oppress, deface and overthrow god
his word, religion or people? Can they be more cruel tha^ Nero, Diocletian,
Domitian? Can rhei pass Iesabel, Nebucadnezar, Antiochus or such like
beastlye tormentors? In the spite of all the mighty persecutours, God blessed
his. Surely their mischeuous malice and blood thirsty tyranny, pass all these
in madness: and yet if they could pass them selves in cruelty, all is vain, He
is stronger that is with us, than any can be against us. The devil is cruel in
his members: but the loving Lord forsakes not his. Let not the wicked tha^
triu^phe, nor gods people be disamaied.

God our father, for love will try his people what they will bear for his
sake: but of mercy, he will not lay to heavy loodes on us, nor forsake us, the
Lord of strength and power will show his glory in our weakness, that by his
mighty hand such weak bodies may be strengthened to suffer that, that
passes reason. The oftener that the goldsmith tries his gold in the fire, beats
and knockes it with his hammer, the finer is the gold: the more that god tries
our faith in the furnace of temptation, the more he loves us, and the more we
glorify him: The stormy winter ca^ not ouerwhelm the fruits of Summer. Weeds
be many, yet the corn is not devoured: wild beasts be cruel, yet god defends
the shiftles sheep. Many fishes be raueners, yet the young fish increases the
Hawks be gredy, yet shifts the littell byrds. Dogs hunte and follow the chase
most gredily* yet escapes safeli the fearful hare: Summer is raging hoate: yet
the leaves make a comfortable cold shadow, the wind^ blow boustously, yet
stand fast the low busshes when the great ookes are overthrown: the waves of
the sea are rough and hudge, yet safelye slips away the slyding ship, the
rage of fire is swaged with water: the heady streams are kept in with banks.
Unruly people are brideled by laws: hot burning fevers are coled by
medecines* Thus ever against an extremite, God hais prepared a remedy, that
fearful man should not mistrust gods careful providence that he takes for him:
How should proud Popery than think too conquer all by might and cruelty that
god defendes so fatherly? and why should gods people be afraid at every storm?
he that smites heales: and he that sends trouble, gyues strength. Let us
therefore pluck up our stomachs, and pray with s. Augustine: D^ quod iubes and
iube quod vis: Lord give me strength to do and bear that, that thou
commaundes, and command what thou will.

It is wonderful to consider the folishnes of the wicked, which in polity
would seem so wise. The higher that a man climmes, the nerer and more dangerous
is his fall: the greater weighte that is cast on, the sooner it breaks, the
faster a man runs* the sooner he is weary: the forther that the bow is
drawn, the sooner it flies in pieces. The heavier that the cart is laden, the
slower it goes: the hooter that the fire is, the less while it continues. The
more grievous that the disease is, the shorter it is. Tyrannes raygne not long:
wild beasts the crueller they be, the more they be hunted and killed. In
sum: No violent thing can long endure. Yet foolish Papists think with
cruelty to wish their will to raygne like lords of the land, and stablish
their kingdom on earth, and to bring it so to pass, that not only men dare
not or will not withstand them, but willingly believe, follow, do and practice
whatsoever they command them: they can not be so ignorant to not know these
things: and wilfully to wish against knowledge and conscience, must needs
be a great madness. Gods word, Christian faith and religion is of that nature,
that the more it is persecuted, the more it thriues: the more it is hated the
more good men love it, the faster that they be pulled from it, the more they
run unto it: Let them therefore consider how God hais wrought in other
kyngdoms, overthrowing the^ all that set up them selves against him* and how
yet he works in the natural course of things to teach us by them his like
working for us spiritual things, and let them look for no less a^
overthrow at gods hand in his appointed time.

If these things can not persuade them to stai their rage: I would they would
consider to whom they make them selves servant, that they might be ashamed
to serve so vile a master. They give place to the devil (for all cruelti is
of him) they b^^ome his instruments, whereby he works his feats: they be his
slaves and drudges at commandment to do that he biddes (but were made too
serve and fear their Lord god) they be driven and led of him like brute
beasts, forgettinge him that made them, and their sely tormented brether that
pray for them: unnaturally forgetting them selves to be men, they regard not
man's life, but unmercifully spilles and spoils them: And for what end or
purpose? to satisfy (if they could ever be full) their bloody appetites, to
fill their idle bellies, to rule like kings, too be glorious in the world, to
oppress the simple, to deceive the ignorant, and deface gods truth: to feed
the people with lies, to set up their god the Pope, to deface Christ and his
merits, to hyde his word, and set up superstitious Idolatrye: where they
should do all things to the contrary, because in such their doings all true
Christians abhor them.

But in these our miserable days where it pleased god of his undeserved ^ercy,
to stay their rage in burning and prisoning gods seli souls, that mischief,
which their bloody hands and cruel herts darre not attempt, their poysenfull
tunges spue out. Now ceases fire and faggot, yet their sclaunderous lieng
lips are not stopped, where they dar not blaspheme the doctrine so frelye as
they be wont: now they inuei against the teachers and professors of it, with
such terms as please them, though never one be true: But as Samuel said too
the people when he had anointed Saul king: i. King. xii.
Speak here before the Lord and his anointed king, whether I have taken any
man's Ox or Ass, or have oppressed any one of you, or taken bribe, and I
will restore it, and they were not able to charge him, and yet were weary of
him: so I dout not, but they be not able iustli to burden the preachers with
such lies as they devise against them: and if any be for my part, I wish them
not to be hid. This kind of persecution is as grievous to an honest heart a^ the
other is: but a justified mind in this case will turn him self to the Rord,
bear his cross thankefully, and knowledge that the scholar is not above his
master. If Christ our lord escaped not these tunges, but they calde him
Samaritane, and said he had a devil, let no Christian look too be free. Psalm.
cxx.
David felt these panges when he prayed: Lord deliver my soul from wicked
lips, and from a deceitful tunge. If they remembered Gods threteninges to all
such, they would not be so talkatiue. What shall be given thee thou craftye
tunge says David: Psalm. xii
Even sharp arowes and burninge cooles, aunswers the holy Ghost, and again:
the Lord will destroy all crafty lips and proud tu^ges. Would God that these
wicked men understood these threateninges to be true, and that God would
faithfully fulfill them to their confusion, if they did believe them, they
would tremble and quake for fear of them, and not be so ready too speak what
please them. Many think their tunges too be their own, and that they may
speak what they lust, and words to be no grefe nor kind of persecution:
Psalm. lii.lvii.
but blessed David is of contrary opinion when he compares such tunges to
swords, poisonfull stinging of serpents, sharp rasers. etc. Thus be we fallen
in such miserable days, where under Popery we be tormented and persecuted with
all extremity, and under the Gospel we be slaundered and reviled, that we
may justly say with the Apostle: we are counted as sheep, appointed to the
slaughter daily.

If these fearful examples and grievous overthrow of the wicked, and so many
from the beginning can not persuade these cruel haters of God and his word,
murderers of his saints and their brether, to abate their pride, and swage
their malice: if this particular prophecy written for that purpose (too teach
all bloody butchers and proud Caiphas, that a like destruction will fall on
them, as it did on Edon) can not help, than let them mark the manifold
threateninges of (...) Lord where he thunders against such wicked doers. Be not
afraid says the Prophet thou Israel my servant, for I am with thee, and
fear not, for I am thy God that stre^gthens thee, and helps thee. Behold, they
shall be ashamed and confounded all that fight against thee, and all that gain
say thee shall perish, and be brought to naught. etc. Again: thou art the hope
of Israel: Esai. xli.
all that forsake thee, shall be ashamed, and they that go from thee, shall be
written in the earth, Iere. xvii.
and not in heaven.

But this sede of Esau in our days is wors than old Edon* as their deeds well
declare, wha^ Jacob was banished.xx. years, Esau was content to mete his
brother Jacob, returning homeward, too forget all old grudges, to take and use
him as his fre^d and brother: but our Edomites would not receive their banished
brother returning home, forget no old malice, nor use any friendship toward
the^, but with word and deed show all cruelty they could devise against them,
and yet so continue. To this, some of the wiser forte peradventure will sai:
there is just cause why they should do so: they be not used as Jacob did his
brother Esau. Jacob sent great gifts too his brother Esau, took nothing from
him, but let him live where he lusted. In deed this may be a great cause:
for they are so well pleased with gifts and wealth, that in the mids of their
rage, a littell bribe would have loosed heavy chains of iron, and quenched
hot flaming faggots. But now though many things ^ay be suffered in te^porall
matters, yet the discipline of the gospel will not suffer persecutors too
occupy the place of feders, nor wolves the rowme of shepeherds. If true
discipline might take place, not only murderers and apostates, forsaking that
religion which before they professed and taught, should be deposed from their
office, but al turntippets that turn with the world and keep their livings
still, should have no office in Christ's church, until they made satisfaction
by open repentance before the congregation. But alas for pity, for lack of
sharp discipline they lie lurkinge and loking for that day when they may
turn to their old vomitt again, en king their hands in blood, and laugh in
their sleues too see such coldness in religion to serve the living Lord, where
they were so earnest, bold and diligent to set up their own devises. Yet all
things considered, it is no meruail, why the good men succeding in the place of
such evil persons, be so evil spoken of at these days. Eor as he that ripes in
a dungehyll, is infect with the smell thereof a long time after, though he were
never so clean before, and be that comes to a house infected with the
pestilence is soon taken therewith, though he be never so sound before (yea the
better complexion, the sooner smite^) so good men, now searchinge the festerd
cankers and riping the stinking duddels of Poperi, for a time smell evil in the
noses of the wicked, and seem to be infected with a wor^ plage than the other.
Their places may ^e well ^^med with the scripturs Cathedrae pestile^tiae, the
seats of pestilence, because they either infect the good or else sore
assaults them. This misery good men must be content patiently to bear. for
this is our nature more than any other people, always to repine and be grieved
with the present state. In the late days of persecution, those which now be
eye sores to look on, were much desired and wisshed for: and those that now be
lamented were than commenly cursed of the greater and better sort. Than all
cried Lord god deliver us this once, and we will be most ware ever here after,
how we offend thy divine majesty: but now being delivered, we are worse, more
unthankful, and disobediente thanne ever before: which wickedness, surely the
righteous god will not let escape without heavy plages.

To make an end: if any natural pity or merci of man were in them: or if like
men they would be ruled by reason, these threateninges and examples of the
wicked might move stony hearts: but saying many of them be so blinded in their
wickedness, that it needs not or boots not to speak unto them, to the rest,
whose hearts God hais, some thing touched and are not altogether cast of
God, I say thus much. Consider for gods love and health of your own souls,
who they be that ye hate and persecute, they be gods creatures and his handy
work, made like to his own image and similitude: they whom ye murder so
innoce^tly be those that Christ l^^ed so derely, that he would dye with most
bitter pains for them, rather tha^ they should perish, they be many of them
your kinsfolk, the most part your neighbors, but every one is your
countreman, spekinge the same language that ye do, true subjects too the same
prince that ye should faithfully obey, and members of the same common wealth,
they saved your lives and goods, not seking your undoing when it lay in their
hands. Consider how unnatural a thing it is thus to fight against nature^
remember how dangerous in gods sight it is thus unthankfully to provoke his
anger, think on how in your late raging madness. God suddenly cut you of, and
yet patiently taries too see if ye would have new hearts. when that day came,
which ye so long looked for, ye had not every thing after your own will, but
many heavy plages God laid on you: and surely whansoeuer God sendes the like
again for our unthankfulness, and not for your goodness, all can not fall as ye
would wish. Surely if God like a father sharpelye correct his children: what
can his enemies look for? give place to nature, fear God. love your brother in
Christ, live quietly like friends and subjects to one prince: wash your bloody
hands and hearts with bitter wepinge tears, take to you pitefull minds,
love them that wish you good, leave your raginge madness, lest ye perish in
your obstinate blindness: so shall God the Lord, bless both you and us,
contrary to our deserts for his own mercies, and not for any our goodness,
through his derely beloved son Christ* who offered him self a sweet sacrifice
for us all, that we should sacrifice our selves to him, mortifyinge all
carnal lusts, that we may live and dye to him, and afterward be glorified
with him too whom with his father and holy spirit three persons and one God,
be glory and praise in all congregations, now and ever. Amen.

Psalm. cxxxvii. Remember O Lord the behauior of the children of Edon, in the
day of Jerusalem: when they said, down with it, down with it too the
ground.

The vision of Abdy.
Thus sais the Lord god to Edom, we heard a voice from the Lord, and a
message: was sents to the Heathen, saying rise and let us go fight against
her in war.
This Prophet is not long in words, but he is pithie in sentence: he
entreates not many nor diverse matters, but this one is weighty and depely to
be considered, for even as Apothecaris use to put their costlist medicynes, and
rich men their greatest Iuels in some littell box or chest: so^ God our
heavenly scholemaister uses many times to teach in short writings so much of
his heavenly wisdom, as many other times ye shall not find in long books:
likewise of learned men, in one witty sentence and figure, will declare as much
wit and eloquence as the commen sort will do in long volumes. And as a little
gold is worth a great deal of brass: and a small Diamond is better tha^ a
number of right stones: so in this short Prophet is more learning, comfort
and godly wisdom than ye shall find in searching long and sundry sorts of
ye learned Philosophers or eloquence Orators.

The Prophets use to call their writings visions or sights, for diverse causes:
first because none should take in hand to be Gods messenger to teach his
people, but he that is lightened of the Lord, and hais his eyes and sight
opened to see the mysteries of God. For unto the blind sinner says God: why
do thou declare my righteousness and takes my testament in thy mouth: and
again, Psalm* ^ Luce. vi.
if the blind lead the blind, both fall in the pytte. Secondly, because they
open the eyes, and give sight too the blind as David sais: the declaring of thy
words lightens and geues understanding to the simple ones, Psalm. cxix
and also: thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light to my paths.
Thirdly and last of all, because of the certainty of the things which they
writ, Why Prophets are called sights and prophesers.
that is to wete: they were not tales which he had heard of our men, but
which he saw him self by the eyes of faith. Things that a man hears of
others, often be false, but of those which he sees him self, no man doubts as
the Poet sais: one witness yt sees it with his eye, is more to be believed than
ten that hard it by report. For this certainty, Prophets were called seers,
commenlye of all men. In old time as it is written: i, King. ix.
when they went to ask counsel of God, they said: come let us go to the
seer. But how can he see these things which were not done in his life time,
but long after? he saw them not in a dream nor in a coniurers glass, nor
by the vayn forsight of ye Stars, as Astronomers deceyuinge the world, would
make men believe, they can tell them their destinies and things to come: but he
saw the^ by the eyes of faith, when God, which can not lie, had showed these
things unto him before hand, and proved the^ true afterward in deed. Sight by
faith is surer than the eye.
This is ye surest way of knowledge, and saying for those things which I
believe and se with the eyes of faith, be surer than those that I see with my
bodily eye, or feel with my hand. God is truth it self, and therefore those
things that he teaches must needs be true: and that faith and crede^ce, which
is given to his word, can not deceive, but must needs come too pass, and be
as true as if I see them with my eye. When Thomas Dydimus would not believe,
except he see the prynte of the nails. Ihon. xx
Christ said: blessed be they that believe and se not. O notable example for all true Prophets and teachers to follow, that they teach nothing but that
which they see in Gods book, and not man's learning, for that is full of
deceit, and that they may call their preachinges visions and sights, for the
certainty of them that they be seen by a true faith and found in gods book
which can not lie: and therefore they be as true and too be believed as if we
saw them with our eyes.

Man's learning is darkness, and therefore can not be called visions or things
seen, but fained as Ezechiel says: woo be to the foolish Prophets, Ezech.
xiii.
which follow their own spirit and se nothing, but of gods word it is
said contrariwise, we have o surer wrytinge of the Prophets, to the which
when ye give attendaunce, as to a candle shyninge in a dark place, ye do well
unto the day shine, ii. Pet. i.
and the day Star rise in your heart. Thus saint Peter attributes thus to
the scripture and writings of the Prophets, yt they lighten our hearts and
eyes, as a candle does a dark place unto a fuller knowledge be given unto
us by the spyrite of God too drive out ignorance. As the day Star or day
it self dryues away darkness.

Abdia or Oabdia as the Hebrewe calls him, Abdya^*
is as much to say as the servant of God, wheren we learn, who is he that
wrytes this Prophet, and from whom he comes, and the goodness of our good God
toward his servants, that he lettes not them wander in ignorance, but
declares his hole will and pleasur unto the^, yt they perish not with the
wicked world, but he was not of such sort of seruau^ts, which saint Ihon
wrytes of: The servant knows not what his master does, Ihon. ^^.
for such be rather slaves, which know not their masters pleasures, and
serve not of love, but fear. But he seruid the Lord his God in true worship,
for such sort of servants the Hebrew word signifies, and that kind of
service is true fredome as saint Paul says: Ye be made free from sin, but
ye are servants to God. Thus Paull and Peter call them selfs not only
Apostles, but also seruau^ts of Jesus Christ: therefore the Lord vouchesaued to
declare his hole will unto him, his faithful and beloved servant,
concerning things to come, and the estate of ye cruel Edomytes, which did
so cruelly handle Gods people, and had persecuted them so long, and like a
true servant that loves his fellows, he kepes it not close too his self, but
confortes others therewith Names in the scriptur be not given in vain, Names
are not given in vain.
but that so often as they hear or think on their own name, so often they
should consider what they be taught by it. Abdia in thinkinge on his name
should remember that he should serve the Lord his God Abraham, on the blissing
of God, which made hi^ a father of many people. Abraham. Zacharia. Peter.
Zacharia, that according too his name, he should continually remember ye
Lord. Peter that his faith is the strong rock whereon Christ will build his
church, for so the word signifies by interpretation and so forth in all
others. Therefore fathers do well in geuinge their children such Christian
names, as may remember them of their duetye to Godwarde, and call them not by
Heathen names or feyned foolish saints, which can teach them no goodness.
Many does think this Abdias to be the steward of Achabs house, which had an.
100. Prophets of God in caves, and fed them: 50. in one company, and as many
in another in the time of Iezabels cruel persecution, and now by gods
providence fedes many thousands with his wholesome doctrine. And although the
holy scriptures do not plainly show that he was the same Abdia in deed, yet
probable enough it is, as many learned men think. Unto whose mind also I can
well agree that it is the same man. He was one that feared the Lord as he said
to Elias, iii. King* xviii
and was a stranger borne in Sychem of Idumea as some think, and not a Jew
borne, but turned after to the law of the Lord, forsakinge the wickedness of
his people. His writing is so much more notable, because being a stranger,
he prophecies against his own country, and therefore the trewer be like also
it is, and without percialitie spoken: because none will willingly threaten
such destruction to his native country, as he does here: but he that is a
true servant of God without sparinge, will speak his masters message freely
and truly against his dearest friends, if the Lord God send him.

This prophecy is more meet also for these our days, because we were under
ye like persecution that he was or worse: for the true Prophets of God were
not suffered to hyde them selfs in dens and wilderness as they might do than,
under cruel Achab and Iesabel, but were most cruelly thrown intoo the fire,
yea, the madness of Gods enemies was so much, that they could not be satisfied
with the^ blood of them that were on live, but ye which was seldom read of
among ye Heathen. They pull up the dead bodies, which were buried many years
before, to burn their bones, and straw their ashes abroad, as master Bucer,
Paulus Fagius. etc. yea, of thieves for praying god to deliver us from the
tyranny of the Pope, These Edomytes against who^ he writes, were not so cruel
as our men were and be. And therefore your destruction shall be the greater at
the appointed time, than this other was. Let us not flatter them nor our
selfs, because they be our country men, or because we would not see the
destruction of our country. For the Lord is a righteous God, and will
sharply punish sin wheresoever he fyndes it, if we do not earnestlye beg
his pardon, mercy and forgeuenes, with ame^dement of life. But it is to be
feared, that as Abdia did no good to his country folks, because they would
not hear him: So, much labor is lost in our country, because they stop
their ears, and will hear nothing but that which pleases them, for it is
true that our savior Christ says: Math, xiii.
There is no Prophet without honor and credit, but in his own country: yet
nevertheless lift up your voice, blow the trumpet of God, and tell the
people their faults, lest they perish, and their blood be required at your
hands, discharge your selfs, rebuke them earnestlye, and let it take rote
and profit as God will, which geues all increase as he thinks good. If they
hear not, they perish in their own sins, and thou art free. The preface
that he puts here before, gets him great authority and credit with the
hearers, and declares him also to be a true Prophet of God, because he speaks
nothing in his own name, but says the Lord god had put these words in his
mouth, and he was aucthor, and Abdyas but the messenger" to speak the^ to his
people. A worthy example for all teachers too follow, that they never say
thing but out of Gods book, and that they may say for every thing that
they teach: Thus says the Lord, this saying is most common in all the
Prophets, and to be followed of all preachers. As saint Peter says, if any man
speak, i. Pet. iiii.
let him speak but the words of God. But of this enough is said in sundry
places of Aggeus.

Edom, unto whom the Lord speaks here, is all the people of Idumea, being so
called of Edom their first father: as the scriptures uses too call the people
by the name of the father: So were the Jews called Israel of Jacob, which
was called Israel their old father. Gene. xxxvi
Likewise Ephrai^ Joseph, Iehuda, of these their old au^cetors. This Edom is
Esau, Jacobs brother, as he is called in Genesis, Esau he is Edo^, and had that
name given him for his color that he had when he was borne, Edom.
or of the color of the potage, for the which he sold his birth right for,
unto his brother Jacob, when he was hongrye. Esau was also called Seir, Gene.
xxxvi Seir.
which signifies rough, because of the roughnes of his skin: and for this
cause these people of Edo^ and their cou^trye, is sundery times in the
Prophets called Seyr also: or if we seek forther, Edo^ may have his name of
Adam, Adam.
for they be written both with one letters in Ebrew, save that they differ in
poinctes: Adam signifies to be read, wherefore Edom for his cruelty, in
sheddinge bloudde may well be so called. As our cardinals in their readde
Scarlet robes, which be the folowers of these Edomytes, do well declare in
their apparel, the blood thristie minds within: and their outward deeds
have declared them too the whole world, but they say their read apparel
signifies, they should abide by the truth to their blood shed. Adam also
betokens a man, and one of the common sort: so these men were not noble before
God, which is only the true nobility, but enemies to his word and his
people. Adama signifies also the earth, Adama.
so that from whence soever we shall drive this word Edom, and all that be
deryued like it, they signifye no good people, but earthy, worldly, cruel,
blood thrystye, mortal, and abiects. Of the two brethren, Jacob and Esau, came
these two people, the Israelites and the Edomites. And as Esau did ever hate
and persecute his brother Jacob: so his stock and posterity did continually
hate and persecute the children of Jacob.

This is the secret judgment of God: That of one good father Isaac, came two
so contrary children. The one so wicked, the other so good, and this wicked
hatred to continue in the hearts of their childers children, so many ages
after, but this is to teach us the free grace of God without any deserts on
our part, when soever he calls any to the true knowledge and fear of him: An
evil father makes not an evil son: nor contrary: and so the good.
and that neither the goodness or euelnes of ye father that makes a good or an
evil child, for many good fathers have had evil children, and evil
fathers good children. Adam had good Abell and wicked Cain. Noe had good Se^
and evil Cham: Abraham had both the carnal Ismaell and the spiritual Isaac:
Isaac had the beloved Jacob and the hated Esau. David had both proud Absalon
and wise Salomo^: so that ye soul of the father is the lords, as well as the
soul of ye son, and the soul that sins shall perish, Ezech. xviii.
and not the father for the son, nor the son for the father, as the
Prophet says: but every one ^hal dye in his own sins. So hays there ben
from the beginning in the house and children of one father, both good and
evil, both carnal and spiritual, where the one hays persecuted the other:
as there is now in the outward church of Christ, and company of them yt call
them selves Christians, both true people and faithful, and also hypocrytes,
dissemblers, and cruel persecutors of their brethren, as these late days well
declared, where the father persecuted the son, and the son the father: the
man ye wife, and the wife the man: which all and such other our savior
Christ declares to be co^sequentes to the Gospel. Therefore can none doubt of
ye truth of the Gospel now taught, and who be the true folowers of the same,
but he yt is wilfully blind, seeing all these and many other true ^oke^s
fulfilled in our days. And where he says: we heard a saying from the Lord,
and a message was sent to the Heathen that they should go fight against Edo^.
He declares by what aucthorite these people came to destroy ye Edomites: not
sent by any kings or the high Priest, but it was the Lord God, which would
use Nabuchodonozor and his people for a scourge of his justice, too the
punishing of these wicked people. It must not be thought strange that God
lettes one people plage an other, seeing the scriptures is so full of it: for as
God shows his mercy unto his people, by the help and means of other men (for
God works nothing without means) so he does not plage other without some
means, and lets one people distroy an other. When ^o^^am would have foughte^
against Jeroboam, for withdrawing.10. iii. King. xii*
Trybes from him: the Lord spoke unto him, and bad him he should not fight
with him, for ye thing was his deed, All plages be^ from God, yet only man
sins in plagi^g one an other.
and he willed it should be so. All gods creaturs be but his servants to do his
pleasur: to help and comfort where it please him, and to punish, correct, try
or distroye where it please him.

But all other creatures, except man, do not sin in destroyinge or hurting
man, because they have no evil affection of mind in doing it: only man
sins in his doings, because he adds too his doings some evil affection of
his own mind, or else is stirred too it of the devil. So Job says, the Lord
hays given, and the Lord hays taken away, Job. i.
the Lords name be praised: He calls it not the deed of the Sabes or Chaldes
that robbed him, but the lords, and yet they sore offended God in so doing:
for they did it not to try Job as God would have had it, but of a gredye
covetousness to rob him, and a malicious mind, because he was so welthye,
which thing they disdayned. Joseph says, that his brether which sold him to
the Ismaelites, Gene. xiv.
were not the cause of his coming into Egipte, but the good will of God, for
the Lord turned the malice of his brether, both to the promotion of Joseph
and all their comfortes.

The Lord therefore, now when the sin of this people was ripe, an^ when he
had tried long enough for the amendment of them, and they would not turn
unto Cod, but abused his patience and long sufferinge: He sendes forth his
messenger too the Heathen about, to come and justly to punish these obstinate
people for their long disobedience, it is as well the property of God to show
justice and punish sin, as mercifully to help the weak and repentaunt
heart: and mercy is not so in God that justice is banished. As the Lord said:
he would whistle and with hissinge call for Nabuchodonozor to come and destroy
Jerusalem: so now he sendes messengers to come bid them fight against Edom.
Esai. v.vi^^
Yet Nabuchodonozor, in justly punishing the Jews and Edomites, and that by
the commandment of God, sore offends God, because he was proud of the
victory, cruel in murder, and couetuous of spoylinge, ambitious in raueinge,
and never thought he had enough: and therefore was his kingdom afterward
distroyed by the justice of God. So the deed as it is of God, is good, pure and
just: but being defiled of us, with addinge our evil affections to it, as
when good wine is put into an evil vessel: It is sin and damnable, and yet is
God free from all our sin and wickedness, and no causer thereof, but a hater
and revenger of all wickedness.

But here is doubted, who these be ye heard this voice of the Lord, and how
this message was sent to the Gentiles. To the first part I had rather say
that the Prophet speaks of him self in the plural number, as though they
were many that heard it: which kind of speaking is common in the scripture,
i. Corinth ix.
as Paul says: If we have sown you spiritual things is it much, or else
that the other Prophets which prophecy against Edom, herd the same saying
from God as well as he did, and they altogether or Abdias alone in their names
says, we heard a saying from the Lord. Who heard ^hys voice.
etc. And so this saying should be true and the rather believed, because so
many did agree in one saying. Against Edom prophesied Esai. 21.34. Iere. 49.
Ezech. 35* Amos. 1 But most plainly, earnestly and orderly agreinge with this
Abdia, and almooste word for woord^ does Iere. 49. Whose words, if ye
compare with this present prophecy, ye shall see the agreinge truth of Gods
spirit in his scripture, and a great light shall be ministered too this place
thereby. How the message was sent
It is no l^sse doubt how this message was sent, and who was the minister that
carried it, for some think that Abdias was sent with this Embassage him self
to stir up Nab^chodonozor and his people, to destroy these Edomites: but
other to whom I had rather agree, thin^^ (...) devil by gods sufferance, put
intoo the mind of them too work his will and justice upon them: God calls
Nabuchodonozor his servant for such causes, Iere. xx^^
although the devil moved him to it and says: that he did him good service
in executing his judgment: as ye hangman serves the king in punisshing
offenders, and the Ialer in prisoning the^, as well as other do in their kind
and office. Yet is God no more the cause of their sin and evil doing, than the
king is of the offenses and roberies of the people: but God like a righteous
judge of justice, must needs punish such faults as other magistrates do in
their common wealth. But like as this voice of the lord was not herd by the
ears of the body of the Prophets, but put into their minds by the work of
God as he thought good: So I think this message was not sent by any man, but
as when Ambassadors be sent, or rumors of war be certainly spread, Kings
prepare them selves too war: so these people stirred up of God by justice
too punish their sin, and set forward of the devil, to satisfy their
wicked desires rise up altogether too fight against Edom, and destroyed it.
iii. King. ^x*


So the Lord used the devil as his Iaylor and hangman, to be a lyinge spirit
in the mouth of Achabs prophets, and send him to war that he might there
perish, and gods righteous sentence be executed, where he said that the dogs
should lick his blood where they did lick up Naboths. Thus God in his
scripture speakinge too men, uses to speak as men: for as men by messages or
rumors of robberies, are stirred up to war: so the Lord by some mete mean,
as though it were by messengers would stir up the Chaldes too destroy Edom.

The cause of this war and destruction was as Ezechiell says.35. because ye
Edomites, The cause of this war.
which should have be^ helpers unto the Israelites in their trouble (because
they were not only neighbors, their kingdoms ioyninge together, but also
they came of two brethern, Jacob and Esau, which thing should have knitie
them in brotherly love) they did not only not help them, but cruelly persecute
them continually. I will destroy thee says the Lord, and make thee desolate
because y^ have had a continual hate against the Israelites, and did fear
them with the swearde in the time of their trouble. Am^s tells the same cause
likewise and almost with the same word. Religion causes nerest fre^des to
be extreme foes.
So this is the case of Gods people: that for their religion they shall have
enemies of their own house, kinsfolk and friends, as this day well declares.
And our savior Christ said, he came not to set peace but too divide the
father against the son. etc. Where hatred falls betwixt brethern and
friends, and specially for religion, it is ye cruelst hate that can be. This
hate began betwixt Jacob and Esau, for losinge his blessinge, but it continued
and increased with the time in their children and posterite. The eldest son,
The privilege of the elder brother.
as the Hebrews write had than privileges before the younger, as they have
commonly now. The eldest tha^ succeeded in his fathers authorite, was reverenced
of his brethern, he had also double portion of his fathers goods, as other say,
and also enjoyed their priesthod, where wordlings that care for nothing so much
as the world have lost their worldly honor and authorite, how do they rage and
sin? Esau when he had lost and sold these things, he sought his brothers
death: as our papists yt would be counted the elder brether, losinge their
worldly estimation, their belly chere and lordlines, their wealth and proud
priesthode: They freat and fume, burn and kill all that gaynesay the^, as the
Edomites did. But as tha^ for Cain the wicked and his sede (although the elder
brother God chose Abel, God refuses the Elder and glorious in the world to
chose the younger an^ abiects.
the younger Seth and Enos, for Ismael the elder, Isaac the younger, for Esau
Jacob, for Ruben Judah and Leui, and David the yo^gest of seven brethren, and
as of no reputation in respect of his other brethern, but set too keep sheep:
so God to pull down the pride of man in these days, also chooses the abiects
to setfoorthe his glory, refusinge the proud Pharisees, and disdaining holy
hypocrites, and at the length will destroy them as he threatens here the
Edomites. For God to comfort his people that ye wicked should not ever
prosper, The wicked shall not ever prosper* nor the godly be in miseri.
and the chosen people live in continual miseri, lest they fall away from God
through over great adversities, threatens too destroy their enemies, and
deliver the^ if they will abide his leisure. But as destruction is here
prophesied to Edom for their crueltye, so shall all haters of Gods people,
perish at the length Where as difference is in religion, No true love is where
religion differs, but enemies will join to overthrow it
their can be no true heart nor steadfast love: for saying God is love it
self, that love which is not in God, but reased of carnal and worldely
reasons, wha^ the world turns, must needs chaung and show it self what a love
it was, and where it was grounded: but that which is build^ on God will
continue, because h^e change not, and all their change with time. These
Edomites joined them selves with Nabuchodonozor, when he came to destroy
Jerusalem, as Pylate and Herod, which before were enemies, agreed too crucifye
Christ our Lord, and as our papists did now with the Spaniardes, to destroy
the Gospel and his professors.

The Text.




will make thee come down, says the Lord.

Where as the scripture uses to put this word behold, it betokens some
notable thing to follow, Behold. Esai. vii.
as when the Prophet said: Behold, a maid shall conceive and bear a son,
he signified that it should be a notable birth and conceyuinge of a child,
and contrary to the course of nature, and that the child which was borne
should be wonderful. So says David: Behold I was conceived in sin,
betokeninge the great corruption, Psalm cxxiii.
infirmity and defiling of our nature in our conception. Behold, as the
eyes of the servant are at their masters hand says David, signifiyng that he
would be more diligente in watchinge what the Lord God would do, and what
were his holy will for him to do* than the lowest and diligentest servant
would be to watch what their masters would will and command them to do.
In the same sense says the Prophet here: Behold and mark it well what I will
say unto thee, for it is no small matter, and truly it shall come to pass.
Likewise in threatninges in our own tunge we use to say: mark what I say
too you, take heed to your self, for I ^este not: Remember my words well for
I will be even with you, and I will do it in deed, and such like sayings.
Behold mark well says the Lord what I say: I will make thee a little one among
ye Heathen: thou that thinks so highly on thy self, and thinks thy self to
be so strong so mighty, and greater than thy fellows, I will make thee a litell
one among the people where thou dwell, and less tha^ any people about
thee. Thou flatterst thy self of thy strength, might, power, multitude,
strong holds, and too be greater than thy neighbors, people or countries
about thee, and thinks none is able too conquer thee, or pull thee down, or
worthy too be compared unto thee: but I will pull thee down says the Lord, I
will cut thy comb. I will abate thy strength, pluck down thy courage and
high stomach. I will throw down thy castles and strong hold, and
whatsoever thou reioicest in, I will take it from thee, and make thee more vile
and slave, less and weaker than any people round about thee. Thou shall well
know that there is a God, which can and will be avenged, on all high minds,
and will let al such lusty stomachs, see what it is to be proud in their own
eyes, and rebels against him and his people. God castes in their tethe that
where he had given the^ a narow place to dwell in among the hyls, they were
proud of it, as though it were the plenteoust place in the coun^rye. They were
proud of a thing of naught in comparison of other places, as Malachie says:
the Edomites I have placed in the mount Seir. Malach. i.
He speaks not all these words in number and order, but so many in effect
and purpose, and to the same meaning he writes them in the preteri^ temps, as
though the thing were done and past: The Prophets for the certainty, speak
that to be paste, that is to come. Psalm xxii.
For so all the Prophets use to speak by the preterit temps, such things as
shall not be done of many years after, and yet shall as certainly come to pass,
as though they were now done and past. In this sort said David: They have
wounded my hands and feet: as though the thing were done and past, which
was not fulfilled unto Christ our Lord had suffered. Also of the murder of the
children by Herod, Iere. xxxi.
spoke Ieremye as though it had been done and past. A noise was heard in Rama,
wepinge and much lamentinge, with infinite such other like, which were not
fulfilled of many years after. And because the hole country and people
pleased them selves so highly, and stood so much in their own conceit, God
threatens them f^rther, that they shall be much despised.

The righteous judgment of God is-commo^ly to punish us by the same parts,
wherein we offend him. The rich gluton that sinned so grievously in his feasting
and ba^ketting, Luc. xvi. Judge. i.
now desires a drop of cold water, and can not have it. Adonibezec, which had
cruelly used his victories, and had chopped of ye hands and fete of.60. kings,
whom he conquered and made the^ gather up ye cru^mes under his table with the
dogs, was used after ye same sort him self wha^ he was ouercomen by the
Israelites. Thus teaches ye wise man: Wisdom. xi.
By what thing a man sins he shall be punished by the same. This people had
much and many years despised ye Israelites without cause, they had highly
auau^ced the^ selfs in their own conceate: therefore justice requires yt they
should be despised again, and should understand how vile a thing pride is in ye
sight of god, and how horribly it procures his great anger to fall upon us wha^
we one despise another. And although Nabuchodonozor was ye woorker of this
destruction, and minister executi^g gods justice upon this wicked people of
Edom, yet the Lord says him self that he will do it, and it shall be counted
his deed. So Job sais, that the Lord had given and taken away his goods,
although the Caldes and Sabes robbed him as we noted before. In all things
look up too God, which rules all.
Thus must we in all things that be done, whether they be good or evil
(except sin, which God hates and causes not) not only look at the second
causes, which be but Gods means and instruments whereby he works, but have a
further eye, and look up to God. If they be good things that he bestows upon
us, think not, nor meruayll not so much at the manne or the means whereby it
is wrought, but lowly praise the Lord God, which hays vouchesaued to use such
away to thy comfort: and if it be evil adversity that is fallen upon thee, do
not so much murmur and grudge against him, or the thing by which it was
done, but look up to thy Lord God, which author being displeased with thy
sin, will this way correct thee and bring thee to repentance, amendment of
life, and the knowledge of thy self, thine own vylenes, and his holy
majesty, mercy and power (whom thou have provoked so too punish thee, and
yet in mercy, and not as thou have deserved) or else he will try thy patience,
and declare thy faith and hope that thou haste in him to the world, that his
might may be praised in thy weakness, which although of thine own self thou
be not able to suffer such adversity, yet by the strength of his spirit,
thou both can and will.

In the next use is declared the cause of this great destruction, and Gods
vengeance so grievously poured upon this people* It was the same sin that
drove Ada^ out of Paradise, being not content with his own state, but would
be fellow with God, and out of which, as out of a root, springes all
mischief. The beginning of sin is Pride says Ecclesiasticus.10. When a man
leaves, Pride.
consideringe of his own vylenes, and the mighty power and majesty of God
(which aucthor of both is able to work lowlines in any honest heart) and
begins too flatter and please him self in any good gift that he hays within
him or without him, in body or soul, in worldly wealth or wisdom, for than
he forgets God and him self, runs headling to all mischief, offending God
and hurtinge him self. The pride of this people was both sundry and great,
both of mind, wisdom and polity, strength of body, holds, castles, and
towers, wealth and plenty of corn and cattle, that it might be well said
of them, that which proves true in all, wealth makes wanton. We will entreat
of all these in order as the Prophet does, and set them out some thing
more at large. The kind of pride that here is touched, wherein they rejoiced
so much trusting in them selves and offendinge God, was their strong holds,
their high castles, builded on the top of the rocks so strongelye that they
were sure enough as they thought, from all hurt and danger that they should
not be ouercomen. These be pleasant things too a worldly wit, and therefore we
are sone taken with the love of them. To declare the inexcusable pride of this
people, the Prophet says: the pride of thine own heart hays deceived thee,
as though he should say: it is not God nor the devil only, nor any other
man's counsayll or persuasion, that hays thaughte thee this, or beaten it in to
thy head, but it is even thy self, thine own devise and free will, thine own
proud heart and vain trust that thou haste taken in thine own stre^ght and
goods. It is a notable word that the holy Ghost puttes here when he says:
The pride of thine own heart hays deceived thee, and well declares the nature
of pride, and well spring of all sin to begin in thy heart and thine own
free will. From the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, theft. etc. As
saint Matthew says.15. And well may that be said too deceive man, that under
the cloak of godliness, honesty, profit or pleasure intises a man to it, where
in the end it proves wicked, hurtful and displeasaunt. For except it had in
the beginning some fair show of some goodness in it, no man would be allured
to it. If it were good in deed, it were no deceate, but because it is not, it
may well be said to deceive. Pride is only of good things.
Pride among all other sins hays this property, that it ever rises of some
good thing that a man hays given him of God, and takes ye praise of it him
self. For no man is so foolish to rejoice in any thing that is evil of it
self, except it have some appearance of goodness in it. When God gyues a good
gift to any man, than the devil and his own froward nature makes him not too
give God due thanks for it, but to rejoice in him self, as though he him self
were worthy all the praise for findinge out, or using well such a gift.

Thus the Pharise being proud of his own righteousness in fasting, holiness,
and payinge his tithes, abuses the good gifts of God, and takes part of the
^raise to him self, which should be given holy to Cod alone, and also in pride
he contemnes. The poor Publicane, which sat prayinge by him, because he was
not so holy as he was: So, strong holds and castles is the good gift of God,
but to rejoice in them, not puttinge his hole trust and deliverance in God, is
a great pride and unthankfulness to God, which hays given thee such gifts to
stir thee up, rather to praise him which hays taught thee to find out the
profitable use of such things. But it is hard for a worldly man to have these,
and not be proud of them, and therefore he says: thy pride hais deceived
thee, Beauty is the good gift of God, but because in outward appera^ce it
semes good* Beawty.
it sone deceyues man, entisinge him too evil, rather then to praise God in
it, the wise man says, look not in the face of a maiden, Sirach. ix.
lest you he entised with her beutie* Towers, castles, holds, bulwarks, be
ordained by the provision of God to defend his people* but yet must we ever
know, Holds.
that in vain labors the watchemen be they never so many, wise and strong,
to defend the city, except the Lord defend it, Psalm. cxxvii.
as David says: What an unthankful pride is this toward God, that when ^e hays
given us wit too devise such engynes of war to defend our selves with all,
and liberally bestowed on us men and money, to make such things withal, and
than we do rob him of his due glory, and take that praise to our selfs, which
is due to him, and rejoice in our selves Because they dwelt and builded their
holds on ye tops of hills, they thought no man should be able to climme up to
hurt them, except he could fly: and though underminings will hurt many
times, and throw down great castles, yet where the buyldinge is ^n the hard
rock of stone as this was, they cannot mine through the rock, so ye above
except they could fly, they could not come nere the^, nor by low they could
not pearce the hard stones of the ground work, being so many, hard, deep,
and strong. Wine is pleasant to look on, sweet too taste, and chere the
hearts of man: Wine.
yet in drinkinge, it sone deceiues a man, and ouercomes the brain, and
therefore the wise man counsails saying: Prouer. xxiii.
delight not thy self in loking on the wine when it shines merely in the glass.
Women. Riches. i. Timo. vi*
The words of women are sweet, yet often full of poison. Riches is the good gift
of God, yet the Apostle calls them the nets of the devil, because under a
fare pretense we be soon tangled with the desire of them. So generally to
speak of al ye creatures of God, wha^ they be loved or trusted in for them
selves, and not for his cause that made them, they deceive us. Consider not
creaturs in them selfs.
Consider not therefore the beauti, strength, wealth, commodite and pleasur of
any creature in it self, for tha^ it will surely deceive thee: but lift up thy
mind to him that made them for thy use and commodite, and praise him for his
great care yt he takes for thee, in making of them, and giving thee ye use of
them, and so shall thou not be deceived by them, but receive profit thy self,
geui^g him his due honor wha^ thou knowledges thy God to work thy salvation,
pleasure or commodite, by such his creatures. The Lord hais given herbs diverse
strength to heal diverse diseases: but if in sickness we trust in the phisicio^
or his medicines, we be deceived in his good creatures. For as David sais: It
is ye Lord yt heales our diseases, Physic. Psalm. ciii.
and is at our bed side wha^ we be sick. So these people, having received a
strong and plenteous country at the merciful hands of God, forgot him that
gave it the^, trusted in their own strength, wisdom and polity, and so be ye
fare outward show of these things, pride crept in, deceived the^ and made
the^ to trust in them selves. And well it may be said too have deceived them,
because it crept in under such a fair prete^se, and also because when they
looked to have been saved by them they were soonest deceived, their holds
wherein they trusted, were thrown down, their country conquired, and the
people spoiled and destroyed. Thus does all worldly things with a goodly
outward show, deceive a man when he trustes most in them. Horses. Ps. xxxiii.x^
A horse is a deceitful thing says David: and again, some trust in their
chariots, and some in the horses, but we trust in the name of our lord God.
When the people would have gone into Egypt for succor. The Prophet said,
Esai xxxvi.
Egypt is but a read. Princes. Psalm. cxlvi.
Golias trusted in his ^arnes and strength but David in Gods name overthrow
him. Trust not therefore in any worldly thing, for it will sure deceive thee
when you lokes for help of it. No, trust not in princes, be they never so
mighty, for Nabuchodonozor walking in his gorgious pal^yce, Daniel. iii
considering his mighty strong city of Babylon, co^teining.16. miles square,
as Pliny teaches, his many kingdoms and people yt were his subjects, thought
he should never have fallen, and tha^ suddenly was he cast out of his kingdom,
and lived and eat gresse with beasts, what could be devised stronger tha^ ye
tower of Babel, Gene xi.
but how suddenly vainquished that vain hope away.

That which is added: thou says in thy heart, who shall draw me down to ye
earth teaches us thus much, that it is not only these gross outward
sins, as murder, theft, horedom, and such like: but even the fine
thoughts of our own hearts, which we think that none knows but our selfs,
which God will judge and be avenged of them. They did not so much
blasphemously crake openly saying: who shall draw us down? as they thought it
in their hearts, and privily laughed in their selfs at Gods people, being so
few, hated, oppressed, and despised of all round about them, and thought them
selfs so strong, Psalm. xiiii.xlv.
that none durst be bold to touch them. Likewise speaks David: the wicked
manne said in his heart there is no God: meaning not so much that there
was no God, or that they did so openly speak of him, as that they thought
God had no care over the^, or knew not things done on earth, as he says in an
other psalm. is their knowledge in the heighte? or who sees us? Math. v.
even in these gross sins. Our savior Christ says: He that lokes at a
woman too lust for her, hays committed adultery, therefore let us not deceive
our selfs saying: Sins of the mind be (...). Psa^. xii.
thought is free, or I may think what I lust, or as the Psalm. says: our
lips are our own, and who is our God, for as God hais creat and made our
hearts and all our powers of our souls, so will he have a count of them, be
seruid with them, and have them to think upon his majesty, mercy and goodness,
and be praised that ways as well as in our outward deeds: and if we do use
the^ for other purposes, it deserves damnation.

In the last verse, the Lord makes answer: w hat shall become on Edo^ for all
their greaie crakes, proud lokes, strong holds, or any thing that they
rejoiced in. And he says, I will not only draw thee down; to the bare earth,
from the tops of the hills, where thou delites thy self in thy strong
holds: but if it were possible that thou could fly as high as the Egle, and
buyld thy nest among the Stars, from thence I would draw thee down says
ye Lord. Herein we may see how horrible a thing it is to forsake God, henge
on our self, or trust in any worldly strength. Let not the wise rejoice in
his wisdom, nor the strong in his strength, nor the rich in his riches:
says Iere. And these things all to be true shall well appear in this Prophet,
proved by particulers: Iere. i^*
for ye people had all worldly wealth wherein to rejoice, but they were deceived
in them al and destroyed, as here after shall appear. But this is ever the
wisdom of the flesh, to rejoice in things contrary to God, and therefore is it
worthily condemned by his example. The worldly man says, when his enemies come
against him, it is good abiding wtin strong walls, and se whether they can
fly over the^ like birds, or under mine the^ like con^es: iiii. King. vi.
but ye godly man sais with Eliseus being beseged of the king within the city,
and his boie came and told him: fear not, for there is more with us than with
the^. Afterward he desired the Lord to open his boys eyes, that he might see
how many were on their side: ye Lord gave him sight, and he saw the hills full
of Angels and chariots ready to fight for him: and beside yt the Lord blinded
his enemies, and Eliseus led the^ in to the midst of Samaria among their
enemies, where God bade him feed the^, and not harm them, for it was not he
yt had brought them thither, but the Lord his God. The worldly man, wha^
persecution comes, thinks, shall I leave my country friends and goods, go
into a strange land: I know not whyther, and whose language I understand not:
but ye faithful man, hering God speak to his conscience: as he did too
Abraham. Gene. xii.
Come out of thy country and from thy friends, into a la^d yt I will show thee,
serve me: and fall not to Idolatri: he will obei with faithful Abraham, knowing
yt God will gide all those yt love and follow him, and yt his country is,
whersoeuer God is served, and these be his friends and cosins yt fears the
Lord: as our savior Christ said, these be my mother, Math. x^^.
brether and sisters yt hear the word of God, and keep it. The tower of Babel
was builded a wonders height, and Na^rod with his companions would have gotten an
everlasting name by it: Gene. ^^.
but ye Lord perceyuinge their proud enterprise, disapointed the^, and scatered
the^ abroad in to all countries. Satan was an Au^gel in heaven, but for his
disobedience is now made a devil in hell. Nabuchodonozor was ye mightiest
prince, yet afterward made a very beast: Daniel. ii^^
Herod was proud of his great eloquence and straight after was wiried of life.
Rabsaces blaspheming ye living God of Israel, and aua^ting him self in his
great co^questes, Act. xii.
as though they had been gotten by their Idols power, had almost.200.1000. slain
in his ca^pe in one night by thau^gel of God, iiii King. ^iii
and without ma^s power, in ye time of good Ezechias ye Madianites, lying so
thick as groshoppers in the field, thought they should have devoured Gods people
at their pleasur, Iud. vii.
but God send his captain Gedeon, which with.300. naked men vnharnessed,
having la^ps in one hand, and earth pots in the other, vanquished them all.
Thus it is true yt the psalm. says: If I climb up in to heaven, you art there,
and if I go down into hell, thou art there also. Psalm cxxi^^
And there thy hand shall rule me.

The hole scriptur, if ye go through it, is nothing else but a perpetual
teaching how God always throws down the proud, and liftes up the simple
and lowly. O if the papists would be as earnest to set up the true glory of
God, as they be diligent spayniels to seek always possible to set up that vile
podell of Idolatry, of their god the Pope. In all ages have been some people yt
have been plages to ye rest, and yet God hays thrown them down at length: So
no doubt the Papists be now, but their fall will be incurable when it comes,
although they be a great scourge almost to all christendom, and flourish for a
time.

Mark well the last words of the Prophet: I will make thee come down says
the Lord. The destruction of this people was done by Nabuchodonozor many
years after, and yet the Lord calls it his own deed, and says he will pull
the^ down. So as I have noted before. etc. that is called the Lords deed,
which is done by his servant, whether they be good or bad: for by such
means the Lord will correct us, It is called the Lords deed that the servant
do.
bring us to the knowledge of our selfs and him. In all such worldly
corrections, therefore let us not look so much at him that vexes us, or murmur
and grudge at him, but look who hays sent him, whose servant he is, and
wherefore he comes: For he comes from God to do and teach us good: And than
we shall patiently bear whatsoever comes. And because they should not flatter
them selfs, as though these things should not thus come to pass, he ioines
unto it, the Lord says: As though he should say: flatter not your selfs, I
speak not of mine own head: the God of all truth, that can not lie says thus:
therefore most certainly look for it. He that is a righteous judge of all
creatures, and both can and will be avenged on all evil doers, and will deliver
us his people out of the hands of their oppressors, when he hays sufficiently
declared the patient abidinge and deep sighing of the oppressed, and abide^
long enough for the turninge of ye proud enemies, when he sees no amendment
to be hoped for, he will then come in deed, fearful for his enemies, and
comfortable for his poor people, as the Psalm says: Psalm. xii.
For the misery of ye poor, and the sighinge of the oppressed, I will rise
says the Lord. Who shall be able to stand when he sais he will pull down:
yea, who dare be bold to look when he shows his anger, deceive not your
selfs, he will come.

The Text.




After that the Prophet hays told them that they shall be destroyed, now he^
tells them after what sort, and of what things they should be spoiled. Edo^
was a country, not only compassed about with hills, that no enemies could
enter and fortefied with strong holds and castles on the top of the hyls as
appears before: but it was a plentious country also of all fruits, and full
of wise men of great polity, which all should be taken from them with all
their things that they reioiced in. And where he uses two similitudes here, one
of thieves and of grape getherers, which both whersoeuer they come do much harm
and take all things at their pleasure, spare nothing, but search all privy
corners, where any thing can be hid: yet these spoilers should be much
wors and more cruelly entreat them. This first part of the similitude hays
two arguments of their cruelnes in it, and it is as much as though he should
have said thus to them. If thieves should come in the day time to spoil thee,
or robbers in the night season thou could not have holden thy peace, but
would have called and cried for help of thy neighbors, thou would have
prepared thy self to have foughten with the^, to have withstand them, too have
defended thine own goods, and to have taken or killed them that thus
violently came on thee, but when these destroiers shall come, thou shall not be
bold too whisper, to cry, to call for help, or else if thou cry never so
loud, it is but vain too defend thy self, or rescew thy goods, but
fearfully like a sheep lie still, and like a coward let them do to thee what
they please: it shall be fulfilled in thee that God thretens to the brekers of
his law, Deuteronomy. xxviii.xxxii. Leuit. xxvi
that one shall chase a thousand and ten men, ten thousand: yea, and that
which is more marvelous, they shall be afraid at the fall of a leaf. Or if we
read thus (so the Ebrewe word signifies both ways:) how should thou have been
destroyed? than this is the meaning: that although thieves and robbers would
have destroyed them, yet that destruction should have been like to this: so
extreme a plage should this be to them, yt these other were not worthy to be
compared unto it. The later token of their great destruction is, that the
Babilonions, wha^ they come should deal wors with them than thieves or robbers
would: for thieves when they come they do not take all, but the best things
they find, lest they should not flee fast enough away, or be bewraid by many
things when they should be known. And again they use not to tarry long in
robbinge a house, for fear lest some should epsy them, and come upon them
suddenly: but the Chaldees should not be afraid of any company of men wha^ they
should ouerrunne them, nor be content with a few things, but destroy all
after them, and that which they could not carry away, they would utterly mar
by some means, that they should have no good of that, which was left. They
would not be content with a few things as thieves, but they would have all:
they would not haistly run away for fear of any help cominge too rescow
them, but they would without fear spoil and tarry their leisure, searchinge
all corners, not caring who shall epsy them. And that which is more
marvelous: thieves although they come suddenly upon a man, giving no warninge
that a man might prepare him self to stand in his own defense, should not
do so much harm as the Assirians should, cominge not suddenly upon them, nor
they unprepared, but being prepared, and although they knew of their coming,
and had all kind of weapons to defend them self withal, yet they shall not be
able nor bold to defend them selfs or their country, but should utterly
perish, be robbed, spoiled and destroyed.

The latter similitude of grape getherers declares this more plainly: Grape
getherers, although they search every branche and pepe under every leaf, lest
they leave any grapes growing behind them, (and yet they were commanded in the
law by Moses, Leuit xix
to leave some growing of all kind of fruit behind them, and if they let any
fall, they should not turn^ again to take it up, but let the poor come
geyther and gleane) yet these gredy cormorantes, so covetous that they never
had inoughe, so gredye that they were never fyld. They would not leave one
cluster growinge behind them, but so utterly spoil them, that they would
leave nothing at all, neither for poor nor rich. They would spare neither
man nor woman, old nor young, house nor land, town nor castle, beasts of all
sorts without mercy should be wasted, burned and destroyed.

The later verse shows this utter destruction at large, in few words,
saying: But how have they searched Esau, and ranseckt their secret things,
as though he should say to them: although thieves, robbers, grapegetherers
use to do much harm, wheresoever they come, and nothing can escape their
hands, yet it shall be nothing like unto this destruction, yt these of Babylon
shall do. This destruction shall be incurable, these shall spoil, kill and
destroy without mercy: Nabuchodonozor when he comes with his men, shall search
and ranseck all your secret places and corners that nothing shall escape
them. In sackinge of towns, men be wont to cast their plate, money, Iuels and
such other treasures in to deep wells, too dig the^ in ye earth or some
privy place, where none or few uses to come, or few would mistrust any thing
their to be hid: but when he comes, hide your treasurs where you lust, cast
the^ into ^akes, dunghils, cesterns or blind corners where please you, it
shall not skill, it shall be espied, and shall not esscape, ye shall not have
profit of any thing ye have. He wonders at the utter destruction of them when
he says: how have they searched and ranseckt the secrets: as if he should
say, it shall be unlike unto all other doings, no reason would think what
great cruelty in searchinge and spoil shall be showed unto thee, it shall be so
horrible, so contrari to men's loking for, and so far unlike too all that hais
ben showed to any other people. And marvel not at this extremity, showed
unto you: good reason it is that they which have comforted them selves in their
worldly things beside God, that they should be so corrected of God, that they
should understand that their is no help, succor or comfort but in ^od: and
they which would not know God in prosperity, must now drink of his justice
in aduersite. He had given plenty to them of all fruits, corn, cattels, and
all kind of riches, but this could not move them to knowledge him to be their
Lord and God, giver and sauer both of man and beast: therefore now must they
test of the rod too know there was a God, whom they had offended. God does
not give us his benefits, riches and blessings too make us trust in our
self or any other creature, but to stir up our minds too heaven, to look
on him, trust in him, call on him, and praise him: therefore it was right that
all these should be taken from them, to bring them too the knowledge of them
selves and his justice, which can not abide such things. This is the
reward, due for all such as will not show merci, but cruelty to them that
be in distress: they shall find the same cruelty, and measure, given them
again when they shall be in need, they shall ask mercy, call for help, but
find none.

Gene. xliiii
Joseph's brethren, when they would show no mercy to their brother, when he
desired them, were straightly looked on for a time, and sharply spoken unto when
they came into Egipte: and than they could confess that God had worthily
rewarded them their unkindness that they showed their brother Joseph.
Nabuchodonozor, with all his cruel proud men, which spoiled, conquered and
cruelly entreated all countries about them, were served with like measure at
Cyrus hands, when he overcame them, he destroyed their city, and conquered
their country. And as our Papists with their spies in all corners, would let no
man dwell in rest, but accuse, complain, imprison, and burn them, and had
rather fulfill the bloody desires, and minds of the cruel murderers and
bochers, tha^ show any gentilnes to Gods people (and all to pike a thank, or
get a bribe of the proud Bishops or hard hearted, and never satisfied
horsleches, the lawers:) so their time will come when they shall feel Gods
heavy wrath and displeasure against the, with such grief of conscience,
Reuela. vi.
that they shall wish for death, and not find it, desire the hills to cover
them from the face of the lamb, and yet be without comfort: These be the
Edomytes that persecute ye true sons of Jacob at this day, these be the false
brethren that be moved, neither with the fear of Gods love to his word, nor
natural to their brethren, countreme^ and kinsfolk: but like brute beasts
devour all aforeth, e^satisfieng their own lusts and desires, encreasinge
their own condemnation, if they turn not and repent with tears. thee and
persecuted all men, which were in leage and confederate with thee: the me^ that
made peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee, and those
that eat thy bread, have wounded thee privily, there is no wisdom in him.





This plage that God threatens to this people now, is of two sorts, and that
because they had double offended. According as it is ye policy of princes to
join the^ selfs in leage and frendsh^p with princes that dwell nere unto the^
(yt by their help, they might be the stronger and more feared) and also to have
wise men of the counsel: so had these Edomites sought the^ friendship of all ye
mighty countries about them, and picked out also the worldly wisest men, they
could find to be their rulers, thinking that by polity and wisdom of the
one, and the strength, power and richesse of the other, they should be able
to defend them selves against all men that would proferre them wrong: yea they
should rather under this pretense be bold to do other men wrong, and none
should once be so bold to say, why do ye so. This is a comen practice, likewise
at these days of such as would hurt other (but yt either they dare not nor can
not) to run always under some great man's winge, to bear the name of his
servant, wear his livery or be one of his retinu, that under this color he
may disquiet the hole country where he dwelles, and no man darre be so
bold to blame him: but God hates al such as forsake him, and hang on them
selfs, takes all such in their own devises, and that wherein they think too
save them selves, is turned to their own destruction. These people, says the
Lord with whom thou art in leage, thinkinge thereby to save thy self, and be
stronger than all other, even the self same people shall rise up against
thee, take part with thy ennemies, and drive the out of the borders of thy
own country.

You would think it a great pleas^^ if when thou were conquered and
ouercome^, thou might dwell in thine own country still, payinge tribute and
taxes to Nabuchodonozor: and other about thee, but thou that hays be^ so cruel
to thy brethern gods people, the sons of Jacob, shall not find so much favor
and friendship at their hands as to dwell in thy own land, but shall be driven,
not only out of thy strong holds and wealthy places of it, but even out of
all the coasts and borders of the same, and that by those which thou takes
for thy friends, and in whom thou put thy trust. Such shall be the case of
all those that forsake the Lord, and put their trust in them selves or their
friends When the people of God would have gone to Egypt again for succor,
when Nabuchodonozor had subdued all the country: Jeremy cried still no, Iere.
xlii
they should not do so: for where they looked for help, they should find woe:
for Nabuchodonozor overcame Egypt also, and than all that fled thither were in
wors case, than if they had tarried in their country still. Esai. xxxvi.
Egipte is a read sais Isaie: and they that f^e thither shall perish in
dangerous times, there is no succor to be found but at the Lords hands: for
when ye Lord sees that in prosperity we forgete him, he sendes us aduersite,
that for fear we^ should be compelled too look for help at his hands. Such
a louinge God is he unto us, that he would win us by all means possible,
but if we can be drawn to him by no way, ^e geues us over that we may work
justly our own condemnation, without excuse, having nothing to lay for our
selves.

Moreover, those that made peace with these people, deceived them, and those yt
eat their bread wounds them privily. This is the reward of worldly wisdom
that when they trust most in them, they shall be sonest deceived, and when they
look for help of them, they shall be the first that shall wound them. True love
is only among the godly.
There can be no true love, which is not grounded in God and for his sake: for
where as God only is sought for, there is love and truth it self, wheresoever
he is not, there is neither truth nor true love. That love which is grounded
on worldly causes, when the world chaunges, it fails to. If it be for beauty,
profit or frendshippe, as soon as these be gone, fare well love, friendship is
gone. Nabuchodonozor whom they feared and looked for promotion at his hands,
was now comen to destroy Edom, and therefore all the country about was not
only ready to fall from the Edomites, with whom they were in leage before,
giuinge the^ no help, but were ye first and cruelst enemies yt they had ready,
not only not too help them, but to drive them out of their own country. Who
pretended a greater love to Christ tha^ Judas? and who sooner betrayed and
denied him? How many examples is England able to give of such, as while they
were in authorite they were feared rather than loved (although it was called
love, fair faces were outwardly, promises, oaths, bands, marriages were made
and all devises that could be to make it sure) but when they fell, they which
were thought derest friends were becomen open enemies accusers and conde^ners in
hope to climb in to his rowme, or catch part of his goods or lands. David
co^plaines of such as made fairest face of frendshipe, Psalm. xli.
and did eat of the same dishe, and yet sonest deceived him. These words in
the Hebrew be written in the preterit te^ps, but spoken that so it should come
to pass as sure as if it were now done: Preter temps.
according as the custom of ye Prophets is, to speak that which is too come
as though it were done, where other languages use to speak such things in
future temps.

But the latter end of the verse, where he sais there is no wisdom in him (yt
is to say in the^, or all the Edomites by a common figurative speech in Ebrew,
where ye singular is put for the plural) as in ye.89. psalm. I will visit their
wickedness with a rod. etc but my mercy I will not take from him. Them is most
marvelous, for who will believe, or who can judge the contrari, but that it is
great wisdom and policy to the strengthening, defense and maintaining of a
country, to have strong holds in it, and to be in leage with their neighbors
round about them as these men were. But God says there was no wisedo^ in them,
nor in this their doi^g. Not because it is not lawful for Gods people too have,
use or make such things in their commonwealth, for their defense and keeping out
their enemies, but yt they may not do these things too put their trust in the^,
or wha^ they have them to dispice their Lord God, seking no help at his hands,
but trust in their own strength, thinking them selfs able to defend them selfs
against all enemies, as though God did nothing, nor victory and defense were
not of him. And again when they have such strong defense, they may not use it
too the hurt of Gods people, as these wicked proud Edomites did both
against God, their brethren and the people of God. This is right wisedo^ to
forsake him self and heng upon God, to know that no policies are good which is
against Gods people, nor to think them selves strong by hurting others. The
coniurers that stood before Pharao, Exo. vii.xiiii
working miracles, thought they should have defaced Moses, and set up them
selves: but Pharao was drowned with his host, Moses with his people was
delivered, and the coniurers granted that the living God wrought in Moses.
Achitophel counsailing Absalon to follow his father David, ii. King. vii.
that same night he began to rebel, lest in deferringe time he should
escape, thought Absalon should have been a king: Worldly wysedom is
foolishnes.
but God proved his worldly wise counsel to be folishnes, for when he see
that he was not beloved, nor his counsel followed, he went and hanged him self:
but David escaped, and Absalon was slain. When Haman had obtained a
proclamation for the distroinge of all the Jews, Ester. v.vii.
and made a galowes for Mardocheus, he thought him self wiser than all the
world, and that he should have been promoted him self, and the people of God
spoiled and destroyed. But Haman was hanged on the same galowes, Mardocheus
promoted, i. King. xviii.
and the Jews delivered. When Saul promised David his daughter for the
killinge of an hundredth Philistines* not for love, but thinkinge David should
have been killed him self before he had killed so many: he thought he had done
politicly, but David killed them all, marye^ his daughter, and was king after
him. For which thing only Saul abhorred him. The Scribes and Phariseis, Luce
xx.
thinking if Christ were once dead, they should be safe, and never hear tell
more of hi^: but after his death, thapostles wrought mo miracles in his name
than he did him self, being alive, and mo believed in him after his death,
than ever did when he was alive. Thus all the scripture proves plain that, that
which worldly wisdom thinks best to set up them selves by, and too destroy
Gods people, is proved too be the destruction of all those that trust in it:
and when they look for most comfort of their devise, it turns to their own
hurt: as we see it hays chanced by Gods merciful providence to our papists,
for bringing in the Spaniardes, trusting by that people to maintain their
superstitious popery and ydell lordly authorite. The wisdom of this world
says the apostle is foolishnes before God. The wiser thou art before men, i.
Corin. iii
not having the glory of God before thine eyes, ever studyinge how too set
forth his will to the world, the more fool thou art: the craftier thou art
to set up thy self, the sooner thou works thine own destruction. How many of
the worldly policy m^^ have been trapped in their own snare here among us? have
not they when they were highest in auctorite, suffered death by the same, their
own laws? thus ye se that al worldly wisedo^ against God is naught, and that
it is no wisedo^ in deed, but folishnes. And although worldly wits do many
things well for a time, yet wha^ they trust in it most, and stand most in need
of it, they shall be deceived as the next verse says. Shall I not in that day
destroy says the Lord, the wisemen from Edom. etc. And as it is in worldly
wits and policies, yt they be all vain when they strive against God, so is it
in the spiritual kingdom of Christ in his word and church: Man's wit in Gods
matters is vain f^oli.
for the dregs of Popery with their Canons and Decrees, shall be thrown
down, and can not always maintain those idel bealy gods, ye Popes chaplens,
but as they have been cast down by times ever, so shall they at length be trodden
under foot to their confusion. Like is the case of subtle scholeme^ with their
distinctio^s, defacing Christ and his truth: neither setti^g forth ye majesty
of God and his son Christ Jesus, nor edifying with comfortable promises the
weak consciences, nor opening ye mysteries of the scriptur, but with folish
gloses defacing the mercies of God, taught in his holy word and burdening men
with traditions vnwrite^ verities, or rather vanities their own dreams and
fantasies: all which God abhorres and says, al yt worship him, teching ma^s
doctrine, worship him in vain. These and all such like conning of the wisedo^
of ye flesh be everlasting death as Paul says: Math. xv To viii. Iaco iii. i.
Corin. ii
and sensual, carnal and deuelish as Ia. terms the^, and mere ignorance of
God and his mercies, for a natural sensual man, perceiues not the things of
God. And to conclude, generally all wisdom that settes up it self in any
kind of things whatsoever it be, it is no wisdom, it shall confound all
that use it or trust in it, and when they would most gladly enjoy it, they
shall surely not have it. There is no wisdom nor counsel against the
Lord says Solomon: Prouer. xxi.
the Pope with all his rabel is not so wise to throw down Christ, as the
Scribes and Phariseis were in their time: and as they were confounded so shall
all that rebel against the son of God, which by the might of his holy
spirit, in the mouth of his true Apostles, disciples and ministers, being but
poor simple abiects and a despised people in the sight of ye world, hais
overthrown tyrannes, stopped blaspheminge mouths, confounded the wise and
learned and declared his strength in our weakness, that there is no power,
wisedo^ strength, nor policy that preuailes against him or his people, and
because they did glory so much in their wisdom and policy, the Lord
countes if a glorious thing to throw them down: and because ye glory "may be
given to him alon for such a noble victory, he says: Shall I not thr^w them
down? as though he should say: No man shall have the praise of it but I my
self, I will destroy them with mine own hands in that day when they look not
for it, and trust most in them selves. The tower of Babel, the cytyes Niniue
and Jerusalem, being great and mighty, were suddenly overthrown when they
thought not on it. The wisdom of God purposes one thing, and the wisdom of
man an other: so wisdom shall overcome wisdom, and the pride of man shall be
ouercomen by the mighty hand of God. God taries long to have his enemies too
turn by repentance, too see their own folly, and ask forgeuenes: but when
he sees there is no remedy nor hope of their amendment, he comes like a
sharp and righteous judge, and utterly overthrows them.

But not only their wisdom and wisemen perished, but their strong men shall
be afraid also, because every noble man among them should be afraid, as
the last verse says. What a case shall these people be in, when neither
wisdom nor strength shall serve? Theman.
Theman signifies by interpretation the south, and it is also, the name of one
of their chief cities, and therefore some translate: thy strong men shall be
afraid of the southe, because Nabuchodonozor came with his host from the
south, ^o: so Babylon stood southward from them: or better the strongest men of
Thema^, thy chief city shall be afraid, and so Jeremy uses it, Iere. xlix.^
there is no more wisedo^ in Thema^, it is thought of many learned, and that
probably that Job dwelled in this country before Esau was borne and married
Dina Jacobs daughter, as Philo says: and that Eliphas also the Aminites, one
of Jobs friends, which came to comfort him as he sat on the dunghyl, Job. ii.
dwelled in this city Theman, and thereof was called the Aminites, and well it
may be so: for in his counsailinge and confortinge of Job, he speaks often more
worldly than godly, although wittely and wisely, ye latter end of the verse,
some read every one of the hill Esau, some the noble men, as the Targ. redes,
but both well enough. For Isch signifies both every one and also a man: Isch.
but such one as is noble. Therefore I join them together and say, every
noble man: and so I express both their meaninges. So here is plainly taught,
ye neither wisdom nor strength can preuail against the Lord. All gloryinge,
craking, reioicing or boasting that any man hays of him self, or any thing
beside God, is vain and wicked: for this must always be before us. He that
glories let, him glory in the Lord, and Cyprian sais well: we must glory in
nothing, because nothing is ours. We have received al from God, and therefore
all praise must be given to him yt gives al. What hays thou says s. Paul, that
thou hays not received of God? i. Cori^. iiii.
and if thou have received it, why crakes thou on it, as though thou had not
received it? What a proud soul is he that will be proud of his borrowed
coat or painted sheath. God clothes us, and couers our filthy nakedness with
his godly gifts: what unthankful treason is it than, to take ye praise from
him to our self, and not render due thanks unto him for them? Mark here the
difference betwixt true wisdom and boldness, and earthly worldly wit and
power, when danger comes, the godly wise man will commit him self holy to God,
lokinge for help and deliverance at his hands, or else patiently bear it
without any dismaiyng, whatsoever God lays on him: for he knows well, ye
things are not ruled by fortune, nor yt any thing can fall on him without the
good will of his good God and louinge father. But ye worldly wise man, when he
sees worldly wit, power and polity fail, he thinks all the world fails,
and things be without recovery: he trusts not in God, and therefore no
meruaill, if he be left desolate. Of the good man's fear, in the time of
aduersite writes Jeremy: Iere xvii. Godly. Wise. Worldly.
blessed is he that trustes in the Lord, for he shall be a tree, planted by
the waters, and in the drught, he shall not be careful, nor cease to bear
fruit. And David also says Psalm. Psalm. iii.
Thou shall not be afraid of fear in the night. etc. The wicked contrariwise
shall be afraid at the fall of a leaf: one shall chase a thousand: and ten,
thousand as God threte^s in Deute: by Moses. He will lie, flater, Deuteronomy.
xxvii^.xx^ii.
swear, and what ye will have him to do, rather than lose his profit. The like
says Jeremy of them to: they shall be a read, shaken with the wind. They
shall dwell in dry wilderness, in a salt ground. The people which dwelte in
the land, promised to the Israelites, when they heard t^^ what wonders God
wrought in the wilderness, Iosue. ii.
and the read sea for his people, and saying them come nere unto them, and
hearing the victories they had against the kings. See and Og: their hearts
melted in their bodies like wax, as Rahab confessed too the spies, which
Iosue sent: but Rahab her self, she plucked up her heart, trusted in God,
and was delivered where the other perished. So the good Gabaonites that feared
God, yielded the^ self to Iosue, and were saved: the other yt trusted in their
own strength, Iosue. ix.
and would try it with the sweerde, for all their brag were faint hearted and
ouercomen. So the Philistines seeing Goliath their grau^d Captain slain of
David, i. King. xvii
being but a child in comparison of him, fled away post: where the
Israelites before were s^^ afraid, that they durst not stir. Thus God turns
the course of things when pleases him: that those, which before were dismayed,
pluck up their courage and win the victory, and those that were stout,
bragginge of them selves before, now be made cowards, run away and fly,
thinkinge the dangers greater than they be in deed. It does evidently appear
here also, how the Lord raises up one wicked, to plage and throw down an
other. These Edomites had joined them selves with their neighbors to trouble
pore Jacobs seed and his people: One wicked plagues an other. iiii. King. ix.
but now the matter is so turned, that one wicked, persecutes, destroys and
plagues another, and Nabuchodonozor destroies Edom. Wicked Iehu was raised to
throw down cruel Iesabel: and all the kings of Israel, called the.10.
tribes, being all evil, every one murdered his predecessor, and was killed
of his successor. How many Popes have used the same practice in poisoning one
an other, that they might come aloft? it were more long and tedious to tell,
than hard to find. In.12. year space under one Emperor were.8. Popes. Whereof
every one almost persecuted an other, being dead and dug up out of the
earth and beheaded them, as Formosus Stephanus* etc. Some other reigned but a
month, and poisoned one an other, as Cranty writes.



against him, even in that dai when strangers did take his goods, and when
strangers entered his gates, and when they cast lotte for Jerusalem, thou also
was one of the^. Thou shall not look in ye day of thy brother, nor in the day
when strange things shall happen him, nor thou shalt not rejoice against the
children of Judah, in the day of their destruction, nor thou shalt not open
thy mouth, boastingly in the dai of their trouble.



Nor thou shall not stand in the cross ways to kill them that flee, nor thou
shall hem them that be left in the day of their trouble.

For the day of the Lord over all people is at hand: as ye hayes done, they
shall do unto thee, like punishmente shall fall upon thine own head.

As ye have dronke^ upon my holy hill, so shall all people drink continually:
they shall drink and swalowe up, and shall be, as though they were not.

Now folowes the declaration of the causes of Gods anger, and heavy displeasure
against Edom, lest any man should think God unjust in his doings, or too
sharp in his punishinges. Some would think a less punishment might have
suffised to have corrected them with all: but when they shall consider how
great and grievous the sins of them were, it shall be judged to litel a
punishment for so many fautes. The first verse co^taines generally that which
the verses folowinge declare by particulars. The pride, violence, injuries,
wrongs and robberies that they showed toward their brother Jacob, be ye causes
of this their destruction. Jacob and Edo^ are not here taken for the two
brethren ye sons of Isaac: but for the hole seed, stock, posterite,
children, and issue borne of them both: Jacob. Esau. Edom.
so that as hatred began in Esau against Jacob in their fathers life, yea, in
their mothers womb (in so much that Esau persecuted his brother Jacob to
death, so sore that Jacob was caused too flee to his uncle Laba^) so the
hatred, persecution and enemite did continue in their children unto this time,
was fulfilled that ye Prophet speaks of here, when the posterite of Esau was
utterly destroyed. God is slow, but he is sure.
And this is comfortable, both for the long sufferinge of God before he do
extremely punish, and also a true proof of his justice, yt although he do
differ his punishing long, yet he is a righteous judge, and will come at the
length, and be avenged on his enemies, and deliver his children that have been
so long oppressed under their enemies. Therefore as the good need not to be
disscouraged, as though their God cared not for them: so the wicked shall not
triu^phe as though they might do what they list, and God would not call them
to a count.

They had thus persecuted Jacob and his posterite, above a thousand year, and
that continually before they were destroyed and could never be satisfied of
their cruelty: therefore partly too stop their raginge, and bring them to
the knowledge, both of God and them self, and partly to fear other for
folowinge the like example, if they should be unpunished, but specially for ye
crying of the poor oppressed people, The wicked be cruel, the godly patient
Psalm. xii.
who^ God takes in to his custody, to be their tutor, the Lord will rise to
show him self glorious, mighty and merciful, pull down his enemies, deliver
his oppressed as David says: for the misery of the poor, and the sighinge of
the wretched, I will rys^ says the Lord. etc. Why should Gods people than be
dismaide when they be persecuted, saying they have so mighty a judge that can
and will deliver them when it shall be metest for his glory, and their
comfort. Refer the vengeance to me says the Lord, and I will revenge it. Let
us therefore submit our selfs under his hands, Roma. xii.
and patiently look for his coming, for no dout he will come. When Moses led
the people through the wilderness and came nere the bounds of Edom he asked
license to pass through their contree kepinge the high ways, Nume. xx.
hurting them in no behalf, in so much that they would pay for the water
that they dra^ke but they more like no men then cosins, cominge of the same
stock and father, being not content with this churlishnes, to deny them
passage threatens them forther, that if they would not pass by all their
country, and not once be so bold as to enter within their coasts, they would
by and by feight against them with all their power. So Moses to keep peace,
led the people by a great compass round about, Deuteronomy. ii.
and what said God to this? did he bid destroy them? No, but clean contrary,
he bade them not to feight against them, not only them, but he sates unto
them: thou shall not harm Edo^, because he is thy brother. Note here the
patience and long suffering of Gods people yt would not once attempt to
revenge such displeasures, unkindness and injuries done unto them: and again
note the churlishnes of feined friends hypocrites and dissemblers which will
show no gentelnes to Gods people though they may do it without their hurt o
displeasure of any man. Is not the world full of such unthankful unkind,
and unnatural folk at this day? S. Paul complains of such as cast of all
natural affection that should be among men: as when they which be all of
one house, stock and kindred comen of one great grandfather or auncetors, be
so cruel one against an other, ye nature which works in brui^e beasts hays
no place in them one to love or help an other, he calls the^ Sine affectu as
though he should say, Roma. i.
if nature can not work nor move them, which moves stoones, trees, herbs
and beasts, what hope is there that the Gospel, which is so far above and
contrary to nature should take any place in them? So saint Paull calls
them, which do not provide for them, and theirs wors than infideles. i.
Timo v
Therefore it was necessary, some great plague too fall on this people that
had so far forgotten nature, that they would not let them pass through
their country, nor drink of their waters, which they would pay for. But this
is the merke betwixt Gods children and the devils, the Gospeler and ye
papiste, the true christian and an hypocrite: that the one will suffer wrong,
do good for evil, pray for them that hate him, be content with a little,
not murmuringe: but the bloody papiste is proud cruel, murtheringe,
oppressinge the innocent, merciles, hatinge without reconciliation, ever
sekinge to hurt, that they may live like lords of the land, and idel
bellygods. What a comfort is this for Gods poor afflicted people* that
although God do long suffer them to be vexed of their enemies, yet he will
not suffer them to be overwhelmed: but he will utterly root out the wicked
when he begins to execute his justice on them. He that touches you says God
to his people, by the Prophet Zachary, touches the appel of mine eye. Zacha
ii.
What part of man is more tender than the eye? or which part do we take
more care for than that? The godly be corrected for a time: the wicked for ever.
yet if the eye be sore or dim of sight, we will lay sharp bytinge waters
or pouders in it to eat out the web, perle, or blearednes: so will God,
although he love his people so tenderly, lay sharp bytinge salues, purging
medicines, corrosines, lau^cings, lettinge blood, yea, and cut of rotten
members, lest the hole body perish or rotte away. But all that is for fatherly
love to drive us unto him, to make us weri of the world, to purge carnal
cares, eat out the dead rotten fantasies of our minds, let out the bruised
blood, or cut away by death some for the example of other, too strengthen
them boldly to confess ye truth and glorifieng of his name, by such
conc^nstant witness of our weak natures. A littell worldly shame, as it is
thought of worldly, but not godly men may light on Gods people for a time,
but everlasting shame shall confound their enemies for ever before God: A short
temporal punishment may grieve Gods children for a time: but their haters shall
be utterly destroyed for ever. The Israelites were asshamed for a time in
their captivity, wha^ Esau joined with Nabuchodonozor, to destroi them, and
yet afterward were brought home again: but now should these be utterly
destroyed for ever without recovery. The Philistines for a time made the
Israelites ashamed: i. King. 1^*
but after ye David had slain Goliath, the Philistines were vanquished,
slain, and every day more and more rooted out.

The verses following, declare ye cause of the destruction of Edom. First
because when Nabuchodonozor sacked their city Jerusalem, entered the gates and
cast lot on Jerusalem, who should have the best part, spoiled their good,
burned their houses and Temple, beat down their walls, and made hauoc of
all: Thou Edom stood among them, took their parts, robbed as fast as the
best, cast lot with the^, which should be thy part: Psalm. cxxxvii.
and when other would have showed pity, thou cried as the psalm. says: Down
with it, down with them, even to the botome, leave not one stick standing,
leave not one stoone upon an other. O what cruel words are these? that they
which were cosins, and should have been friends unto this people, when their
enemies would have showed pity, they cry down with them, down with them,
leave not one piece standing The Scotts inuading England, made a like brag
among them selves to destroy all before them, and the morning before the battle
was fought, they plaide at dice for all the dukedoms and great cities in
England, who should have them: but God turned them in their own pride, for
their king was slain in ye field, and all the host disconfited too their
great loss and shame. Where brotherly love required that thou should have
helped thy brother Jacob and his seed, thou stood by and looked on, and would
not help, when such strange things and destruction fell on him: yea not
only that, but ye reioised at their harm, and stood boasting and crakinge
against them, where thou should have been a comfort, and delivered of them. It
is hard to tell whether he offendes God more that does the wrong and
oppresses an other, or he that stands by laughing, mocking and scorning, and
may help and will not: but sure both be dampnable. David complaynes of such as
hurt the oppressed: they have persecuted him whom thou have smitten and they
increased my sorrow, and again they song rymes against me as they sat
drinking wine. Psalm. lxi.
They that stood mockinge at our savior Christ hanging on the cross were as
giltye of his death, Mat, xxvii. Roma. i.
as they that crucified him. Thou that destroys the temple of God hail king
of the Iues. Let him save him if he will have him, they which consent to any
wickedness are as well gilty as they that do the deed. It is against al
humanity that when god punishes, man should also lay on more sorrow beside. No
beast if an other stick fast in ye mire or fall under his lode, will stand
mockinge or hurting him, or laying on more weight to hold it down: and what
beastlines or worse rather is this yt man should rejoice at an other man's harm
it is against nature of man. God bids by Moises yt if you se thine enemies Ass
fallen under his lode yt thou shall not pass by but thou shall help to lift him
up: Exodus xxiii.
and surely god does not co^mau^d this so much for ye Asses sake as ye ma^s as
s. pa. a like case in muslinge the laboring ox. Hais God care for oxen? and if
we be taught thus to show this friendship to our enemy and his ass, much
more it will be required at our hands, for our friends and neighbors. But
they had so far forgotten all gentilnes, yt they were more ready to do them
harm than their open ennemies were and strangers. They brass open their
gates, and went in with ye first, laid hands upon their goods, and spoiled
them as fast as the best. Yea they were not content to stand by, look on, and
rob the^, but they stood in the cross ways, that if any escaped, ran away,
or made shifte to save him self, they either were ready to kyl him, or else
take him prisoner, and bring him and deliver him in to ye hands of his
enemies. O miserable cruelnes, that would not let them live, which had once
escaped danger, nor would not let them flee away, which were once delivered
from their enemies. What a pleasur had these wicked men in murdering and
robbinge their brethern, that could not suffer them to escape, which had once
escaped. Yea all this cruelty they showed when the Lord had forbidden them:
for so the Hebrew redes al these cruel parts negatiuely, forbiddinge them so
to do. And because they had done so cruelly too their brethern, and contrari
to Gods commandment, the plagues fell on them, which the next verse speaks
of.

The Chalde targum redes them all affirmatively, saying thou did stand
against thy brother, when the Heathen robbed him, entered his city, cast lot
for Jerusalem, thou took their parts, stood lokinge on him in the day of his
destruction and spoke boastingly against him, you robbed him, and stood in the
cross wais to kill them that ran away to save them selfs. The sense and
meaning is al one, whither we read them affirmatively or negatiueli for the one
castes in their teethe their cruelty, and the other forbiddes them it, and
shows that for this their unkind and wicked behauior toward their brether
Gods people, they should drink such as they had given other. This is the
comen practice of the world, that when a man is down, than even those
which were his fained friends before, will be the first that shall work him
displeasure. When Absalon had gathered a great company, and driven out his
father, tha^ those that were David's counsailers and flattering friends* were the
first that forsaked him: saw the world change, ran to Absalon, ii. King. 1^.
and thought there was most profit to get, i. King xv
to be gotten that way. But if I: should apply this to Antichrist the Pope
and his pigges we shall easily perceive how true it is not only before, but in
these our miserable days.

When Uertiger king of this realm would forsake his lawful wife ye Queen and
marry the daughter of Hengist a Saxon, tha^ to defend that noughty deed, most
the Saxons be brought in contrary to the peoples mind, and so at length they
conquered all, and made them selfs kings driving out the English men. Of what
one cruel poinct can our unmerciful papists excuse them selfs at this
day, but they have been as cruel against the brethren in this realm for
religion, as Edo^ was against Jacob. For the mainteyninge of the Idolatries,
when they see that the most part of the realm had espied their wickedness and
proud tyranny that they would exercise against ye people of God, Papists
are worse tha the Edomites.
they see there was no way to keep their pomp, and feed their idel bellies,
but by might power and strong hand. So these caterpillars, caringe not how
they come by it, so that they had it: better they think it to danger the hole
realm, than Idolatry be not mainteyned, their Pope honored, poor souls
bought and soulde, their gredy ambitious desires set a loft that they may rule
like lords. Wha^ they se their brethren cast in the fire, they stand by
laughing, boastinge their false doctrine, craking to root out al ye love the
gospel, and not to leave one alive that is suspecte to love any good religion.
These gredy cormorantes if they se any that had a good living that they list to
have, by and by they set one of their promoters or other to accuse him, and
never ceased unto they had driven him out. Yea when the Popes spanielles, some
would speak against such crueltye and wish more gentelnesse to be used,
they would most earnestlye be against it and ye call them selfs spiritual.

Nero when any evil chanced or he had done any mischief him self and set
fire in Room, Nero.
would say the christians were cause of it, or had done it, to bring them in
hatered with the people: so our papists, if there was unseasonable weather or
any thing did displease the people they said it was because these gospellers
were not yet rooted out but suffered to live, when any was content to forsake
country, house, wife, lands, and goods, according to gods commandment rather
then file him self with wickedness, submitting him self to their abominations
they would rail on him, calling him run a gate, traitor, heretic, and what
pleased them. And because they would be like Edomites in all points, which
watched their cross ways to kill those that escaped: so the papists, if any
gospeler had escaped their hands, they would send commandments in to
other countries to call the^ home, lay watches and spies in all corners to
catch such as they lust to have, and bring them home like prisoners, which
never had offended. What strait watch was laid in every haven to catch them
that came in or out, though they were but poor afflicted men, and banished
members of Christ. What reioisinge, if any was taken: and what strait
commissions to search what goods any such banished person had left behind
him: and in whose hands it was, that it might be taken from them. What great
crakes their great Nimrod and captain made, that he would bring all such
runneagates (as it pleased him to term them) to such need that they should
eat their fingers for hunger, it is not unknown too the world: that they
might thus prove them selfs true Edomites, in robbing their poor brother
Jacob. But that we may perceive our papists to be the true seed of the
spiritual Edom, mark the beginning, and it shall more easily appear.

Edom which is Esau, A comparison betwixt the Edomties. and Popes*
lost his fathers blessinge, by which he should have had auctorite over his
brother, and yt was ye chief cause of hatred toward Jacob: so our papists by
cause ye gospelers teach the^ to be humble as Christ was, and to leave their
lordlines over Gods flock, they persecute them to death. Esau to fill his
belly, lost his byrthright* by which he should have had double portion of
his fathers goods to his brother: so our Popes, because they may not have
double honor, promotion, riches, and wealth to other, as their father the Pope
hayes, they hate all that gayn^ say they: Esau was roughe skinned, ^ wild man
of conditions, and a hunter: so our hypocritical Popes be of cruel and
tough conditions, hunters for promotio^s* yea haukers and hunters in deed, and
given to all pleasure, rather than to feed Gods sheep. We read in the
scripture of two notable hunters, and they were both naught, Nimrod and Esau:
but among the Popish priests ye shall find few, but he can keep a curre
better than a cure, can find a hare, keep a kenell of hounds, or a cast of
hawks better than many other: and because they will be conning in their
occupation, and all kind of hunting, they hu^t for pluralites of benefices a
tribus ad centu^, and tot quot, yea they can hu^t hoores (for they say it is
better to have a boore tha^ a wife) so cunningly that they may teach a schole
of it. Edom hunted for venison and good cheer: so can our belligoddes the
Popes Sir Ihon smell smock, smell a feast in all parishes nere him, sit at ale
house, carding dising, bolling and drinking from morning to night, thinking he
hais served God well when he hais mumbled his matens, some piece roasted over the
fire, some sodde over ye pot, some chased over the fields, some chopped,
some chowed, yt if their god were not coming, he could never set them together.
Other of the higher sort, can sit drinking with their maluesey, marmelade,
sucket, figs, rasens and grene ginger. etc. and say they fast, punish their
bodies, and go the right way too heaven: even as right as a rams horn.

Esau because he had lost aucthorite over his brother, persecuted him so
sharply, that he lived banished.20. years: so our Edomites (I had almost
said Sodomites) bannishe their brether for ever if they can, yea curse them
to hell, because they may do much there, by their many friends, not leaving
them any rowme in their purgatory, because they be lords of the soil, and
none shall dwell there, except he take a lease and pay rent to them. Esau
because he would not obey, but displeased his parents, married diverse wives
of the Heathens round about him, contrary to God, and example of all his good
forefathers: so our papists abhorring^ lawful marriage, follow carnal hoores,
and living in spiritual adultery, worship false gods, images, stocks and
stones, the works of man's hands, and follow all men's traditions in all
countries about, gaddinge from country to country a pilgrimage, to bye
pardons, and rob Christ's of his due honor. But I must make an end of their
ungodliness, which hais no end: and let them, which would see more of their
doings, confer the life of Jacob and Esau together, from the beginning too
the end, and thanne they shall easily see how truly these Antichrists do
resemble their father Edom, that all things which is here prophe^ied, may
be well and truly applied too them. It shall be sufficient for me thus
briefly at this time in these few things to have compared them together, and
have opened the way, and given an example for the ruder sort to follow, in
comparing the^ further together, and setting out worthly their wickedness, if
any tunge or pen could sufficiently do it. What shall be the end and
reward of such cruelty, pride, reioisinge, robbinge, killing their brether:
the two last verses declare. The day of vengeance over all people that have
so violently handled Gods flock is at hand: God hays borne long enough, he
will not see his sheep any longer devoured, he hayes tarried sufficientlye for
their repentance, if they would have turned: he sees there is no hope of
amendment, he will now be avenged of his enemies, and that most justly. For
even as thou o Edo^ hayes done to him, it shall be done to thee: and what measure
thou hays given other, Luce. vi.
the same shall be measured to thee again. Such punishment shall it be, that it
shall extend even unto thy infantes, which in all other destructions are wont
to find favor, and thought to be innocente: yet now they shall be as extremely
punisshed as the rest.

And as ye have drunk and made merry on my hyl Sion and Moria, where the temple
was builded, and God worshipped, and ye laughed to see it destroyed, burned and
cast down: so shall your enemies drink, laugh and make merye on your hills,
where your strong holds were builded, when they shall throw them down,
conquer your lands, and lead you captives and prisoners, make you slaves,
rob your goods and treasours, laughe you too scorn, and work their pleasure
on you and youres, they shall swalowe you and youres up so clean, leaving
nothing behind them, and devour all your goods, as though ye had never ben
dwelling there, and as though no such things had been. This is the ^ust
judgment of God to do again the same things to his enemies, that they did
too his people, and reward like with like. If he should show sharper
punishmente, men would call him cruel: if less, many would judge that he
could not, would not or durst not. Therefore he renders eue^ the same again,
that both his enemies and his people may call him a righteous judge. For few
will or justly can blame him that does but like for like: So says David let
ye people rejoice, for you judges thy people righteously. Adonibeze^ a Heathen,
Psalm lxvii Judge. i.
that chopped of the toes and fingers of.70. kings which he conquered, was so
served him self when he was taken: and than confessed he God to be righteous
in doing to him, as he had done to other. Absalon killed his brother with ye
sword violentlye, ii King. ^iii ^viii.iii.ii.^
and perished with the sword him self. Ioab smote Abner unjustly, and David
commanded him to be likewise handled: He that came bringinge word to David,
that he had killed Saul, thinki^g thereby to have piked a thank, and gotten a
bribe of David, was commanded by David to be slain, for laying his hand on
the anointed of the Lord, contrary to his expectation. Thus by these few and
such other examples, the rightuous judgments of God, and merciful dealing in
his punishing appear: that although his enemies rage and furye in their
doings and in their madness, care not what crueltye they show: yet God
although he most justly might, according to their deserts, revenge with
more sharpnes, he will not but reward with like. Let all cruel papists and
persecutors of Gods people take heed therefore what violence they show: for
although God seem to suffer for a time yet he will come at his appointed time to
do liver his, and reward them with ye like measure that they have showed too
other. And of all causes and injuries God can suffer none wors vnauenged,
Among al injuries god will not suffer his religion, specially to be defaced.
than that which is counted against Jerusalem, his temple, his religion, and
where he is honored: for that touches his own person. His honor he says him
self he will give to no other, he is a ielous God. And ye first and chief
commandment is, to worship him alone, Esai. xlii.
too have no other Gods but him, for else he punishes to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate him. Exodus xx.
Can any country or people be found from the beginning, which rebelled
against God and his people, but God hays thrown them down? Can than our
antichrists or any hater, mocker of God or his people at this day, by what
name soever they be called, look for any less than too receive the same
measure that they have given other? nay nay, for surely the mo examples that
they have had to teach the^, and they will not learn, the greater shall be
their condemnation.

And let them not think that this day of vengeance is so far of, seeing that
so many things cry on the Lord to hasten his cominge. Every creature in
heaven and earth, quick and dead, groans and trauails, loking for our full
deliverance. The souls under the aultare cry, how long o Lord, Romans viii.
Reuela. vi
is it that thou reuenges not our blood, and these be not few in number: for
from the blood of the righteous Abel. all innocent blood shall come on you.
The spirit and the spouse, cry come, and he that hears cries come. Math.
xxiii Reuela. xxii
Merci to help his oppressed, and justice to revenge, cry come Lord Jesus
quickly. Can God stop his ears from all these cryinges? The day of vengeance
is not far of.
No no, let them assure them selves, their days be at hand, they shall
perish everlastingly, if they repent not, and Gods people shall be delivered
to his glory. Come Lord Jesus let all cry, and he will come. The church of
Christ is the spouse of Christ, and he is our housbande, he our head, and we
his members, and part of his mistical body: he our father, and we his
children, he our God, and we his creatures, he our king, and we his
subjects, he our Lord and master, and we his poor servant, Christ our
brother, and we fellow heirs with him, he loves us better, and takes more
thought for us, than we do for our selves. Great is the love of the mother
toward her children, yet greater is Gods love toward us. Although the mother
can forget the child, says the Prophet, I will not forget thee: Esai xlix.
Math. xxiii
Yea as the hen will feight for her chekins, so will our God for us against
all our enemies. i Corin. iii i. Pet ii. Ephe. ii.
How often would I have gathered thee under my wings as the hen her chekens:
says our savior Christ. Our bodies are the temple wherein he dwelles, yea
we are the lively stones, whereof his house is buylt: we be of his household,
cy^^^ens, burgeis and freemen in heaven, his familiar friends, whom he loved
so derely, yt his son should dye that we might live. And that we should not
doubt of his good will, but that he hays given us all his treasure, he says:
He that spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, Romans viii.
how can it be but he hays given all things with him? etc. Let no man
therefore doubt of Gods good will toward us, saying God him self hayes
declared so many ways, his exceeding great love toward us, by so many
similitudes: and let no papiste rejoice nor triumph against Gods people, as
though God cared not for the^, had cast them away, or would not deliver
them. For he will come in deed, and not be slow. Peter says, the Lord is not
slow in cominge as some think, but patienly taries for us: etc. Can any
housbande see his wife take wrong? ii. Pet iii. Math. vii
or any man hate or neglected his own flesh, can the father deny his child
any thing he asks, or if he ask bread, will he give him a stoone? is any
more ready to help his people than God? will not a king defend his subjects,
the master his servant, or lord his tenant? will not brotherly love move
him (that is love it self as s. Ihon says) too have pity on us, he hays
boughte us too dear to see us cast away. Will he do less for us then the
Hen for her cheke^s, or the brute beast for her ionge ones? No man will see
his house pulled down over his head, but he will restore it. A good
burgmaister and ruler of a city, will provide necessaries for his that he hais
rule over: therefore saying our God hays taken all these names and offices on
him, doubt not but he will do his part for us, if we do not run from him.
He settes not deputies to do his office, nor is not weary of well doing: He
bears not the name of these offices, and refuses the labor as men do: but he
sais by Solomon: My delight is to be with the children of men: and by David:
Prouer viii. Psalm. cxxi.
he neither slumbers nor slepes that watches Israel.

The Text.
be eschaping, and there shall be holiness, and the house of Jacob shall
possess the enheritaunce of them, which possessed his.





of Jerusalem, which be in Sepharad, shall possess the cytyes of the South.



Mark here the diverse end of the good and bad, the persecuted and the
persecutor, the true Christian and the hypocrite, the gospeller and the
papiste. The wicked florishes for a time, but his end is everlasting
damnation: the manne of God lokinge for an other kingdom than on the earth, is
content to bear the cross here, under hope of that which is to come. The
stock of Esau hays hitherto triumphed against Jacob, Gods people, but now
when his wickedness is ripe, ye Lord reward him, according to his deserts.
The hill Esau before reioiced in his strong holds, wealthy country, and the
leages made with all neighbors round about the^: but now in the hill Sion shall
be safe esscapinge, when Edom shall have no place to flee unto. In Sion that is
Jerusalem and Gods elect beloved people, shall be holiness the true
worshipping of God, the hole sanctuary and temple where Gods holy name shall
be called upon: where as Esau in the mean time is defiled with Idolatry, and
given up to the hands of the gentiles. Yea, and furthermore Jacob shall possess
the land of them that possessed" his. And although God have promised to
godliness, not only in the world to come, but in this life also great
blessings, as appears by Job, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Josias, Ezechias,
Iosaphat, which were of great riches: yet this place do I not think to be
so understand that Jacob should ever possess the lands of Esau, although the
scriptur says yt David and Jacob overcame ye Edomites. But I think rather under
this outward kingdom to be prophetied that the kingdom of Christ (as the
Prophets use by worldly prosperity to declare the spiritual felicite) by the
preachinge of the Gospel, i Chro. xviii iiii. king. xiii^
should be enlarged in those countries, which were now enemies to God and his
people, and so the spiritual seed of Jacob, the Christians should by
preachinge confer and possess Esau his land and the gentyls which so sore
hated and persecuted them before. This is the nature of Gods people, to be
good to the^ which hate them, and to win them all to God, which have done
them most displeasures: and this is the nature of God to call the^, which be
his utter enemies, and soften their stony hearts to make them meet houses for
the holy ghost to dwell in, and in the midst of their raging persecution, to
smite them down as he did Saul, raise them up, and make the^ Paul's, of
wolves, sheep, and of haters, lovers of the truth. Thus shall Esau be
destroyed when his Idolatry, superstition, false gods and such wickedness
shall be taken away: and Jacob shall possess him, when he shall turn him too
the true worshipping of the living god, forsaking their Idols and
superstitions, and follow true religion. What can be counted a greater conquest
than to conquer the devil, and make all people subject to Christ.

After rebukinge their sin, and threatening them just punishment for
the same, now folowes comfort, as ever after ye law preached folowes the
gospel, and after correction comes grace and pardon. Sio^ is ye church. and
congregation of Christ and faithful men believing in him: Syon.
so yt whosoever flees thither shall be safe, and whosoever is not under his
wings, and in the number of christen people, shall perish in the dai of his
wrath. As all living creatures, which were not in ye Arc with Noe, did perish
with the waters, so all that be not of gods household, shall be cast into outward
darkness. This other promise that God makes here unto the faithful seed of
Jacob, that hays his faith, is most notable and confortable. In ye hyl Sion:
the church of Christ there shall be the holy one as 70. read or holiness as
other, or the sanctuarye, as sum and holy place to worship God in purely. It
skilles not much, which we read for the sens^ is al one, and the meaning is:
that ye church and faithful people of Christ, shall not want the true religion
and knowledge of god. For the church of Christ is the spouse of Christ and his
mistical body: and if mortal men love their wives and bodies so derelye, that
they will not forsake them or leave them comfortles, much less will Christ
our savior not forsake us after that he hays redeemed us, seeing he bought us,
and love us so derely, being his ennemies. This is than the greatest token of
gods love to his people, when he gyues them his true religion, and
therefore most earnestly too be enbraced of us: And this is the blessinge
taken from Esau, and given to Jacob, If we read the holy one, he is Christ,
which promised to be with us to the end of the world, he is made to us of
God our father, righteousness, Math. xxviii i. Corinth. i
holiness, wisdom and redemption: because that who soever is holy receyues it
of him, and none is holy that hais it not of him, though he have bulls,
calves, pardons, relics, holy water, holy ashes, holy palms, holy cross:
yea, and all the holiness that is in Rome, if he have not ye spirit of Christ.
I am sure they will not say they sell the holy Ghost when they sell pardons,
for that were symony: therefore they bye no holiness in them. If we read,
holiness, than it is an upright life, true faith with pure worshipping of God.
i. These. iiii.
This is the will of God says saint Paul, your holiness. As they have but one
God, so they will worship him only, and as he hais taught them, and not
after the devise of man: they will also study for a holy life, as God
commaundes. Be ye holy, for I am holy. And if we read a holy place or
sanctuari to worship God in, Leuiti xix.
it is true also: for in all persecutions, and in the spite of the Pope and all
Antichrist, there hays ben in all ages and shall be (for God so saying can not
lie) true professors of God, although the most part of the world was
blinded. Luce. xii.
So Christ co^forts his, saying, fear not thou litel flock. Thus in
Christ's church, in spite of their foes shall ever be Christ the head, knit
to the body necessarely, and as he is holy so shall he make them holy that heng
upon him, and so govern them by his spirit, that they shall ever follow a holy
kind of life, fleinge mischief and uncleanness, In all persecutions God
defendes his, and prouides a pl^ce for them to worship him in.
and so shall they have also his sanctuari and holy place where to resort to
worship their God, here is word and call upon him. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
David in their wa^drings called upon their God, taught their children too
fear the Lord, made their sacrifices, and God reveled him self to them
again, and never forsaked them. In the captivity of Babylon, though not in
the temple, Psalm. cxxxi^ Act. i.ii.
yet they could by the water banks singe psalms on their instruments:
When Christ was crucified, the disciples kept them together in a chamber,
praying and loking for the cominge of the holy Ghost: after when persecution
began, some went to other countries, some from house to house teachinge,
prayinge, Act. x^i*
communicatinge and dealinge to the poor. Paul says at Philippes, by the
water side they were wont too pray: and in the mids blindness of all Poperi
hayes there ever ben, some good men teachinge true doctrine, and openinge their
blasphemies: for this can not be false that Christ promised his church. When
the spirit which is the comforter shall come, he shall lead you into all
truth: Joan. xiiii.x Math. xxviii
I will be with you unto the end of the world, he that is of God, hears the
words of God, and you hear not, for because ye are not of God. And my sheep
hear my voice, a stranger they do not follow. Therefore let all that be under
the cross and persecution, se they assemble together to praise God, and openly
confess him if it be possible, or at the least as much as they may, following
the example of the faithful christians in the beginning, which in spite of
their foes could not be holden from assembling together with prayers and
songs, before ye day was light, nor let any papiste rejoice against gods
scatered and persecuted flock, for this is the state and condition of gods
people, and preachinge ye gospel, that they shall not want a cross: and yet
God will perform this promise, that in Sion the holy one Christ will be with
them, to govern them in holiness of life, pureness of religion, and an earnest
faith, trustinge in God, and will give them a place to call upon him in, that
his might, mercy and grace to his people may appear to the world, in the
sight of his enemies. When Abraham and Jacob fled into Egipte, the Egiptia^s
learned God, which before never heard of him: in the captivity of Babylon, the
Caldees, Assyrians, Persecution spreades the gospel abroad
Babylonions, Medes and Parsians, with all other people, among whom the Jews
were scatered, learned God of them. Wha^ persecution began in Jerusalem after
Christ's Ascension, the disciples scatered by persecution, went and preached
Christ to the Heathen, which before heard not of him. In England after Wiclefs
death, when persecution arose, some died for the truth constantly, some fled
into Boemia, and brought the gospel thither, where it continues to this day,
although both Emperor and Pope with all their might, many sharp battles and
bloudde sheddinge, would have rooted it out. What great assault the poor
Waldeses have suffered at diverse French kings hands, goinge about to have
destroyed them for their religion, being a few in number, and yet could
never deface the^ this.360. years, it is piteous to hear. Thus is this ever
true, that in Sion: the true church of Christ shall be the holy one, Christ
sanctifieng all that believe in him: there shall be holiness, in faith, religion
and manners to the praise of God, there shall be also a sanctuari and holy place
with asse^bles, in spite of their foes, and persecution does not hurt, but rather
increase and further true religion, though not in the greater, yet in the
better part of men. For who soever the holy ghost does inflame with an
earnest zele to his religion, they can not keep it within them, they can
not abide to see their God and his word blasphemed, they will braste out and
declare their faith and say: the earnest love toward thy house hais eaten
me: as our Savior Christ did when he see the temple his fathers house so
misused, Psalm. lxix. Joan. ii Ierem. xx.
and his religion contemned, he gate whippes and drove them out. Jeremy says:
the word of God was to him as a burninge fire in his heart, and closed within
his boones, that he was not able too keep it within him, but would brust out.

This victory is set out more at large in the next verses folowinge, where
he says: the house of Jacob shall be fire, the house of Joseph the flame, and
the house of Esau the stable. etc. Here is no description of horse, haines,
gunnes, any great host, or such other worldly things where in princes do
conquire and triumph. As the house of Jacob is spiritual, and the kingdom of
Christ, so be the weapons soldiers and victory. The swords where with they
faught, were as the apostle sais the word of god, which is sharper than any
twooedged sword, Hebre. iiii.
and per^es more the soul, conqueres the affections, and pulles down high
sto^mackes, deper than the swoorde can the body.

The gunnes were the Apostles words as James and Joan were called the sons of
thunder, Mar iii.
because with such great power they thundered terribly, preached and feared
carnal minds more than the thu^der does, and threw down sin more than any
gunnes could the walls. When Peter at two sermons converted 5000. and Paul
filled all countries from Jerusalem to Illyzicum with the gospel, Act, iiii xv
what Emperor is able to be compared of such men of war? When Charles
the.5. Emperor, began to raygne Luter and Zuinglius began the same time to
preach: and whither he hays thrown down, stopped and hindered the gospel
more with all the help, that his gostly and superstitious prelates could give,
Preaching co^queres more ^eighing.
than they with their scholars have set it forth, and showed the wickedness of
Popery, and defaced his pomp, let them selves judge. The Pope with his
partakers have had strength, power, polity, wit, wisdom, armure, gunnes,
horses, harnes, men and money and whatsoever they could devise these other have
foughten with preachi^g, writing and giving them selves to ye fire for the
truth. Their weapons were their tongues, pen, ink and paper, never sheddinge
blood but their own, and ever seking how to save other men's souls, sparing
no labor, nor fearing any displeasur. So mighty weapons is the undefiled law of
the Lord, Psalm. xix. Roma viii.
turning souls and hearers that neither life nor death, angels nor powers,
things present nor to come can pull them from the love of our God, offered in
Christ Jesus. This fire yt he speaks of here, is the might of the holy ghost
which came on the apostles in fiery tu^gs, and so kindels the hearts of all ye
receive the word, that it burn up al carnal affections and worldly lusts, so
that for the glory of God they care not what they suffer. Psalm xxvi. Reuela.
xiii. i. Corinth. iii
David prays often for this fire: burn my renes and heart. And Ihon in his
revelation says, that these which be neither hot nor cold, God will spue
them out of his mouth: it is therefore a good fire that burns up the stuble,
which is false doctrine, superstition and all evils, as S. Paul calls it: if
any man buyld hay, wode stuble, it shall perish. etc. The house of Jacob and
Joseph shall be the preachers, and Esau shall be thus happily burned up from
his former fylthy life, and turned too the Lord. The house of Joseph co^taines
two tribes, Ephraim and Manasses, which were the children of Joseph, Joseph.
Gene. xlviii
but chosen and taken of Jacob to be as his own sons, when he blessed them
all, lyinge on his death bed, and made them equal enheritors with his own
children, of the land promised. iij King. vii.
And because Jeroboam, which first set up the golden calves in Dan and Bethel
(and so provoked all Israel to sin and Idolatry, in which they continued so
many years) was of the house of Joseph and stock of Ephraim, lest they
should think them selfs to be cast away of God, and their sins could not
be forgeuen, he says they shall be so hot folowers and setters forth of
Christ, yt they shall be like the flame, and shall turn Esau and the ge^tils, God
is merciful too the wretchedst: and his word works either life or death
mightily.
Heathen and wicked men to ye knowledge and worshipping of ye true God. Such a
merciful and loving God is our Christ, yt eue^ those that have been most
traitors and enemies to him, he will call the^ to most high honor. Peter and all
ye rest of the apostles denied our savior christ, wha^ he was taken of ye
Jews and ra^ne away from him: but he forsaked not the^, nor cast not the^ out
of their apostleship but sent the^ into al ye world to preach the word of
life, grace, and salvation, and gave the^ more fulness of ye holy ghost than
they had before. And because it is uncertain in the scripture, whither any of
the Apostles were of the tribe of Ephraim (yet in ye later end, Roma. xi.
and when all sort of Jews shall be converted to the Lord, and so all Israel
shall be saved) if this be not yet performed in the^ or but partly performed, it
shall be before the last day more fully. Thy word is fiery says David:
Psalm. ^xix.
and therefore it is no meruaill if it burn them up, that hear and receive it.
The word of god is not like other histories or learning, which do not move,
or else but litel stir the hearers: but such grace and strength is given by
it to the ministers and hearers of the same that either it turns them that
hears it too a godly zeal, and love toward his glory and an upright life,
or else it castes them in to the burninge fire of hell, as the Apostle says.
He makes his aungelles, spirits or wind* and his ministers a flaminge fire,
and again ye preachinge of Christ's cross is foolishnes too them that perish:
Hebre* i. i. Corin. i.
but to them that be saved? it is the power of God. In the disputacions
against the Arrians, where all the learned men could not confute Arrius a man
unlearned stood up, Ruffinus. lib. i. capi. iii.
making a simple confession of his faith openly, and where as long as they
thought to overcome him by disputinge and by reasons. He ever had to answer
them withal, when this simple plain man, trustinge not to eloquence nor
learning, but in the might of Gods spirit, Ruffinus lib. i. capit iii
and only sekinge the glory of God, began to speak, he see such grace in
his words and power, joined withal that he was, not able ^oo withstand it.
Arrius granted his one error, and the other to say true. i. Corin ii. ii.
Corin. xi.
So saint Paul writing against false Prophets says, his preachinge was not
in eloque^te words of man's wisdom, but in power of the spirit, and
although he was not eloquent in words, yet not ignorant in knowledge. Thus
shall hypocrites, Antichrists, and unbelievers be ouercomen by the might of
Gods word and the holy Ghost, workinge with all, and not by any worldly
wit, strength or polity, as ye Apostles preachinge, took place and turned
the hole world, to receive their doctrine after the same sort.

But where he says there shall be no remnant of Esau left: that shall be
fulfilled in the latter day, where the wicked shall be cast into unquenchable
fire: for in the mean time the good and bad shall be blend together, so that
wicked hypocrytes Idolaters shall be consumed both in this world and after:
but in the fulness of time when God hays appointed, and not when we think, for
they shall preuail a time, as this wicked seed of Esau did for the trial of the
good, and exercise of their faith, yt all men may know that the godly love
the Lord unfeignedly. Thus the house is put for them that be of the house of
Jacob and Joseph, and not so much for the carnal seed, as for them that
have and follow the faith of Jacob and Joseph, which be only they that be
ordained to life.

And because they should not doubt of the performance of the thing, he adds:
ye Lord hais said it. As though he should sai, this is no man's tale, but the
living Lord God yt made both heaven and earth, and have all things at his
commandment, which is truth it self and can not lie, which is both able,
and will perform it: hais said these words, therefore they must needs come to
pass. All men be liers, but God only can not be deceived nor deceive, and
whatsoever he hais said, yt he will perform. Ca^ ye find any thing yt he said
he would do since the world was made, but he hays done it? believe him therefore
in this thing to, for he will do it in deed.

The next verses, which co^tein so many people by name, I think do not
signify these people only to be counted (for yt is to possess them) to the
faith, but all gentiles and people should receive the word, and these be put
by name, specially because they were the next countries about them, and always
their open enemies. For if these, which were ever most bitter enemies, should
be converted by them: much more other countries yt were not so ernest haters of
them, should rather be turned to them. Cananites. Zarphat. Sepharad.
The Cananites be called of some men the Germans. Zarphat is thought too be
France, and Sepharad Spain by the Rabbines: so that even the utmost parts of
the world shall follow them. For in to these parts it is written of some that
the Apostles came, or at lest their doctrine, as David says: Psalm. xix.
their sound went out in to the hole earth, but whither they or their
scholars came to teach the gospel it skilles not, the thing is proved plain,
that these countries once received the word and faith of Christ, howsoever they
be now drowned in Popery, or fallen to Heathen Idolatry, which shall be rooted
out at length to notwtsta^ding their malitiousnes now. Have not al ye wicked
tyrans and Idolaters which reigned once in all these countries, be driven out
by ye light of Gods word? their cruelnes could not stop the faith of the
Christians, neither with fire, swoorde, nor any cruel death they could
imagine: Yea, the more cruel they were in persecutinge the more earnest were
they in professinge, and the mo they put to death, the mo increased, Ciuitat.
dei, lib. xxii. cap. vi
as Augustine says. Christian men were bonden, cast in prison, beaten,
racked, burned, cut in pieces as butchers cut their flesh* killed, and yet
notwithstanding all this they multiplied and increased.

The last verse promises Sauiors too come and judge: and the kingedome to be
the Lords. This is notable to consider in the kyngedome of Christ, that
which is contrary to earthly kingdoms. Worldly princes when they go too
conquer a country, they go with fire and and sword to destroy all that
withsta^de them: but in Christ's kyngedome, there come sauiors to preach
salvation too rebels, his enemies and haters if they will repent. Earthely
princes come with gunnes, horse, and barnes. Christ's disciples come to
conquire the devil and his members without bag, The diversity of Christ's
kingdom and earthy.
staf or money: mortal princes come with might and power of men: the preachers
of Christ's kingdom* come in the might of Gods spirit, which opens the eyes of
the blind, and softens stony hearts, and turns them too the Lord. Worldly
princes do much by flattery, bribery or threatening to win the people, but
christ's ministers come in mekenes of spirit, prayinge and besechinge, sekinge
not their own va^tage, but the turninge of the poor straye sheep, that they
may bring them home too the fold again. Earthely princes feighte for an
earthy kyngedome: but the preachers of Christ's gospel teach the way to
heaven, peace of conscience, the love and favor of God, purchassed by the death
of Christ Jesus* So in all points as heaven and earth are contrary, so are
the kingdoms, the ministers, and subjects of them both, the way to
conquer and compass them both, the means to enjoy them both, and the
pleasures in them both when we have gotten them. Yet notwithstanding all
things in them be so contrary, and worldly men by all ways possible go
about too stop and hinder the gettinge of the other heavenly kyngedome, to
withdraw men from it, and envy the glory, and increase of it, yet the
kingdom shall be the Lords, in spite of all his foes, and their malicious
enterprises shall come to naught. Sauio^^* judges.
They be called saviors because they teach the word of salvation: and
judges, because they will be rig^^teous and neither for gifts, bribery, nor
partiality, deliver the wicked, and condemn the innocent, but uprightly
according to the scripture, preach salvation to the penitent, and
condemnation too the hard herted. Their iudginge shall not be in worldly
matters, no more than their preachinge and saving: but as their ministry is
spiritual, so shall their commission, judgment, and deliverance be. In Esau
is meant hypocrites, persecutors, false teachers, and all evil doers. Saint
Paul says to Timothe, i. Timo. iiii.
that in doing these things, which he taught him, he should save him
self, and these that heard him. Iaco i.
Saint James called the gospel, the word that can save their souls, and
too the Romans: it is called the power of God unto salvation of every one
that beleues: Roma* i.
because the mighty power of God, how he saues us, is d^ declared in it.

But Christ is only the Savior, properly speakinge: and other be but
ministers and teachers of the same, for there is no other name, as saint Luke
says under heaven, Acts iiii.
in which we must be saved. Thus in the church of Christ, Sion shall be
ever, salvation preached judgment ministered, and sin punished. Woo than be
to them that flatter, lay pillowes under their elbowes, teach false doctrine.
etc. And yet will have the rowmes and names of preachers in the house and
church of Christ, they be Wolves, hierelinges, and deuourers of the flock of
Christ. Joan. i^
Christ says he came to the judgment of the world: too condemn the
works of the world, and so for the same use, he geues his spirit still too
his ministers, to set up his kyngedom, and condemn the works of the
world, antichrist, and his enemies. A kingdom can not stand without
ministering of justice: punyshinge sin, and maintaininge the truth,
delivering the innocent repenter, and condemninge obstinates. So the ministers
of Christ's kyngedome have power spiritual to louse and bind as they see, the
scriptures teach them. Joan. x^.
Receive ye the holy ghost, whose sins you forgive they are forgeuen: but
not when soever sir Ihon lacklatin will for money lay his hand on his head,
whisper Absolutione et remissione. etc. in Latin, that neither he nor the other
weak conscience vndersta^des it, is not I say by and by forgeuen: but unto
them it is said, Malach. ii.
I will curse your blessings, and I will bless your cursinges. If the
absolution be not given to the penitent heart, oppressed with the burden of
sin, and sekinge comfort in Christ, it is no more profitable thanne
Baptism or the Communion is too an hypocrite or vnpenitente sinner. Yea,
rather it is to the condemnation, both of the gyuer and receyuer, if it be
ungodly done, because they misuse ye good ministry of God. Therefore they that
in absoluinge judge not, according too the commission of Gods word,
committed unto them, be not saviors of the people, but deceivers.

And where he says, the kyngedome shall be the Lords* he condemns all that
teach any doctrine in the church, to set up any other king or kyngedom,
but the word of God, which be his laws given to his people, that they may
live, according thereto knowinge them to be his subjects, and him their
king: that so his kyngedome may increase and be ruled by his laws, as
earthy princes rule by their laws. Therefore the Pope teachinge his Decrees,
settinge up him self and his kyngedome, as though he were Lord of heaven and
earth, purgatory and hell, and bringinge the people to his obedience, as the
chief ruler, is traitor to God, and deceiues the people. The Pope is most
unlike saint Peter.
And to saint Peter, whose vicar he says he is, he must needs be proved
most unlike and a traitor too Christ, for drawinge men from him, and
willinge them to bye his pardon and forgeuenes of sins at his hands, as
though he were set together up Christ's tollinge money, i. Peter. i.
when saint Peter teaches: ye be not redeemed from your vain and false
superstition, with gold either with silver. etc. If we be not redeemed with
money, than the Pope lies, saying: our sins be forgeuen if we bye pardons
to forgive sin. Saint Peter says: money does not forgive sins, but the
bloudde of Christ Jesus: the Pope says yes, or at least he will not do it
without money. Saint Peter had his own wife, the Pope will none, nor let
his clergy, but hoores as many ye will. Saint Peter said he had neither
gold nor silver, the Pope will do nothing without gold or silver, as it is
said: Quicquid To. dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum Whatsoever it be that
Rome will give trifels it will give, but gold it does receive. Saincce Peter
was subject him self unto Nero, a wicked infidele tyranne, and teaches other
too be so in civil matters, but the Pope will rule all christian princes by
rigor, depose them at his pleasur, and obey none, but his own lusts. Therefore
it is plain too see what is to be thought of his kyngedome, and of such men
as will rule with rigor over the flock of Christ, and will not feed Gods
sheep with his word, that the Lord may rule in his own kingdom, by his
own law and word, and his sheep hear the voice of their own true
sheepehearde, and flee from strangers, hyrelinges, and wolves. It is not mete
that God should be king, and the Pope too make laws for him to rule by: but
God rules by his own laws.

Pray therefore the Lord of the Harvest that he will thrust out workmen into
his Harvest that they may work truly for the setting up of his kingdom, and
pulling down the popes: and that we may grow to good corn, to be laid up in
the Lords barnes, and be not light chafe, blown away with every puffed of
doctrine, but grounded upon the rock Christ Jesus, may surely stand against
all storms, that we be not cast in to outward darkness and everlasting fire but
may enjoy that unspeakable joy that he hays prepared for them that love him,
and look for him.

AMEN.
A prayer.
Most righteous judge, God of al mercy and comfort, which by thy secret
judgment and wisdom, suffers the wicked to triumph and increase for a
time, for trial of the faith of thy well-beloved litel flock, and the mortifiynge
of their lusts, but at length to the utter confusion of the enemies, and
ioiful deliverance of thy people: look down we beseech thee on thy dispersed
sheep, out of thy holy habitation in heaven, and strengthen our weakness
against their furious rages, abate their pride, assuage their malice,
confound their devises, wherewith they lift up the^ selfs against Christ
Jesus thy son our Lord and Savior, to deface his glory and set up
Antichrist. We be not able of our selfs to think a good thought, much less
to stand against their assaults, except thy undeserved grace and mighty
arm, defend and deliver us. Perform thy promises made to Jacob, and stop
the mouths of the cursed Edomites: call them to repentance whom thou hays
appointed to salvation: bring home them that run a straie, lighten the blind,
and teach the ignorant: forgive al those that wilfulli and obstinatelye rebel
not against thy holy will, let thy fearful threatninges parse our stony hearts,
and make us tremble at thy judgments. Make the examples of them, whom thou
hays overthrown in their own devises, to be a warninge for us: that we set
not up our selfs against thy holy will: grant free passage to thy holy
word, that it may work effectually in us, the blessed hope of our
salvation, too the eternal praise of thy majesty, through our mediator
Christ Jesus, too whom with the father and the holy Ghost, three persons
and one God, be praise and thanks geuinge in all co^gregations, world
without end. So be it.

Iaco. P. Ep. D.

Imprynted at London, by Wylliam Seres, dwelling at the west end of Paul's
Church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge.

Anno. 1562.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum sol^m.


