A LEARNED AND PROFITABLE Treatise of man's Justification.

Two Books.

Opposed to the Sophismes of Robert Bellarmine, Jesuit.

By John Piscator, professor of Divinity in the famous School of Nassouia
Sigena.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, for Raphe Iackson, dwelling in Paul's
Chruch-yard at the sign of the Swanne. 1599.

TO THE REVEREND and renowned men, Daniel Tossanus, James Kimedoncius, and
David Pareus: Doctors of sacred Theology, and professors in the famous
University of Heidelberg: his high-esteemed brethren, greeting.
WIth how great endeavor and subtly devised and writhed Sophismes, Robert
Bellarmine Jesuit, has studied to cloak and defend the Popish errors: and
contrariwise, to caluminate and refute the doctrine of the true teachers of the
Gospel about Christian faith: it is known to them that have read with
judgment, his disputations of the articles in controversy between the
Papists and the Gospellers, whom he falsely calls heretics. These
disputations, when not long since they came also to my hands. I read them
desirously, and was not a little greened, when I saw the truth of the Gospel to
be with such a show oppugned. And when I remembered how I heard of a credible
man, that learned men addicted to the Popish religion, so greatly boasted of
this Bellarmine, as if he were some Goliath of the Papists, that they feared
not to say he was invincible: I began earnestly to desire that God would stir
up many of the teachers of the Gospel, valiantly and happily to withstand the
enterprises of this Goliath, and with the stone of Gods word handsomely thrown
out of the sling of true Logic, to fell him down, and finally, to kill him
with his own sword. And I gave God thanks, that even then he had stirred up
some learned men which had prosperously begun this fight with him: among whom
first was known unto me, that famous man William Whitakers, who fought with
him manfully and happily about the holy scripture, and purposed also to dispute
against him about other chief points in controversy. God the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, grant that what he has holily purposed, he may
prosperously bring to effect.

But when as about the same time I was to write and propound for public
disputation in the famous school of Nassouia Herborne, positions of
Justification, I thought it would be worth my labor, diligently to inquire
into Bellarmines sophismes, published concerning that article of faith, and to
endeavor briefly and plainly to refute them. And by this occasion was this my
writing brought forth, which now I publish abroad. Which when for the length
thereof I saw not meet to be proposed for Positions publicly to be disputed
of in the school, I then wrote and set out other positions of Justification:
and reserved this writing for a more fit time. It fell out about the same time,
that the learned man Corradus Vorstius Agrippensis, created among you and of
you a while after. Doctor of Theology, desired by Letters mine opinion about
soluting one or two of Bellarmines sophismes in the controversy of
Justification: unto whom I sent to that end this writing: and withal,
requested him to communicate it with learned men, of which your University
has store, and to know their judgments of it, and write me word. He
therefore of late about Francfurt Mart, passing by Sigena, and for the
friendship betwixt us, saluting me, told me how he had given you this writing
of mine to read; and that you having read it, affirmed unto him that you liked
all therein, and would exhort me to set it forth, distinguished into two Books
and certain Chapters: which thing also he wrote of to me not long after from
Heidelberg, and so stirred me up a fresh to diualge this writing. Now therefore
comes this my writing forth in the name of the Lord: and it comes forth
under your excellent name: for that I thought I should do conveniently, to
offer this doctrine to be defended by them (together with my self) which had
once approved it for a good and right opinion: and therwithal publicly to
testify our holy consent in this heavenly truth. You therefore reverend
brethren, take this my doing in good part: and valiantly defend as often as need
shall require, together with me, the truth of Christian doctrine delivered in
this writing: to the glory of Gods name, and profit of Christ's Church. To
conclude, I commend you and your holy labors to God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. At Sigena, from the famous School of Nassouia, the 18. of
December, 1594.

Your Brother, John Piscator, of Argentine.

OF MAN'S JUSTIFICATION before God.
The first book. Wherein the judgment of the professors of the Gospel is
recited, confirmed and defended from Bellarmines exceptions.
CHAP. I. Of the diverse significations of the word Justifying.
WHen it is demanded, how a man may be justified before God: the word Justify
is taken two ways sometime for to make or to be made just: and sometime for to
pronounce, or to be pronounced just.

These two do consent and agree between themselves, as the cause efficient,
and the effect. For God, being a just judge, pronounces no man just, neither
acquiteth any, but him whom he has first made just.

And God makes a man just (whom he will pronounce just) by imputation of
justice: that is, for so much as he imputes justice to him, or (that which is
all one) imputes not sins unto him, but pardons and forgiueth them, Romans
4. ver. 5.6.7.8.

In the first signification, the word [Iustifying] is taken Romans 4.5. where the
Apostle says, To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is imputed for justice. Here God is said to justify
the ungodly. But God pronounces not the ungodly just, but makes him just; and
that whiles he imputes justice unto him: as the Apostle teaches in this
place. And then at last pronounces him just. And so the Apostle himself
expounds the word Justified, by to be made just. Romans 5.19.

In the latter signification it is taken Romans 8.33. where the Apostle says:
Who shall accuse Gods elect? God is he that justifies. Who is he that
condemns? Here, unto justification is manifestly opposed condemnation:
whereby we may perceive that by that word here is signified judicial
acquitting, whereby the judge pronounces just and innocent the guilty party,
(that is, him that is accused and brought to the judgment seat.)

But, Justification being taken this latter way, is again to be distinguished.
For it is done either in this life, and that in justifying every one apart by
himself and secretly: or after this life, in that universal day of judgment,
in altogether and openly.

For God has set up his judgment seat in the conscience of man, in as much as
he has so endued ma^s mind with knowledge of just and unjust, that if he have
done any unjust thing, his conscience of it own accord, as it were summoneth
him to Gods judgment seat, and accuses him: and if he be by others accused
unjustly, his conscience excuses him. Romans 2.15. 1. Ioh. 3.20.21.

In this life therefore God justifies or pronounces man just, so far forth as
he gives testimony to his soul (by the holy Ghost, the word of grace being
the means) of imputed justice, or of forgiveness of sins, and by consequence, of
adoption, for the satisfaction sake of the mediator, Romans 8.16.

And in that day of judgment, Christ being appointed of the father judge of
all, will with his mouth openly before all Angels and men, pronounce just, and
crown with life eternal the reward of justice, all those that before were
justified in this life, both by imputation of justice, and by that secret
testimony of the holy Ghost. But the rest he will condemn as transgressors of
the law, and punish them with eternal pains, Romans 11.12.13.14.15.16. Mat.
25.31. etc.

CHAP. II. The state of the controversy, and partition of this disputation.
FVrthermore, about man's Justification before God, being taken the first way,
this question chiefly is controuerted betwixt the professors of the Gospel,
and the Papists, especially the Jesuits: whether Iustificaion be infusing of
justice, or whether it be imputing of justice? For the Papists say, that
justification is infusing of justice: but the Gospellers say, that it is
imputing of justice.

We in the first place will declare and confirm the Gospellers opinion as
true, and therefore first by nature: then will we recite and refute the opinion
of the Papists.

CHAP. III. The Gospellers opinion expounded by seven parts.
WHen the Gospellers therefore say, that justification is imputing of justice,
their meaning is, 1. that man by himself and his own nature unjust, is
accounted for just: 2. and thereupo^ pronounced just of God: 3. in as much as
he forgiueth him his sins for the satisfaction of Christ, performed for him:
4. and apprehended of him by faith: 5. and therefore that man is justified by
faith only: because he is counted just, and by consequence pronounced just, for
Christ's satisfaction only which is imputed to him by faith only: for that he
does not apprehend and apply it to himself, but by faith: 6. and so that man
is justified, partly by Gods grace or free love, with which he being moved, did
ordain Christ to be satisfier or mediator for the elect: 7. partly by Gods
justice, whereby accepting Christ's satisfaction for the elect, he imputes the
same unto them: and thereupon receives them into favor, and adopteth them for
sons and heirs of eternal life.

The Gospellers opinion being thus declared, it follows next that we confirm
by testimonies of scripture all the parts thereof, and free it from the
objections of the Papists.

CHAP. IIII. The first part of the opinion expounded is confirmed, and the same
confirmation freed from Bellarmines exception.
ANd first, that man by himself and of his own nature being unjust, is
counted for just, Paul bears witness Romans 4.5.6. in these words, To him that
works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
imputed for justice: as also David declares the blessedness of that man to
whom God imputes justice. The like sentences are in the same chapter, verse.
9.10.22.23.24.

Against this proof Bellarmine excepteth: 2. Book of justification Chap. 9.
that the word Impute in this place does not signify a bare accounting: but an
accounting whereunto the truth in the thing it self makes answer, as is
plain by these words, To him that works, wages is imputed, not according to
grace, but according to debt. For it is certain, that to him that works,
wages is due, not only in opinion and accounting, but in truth and in deed.

I answer. Here Bellarmine first of all commits the fault of falsehood, in
as much as he inuerteth the order of the Apostles words, that they may serve
his purpose. For it is not in that place, To him that works, wages is
imputed, not according to grace, etc. But it is, To him that works, wages is
not imputed according to grace, etc. Neither may Bellarmine except, that it
skilleth not, whither way the aduerbe of denial be there placed: because,
howsoever it be there placed, yet in the opposition, the word Imputed, is to be
repeated thus: But (the wages) is imputed according to debt. For by the very
phrase we may perceive, that after the words [ou logizetai] is not imputed,
these words must be understood [tout'estin ou didotai] that is, is not given:
and therefore that in the opposition, the word [didotai] given, is to be
understood, that the whole sentence is this: [to ergazomeno ho misthos ou
logizetai, toutestin on didotai cata charin, alla didotai cata to opheilema:]
that is; To him that works, wages is not imputed, that is to say, is not
given according to grace: but is given according to debt. And if Bellarmine
will not grant this i. want of a word.
ellipsis, he must confess that here is a manifest i. abounding of a word.
pleonasmus in the former part, and also a manifest i. abuse of a word.
catachresis in the latter part. For if one say, Wages is not imputed: is not
this as if he should say, Wages is not given according to grace? It is
therefore a pleonasmus if one say, It is not imputed according to grace. Also
if any say, Wages is not imputed, but is given according to debt: he speaks
properly. Therefore if one say, Wages is imputed according to debt: he (as
touching the word imputed) speaks improperly. Wherefore this place is not of
force to shift off the other: in which it is plain by the Apostles words, that
the proper signification of the word Imputed, is kept. For he says, that Faith
is imputed for justice to him that works not, but believes in him that
justifies the ungodly. Which what other thing is it, then that man is
justified, not by debt or desert of his works, but by grace for Christ's
satisfaction apprehended by faith? It is therefore nothing to the matter that
Bellarmine says: that wages is so imputed, that in the mean time it is due
indeed. As though it were in the same respect said, that faith is imputed for
Justice. But even Bellarmine himself also teaches, that faith is given to man
of grace, and likewise, that Justification of which we speak in this place:
which he is wont to name the first. Whereupon doubtless it follows, that
neither faith nor this Justification is owed to a man; seeing debt and grace
are here manifestly set one against an other.

And whereas Bellarmine says, that by the word Imputing, is signified that
accounting whereunto the truth in the thing it self makes answer: it is
truly said, if it be rightly understood. For to whom God imputes justice, they
are truly just; but by imputed justice, and not inherent; as Bellarmine
understands. Even as he whose debts his surety has paid to the creditor,
owes the creditor indeed nothing, though himself paid not his debts,
neither had wherewith to pay them.

CHAP. V. The confirmation and freeing of the second part.
SEcondly, that man of himself and his own nature unjust, but now being
endued with imputed justice, is pronounced Just of God: the truth of this
sentence is plain by these testimonies, in which condemnation is opposed to
justification: as Romans 5.16. Judgment verily of one unto condemnation: but
grace of many offenses unto justification. And ver. 8. As by the fall of one,
sin entered upon all men unto condemnation: so also by the iust-worke
(dicaioma) of one, justice entered upon all men unto justification of life. And
Chap. 8.33.34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies, who is he that condemns?

Against this proof Bellarmine excepteth: that the word Justification does not
always pertain to the judgment place, because it is opposed to condemnation.
For condemnation is sometime an effect of the fault which deserves punishment.
And as Adam condemned us, not by judging, nor after the manner used in judgment
places, but by imprinting original blame, but God has condemned by judging:
so Christ as the second Adam, justifies us by putting out our sins, and
infusing grace: and secondly shall justify us in the day of judgment, by
declaring them just whom he before has made just. I answer. First this
exception makes nothing against the proof brought from Romans 8. For although
the word condemning be not always belonging to the judgment place; yet that
it is so there, is manifest by that which the Apostle says, Who shall accuse
Gods elect? Moreover this exception corrupts the place of the 5. Chapter,
both touching the words, and touching the sense. For the Apostle says not
there, either that Adam condemned us, or Christ justifies us: but says, by
one offense of Adam, judgment, that is, guiltiness came upon all men unto
condemnation: likewise by the iust-work (dicaloma) that is, satisfaction of
Christ, the gift, that is, justice came upon all men, unto justification of
life. Where both comdemnation and justification are referred unto god as Judge:
who may with right condemn all Adams natural children, for the sin that he
committed; and who justifies them to whom he has given justice, for the
satisfaction sake of Christ.

Furthermore, Bellarmines reasoning from a contrary sense, or from a like
reason of contraries, stays upon a false supposition: to wit, a false
opposition of contraries. For these are not opposite one to an other, to
imprint original blame, and to put out sins, (to wit, from nature) and infuse
grace, that is, inherent justice. But these are opposite, to imprint original
blame, and, to put out original blame; likewise, to obtain imputation of
justice. And indeed as Adam imprinted by his fall original blame in all his
children, so Christ, for those that pertain unto him, has put out that blame,
and obtained imputation of justice by his satisfaction.

Moreover, although as Adam did not only imprint blame in his posterity, but
also by generation infused into them the very force of sin: so Christ also,
has not only put out the blame of the elect, and obtained imputation of
justice for them, but also regenerateth them by his holy spirit, and by that
regeneration, puts out the force of sin, and infuseth justice or study of
good works: yet in that place of the Apostle, he speaks not of this benefit
of Christ, but only of the other. And of the benefit of regeneration or
sanctification, he entreats afterward in the 6.7. and. 8. Chapter.

CHAP. VI. The confirmation and clearing of the third part.
THirdly, that man is accounted for just, and pronounced just of God, in as
much as God forgiueth him his sins for the satisfaction of Christ, and
therefore that justification is no other thing then forgiveness of sins:
these sayings teach us. Romans 4.6.7.8. David says, That blessed is that man, to
whom God imputes justice without works: saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is the man to
whom the Lord shall not impute sin, In these words it is certain, that the
full definition of Justification is contained: for of this the Apostle
manifestly there entreats: to wit, minding to teach how man is justified
before God, as appears by comparing together those things which go before,
from the 17. verse of the 1. Chapter, unto this place. And he defines
Justification here, by imputation of justice, or (that which he takes for the
same) for giuenesse of sins.

A against this proof, Bellarmine excepteth: that Paul alleges not this
testimony of the Psalm, 2. Book of justification. Chap. 9.
perfectly to define Justification: but only to prove, that true Justification
is the gift of God, and cannot be gotten by our own strength. He also says,
it may be answered, that in these words a perfect definition is contained, but
intricately. For, forgiveness of sins, says he, cannot be except justice be
infused: even as darkness is not driven away, except light come in place
thereof. Also: by not imputing of sins, says he, the Apostle gathers imputing
of justice: and by this teaches, that these two cannot be separated,
forgiveness of sins and giving of justice, to wit, inherent; for this
Bellarmine understands.

I answer, that Paul alleges the testimony of this Psalm perfectly to
define Justification, is plain by his drift, and comparing together things
that went before: as even now we warned. Wherefore Bellarmine feigneth here a
false drift. Whereupon it follows, that it is also false, that here is
contained a perfect definition intricately; to wit, infusion of inherent
justice being understood herewithall, as the other, and that the principal
part of justification.

And although it be true, that with justifying faith, inherent justice is
together infused, not perfect, but begun: yet is it not true, neither
follows it, that this justice is a part of that justice whereby we stand
before the judgment seat of GOD, about which the Apostle deals in this
place. Besides, Bellarmine makes a false comparison. For infusion of justice
is not so in respect of forgiveness of sins, as infusion of light into the
air, to drive darkness out of the same: but is so compared unto the real
putting out of inhabiting sin, which the scripture calls mortification of
the flesh and of the old man. For how much as inherent justice is infused,
that is, how much as the spirit or new man is quickened: so much is inhabiting
sin put out, or the flesh and old man mortified. Moreover, Bellarmine falsely
interprets the Apostles reasoning; as though he gathered imputatio^ of
justice, by not imputing of sins, as if it were some diverse thing. For the
Apostle does not gather here a diverse thing from a diverse: but proves
imputation of justice by the testimony of David: whereby appears, that he
holds imputation of Justice (which he would prove) and not imputing of
sins (which is mentioned in the testimony alleged) for one and the same
thing. For otherwise he should not prove his purpose. For it were ready to
except: Thou art in hand to prove imputation of justice: but David mentions
not imputation of justice, but not imputing of sins: but these are diverse.
Wherefore by that testimony, thou have yet proved nothing. Thus I say, might
one except against the Apostles proof. Lastly, Bellarmine falsely expounds
imputation of justice, by giving of justice, in as much as he understands
inherent justice: seeing these be diverse: neither is there any speech of
inherent justice in this place: and finally, seeing it implies a
contradiction, for inherent justice to be imputed.

But let us bring now more testimonies to confirm the sentence proposed: 2.
Proof.
viz. that man is justified, in as much as his sins are forgiven him, for the
satisfaction of Christ. Romans 3.25. Whom (to wit Christ) God has set forth
to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, etc. that he way be just,
and justifying him that is of the faith of Jesus. And Chapter 4.24.25. It shall
he imputed unto us (to wit, faith for justice) which believe in him that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered to death for our
faults, and raised up for our justification. And Chapter, 5.9. Justified by his
blood. And Chap. 10.6.7. The justice which is of faith, says thus: Say not in
thy heart, who shall go up to heaven? this is to bring Christ from on high:
or, who shall go down into the deep? this is to bring Christ again from the
dead. Gal. 2.20.21. I live by faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me: I do not abrogate the grace of God: for if justice be by the
law, then Christ died in vain. Ephe. 1.6.7. God by his grace has made us
gracious in that beloved one, in whom we have redemption by his blood, even
forgiveness of sins.

Against these proofs some may except, that in these speeches mention is made
indeed of Christ's satisfaction, as of the first moving and deserving cause, for
which man is justified, and his sins forgiven him: but hence it follows not
that Justification consists only in forgiveness of sins: because that Christ
by his satisfaction, has deserved and obtained of God for us, not only
forgiveness of sins, but also the gift of the holy Ghost, which does
regenerate us, and infuse justice into us.

I answer. That which is here said of Christ's merits, is indeed true: but
yet in those speeches, is no speech of regeneration, but only of forgiveness
of sins as the effect of Christ's satisfaction, and as the thing by which we are
formally justified: as chiefly appears by that place, Ephesians. 1.6.7. Wherefore we
must determine, that it is one and the same thing with the Apostle, for A man to
be justified by the blood of Christ; and A man to have his sins forgiven for
the blood of Christ.

Let us add also an other place, 3. Proof.
Act. 13.38.39. By this man (to wit Christ) is preached to you forgiveness of
sins: and from all things from which ye could not be uistisfied by Moses law:
by this man, every one that believes is justified. Here Justification is
manifestly defined, by forgiveness of sins.

Bellarmine excepteth: 2. Book of justification. Chap. 12.
He that believes, to wit, as he ought: that is, by fulfilling all things
which faith shows should be fulfilled. For he that believes a Physician,
though a most skillful one, and that infallibly cures, is not healed, except
he receive the medicines that he appoynteth.

I answer. This is a Iesutish gloss, confounding things diverse, that I say
not adverse: to wit, to believe in Christ; and, to fulfill the law; or
doubtless knitting a false consequence, as though the fulfilling of the law
because it is joined with true faith, concurreth as a cause with the same to
justification. Moreover, he deceives by the diverse signification of the word
believe: as though to believe in Christ, were no other thing, then to believe
Christ, that he is a most skillful Physician of souls, and curing infallibly,
and in the mean time not to receive the medicines that he appoints.

But I say, that to believe in Christ, is by faith to receive and apply to ones
self the medicines that Christ appoints, namely his blood shead for us on
the Cross, with feeling of the wrath of God.

Bellarmine adds: though the Apostle in this place names only the
forgiveness of sins, yet is it no let, but justification may be understood to
consist in forgiveness of sins, and infusion of justice, For, forgiveness of
sins is not only forgiving of the punishment, but is the washing away and
cleansing of the fault: which washing and cleansing is not, except there
succeed the brightness of grace and comeliness of justice.

I answer. That the Apostle in this place defines Justification by
forgiveness of sins only, is manifest, partly by the consequence of
sentences, whereof one is added to an other, as explaining the same: partly by
the very phrase, to be justified from sins: which is no other thing, then to be
absolved from sins committed, and by consequence, to obtain forgiveness of
sins. Moreover, it is unfitly distinguished by Bellarmine, as things diverse
and separable one from an other, Forgiveness of the punishment, and, cleansing
of the fault: when as cleansing or rather forgiving of the fault, is no other
thing then deliverance from the punishment: for he is said to forgive the
fault, that will not inflict deserved punishment for the fault. Besides, he
confounds cleansing of the fault, with cleansing of inhabiting sin, which
is by regeneration: seeing unto the cleansing of the fault, he opposes the
brightness of grace and comeliness or seemelinesse of justice to wit,
inherent.

Finally, he hides a false consequence, in that he says; The cleansing of the
fault is not, except there succeed the brightness of grace and comeliness of
justice. By which words he insinuates, if justification consist in
forgiveness of sins: and this is the cleansing of the fault: and this
cleansing is not, except there succeed inherent justice: it follows, that
inherent justice also is part of that justice wherewith man is formally
justified. But it is not necessary, that inherent justice should be part of
that justice wherewith man is justified, although that justice wherewith man is
justified, befall no man (that is grown to years of discretion) without the
gift of inherent justice.

But Bellarmine further excepteth, Although, says he, in this place mention
only should be made of justifying from sin: yet in many other places,
mention is made of sanctification, cleansing, washing, renewing and the like,
which show the other part of Justification.

I answer. It seems, Bellarmine by the very phrase of this place, to be
justified from things, understood, that speech here properly was of
justification from sins: that is, of forgiveness of sins: but least he
should hurt his cause, he will not freely confess this.

Then, in that he says, mention is made in other places of sanctification or
renewing, it makes nothing to the matter. For there is indeed mention made
thereof every where: but not as part of justification, as here Bellarmine by
begging the question does affirm.

Yet Bellarmine proceeds in his exception. That from which ye could not be
justified in the law of Moses, signifies, says he, that the observation of
the law, presumed on by our own strength, or by the help of the law only does
not justify: not that the true observation of the law is not justice; but that
the law cannot be kept, before forgiveness of sins. For when God by Christ's
merits reconcileth any, he together, both forgiueth him his sins, and
infuseth charity, by which he keeps the commandments of the law.

I answer. Whatsoever that signifies, To be justified in the law of Moses:
the Apostle says clearly, that the Jews to whom he speaks, could not be
justified in Moses law: which thing also Peter affirms of the fathers, Act.
15. where he says, that the law was a yoke, that neither they nor their
fathers could bear. And who skillful in the holy story, knows not, that
there were among the fathers some godly, and therefore endued with forgiveness
of sins and the gift of regeneration? And yet they, as Peter witnesses,
could not bear the yoke of the law, that is, by keeping of the law, be
justified from their sins. Also who dare affirm, that none of those Jews
whom Paul then spoke unto, was endued with true faith in Christ to come,
although as yet they knew not who he was: and therefore were also endued with
the gift of generation? Surely that some of them were such, may be gathered
from the 43. verse, where it is said, that many of those Jews and religious
proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas: and that they persuaded them to continue
in the grace of God. And yet these, as Paul witnesses, could not in the law,
that is, by the law be justified. Wherefore that which Bellarmine says, that
the true keeping of the law is justice, is true: but it is not true which he
understands and insinuates in the words following, namely, that they which
have received of GOD, forgiveness of sins, and the gift of charity, can
perform the true, (that is, perfect) observation of the law; so that by that
justice of the law, they can stand in the judgment of God.

An other place for a sentence there is, 4. Proof.
Luke 18. where the Publican is said to be justified, when only he had asked
forgiveness of sins, saying, O God be merciful unto me a sinner.
Contrariwise, the Pharisee preaching the gifts of God bestowed on him, and
giving thanks, went away not justified. Therefore Justification consists not
in gifts and good works, though done through Gods help, but only in
forgiveness of sins.

In the place before cited.
Against this proof Bellarmineexcepteth thus: when the Publican said, O God be
merciful to me a sinner, he asked not only forgiveness of the debt, as
though he would be unrighteous, yet not so accounted of GOD, nor punished:
but he asked whole reconciliation; and the same he obtained. Whereupon, our
Lord concludes the (...): This man went away justified from him, for every
one that humbles himself, shall be exalted: and he that exalts himself,
shall be humbled. The exaltation of the humble and penitent publican,
signifies doubtless somewhat more then only forgiveness of his offense. For
they are not said to be exalted, whose debts are forgiven: but which are
advanced unto degrees and honors. Therefore the publican is for this said to
be exalted, because of a sinner he was suddenly made just; of the servant of
sin, the servant of justice; of the child of the devil, the child of God.
Moreover, the Pharisee, deserved to be set after the Publican, not because he
rehearsed the gifts of God, and gave the Lord thanks: but because he was full
of the swelling of pride, and trusted in his own justice, so as that he would
not crave any thing to beadded to him, nothing to be forgiven him: besides also
he contemned the humble Publican.

I answer. Bellarmine does here crookedly cavil at the sentence of the
professors of the Gospel, as if they did teach that such shall receive
forgiveness of sins, as will yet be unrighteous: or as if such a purpose can
stand with carnest suite for remission of sins. And where he says, that the
Publican when he said, God be merciful unto me a sinner, asked not only
forgiveness of his debt: what is this but to wrest clear words from their
simple sense? Also, what means this, that Bellarmine opposes whole
reconciliation unto forgiveness of debt? As though that forgiving of debt, or
remission of sins, were not a whole, but only a half reconciliation,
against the manifest testimonies of scripture: Romans 5.9.10. Being instified by
his blood, we shall be saved now much more by him from wrath; for if when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son: much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Here it is manifest, that
to be reconciled unto God, is the same that to be justified of God, as may be
perceived by Chap. 4. ver. 5.6.7. Yet there is a clearer place, 2. Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them their
sins. Behold whether the Apostle does not expressly define reconciliation
wherewith we are reconciled unto God, by forgiveness of sins? And whereas
Bellarmine interprets that clause, Every one that humbles himself, etc. so
as if the Lord would define what it is to be instified: he misseth the mark:
for the Lord had no other purpose, then by that prouerbiall sentence, to
confirm that special two-folde example, the one of a man justified, the other
of a man not obtaining Justification. Likewise, where he interprets to be
exalted, of infusion of justice, he uses a fallacy of the consequent,
reasoning from the gerall to the special, affirmatively, thus; To be instified
is to be exalted: therefore it is, to be exalted by infusion of inherent
justice. But though it be true, that he which is justified, is exalted not
only by adoption, but also by regeneration: yet hence it follows not, that
Justification is the same that regeneration. Moreover, Bellarmine in this place
contradicts himself, whiles now he grants, that forgiveness of sin is
signified by exaltation, and straight way denies that they are said to be
exalted whose debts are forgiven.

Lastly, as touching the Pharisee: it is true, that for spiritual pride and
trust in his own justice, he was repulsed from God: but in the mean time,
this also is true, that the Lord would teach by this example, that this pride
is an inseperable companion of that desire whereby men seek justice in their
own works. Neither is Zacheus, Luke 19. (which example Bellarmine obiecteth)
said to be justified by good works: although when he promised good works, the
Lord said unto him, To day is salvation come to this house: but only the
sincerity of his faith is after this manner commended by the effects. And the
cause of Zacheus salvation, is showed in the words immediately following; for he
says, To day is salvation come to this house, for that he also is the son of
Abraham: to wit, infisting in the steps of Abraham's faith, as Paul interprets
this sonne-ship, Romans 4.12. For as touching the flesh, many were Abraham's
sons, to whom notwithstanding salvation came not. And king Ezechias, (which
example Bellarmine adds) although he showed his good works with a sincere
heart: yet he thought not, that he was by them just before the judgment seat
of God: like as Paul said, I know nothing by my self; but I am not hereby
justified.

CHAP. VII. The confirmation of the fourth part.
FOurthly, that man is justified by faith, in as much as by faith he lays
hold on, and applies to himself Christ's satisfaction, may be perceived by
these sayings, Romans 3.24.25. They are justified by the redemption made in
Christ, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his
blood. And chap. 4.24.25. It shall be imputed to us (to wit, faith for justice)
which believe in him that raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead: which was
delivered to death for our faults, and raised up for our justification. And
chap. 10.6.7. The justice which is of faith, says thus. Say not in thy heart,
who shall go up into heaven? this is to bring Christ from above. Or, who shall
go down into the deep? this is to bring Christ again from the dead. Gal.
2.20. I live by faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
me, etc. Romans 4.5. To him that works not, but beleeneth in him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed for justice. Where it is manifest,
that by the name faith, by a metonymie of the adioynt, is to be understood any
thing which is by faith imputed to a man for justice. For to speak properly,
that which is in a man, is not said to be imputed to him, but that which is
without a man. And faith is in a man, but Christ's satisfaction which faith
apprehends is without a man: whereby it comes to pass, that it is imputed
unto man by faith: that is to say, is accounted his, so as man is esteemed in
this place, as if he had performed the satisfaction for himself.

CHAP. VIII. The confirmation and clearing of the fifth part.
Fifthly, that man is justified by faith only, that is, for the only
satisfaction of Christ apprehended by faith: and not partly by faith, that is,
for Christ's satisfaction imputed; and partly by works, that is, for inherent
justice: may be gathered by the sayings following, which teach that a man is
justified without works. Romans 3.27. Where is then the rejoicing? It is
excluded. By what law? of works? no; but by the law of faith. And by and by,
verse, 28. We conclude therefore, that a man is justified by faith without the
works of the law. And Chap. 4.2. If Abraham our father were justified by
works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God. Gal. 2.16. Knowing that
man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ: we also have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law. Ephesians. 2.8.9. By grace ye
are saved through faith, not of works. Tit. 3.5. Not of just works which we
had done, but of his own mercy he saved us, etc. Phil. 3.9. That I may be
found in him, not having my own justice which is of the law, but that which is
by faith of Christ.

Unto those sayings wherein works are opposed to faith, I. Book of
Justification. Chap. 19.
Bellarmine excepteth first in general or in commune, that by works which are
opposed to faith, and excluded from Justification, are understood works which
go before faith, and which are done by the only strength of free will, and not
all absolutely. And this he says may be proved from Romans 4. where we read,
says he, to him that works, wages is imputed as by debt, not as by grace. In
which place the Apostle opens himself, says he, what should be understood by
works which are opposed to faith: and says, that he calls them works, to
which that which is given is wages, not grace. And such be not any, but those
that are done by the only strength of freewill. For that which is given to the
works that be done of grace, such as is the very act of faith, and those that
follow thereupon, is not simply wages, but also grace: yea more grace then
wages. Thus says Bellarmine.

I answer. It is false, that Pault should here say, he calls them works, to
which that which is given is wages, not grace: that is, which are done by the
only strength of freewill. For, that he speaks of works in general, whether
they be done by the strength of freewill or by grace, appears by this, that
he entreats there of Abraham's works, those which he had done of grace and
faith, as that he was obedient to Gods commandment, and trusting upon his
promise, left his country of Chaldea, and went into a land which God was to
show him: also, that he refused not to offer his only son Isaak at Gods
commandment: for these are those works wherein he might rejoice and boast
with men. And from these works does Pault derogate Justification before God, by
this argument which is taken from the general; for that to him that works,
wages is given as by debt, and is not imputed, that is, not given of grace: but
to Abraham justice was imputed. And whereas Bellarmine faith: that which is
given to works which be done of grace, is partly wages, parley grace: therein
he feigneth, that things immediately adverse, may stand together; and that
against the Apostles manifest sentence, both in this place, where he opposes
grace to debt, and by consequence, to wages, as that cannot stand together; and
also Chap. 11.6. where he says, If by grace (to wit, there be a reservation of
certain Jews that are justified) it is not now of works, (that is, deserts
of works) otherwise were no more grace. But if of works: then not now of
grace: otherwise works were no more works.

But Bellarmine having first set down that general answer, Bellarmines
exception against that place. To. 3 27.
makes answer afterward unto every of those sayings. And first unto that
place, Romans 3.27. he answers, that the rejoicing of the Jews is excluded by
the law of of faith, not by the law of deeds: because man is justified of
grace, which first of all inspireth faith, then by faith, leads unto mercy
and good works: and is not justified by the law of deeds, that is by the only
knowledge of the law, and strength of free will.

I answer. Although Gods grace whereby a man is justified, leads him by faith
unto good works: yet is not in that respect man said to be justified by faith
(as Bellarmine insinuates) because of faith he does good works, but he is
said to be justified by faith, because by faith he leyeth hold on Christ's
satisfaction, for which only he is justified. Moreover, it is false, that the
Apostle understands those works only which are done according to Gods law,
by the strength of free will. For it is plain by Abraham's example, which he
presently adds to this sentence, by a prolepsis in the beginning of the
chapter following, that he speaks of those works that are done of grace and
faith.

Against this answer, Bellarmine excepteth: that the Apostle says not, where
is the rejoicing? but, where is the rejoicing? that is, where is the rejoicing,
wherewith thou reioycest in thy self and not in the Lord? And of works done
of faith, and thereby of grace; seeing faith is of grace; none can rejoice but
in the Lord. Which rejoicing is not forbidden, seeing the same Apostle says,
He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord.

I answer. That Pronowne, thy, is not in the Greek. Nevertheless, by the
very matter it appears, that it must be understood. Then, that there is no
need the Pronowne should be so expounded, as Bellarmine does; for rejoicing is
rightly said to be his that reioiceth; whether he rejoice in himself, or in an
other. Lastly (that which is chiefly to be marked) the Apostle speaks of
rejoicing wherewith any may truly rejoice, that he is just by inherent justice,
bred of perfect observation of the commandments of the law, whether he
perform this observation of natural strength, or of Gods singular grace. And
such rejoicing no man has: because all have transgressed the law, and they
which begin to observe it by Gods singular grace, yet can they not (in this
life) observe it perfectly, so as for that observation they can be counted just
of God. In the mean while it is true, that it is lawful for the godly to
rejoice in the Lord: but so far forth as they rejoice not falsely: and they
should falsely rejoice, if they should say, that they can by Gods grace
perfectly fulfill the law, so as by fulfilling thereof, they may be just before
God.

The second place from Romans 3.28. We gather that a man is justified by faith
without the works of the law: Bellarmine passes over in silence, and
answers nothing to it in special. But in the second place he answers unto
that saying, Romans 4.2. of Abraham: and withal, unto the rest of the places
before recited. He says therefore, Exception against the other places before
recited.
that Abraham was justified by faith, not by works that went before faith. And
the same he answers unto the places following, Gal. 2. Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3. for in
all those places, are excluded only works done before faith.

I answer. The Apostle derogateth Justification not only from those works
which are done before faith, but also from those which are done after faith.
For he speaks of Abraham's works, which are mentioned in scripture for to
show his uprightness, as, that he obeyed God, going out of his own country,
and offering his son. But the works which Abraham did before faith, are
mentioned in the scripture, not as such whereof he might rejoice, but as such
whereof he might worthily be ashamed: namely, that he served strange gods,
Josh. 24.2. Also in Gal. 2. he speaks in general of the works of the law,
wherein the Jews exercised themselves, among whom were many regenerate, and
endued with faith of Christ, as cannot be denied: although they knew not, that
that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ, and that justice should be imputed to
them that believe in him. Besides in this saying. Gal. 2. is to be noted the
want of that expounding particle [ tout'esti, 1. that is:] which being
observed, it will be evident, that here are contained exclusive particles,
equivalent to that exclusive particle [onely.] For it is, as if he should say;
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law: that is, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ, etc. And these are equivalent, Not to be justified
but by faith, and to be justified by faith only. Besides, although Ephesians. 2. and
Tit. 3. he takes away justification from works done before faith, yet by
this he does not ascribe it to works done after faith.

Against this answer Bellarmine excepteth, that the Apostle when he says,
Abraham was justified by faith, not by works; does not reject the works done
by faith, but affirms them not to be don without faith: for if they had bin
such, they had never justified him, therefore he excludes (says he) the
works which Abraham could have done, not of faith.

But what is to mingle darkness with the clear light, if this be not? The
Apostle openly denies that Abraham was justified with God by works: and
speaks of works don by faith, as we have now twice showed: and yet Bellarmine
dares to say, that the Apostle rejects not (to wit, from Abraham's
justification) works done of faith. Then what means Bellarmine when he says,
the Apostle affirms that Abraha^s works were not done without faith: for if
they had bin such, they had never justified him. But where does the Apostle
affirm this? And does not now Bellarmine co^tradict himself: which affirms
here, that the Apostle speaks of Abraham's works done of faith: when yet
before he said, in all those places, speech was of works done before faith?
Also, does he not straightway in the words following again co^tradict
himself, when he says, that the Apostle excludes works which Abraham could
have done, not of faith?

Besides, Bellarmine says, that the Apostle speaks with condition, namely
thus: If Abraham (...) justified by works not proceeding from the grace of
faith: surely he had rejoicing, but not with god. And because it is manifest
enough (says he) that Abraham had rejoicing also with god, thereupon the
Apostle gathers, that he was not justified by works without faith, but by
faith whereof good works truly proceed.

I answer. Bellarmine peruerteth the meaning of the Apostles words, in
feigning unto him such a syllogism: ye openly contradicts the Apostles
words. For the Apostle denies that Abraham had rejoicing with God: but
Bellarmine affirms it. And that Bellarmines syllogism is feigned, appears
by coherence of sencences. For when the Apostle had recited the objection of
the Jews drawn from Abraham's example, as if he had obtained the praise of
justice by works: he answers by distinction: granting that Abraham got
that praise with men but not with God. Then, if in this place there were an
hypotheticall or connex syllogism, it should be such as this: If Abraham
were justified by works, he has whereof to rejoice with God. But he has not
whereof to rejoice with God. Therefore he was not justified by works.

The assumption of which syllogism, plainly contradicts the assumption of
Bellarmines syllogism: and the conclusion is diverse from the conclusion of
Bellarmines syllogism; because it speaks of works in general, when
Bellarmines speaks only of works done without faith.

Unto the last place, Exception against the place, Phil. 3.9.
from Phil. 3. Bellarmine answers: that those works are called the justice
of the law, which are done through knowledge of the law, by the only strength
of nature.

I answer. By that which the Apostle signifies, that he trusted not in the
justice of works which he had done by the only strength of nature, it cannot
firmly be gathered, that he trusted in the justice of works which he had
done of faith. Yea he openly signifies, that he trusted in the only justice
of faith. And this is the justice which is imputed to man by faith, as he
teaches Romans 4.5.6. and not the justice of works done of faith, inherent in a
man. And in an other place speaking of this inherent justice, he says, I know
nothing by my self: but I am not hereby justified.

CHAP. IX. The confirmation and clearing of the sixth part.
HItherto of the fifth part of the sentence proposed: now follows of the
sixth, that man is justified by the grace or free love of God; in as much as God
has of favor to man, ordained Christ for a Mediator or satisfactor: according
to these sayings. Act: 15.11. By the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
believe that we shall be saved even as they. Romans 3.24. Are justified freely by
his grace, by the redemption made in Jesus Christ. Romans 4.16. Therefore the
inheritance is of faith, that it may be by grace: Romans 5.15. If by the fall of
that one, many are dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace,
which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And verse. 17. they
which receive the abundance of grace, and the gift of justice shall reign in
life through one, that is, Jesus Christ. And verse. 21. So grace might reign by
justice vnto-eternall life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 11.5. Even so
at this present time there is a remnant according to the election of grace.
Gal. 2.21. I do not abrogate the grace of God. For if justice be by the law,
then Christ died in vain. Gal. 5.4. Ye are abolished from Grist whosoever are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. Ephesians. 1.5.6.7. Who has
predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, unto himself, according to
the good pleasure of his wilt to the praise of the glory of his grace:
wherewith he has made us accepted in his beloved: by whom we have redemption
through his blood, etc. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved, etc. Tit. 3.7. That
we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the hope
of eternal life. In all these speeches, the word Grace, signifies the favor
of God, wherewith he accepts his elect. 2. Book of justification. Chap. 3.


Against this, Bellarmine excepteth: that justifying grace is not only the
favor of God, but a gift inherent in the mind, as may be understood (says
he) by the diverse attributes and names thereof. For it is called the gift
which we receive, Romans 5.17. receiving the abundance of the grace and gift.
Also it is said, to be given by Christ. Grace and truth is made by Jesus
Christ. Ioh. 1. Now it is not rightly said, that the good will of God the Father
is made by Christ. Also it is said to be given of Christ by measure: To every
one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Ephesians:
4. But the good will of God is not, given by measure, neither of Christ. Also,
it is compared to the being which is given by creation. For thereof we are said
to be Created in Christ, Ephesians. 2. and, a new creature. Gal. 5. But that whereby
we are said to be creatures, is inward and inherent. Finally, it is compared to
the light, 2. Cor. 6. What part has justice with iniquity? What fellowship
has light with darkness? Ephesians. 5. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are
light in the Lord. 1. Ioh. 2. He that says he is in the light and hates his
brother, is in darkness. But certes light makes not a lucide body, except it
be inherent, neither suffers darkness with it. Besides, the grace by which
the Apostle says we are justified, is called also, love shead in our hearts
by the holy Ghost. Romans 5. Also, by justifying grace, we are said to live.
Romans 8. the spirit lives for justification. But we cannot be rightly said
to live by the outward favor of God: when nothing is more inward then life is.

I answer. Romans 5.17. the grace and the gift, of justice are openly
distinguished: therefore the gift is not there called the grace, as Bellarmine
says. Then, there is there no speech of inherent justice, as Bellarmine would:
but of the justice which God gives, and of the grace or favor he imputes:
for the Apostle speaks of the same justice that before. Romans 4.6. where he
said, justice was imputed.

Ioh. 1. The name of Grace signifies the benefit of redemption, by a
metonymie of the cause efficient: but thereof it follows not, that it is
taken after the same manner in the sayings rehearsed. As neither from the
saying, Ephesians. 4. where the name Grace, signifies some spiritual gift,
profitable for the edifying of the Church. Neither yet by the other speeches,
Ephesians. 2. Gal. 5.2. Cor. 6. where the name of Grace is not found; neither is the
speech of justification, but of regeneration. And in that saying, Romans 5. Love
is shead, etc, is not meant the love which is inherent, in us, and wherewith
we love God; but wherewith God loved us: as is plain by comparing it with the
8. verse, where it is said, God commends his love toward us, etc. Finally,
Romans 8.10. he speaks not of justification, but of sanctification, neither is
there the name Justification as Bellarmine falsely alleges; but the name of
Justice, whereby is there meant, a just and holy life: as may appear by the
whole context and scope of that place: and not that justice whereby a man
stands before the judgment seat of GOD; the disputation of which matter,
the Apostle finished in the end of the sift Chapter.

CHAP. X. The confirmation of the seventh part.
THere remains the seventh part of the sentence propounded, to wit, that man
is justified by the justice of God, whereby he accepts Christ's satisfaction
for the elect. Of this Paul testifies, Romans 3.25.26. Where he says, Whom (to
wit Christ) God has set forth to be are conciliation through faith in his
blood to declare his justice, by the forgiveness of the sins, that are past
through the patience of God, to show at this time his justice, that he might be
just and a iustifier of him which is of the faith of Jesus. By which words the
Apostle teaches, that God declares his justice, in as much as he forgiueth
sins to them for whom Christ has satisfied, namely the believers. For it is
the part of justice, to be content, if satisfaction be made for the debt by a
surety, and not to exact satisfaction of the debtor himself.

THE SECOND Book of Justification. Wherein the opinion of the Papists, and
proofs of the same, are recited out of Bellarmines Book, and refuted.
CHAP. I. The Papists opinion recited: which consists of four parts.
HItherto has been the first part of our ente^ded disputation, the opinion of
the professors of the Gospel, touching Justification: the other part
follows, to wit, the opinion of the Papists.

The Papists opinion and sentence therefore, Bellarmine delivers in these
words, (2. Book of Justification, Chapter 2.) that Justification is the
infusion of inherent justice.

Also (in the same book, Chap. 3.) that it is a regeneration and renewing
through the goodness of God, made in us by the lauer of Baptism and sheading
out of the holy Ghost. Inherent justice he makes to consist in faith, hope and
charity: (in the same book, Chap. 2.) yet in an other place (1. book of
Justice, Chap. 2.) in charity only. Therefore (in the same book Chap. 13.
and 2. book. Chap. 4.) that faith justifies, not only, but as the beginning
and first root of Justification. Also (2. book of Justification. Chap. 6.)
that justification consists not in only forgiveness of sins. Finally, (in
the same book, Chap. 7.) that Justification consists not in imputation of
Christ's justice. All which things how he endeavors to prove, let us see
after.

CHAP. II. The proof of the first part recited and refuted.
TO prove the first part, That Justification is the infusion of inherent
justice, he brings these arguments.

1. Argument.
The first argument (says he) is taken from these words of the Apostle, 2 Book
of justification chapt. 3.
Romans 5. As by the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners: so by the
obedience of one, many shall be made just. Hence Bellarmine infers, that we
are made just by obteining inherent justice, both for that the Apostle says,
shall be made just: and also, for that he says, we are so made just by
Christ's obedience, as we were made unjust by Adams disobedience. But by Adams
disobedience we are made unjust, by injustice cleaving within us indeed.

I answer. It follows not: we are made just; therefore by obteining inherent
justice: because we may be made just by imputation of justice. And indeed the
Apostle teaches that we are made just so, Romans 4.6. where he says, that David
affirmed the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes justice. But that
comparison of the Apostle, is wrested to a wrong sense: for the Apostle would
say; As unto all naturally borne of Adam injustice is imputed for his
disobedience: so to all that believe in Christ, and belong unto Christ, justice
is imputed for his obedience, to wit, wherewith he obeyed his father, in
suffering the punishment for them. And although it is true, that Christ by that
his obedience, has obtained also that justice is infused into the elect by the
regeneration of the holy Ghost; as Adam by his disobedience caused that
injustice is infused into his posterity by carnal generation: nevertheless
the Apostle speaks not here of that thing, because here he handles not
regeneration (which he handles in the 6.7. and 8. chapters) but justification.

The second argument for inherent justice, 2. Argument.
Bellarmine takes from Romans 3. Justified freely by his grace. That is (says
Bellarmine) by justice given and infused of him.

I answer with them of sound judgment: that by the name grace, here is not
meant any infused or inherent gift, but Gods favor and good will which he
bears toward us. As in many other places in this disputation: as is to be
seen in the sayings recited before, for to confirm the sixth part of the
sentence of the professon of the Gospel.

Against this answer Bellarmine excepteth: that gods favor is explained
enough by that word, freely; in that addition therefore, by grace, is signified
the effect of his favor. Then (says he) the prepositio^ per, by, is not
rightly applied to favor, that it be said, God by his favor justifies us.
Moreover, the good will of God effects that good which it wills to any; and
Gods will is, that we be truly just and holy before him.

I answer. Although Gods favor he signified enough by the word [dorean, a.
freely] yet because by that aduerb there is not expressed the author of this
gift whereof we speak; it pleased the Apostle for more full declaration sake
to add, te autou chariti, by, (or through) his, (that is, Gods) grace; by a
certain apposition. Then, Bellarmine assumeth falsely, that the Apostle here
uses the preposition per,.i. by. Moreover he frames a false position, when he
says the preposition per.i. by, is not rightly applied to favor. For the
contrary is gathered by The Apostles words Ephesians. 1.6. where he says, to the
praise of the glory of his grace, in which (en he) he has made us accepted,
etc. Here it is certain, by the name grace, is understood the favor or good
will of God: for this is the subject of the praise whereof the Apostle
treats. Then, this also is manifest that [en he] in which, is put by an
hebrew propriety, for [di hes] by which. Lastly, the good will of God
effects in deed, that we be truly holy: but it effects not that we be
perfectly holy in this life, so as that we can stand in the judgment of God by
the holiness inherent in us: but effects that we are counted for perfectly
holy, for the redemption made by Christ: of which benefit the Apostle here
properly speaks, as appears by his words.

The third argument he takes from 1. Cor. 6. 3. Argument.
And such were ye; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified. Hence Bellarmine infers, that justification contains these two:
purgation or washing, and sanctification.

I answer. This consequence cannot be firmly drawn from the Apostles words.
Then this is not the Aposties mind, that sanctification is part of
justification: which may be gathered by this, that in the Epistle to the
Romans, having ended the disputation about Justification, he treats of
Sanctification apart by it self, to wit, in the 6.7. and 8. chapters. And
those three things by the sentence of the Apostle, are thus compared among
themselves. First by the word washing, he signifies in general,
metaphorically hoth the benefits of Christ, to wit, sanctification and
justification: which afterward he adds for special explication sake.
Moreover, the things that Bellarmine in this place does further infer from
those words, against forgiveness of sins, and imputation of justice, shall
more fitly be answered otherwhere.

The 4. argument he takes from Tit. 3. When the bounty and humanity of God our
savior appeared: not by works which we did, but according to his mercy he
saved us, by the lauer of regeneration and renouation of the holy Ghost, which
he has shed into us abunda^tly through Jesus Christ our Savior: that being
justified by his grace, we may be heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
From those last words, that being justified by his grace, we understand (says
Bellarmine) that justification of described in the former words: so that, after
the Apostles mind, justification is regeneration and renouation through the
goodness of God wrought in us by the lauer of Baptism, and pouring out of the
holy Ghost. Also, in those words, that being justified by his grace, etc. he
shows the cause (says he) why God has regenerate and renewed us by the lauer
and holy Ghost: and says, the cause was, that being justified, that is, being
justified by that regeneration and renouation, we may deserve to be made heirs
of the kingdame and life everlasting.

I answer. Bellarmine as his manner is, confounds and takes for one and the
same, the things which in the Apostle are manifestly diverse: to wit,
regeneration and justification; and to obtain this, he gives a gloss upon
those words, that being justified: saying, that is to say, that being justified
by that regeneration: which gloss notwithstanding might be admitted, if it
were rightly understood, namely of the procreant cause of faith, and not of the
formal cause of justification. For by regeneration, the holy Ghost works
faith in the elect, whereby they apprehend the grace of Christ, that is,
Christ's satisfaction through Gods grace performed for them. And this is it
which the Apostle says in this place, that being justified by his grace, etc.
That is to say, having by regeneration the gift of faith, we apprehend the
grace of Christ, and so are justified, and obtain the inheritance of eternal
life.

The 5. argument he takes from Heb. II. where the Apostle testifies (says
he) that some men were truly and absolutely just: 5. Argument.
for of Abel he writes, He obtained testimony that he was just. Of Noah, He
was made heir of the justice which is by faith. And this their justice (says
Bellarmine further) was not the justice of Chrise imputed: but justice inherent
and proper to them. For the Apostle willing to show, from whence Abel obtained
testimony of justice, says, God giving testimony to his gifis. Where we see,
that Abels justice is proved by the effect of his justice; to wit, because he
did good works, when he sacrificed unto God aright. Now the cause of a good
work is inherent justice, not imputation of justice: which seeing it is
outward, cannot be the beginning of the work. So also that Noe was just, the
Apostle proves in the same place: Because he believed God, feared Gods
judgment, obeyed Gods commandment. And in Genes. 6. he is said to be just,
because he walked with God. Even as also Saint Luke proves (Chapter. 1.) that
Zachary and Elizabeth were just before God, because they walked in all the
commandments and iustifications of the Lord.

I answer. The fraud of Bellarmine is to be marked, who that he might wrest
that place of Abel to his purpose, recites it vnperfitly: leaving out these
two words By which, which do agree in the same sentence with those words which
he cites, and pertain greatly unto the question in hand. For so says the
Apostle: Abel by faith offered a more precious sacrifice then Cain; By which,
he obtained testimony that he was just, God bearing witness of his gifts.
Where it is manifest, that faith is made the procreant cause both of the
pretiousnes of Abels sacrifice, and also of Abels justice, and lastly also of
the testimony, whereby God bare witness that Abel was just by faith, and
therefore that his sacrifice was precious and pleased him. Wherefore it is
plain, that here he speaks of the justice of faith. Which thing appears
yet more manifestly by the other testimony; namely, that Noe was made heir of
the justice which is by faith. Which testimony it is strange that Bellarmine
would cite here, seeing it plainly repugneth his purpose. For the justice of
faith, is the justice which God imputes to man, as is evident by the words of
the same Apostle, Romans 4.6. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes
justice. Moreover, Bellarmine feigneth a false drift of the Apostles words; as
though he would prove, that Abel was just: and as though he proved it by this,
that he did a good work, by sacrificing a right. But the Apostle has another
purpose, namely, by Abels' example to prove, that both man himself and his
works please God by faith. Besides he falsely denies, that imputed justice is
the cause of a just work. For except justice be imputed to a man by says, no
work of his can please God and be approved as Just. For without faith (as the
Apostle there says) it is impossible to please God. Neither does it hinder,
that imputation of justice (as Bellarmine speaks) is outward. For faith, by
which justice is imputed to man, is (that I may so say) inward, that is, seated
within: and this is it which works by love. But as concerning those places,
Genesis 6. of Noe, and Luke. 1. of Zachary and Elizabeth; their begun inherent
justice, is there commended, by the adjoined sincerity: to wit, for that they
minded, that God was the beholder of all their actions: and thereupon studied
to approve them unto him: and it is not meant, that they trusted upon that
justice of their life before God, as being perfect, and in all things
answerable to his law, for which eternal life ought to be adjudged them of God.

The 6. Argument he takes from Romans 8.29. and 1. Cor. 15.49. where the
Apostle says, 6. Argument.
that the just are conformed to the Image of Christ, and bear Christ's Image,
Those whom he fore-knew (says he) them he praedestinated to be made
conformable to the Image of his son. And as we have borne the Image of the
earthy, we shall bear also the Image of the heavenly. Bellarmine assumeth: now
Christ is not just by imputation, but by justice inherent to himself. He
concludes: therefore it is necessary, that we also have inherent justice.

Here first Bellarmine uses a fallacy from that which is spoken in respect,
unto that which is spoken simply: whiles he takes those speeches of the
Apostle which are spoken properly of the conformity of the believers with
Christ in glory, as if they were spoken of co^formitie in all things. For
otherwise he could not thence infer, that we ought to be conformed unto
Christ even in this also, that we be not just by imputation. Then he
deceitfully leaves out in the conclusion, the one part of the assumption: when
as the whole conclusion is this: therefore we also are not just by imputation,
but by inherent justice.

The first part of which conclusion manifestly contradicts the Apostle, who
says, Romans 4. The man is blessed to whom God imputes justice. Finally that
conclusion of Bellarmines, makes nothing for the question in hand. For the
question is not, whither it be necessary that we have inherent justice: but
whether by inherent justice we can stand in Gods judgment and be justified of
God.

But Bellarmine proceeds to reason from that place to the Corinthes thus. We
have borne the true Image of the earthly man, that is, of the sinner Adam:
because sin cleaued in us not putatiuely, but in truth and in deed: Therefore
we bear also Christ's true Image, if justice cleave in us, not putatiuely, but
in truth and in deed.

Here Bellarmine deceitfully in stead of the word Imputation, puts as equal
thereto, the word Putation: saying putatiuely, for imputatiuely: that he might
note a certain vain opinion, whereunto no matter subsisteth. Yet in the mean
while Bellarmine is not ignorant, that not only the sin which dwells in
man since the fall, is derived from Adam unto his posterity by generation: but
also that first sin committed properly by Adam, is imputed to his posterity.
And by like reason, not only inherent justice, that is, study of godliness in
those that belong unto Christ, is wrought by Christ through regeneration of the
holy Ghost: but also that obedience of Christ, whereby he satisfied for the
sins of the elect, is imputed unto the^ for the justice whereby they stand
before God. Moreover, he concludes not here the question, which is not,
whether we shall bear Christ's Image as touching inherent justice: for no
professor of the Gospel denies this: but the question is, whether by this
justice we can stand in the judgment of God.

The 7. argument he draws from Romans 6. where the Apostle teaches (says he)
that we through Justification, 7. Argument.
whereby we die to sin, and rise again to justice, do represent Christ's
death and resurrection. And amongst other things says, He that is dead, is
justified from sin. Which also the Apostle Peter signified in his first
Epistle, Chap. 4. when he says, Christ therefore having suffered in the flesh,
be ye also armed with the same mind. For he that has suffered in the flesh,
has ceased from sins. But Christ was not putatiuely, but truly dead, and
truly rose again: therefore we also do not putatiuely but truly die to sin,
and rise again to justice, when we are justified by Baptism.

I answer. First it is false, that the Apostle in Romans 6. teaches, that we
by Justification do represent Christ's death and resurrection. For he treats
not there of Justification, having made an end of that dispute in in the 5.
Chapter: but he treats of sanctification or regeneration. Neither can it be
proved otherwise, from those words: He that is dead, is justified from sin.
For the Apostle speaks not there of man's Justification before God, but uses
the word Justified for Freed, by a synechdoche of the species. For every one
that is justified, that is to say, is quitted by the Judge, is freed: to wit,
from punishment: but every one that is freed, is not justified: for one may be
freed from some other thing then from punishment; as, from sin. And of this
freeing says the Apostle: He that is dead is justified from sin: for because
he that is dead cannot work either good or evil. Therefore beleeuen in as
much as they are dead to sin, (as the Apostle there says, verse, 11.) so far
forth they are freed from sin. Even as a servant by death is freed from his
master, that he serve him not any more hereafter, as the Apostle says in the
words immediately going before, That our old man is crucified with Christ, that
the body of sin may be weakened, that hereafter we serve so no more. Then it
is true, that we do truly die to sin and rise again to justice: but the
question is not of this thing: but it is, whether by this spiritual death and
resurrection (that is to say, inherent justice) we be justified before God.
Finally Bellarmine comprehends more in the conclusion, then follows of the
premises where he says, When we are justified by faith: in which very thing
he beggeth the question. For the Apostle says not in the place cited: that we
are justified by Baptism: seeing he handles nothing there of Justification:
but teaches, that Baptism is a testimony of our regeneration, which is
wrought by the holy Ghost, in as much as it teaches us of Christ's death and
resurrection. For it being taught by the holy Ghost, we believe that Christ
died for our sins, and rose again unto heavenly life, as our first fruits
and head: certainly we will study to avoid sins, and will meditate an
heavenly and an holy life.

The 8. Argument he takes from Romans 8. where the Apostle (says Bellarmine)
writes, 7. Argument.
That we now by Christ have received the spirit of adoption of sons of God,
as touching the soul, which lives (as there is said) because of
Justification: though the body be dead, (that is, be yet mortal) because of
sin. But by and by after he adds (to wit, the Apostle) that we now having
the first fruits of the spirit, do sigh in our selves, expecting the adoption
of the sons of God, the redemption of our body. For as the same Apostle
says, Phil. 3. We expect a Savior which will reform the body of our
humility, configured to the body of his glory.

But the adoption of sons which we expect in the redemption of our body,
shall be most true and inherent in the body: that is, immortality, and
impassibilitie, not imputative, but true. Therefore the adoption which now we
have in the spirit by Justification, ought also to be true, not putatiue.
Otherwise as we expect the redemption of the body, so also we expect the
redemption of the soul.

I answer. First Bellarmine faulteth in a false exposition: in as much as he
takes the name body simply for the body of man: and contrariwise, the name
spirit for the soul. For the Apostle there by the name body, understands
that which in that and other places he calls flesh: that is, the body
together with the soul, but such as it is by carnal generation: and likewise
by the name spirit, he understands the soul with the body; but so far forth
as the soul is regenerate by the holy Ghost.

Next, he faulteth in false citation: for the Apostle writes not, The soul
lives because of Justification; but The spirit is life, because of Justice.
Then again he faulteth in false exposition; in as much as he expounds those
words, The body is dead, to mean, Is yet mortal: when the Apotles meaning is,
that by the holy Ghost dwelling in the believers, it comes to pass that
their flesh is mortified as touching sin; to wit so, as that it sin not:
and the spirit is quickened as concerning justice, to wit so, as that it
endeavors for justice and works it. That this is the meaning of those
words, may plainly appear to any that marketh, by the words there next
ensuing. Moreover Bellarmines sophisme, from a like reason of the adoption of
the body, and the adoption of the soul, is utterly dark, and far from the
Apostles words and meaning. For neither does the Apostle say, the adoption to
come in the body; nor yet, that we now have adoption in the spirit; that is,
in the soul: neither does he compare these two adoptions as like one to an
other. But he says, We expect the adoption of the sons of God: that is to
say, that heavenly inheritance, which we are adopted to possess and enjoy in
due time. And this very thing he calls redemption of the body: that is to
say redemption, whereby both the body shall be delivered from the cross
whereto it is subject in this life* and the soul, from inhabiting sin,
wherein it is holden, so long as it lives in this mortal body. Wherefore it
is unapt, and not beseeming a Divine, that Bellarmine counts this an absurd
thing, that we should look for redemption of the soul. For that lamentation
of Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death? does it not pertain to the full deliverance of the soul from
inhabiting sin. Finally, it is a true, and not a putatiue adoption (as
Bellarmine cauelling speaks) wherewith God has adopted us: and yet the
adoption, is the imputation of sonneship, whereby we are counted for the
sons of God through grace: when by nature we were the children of wrath. But
in the mean time, adoption is one thing, the spirit of adoption an other
thing. By adoption we are received into grace, and justified: by the spirit of
adoption, we are regenerate, being already adopted.

CHAP. III. The proof of the second part recited and refuted.
HItherto we have disputed of the first part of the Papists opinion, wherein
they determine, that Justification is infusion of justice.

It follows that now we treat of the second part, wherein they say, That
faith alone justifies not, but The I. principal Argument the proofs whereof
do follow. I. Argument. I Book of Justification Chap. 13.
as the beginning and root of Justification.

To prove this, Bellarmine first brings the place, Heb. 11. He that comes
unto God, must believe that God is. Where the first motion unto God, is given
to faith; by which he that was far off, begins now to draw nigh.

I answer. The Apostle here makes no comparison between faith and other
spiritual virtues: but speaking simply of faith alone, affirms it to be
necessary for him that comes unto God, to wit, to crave his help, and ask
any thing of him. Wherefore it is a strange gloss, that the first motion unto
God is here given to faith.

As though the motions that follow, were not of faith, but of other spiritual
virtues: And as though Justification were done by I know not how many motions
unto God. Nay, Justification is made by this only motion, whereby the mind
through faith is so moved unto God, that it takes hold of his good will,
reconciled by Christ's satisfaction to all that believe in him.

Then he brings the saying Romans 2. Argument.
10. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. But how
shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? how shall they
believe without a Preacher? how shall they preach except they be sent? Where
the Apostle deseribeth this order of lustification, that first there be a
sending of Preachers: secondly, the preaching of the Gospel: thirdly, faith:
fourthly, invocation: fifthly, salvation: that is, Iustifications, which is
health of soul, from the disease of sin. Of which sending and preaching, are
without us: and and to the first beginning of Justification in us, is faith:
after which follows invocation and the rest in their order.

I answer. Bellarmine faulteth fast in confusion of things diverse, in that be
expounds the word Salvation, by the word Justification* when as Salvation
properly spoken, is more large, to wit, comprehending justification,
regeneration, and glorification. Then he faulteth in a false definition: when
as he defines Justification to be health of soul from the disease of sin:
that is to say, regeneration. Finally, he goes from the question, in that he
numbreth certain things which be needful unto salvation besides faith. For
when the professors of the Gospel teach, that man is justified by faith only:
they exclude not those things that are here reckoned, from the obtaining of
salvation: but only they exclude man's works from obtaining that rustice which
God may approve as perfect.

Thirdly, he brings the place John. I. So many as received him, 3. Argument.
he gave them power to be made the sons of God, to those that believe in his
name. Here John openly teaches (says Bellarmine) that they which receive
Christ by faith, are not yet the sons of God, but may so be made, if they go on
further, that they also begin to hope and love. For love properly makes the
sons of God, as as appears, I. John. 2.

I answer. The meaning of John words, is not that which Bellarmine brings:
but he means, that God has given to the believers power or right [exousian]
for to be made the sons of God, that is, to be the sons of God, in this
very respect, that they are borne of God (as be declares in the verse
following) that is, that they are regenerate, and by consequence endued with
faith. Whence I draw this Argument:

As far forth as the believers are borne of God, so far forth is given unto
them the right of the children of God.

But the believers as far forth as they believe, are borne of God.

Therefore to the believers as far forth a they believe, is given the right of
the children of God: and by consequence, they are justified as far foxth as
they believe, or, by faith.

And whereas Bellarmine says, it is plain by 1. Ioh. 2. that love properly
makes the sons of God: verily I find not this sentence in that Chapter,
neither expressly, nor yet by collection: But if perhaps through the Printers
fault, the number second crept in for the number third, there is indeed in the
third Chapter a certain sentence of love, but not this. That love makes the
sons of God; but, that by love the sons of God are known: namely in the
10. verse. By this are manifested the sons of God, and the sons of the
devil: Who so does not justice, is not of God, and he that loves not his
brother. Neither can Bellarmines sentence be concluded (as he peradventure
thinks) from the 1. verse, where it is said thus, Behold what love the father
has given to us, that we should be called the sons of God. For by the name
Love there, by a metonymie of the efficient cause, he understands a benefit
proceeding from the love wherewith God loves us: and what that benefit is, he
declares by opposition in those words, that we should be called the sons of
God: namely, the benefit of adoption. Wherefore Bellarmine has not yet showed,
that we are adopted and justified of GOD by love, and therefore not by faith
only.

To these Arguments Bellarmine adds a natural reason, 4. Argument.
as he calls it in these words. Some man may believe that which he hops
not for, neither loves: be cannot hope for, or love that which he believes
not. Therefore faith is the foundation of hope and love: and not contrariwise,
hope or love, the foundation of faith.

I answer. In this reason, the question is not concluded. Which is not,
whether faith be the foundation or original of hope and love: but whether we
be justified by faith only, or by faith hope and love together.

Unto this reason he joins an other: in bodily diseases the beginning of
health is, 5. Argument.
to believe that he is sick, and to have faith in the Physician that is
willing to cure: yet is not that only faith, perfect health.

I answer. First Bellarmine unaptly makes the sick ma^s faith a part of
health when as it is the procreant cause of health: in as much as the sick man
should not obtain health, except he had that faith. In like manner faith
whereby we are justified, is not a part of Justification: but the procreant
instrumental cause, because by faith we apprehend Christ's satisfaction, for
which we are justified. Next as his manner is, he confounds justification with
regeneration: in as much as he calls faith health, towit, of soul,
understanding newness of nature.

Moreover, he falsely defines faith whereby we are justified: to wit, as though
by it we believed only, that we are spiritually sick, that is to say, sinners:
and that the spiritual physician Christ, is willing to cure us. But these
suffice not unto justifying faith: but it is required further, that we believe
that Christ has already perfectly cured us by his satisfaction, as touching
forgiveness of sins: and has begun to cure us, as touching renewing of
nature: and finally, as touching the same, is willing perfectly to cure us, and
also will cure us after this life. Wherefore there is not the like reason of
the faith which Bellarmine in this place attributes to a sick man, and of
justifying faith.

Bellarmines arguments, that fear concurreth unto justification.
Bellarmine proceeds unto the second disposition (as he after the Council of
Trent names it) whereby they feign a man is disposed unto justification, that
is to say, Fear. And indeuoureth to prove by the places of scripture following,
that this concurreth unto justification, almost after the same manner that
faith it self concurreth.

First (says he) we have learned by the Apostle, that faith justifies, I.
Argument.
when he says, Without faith it is impossible to please" God, Hebr. 11. But
the same is also said of Fear; Ecclesiasticus, 1. He that is without fear,
cannot be justified.

I answer, First, the testimony of Ecclesiasticus is not of force to prove
any point of faith: because that book is not Canonical, but Apocryphal.
Then, though that book were of authority; yet the saying alleged would
prove nothing: because here is brought a false interpretation, which contains
a plain diverse sentence from that which is contained in the Greek words of
Jesus the son of Sirach; which are to be interpreted, an angry man cannot be
justified: for the moment of his anger is ruin unto him. Thirdly, although it
were so in the Greek as Bellarmine cites out of the common translation; yet
this speech would make nothing to the purpore for the son of Sirach speaks
not of man's justification before God; but before the civil Judge: warning,
that they which are given to anger, or that without the fear of God follow
their own lusts, will at length commit those heinous sins and wickednesses,
for which being brought unto judgment, they cannot be justified, that is
quitted: but are by the Judge condemned unto deserved punishment. Fourthly,
although this saying of Syrach were to be understood of Justification before
God: yet could not the question be concluded from it.

For it is brought as being like to that saying of the Apostle: and from that
likeness, is the Argument drawn: when as notwithstanding it is not like. For
it is not said, Without fear it is impossible to be justified; as it is said,
Without faith it is impossible to please God: but it is said, He that is
without fear, cannot be justified. Besides, though it were said, Without
fear it is impossible to be justified, as it is said, without faith it is
impossible to please God: yet would it not follow from hence, that fear would
pertain unto Justification, after one and the same manner that faith does:
for faith pertains to Justification, as the isntrumental cause whereby we
take hold on Christ's satisfaction, for which we are justified: but the fear
of GOD pertains as an effect of faith, necessarily agreeing therewith. For
where the fear of GOD is not, neither is there iustyfying faith.

Then, 2. Argument.
faith justifies (says Bellarmine) because it is the beginning of justice and
salvation: But the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prou. I. and
by wisdom is understood perfect justification.

I answer. First it is false, that by wisdom is understood justification,
for justification is Gods action, whereby he counts and pronounces man just:
but wisdom is a quality in man's mind, wrought of God. Wherefore that saying
makes nothing to the matter. Next, if by the name of wisdom in Salomons
speech, were understood justification, Bellarmine assumeth things that
manifestly cannot stand together, and feigneth them unto the holy Ghost that
speaks in the scripture: in as much as he affirms both faith and fear to
be the beginning of justification. For if faith be the beginning of
justification, fear cannot be: and so contrariwise, seeing of one thing, there
is but one beginning.

Moreover, 3. Argument.
faith justifies (says Bellarmine) because by it we seek God, and come unto
him. But the same thing does fear. For it is written in Psalm. 77. When he slew
them, they sought him and returned, etc

I answer. Bellarmine assumeth a false thing: for faith justifies not,
because by it we seek God: but because by it we take hold on Christ's
satisfaction, for which God justifies us. Which thing cannot be attributed
unto fear.

Furthermore, 4. Argument.
faith justifies (says Bellarmine) because by it Christ is formed in us, as
he says, Gal. 4. But of fear, Isaiah writes, chapt. 26. according to the 70.
Greek interpreters, By the fear we have conceived, and brought forth the
spirit of salvation.

I answer. First it is false, that it is said in Gal. 4. Faith justifies
because by it Christ is formed in us. Yet it is true, that this sentence may be
concluded from the Apostles words, which are: My little children, of whom I
travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you. By which words the
Apostle signifies, that he went about by the doctrine of the Gospel to reduce
the Galathians to the true knowledge and faith of Christ. And the scope was,
that by that faith they might be justified; in as much as by it they should
take hold on Christ's satisfaction. Which taking hold, the Apostle
metaphorically calls a forming of Christ in the Galathians: because he had
said, that he traveled in birth again of them: that so he might continue the
metaphor he had begun. But such forming of Christ in man, cannot be ascribed
unto fear. Neither can that any way be proved from that saying of Isaiah: in
the citing whereof hitherto, Bellarmine bewrays his marvelous impudency:
seeing that place contains nothing at all of Christ or justification: no not
though the interpretation of the 70. be admitted. But why does not Bellarmine
cite the common Latin translation; when as notwithstanding he approoueth and
defends the decree of the Council of Trent; wherein is determined, that the
common Latin edition is to be held for authentical? 2. Book De Verbo Des,
Chap. 10. For if that be authe^ticall, that which differs from it cannot be
counted for authentical. And the interpretation of the 70. differs in this
place.

But if one look into that place, and consider the whole context, he shall
see, that there is nothing at all of Christ's or man's justification before God,
contained in those words: but a narration of the Jews, wherein they tell their
own weakness in delivering themselves from calamities, and purchasing
themselves salvation.

Their calamities they compare to a woman in travel, saying: As a woman with
child, that draws near to the travel, is in sorrow, and cries in her
pains, so have we been in thy sight o Lord: We have conceived, we have borne
in pain, as though we should have brought forth wind; We could not give any
help to the Land. It is therefore an impudent sophisme of Bellarmine: who
shameth not to allege these things here, as being spoken of man's
Justification.

Again, faith Justifies (says Bellarmine) because the just lives by faith.
Hab. 2. And of fear it is written, The fear of the Lord is the fountain of
life. Prou. 14.

I answer. It is false, that faith justifies, because, or in as much as the
Just lives by faith. Neither does Habacuck say this, but only says, The just
shall live by faith. You contrariwise, the just shall live by faith, because
he is justified by faith. For justice goes before life, as the cause before
the effect. And faith Justifies, because, or in as much as it apprehends
Christ's satisfaction, for which God justifies.

To conclude, 6. Argument.
faith justifies (says Bellarmine) because it purges sins, as the Apostle
teaches, Act. 13. Romans 3. Gal. 3. and in other places: But of fear also we
read, Ecclesiast. 1. The fear of the Lord expels sin.

I answer. Faith, to speak properly, purges not sins, but Christ's blood,
1. John. 1. And if faith be said to purge sins, it is to be understood thus,
that it apprehends Christ's satisfaction unto forgiveness of sins. But
after this manner the fear of the Lord does not expel sin: but so far as
it holds a man like a bridle, from giving himself up to sin, and sinning
securely. Neither is it said in any of the places alleged, that faith purges
sins. But Act. 15.9. Peter says, that God had purged the hearts of the
believing Gentiles by faith: that is, had forgiven them their sins by faith,
whereby they apprehended Christ's satisfaction. In Romans 3.25. it is said, That
God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation by faith in his blood, to
declare his justice by forgiveness of foredone sins. In Gal. 3. there is no
such thing.

Last of all he adds this reason: 7. Argument.
The nature of fear is (says he) to flee evils, and seek remedies how it may
escape them.

I answer. But hence it follows not that fear justifies; and that after the
same manner that faith does.

Bellarmines arguments, that hope of pardon is a disposition unto justice and
remission of sins.
Bellarmine proceeds to the third disposition, as he calls it, to wit,
Hope: namely, hope to obtain pardon. That this is a disposition unto justice
and remission of sins, he proves by these sayings. Prou. 28. He that hops
in the Lord, shall be healed, Psalm. 36. He will save them because they hoped in
him. Psalm. 90. Because he hoped in me, I will deliver him. Mat. 9. Have
confidence some, thy sins are forgiven thee: where he notes, that the Lord
first said, Have confidence son: and when he saw him lifted up unto the hope
of salvation, he added, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

I answer. First, Bellarmine strayeth from the question. For the question
proposed is, whether only faith justifies; and not, whether it only dispose
unto justification: wherefore he should prove, that hope also justifies, and
not, that hope disposes unto justification. Moreover, the sayings all eaged
out of the Proverbs and Psalms, make nothing to the matter: for none of them
speak of the obtaining of the forgiveness of sins, but they speak of outward
felicity, and deliverance from outward dangers. Neither is there in that place
of the Proverbs, in the Hebrew, the word bealed: but (...), shall be made fat.
Neither in the said 90. Psalm, or after the Hebrews dist^ction, the 91.
Psalm, is the Hebrew; because he hoped in me: but because he has loved me,
or, been lovingly affected unto me. Finally, in none of these places is there
speech of hope of obtaining pardon, of which the question was propounded: but
there is speech of hope of the fatherly providence and care of God toward his
children. Now as touching that saying, Math. 9. Bellarmine wresteth it unto his
purpose, by a false interpretation of the word, Have confidence: as if it were
the same that Conceive hope of pardon is. Then he maket'd a weak consequence.
If the Lord said first, Have confidence: and after, Thy sins are forgiven
thee. Therefore that confidence of which he spoke, went before forgiveness of
sins. Lastly he follows the false interpretation of the word [apheontas]
forgiven, which signifies not are forgiven, but, have been forgiven, for it is
not of the time present, but past. And the natural sense of the words is this:
Have confidence son, that thou shall obtain of me healing of thy palsy:
because thou have already obtained a far greater benefit, to wit,
forgiveness of sins. But if that were the sense which Bellarmine gives the
word* should sound thus, Have confidence son, and thy sins shall be forgiven
thee: that is (as Bellarmine would have it) Conceive hope of pardon, or
forgiveness of sins; for if thou so do, it shall be done unto thee.

Bellarmines arguments, that love disposes unto forgiveness of sins.
The fourth disposition (says Bellarmine further) is love. Now that some love
is before forgiveness of sins, either in time, if it be imperfect love, or
in nature, if it be perfect and from the whole heart, Ecclesiasticus teaches
first (says he) chapt. 2. For after that he had said, Ye that fear the Lord,
trust in him, he adds, Ye that fear the Lord, love him, and your hearts
shall be enlightened. Then also our Savior himself teaches it, when he
says, Luke 7. Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much. Also the
Apostle Paul teaches it, when he writes, Galath. 5. Neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision: but faith which works by love. The
Apostle John teaches the same, 1. John. 3. saying, We are translated from
death to life, because we love the brethren.

I answer. As touching that place in Ecclesiasticus: it is not of force to
prove any point of faith, because the book is Apocryphal. Then, that sentence
is not found in the Greek copy. Thirdly, he treats not there of remission
of sins, wherefore this sentence is nothing to the purpose. As concerning the
other places, Luc. 7. the conjunction because, in Greek [hoti,] notes not the
cause of the thing, but the cause of the conclusion: that is the argument,
whereby the sentence proposed is proved. And that argument was drawn not from
the cause, but from the effect. For, that many sins are forgiven this woman,
Christ proves by her deed, as an effect of the forgiveness of sins, which
she perceived she had obtained by the grace of Christ. As is plain by the
Simile, which the Lord adds to declare that deed, to wit, the creditor,
which forgave two debtors, to the one, more; to the other, less: whereupon it
came, that the one loved him more, the other less. As therefore that love of
the debtors, was not the cause of forgiving the det: but contrariwise, the
forgiving of the det, was cause of their love: so also the love of that woman,
was not the cause why Christ forgave her her sins: but contrariwise, the
forgiveness of sins, was cause why the woman loved him. Neither is this
declaration answered, by the exposition which Bellarmine brings in an other
place, that the conjunction [hoti] because, is a causal. For it is not named a
causal, for that it signifies the cause of the thing, but for that it
signifies the cause of the conclusion: that is, the argument or medium of the
proof.

From the words Gal. 5. it cannot be gathered, that love disposes unto
justification: but only we are taught, what manner of faith that is whereby we
are justified, namely faith working by love.

In the place out of the Epistle of John, Bellarmine has committed the crime
of falsehood, for that he has cited the text imperfectly, that he might wrest
it unto his purpose. For it is not there, We are translated, etc. but, We know
that we are translated. It is evident therefore, that love is not there made
the cause of our translation from death to life: but the sign and argument,
whereby we know that we are translated. And love is the sign of this thing:
because it is the effect of true faith, by which that translation is made, as
our Lord witnesses, Ioh. 5.24. He that believes, has passed from death into
life.

The second principal argument.
Bellarmine proceeds to another principal argument; which he concludes in
this reasoning: If faith be separated from hope and love and other virtues,
without doubt it cannot justify: Therefore only faith cannot justify. The
consequence of this argument is proved says he, thus: If the whole force of
justifying were in faith only, so that other virtues though they were present,
conferred nothing at all unto justification; surely that faith would justify
It should be, as well when they are absent as present.
as well when they are present, as absent. Therefore, if it cannot justify
when they are absent, it argues that the force of justifying is not in it
only, but partly in it, partly in the other.

Also: If it cannot be, that faith severed from love should justify; then it
alone justifies not. But the first is true: for without love there can be no
justice: because he that loves not, abides in death, 1. John. 2. Therefore
the latter also is true. Besides, if faith separated from virtues can justify,
it can also do the same with vices: for as the presence of other virtues
profits faith nothing, as concerning the duty of justifying, because it
only justifies: so the presence of vices shall nothing hinder it as touching
the office of justifying: because by accident, there are joined with it either
vices or virtues. But the consequent is absurd: therefore also the antecedent.

I answer. All these connexe or (as Bellarmine calls them) conditionate
propositions of these three reasons, are false. For although faith be not
alone, but has other virtues joined with it, and not vices (which is
impossible:) yet faith only justifies. Even as the hand of a writer, although
it be not alone, but joined with the other members: yet it only writes. And
as the foot as not alone, but joined to the other members, yet it only
stands. Likewise as the eye is not alone, and yet alone sees: the ear is
not alone, but yet hears alone. Finally, the members of man's body, although
they be joined one to another, and cannot do their several actions, except
they be joined one to another, yet have every one their proper action.

The third principal argument.
The third principal argument, whereby Bellarmine would prove that faith
justifies not alone; is taken (says he) from the removing away of the causes
which may be given why faith only justifies. For all such causes may be
reduced (says he) unto three heads. And thus he concludes.

If faith alone justifies: either it therefore justifies alone because the
scripture expressly says it; or because it pleased God to give justification
with the only condition of faith: or because it alone has the force to
apprehend justification, and apply it unto us, and make it ours.

But none of these causes can truly be said of faith.

Therefore neither can it be truly said of it, that it only justifies.

The first part of the assumption he endenoureth to prove by this, that in the
scripture there is found an express denial of that word (to wit, Only) or a
word of the same signification: namely, Iam. 2. Ye see that of works a man is
justified, and not of faith only. The second part he proves by this, that
scriptures do much more openly require the condition of repentance and of the
Sacraments unto Justification, then of faith: as Ezekiel. 18. If the wicked
repent, he shall live. Luke 13. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
Ioh. 3. Except a man be borne again of water and of the holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. The third part, he endeavors to prove thus:
for that faith is not said properly to apprehend: or certainly, Justification
is not so apprehended by faith, that it is had indeed and inherent: but only
that it is in the mind after the manner of an object, apprehended by the action
of the understanding or will: But after this manner love also and joy do
apprehend.

I answer. The assumption of the syllogism proposed is false, as touching the
third part or branch. For only faith apprehends Christ's satisfaction unto
Justification: because by faith only we can make full account, that Christ
has satisfied for us, and by his satisfaction obtained of God forgiveness of
sins for us. And in this very sense faith only is said to justify, because
it only apprehends Christ's satisfaction: for which only, and not for our
works also, god counts us for just. And this answer is enough for soluting
the Argument propounded. Yet in the mean time, the Reader is to be put in
mind, as touching the first part of the assumption, that it is not denied by
James of true faith, that it only justifies, but this only he means, that
man is not justified by a dead faith, but by a living faith, which of it self
brings forth good works.

And although it be not found expressly written, Faith only justifies: yet is
there found a sentence of equal force, namely, A man is not justified but by
faith, Gal. 2.16.

Besides, as touching the second part of the assumption: it is false, that the
scripture requires the condition of the sacraments unto Justification: as
though none could be justified without the sacraments. Neither can it be proved
from that place, Ioh. 3. Except a man be borne again: for Christ speaks not
there of Baptism, but of the holy Ghost that regenerateth: which he compares
to water.

The 4. principal Argument which has three branches. 1. Branch.
The 4. Argument Bellarmine fetches from the manner of justifying of faith. And
this he parts into three. The first is: Faith justifies after the manner of
a cause: therefore it justifies not only.

I answer. I deny the consequence: For although faith justifies after the
manner of a cause; yet it justifies alone: for it justifies as an
isntrumental cause, apprehending Christ's satisfaction, for which only we
are justified. And there is no other isntrumental cause whereby Christ's
satisfaction is apprehended.

The other Argument. 2. Branch.
Faith is the beginning formal cause of Justification: Therefore it justifies
not only. To prove the antecedent, these sayings are brought. Romans 4. To him
that believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed for
justice. 1. Cor. 3. Other foundation can no man lay, etc. Where by foundation,
Bellarmine would have understood, faith in Christ. And the foundation is the
beginning of the house: Therefore also faith is the beginning of Justification.
Act. 15. By faith purifying their hearts.

And what is pureness of heart (says Bellarmine) but justice either begun or
perfected.

I answer. I deny the antecedent: and I deny, that it can be proved by the
sayings alleged. For Romans 4. Faith is said to be reputed for justice, in this
sense, for that justice is imputed unto a man by faith. For so the Apostle
there says, in the words next joined to them, that David said, The man is
blessed to whom God imputes justice, namely by faith: as we may perceive by
conferring of the words that go before: as also by conference of that phrase so
much used of Paul, wherein he says, That God justifies man through faith, of
faith, by faith. Now to justify and to impute justice, are of equal force with
the same Apostle. Next, 1. Cor. 3. by the name of foundation, is understood
Christ, as the Apostle himself plainly affirms: that is to say, the doctrine
of Christ, namely, of his person and office. For he there handles Christian
doctrine, and not justification. Bellarmine therefore Sophistically wresteth
the name foundation, unto Justification: as though he treated there of the
foundation, that is the beginning of Justification.

Now, Act. 15. Peter faith, their hearts were purified by faith, because by
faith the hearts are certified, that the blood of Christ purges us from all
sin: to wit so, as that no sin is imputed to us. There fore pureness of
heart is evil restrained of Bellarmine, unto pureness or justice inherent: when
as there is also pureness or justice imputed.

The third Argument straieth from the question propounded: for it concludes a
diverse thing; namely thus. Faith obtains forgiveness of sins, and after a
sort also deserves it: therefore it justifies not, because it apprehends
the promise. The antecedent he proves from Luke 7. where our Lord says to
the woman, Thy faith has made thee safe. But if faith did only receive
mercy, it could not rightly be said to save. For who would say to a poor man,
that only reaches out his hand for alms, thy hand has got the alms? or who
would say to a sick man, that with his hand takes the medicine, Thy hand has
cured thee of thy disease?

I answer. It follows not: Faith makes safe, therefore it saves by
obtaining and deserving. For the word, make in general notes an efficient
cause.

And from the general to the special, the consequence follows not
affirmatively. And how faith makes safe, we must learn out of the scripture:
which declares the nature and force of faith in justifying, no otherwise then
by relation unto Christ's satisfaction, as the object which it apprehends and
applies to a man, as Romans 3. By faith in his blood. Gal. 2. Who has loved me
and given himself for me, etc. And although no wise man would say, Thy hand
has got thy alms: yet might one rightly say to him that is enriched by
receiving alms: Thy hand has made thee rich. For if he had not taken the
alms, he had not been enriched. So our faith has not made for us Christ's
satisfaction: but yet by receiving it, it enricheth and justifies us. Finally
when it is said, Faith justifies, it is a * figurative speech; to be
understood thus, God Justifies a believer, because of Christ's satisfaction
which he apprehends by faith.

Bellarmine brings also other places of scripture to confirm his antecedent,
namely, Rom 4. Abraham was comforted by faith, giving glory to God, etc.
Therefore also was it counted unto him for justice.

In this place, the Apostle shows the cause why Abraham's faith was counted
justice: because in believing he gave glory to God. Therefore that faith
pleased God, by which he was glorified: and therefore for desert of that faith
(which notwithstanding was his gift and grace) he justified Abraham. Also Romans
10. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. How shall
they call upon him is whom they have not believed? how shall they believe
without a Preacher? Where S. Paul (says Bellarmine) as he makes the
preaching of the word, the cause of faith: so he makes faith the cause of
invocation: and invocation the cause of saving: that is, of Justification.
Whereby we understand (says he further) that faith by invocation, obtains
justification. Faith therefore justifies not relatiuely, to wit, by accepting
Justification offered. Lastly, in the 11. to the Heb. the Apostle teaches by
many examples, that men please God by faith; and by this, that faith is of
great price and merit with God.

I answer. Although that place Romans 4. may seem much to favor Bellarmines
opinion: yet if one look throghly into it, and consider the applying of
Abraha^s example unto us. Which immediately follows, he shall see, the causall
conjunction dio, therefore, not to be so much referred unto that effect of
Abraha^s faith, to wit, glorifying of God, as unto the truth of his faith:
which truth is signified by that effect. For in applying Abraham's example, he
does not now mention strong faith: such as that of Abraha^s was: but simply
true faith to wit, whereby we believe that God gave Jesus for our sins, and
raised him up for our Justification. The place Romans 10 speaks not of
Justification, but of salvation: that is glorification. Which although it be
obtained by invocation proceeding of faith: yet is it not obtained by the merit
of faith, but by Gods grace and the way that he has prescribed. Lastly,
although out of Hebr. 11. it is manifest that faith is of great price with God:
yet hence it follows not, that we by faith do merit Gods benefits. For as
other the benefits of God, so faith it self also is Gods free gift, as the
Apostle witnesses, Ephesians. 2.8.

The 5. prin cipal argument, which has 2. branches.
There remains the last argument: which Bellarmine says is taken from two
principles: of which the one is, that the formal cause of Justification is
Justice really inherent in us: the other, that good works are necessary to
salvation.

Before we see how Bellarmine does reason from these principles; it is meet
first to put in mind, that that first principle is false, even by Bellarmines
own testimony: 2. Book of Justification Chapt. 2.
For elsewhere he says, The formal cause of Justification consists in the
infusion of that inherent justice. But infusion of Justice, is not the inherent
justice it self. But now let us see how he reasons from these principles.

From the first principle he reasons thus:

Unto the infusion of justice are more actions required then the action of
faith: But Justification is the infusion of justice: Therefore unto
Justification are required more actions then the action of faith: And by
consequence, only faith Justifies not, after the manner of disposition. I
answer. First Bellarmine here departs from the question: not oppugning the
opinion of the professors of the Gospel, but a Popish fiction. For the
professors of the Gospel, when they say, that faith only justifies, do not
mean, that it justifies only by way of disposition, but by way of
apprehension: as has already b^^ often declared. Then the assumption is false:
as we have showed before. Besides, Bellarmine agrees not with himself: who now
affirms, that the action of faith is fore-required unto Justification; also
that it disposes unto Justification; when before he said, 1 Book of
Justification Chap. 13.2. Book Chapt. 4. Of grace and freewill. 1. Book.
Chap. 6. The latter Branch.
that Faith justifies as the beginning and first root of Justification: and
afterward he makes faith, part of the formal cause of Justification, where he
says, That faith is not the whole formal cause of Justification. And in an
other place, that the formal cause of Justification consists in faith, hope
and charnie. Is part of the form therefore, fore required for the obtaining of
the form?

Now from the other principle, he draws this argument.

If faith only did justify, it should only save also. But it does not only
save: because good works are also necessary to salvation. Therefore it only
does not Justify.

I answer. Although this argument at the first sight have a great show: yet if
it be throghly looked into, it will be sound to be a i. A false argument.
Paralogisme, having four terms by the homony^^^^ or double signification of
the argument or middle cerme. For that Only save, in the proposition, is to be
understood specially of salvation, which is by way of apprehension: but in the
assumption, it is understood generally of salvation which is any manner of way.
For faith only saves as the isntrumental apprehending cause, to wit, by
apprehending Christ's satisfaction, for which God saves the believer: but it
does not only save every manner of way: for Gods grace and Christ's satisfaction
also saves, but as the principal efficient causes: also good works save, but
as the way by which God brings the believers unto salvation. This double
signification being observed, I answer to the assumption, where it is said,
Faith saves not only. If this be understood generally, it is true: but then
an other thing is assumed then was in the proposition. For when it is said in
the proposition, Faith only saves: that is not understood generally, but
specially: to wit, by way of apprehension. But if the assumption be understood
specially, as in the proposition, namely, that faith only saves not by laying
hold on Christ's satisfaction; it is manifestly false.

CHAP. IIII. The proof of the third part, recited, and refuted.
HItherto of the second part of the Papists sentence, wherein they contend,
that faith only justifies not. Now follows the third part, wherein they
dispute, that Justification stands not only in forgiveness of sins. Which
Bellarmine purposes to prove thus. I Book of Justification Chap. 6.
Justification consists also (says he) in inward renewing. Therefore not in
forgiveness of sins only. We deny the antecedent. But to prove that,
Bellarmine brings some places of scripture: which we will consider in order.

The first place is Romans 4. Who was delivered for our sins, and rose again
for our justification. That is, as Bellarmine interprets: that we may walk
in newness of life.

I answer. This exposition of Bellarmines is false, co^fou^ding those things
which the Apostle distinguishes. For Paul begins in that Epistle to dispute
of renning of nature, or of sanctification, at the sixth chapter, having
finished the disputation of justification in the fifth chapter. And the sense of
the place alleged is: That Christ was delivered unto death for our sins,
that is, to purge our sins by satisfaction, and was raised up for our
justification: that is to say, that he might make known our justification: to
wit, that he has obtained it by his death for us. For if he had not risen from
the dead, we should yet be in our sins: 1. Cor. 15. Wherefore seeing he is
risen again, we know that we are no more in our sins, but that forgiveness
of sins, or our justification is gotten for us by Christ's death.

The second place is, The 2. place.
Romans 5. As sin reigned unto death, so also grace reigns by justice unto
eternal life. From hence Bellarmine reasons thus. He opposes justice to
sin: and by justice understands renewing, from which works proceed of life,
for that the opposition requires. For sin is said to have reigned unto
death, because it wrought deadly works: contrariwise, therefore the grace of
God is said to reign by justice unto life, because by justice infused, it
works the works of life. And if inward renewing, which is the beginning of
good works, be rightly called rustice, out of doubt Justification must be
constituted in that renewing, and not in forgiveness of sins only.

I answer. A gain Bellarmine brings a false exposition. For the Apostle
entreats nothing in that Chapter, of renewing of nature: but afterward in the
Chapter following. And the meaning of the place alleged, by comparing it unto
the former, with which it agrees, may be perceived to be this. As Adams sin
reigned in his posterite unto death, because being imputed unto the^, it
brought death: that so the grace of God whereby he imputes justice to them
that believe, for Christ's satisfaction, reigns in them unto life eternal:
because justice being imputed to them, brings life eternal.

The third place is, Romans 6. Neither exhibit your members as weapons of
iniquity to sin: but exhibit your selves to God, as living from the dead,
and your members weapons of justice to God.

I answer. This place speaks not of Justification; the dispute whereof the
Apostle ended in the 5. Chapter: but treats of sanctification. Wherefore it
makes nothing to the matter.

The 4. place is, Romans 8. The spirit lives for Justification: or (as it is in
the Greek) the spirit of life for justice: Bellarmine adds: Justification or
justice, which makes to live, and by this to work, cannot be for giuenesse of
sins only: but some inward and inherent thing.

I answer. Again he brings a false exposition: for neither speaks he here
of Justification, but of sanctification: as is manifest by the things before
and after. And the meaning of the place is: that the spirit of God, dwelling in
them that believe and are justified by faith, quickneth them, as concerning
study of justice or good works: so that now they cease to give themselves to
sin, and contrariwise do study for justice and good works.

The 5. place is Gal. 3. If there had been a law given, that could have given
life: surely justice had been by the law. Here the Apostle shows openly
(says Bellarmine) that Justice whereupon Justification is called, is something
that gives life to the soul: and constituteth it in motion and action.

But I see not by what syllogism Bellarmine gathers this consequence from
the Apostles words. The meaning of the Apostle is: If the law could give life
to man, unto whom it was given: that is, could give him strength perfectly to
fulfill or keep it: then should man's justice arise of the law: that is, man
should be just, and counted of God for just for the law by him observed. But by
what force will you conclude from hence, that justification consists in that
justice which constituteth the soul in action, that is, in inherent justice?
Yea the contrary may rather be from hence concluded: namely, that justification
consists not in that justice: for that justice, which is required unto
justification, namely, perfect observation of the law, falls not unto man in
this life.

The sixth place is, 6. Place.
Ephesians. 4. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which
according to God is created in justice and holiness of truth. Where the
Apostle calls renewing, justice and holiness.

I answer. This place also makes nothing to the matter: seeing it speaks
not of justification, but of sanctification: neither of the justice of faith,
but of the justice of works: which although it be not perfect, and every way
absolute in the regenerate, so as to answer in every part to the law of God:
yet is it true and sincere, and not feigned.

Three reasons.
To these arguments Bellarmine adds three reasons, which he calls natural:
which also we will consider.

The first reason is. 1.
Justification without doubt is a certain motion from sin unto justice: and
has it name from the thing whereunto it leads, as all other the like
motions; inlightning, warning, etc. True justification therefore cannot be
understood, except some justice be gotten besides forgiveness of sins: even
as it can (...) either be true inlightning, nor true warming: if when darkness
is driven away, or cold expelled, there follow no light, and no heat in the
subject the body.

I answer. Justification, it is in deed a kind of motion from sin to
justice, but not such as Bellarmine feigneth: to wit, such as inlightning and
warning be. For it is not the motion of expelling sin and infusing justice:
for this motion in scripture is not called Justification, but Regeneration,
Renouation, Sanctification. But it is the motion of forgiving or remitting
sin, and imputing justice. Now forgiveness of sin, and imputing of
justice, differ only in name, indeed they are the same: as appears by the
Apostles words Romans 4.6.7. as we have declared elsewhere. And what other thing
it is to drive out darkness, but to bring in light? also what else, to expel
cold, but to put in warmth? Unaptly therefore does Bellarmine feign, that
darkness may be driven away, and cold expelled, although there follow no
light nor heat in the subject body.

The second reason. 2.
Justification (says Bellarmine) is not therefore only given us of God, that
we may escape the pains of hell, but also that we may get the rewards of
heavenly life. But surely, only forgiveness of sins delivers from pain,
does not give glory. Which thing we see daily in civil judgments. For they
that are quitted by the judge, are delivered from death, but they get not new
rewards for this alone, that they are judged not to have been, or not to be
guilty.

I deny the assumption. For remission of sins does not only deliver from
pain, to wit, eternal death; but also brings glory or eternal life. The
reason of which thing is this, that remission of sins, wherein man's
justification consists, is remission of all sins: and therefore not only
of sins of committing, but also of sins of omitting: whereby it comes,
that he to whom God forgiueth sins, is so accounted of, as if he had not
only committed nothing which God has forbidden in his law: but also, omitted
nothing of that which he has commanded: and therefore, as if he had perfectly
fulfilled the law of God. Now where the perfect fulfilling of the law is, there
also is life; according to that, The man that does these things shall live in
them. Moreover, the example of civil judgment which Bellarmine brings,
proves not his assumption: because that absolution is unlike to the absolution
of God. For this is universal, to wit from all sins against the law of God:
but that is particular or special; to wit, from some certain crime or crimes,
against the politic laws. Notwithstanding, the civil Judge gives unto him
whom he has quitted from certain crimes, those rewards which he has
promised to the innocent, namely, preservation in life and defense; although
he give him no new and singular rewards which he has promised only to
certain virtuous exploits. And so God gives eternal life as a reward to
those, unto whom he has promised it, to wit, unto those that keep his law:
such as he accounts all those, whose sins he has forgiven.

The third reason. Justification of enemies makes friends, children, (...),
citizens with Saints, of the household of God, heirs of his kingdom.

Only for giuenesse of sins, makes not men such:

Therefore only forgiveness of sins is not justification.

The assumption he would prove thus: For one is not worthy of love for this
only that his dets are forgiven him when he cannot pay them. Neither is he
straightway made a son, a citizen, or of the household, or an heir: who by
the judges clemency undergoes not the punishment, whereto he was justly
adjudged.

I deny the assumption. And I prove the contrary by the Apostles words, Ephesians.
1.5.6.7. He bath predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ, unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: To the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherewith he has made us accepted in that Beloved; by
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. If
thou ask how God has adopted us for sons, and so for heirs of his
kingdom? also, how he has made us accepted, that is, friends and beloved? the
Apostle answers: By Jesus Christ: also, In that (his) beloved: and declaring
this same thing, he faith, that in him or by him we have redemption through his
blood, the for giuenes of sins. Therefore the Apostle shows no other thing
by which we are made the friends of God, then the forgiveness of sins:
neither any other thing for which, then the redemption made by the blood of
Christ.

The proof which Bellarmine brings of the assumption, has no force, for the
manner of dealing with God and with men is unlike. Men are not so affected,
that they will straightway vouchsafe to heap benefits on him, to whom they
have forgiven offenses: but God, to whomsoever he forgiueth offenses for
Christ, them he prosecuteth which eternal favor for his sake: and thereupon
heapeth his benefits on them, though unworthy.

CHAP. V. The proof of the fourth part, recited and refuted.
NOw remains the fourth and last part of the Papists sentence, That
justification confisteth not in imputation of Christ's justice.

This first he would prove by this, I. Proof.
that it is never read in the scripture, that Christ's justice is imputed to
us: or, that we are just, by Christ's justice imputed to us.

Before I answer this argument, I will first show in what sense these things
be spoken of the professors of the Gospel, whom Bellarmine oppugneth.
Therefore when they say, That Christ's justice is imputed to us, they
understand, the justice gotten by Christ's death. Therefore this they mean:
That justice is imputed to us of God, or, we are counted of God just, for the
death of Christ, whereby he has satisfied his judgment for our sins. Which
is all one as if they should say, that Christ's satisfaction is of God imputed
unto us for justice. This appears by Caluins words in his third book of
Instir. 2. Book of Iustific. chapt. 1.
chap. 11.5.3. Which place Bellarmine himself cites: namely, To justify, is
nothing else, but to acquit from guiltiness, as being of approved innocence,
him that is guilty or so accused. When as therefore God justifies us by
Christ's intercession, he does not acquit us, by approving of our own
innocence, but by imputation of justice: that we are counted just in Christ,
which are not so in our selves. Behold he says, God justifies us by Christ's
intercession, that is, for Christ's intercession: under which name is
comprehended satisfaction. Also, He acquitteth us by imputation of justice, or,
in as much as he imputes justice unto us: namely for that intercession and
satisfaction of Christ. Whereby we perceive, that Calvin makes the formal
cause of justification, to be imputation of justice, which otherwhere he
calls forgiveness of sins.

Now the meaning of the words being declared, I answer to Bellarmines
argument: and say, that it is not necessary that those very words, Christ's
justice is imputed to us, be read in the scripture: but that it is enough, if
those things be read, from which this sentence may by good consequence be
drawn. And such we read: namely where it is said, that faith is imputed to man
for justice, and, that justice is imputed to man, Romans 4.5.6. Now seeing these
phrases be diverse, and therefore cannot be both of them proper: we must
consider which is proper, and which figurative. To speak properly, a thing is
said to be imputed to one, which himself has not done, or which is not in
himself: and contrariwise, that is said not to be imputed, which one has
done, or which is in him. Therefore when justice is said to be imputed to
sinful man, it is a proper speech: us also when it is said, that sin is not
imputed to a sinner. It is therefore improperly said, that To him that
believes, faith is imputed for justice; and therefore this is to be vnfolden
by a proper speech: to wit, that To him that believes, justice is imputed: or,
he that believes is counted for just, by faith: as elsewhere the Apostle
says, The believer is justified by faith. Which that it may more fully be
understood, it is needful that the nature of faith be declared by his object
whereon it leans, or which it apprehends for justice. For that is the thing
for which the believer is justified, or justice is imputed to him: or finally
which is imputed to him for justice by faith. And that object of faith is
Christ's satisfaction: as appears by the Apostles words, Romans 3.25. Whom God
has set forth a reconciliation by faith in his blood. Therefore to speak
properly, justice is imputed to us for Christ's satisfaction by faith: because
we apprehend that by faith: or Christ's satisfaction is imputed to us for
justice by faith: that is, in as much as it is apprehended by faith.

Secondly, 2. Proof.
he would prove the same thing by this, that no necessity can be alleged of
that sort of imputation.

But, say I, there is manifest necessity: namely our sins which cannot be
undone: but least we be damned for them, it is necessary that they be not
imputed to us, but covered: which is no other thing, then to have justice
imputed to us: as appears by the Apostles words, Romans 4.6.7. David says,
that Blessed is that man to whom God imputes justice. Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is the man to
whom the Lord shall not impute sin.

But Bellarmine labors to confirm his argument, thus.

If this imputation were necessary: it should therefore chiefly be necessary,
for that man after forgiveness of sin is yet verily a sinner, to wit, his
sin being covered, not taken away.

But this cause of necessity has no place. Because by forgiveness of sins,
sin is utterly taken away, that it is not: (for proof whereof, he heapeth
together many testimonies of scripture.)

Therefore this imputation is not necessary. I answer. First, the proposition
is false: for although imputation of justice be necessary for man, yet is it
not therefore necessary, for that man after forgiveness of sin is yet verily
a sinner: as though imputation of justice were done after forgiveness of
sins. For remission of sins, and imputation of justice, are one and the
same thing: as appears by the Apostles words, Romans 4.5.6. where these two are
taken as equivalent, for Justice to be imputed to man; and iniquities to be
forgiven a man. Yet is it true, that imputation of justice is necessary for a
man, because he is a sinner. Then, Bellarmine confirms his assumption by a
false sentence: to wit, that by forgiveness of sins, sin is utterly taken
away, that it is not. For sin is taken away by forgiveness; not so as that
it is not, but that it is not imputed, but covered: as David expressly teaches
in that place which the Apostle cites, Romans 4.7.8. in these words, Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is
the man to whom the Lord shall not impute sin. Behold, if thou ask what it is
to have iniquities or sins forgiven? David answers: It is to have sins
covered, that they come not into the sight of God, as judge. Also, it is to
have sin not imputed of the Lord: to wit, that man be punished for his sin,
as he has deserved. Wherefore we may not think, that in those places of
scripture (those I mean that speak of justification) which Bellarmine has
heaped together, a diverse thing is taught: seeing it is certain, that the
holy Ghost contradicts not himself. Further, unto that argument, from the
opposition of Adam unto Christ, Romans 5. which Bellarmine thinks, will admit
no answer at all: we have answered Before in the second chapter of this book,
in the solution of the first Argument.
before. Bellarmines third argument is this.

If faith, hope and love, can be perfect in this life: the imputation of
Christ's justice is not necessary.

But the antecedent is true: 3. Proof.
Therefore also the consequent.

I answer. The proposition is false. For first, that imputation of justice be
not necessary for man; it is not enough, that faith, hope and love, can be
perfect in this life, but it behooves that they be perfect. Then, though it be
granted that perfect faith, hope and love, befall some (as the Martyrs) in
this life: yet nevertheless is imputation of justice necessary for them, for
sins committed before the perfection of those virtues. For we cannot satisfy
God for them, by the duties of virtues that follow; seeing they are owing unto
God. Therefore for old debts another satisfaction is needful. And God cannot
be satisfied for sins, but by suffering the punishment of them. And this has
Christ suffered for them that believe, and so has satisfied for their sins:
which satisfaction is imputed to them for justice: and this imputation is
needful for them: seeing they cannot but by it be counted for just, and worthy
of eternal life: yea, justifying faith, whether perfect or imperfect, does in
any wise require imputation of justice: seeing it justifies no otherwise, then
in as much as it apprehends Christ's satisfaction, which by the grace of God
is imputed for justice to him that believes.

In exposition of the fourth argument, Bellarmine allows of the Gospellers
sentence, at least in part: in that he says, it is right if it be so
understood: that Christ's justice is imputed to us, that is, Christ's merits,
because they are given unto us: and we can offer them to God the Father for our
sins: because Christ has taken upon him the burden of satisfying for us, and
reconciling us to God the Father. Yet he denies, that Christ's justice it so
imputed unto us, that we are called, and be formally just by it, and that he
would prove thus.

When there be two contrary forms in any, the one inherent, the other outward:
without doubt the absolute denomination is taken from the inherent form,
rather then from the outward. For if one should put a white garment upon a
black-moore, he could not rightly say, This black-moore is white: but contrary
wise it might rightly be said, this Moore is black; because the proper and
inherent blackness perteyneth more unto him, then that outward whiteness
fetched from an other thing.

But in man by the doctrine of imputation of justice there are made two
contrary forms, the one inherent, namely Injustice: the other outward, namely,
inputed justice. Wherewith man by apprehension is clothed as with a garment.

Therefore man to whom justice is imputed, is rather to be named unjust of the
inherent form, then just of the outward.

I answer unto the proposition. Although that denomination be usual with men:
yet God in this affair follows a diverse: reason in his word: saying both; to
wit, that faith is imputed unto us for justice, or that justice is imputed to
us, to wit by faith, Romans 4.5.6. and that we are justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
And surely, when as we are so far forth just before God, as justice is imputed
to us, as Paul in the place alleged, Romans 4. does teach: it is rightly said,
that we by imputed justice, be and are named formally just.

Now to the assumption. In man to whom justice is imputed, it is granted there
is injustice inherent: but it is understood, injustice cleaving unto him by
sins already committed, and not a purpose of doing unjustly. For to whom
faith is given, that by it justice is imputed to him and committed sins are
forgiven: to him withal, is given a purpose to live justly, and to avoid
sins.

The 5. Argument. 5. Proof.
If Christ's justice were truly imputed unto us, that by it we were counted and
thought just, even as if it were our own inward and formal justice: surely we
ought to be counted and thought no less just then Christ himself. Then ought
we to be called and counted redeemers and saviors of the world, and to
receive other such names and attributes of the like sort: which is most absurd.

I answer. I deny the consequence. For by Christ's justice which is imputed to
us, is understood the obedience of death, whereby he satisfied for our sins,
and so brought us everlasting justice (as Daniel speaks.) This obedience I
say, is imputed to us for justice: so that we are esteemed of God, as if our
selves had performed it. Neither does it follow from hence, that we should be
called and counted redeemers and saviors of the world: both for that Christ's
suffering is so imputed to every believer, as if he had suffered for himself,
and not for others: as also because that any may be called the redeemer and
savior of the world, it is not inogh that he be ready to suffer for the world,
but it is necessary that he be meet to satisfy God by his suffering for the
world: and unto this is required, that he be not only man, but a holy man, and
besides that, God.

The sixth Argument. 6. Proof.
Christ has restored us that which we lost in Adam. But in Adam we lost not
imputed justice: neither to be in Gods image and likeness by imputation: but
true inherent justice, by which we were truly (...) to God. Therefore we
receive by Christ true justice and likeness of God, and not only an outward
imputation. Thus says Bellarmine. Which things that they may the more easily
be judged of, we will resolve them. And they be two syllogismes. The first is
this.

That which we lost in Adam, is restored us by Christ: In Adam we lost not
imputed justice, Therefore, imputed justice is not restored us by Christ. The
second syllogism is this. That which we lost in Adam, is restored us by
Christ. (...) out justice we lost in Adam. Therefore, inherent justice is
restored us by Christ.

I answer to the last first. I grant all the latter syllogism: but the
conclusion of it, is far from the question proponed. For although Christ has
restored us inherent justice, in regenerating and renewing us to the Image of
God by the holy Ghost; in this life as beginning; in the next* perfectly: yet
that lets not, why he should not impute justice to us, whereby we may stand
in the judgment of God. As touching the first syllogism, it first of all is
faulty in the storm, because it has a negative minor in the first figure.
Then, the conclusion is from the question proponed. For it is not asked,
whether that justice be restored us which was imouted to us in Adam before he
fell* but it is demanded, whether justice be imputed to us, that is, whether we
be esteemed of God for just, because of Christ's satisfaction. Thirdly, the
minor ^omimu in the assumption is doubtful. For imputed justice there may be
understood either of the justice which may be said to be imputed to us in
Adam before his fall: or of the justice which we say now is imputed to us for
Christ's satisfaction. In the first sense, the assumption is true: but then
there be four termini, for that minor terminus in the conclusion is manifestly
understood of the justice which is said to be imputed to us in Adam before his
fall: as is plain by the word Restore. And in the latter sense the assumption
is false: for we lost surely in Adam that justice which now is imputed unto us
for Christ's satisfaction. For by the disobedience of Adam we were made unjust;
and again, by Christ's obedience we are made just, Romans 5.19. and that by
imputation of justice, Romans 4.6.

The 7. Argument. 7. Proof.
If by Christ's justice imputed to us, we may truly be called just, and sons of
God: then might Christ also by our injustice imputed to him, be truly called a
sinner, and (that which the soul trembles to think) the son of the devil.
For the adversaries grant that sin was so imputed to Christ, as justice is
imputed to us. But the consequence is not true; but blasphemous, sacriligious,
and repugnant to all the scripture; wherein Christ is every where preached to
be holy, innocent, immortal, unpolluted, and most just. Therefore neither is
the antecedent true.

I answer. There be four termini, for the doubtfulnes of the word truly:
which in the proposition is understood of the truth of imputation, but in the
assumption of the truth of inherence. For after the manner of inherence, Christ
was not truly a sinner, but truly holy, innocent, etc. Yet after the manner of
imputation he was truly a sinner: for our sins were truly imputed unto him of
God, when as for them he was truly made a curse or execration, Gal. 3.13. that
is, accursed: as is there declared, when it is added: For it is written, Cursed
is every one that hangs on tree. Now none is accursed unto God, but for sin;
that is, in as much as either he is a sinner, or so reputed. And so also may be
expounded, and it seems should be expounded that place, 2. Cor. 5 Him which
knew no sin, he made sin for us: that we might be made the justice of God in
him. For although it be a sound exposition, that God made Christ a sacrifice
for sin: yet the opposition seems to require that it be expounded, he made
him a sinner: namely by imputing our sins unto him: for so are we made justice
in him, whiles we are made just by imputation of his suffering.

But Bellarmine urges this argument: and from that comparison of the
imputation of Christ's justice, and the imputation of our injustice, he
proceeds to reason thus.

If we were truly unclean and wicked, even after justification: although
Christ's justice were imputed unto us, yet were we not to be called just, but
unrighteous.

But the scripture calls us just and holy. Gods sons and heirs after the
lauer of regineration and renouation.

We are not therefore justified by imputation of justice, but by justice
inherent and abiding (...) us.

The proposition he confirms by the comparison before spoken of.

I answer. First, there be 4. termini: for it is one thing to be called just
after Justification, as it is set down in the proposition: and an other thing,
to be called just after the lauer of regeneration and renouation, as is set
down in the assumption. Then the conclusion follows not of the premises, no
not though the same argument be repeated in the assumption, which is contained
in the proposition, as namely, if it be said, But the scripture calls us just
after Justification. But this conclusion follows of those premises: Therefore
after Justification we are not truly unclean and wicked: Which no professor of
the Gospel denies. For after the justification of faith, we are truly clean
and godly by imputation; yea and moreover also, by inherence of godliness, but
begun only: for justifying faith, does necessarily bring with it study of
godliness.

The 8. Argument. 8. Proof.
Christ in the song of Songs, is compared to a Bridegroom: and the Church or
justified soul, is compared to a Bride. And that Bride is said to be fair,
with the beauty inherent to her self, not with the beauty of the Bridegroom
imputed to her. For therefore unto the Bride is given the beauty proper to
women; and unto the Bridegroom, the beauty proper to men: that we may
understand, that the beauty of Christ is one, the beauty of the Church or
justified soul is an other. Moreover it would be most absurd, if an heavenly
Bridegroom, and one that is most fair indeed, should have a filthy Bride, and
only decked outwardly with some precious garment of a man.

I answer. Christ's Bride, the Church, in the Song of Songs, confesses that
she is black, and withal affirms that she is comely, Chap. 1.5. By that
confession she acknowledges her filthiness or native deformity, that is,
sin: but by that affirmatio^, she sets forth the beauty received from the
Bridegroom. And that beauty is double: the one of justice imputed, the other
of justice infused: but this is imperfect in this life. Wherefore Bellarmine
does falsely lay it to the Gospellers charge, as if they thought, that Christ's
Bride even justified, should yet be filthy: or fair only by imputation of
justice. Moreover, although Christ's Bride be fair, even by justice inherent
to her: ye hence it follows not, that she is not justified by justice
imputed.

The 9. Argument. 9. Proof.
If by Justification the heart be prepared unto the sight of God: then is true
cleanness conferred by it, and not imputative. But the antecedent is true:
therefore also the consequent. The consequence of the proposition is proved by
a simile. For as the eye being indeed unclean, though it be counted most
clean and pure, cannot see the sun: so neither can an unclean heart, though
it be counted clean, ever see God.

I answer. Bellarmine does sophistically oppose, true and imputed cleannes: as
though the cleanness which is imputed unto us by faith, were not true
cleanness. Also by the rest of his disputation it appears, that he by true
cleanness, understands inherent cleanness. But the consequence of his
proposition is false. For although it be needful to have an eye truly and
habitually clean for to see withal: and by Justification the heart is after a
sort prepared to see God: yet is not inherent cleanness conferred by it, but
by regeneration. Even as by taking away the putrified matter, a wound is
prepared unto the scarre: yet is there no forte conferred by it for the wou^d
to close together, but by the plaster which is laid upon the wound being
purged of the putrified matter. For God first by Justification remoueth from
man the filth and uncleanness of sin: then by regeneration endueth him with
faith and study of godliness: that by faith he may be made more sure of his
Justification, and may begin to see God: and by study of godliness cleave
unto him, until he come to see him fully in the other life.

The 10. Argument. Christ suffered, 10. Proof.
that he might sanctify his people by his blood: Heb. 13. that he might
sanctify his Church, Ephesians. 5. that he might cleanse for himself a people
acceptable. Tit. 2. And the Lord himself says, Ioh. 17. I sanctify my self
for them, that they also may be sanctified in the truth. But if Christ have
sanctified his people not truly, but only by imputation, he has suffered and
died in vain, and he could not perform that he desired. For to be willing to
sanctify, and to sanctify in the truth, does not signify only to be willing
to deliver from the punishment of sin, or to be willing that we should be
counted for Saints, though indeed we be not so: but to be willing to effect
that, whereby we may be truly Saints, clean and immaculate. Thus far
Bellarmine.

The Syllogism is to be formed thus.

If Christ have not sanctified his people truly, but only imputatiuely he
suffered in vain.

But he suffered not in vain. Therefore, He has sanctified his people truly
and not only imputatiuely.

I answer. Again, truly and imputatiuely are sophistically opposed. Then, the
conclusion is from the question. For the Gospellers confess, that Christ has
sanctified his people, not only imputatiuely, but also habitually: or, not
only by imputation of holiness, but also by real beginning of holiness: for
by his suffering, he obtained both benefits of God. But yet it follows not
from hence, that the justification wherewith man is justified before God
consists not in imputation of Justice.

The conclusion.
These things the Lord has given me at this time to dispute against Bellarmines
sophismes of Justification. His graune that they may be a help unto many to
rid themselves out of those sophismes.

FINIS.

