The burning of Paul's church in London in the year of our Lord 1561. and
the iiii. day of June by lyghtnynge, at three of the clock, at after noone,
which continued terrible and helpless unto night.

WERE THESE GREATER SINners, than the rest? No; I say unto you except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise peryshe. Luc. 13. Imprinted at London by Willyam
Seres, dwelling at the west end of Powles, at the Sign of the Hedgehog.

AN ADDICION WITH AN APpologie to the causes of brinnynge of Paul's Church,
the which causes were vttred at Paul's Cross by the reverend Bishop of
Duresme the. viii. of ^une. 1561.
ALthough almighty God be pacyente, merciful, and long sufferinge, wyllinge
all sinners to repent their wickedness, to rise from sin, and come to his
mercy: yet if sinners will not amend after monition and warninge had, at the
last God strikes suddenly and sore, as appears in the Scripture by Sodom and
Gomorra upon the which Cytyes God rayned fire and bremstone wherewith the five
Cities were destroyed miserably. Also Pharao and the Egiptians that would not be
moved by the words of Moises and Aaron nor with the ten plages, at last were
sodainlye drowned in the Sea.

Also Chore Dathan and Abiron, with a great number of people, that would not
obey the ministration of Aaron and the Priests appointed by God, but went from
them, seking a new way to serve God: part of them were suddenly swallowed up
of the earth, and part brent sodainlye with fire from heaven in the tabernacle.
After when the people of Jerusalem would not hear the true Prophets of god,
but would believe false liyng Prophets, and so declined from the steps of
David, Ezechias, and Josias, which walked in the fear of god* because they
forsook their fathers steps, and fell to Idolatrye, the Temple was brent, the
City destroyed, and the people taken Captives to Babylon. Also our savior
Christ for the tender* love he had to mankind came into this world, by his
do^trine he gathered. xij. Apostles Disciples, and a great multitude of people
in one unity of faith, and sanctified them, his church by his precious blood
sheding. committing the rule and government of his Church to the Bishops:
after his Ascencion he send the holy Ghost in Jerusalem, in lykenes of fiery
tongues among the Apostles, and straight way they preached as the holy Ghost
taught them: and there, in Jerusalem Saint Peter converted a great multitude
to the faith, which faith at Jerusalem was first taught and declared upon by a
counsel of the Apostles and Seniors, there Saint James being Bishop: and
afterward the same faith was taught in all lands as 2
the Prophet David says. In omnem terram exiu^t sonus eorum. The faith of
Christ's Church has been from time to time establyshed by general councels:
the which faith what Country so ever has forsaken it, has been miserably
scourged and plaged: as about forty years after the Assention of our Savior
Christ, because the Iues would not abide in that religion, that was decreed by
the Apostles, and walk in their steps, miserably Jerusalem was plaged with
fire, pestilence, famine, battle, and murder. Also in all other Countries, as
well with the Greeks as other parts of the world, when the people have declyned
from the fear of God, forsakinge the steps of blessed fathers, miserably
they have been plaged. And in England where the faith of Christ and true
religion was planted about the year of our 3
Lord. Cixxxij. by Elutherius Pope, sending Legates to Lucius then King of
England, which converted this Realm to the faith, and establysshed true
religion in England, which continued. CC. years: but when the people did
declyne from the fear of God and the steps of God and blessed fathers, they
came to great calamitye and misery by the scourge of God. Cadwaliader last
king of the Britans did confess by the hand of God with pestilence and famine
they were driven out of this land. After that again this land being
inhabyted with Saxons being pamius Saint Gregorye Pope of Rome about the
year 4
of our Lord God. D. xcv. sent Saint Augustine and other Monks with him into
England, Ethelbert being king: and then Saint Augustine and his company by
their doctrine and virtuous living planted the faith and so establyshed a true
religion in England: the which faith and religion ever when the people have
declyned from it, they have field great calamities as well by the hand of God,
as by the conquest of the Danes, and after by the Normans, and since the
conquest from time to time, God has plaged this Realm for Sin and
infidelitye. And now whether the people of this Realm be declyned from the
steps of Saint Augustine and other blessed fathers and Saints which had Mass
and seven Sacraments in the Church: and God was honored night and day 5
in the Church with divine service: I think there is no man so simple but he
may easily perceive except malice have blinded his heart.

As in Saint Paul's Church in London by the decrees of blessed fathers, every
night at midnight they had Mattines, all the fore noone Masses in the Church,
with other divine service and contynuall prayer: and in the steple Antimes and
prayers: were had certain times: but consider how far now contrary the
Church hais been used, and it is no marvel if God have send down fire to
brinne part of the Church as a sign of his wrath. And where a reverend
Bishop at Paul's cross did exhort the people to to take the brinninge of
Paul's to be a warninge of a greater plage to follow to the City of London if
amendment of life be not had in all estates, it was well said: but we must
add Accidentem ad deum opportet credere, the Scripture sais, he that will come
to God must first believe. Saint Paul sais: without faith it is impossible to
please ^. xi. ^e. vi.
God: and the Prophet Hieremi says by the sprite of God speakinge. State super
vias and interrogate de semitis antiquis que sit bona and ambulate in ea, and
inuenietis refrigerium animabus vestris, that is stand upon the ways of
blessed fathers, and consider and ask of the old paths and high ways which
is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall find refreshing to your souls.
First search whether the faith and religion now used, was taught with the
blessed fathers in Christ's Church in times past: ye shall prove by no record
of authority or Chronicle that this manner of service now used in the Church
was ever hard tell of before Luthers time, which is not. xl. years old.
Therefore it is to be rejected and put away as a new fangled doctrine and
scismaticall: therefore come back again into the old fathers steps as well
in faith and religion, as godly conversation and living or a greater plage is
at hand. Also where the said Preacher did recite certain abuses of the said
Church as talking, biyng and sellinge, feightinge and brawlinge (although these
be very 7
evil and worthy much rebuke) yet there be worse abuses, as blaspheming God
in lyinge Sermons, polluting the Temple with Schismatic service, destroying
and pullyng down holy aulters, that were set up by good blessed men, and
there the sacryfice of the blessed Mass ministered according to the order of
Christ's catholycke Church. Yea where the alter stood of the holy Ghost, the
new Bishops have made a place to set their tales upon, and there sit in the
judgment of such as be Catholycke and live in the fear of God. Some they
deprive from their liuinges, some they commit to prison, except they will
forsake the Catholic faith, and embrase a faith and religion that hais no
foundation laid by general Counseil, nor blessed fathers in times past but
invented by Heretics that do not agree one with another nor them selfs. Thus
the Bishops that now be, have abused the Church, and polluted it as the
Prophet Hiere. sais: they have put offendicles in the house of God and
polluted it. Also the said Preacher in his Sermon at Paul's Cross did
declare the virtue of obedience to be much decayed in these our days: but he
leaves out who they be that cause disobedience. For there is none more
disobedient then the new Bisshops Math.
and Preachers now a days, which disobey the universal Church of Christ: the
which Church whosoever will not obey, our Savior in the Gospel commaundes us
to take them as infidels. As where the universal Church of Christ commaundes
Mass and seven Sacraments as necessary for our salvation, they call it
abomination with their blasphemous mouths: where the Church commaundes to
fast, they command to eat: where the Church commaundes continual prayer of
the Clergy, they call it supersticion and blind ignorance: where the Church
commaundes the Clergy to live in chastity, they command and exhort the
Clergy to marriage: where the Church and all laws civil and canon, yea the
laws of this Realm do prohibit marriage of Priests, they allow marriage of
priests obeying no law but follow their own carnal lust. Yea where the Queen
hais given straight commandment to abstain from flesh in Lent and other
days commanded by the Church, these new Preachers and Protestants have eaten
flesh openly to the great sclaunder of other: so they obey neither the Queen
nor the church: so that almighty God complains by his Prophet Esai, tota die
blasphematur nomen meum Esa. 62.
with these men God is continually blasphemed. woe be to you sais Esai that
call good evil, and evil good, putting darkness light, and light darkness,
Esai. 5. Ezech. 3.
as by Ezechiell sais almighty God: the Priests have contemned my law and have
polluted my Sanctuary. Also O see the Prophet does say: the bread that they
do offer is full of mourning* and all that cat there of shall be defiled. We may
see how they contemn all that blessed fathers, holy Martirs and Saints have
decreed: they disobey all that have been virtuous and good in Christ's
catholic church. As now of late they have invented a new way to make Bishops
and Priests, and a manor of service and ministracion, that Saint Augustine
never knew. Saint Edmund, Lanfranc, Saint Anselme, nor never one Bishop of
Canturburie, sauinge only Crammer, who forsook his profession as Apostata: so
that they must needs condemn all the Bishops in Canturbury, but Crammer, and
he that now is, all the Bishops in york sauinge Holgate and he that now is:
although 9
Saint wil^^^d, Saint willyam have been taken for saints and were bishops in
york. In Cou^ntree and Lichfelde. Saint Chad was Bishop and many blessed
Bishops. And he that is Bishop now, can find not any one that was made as he
is, nor of his religion. Therefore he must prove, al Bishops of Lichfelde
were deceived, walked in biyndnes and ignorance: or else he that now is, must
needs be deceived and be in blindness. In Duresine have been many good fathers,
but he that is now Bishop, can not find any one Predecessor in that see that
was of his religyon, and made Bishop after such fort as he was: so that he that
now is must take in hand to condemn all the Bishops before him, that they were
in ignorance and blindness, or else they will come to his condemnation at the
day of judgment. And this in all Bishoprics in England, some can find one,
and some none, that ever was of their religion. What arrogance may be thought
in those men that will take in hand to contemn so many blessed fathers, all to
be in blindness? But now they say, they have found a light and reform
religyon according to the primitive Church. Then seeing they reform religion so
well (as they say) it were meet as they forsake all the religion that their
predecessors used, as Mass, Mattins, ministracion of 10
sacraments: that they should also forsake houses, ^arkes, lands, and revenues
that their predecessors had, and go from place to place for Gods sake and
preach, and th^n were some liklyhode of reformation: or else it may be called
rather a deformation, then a reformation.

In Christ's Church hais ever been a succession of Bishops from the Apostles
time to this day, in every see. And Tertullian says: if in any see there be a
Bishop that walks not in his fathers steps, he is to be counted a bastard, and
no true inheritor in Christ's Church. Saint Cypryan does 11
say: they that be made Bishops out of the order of the Church, and not by
tradition and ordinance of the Apostles, coming by succession from time to
time, are not Bishops by the will of god: ^ut thieves and murderers coming to
kill the flock of Christ with heresy and lies. And where the said Preacher
does affirm greater matters, then the brinning of Paul's to have chanced in
time of supersticion and ignorance (as the Church of Paul's was ^rent in the
first year of Steven, and the Steple of Paul's set on fire by lyghtninge in
the 12
time of king Henry the vi.) they that count that to be the time of
supersticion and ignorance, when God was served devoutly night and day, the
people lived in the fear of god every one in his vocation, without reasoning
and contencion of matters of religion, but referred all such things to
learned men in general counsels and universities, there to be disputed: then
was the commandments of God, and virtue, expressed in living, now all is in
talk and nothing in living: then was prayer, now is prating: then was
virtue, and now is vice: then was buildinge up of Churches, houses of religion,
and hospitals (where prayer was had night and day, hospitalitye kept and the
poor relieved) now is pulling down and destroying such houses, where God
should be served, hospitality kept, and the poor releiued: by means whereof
Gods glory is destroyed, and the commen wealth impouerished: then was plenty of
all things, now is scarceness of all things: therefore Operibus credit, the
fruit will show whether then was supersticion and ignorance Osee
or now in these days. Forther: where the true word of god is taught, the
holy ghost does so work there with, that virtue does increase: but as the
Prophet sais, sicut populus ita and Sacerdos, as the people be, so God sendes
them Priests. Hier. 8. Hier. 1.
Apprehenderunt mendacium and nolueru^t reuerti, the people have apprehended a
lie and will not come back, but trust in liyng Sermons which will not profet
them, as almighty God says by Esai. 2.
his Prophet Hiere. thinkinge they have done well because they have done these
abominations says Esai. 6
God by his Prophet Hieremi: so as the Priests be, so be the people: blinded
in herisie, as God sais by his Prophet Esai: that their hearts do not
understand, their eyes do not see, their ears be stopped for hearing the
truth: so that this may well be called the time of supersticion and
ignorance, calling darkness light, and light darkness, that which is evil
good, and good evil. And for the brinning of Paul's Church which he speaks of
was ^^
in time of civil war, and not destroyed by thandes of God as it was at this
time. Whosoever reads the Chronicles shall perceive that and this be not like:
Therefore beware of false Prophets and Preachers which come with fair words
in their mouths of the Gospel, but mark the fruits that comes of their
preachinge: how they have set the people in such case that no prayer is used,
no fasting little alms deeds, all liberty used. What disobedience children be
in against their parents, how untrusty servants be, what swearinge and
blaspheming of God is used of all people? what theft, whoredom, craft,
subtiltye and deceit: these be fruits that come of this new fanglet doctrine.
Therefore return back again to the steps of good fathers before us: be not
carried away as S. Paul sais with a strange and diverse doctrine, embrace the
religion and faith taught in Christ's Church from time to time continually,
and frame your living accordingly, or else Gods 14
vengeance hanges over your heads, ready suddenly to fall upon you: so sais
the Scripture and let this token of brinninge of Paul's be an example and token
of a greater plage to follow except ye amend.

A CONFVTACION OF AN ADdicion, with an Appologye written and east in the
streets of West Chester, against the causes of burnyug Paul's Church in
London: which causes, the reverend Bishop of Duresme declared at Paul's Cross
^. Iunij. 1561.
OUr Savior Christ when the Devil spoke the truth plainly, did not confute or
gain say it: but when he did it frowardly, Christ rebuked him sharpelye. As
when the devil said: Jesus of Nazareth, what Luc. 4
have we to do with thee, art thou comen to destroy us? I know that thou art
the holy one of god. He did not refuse nor deny that truth which he spoke: but
when the devil tempted him, to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple, be rebuked him quickly, because he alleged ye true scripture
maliciously. So it is Math. 4 Truth must be truly vttred.
not sufficient to do a good deed barely, or speak the truth only, except it
be done rightly, and with such circumstances, as be necessarily required to
make it good: as that it be from the heart, and for Gods cause willingly. etc.
In like manner where this scauenger sweping the streets with his books (as a
fitte^ brom and officer thereto) hais spoken the truth, not truly (because it
is for an evil purpose, and frowardly) I shall pass over it with silence: but
where he follows his master, the father of lies, in falsifiyng the truth, or
racking the Scripture subtly, I shall by gods grace let the world see his
iugling, and by truth truly uttered, disclose his shameless lyinge. The first
examples that he bringes, declaring how god does iustlye plague the obstinate
sinners, that will not repent after many warninges given, are true all: but
being alleged to bring us back to Poperye, and for another purpose then God
our Lord hais taught them, they be craftelye misused, and ye see whose
fotesteppes be followed. And as he uses them to persuade us to supersticion: so
they may, and ought to be used specially, for maintainynge true religion. The
Rhetoricians teach, that such kind of beginninges as may be applied to two
contrary parts, are fauty. Therefore saying I may use the self same reasons
and words, that he ha^s from the beginning hitherto, to train us to love and
embrase our godly reformed religion, he can not much crake of his wyselye
placed examples or reasons. But I will not stycke with him in such small
points as these, although they be fautes: but I will join with him in matters
of weight and those thief points of religion which he hais touched, and we
differ from him and his sort in them.

Committinge the rule and government of 1
his Church to the Bishops. etc. THe first is concerning thautority and
government given to Bishops over Gods Church: wherein his words are not so
untrue, as they conteyne a false doctrine and meaning in them. If ye think
that I to boldly enter to judge his meaning, confer these words with such as
follow in his own writing (wherein untruly he claims those privileges to his
Bishops which neither he nor they are able to justify) and there at large ye
shall easlye perceive what he means by these few words here. But I will
follow him where away he leads me, and because he does here but briefly
touch it I shall likewise shortly pass over it, and more thoroughly search it,
where he does more at large press it. In the beginning of their late reuyued
tyranny, and before they had obtained their long desired authority to ragne
over Kings and Princes, it was my chance to talk with one of their stoutest
Champions and of those that he calls the godly Bishops in prison. Among sundry
things that were to be redressed in talk as he thought, he took this self
same matter first and said it was not fit for any temporal officer to sit as
judge on any Priest or spiritual What autoritye Bishops have over the Church.
manne, specially in any spiritual matter. For the same cause began Tho. Beket
to rebel against his Prince: not sufferinge his Priests to be punyshed for
their murders and roberyes and now like good childer they follow his steps.
I asked why? for the laws were then as they be now: and both very well that
Justices in their Sessyons and Assizes might and should enquire who than
offended the civil laws and the order of religion establyshed, whether he
were Priest or other: he answered that in the xx. of the Acts of Thappostles
it was plain that God had set the Bishops to govern the Church. I said that
was another kind of government that Saint Paul there grauntes to Bishops, and
differs from that which kings or Princes claim and ought to have. No sais he
mark the words, and it is ad regendum Ecclesiam and regere regum est,
therefore Bishops have authority to rule as kings. No said I, if ye will be
judged by the word, the Greek word must be judge in this case: For in Greek
it was first written and spoken, and there will appear an other kind of
government, far diverse from that which belonges to Princes, the Greek word
in that place is (...). Which signifies, to feed, as the sheperde fedes his
sheep, and yet not without all government or authority, but only such a simple
kind of rule and autoritye as shepeherdes have over their flock. If ye will
confer one place of the scripture with another where this word is red or
found (which is the best kind of interpretinge the Scripture rightlye, as S.
Austin teaches) and see what kind of government it signifies there, than this
place shall more easily be understand.

Feed the flock that is among you, sais i. Pet. 5.
Saint Peter. Feed my sheep sais our savior Christ to Peter. Where, and in
other Joan. 21
like places also, the same Greek word that is commenly translated in the
Acts regere to rule, is put and signifies as ye ^s to feed. The same word is
aplied also to Math. 2.
our savior Christ in the Gospel, where is declared plainly, what kind of
authority it signifies. Thou Bethleem in the land of Judah, thou art not the lest
of the Princes of Judah: for out of thee, shall Joan. 10
there come to me a Prince, that shall rule or feed my people Israel. Also I
am the good shepeherd sais Christ: where likewise is the same Greek word
placed. Than if Christ our Lord had any temporal jurisdiction, or these other
places, using the same Greek word contain any such thing: they might have
some appearaunce to clame their usurped authority: else it is not probable to
give the same word in that place alone that meaning contrary to so many other
places having the self same word. Nay further to say: did not our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ refuse this wordlye autoritye himself when it was offered
unto him, and the one brother desired him to divide the enheritaunce betwixt
him and his other brother: he would not but said: Luke xii.
who appointed me a deuider betwixt you: as though he should say. It is not my
calling nor belonges to me, his kingdom was not of this world: but he came
to teach his fathers will, likewise he taught his Appostles not to challenge
this superiority, saying: the Princes of Luk ^xii
the people have rule over them, but it shall not be so among you: but he
that would be the greatest, shall be the least, that they might follow his
steps truly. But the manifest place where the proper signification of this
word appears, Ephe. 4.
is in Paul: Where he reckens what officers God hais set in his Church, and
sais: First he set some Apostles, other Prophets, some Euangelystes, other
shepeherdes and teachers. These shepeherdes (which are noted there, by the
same word that they claim their authority by) are placed by S. Paul, almost the
lowest officers in Gods Church: than much more they can not have the highest
rowme in the commonwealth and Church both. I know the Greek Poets attribute
this word to kings, but I trust they build not on heathen men's writings,
and yet that name there is given them, for their fatherlye love toward their
Subjects: rather then their royal authority. But compare them with shepeherdes
that keep our sheep in deed, of whom they have their name, and easily their
nature, property, office, and authority shall be spied, Gods people are called often
in the Scripture, sheep (as we thy people Psa. 79.
and the sheep of thy pasture will praise thee) and their teachers are called
shepeherdes: because the one should in living follow the simplicitye and
obedience of sheep, and the other, the careful pains and diligence of
shepeherdes in fedynge, healynge, releuinge, guydynge, correctynge. etc. Look
than what temporal autoritye the sheepeherde hais over his sheep: and the
same spiritual power have the Bishops over the Church. The good shepeherde
will not let his sheep feed in hurtful and roating pastures, but will remove
them to good feding grou^des: No more will Gods good shepeherbes let Gods people
and his brethren be poisoned with false doctrines, but by his authority root
out and confute them. The true shepeherd if he see the wolf or fox come to
devour the flock, he will watch and defend the fold: so should the good
Bishop by his office. The good shepeherde will save the scabbed sheep, bring
home the stray, and feed the weaks and hungry: so will the good Bishop according
to his duty. The good shepeherde if his sheep be unruly, will set his dog to
pull him down and tame him: if any can not be healed, he will cut it of, and
kill it, for infecting the rest: so will Gods good Bishop with the threatninges
of Gods vengeance, pull down the unbridled stomaches of the people, make them
to tremble and quake at Gods judgments, and if any can not be reclaymed, he
will cut him of by excomunication, separate him from the fellowship of gods
people, not suffer him to communicate the Lords Supper, which is the band of
brotherly love, and forbid all good folk his company, y^ through such shame
he may be brought to knowledge his faut and amend, that he may ioifully be
received as a brother in the company and fellowship of Gods people again, and
communicate with them in prayer, doctrine, discipline, and sacraments as
before. In these points the autoritye of Bishops is so great, that it extendes
to Prince, pope, and prelate, and none is exempt, but as they be subject to
Gods word, sacraments and doctrine, so must they obey Gods true minister and
discipline. As for example, the good Bishop Ambrose did sharplye correct and
excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius for a rash murder done by his
commandment, and whether he is more praise worthy that would or durst rebuke
and excommunicate so mighty a Prince: or the good Emperor that willingly
submitted him self, and obeyed his correction, it may be doubted, the power and
authority than of Bishops is spiritual, belonginge to man's soul as their
office and ministry is, and it stands cheiflye in these two points: in
doctrine and disciplyne. As the temporal officer in the commonwealth hais not
the swearde committed to him in vain, but to defend the good, and punish the
evil: to smite the ennemy, and save the subject, to prison the froward, and
loose the giltles: so hais gods minister in his Church full power and authority
to teach sound doctrine and confut the false, to beat down hawty minds, and
raise the weak, to bind and loose the conscience by virtue of Gods word, to
throw into hell the obstinate, or lift into heaven the penitent, to cast out of
Gods Church, and receive again such as he rightlye judges by the Scriptures
mete for mercy or justice. And as Saint Peter calls Christ our lord the
shepeherd and Bishop of our souls: so those Bishops that follow Christ will
challenge no more autoritye to them, than their Master Christ had.

I am sure this pleases him well to hear, specially of my mouth, that such
spiritual autoritye is given to spiritual ministers to execute on all sorts
of people: for as they belie us in other things, saying: we teach false
doctrine, and move the people to sin, so they say that in deniyng them their
usurped authority, we take from them, that which is due to them. Yet in
granting thus much unto them, I mean as they teach (that Priests and
Bishops have this power of them selves, or when they be greased with the
Popes oil, that they may execute it when and on whom it pleases them) but
that God works it by them, as his wisdom thinks good, when they use them as
he appointed them. For as the judge or pursauant that bringes the kings pardon
to save a thief on the galowes, is but the Princes servant, and not the
chief Savior and delyuerer of the condemned, so in this absoluing and raising
up the sinful clogged conscience, the chyefe praise and work is gods, and the
Bishop or minister is but Gods servant, goinge his message by his word and
commandment to save and loose them whom it pleases God to offer this grace
unto.

But me think I hear him say: If Bishops in temporal causes have not this
authority, why sit they so often by commission now under ye gospel in temporal
matters. In deed for so much as they sit by commission, it proves that it belonges
not to their office, as appointed by god, but in y^ they serve the Prince as
they be bounden. Who wills and commaundes the^ by Commission to serve in such
place and time. The Bishops office is chiefly taught in the scripture by the
holy ghost: and from him he receives his Commission, and is not invented by
Pope or man. If ye compare together Saint Paul's Bishop described in Timothe
and Ti^us, with such toys as the Popes Prelates are ordained to play and feed
the people withal: they are as like as black and white. Saint Paul's Bishop
is in the first place licensed to marye, the Popes are forbidden wives, and
allowed hoores for money. Saint Paul's Bishop must preach: the Popes think it
shame to stand in the Pulpit. Saint Paul wills his Bishop to have his children
obedient with all reverence: the Popyshe Priests Children sit by other men's
fires, and brought up most wantonly. The Pope hais commanded his Bishops to
christen belles and ships, to halow Miters and staves, ringes, Church
yardes, Altars, Superaltares, albes, vestimentes, Chalices, corporas, Palms,
ashes, candels, water, fire, bread, oil, cream, flowers, strippes, swords,
crowns, fingers. etc. This is their holle life, and yet not one such word
appointed them by God in Scripture. What is this, but to forsake Gods
ordinance, and follow their own deuyses, to prefer man and his doings, to the
wisdom of the holy ghost. When he hais done all these things, he may say, he
hais served bis master the Pope, and done his commandment, but not one thing
that God biddes him.

Yet remaynes one doubt unanswered in these few words when he says, that the
gouernemente of the Church was committed to Bishops, as though they bad
received a larger and higher commission from god, of doctrine and discipline
tha^ other lawer priests or ministers have and thereby might challenge a greater
prerogative. But this is to be understand that the Privileges and superiorites
which Bishops have above other ministers, are rather granted by manne for
maintaining of better order and quietness in commen wealths, then commanded
by God in his word. Ministers have better knowledge and vtteraunce some than
other, but their ministerye is of equal dignitye. Gods commission and
commandment is like, and indifferent to all, Priest, Bishop, Archbishop,
Prelate, by what name so ever he be called: go and teach baptisinge in the
name of Mar. xvi. Joan xx.
the father, the Son, and the holy ghost. And again whose sins so ever ye
forgive, they are forgeuen, and what soeeuer ye loose in earth, it is loosed in
Act. xx.
heaven. etc. Likewise the Lords supper by whom soever being lawfully called,
it be ministered: it is of like strength, power and holiness, Saint Paul calls
the Elders of Ephesus together, and sais, the holy ghost made them Bishops to
rule the Church of god, he writes also to the Bishops of Philippos, meaning
the Ministers: for neither Ephesus nor Philippos were so great towns, but one
little. Byshopricke is a greater compass of ground, than they needed not many
Bishops, therefore this diuersitye of absoluing sins, invented by idle
brains, that a simple Priest may absolve some small ones, other greater
belong to the Bishop, Tharchbyshop clames an other higher sort, the rest and
fowlest sort, pertein to Popes and Cardinals, as the fathers and maintainers of
them: these I say are so foolish and childish to believe, that I think it not
nedeful to speak of the^, they Mynyster autoritye of like power, all
are not grounded on Gods word, and therefore must needs be untrue, and not to
be credited because our faith hangs only on the holy scripture, greadye
covetousness to enriche themselves, hais invented these as also the rest of
their supersticion which they term religion. Saint Ierom in his commentarye
on the. i. Chapter ad Tit sais: that a Bishop and a Priest is all one, and in
his Epistle ad Euagrium, he says: that the Bishop where so ever he be, he is of
the same power and Priesthood. Rome makes him not better, nor England makes
him worse. A Bishop is a name of office, labor, and pains, rather then of
dignytye, ease, wealth, or ydlenes. The word Episcopus is Greek, and signifies a
Scoutwatche, an ouerloker or Spy: because he should ever be watching and
warning, that the devil our enemy do not enter to spoil or destroy. And as
in war, the watchemen, Scoutes, or Spies, if they fall on sleep or be
negligent, they betraye their fellows, and deserve death? so in Gods Church, if
the Bishops watch not diligently, and save their sheep, God hais pronounced
sentens of death against them by his Prophet. I made thee a watch man to the
house of Israel sais the Lord: thou shall hear the word of my mouth, and
declare it them from me. If I say to the wicked, thou wicked, thou shall die,
and thou will not warn him to take Ezech. 33
head to his way, he shall die in his wickedness, but his blood I will require
of thee. But I think the holy Bishops he crakes so much of, have their
calling of the Dutche name, that signifies byts sheep: rather than of the
Greek, that teaches to save sheep by his painful diligence. If they were not
to much blinded in their own folyshnes, they might see in the last subsidye
granted in the time of their own raygne, that they grant those to be their
betters, and above them, from whence they receive their authority. The
Parliament geues them and their Collectours, power to suspend depryue, and
interdite any Priest that paies not the subsidy: In that doing they grant the
Parliament to be above them, and from it to receive their power. Yea further to
let them se how they be contrary to themselves, they give a lay man (as most
part of their Collecters were) power, to interdite, suspende and absolve a
Priest: which both be contrary to their own doctrine. I had not thought to
have said so much on these his few words, and yet much more hanges on this
their opinion of claming their usurped power above Princes and other ministers.
For if this their opinyon were true, that god gave them such authority over his
Church as they clame, it might be said on them, as the Poet sais, Ouem lupo
comisisti: that God had appointed wolves to keep his sheep.

There Saint James being Bishop, and there said Mass. ALas poor Mass that
hais no better a ground work to be bylte on than false lies, and so unlearned a
Proctour to speak for it. I pray you who helped Saint James at Mass, who
hallowed his Corporas, Superaltare, Chalice, vestimentes, etc. Who was deacon
and Subdeacon to read the Epistle and Gospel, who rang to the sacring and
served the pax: for I am as sure it was a solemn feast, and that these
things were done, as he is that S. James said mass. He that told you the
one, could have told you the other as well as this, if he had lust, and ye say
your Mass can not be said without these trinkettes. I pray you what Mass
was it? began it with a great R. of Requiem, or Scala coeli, or resurrexi: For
the plague, or murrion of beasts? part of a trentall, or for all christen
souls? if ye will have us to believe it ye must tell us some more. I pray you
also which Saint James was it, for we read of diverse of that name, both in the
Scripture, and other histories living at that time. It is not inoughe to say,
so it is: but ye must prove it, if ye will be believed. I pray you whose mass
as they term it used he, and of whose making was it? Chrisostomes or Basils,
Gregory's or Ambrose, or that which bears his own name of Saint James? what
language spoke he? Hebrewe, Greek, or Latin? these things must be proved before
your Latin popish patched Mass, by so many Popes in so many years, or it was
brought to his perfection, can be proved. Do they think that beccaus^ my
Lord Bishop, Master Docter, or such Scauingers, and corner crepers, as thi^
Champion is, say it is so, and deceive the people with lies privily in corners,
tha^^ none dare say against it openly, but al^^ their sayings must be
believed: I do no^^ take them to be of that autoritye or credit. But I will not
stand with him in all these narrow points, although I could keep him much play
in so doing. I agree that James brother of our Lord, was Bishop there at
Jerusalem as the ancient writers testifye: but that he said or did any thing
like the Popyshe ^louted Latin mass, that I utterly deny. For that the church,
alter, Superaltare, vesstiments, Chalyce. etc. should be hallowed before they
could have mass said in the^, on them, or with them, it is plain written in
their own law, de consecra distincto.i when they have proved that S. James had
these hallowed, how and by whom they were hallowed, than I will believe he said
their folish mass, and not before: for their mass can not be done without
them. Also if they will be believed, they must declare what order of mass he
used, was it Chrisostomes, Basils, Iustines, ^ertulians, Austins, Dionisius,
Isidorus, Gregory's, Rabanus, the Romans, or whose else? Surely all these were
unborn many years after Saint James died, that it could not be theirs, whi
(I am sure) some will say is there so many diverse sorts of so many holy
fathers to minister the Lords supper, and our holy Bishops of late have
burned so many innocents that would not use their only one disordert order of
massing, as though all other were heretical and schismatical (as they term
it) but that only one which they have devised, disguised and misused: yea
surely these diuersityes al be printed and to be had with many more godly
ones, and therefore they can not deny it: and because they be prynted, I will
not stand to rehearse them holly, for it were infinite. There is yet an other
liturgy in Print, (which word they call and vnlearnedly^ translate ever a
Mass) bearing the name of Saint James, but even in their late raging time of
madness, when they had gotten certain copies of these Greek liturgies, or
ministering the Lords supper, thinking to have printed them, and that it would
have stablyshed their doings: when in trial and translatynge them they see it
fall out otherwais and to make against them, they let it alone, and suppressed
it: like as the same holy father and Cardinal first prynted his book that
he wrote against king Henry the eight, to please the Pope wythall, and to
stir Themperoure to war against England, for falling from Popery, and after
his conscience accusing him to have done amysse, he burned all the books he
could come by, and yet now they be commonly sold to his shame as these
Liturgies be to theirs. Al these orders of ministering the Communion differ from
their Pope holy relic, their Latin mass in the chiefest points: that is
that the Priest prays not alone, nor in a strange language, eats not, nor
drinks up all alone, nor receyues it for other: sels it not for money, nor
swepes the Popes scalding house, his purgatory with it: but the people pray
with him in their mother tongue, receive with him for the coumforte of their
own souls, and not for pockye pigges, scalled horse, nor scabbed sheep,
neither making trentals or merchandise of it, but in remembrance of Christ's
death, who dyed for them.

But that Saint James never said the Popysh mass (as they would father it on
him) the Pope himself grauntes. Pope Gregory the first (called the great for
his great holiness and learning, in Epistula lib. 7. C^* 63.
comparison of the rest) sais that the Apostles consecrated the host only,
with the Lords prayer when they minystred. Than Saint James if he ministered
an^e thing at al there even by the Popes confession never said their latin
Mass, nor any thing like it. For that consecration in latin of theirs, hais
many long other prayers, crossinges and blessings, and supersticious
Ceremonies as all manne see beside the Lords prayer. And in that same self
Chapter of Gregorye, ye shall see other diuersites of Ceromonies and prayers
there rehearsed, wherein the latin mass differs from the Greek and other.
Wherefore it was not thought of old time to so many holy fathers, a wicked
thing to have diverse orders in ministering the communion, though our bloudye
butchers will not swerve an inche from their father of lies: but burn all that
gainsay them. How many toys, crossinges, blessings, blowinges, knockinges,
knelinges. bowinges, liftinges, sighinges, houstinges, tournynges and half
turninges, mockinges, mowings, slepynges, and apyshe playinges, soft
whisperyngs, and loud speakinges have we to consecrate our own devises with
all, or it can be getten done? Morcouer if Saint James should have used our
latin canon and priuitye of the Mass (as they term it) in his consecration or
any such like, he should have prayed to him self, and worshipped himself
being alive, which were a great absurdite to grant. For the latin canon and
preuity Saint James never said Mass.
of the Mass is full of praying to Saints, and names them particularly: among
whom Saint James is one himself. Than Saint James using the Lati^ Mass as
they say he did, he should hau^ prayed to himself: and worshipped him self
being alive: which I think when they advise themselves better, they will not
grant to be true, nor meet to be done: and with such wicked foolyshnes I
trust they will not burden Saint James withal. Furthermore it skils much what
language Saint James used: for our holy Bishops think it not mete that their
holy relyques should be uttered in our English tunge. Saint Paul sais, be
had rather speak five words that he i. Cor. 14.
understands, and to teach other, than ten thousand in a strange tongue,
our Prelates say, nay. None will prepare himself to war, e^cept he
understand what the trumpet blows: no more can any learn his duty to God, if
he understand not the thing that is taught, and the language. Our Prelates
says that blind ignorance is the mother of devotion: but Christ says: ye
err because ye know not the Scripture, Than ignorance is the cause of error.
By like God either understands not English, or else he is partial, and loves
not our English tongue so well as the latin: and yet to speak or understand
diverse languages is the gift of the bolye ghost. Surely if the holy ghost,
give the grace to speak and understand diverse languages, God can not bate
them that use any of them, nor disalowe the gifts of the holy ghost in any
man. We read (for they be turned into latin and printed) that other Countries
have used of old tinie, and yet do at this day their own language in
ministering the lords supper. Why than may not England do the same? What fault
have we made more than other? Chrisostomes order of the Communion Basils, and
that which bears the name of Saint James, were written in the Greek, which
the people understood, and answered in the same language. The Sirians,
Athiopians, Armenians, Moscouites, and the dominion of Prestor Joan do at this
day and ever did use their own language when they ministered, and out of them
are turned latin that easily it may be seen how we differ. The good Christian
Emperor Justinian commaundes plainelye in his civil laws. Novel constitut
124. and. 126. that all things should be done in the Churches in those
languages which were known in the Countries, and also that the words of
baptism and the lords supper should be spoken in a loud voice, that
thereby the devotion of the hearers might be stirred up: which al (although
they were written a thousand years sins) our holy Papists deny and say it
was never done, nor ought to be done, nor that Princes have any such
autoritye to command or medell in. Pope Pius the second bears witness
aeneas syluius Pisto^ Boeica. Ca. 13.
that the Sclauons when they made suit to minister in their own tunge, and the
Pope made curtsie to grant it, a voice was heard from heaven, that every
spirit and language should praise God, and so it was granted them to use
their own language. The Popyshe kind of marriage although the rest was latin,
yet the best part was English. I N. take thee N. to my wedded wife. etc. I N.
take thee N. to my wedded husband. etc. If this was well, why not the rest
also. If in making promises we use that language which we understand, why
should we not do it to understand what God commaundes us? Is a promise to man
more to be considered than that which is made to God? If these things should
be denied, they be in Print, that every man may read, and therefore I will not
stand long in rehearsinge of them: Are these tongues more holy than ours,
that the holy misteryes may be used in them and not in ours: I leave out
the Boemians and Waldenses, which have ^sed to communicate in their own
language many (though not al) these. C C C years. The Germans, the Italians,
and the French I pass over because it is not old. But these Countries they
will say, are in the East part of the world, and parts of the Greek Church,
which never was subject to their holy father the Pope, and in these things
they do err, but the west Church (worshippinge the Pope) would never suffer
any such thing. In thus saying they prove the Pope to be worse than the
Turk, Presster Joan, the Sophi, or any Heathen Prince that will not suffer
Gods people to worship their God in their own language as they do. It is
great marvel to me why our holy Prelates will not have the people to pray
in English seeing the common rude sort and altogether unlearned in all the
far North parts of the Realm, even the borders: have ever used the lords
prayer, the articles of our faith, and ten commandments, and yet do in
Englysh meter differing nothing from the true sense of the scripture. They
never learned them in latin, and can not nor will not learn that they
understand not. Surely Gods wisdom in their rude simplicitye, does confound
these proud Prelates wicked Poperye.

Yet is there remaining one of ye foulest lies that is commenlye red or written
in the Popes testament, the decrees whereon they bylde their faith: which if
this proctour and all his partakers can prove to be true, I will say with
them: It is written de consecra distincto. i. ca. Iacobus that Saint James y^
brother of our lord, Bishop of Jerusalem, and Eusebius Bishop of Cesaria made
their mass. If this have any likeness of a truth in it, let the world judge.
Saint James was Bishop of Jerusalem and there lived continually, not wandringe
into other countries, as other Apostles did, but there suffered martyrdom:
being thrown down from the pynacle of the Temple, where a Fuller smote out
his brains, with a clubbe. In Jerusalem then their natural speech was
Hebrewe, and the prayers that they used in the Temple were only the
Scriptures, and in the Hebrew tongue, as the Jews do to this day, in their
Synagoges: (wherein they prove themselves better than y^ Papists, which in
their Churches have few prayers of the Scripture, but many foolish ones
devised of their own brain, and in a language that the people understand
not.) Therefore when they have proved that the Latin tongue was used in
Jerusalem, or that Saint James prayed in Latin (although I doubt not but he
had the gift of tounges as well as other Apostles had) I shall than believe
them. The order of the Communion which is abroad in the name of saint James
is in Greek: but that he wrote or spoke latin in Jerusalem, there is no
probability in it. And if he made our latin mass than, that should be used
now through out the world, why would he make another in Greek so far unlike to
it? both can not be true that he made one in Greek, and another in latin, so
far unlike one to the other. Afterward the gloose upon this text of the Popes
decree, before rehearsed de consecra distincto. i. says: that Saint James made
the Canon of the mass, and Eusebius added other pieces to it afterward: but
beside that inconvenience which I spoke of before (that Saint James than
should pray to himself, if that were true) a greater untruth would follow,
that is to pray to Saints, that were unborn, some C. some CC. some. CCC. year
after and more: as to Cipriane, Cornelius, Laurence, Chrisogonus, Damianus,
which and such like women as Luce, Agnes, Cecili. etc. are put in their Canon,
or priuitye of their latin mass. Is this like that Saint James a saint
himself would pray to a saint (if they were saints) that was yet unborn so
many years after his death. But it may be thought that they knew these
things to be so foolish that if they were openly read and understand, they
would be laughed at and despised, and therefore they inioyne their ^haplaynes
to speak softly when they ^ay these things that none should hear them what
they say. If it were good, it were no danger in letting it be heard, for it
would make them good that heard it (for faith comes by hearing) though their
opinyon is that it would be despised. But surely hearing is the way to make
men good.

Yet folowes a greater inconvenience if this Popes decree were true. For as the
gloss there sais, that Saint James made their Canon, so it sais that Eusebius
which lived (as he sais) under the Emperor Iulianus Apostata, should make
the rest. How can their great relic the mass than be. M. D. year old, as
they crake it to be. This counsel of of the Apostles where Saint James said
mass (as this Proctour sais) was about l. year after Christ our lord was
borne, and not full. xx. years after he was crucified (as many histories do
testify) but Eusebius lived under Julian The Emperor CCCix. year after the
birth of our savior Christ: and now sins Christ's birth, it is. M. D. lxii.
Tha^ take CCClx. out of M. D. lxii. and so remains but. M. CCii So by their
own accoumpte they lie CCClx. year in the auncientye of their mass.

But yet a greeter lie, Eusebius was a Grecian and never wrote in Latin, that
any history makes mention of: how than wrote he their latin mass? Yea where
Gregory Bishop of To. in the Epistle before alleged sais: that one Scholasticus
made the prayers of their Canon, how can this be true that Saint James made
Lib. Epistula. 7, Ca. 63.
it? darre they deny that which the holiest of the Popes their fathers, sais
is so.

But because they charge us with contrarietes and diuersites of opinions, and
are most in that fault themselves. I will yet let them see more where in they
dyffer among themselfes: Isidorus lib. i. de origin officiorum Ca v. as Faber
alleges him, Joan Faber de missa ver ^ger.
sais that Saint Peter ordained first the order of the Mass or prayers, with
which the consecration is made, and that the holle world followed the same
order, and this was done by Peter at Antioche as the same Joan Faber sais Than
how is that true that saint James and Eusebius made it at Jerusalem? nay how
can any of these sayings agree with Platina one of y^ Popes sworn men which
affirms, that Pope Sixtus appointed the Sanctus to be song. Gregory the
Kirieeleeson: Telesphorus, Gloria in excelsis: Ierom the Epistle and Gospel.
Leo the censing: Innocentius. i. the pax. Sergius the Agnus. etc which all
lived a great sort of years a sunder, and from the first to the last, before
it could be patched together, it was six hundredth year. For Gregory was Pope
six hundredth year after Christ was borne. Other sorts of reckening there be,
which Pope added which part to the Mass, and they agree not on the names,
but in the number of years there is no great difference: For it was seven
hundredth year after Christ before they had perfectly patched it together, and
brought it in estimacion as appears by these reckninges. Where is now their.
M. D. year they crake so much on? when they have learned to speak the truth,
and agree among themselves: they may better blame other that do not. I will
not lay all their lies and disagreeinges to their charge, for it were to long,
but when they have answered these, then they shall have more. In the mean time
these are sufficient to let them see that have eyes, and be not wilfully
blind, how vain their bragginge lies be when they crake that their
supersticion which they term their religion, is so old: and that the contrary
was never herds of unto now a few years past.

There is another sutteller sort of Papists, and when they see these things
to be so foolyshe, that they have no good ground work, nor able to be
defended, they say, that Christ himself said the first mass: and yet that is
as untrue as the rest. For the reasons that I made against the canon of S.
James (as they call it) ye same may more justly be applied for our Savior
Christ. I am sure they will not say that he eat all alone, nor prayed to any
saints, nor what kind of mass it was, they are not able to show, and prove
it so to be. I grant, and most true it is: that our Savior Christ instituted
the holy communion, or the lords supper (as saint Paul calls it) but for
any thing done by him to prove their mass I utterly deny. In his less
supper be sacryficed not for the quick and the dead as they do in their
mass: but that sacrifice was offered by himself in his own body and bloodshed
on the cross, on good Fridaye, the next day after that he instituted his holy
supper, the night before, and bad them do that in remembrance of him unto his
cominge again. This is that which we desire all to follow: this is that,
which condemns their mass: this is that, which we would have all to eat and
drink of that bread and cup with the mynister, as he did with his
Apostles, and as Saint Paul wills the Corinthians to do: and not one Priest
to stand liftinge it over his head to be worshipped, and the people to stand
gasing at it, and be content with loking at it: and when they receive to take
both the bread and the cup, and not to rob Gods people of the one half of
his supper, ye blood of our Savior Christ, which he shed for the lay people,
as well as for Priests: and badde them drink it, as well as the Priests:
for he loved them, and dyed for them as well as for the Priests. And
Priests can no more save them selves, than they can, but have the same savior
that they have, and must go to heaven the same way that they do.

And because they crake so proudly of the auncientye of their mass, let me see
in what ancient writer they read of it or find the word written. I know they
would feign have the word to be Hebrewe: but if it be so, it rather makes
against them, than with them. For if it Mass.
be a sacrifice of the Jews, than it is taken away by our Savior Christ,
and fulfilled by him, as all other sacryfices of Moses be* or else they be
Jews using those sacrifices, which god forbad to use at these days after the
coming of christ* Thappostle to the Ebrewes sais, that if the Priesthode be
taken away and translate to another sort, than the law is taken Hebre. 7.
away to: but the Priesthood of Aaron is taken away and all his sacrifices
(or else Christ is comen in vain) why than the law of sacrificing must be
taken away to, as Thapostle there sais. If they consider the nature of the
Hebrewe word, they would not strive so much about it. They glory much that
the name of their mass is Missah in Ebrew, and should be written deutero 16
and thereof should Missa come in latin, or else the Ebrew name to remain still.
The word Missah signifies a free will gift that a man offers willinglye unto
the lord: and not only that which the Priests offer of themselves, but also
which any other manne frelye bringes to be offered, Therefore if this word or
place make for them, it proves that all manner of men may say Mass: For every
manne may willinglye bring what he lust to offer: and than Priests have
spunne a fair threde in alledginge this against them selfs, and proving that
every man may say their mass. But the word signifies also a lyftyng up, as
some do take it, and therefore they prove their elevation by it. Thus they be
driven to hard shifts, that they can not well tell what to make of it. They are
well content with either signification or both, if they might keep it, for the
one biddes men bring, and they would gladly take: the other to lift up as a
sacryfice, and that maynetaynes their state. Read the place, and than judge
the meaning. Thou shall keep the holy day of wekes, sais Moises (that is
Witsonday. vii. wekes after Easter) and Deuteronomy. 1^.
thou shall bring a gift of thine own fre^ will, according to thy power as the
lord hais blessed thee with much or little.

This free gift is called Missah, and the people must give it: than if it make
any thing for mass, it makes also that the people should say mass: for they
bring every one this gift as they be able. The Priests say not mass frelye
but for money, and therefore it can not be called a ^rewil gift on their part.
But because they are delited with gifts, and will not say mass freelye, they
rather ground them selves hereon, that they may not only sell, but raise the
price of them, and ^ift it high over their heads, They may speak well of the
Gospel if they would ^r had any good natures in them. For their Mass was never
so honored, nor ^t so great a price as the gospellers have made it, at a
hundredth marks, where they will sell it for a grote, and God forbid that ever
it be better chepe. Surely if it be so good (as they report it to be) it is to
good cheap yet, and they with selling so good cheap, have brought it out of
estimation. A good thing can not be to dear: and surely he that will lie
broilynge in purgatory for sparinge. i. d. a grote, or x. s. for a trentall,
he hais few friends: and if he be able, to pay it and will not, I will never be
sorry for him, though he ly there still. There is an other Ebrew word called Mas,
that signifies a tribute, which may well be applied to it (because they be
delited with ancient names, I shall help them) for it is the greatest tax
that ever was laid on y^ world. Al princes heathen and christened laid
together, never took such a tribute of the people, as the Pope and his
collectours do by mass. For mass Princes have given wholle countries, noble
men their land, and the people their goods, they have disherited their
children, and impoueryshed them selves to feed the Popes chaplains and bye
masses. Alas dear penny worthes, forse vile a thing. The Ducthe word Mess
helps them well to, which signifies a fre mart, or fare for all people to
resort to with all wares to bie and sell, and with such lybertye, that those
evil men which darre not, nor may not come near at other times without
danger, than may frelye go and come without harm, after that the market be^
be ronge, as they use. So is their mass. What ware so ever is brought for it,
it is welcome, they refuse none, wolle, bacon, chese, Freers never refused, and
be he never so wicked, it is not denied him, It is a salve for all sores, and
heales all wickedness and sorrows that fall either on manne or beast. They would
feign have it ancient, and therefore they seek the old Autours where the
word Missa may be found. They allege Ignatius, Clemens, Dionisius, Sozomenus.
etc. where they would make men believe it were red. In deed in translating
these out of Greek, they use the same word, but he that hais read his Greks
grammar can sone understand that there is no such word in Greek. Therefore as
Thinterpretour does foolyshlye use the word: so foolyshlye they follow and
believe him: The word is latin, and is used in no latin writer commenlye before
Gregorye the first, who lived six hundredth year after Christ, save twice or
thryse only in Ambrose in his Epistle, and yet he lived. CCCC. year Lib. 5
Epistula. 33.
after Christ. Than they have not so great cause to crake of auncientye of
the thing, nor of the word, seeing neither Ebrewe, Greek, nor Latin, can be
proved to have such a word in such a signification, the space of four hundredth
year after Christ, no nor than neither, for though Ambrose use the word yet
it signifies far otherways, as Ambrose order of communion well declares. I
will not stand to rehearse the manifold interpretacion of the latin word, and
what the meaning of it is, least ye wold^ laughe, herafter if occasion be given
by them, I shall more fully entreat of it.

One thing I would demand o^ master Proctour, and if his answer b^ not
ready, I am content he ask counsel, so that he answer substancially, that i^
may abide trial. Good fridaye mass, why does it differ from all the year
beside? one of these iii. must needs follow* either that one mass only is
good, and the rest naught, or the rest good, and tha^ naught, or else (as I am
sure he will saye^ ^oth are good. If both be good, tha^ there may be diverse
sorts of them: I Good Fridayes Mass.
there may be two diverse sorts, and bot^ good, why may there not be a third
or fourth as good? Why than may not the order now appointed in English be goo^
to? On good friday there is neither Epistle, nor Gospel, Gloria in exelsis, n^
Creed, Sanctus, nor Agnus, Canon n^ priuity, crossing, toying, nor blowynge nor
their words of consecration, pa^ ^or Ite missa est, not so much as Dominus
v^bis cuna: but straight after confiteor, he leapes post haist over all, to the
Pater noster. Surely if this be good one day it may be used oftener: and this
agrees best with that that Gregory sais: Thap^stles consecrated only with the
Lords prayer: and therefore it seems that if any of their masses should be
good, that this goes next to the best and simpliest sort, without all
curiosity. If they may do all perfectlye this day, without their canon, than
their canon and priuitie is not of so great force as they make it to be For
sure if this be well on this day, it may be well on other days to, for God is
no chaungelynge, nor he commaundes not one sort of communicatinge his supper to
day and another to morrow, but always such a one which agrees with his word.
Their commen answer and solution is known, but it will not serve: they must
provide better stucte, or else their doings be foolysh. But to make an end of
this great controuersye for thauncientye of their mass, ye shall hear it
determined by a miracle from heaven. When there were diverse sorts of masses,
as they be called, used in latin in diverse places, as at Millane and every
where almost generally there was used, Saint Ambrose order of Communion which
there continues to this day, and Gregory's order was used also in other
places: the Pope to determine the matter, would try whether should be allowed
through his Dominion (For Gregory's was not used at all in France) and it was
thought shame that Ambroses order being but a Bishop should be preferred to the
Popes. Therefore he took either of their mass books as they term them, in an
Evening said them on the Altar, locked the Church dodres, and desired god to
declare by some miracle whether book should be used generally of all sorts. In
the morninge Gregory's book leaves were found scattred al y^ Church over: and
Ambroses lay still: the doors be^nge fast locked all night (as he sais:) but
wise men may doubt. This miracle master Pope like a wise expounder of dreams
sais, that as the leaves were forne and blown abroad all the Church over: so
should Gregory's book b^ used through out the world. For this was done by God,
as well their great God Bell, did eat up all the meat^ that was set before
him al night as Daniell writes. But that a man may no^ be wiser than Mounser
Pope, I would int^rprete this great miracle thus: That God was angry with
Gregory's book, and therefore rent it in pieces, and scattered it abroad: and
the other as good, lay sound untouched, and at the least so to be preferred.
This was done by pope Adrian the first more than vii. C. lxxvii. years after
Christ, and thus long their holy mass was in controversy before it was
determined. Than it lackes much of M. D. as they untruly and proudlye crake.
These things are not written by any new men or heretics as it pleases them
to term them, but by their own catholic fathers: Durandus and Nauclerus.
Yea Polychronic. lib. vii. ca x. writes that the white obserua^t munkes use by
their profession Saint Ambrose order, and not Gregory's even at these days:
wherefore their mass is not general. I would they did make ^n en^^ of
liynge, that we might ^ake an end of reprou^nge them: and ^oth join together
in worshipping the ^uing God only, and believing his holy lord before al other.
Saint Austin in ^ like controuersye of religion betwixt ^m and y^ Maniches
prays thus. O great and almighty god and god of al goodness, whom we ought to
think and believe that ^ou art inviolable, incorr^ptible, and Retract. i. cap.
xv.
^^mutable: O triple unity which all the ^^urch does worship, I having
expe^ence of thy mercy to ward me, pray ^ee humblye, that thou w^^te not
suffer them to dyffer from me in thy religion, and worship of thee, with
whom syns I was a child I have had a most special agreement in fellowship of
men. Amen. God grant us all this to pray and diligently endeavor our
selves to seek this unity of religion in worshipping the living God only as
he hais taught us in his holy word, and no other ways, for his sons sake,
our lord and christ, So be it.

In England where the faith of Christ and true religion was planted about
the 3
year of our lord. C. lxxxii. Elutherius Pope, sendinge Legates to Lucius
than king of England, which converted this Realm to the faith, and
establyshed true religion in England which continued* CC years. As the rest
of al their doctrine is founded on the Pope so is this. This is their subtility
to make men belcue that England hais ever received y^ christian fait^ and
religion from Rome: and therefore we mu^ fetch it from thence still: which are
bot^ most untrue. If nothing else would, this one saying proves him to be
unlearned that thus sais: Gildas our country man in his history says, that
Britane received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the Emperor under whom
Christ suffered. Does not Tertulian who lived ^ the same time of this Pope write
in h^ book against the Jews thus: Thapostles England received no the faith
first from To. bu^^n Thapostles time.
are declared in David's Psalm. to be the Preachers of Christ. Their sound he
sais went out in all the earth, and their words unto the roastes of the
earth. In whom else have all people believed but in christ which is now comen.
Whom have other people believed: the Parthians, the Medes, the Persians, they
that dwell in Mesopotania, Jury, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrigia, Pamphilia,
Egypt, and the parts of Libia about Cyrene, the strangers of R* y^ Jews,
Proselites, men of Crete and Arabia: and other people, as now the diverse
sorts of the Getes, and many coasts of the Murrians, all the bou^ders of
Spain, diverse nations of France, and the places of the Britanes, which the
Romans could never attain to, now are subject to Christ, and the places of
Sarmatia, of the Danes, the Germans, the S^ithians, and of many other hid
people and provinces, and many Isles unknown to us* and which now we can not
reckon. In all which places reanes the name of Christ which is now comen: Thus
far Tertullian. Mark in how many countries, he sais the name of Christ
reaned, it was so commenly and well believed: and how among them, he reckens
the wildest places of the Britains to be of the number: and these were
chrystened in his time, who lived in the same Pope Elutherius time. Than it was
not Pope Elutherius that first send the christian faith hither, but they had
received the Gospel before he was borne? does not some Chronicles tell that
Joseph of Arimathia, came hither and preached here? no doubt either he or some
Apostle, or scholar of theirs had preached Christ here, and he was received
and believed before this Pope was borne. Beda writes that in his time and almost
a thousand year after Christ, here in Britain Ester was kept in the full
moon what day in the week so ever it fell on, and not on the sunday after as
we do now Wherefore it appears that these Preachers Polychronic. lib. 5. ca. 17.
came from the East part of the world where it was so used, rather than from
To. which condemned that use Parauenture Elutherius helped to increase it, and
send some Preachers hither, but that he was the first, can not be proved: yet
would to God the ^ would follow that Gospel, religion Laws, and Counsel
that Elutherius gave king Lucius. But letts it (...) granted them, that
Elutherius establyshed relygion in England: will (...) make any thing for
their purpose: red^ the Popes Epistle to the King, and than judge. There is
great controuersye what time this king lived (as appears in Fabians table)
and therefore a froward manne might doubt, whether any such thing were or
not: but I will not deal so preciselye with him.

In the year from Christ's passion. Clxix. the Lord Elutherius Pope wrote
thus to King Lucius King of Elutherius Epistle to king Lucius.
Britain, for the correction of the king and his nobles of the Realm of
Britain.

Ye required of us the Roman laws and the Emperors, to be sent over to you,
the which ye would practyse and put in ure within your Realm. The Roman
laws and the Emperoures, we may ever reprove, but the law of God, we may
not. Ye have received of late through Gods mercy in the Realm of Brytaine,
the law, and says of Christ: ye have with you in the Realm, both the
parts of the Scryptures: out of them by Gods grace, with the Counsel of
your Realm, take ye a law, and by that law (through Gods sufferance rule
your Kyngedome of Brytaine. For ye ^ee Gods Uycarre in your kingdom,
according to the saying of the Psalm. etc. O God give thy judgment to the
king, and thy righteousness to the kings son. He said not the judgment and
righteousness of The Emperor, but thy judgment and justice, that is to say of
God. The kings sons be the christian people, and folk of the Reame, which
be under your government, and live and contine we in peace within your kingdom
as the gospel sais: Like as the hen gathers her chickins under her wings,
so does the king his people. The people and folk of the Realm of Britain be
youres, whom if they be divided, ye ought to gather to concord and peace, to
call them to the faith, and law of christ, and to the holy church, to
cherish and maintain them, to rule and govern them, and to defend them alwais
from them that would do them wrong, from malicious men and enemies. etc. A
king hais his name of ruling, and not of having a Realm. Thou shall be a king
while Rex a regendo, non a regno.
thou rulest well: but if thou do not, the name of a king shall not remain
with thee, and thou shall loose it, which god forbid. Thalmighty God grant you
so to rule the Rea^me of Britain, that ye may reign with him for ever, whose
vicar ye be in the Realm, thus far the Epistle. Mark I pray you what this
good Pope grauntes, and whether he be of this peuishe Proctours opinion or of
his holy Bishops that he crakes so much on. First he wills him not to take the
Romans laws to rule his realm by, for they may ever be reproved, but to
make laws according to the scripture, which never can iustlye be gain, said,
and by them to rule. Further he calls the king Gods vicar twice in this letter:
thirdlye he sais the king ought to call the people to the faith of christ. How
can Papists than be disobedient to kings, when they see the Pope grant so
much to kings? the Pope calls the king gods vicar: and our Papists deny it,
and say the Pope is Gods vicar. The Pope biddes rule by the Scripture, and
refuses his own laws: but our holy Bishops say Scriptures make
herretikes, and will be subject to no laws but the Romans. Lastly he charges
kings to bring the people to the faith: but our spiritualitye say, kings
have nothing ado in Ecclesiastical matters, nor religion. They stick much on
auncientie, and the Popes authority: and yet those godly things which godly
ancient Popes have said and decreed, they can not abide, because it takes a
way their authority and pride. Platina and Polychronicon write that this Pope
decreed that no man should refuse any meat that manne eats: if this Pope
say true, why have we than commanded upon pain of deadlye sin by Papists,
so many supersticious kinds of fastinges and forbearing meats at certain
times. If they be not supersticious (because they would bind the conscience
with them and make it sin to break them) let them prove it by the
Scripture to be godly. If they be catholics that believe and follow the Pope,
why are we called heretics in believing and teaching that which the Pope hais
written? if they will be called the Popes darlings, why do they deny the
Popes writings: If true religion was stablyshed here by this Pope, why than
does this scauinger sweep the streets with contrary doctrine to this Pope,
and with false lies. If they would have us believe and honor the Pope, they
must first begin theyw selfs. Who will think that he geues good counsel
and would have men to follow him, which will be ye first y^ will do and teach
contrary to his own sayings: these holy Bishops of ours, honor their Pope in
sufferinge for him, that never will thank them, and say, they would have
all to do the same: yet they themselfes are the first that teach and do
contrary to this Pope, and many other of the eldest forte, in all such things
as please them: and so they will correct him rather than follow the auncienst
and best of them.

After that again this land being inhabited with Saxons being panims. Saint
Gregorye Pope of Rome about the year of our Lord God. Dxcv. sent 4
Saint Austin and his company, who by their doctrine and virtuous living,
planted the faith, and so established a true religion in England: the which
says and religion ever when the people have declined from it, they have felt
great calamities as well by the hand of God as by the conquest of the Danes,
and after by the Normannes: and sithe the conquest from time to time. As I
noted before, they deryue al their religion from To. to make men believe that
place (which is a sink of all sin and esteamed of none, but them that
knows it not) to be the fountain of all godliness. But as I declared before,
that they forsake all the ancient goodness in Rome, so shall I by this Popes
doings to, let the world see if they will, that in mainetaynynge the Pope
in words, by outward apperance they utterly deny him in their deeds: and they
only pike out of the filthiest of them, that which may maintain their
supersticion, pride and tyranny. That the Saxons invaded and obtained this
Realm for the sins of the country, it is to plain, but whether Austin
planted true religion the Doctors may dout, and his deeds will prove. It were
to long to write all that Galfridus Britanicus in his history wrote about the
year of our lord. M. C. L. in the latter end of his viii. book. ca. iiii.
How the holy learned Bishops withstoode the teachinge of Austin at his coming
into the Realm, and the Popes autoritye that send him: but these few words
of his are sufficient to declare their mind. In the mean while was Austin
send of Gregorye, he sais, into Britayne to preach the word of God, to
Thenglysh men, which almost had driven out all christian religion of that
part of the I le where they dwelt in Kent: but among some of the Britains, the
faith of christ did yet flourish, and there were. vii. Bysshoppes, and an
Archbishop, and many holy Prelates and Abbayes remaining which taught their
flock the right order. At Bangor in one church were MM. C. munkes, which
gets their lyninge with their hands: their Abbot was called Dineth. When
Austin required of the Bishops subjection, Dinoth proved by diverse arguments
that they ought him none. Than Edelbert King of Kent perceiving that the
Brittans disdained to submit them selves to Austin he sturred up the other
Saxons kings to fight against Dinoth and his clerks. They gathered a great
army, and came to Westchester where Bremael was Mayor. The munkes and
Heremites met him there to pray for the safegarde of their people. Eldefridus
The best witstoode Austin the Popes legate.
king of Northumberlande, faught with Bremael, and slew. M. CC. Munkes, and
had many of his own men slain. Than the Dukes of Britain hearing of his
cruelty: Blederic Duke of Cornwall, Margadu^ Duke of Southwales. Caduane Duke of
Northwales came and fought with him, and slew ten thousand of his men, and
about. lrvi. mo: and Blederic that was the graund captain was slain there.
Thus far sais he. First mark here that the chrisstened Britains would not
submit them selves to Austin the Popes Legate, as they that had fallen from
religion did: Secondly that so many Munkes lived not idle, but wrought for
their lyuinge: Thirdly note the old practyse of Papists, to shede blood
cruelly if their superiority^ be denied them. Polychronicon lib. v. cap. ix.
and Fabian ca. Cxix. write all this same in effect, and also further that
Austin called a counsel for stablishing his religion, and when the Bysshoppes
asked Dinoth whether they should go to it or no: he said, they should go and
obey him, if he behaved himself lowly like a disciple of Christ. His lowlines
they should try, if he would rise and reverence them when they come in to the
counsel. But when Austin gave no reverence to them at their cominge, they were
angrye, and went their ways. Among other things mark also the pride of the
To. Legates, that would not as much as make any kind of curtesy to so many
bishops cominge to the counsel. Gildas which writing lamentes this miserable
destruction of Britain by bringinge in the Sarons, and complains as much of
the decay and neglectinge of religion as of wicked living, in all sorts of
men from the highest to the lowest, to be the cause of this plage of God, and
overthrow of the Realm. He sharplye rebukes the Kings, but Priests and
Bishops rather more, than any other sort of men: so that it seames to be
a double plage, both in bringinge strangers to rule, and strange religion to
blind us wythall. And because they crake so much of y^ religion that Austin
brought in, ye shall see what he used. There be ^. xi. questions written in the
latter end of Gregory's works in latin which Austin being in England
desired Gregory Pope of Rome, to write him his mind and opinion in them. The.
iii. question is this, which Polichronicon also touches. Lib. v. Ca. ix. Why
seeing there is but one faith, there be diverse customs of Masses in the
Churches: and one custom is in France, and another in Rome. To this Gregory
aunsweres that Austin should pike out of the Romyshe Church or the French
Church or any other, the best, and use them in England. Mark here I pray you
the beginning and auncienty of their mass here in England, and the pat^^inge
it together, and beggarly piking it out of al countries, and also that the pope
did not condemn those diverse kinds of masses as our butchers have, and burned
them that gain said it: and than ask my masters that so shamefullye lie and
proud^ye crake their mass to be M. D. year old, whither these sainges be
truly alleged or no. But believe neither me nor them, look your book of
Gregory, and judge your self who Austyn^ christening
lies. Fabian also writes cap. C. xix. and Cxxx that this Austin christened the
people in the river called Swale, in Swaldale not far from york: and that
Paulinus, in steed of fontes, at the same time (who was one of those whom
Gregorye sent from To. hither to preach here) baptized many also both in the
same river and in another called Gweni: in Gwensedale in york shire to, was it
lawful than to christen without halowinge of fontes, yea without fontes,
without crossinge, blowinge, censinge, saltinge, spittinge, oil and chreame.
and^ and now is not, who hais made it unlawful sins? Are we heretics in
doing it without coniured water, as Austin did, whom they so much commend. Nay
we do it not, nor wish it to be done in the River as they did, but in the
Church. Are they worthy to be called Papists, and glory so much in it, which
will not follow the Popes legate, nor allow his doings, and dispraise them that
d^ as he did. I speak not this because ^ would be called a Papist, or make
the Pope my schole master, but that w^ would not untruly be called forsaker^
of true religion and ancient custom of the church, when we have the old^
Popes and ancient Romish Church to teach and allow that which we do.

And because this scauinger crakes so much of his holy Bishops that suffer
so great pains for disobeyinge their Prince, and cleauinge to their holy
father the Pope, they that be not wilfully blind, shall see here that there is
none more enemy to that usurped power of the Pope, claimynge to be above other
Bishops and Princes, nor to that blasphemous name to be called the universal
Bishop of the whole Church, than this Gregory was as fully appears in sundry
places of his works. In his time began this ambitious desire to crepe into
the mind of Joan Archebisshop of Constantinople, to be called the head bishop
of the world, because Maurice then Emperor, and head above many Princes, lay
than at Constantinople, and not at Rome, as his auncetoures did for the most
part: while the Emperor lay at Rome, the Bishop there was more reverenced,
than other Bishops were as it is in all commen welthes where so ever the
Prince lies: therefore he thought that like as when ^he^perour lay at Rome y^
Bishop was preferred above other (because comenly Princes will have the
learneder sort here him) so he thought that the Emperor Neither Pope no^
other ought (...) be called ^he universal ^or head bishop of all.
now lyinge at Constantinople, that that Bishop should likewise be esteemed,
and therefore he caused The Emperor to write to Gregorye Bishop of To. in this
behalf and that he should submit himself to the Bishop of Constantinople.
Gregory aunsweres diverse of Themperours letrers sharplye, godlily, wisely, and
learnedly, saying that neither he at To. nor the other at Constantinople, nor
no other in any place should challenge to him that proud name nor authority above
other. None of my predecessors sais Gregory would use this cursed name (to be
called the universal Bishop of all) for if one Patriarche Lib. 4. episto^^.
^.
should be called universal, than the name of Patriarchs should be taken
from other: but God keep this far from a Christian mind, that any man should
challenge that to himself, whereby he might any thing at all diminishe the
honor of his brether. Note that he sais none of his predecessors used this
cursed name: Than in his time it began to be desired: than also they lie,
sayin^ that Christ gave this authority of being above other, to Peter and his
successor^ from time to time, he calls it also (...) wicked and cursed name,
wherein the^ glory, and so much desire, wicked and cursed therefore is he that
hais it or desires it, be sais further, they do their brether wrong in taking
that honor from them that is due to them, which is to be of like power and
autoritye with them: If any manne now a days should write thus, he would be called
a railer a fool, a prater, etc. But seeing this good Pope, sais so to the^, let
them take it among them, and believe their Pope Lib. 7. E^ 30. C^* 19*
for it is true. Again he says: I say boldlye that whosoever calls himself
or desires to be called the universal Priest, in his pride he runs before
Antichrist: because in being proud he preferres himself above other. This is
their parts than that they play, to be Antichrists forerunners, or rather to
be Antichrist himself. Much good do it them with their Popes that so rewards
their folowers: and saying their master geues them that name, they may be
glad of it, and neither refuse it, nor be angry with them that so call them.
It were an easy thing to take many such like sayings out of other Doctoures,
but because be cries out so often of this holys fathers religion. I keep me
with in his comepasse, and allege his writings Lib. 4. E^stola. 76.
only Gregorye in his Epistle to Maurice The Emperor among many other words
sais thus. Who is this that against the ordinance of the Gospel, and against
the decrees of the canons presumes to take this new name: let this
blasphemous name be far from christen men's hearts to be called the
universal Bishop, by which the honor of all Priests is taken away, when
it is folishly clamed of one manne. This name was offered in the Synod of
Chalcedome to the Romyshe Bishop, but none of them did take this name of
singularitye, nor did agree to use it: least while any private thing should
be given to one manne, all Priests should be robbed of their due honor. He
is to be bridled which does wrong to the universal Church, which by this
private name settes him self above the honor of your Empire etc. thus much
Gregory. I maruail that the later Popes scraped not these sayings out of
Gregory's works, or else condemned not his books for heresye, seeing he does
so plainly condemn their proud Prelacy. But surely as God hais preserved the
true text of the Bible by the Jews that are his enemies to the comfort of
his people. So for the glory of his name, he hais saved the writings of good
Popes, to condemn the foolishnes of the late presumptuous tyranny of Popes
after their times.

Remember that he calls it a blasphemous name, and that it is against the
gospel and Canons, that it was never used, and is a wrong to all the rest.
Thus many years it was vi. Cv. before the pope had any supremacy granted
him? but straight after his death, when Phocas had murdered The Emperor
Maurice his master, and made himself Emperor, Pope Boniface the iii. and
iiii. obtained at his hand that To. and the bishop there should be the head of
other churches and Bishops. A mete manne to set up a Bishop like himself: the
one murdered his master, and the other kill^s souls. When they have answered
this Pope that denies any of his predecessors to have had this name and
authority than they may crake that they have had it. M. D. sins Saint Peter's
time. And where he sais in the latter end that when the people fe^le from this
relygion that Gregory send, and Austin brought in, they felt great calamites
by the conquest of the Danes and the Normans: if he had advised him self well
he would not have said thus. But as Caiphas prophesied truly, saying: that it
was necessary that one man Christ should die for the people, and not all
perish, not understanding what he said: so this unlearned Proctour hais
spoken more truly than he wotes of.

For God in deed plaged this Realm for fallinge from true religion taught in
his holy word, rather than by Austin and submittinge them selfs to the Pope,
who as ye heard, refused that name and autoritye. The conquest of the Danes was
not long nor great, but than followed the Normans. D. year sins save five.
And if ye mark even about that time was Hildebrande, commenly called Gregorye
the. vii. Pope, who with his fellows brought more wicked super sticion into the
church of God than ever was before. Before his time there was no swarm of idle
munkes and Freers in England, nor in the world, but they wroughte for their
living, no such gaddinge of Pilgrimages, selling of Masses. etc. And
therefore God iustlye plaged the world for falling from him, and defilynge
them selves so filthilye with the dregs of Poperye. I speak not this
because I think all was well before, or that all the doings of Gregorye and
Austin were perfect, but to let you see that our Papystes leave the best,
and pyke out the worst to follow, as metest for their purpose.

Now whether the people of this Reame be declyned from the steps of Saint 5
Austin and other blessed fathers and Sauntes, which had Mass and vii.
Sacraments in the Church, and God was honored night and day in the Church
with deuyne service, I think there is no man so simple, but he may easelye
perceive, except malice have blinded his heart As in Saint Paul's Church in
London, by the decrees of blessed Fathers every night at Mydnyght, they had
Matty^s, all the fore none Masses in the Church, with other deuyne service and
contiuuall prayer, and in the Steple antimes and prayers were ha^ certain
times.

That the people of this Realm be swarued from the steps of Austin I will
not greatly stycke with him to grant: but how? not in falling from any
goodness that he used (for that they either keep still or the better instead
of it) but in refusing such abuses as he first began, and since his time
the Church of Good hays been over laden by the Popes oppression withal. And
because he says that we swerve from Austin and other blessed Fathers and
Saints which had mass, and vii. sacraments, who those Fathers and Saints
be, I would he ^adde named them, that it might be seen how truly he sais. I
think he durst not, nor yet can, least he be taken with a loud lie. I think
he means that Austin which is called thapostle of England, and not that other
Austin, which is taken for one of the iiii. Doctors of the Church. There is
great difference betwixt them two, both in auncientye of time, in learning and
godliness. Thenglysh Austin lived here vi. C. year after Christ, the other
in Aphric. CCCC. and that the elder Austin and blessed fathers before him agree
better with our reformed religion than with their Popery. I boldlye affirm and
if he or his partakers have or can say any thing to the contrary, they
should prove it better, than they have done hitherto, or else the world may
judge that they more proudlye brag (as Golias did Gods people) than can truly
i. king. 17
prove it. But as David with his slinge and stone overcome that mighty Giaunt,
so I doubt not, but they shall find many, that with the simplicitye of Gods
truth shall be able to confound their wicked subtilitye. I am sure he means
chefelye the doctrine of the sacrament of Christ's body and blood* but in
that he is already over matched. I remember in the time of that blessed king
Edward the. vi. D. Kidlay late Bishop of London came in visitacion to
Camebridge, and because that doctrine of the Sacrament seemed strange than to
many, he propounded this proposicion to the hole university to dispute on.
That it could not be proved by any ancient writer, Greek or latin, which lived
a thousand year sins, or within D. year after Christ that the substance of
the bread was changed in the sacrament to the substance of Christ's body.
There was the eldest and stoutest champions of the bole vuiuersitye, and the
pertest lustye young princockes also that could be pyked out, to say what
they could. ii. or iii. days together: and one while they had liberty to
speak what they could in defense of it, and an other while to speak against
them that wtstode it with what reasons or autorities they could devise. But the
pithy solutions of that godly learned Bishop were so strong than, that unto
the world changed, his enemies praised him, and wondert at his learning, and
liked the doctrine so well that their lusty yonker would have turned Bishop
Crammers book into latin, yea and married to (as was needful) if the good King
had lived a while longer. If this be true in the chefest point of their
religion (as it is most true in deed) that they have not one ancient writer
without wraistinge to seem to make for them, it is much more true in the rest.
There is another conference of late betwix the reverend Bishop of Sarum, and D.
Cool wherein that learned father lays to their charge that for the rest of
their trashe (which they reverence as bolye relics) they have neither
Scripture, ancient writer, Doctor, nor general counsel, to defend their
doings. The writings of good Crammer, and these learned Bishops are in print,
and yet vnconfuted, and in strength, although one attemted with small praise
of late to defend D. Coals part, but if they could have gainstand it, no man doubts of their good will. They need not to fear their recognisans,
fire nor faggot, nor any punnyshement according as they deserve, their bloody
laws are laid on sleep, though their hearts be bloody still.

And because he but only names particularly mass and. vii. Sacraments, and
proves it not to be so, I will not use many ways in desprouing it, for he is
not a man of that authority, learning nor credit, that because he sais it is
so, therefore straight it must be so and be believed: For I may say it is not
so with as good reason as he, if saying without proof were sufficient. For
their mass I said inoughe before, and proved of what auncienty it was. I
declared before how Gregory's mass book was allowed vii. C. lxxvii. years
after Christ: and also how Austin by Gregory's commandment out of such
diverse orders of massinge as ye see in other Countries patched their order of
mass together, that they used here in England. Seeing than by their own
Doctors confession it is manifest to be so many years after Christ before
their mass took place here or else where. I may boldlye say that never one
holy father before Gregory knew nor allowed any such kind of massinge: for
than was no such thing made nor used. These unto they be answered are
sufficient.

For their vii. sacraments I will not say much at this time, because he
stands not any thing in the proof of them The question is meter for the
learned sort than the people to try out such narow points. The controversy is
more about the word and name than the thing it self, and use of it.

We use vi. of them that he calls Sacraments as well as they, though not
without great reason, we forbear to call them all Sacraments, and differ
much in the doctrine, the order and vsinge of them, with other ceremonies and
language than they do. Baptism, the lords supper, confirmation of Children,
marriage, orderinge of ministers, we use the^ al as well as they, though not in
the same sort that they, and teach the people to have them in reverence
better than they. Confession is left free to all that feel them selves
burdened in conscience, and want either counsel or comfort, and the weak and
ignorant, are moved to resort to a learned minister to receive the
comfortable promises of absolution and forgeuenes of sin by the lively word
of God applied to so troubled a mind as a souerain salve for all such grefes.
The only controuersye in number than betwix us is for extreme unction whether
that be so necessary to be observed continually in the church. The chief
reason whereon they ground it, is the saiynge of Saint James. If any be sick
Iam, v.
let him call the elders of the congregation and let them pray for him,
annointinge him with oil in the name of the lord. etc. The other place of
saint Mark Mar. vi.
where the Apostles used oil in healing the sick, though they allege it, it
proves not their purpose, even as their own Doctors teach. Than was a time
of miracles, and God gave that power of healynge diseases to confirm Whether
extreme unction be a sacrament or no.
his gospel withal: now it is not lawful to look for such miracles. If
they wey the words of Saint James well, they will not so much glory in that
their sacrament. Saint James biddes them anoint him with oil. I ask them
with what oil? I mean not whether with oil Olive, or lamp oil, or other
kind of oil (although that question can not be answered out of the text of
the scripture, and yet according to the general rule) I grant that where oil
alone is named, there is meant oil olive) but whither it be hallowed and
consecrate oil, or commen and unhallowed? I trust they will not say unhallowed:
for than their holy sacrament should stand on an unhallowed thing, which is a
great inconvenience, than if it must be consecrated. I ask with what words,
and after what sort must it be done? there is no words of consecration for the
oil in Saint James, nor in any place of the Scripture. If there be, let them
show them: but their own Doctors say that there is none. Than it must be
hallowed with words of their own deuisinge: why than folowes it consequently,
that man is better than God which is blasphemy to grant. It is a greater might
and power to make a holy thing than to make the unholy and bare thing it
self, as the baker makes the bread, but Christ's holy ordinance sanctifies
the bread in his holy supper, but in this their sacrament, God should make
the oil, and the Bishop should make it holy. And because they stycke so
stiflye that all consecrations stand in speakinge certain words. I ask what
those words be, where they be taught in the Scriptures, and whether manne have
power of his own head, to make a thing holyer than God haies done, and to
devise the words himself, also wherewith it shall be consecrated and made so
holy? the Scripture hays no such words, and that manne should deuyse those
holy words, is great absurdity. When these are answered* more may be
replied against them. Again I demand what Scripture they have to prove that
Bishops only must halow this oil: for those that be sacraments in deed,
as Baptism and the L. supper every Priest hais autoritye to use, minister,
and consecrate them according to their holy institutyon, and do all that
belonges thereto as well as the Bishop. Is this they Sacrament of an oylinge
more holy than the other, because Bishops a^ more holy men are put to the
doing and consecratynge of the oil? Yet one doubt more. They have. ii. sorts
of Oil to anoint withal, differinge in holiness, consecration, and use of
them, and yet both hallowed by the bisshoppe. One is of Oil and Balsam blend
together, which is called commenlye oil and Chreame wherewyth Bishops and
Priests in their consecratinge, and Children are anointed in Christenynge: and
that is more holy, than this for sick persons is, for this is Oil alone
without other things blend thereto, as their master teaches. Ma. sententiar.
li. 4 disti. 23.
What scripture is there for these toies, and the consecratinge of them. Saynct
Paul sais that our meat is sanctified by the word and prayer: but I trust
they will grant a better consecration than this, and more holiness in that oil
than in our daily meat. But how will they prove it? Further every sacrament
hais a promise anexed of god working some spiritual grace by the^, in the
receyuer: bear is none such, but S. Iam. sais the faithful prayer shall heal
the sick man. The promise here named is corporal, bodily health, and is
attributed to prayer, and not to their sacrament. Than as the promise is
corporal, so was this Oil a corporal medicyne and Salve for diseased bodies:
although I doubt not but than by such godly prayers and exhortacions god
wrought a spiritual grace inwardly. Nothing was more commenly used for weak
and wearye bodies than oil in all those countries, and nothing does more ease
the pains of the sick body than these supplinge oiles: therefore partlye for
the custom of the Country, partly for the wholesome strength and medicinable
nature of oil and partly for an outward sign of an inward grace wrought by
God (while that gift of healinge diseases did continue in Christ's Church)
Saint James biddes them call the elders, anoint him with oil in the name of
the lord, and the faithful prayer shall heal the sick person, but what does
that belong or how is it to be applied to our days where no such gift is:
I would feign make an end of their foolishness if it had any end. Their
own Doctors teach further that this anointing takes not away mortal sin,
but venial only, and that it must not be used as long as there is hope of
life in the sick Joan d^ Sco ^us. 4 senten. distic. 23.
person, than by their own doctrine it is not so holy a Sacrament nor a
Sacrament at all: Their opinion holds that Sacraments do both gene grace and
forgive sin, and should be given only to them that have use of reason to
repent for their sins, and call on God for his mercy, being not children,
but comen to full age, this does not so, nor is so used by their own doctrine,
and therefore no sacrament.

The Popes holy water is as good, or better, as this their sacrament by this
doctrine: for he sais that his coniured water can forgive venial sin, and
drive away devils to. Than after their own teachinge this their sacrament is
not so good as the Popes holy water, for it can drive away devils, beside
forgeuinge venial sin, which this oylinge can not. But thus to teach is to
blaspheme God in making Gods Sacraments worse than the Popes dregs. To
conclude thautority and auncienty of this their sacrament from whence it comes,
and what it is, Polychroni. teaches lib. v. Ca. v. that Pope Felir. iiii.
Graundsir to Pope Gregory's father (mark whether he was married or no) ordained
the sick to be anointed with oil. If ye look for greater autours Uolaterram
teaches the same: but I had rather prove it by their own doctors, because they
call other, new fellows: tha^ christ taught it not. Forther where he charges
us with declynynge from the steps of blessed fathers whi^he ordained in
Paul's, mattins to be had at midnight, all forenoone Masses and in the steple
antems: these things we do not only not deny, for we do not count such
supersticious Idolaters to be our fathers in religion, but we reioise and
praise God for our deliverance from such supersticion. They crake much of
blessed fathers, and yet name not who they be, but much it shall not skill for
their deeds will prove their holiness: what great holiness was this, to have
mattins at midnight, when folk were on sleep in their beds. Is not commen
prayer to be had at such hours wha^ the people might resort commenly unto it
Midnyghte Mattins.
conveniently: if midnyght be such a time most convenient, let the world indge.
I grant in the primative church gods people had their prayers earlye before
day, because at other times, they were not suffered, but in those assembles were
not only munkes or Priests, but all sorts and degrees of men were gathered
to pray, here Sermons, and receive the Sacraments: for at other times of the
day, they durst not for the greatness of persecution. In Paul's and Abbayes at
their midnight prayers were none commenlye, but a few ballynge Priests, young
queristers and nouyces which understood not what they said, the elder sort
kept their beds, or were worse occupied. A prayer not understand in the
heart, but spoken with the lips, is rather to be counted praiting and ballyng,
than prayinge with good devotion. The elder sort both in Cathedral Churches
and Abbaies almost never came at their midnyghte prayer: it was thought enough
to knolle the belles, and make men believe that they rose to pray: therefore
they have not so much to crake of this their doing. The Papists have a rule
of their own making, to say their mattins in, which I think was a great
cause of these early mattins, and also of saying them over night, Ante tempus
meritum, in tempore debitum, post tempus peccatum. To say Mattins, before the
time due is a merit, to say them in due time it is duty: but after the
appoincted time is sin. But as all their religion is of their own deuysynge,
so is their reward: God hais made them no such promise, and therefore they can
claim nothing at his hands.

For their continual massynge before noone, we praise Godde that hais delivered
us from it, as a thing contrary to his holy will and ordynance: Saint Paul
says, that when they came together to eat the Lords supper, they should
tarry one for another, but these shorn shaueling shameless priests: would
neither receive together one of them with another, nor yet let the people have
any part with oore none masses.
them. Enery one would crepe into a corner to an altar alone, there lift up
on high, eat and drink up all alone, sell good penyworthes, and bless them
with the emptye Chalice. Than all was well as they thought, and Godde well
served, but to break Gods Commandment of receiuinge together, they passed
not of it, so that they might follow their own deuyse. I know their shift in
writhyng this text to their purpose, and saying that Saint Paul spoke this of
that feast which they used than to have: when they received the communyon: but
that wrasting will not serve for both for that feast and al other kind of
eating, to fill their belly, s. Paul gave that Commandment that folowes: If
any man be an hungered, let him eat at home: have ye not houses i. corint ii.
to eat and drink in? or do ye despise the congregation of God: seeing that
Paul speaks there but of two sorts of eating, the one for hunger to fille
their belies, the other fedynge the soul with the spiritual food of Christ's
body and blood: for nouryshinge and feding our weak bodies, he byddes us eat
at home: but for the liuelye food of our souls, in the sacrament of his body
and blood, he biddes us tarry one for another for it is the seal and band of
brotherlye love as well as the sacrament of Christ's body and blood. Every
pillar in the Church commenlye had his altar, every altar his priest, and his
God, to whom the Altars were dedicate: thus like men, not regarding Gods
commandment, they followed their own devises, and yet having the truth
reveled, they harden their hearts, and stop their cares, that they will not
learn.

For climbing up to the top of the steple Antems in the steple.
to sing their antimes. I demand of them, to show a reason if there be any,
why it is done there, rather than on the ground? and why on such saint dais
rather than on other? and why that time of the year rather then other? When
Baals priests were assembled against y^ Prophet Elias to try whether of them
served the living God, and Baals priests 3. kin 18.
began to pray, and call on their god, but he would not hear them, Elias
said cry louder, perauenture your God is busy, he is chasing his enemies, from
home, or on sleep: so unto ye find a better answer I am content freelye to
lend you this, without payinge any penny for it, that ye may francklye say
ye go up to the top of the steple, to call on your god that he may the more
easelye hear you: standing so high rather than on the ground so far of,
and at night when other suitors take their rest: for all the day long perauenture
he hais been otherways occupied, and now waringe old his hearing decays so
much that if ye stand not nere hand and cry loud, he can not help you.
These and such other are mete for them that serve strange Gods: but he that
calls on the living Lord knows him to be present in all places, and
therefore makes no such difference of them. Again if according to their own
doctrine, a prayer made in a hallowed place be better than that which is made in
an unhallowed: than better it is to stand on the ground than to climb on
height, for the top of the steple was never hallowed as the church was beneth.
Wha^ such folishnes is wisely proved we shall straight ways believe it.

First search whether the faith and religion now used was taught with 6
the blessed fathers in Christ's Church in times paste, ye shall prove by no
record of autoritye or Chronicle tha^ this manner of service now used in the
Church was ever hard tell of before Luthers time, which is not xl. pear
ago: therefore it is to be rejected, and put away as a new fangled
doctrine and schismatic, therefore come back again into the old blessed
fathers stepes. In that he denies this faith and religion ever to be heard tell
of unto within these xl. years and bids try the records, whither it be true
that he sais, and semes to charge us with forsakinge the old faith and
fathers, alledginge the Epistle to the Ebrewes, that be that II. Ebrew.
comes to Godde must believe: and that without faith it is not possible to
please God: and Iere. that we should search Iere. 6.
out the old way and walk in it, I am well content to stand with him in these
points, and prove that this faith and religion was taught in Christ's church,
continuallye from the beginning, and that this service now used goes nearer
the order appointed in the Scripture, than any that ever they have received
from the Pope. If we had not this faith spoken of to the Ebrewes, we durst not
so boldlye come to the throne of grace, without making any more medyatoures
than one only Jesus Christ: Where as they in making so many means and
intercessoures for the^ (as though God were a cruel judge, and not a merciful
father) declare them selves to want this faith, in that they dare not so boldly
come to the throne of grace, without such spokes men as we use none, for faith
only makes us bold to come into Gods presence, and beg of his grace. But
according to their desire, let us search out the old way which is good
that we may walk in it. The faith of a Christian manne is generallye
contained in the Creed, and particularly declared in the scripture at large,
and whether we keep that better then they, let wise men judge. We do esteame
these articles of the Christian faith, so much with the Lords prayer, and the
ten commandments of almightye God, that by commen order it is appointed,
and good ministers practice it, that Children shall learn them not in a tongue
that they understand not as the Pope would have them, but in their mother
tongue, we such a short declaration on it by a Catechism, that now a young child
of a ten year old can tell more of his duty toward God and manne, than an old
manne of their bringinge up can do of. lx. or. lxxx. year old, all the
canonycall Scryptures we do so renerently receive, and faithfully believe, that
we stand in contention with the Papists, that nothing is to be believed as
necessary to salvation, but only the old testament and the new: where their
faith is never certain, but when it pleases the Pope or his Council to make
them a new article of their faith, or condemn or change any that they have,
they receive it willingly, believe it faithfully, and follow it earnestlye with
fire and fagor. It is not long sins that by commen autoritye (where our
Creed hais but xii. articles) they added. vi. mo articles and with no less
danger of wythstandynge them, than of life. This six stringed whippe did vere
Gods people sore, unto God of his undeserved mercy, provided a remedy.

And where they think no faith nor Councels.
religion to be good, allowed or received, but that which is confirmed by
general counsels or written by the doctors: for that, I say, their religious
supersticion cannot be proved by general counsel, nor Doctor, as the reverend
Bishop of Sarum, lays against D. Cool, But so far as either general
counsel or the Doctoures writings do agree with the body of the holy
scriptures, we do not only reuerentlye and willingly receive them, but
diligently so far forth as we may practice them: They crake much of the
autoritye of a general counsel, and bleare the peoples eyes with so glorious a
name and also with the reverend name of the fathers, Doctoures, and
auncientye, where in deed they make more for us than them.

If they considert what Gerson and Panormitanus write, which were ancient
fathers, and not new protestants, and were at the counsel of Basil, where it
was disputed what autoritye a counsel hais, they would not so stiffly stick
to so weak a staff, we must rather believe one simple lay manne say they,
alledginge the scripture, than the hole counsel to the contrary. De Elect.
Ca. significasti This thing was well proved true in the great Nicene
council, where many would have forbidden Priests marriage, and only
Paphnutius being unmarried, and alledginge the Scriptures which allow marriage in
all men, did stop it, Gregory Nazainzene sais that he never see good end
of a counsel.

They allege much general Counselles, when in deed very few of them be
general: If it be but a provincial Counsel they themselves grant that it
may err. Now than look bow many may be called, or are called general in
their own books, and ye shall find very few. Take heed therefore of these
Fores (ye that will not be deceived) when they allege a Counsel, and try
even by their own book of counselles, whither it be general or no? Ye shall
find that every tenth that they allege, is not general: than being a
particular and provincial, they give us leave to deny it, and so they condemn
their own doing when they allege nothing but provincial Counselles. There
is no Creed made at any general counselles, nor Athanasius Creed, but we
willingly embrase it, receive it, and believe it. Saying than we openly profess
and teach all things contained in the holy Scriptures: and all the artycles
of any Creed determined in general Counsel, or written by Athanasius, or
any Catholycke father, how can it be that we be out of the faith, and how
can it be, but this sclaunderous Proctour of the Pope hays blasphemed Godde,
belyed his Minysters, Gods people* and his truth. Thus much I have spoken
particularlye to purge us from his liynge lyppes, where he speaks generallye
naminge* nothing, but meaning all, that we should forsake both faith and
religion, and deuyse a new one of our own, where they themselves are gilty
in this as more plainly shall appear.

This shall be sufficient I trust to them that will be satisfied to declare that
we be not out of the faith, saying we profess our faith: now to try whether
we be fallen from the old ways of holy fathers, and whether ancient
records do testify this manner of Church service to be godly, and have been
heard tell of before Luthers time, and whether it be elder than theirs, I am
content to wine with him in trial thereof. I trust they will be content to
call Moses, David, and the Prophets, ancient fathers: why than look what
order of prayer, was in the Tabernacle of god, and Salomons temple in their
time, and see whether it go nerer our service, or the ^ur Church ^ruice agre^s
with the ^uncient Church.
Popes Portuis? Read David's Psalm, and mark how many of them have their
title directed to the Chauntor, or chief singer and plaier on thinstrumentes to
Asaph, Hema^ Dithum. etc. to be song in the Temple, and ye shall find a great
sort such. Read the xxv. chap. of the first book of the Chronicles, and
there it appears whom David appointes to be singers of the Psalms in the
Temple with their posteritye. Read the xiii. Chap. of the art. of Thapostles,
and there it appears that the law and the Prophets were read in the temple
every Sabbath day, for their service, with a Sermon. After the reading (sais
Saint Luke) of the law and the Prophets, the rulers of the Synagoge sent to
Paul and Barnabas saying: ye men and brether, if ye have any exhortacion to
the people, speak. Again in the. xv. Chap. he sais: Moses hais of old time
them that preach him in every city in the Sinagoges, where he is red every
Sabbath day. Mark what prayers or kind of service as we term it, Saint Luke
sais here, was than used in the temple of Solomon: the law and the Prophets
he sais were read. In the Ebrewe bible appears the division in the books of
Moses how far was read wekely and monthly. So that as they had than the
law and the Prophets read in their Temple for their commen prayer and
service: so have we now the Psalter of David, monthly red over* and one
Chapter of the old testament and another of the new red dailye, in our
Churches, in our own tongue, as they had than in theirs. The new testament was
not than written, so that it could not be read: but as the new Testament
now does more plainlye set out to us the office and mediation of our
Savior Christ, so did than the Prophets more plainlye speak of the cominge
of Christ, than the law of Moses did signify him. And therefore was
orderlye red with Moses, the law as a fuller declarer thereof: so that in
effect our Church service disagrees not from theirs, in this readinge together
of the old testament and the new in our commen prayer, as they read the law
and the Prophets together: this order is three thousand year old, when they
have proved their popish Portuis to be much above. iii. C. year old, than
they may begin to try auncientye. Their Mattins and Euens^nge are appointed
them out of their Portuis: and when any old record of authority teaches them
that so many false miracles, fained lies and tales as be there written, with
serving such saints, as no scripture does allow, nor good Historye makes
Mentyon of (but only the Popes calendar and his scholars) were used in the
Church for commen prayer, and Gods service, than let them crake of the
blessed Fathers steps, that they follow. Let them try their: aunciente
Portuis of Sarum, Yorkes use, Bangor, or the great diuersytye of Freers,
Munkes, Channons Nuns, which for every order of them, had their diverse
sorts of Mattins, and Euensonge, and if they be proved. iii. hundred year
old, they have much to rejoice in, and yet far short of iii. thousand. But
of al other Blasphemies the Psalter of Brigit where every word and prayer that
The Por^uds antiquity^.
David names God in, is turned to our Lady, is most horrible to pervert the
scripture to man's fantasy. Pope Paul the. iii. but. xx. year ago, was so
ashamed of his Portuis, that he printed a new one putting out many of the
blasphemous lies that were in the old, yet this Popish pricker thinks all in
it to be so good, that it can not nor should not be amended. The English Priests
Portuis, and order of service that he crakes so much of, for auncyentye, is
full of memoryes daily, and service of Thomas Becket twyse in the year: and
yet it is not long sins he was bisshoppe of Canterburye, he lived under King
Henrye the second, four hundredth year sins. The feast of Corpus Christi, and
the Service of that day, was invented by Pope Urbane the. iiii scarce CCC.
year sins. The feast of the visitacion of our lady commenly called, the new
found Lady day, and the service for that day is not. CC. year old and
decreed by Pope Urbane the syxt. What auncientye than is their Portuis and
mass book of, which received these solemn feasts, and their service of so
late years* and yet he would ^ake men believe that it hais been from the
beginning, and that old records make mention of them. Many such other may be
found in their Popish service, whereby it may easily be seen how falslye he
bragges of their auncienty. The auncienst beginning of their Portuis of Sarum
was under Willyam Conqueror not v. C. year sins, by Osmundus the second
Bishop of Sarum as Polychro. writes, lib. vii. ca. iii. but it hais been
increased sins, with many a loud lie, as though they should strive who should
tell the greatest for the best game, our service hais nothing in it but it is
written in Gods book the holy Bible (where no lie can be found) saving Te*
deum and a few Collettes or prayers, which although they be not contained in
the scripture, yet differing in words they agree in sense and meaning, with
the articles of the faith and the hole body of the scripture. Their Portuis
and missall hais many untrue fables, and fained miracles for their lessons,
written neither in the scripture, old hi^^orye, nor ancient record of
autoritye, many inuocations of such as be no Saints, and wickedly calling on
saints of their own making, instead of the living God, as Thomas Becket
and many Popes, some charms, as S. Agathes letters for burning of houses, some
witchcraftes, as holy wa^er for castinge out devils, holy bread instead of
the Communion, ringinge the hallowed belle in great tempests or lightninges,
and all in an unknown tongue (contrary to Gods commandment) yet craftily
devised to deceive the people, least in hearing them in their own tongue, and
proving them false, they would laughe them to scorn. Dusegisus. lib. i. ca.
rix. and l^^vi. wrytes that Charles the great Emperor decreed that nothing
should be read in the Churches, but only the Scriptures, nor any thing
taught, but out of the Scriptures, but none is so ignorant, but he sees the
Popish service and doctrine to agree little with ye scriptures, and ours to
contain nothing else but the scriptures. Now compare these together, and
judge whither that be the elder and more to be allowed that hais nothing in it
but y^ scripture it self and that which is drawn onte of it, or that which is
devised of man's branes alone, beside and contrary to Gods word. Is that
new fangled and schismatic that conteines nothing but the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, and is that ancient, that can not be proved good at
all?

This text of ^^re. that biddes them search out the old way, and walk in
it, does not mean all old ways, but he sais search of the old ways which
of them is good, and walk in it, as though he should say all old ways
are not good. If all old ways were good, he would not bid try which were
good: therefore it is not enough to have it old but to have it good also, and
than to cleave to it. If bare words would serve, there is manifest sayings
for the contrary. Ezech. sais xx. Ca. walk not in the commandments of
your fathers, nor keep not their judgments. I might as well beat in this
text as he the other and of like strength, therefore it is not sufficient to
say it is old, or to follow fathers: but to try that it be good and that godly
fathers used it, and than be bold to follow it. Evil hais been (...)

To the lord and his friend wa^eram by the grace of Godde, the worshyppefull
Bishop of Nicemburge. Anselme the servant of Cantorb. Church greting. etc.
YOur worship complaynes of the sacraments of the Church, that they are not
ministered every where after one sort, but are handled in diverse places after
diverse sorts. Truly if they were ministered after one sort, and agreinglye
through the whole church it were good and laudable: notwithstanding because
there be many diversities which differ not in the sum of the sacrament, nor
in the strength of it, or in the faith: nor all can be gathered into one
custom I think that they are rather to be borne with agreement in peace than
to be condemned with offense. For we have this from the holy fathers that if
the unity of charity be kept in the catholic faith, the diverse custom
hurtes nothing. If it be demanded whereof these diversities of customs do
spring I perceive nothing else than the diversities of wits, which
although they dyffer not in the strength, and truth of the thing, yet they
agree not in the fitness and comelines of the mynistring. For that which one
judges to ^e meter oftentimes other think it less mete. And not to agree in
such diversities I think it not mete to swerve from the truth of the thing.

Also where the said Preacher does recite certain abuses of the said Church as
talkinge, biynge and sellinge, feightinge and brawlinge (although these be
very evil and worthy much rebuke) yet there be 7
worse abuses, as blaspheming God in lyinge Sermons, pollutinge the Temple with
Schismatic service, destroyinge and pu^lynge down holy aulters, that were
set up by good blessed men, and there the sacryfice of the blessed mass
ministered according to the order of Christ's catholycke Church. yea where the
alter of the holy Ghost stood, the new Bisshoppes have set their tales
upon, and their sit in judgment of such as be Catholycke and live in the
fear of God. Some they deprive from their liuinges, some they commit to
prison, except they will forsake the Catholic faith, and embrase a faith and
religion that hais no foundation laid by general Counseil, nor blessed fathers
in times past but invented by Heretics that do not agree one with another, nor
them selves. We both do agree the Church of Paul's to be abused and therefore
justly plaged. God grant that henceforth it may be amended, that worse do
not follow. When Iosue had conquered Ierico so marua^^ouslye with cariynge the
(...). 6
arcke of God about it, the priests blowing their trumpettes, and the people
show^ing, by the might of God rather (...) house: Gods house must be a house
of prayer, and not the proud tower of Babylon, nor the Popes market place, nor
a stews for bawdes and Ruffians, nor a horse fair for brokers, no nor yet a
burse for merchants, nor a metinge Paul's.
place for walkinge and talking. If a convenient place to mete for honest
assembles can not be found nor had conuenientlye other where: a particion
might be had to close up and shit the praters from prayers, the walkers and
ianglers, from well disposed persons, that they should not trouble the devout
hearers of Gods word, so that the one should not hear nor see the other. God
hais once again with the trumpet of his word, and the glad receiuinge of
the people, thrown down the walls of Jericho, and the Popes bulwark there
by his own might, without the power of man, if man would so consider it,
and fear the Lord. No place hais been more abused than Paul's hais been, nor
more against the receiving of Christ's Gospel: Wherefore it is more marvel
that God spared it so long, rather than that he ouerthrewe it now.

From the top of the steple down within the ground no place hais been free
from the top of the spire at C^ronations, or other solemn triumphs, some
for v^in glory used to throw themselves down by a rope, and so killed
themselves vainly to please other men's eyes. At the Battlementes of the steple
sundry times were used their Popish ant^ms to call upon their Gods with
torch and taper in the Euenings. In the top of one of the pinacles, is lollers
tower, where many an innocent soul hais been by them cruellye tormented and
murdered. In the midst alley was their long Censer reachinge from y^ ro^e
to the ground, as though the holy Ghost came in their cen^ing down in liknes of
a Dove. On y^ arches though commonly men complain of wrong and decayed
judgment in Ecclesiastical causes, yet because I will not judge by here say
I pass over it, sauinge only for such as have been condemned there by Annas
and Caiphas for christ's cause, as innocently as any Christians could be. For
their images hanged on every wall, pillar, and door with their pilgrimages
and worshippinge of them, I will not stand to rehearse them, because they can
not be unknown to all men that have seen Lon^on, or heard of them. Their
massing and many altars with the rest of their Popyshe service which he so much
ertolles, I pass over because I answered them before. The south alley for
vsurye and Poperye, the north for Simony, and the Horse fair in the midst
for all kind of bargains, metinges, brawlinges, murders, conspiracies, and the
font for ordinary paimentes of money, are so well known to all men as the
beggar knows his dishe. The Popish clergy began and mayntained these, and
Godles worldlinges defend them: where the poor protestant lamentes and would
amend them. Judas chapel under the ground with Thapostles mass so early in
the morninge, was counted by report as fit a place to work a feat in as the
stews or tavern. So that without and within, above the ground and under,
over the roof and beneath, on the top of the steple and spire down to the
low flore, not one spot was free from wyckednes, as the said Bishop did than
in his Sermon declare, so that we should praise God for his mercy in sparinge
it so long, and now tremble at his fearful judgment in justly revenging such
filthiness, god for his mercy sake grant it may now be amended.

Secondlye, where it pleases him to term this Church service now used
schismatic, it is as true, as before wha^ he said that no ancient record
made (...) (...) the (...) fat^^rs and the apists be (...).
mention of any such af^re. xl. years past. Why dooc^ye call it a
schismatic? Because it differs from the Popes pertu^s? That it differs we
deny not, but rejoice and praise God for it: but if it agree with the holy
Scriptures, and the ancient fathers as I have proved before, than be ye
schismatickes in swaruinge from them, and not we. In one Morning and Eueninge
prayer (...) ^rayer. (...).
we agree with the old prayers of Salomons temple as I proved before: In
Baptism we follow Christ Jesus his* App^stles, Austin and Paulme whom Pope
Gregory sent into England, in the chief points, which al christened* (...)
^^^oniured water without salt, spit(...), oil and chrisme. etc.

In the Lords supper we receive together as S. Paul commanded: and ^^pe
Gelasius teaches either to receive ^^the parts, or to refrain from both: for*
it is sacrilegs to ^euide them. De cons^^^. distinc. ii. We give the people
the ^uppe of Christ's blood as well as (...) the Priests, as Ciprian teaches,
saiyng^: (...)
how do we teach or provoke them to she^e their blood in confessinge his name,
if we deny them that shall be christ's (...).
soudiers, the blood of christ? or how do we make them mete to the cup of
(...)

In burials we do not assemble a number of Priests to swepe purgatory, or bye
forgiveness of sins, of them which have no autoritye to sell, but according
to Saint Ieroms example we follow. At the death of Fabiola sais he: Epitaph
Fabiola.
the people of To. were gathered to the solemnite of the burial. Psalms were
song, and Alleluia soundinge out on height, did shake the gildet celinges of
the Temple. Here was one company of young men, and there another which
Burials.
did singe the praises and worthy deeds of the woman. And no marvel if men
rejoice of her salvation, of whose conversion Thangelles in heaven be glad,
thus Ierom used burialls likewise Gregory Nazanzene hais his funeral Sermons
and Orations in the commendacion of the party departed: so hais Ambrose for
Theodosius and Ualentinian the Emperors: for his brother Satirus etc. Their
Dirige grotes, masses, and trentalles, tapers, and ringinges, have no
foundation on the Scripture, nor good auncientye to maintain them. Ierom sais
that Alleluia was song so loud that it made the Church roof to shake: and
our Papes will not sing Alleluia at all, neither at burial, in lent, nor
Aduent, and say they follow auncientye. Alleluia is as much in English as
praise ye the lord: as though they should say, praise the lord that hais
called his servant out of this misery to himself in heaven: But the desperate
Papes say weep, rejoice not for the dead, but mistrust of their salvation
think that they be gone from one sorrow to another, and therefore bie masses
apase, the Popes proctoures for money inoughe, will sell that which God can
not, or will not give freely as they think. God is wearye as they say of well
doing, and turned over the matter to these the Popes Proctours. But Solomon
Eccle. 11.
teaches, that in death the body tournes to earth from whence it came, and the
soul to him that gave it. Look how both body and soul is bestowed,
whatsoever gredy gaping Cormorauntes, do say to get money withal. Blessed be
the dead that die in the lord sais Saint Ihon. For they rest from their
labors, the Papes say the dead be accursed and go into purgatory from
sorrows here to greater there, chose whether ye believe. In marriage as in other
things beside, we are but to much like unto them, that is our fault generally:
that we differ not more from them in all our ministry. We have all in Englysh
where they have but I N. take thee M. etc. And here I would ask Master
Marriage.
(...)

schismatics commenlye, and not Protestants. Fascic. tempor. a book made by
one Munke of their own sect, reherses. xxiii. schisms betwyr Popes, and their
partakers: when they find the third part of to many among the Protestants,
than they may have some face of apparens to call us schismatikes. At the
counseil of Constance were. iii. Popes in. iii. diverse Countries, Italy
France, and Spain, all claymynge to be chief, and some Countries followed
one, some another, but all were deposed, and a iiii. chosen little more the a C.
l. year sins. It were to long to rehearse all the schisms spoken of, who so
lust, there may read. This schism that I named last, and the other when
there was one Pope at Rome, and another at Auinion in France. rl. years
together are the notablest, and troubled the world most, in striving who
should have the most folowers and partakers, the other I pass over for
shortness sake, unto these be considered better of them how they may defend
them selves that they be not proved schismatikes, if that be schismatic
service when one differs from another, than be all orders of Freers, Munkes,
Chanons, Nuns, yorks use, Sarum, Bangor. etc. schismatical: for they differ
every one from other.

Now for pullinge down Altars, and ministering the Communion on tables, a few
words to try whether we do this without reason or example. First The
Communion table.
our savior Christ ministered it sittinge at a table: Than it is not wicked but
but best to follow his doings, for he did all things well. Saint Luke sais
that the hand of the traitor was with him Luke. 22.
at the table. Saint Paul for the use of it in his time sais: ye can not be
partakers 1. Cor^. 10.
of the Lords table, and the table of Devils: where it appears plain that
both Idolaters at their Sacrifices, and the Christyans also in their holy
mysteries used tables. Theodor. writes that after Ambrose had excommunicated
The Emperor Theodosius, and received him again to the Church, the Lib. 5. Ca.
18.
Emperor ^ynge flat on the ground, wepinge and tearinge the hear of his head
for sorrow and shame of his offenses he rose up and offered (at such time sais
he as the gifts were offered at the holy table. Sozo writes lib. viii. ca.
vii. how Eutropius fled to the Church as a Sanctuary for succor, because he
had offended Themperoure: and when Ihon Bishop of Constantinople see him lie
before the holy Communion table, he preached unto him, and rebuked him of his
pride, when he was in autoritye. The Canon of the great Nicene counsel sais
thus. In the godly table we must not lowlye cleave to the bread and cup set
before us, but lifting up our mind on height by faith, we must consider the
lamb of God to be set before us in that holy table. Wherein I note that they
all call it a table and not an altar, where they ministered the communion. This
was. iiii. C. year after Christ, above a thousaunde year sins: why than
Alters were not continued from the beginning as they say, and we are not the
first that used tables, but we would gladly restore these old cusstomes
again. If Ambrose lawfullye and well used tables at the Communion at Millan
and the Bishop at Constantinople in Greece and else where. I see no reason why
we should be rebuked for folowinge them, except they can prove that they did
it against the Scripture. I know that the Scripture and old writers also,
make mention of altares: but that is because Moises in the law commanded
them to offer their sacryfices upon Aultars, because the sacrifices than
commenlye used were heavy, as Oxen, calves, sheep. etc. and tables were not
able to stand and bear such weyghtes contynuallye. These sacrifices were a
figure and shadow of that only pure sacrifice which Christ should offer on
the cross for us all: for as those innocent beasts were killed for other
men's fautes: so Christ without sin should die for the sins of the
world: For this cause the cross whereon Christ our lord died, is called an
altar also: because the sacrifice for the sins of the whole world was thereon
offered as those were on an altar. Where so ever therefore the new testament or
old writers use this word altar, they allude to that Sacrifice of christ,
fygured by Altars.
Moses, and use the word still that Mosses used to signyfye the same sacrifice
withal, and rather it is a figuratiu^, than a proper kind of speech in all
such places. And because altars were ever used for sacrifices, to signify
that sacrifice which was to come, seeing our savior christ is comen already,
hais fulfilled and finyshed all sacrifices, we think it best to take away all
occasions of that Popyshe sacrificinge mass (for maintaynnige whereof they
have cruelly sacrificed many innocent souls) to minister on tables,
according to these examples.

It greeues him that the Bishops set their tales (as it pleases him to speak)
when they sytte in judgment, where the Altars were, but if they were handled
as did Baals Priests and his 4 king. 10.
Altars, God did them no wrong. It is a commen true saying: he that will do no
ill, must do nothing that longes there til, so surely if we will warely audid
the wickedness of Popery, we must f^e from such things as maintain their
doings. There is nothing more profitable unto them than massinge sacrifices:
therefore because Altars importe and maintain their gainefull sacrificynge, it
is necessary they be removed.

For their sacrifice of the Mass, that he so much lamentes to be defaced, and
all good conscyences rejoice, that God of his undeserved goodness hays
overthrown it: I refer all men to the fyft and last book that the
blessed souls now lyuinge with god, Bishops Crammer and Ridley wrote of the
Sacrament, whose bodies they cruellye tormented therefore. There who so ever
lust, may read, and with indifferencye wey the reasons of both parties and
judge with the truth Stout Steven would gladlye have overthrown that book:
but God confounded him, and their names live for ever. So long as that book
stands vnconfuted, they may bark against the truth, as the Dog does
against the moon, and not prevail.

And if ye will call but a little to your remembrance how many diverse sorts of
masses there were used in diverse countries as appears in the words before
rehearsed ye shall se how loud he lies in saiing ^^^^e is not Catholycke.
here that their mass was according to the order of christ's catholic church.
That is catholic as the Greek word signifies, which is universal and general
both in time, person and place: therefore he must prove if he will be believed
that this Popish latin patched masking mass hais been used at al times, of all
men and in all Countries. But I have declared before both many sundry sorts
of ministringe the lords supper in several countries and also how of late
years this his order hais been violently and blind ignorance brought in:
therefore it can not be catholic.

None that be counted learned can be ignorant of the general points wherein
the Greek East church differs from ^he difference be^^yx the ^reke Ghur^he and
the ^atin.
the west latin Romish church. The Grecians never received the Pope for their
head nor the doctrine of purgatory their Priests were ever free to mary, they
ministered the Lords supper alwais in their own language with leauened bread in
both kinds to the lay people both the bred and the cup severally, the
Priests never received alone without other to receive with him, they never
made trentals of it, nor knew transsubstantiation, they never used pardons
images with many other more things like as auricular shriuinge to a Priest.
etc, which all the latin Romish Church defendes, and does contrary, and their
these religion stands in them: therefore none of these opinions can be called
catholic, because the Greek Church which is the greater part of the world
never received, believed, nor used them. Thus many lies than this master D.
hais made in one word calling it catholic, as there be things wherein their
Romish mass dyffers from the the Greek liturgies and orders of ministringe
the Lords supper: as I have declared most of them. If I should particul^rly
and thoroughly handell all his folysh sayings, it would grow to to great a
work: therefore brefelye I touch the chefest.

He charges us with a faith and religion that hais no foundation laid by
general counsels, which saying when he better considers, I trust he will be
content to be reckned in the same number with us. Was not the first general
counsel, under Constantine the Emperor at Nice, above. iiii. c. xxx. years
after Christ was borne? Shall I say than, or Our religion is elder than
Counsels.
is he so shameless to think that there was no religion nor faith in the world
so many years together after Christ. because there was not of so many years
a general counsel to bilde upon. No and because we say and prove our faith
and relygion to be the best and auncienst, we bylde not on counsels as they
do, but on Goddds word, which is above the counsel, and rules al being not
ruled of any, hais been from the beginning, and shall continue to the end: and
we say with Paul that we be bylded Ephe. 2.
on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ himself being the
head corner stone. The Prophets whereon we buyld lived many of them a
thousaunde year before any general counsel was heard of, and the Apostles
lived. iiii. C. year before them. Wherefore our foundation and religion is much
elder than theirs. Councels are like to Parliamentes, that that pleases one
Pope in his Counsel, pleases not another, as the books do easily declare: and
that which one thinks good, and makes a law one year, an other conde^nes and
disanulles. What a vayn thing is it than to bild on so uncertain a groundworke?
Heaven and earth shall pass, change, and decay, but the word of the Lord
our God, from whence comes our religion, remains for ever, as the Prophet
Isai. 40.
sais. Therefore the wise builder will follow that which will not fade.

Lastly where he charges us that we agree not one with another, nor with our
selves, I may say to him with the Luke 6.
Gospel Thou Hypocryte first pluck the mote out of thine own eye, and than
thou shalt better see to take the beam out of thy brothers eye. There is no
sort of people more giltye in this behalf than the Papystes be. The heathen
Philosophers had not so many sundry sects and oppinions among them selves
in their schools, as the Papists have in their doings. D. Ponet late Bishop
of Winton in his answer to the book that bears Martins name for marriage of
Priests, proves well that Poperye is a monster patched of al kynds of heresy,
and worse than they al. Where such things are fullye taught and proved. I had
rather refer you to ye reding of them there, than to write one thing often. I
declared to you before also where ye shall find. xxiii. schisms among the popes
themselves. These holy Bishops y^ he craks so much on for their imprisonment,
and other that in losing their livings, live more welthily and at ease than
ever they did before, or the Protestants do in their liberty now. Mark
how like them selves they be, and agreing with themselves. As long as king
Henry lived, and all the time of blessed king Edward, they taught, they
preached, they subscribed, they swear and believed all this, that they now deny.
As often as they had any living The Papists turn with the world, and dyffer
one from another.
in any College of the universities, as often as they took degree in the
schools, as often as they took any benefice, and when they were made Priests or
Bishops, so often they swear and forswear all that now they deny. Periurye
in other men is punished with bearinge papers, loss of their ears, and
other worldly shame: but these men abusinge the gentilnes of the Prince,
being thus often forsworn are counted holy in the world. The Papists in their
religyous monsters have ^o kind of munkes, Freers, Chanons, Nuns, differing
in their coats than any people have, some be white, some black, some graye:
differinge in their shoes, some having whole, some half, some nothing but
sooles under the foot: differinge in shauinge their heads, some more, some
less: differing in meats, some eatinge fish only, some flesh and fish at
their days and times appointed, differinge in places for some never go
abroad, but are kept still with in the compass of the house, some walk abroode
at their pleasure, and some locked up in stone walls: diffring in their
service, for every order had his diverse order of mass and Mattins, in many
points: differinge in their Saints, or rather their Gods whose names they
bear, whom they worship, and stryuinge which of them should be the holiest.
Some hold of Francis, some of Benet, some of Dominic, some of Brigitte, and
others of other as they lust to devise. In their schole men is found more
diversity of opinions, than among any sort of Philosophers. Some hold of
Thomas, some of Dominus, some of Albertus, some of other as they like, for
there be so many that almost they can not be reckened. Which things being all
considered, and known of all men to be true, except they be wilfully blind
how can they say that they agree in one unity of the truth. Pilate and
Herod agreed to crucify christ, so these in mischeues agree to set up
supersticion, but in their private opinions none are more contrary and diverse.
In their pilgrimages, pardons, relics, fastinges, what diversities and
striving which should be the greatest. Among so many Ladies and Roodes,
what striuinge in every country which should be the holiest, and work most
miracles. Among pardons, Boston bear the name, and yet other would compare
among relics, the blood of Hales passed other, unto their iugling was known.
Fastinges were mo than I know. Some used Saint Rinians, some our ladies, some
the golden Fridayes, some every Wednesdaye, some half Lent, some whole: some
with fish only, other as they lust. What reason is it that they which fasted
our Ladies fast, some fasting to bread and water ended it in. iii. years
space, other in eating fish had. vii. and why should they follow the Lady
day in lent more than other Lady days? and why yearelye do they change
their day. etc. When these and such other their doings are proved to agree in
one, and good reason showed for their doings, they may better charge other
men with disagreinge: but they may think it shame to burden other with
that wherein they be most gilty themselves.

There is none more disobedient then the new Bishops and Preachers now a
days, which disoveye the universal church of Christ, the which Church who
^^^. 1^.
so ever will not obey, our savior in the Gospel commaundes us to take them
as infydelles. As where the universal Church of Christ commaundes Mass and
senen Sacraments as necessary for ^
our salvation, they call it abomination, with their blasphemous mouths:
Where the* Church commaundes to fast, they command to eat Where the Church
co^maunds coutynual prayer of the Clergy, they call it superslicyon and blind
ignorance: where the Church commaundes the clergy to live in chastitye, they
command and exhort the Clergy to marriage: where the Church and all laws
ciuyll and canon, yea the laws of the Realm do prohibit marriage of Pryestes,
they allow marriage of Pryestes, ^beyinge no law, but follow their own carnal
lusts. Yea where the Queen hays given strayte commandment to abstain from
flesh in Lent, and other days, commanded by the Church^, the new Preachers
and Protestants have eaten flesh openly to the great sclaunder of other O God
how many lies, in so few lines. The universal Church of Christ agrees in
the necessary Artycles of our Salvation, but in certain outward orders and
Ceremonies, every Country differs from other, without any dyshonoure to
Godde. I declared before how we agree with the universal church and confess
the necessary Christian articles of our faith, religion, and salvation better
than they, and also I touched some diversities of out ward orders in the
Church, whereof many or all were tolerable: and now by occasion of these
matters mynistred by him, I shall touch some more. He lays to our charge, that
we disobey the universal church, if he mean in those things which
afterward follow, I am content to try with him. Where under y^ name of mass,
he understands the Romish latin mass, it appears before how many sundry good
sorts of ministering the Lords supper be in other countries at this day, and
have been of old time: Therefore he makes a loud lie in saying Mass.
or thinking, that who so ever disagrees from their Popish mass disobeies the
universal Church: for the most part of Christendom, neither does at this day,
nor at any time hais used it. In the substance and doctrine of the holy
Communion, we agree with the scripture and the catholic Church, though we
differ in some piece of the outward order of it from other countries: but we
prosesse an open disagreeinge from the Romish sinagoge both in the order and
substance thereof. The Church of God, according to the scriptures, does
profess and believe that all faithful Christians worthily coming to the lords
table, receive by faith in those holy mysteries, the body and blood of Christ
which was given, broken and shed for the sins of the whole world: this we
teach, believe and follow, and exhort all men often to prepare them selves
worthelie thus to receive. The Popish Synagoge contrary to Saint Paul teach
practice, believe (and persecute with fire and faggot all gainsayers) that in the
sacrifice of their bread and wine, the creatures be changed from their natural
substance, and are made a God to be worshipped, when they lift it over their
heads, hang it in a cord over the Altar, or carye it about the fields, and
if the people will bie trentals or masses of it, at their hands, they can
swepe purgatory clean, and make souls fly to heaven as thick as duste.
These have no ground work on Gods word, and therefore we can not believe
them: For we read that Christ took the substance of his flesh of the virgin
Mary, but never of bread. Only the Romish prelates have made this
marchaundise put in that article taught this doctrine, and believe this
contrary to the whole church of Christ beside theymselues. Than it is they
that disobey the Church, and not we. I spoke sufficientlye for their mass
and Sacraments before, yet for their sacraments now a little more.

He sais here that there be. vii. Sacraments necessary to salvation, and yet
within few words folowinge, he denies marriage to Priests, and that is as
much to say as either that marriage is no Sacrament, or that Priests shall not
be saved. There is but one way of salvation for all men, than Priests must
either be saved that way or else condemned. But it is to foolyshe to say that
any manne shall be condemned, except he be married. Shall none be saved but
married folks? when he looks at him self being unmarried, and yet not so
chaste, he will say nay. Than. vii. sacraments are not necessary for
salvation to every man: for many have been saved without many of them: as
marriage, extreme unction, order of Priesthode, shriuinge, Byshoppinge, and the
Lords supper. Who is so ignorant but he knows that many children never, yea,
and old folk to, never received all those his Sacraments: which God
forbid should all be condemned. No learning can bear this saiynge to be
true, that there be. vii. sacraments necessary to salvation: therefore by this
judge the rest of his sayings. And least he should think the general order
of the Church to be thus, though many particulars never receive them, yet
in searching, he shall find that tobe untrue to. Socrat. lib. v. cap. xix. and
Sozo lib. vii. ca. xvi. in their Ecclesiastical histories write and teach that
shriuing to a Priest was not commanded by god, but invented Confession.
by man: and therefore when they see it abused they took it away, and used it
not any more. In ye time of Theodosius Themperor iiii. c. year after Christ,
and Nectarius being Bishop of Constantinople as they write there, a Diacone of
the church, get a Gentel woman with child in the Church, that came to be
shreuen, while she was there doing the appointed penance by her ghostlye
father. The hole church was so offended at it that not only there, but many
other Bishops beside in their churches left of afterward that order of
shriuing and left every manne free to the examination of his own conscience
for his sins. There hays been nothing more profitable to the Pope than this
care shriuinge hais, beside many such like fylthynesse done by it, as this
Diacon did, for no time was fitter to woe or work their feate in, without
suspicion than shriuing time. No prince could enterprise or purpose any great
thing, but his confessor would by some means learn it under confession, and
declare it to the Pope or his chaplains. Eliseus by the spirit of God never
told more secret things what the king of Siria did in his privy chamber, than
the Pope could learn by these his confessors, the secret pourposes of all
Princes. Than if confession might be taken 4. kin. 6.
away as here appears it was, it is not so necessary to salvation: nor the
universal Church hais used it ever as he sais: nor we disobey not the Church
in leauinge it of, seeing so many holy men have done it before us. Joan Dominus
writing on the. iiii. book of the sentences distinc. xvii. and serching out
where this their sacrament should be bilded, writes thus. If we say it is
grounded on the saying of Saint James, confess you one to an other, many
inconveniences will follow, for so every man might hear an others confession
how should Saint James Bishop of Jerusalem command Peter the highest and the
Romyshe Church. If it be grounded on Saint Ihons saying, whose sins ye do
forgive, they are forgeuen: yet there is no mention to do it in his ear. If
that will not serve than, say that it comes from Thapostles: if that serve
not, because y^ Grecians use it not, than say it comes from To. as does the
Communion in vnleuend bread, thus ye see what hard shifts they are driven to,
in triynge out the autoritye and auncientye of this their sacrament and how
small it is when it comes to proof. But if ye will iudiffrently judge whether
the new Bishops or the old, obey their Prince and Gods Church better, read
the oath of them both and than judge. The Pope first devised an oath for his
Bishops to swear at their creation and when that was not thought strait
inoughe, he devised this afterward. I N. Bishop of N. from this hour
forward, The Prelates oath to the Pope
shall be true to Saint Peter, and the holy Romish Church, and to my Lord
Pope N. and to his successors, entering canonicallye: I shall not be in
counsel, consent, nor at deed, that he may loose his life, or that any member
may be taken from him by deceyte, or violent hands laid on him or wrong done
to him, by any means. That counsel that shall be declared to me by him
self, letters, or messengers. I shall not disclose to any manne wittingly to
his harm. I shall help to defend the Popedom of the Romish church, and
the rules of holy fathers, and the rialtes of Saint Peter against all men
sauinge my order. I shall not be at any council or deed where any evil is
devised against the honor and power of them, but to my power I shall stop it,
and so shortly as I can signify it to our lord Pope or some other that will
tell it his holiner, Heretics, schismatickes and rebels to our lord Pope,
to my power I shall pursue. etc. Look how well our holy prelates keep their oath
to the Pope, and deny it to their lawful Prince. The oath of the new Bishops
is in print in English, and so known of al (that lust to learn) that I need
not to write it, and although the Popish prelates refuse to take that oath,
because it makes the Prince, the chyefe gouernonr over them (which they can
not abide) herafter in his proper place where he falls into that question, I
shall entreat of it.

Secondly where he charges us, that where the Church commaundes to fast, we
command to eat, and have eaten flesh in Lent, and other forbidden days,
we speak plain English, and say he lies. Under the name of the Church, he
ever understands Rome, yea and not when it continued in any pure religion,
but even in these latter days when it is ever whelmed with infinite
supersticious. Fasting days be Fasting.
appointed commenlye by every particular church and country, rather than by
the uniuersall Church, but if any kind of fasting be general, I say they
Ambrose.
break that order rather than we. Ambro. writes on the. xvii. cha. of Luc.
that for the space of. l. days betwixt Easter and whitsondaye, the Church
knows no fasting day. Mark what the church used in his time, and what it
is grown to since. How many fasting days in that space have Popes brought
in since? from whence came all the gang days to be fasted in the cross weke?
was it from the church or no? if the church did it, than the latter church
and Popes were contrary to the old church in Ambro. time, or else the church is
free in all ages to disanull that which was done before them. If it be free:
why than may not the church now disanull that which was done before our
time, as well as they brake the custom of the chuch in Ambrose time before
them, hais not the Church like power in all ages to decree or dysanulle what
they lust? Are we more bound that we shall not break old customs than
they were? What is the reason that we should be so, or where is it so
written. If the Church be ruled by general counselles where is that counsel
that decreed so many fasting days to be betwix Easter and Whitsunday: and
Ambrose says none was before his time. Is counsel so contrary to counsel, or
does one counsel deface that which an other determined? Than is that true,
where I said before that their counsels were like our Parliamentes, and they
are no longer to be observed than other counsels following shall think mete.
Which being true and granted who will be so mad to bild his faith upon
councils, which have so often changed, and one sort believe contrary to
another? And although Ambrose say that the church knew no fasting day
betwix Ester and whitsonday, yet beside these many fastes in the Rogation
weke, our wise Popes of late years, have devised a monstrous fast on Saint
Marks day. All other fasting days, are on the holy day even, only Saint
Mark must have his day fasted. Tell us a reason why so that will not be laughen
at. We know well enough your reason of Tho. Beket, and think you are ashamed
of it: tell us where it was decreed, by the church or general counsel. Tell
us also if ye can, why the one side of the street in Cheapeside fastes that
day being in London diocese, and the other side being of Canturbury
diocese fastes not? and so in other towns more? Could not Beckets holiness
reach over the street, or would he not. If he could not, he is not so mighty
a saint as ye make him: if he would not, he was malicious that would not do
so much for the City wherein he was borne. This is his great ancient holy
church that he crakes so much. Becket was living sins the conquest under king
Henry the second, not ^iii. C. years sins: and yet all as they think that
will not believe their trumpry to be M. D. year old, and ought not to be broken,
is an heretic, disobeyes the universal Church, and not mete to live. Monica
Saint Austins mother seeing them fast at Rome on the saturday, and coming to
Millan see them August P. p^^ 06.
not fast there, ma^uailed at it, and asked Austin her son, the cause of
such diversity of fasting, thinking that both did not well. Austin being
yet but a young scholar in Christ's schole, asked Ambro. the cause. Ambro.
said: Fasting was free, and therefore when he came to Rome he fasted, and did
as they done: When he was at Millan, be fasted not but did as they did.
Afterward Austin being better learned, gave this lesson in the same Epistle,
and said: that he found written in the new testament, that we ought to fast:
but he never found it there written, what days we should fast. Therefore the
time is free to all christians by the scripture to eat or not eat: but they
must eat so soberly every day, as though they fasted, and see that they surfeit
not. Montanus an heretic was the first that made laws for fasting, and they
like good children make it heresy to break their days, or fast otherwise
than they appoint. There be. ii. sorts of fasting, from meat, which we be
bound unto. The one voluntary when we feel our selves by to much eatinge given
to any kind of sin, than the flesh must be bridled by abstinence, that it
rebel not against the spirit, but the mind may more freely serve the lord:
The other is by commandment on such days as be appointed by commen order of
the country, wherein we must beware that we be not breakers of polities. These
kinds of fasting stand in outward disciplyne, and are to be observed with
fredom of conscience so far as the health of the body may bear, and
supersticion be not maintained. 58.
There is a. iii. sort which Esai speaks of, that stands not in forbearynge
meats only, but in exercisinge the works of mercy. Is this the fast that I
choose sais the Lord that a man should punish him self, pynche his belie,
and pull down himself, so that for hunger and pain he cry out, or fall into
sickness, that he wrythe and lap his head in huddes and Kercheffes. No says
the Lord: but this is the fast that I have chosen: bring the poor and
strangers to thy house, feed the hungrye, clothe the naked. etc. God is not
delyted with a hungrye belly for meat, but with the soul that hungers for his
righteousness. Furthermore this general kind of fasting which stands in
forbearynge flesh, and eating but one meal a day, to many it is no grefe
nor a bridelinge to the lust of the flesh. Some love fyshe so well that they
had rather feed of that than of other meat, and some have so weak stomachs
or live so idle lives, that they can scarce dygest one meal a day. Again
other some have so costlye and great dinners that they eat more at that one
dynner, than the poor man can get at three scamlinges on a day. Therefore I
can not say that he punishes his body by abstinence that eats fyshe which he
loves, nor that for weakness of stomach, can not eat more although his
appetite desire it, nor he that gorges himself so full at one meal that he can
not be hungry of a whole day after. Hard it is therefore to appoint to every
particular manne, what, when, or how seldom he shall eat when he fastes: but
because generally every man loves flesh better than fish, and eats twice a
day at the least, generallye it was well appointed in fasting to forbear
flesh, and eat but ones a day, though it fail in many particulers. Therefore
when any is to be charged with breaking his fast the person is to be considerd
whither he may do it with the health of his body: the kind of fasting,
whether it be supersticious, to bye forgeuenes of sins and righteousness,
the time that it be not with Iewyshe obseruatyon of days, and the meat it
self, that it be not thought unclean by nature, and unlawful: and the cause
that it be for taminge the flesh, and not to compound with God or bargain
that for so many days fasting, God shall reward him with such worldly
blessings as please him to appoint. In Flaunders every saturdaye betwixt
Christmas and Candelmas they eat flesh for joy, and have pardon for it because
our Lady lay so long in child bed say they: we here may not eat so: the
Pope is not so good to us, yet surely it were as good reason that we should eat
flesh with them all that while that our lady lay in child bed as that we should
bear our candel at her churchinge at Candelmas with them as they do. It is
seldom seen that men offer candels at women's churchinges, sauinge at our
ladies: but reason it is, that she have some preferrement, if the Pope would
be so good master to us as let us flesh with them. Every one even by the
Popes law is not bound to fast as children, old folks, women with child,
pilgrims, poor prisoners, labouringe or iorneynge men: and by the consent
of the Physician and gostlye father even in the midst of blind Poperye all
sick persons might eat flesh at all times: And those that be bound to fast
may be dispensed with for a little money. That is good holiness that is
bought for so little money. Our savior christ seeing the Pharases offended with
eating meat, said to them. That which enters in at the mouth, defiles not the
manne, and when they would not be so satisfied he said: let them alone they
Math, 15.
be blind, and guides of the blind. So surely to such obstinate blind
Papists as will not learn the fredome of conscience taught in the Scriptures,
and serve the lord in singlenes of heart, but put their hole devotion in
outward observation of man's traditions, it may well be said, let them
alone they be blind and guides of the blind. It is the weak conscience that
is to be born with, as Saint Paul teaches, saying, I had rather never eat
flesh, than offend my brother, and not the obstinate wilful blindness of the
supersticious that may learn and will not. When he hais proved that the
protestants upon their wilful lusts and not for such necessary
considerations (as is here rehearsed) have contemptuouslye broken the fasting
days appointed by commen order, he may well rebuke them: but there be to many
witness which have heard many of them sundry times out of the solemst places
and pulpites in ye realm teach the contrary: therefore none can believe these
his liynge words to be true. Breakinge thy fast stands not so much in
eating any kind of meat, as in the quantitye of it, or doing it with
contempt of the higher powers, and commen order appointed, or else in
offending the weak conscience which hais not learned his liberty given by
god in his holy word.

Where he castes in our teeth the breakinge of lent, as though that were
commanded by Gods own mouth, and should be observed without all excuse,
they that lust shall see how great diversities of fasting Lent have been in
old time before, and than judge whither this their one kind of fasting Lent
be so necssarye. Socrat. lib. v. ca. xxii. of his Lent.
ecclesiastical history writes of the diuersites of sundry things in the
church as kepinge of Easter, baptising, marriage, and the Communion. etc. Among
which he touches the diversity of lent fast, and sais: that the Romans
fasted. iii. whole Wekes before Easter, except Satturdaye and Sunday, some
Grecians fast. vi. Wekes, some begin. vii. Wekes before, and fast but. xv.
days in that space, and those not all together. They differed also in meats,
for some would eat nothing that had life: some would eat no liuelye thing
but fish: some would eat both fish and foul, other forbear Beryes and
Eggs, other forbear all things save dry bread, and other would not eat that,
some would not eat before the. ix. hour, but than would feed of diverse meats.
Some at one hour of the day, some at another. etc. If all these christian men
served God, and yet had such dyuersites of fasting their Lent, why should
they be counted evil men that do no worse than they did, or swerve but a
littel from this their used Lent fast. Is this so well, that nothing is well
but this? And because they stick so much to the To. Church, note that he sais
the Romans fasted but. iii. wekes why should we than fast sir? or how hais
Rochaunged this old custom? or may it be changed? If it may not why have
they done it, and if it may, why blame they them that do it? Polychronic. lib.
v ^a. ir. writes that Pope Gregory the. i. ordained fasting of all Lent, who
lived vi. C. year after Christ, than it lackes much of their autoritye and
auncientye that they crake so much of. We read that our Savior Christ eat
flesh at his last supper on mau^dy thursday (which day of all in lent is one
of the holiest) if Christ than fasted Lent. I speak not this because I would
have men to break the commen appointed order of fasting without lawefull
cause: but that I would every man should know the liberty of conscience, that
Christ hais given and taught us in his word. Let every manne obey the
ordinance of the rulers, which command not any thing contrary to God,
and let them know also the fredom of conscience, that they be not boundmen to
the creatures which God of love hais made to serve, and not to rule us. Surely
these people were christened, and holy members of the church of christ: and
yet so shamelesly he crakes so much of the whole church to maintein their
doings. Spiridion Bishop of a town in Cyprus Sozo lib. ^. ca. (...).
when his fryende came to him on the fasting day after dinner, bade his
daughter Irene dress a piece of bacon, because he had no other meat in the
house, nay sais the manne I am a christen man I eat no flesh on the fasting
day, why sais Spiridion because thou art a christen manne thou should eat. O
worthy lesson teaching both the marriage of Bishops, and also liberty of meats.

Thirdlye where he belies us, saiynge that we call prayer, supersticion, read
the books of prayers, which the protestauntes have made, the order that they
teach to pray in, mark their prayers openly in their sermons, with what
seruent zeal it is done, and judge than how falsely he misreportes them. But if
he mean the prayers of munks, Freers Bunnes. etc. we will not greatly stick
Prayer.
to grant them to be so in deed: and good reasons we have out of their own
^o^tours, why to say so. Saint Tho^ in his scda^ scde quest. xcii. writes that
it is supersticion when a man is to holy. As when he is so Pope holy that he
beleues things not to be believed, fears things not to be feared, worships
things not to be worshipped, or does things as holy: which be not holy in
deed. Confer these sayings with munkish prayers, and such like, and see
whether we say true. Things necessary to be believed are written only in the
scriptures: so be things to be worshipped, to be feared as godly, or counted
holy, are Supersticion.
taught there only. Than he that beleues more than the holy Bible teaches, or
worshyppes, fears other Gods than the only living God, or does any thing for
the service of God, or countes holy that which is not taught there generallye,
he is supersticious and the use of the thing it self is supersticion. The
English word is the harder because we use the Latin word supersticion, and
makes it English: But the Greek word makes the nature of it, and the things
before rehearsed playner by much. There be. ii. Greek words signifyinge this
supersticion. Ethelothresceia and deisidaemonia, Ethelothresceia
the further word signifies as the interpretacion of it declares, all such
relygyous woorshyppinge of God, as manne dcuises on his own head, and is not
taught in the holy Scripture. So sais the gloss Colloss. ii. when man's
tradicion is taken for religion than it is supersticion. As either to worship
any other God than the only true living God, or to worship the only
Godde other ways than he hais appointed us in his word: as with Lady
Psaltars: trentals, pilgrimages. etc. And because the chief part Supersticions.
of godly worship stands in prayinge to God, and calling on him in our
necessities with a stedstast belief of his holy word and promise: He that
calls on any creature but Godde alone for help, or beleues other doctrine
necessary to salvation than Gods book alone, Deisid^: moni^.
he is well called supersticious. The latter word signifies that godly fear in
their opinion which is due to Godde alone: which who so ever gyues to any
other creature beside the true God, he is supersticious also. As they that to
know things to come will counsel with spirits, or in their sickness or
trouble seek help at their hands, hang upon the sterres for lucky or unlucky
dates, or fear any creature more then the lord and creator. All the popes
creatures therefore be supersticious puttinge their holiness and religion in
their ^owles, cloisters, order inverted of men, and fearing more to break the
rule of Austin Dominie, Benet, than of any Appostle, Euangelyste, or Christ
himself. They also be superstycious that put holiness in meats, days,
times, places, beads, holy water, palm, cross, pardons. S. Agathes letters
for burninge houses, thorn bushes for lightnings. etc. Learn therefore to put
difference betwix religion and supersticion, and than ye shall easily know how
we disalow no prayer but the supersticious. The Scribes and Pharisees prayed at
every corner of the streets, and fasted often: yet our Savior Christ rebuked
them, not condemninge prayer, but their misusinge of it. So we will every manne
to pray in every Prayer.
time and place: yet supersticion we abhor in all sorts of men, prayer,
time and place. What wicked blindenes is this than, to think that bearing
prayers written in rolls about with them, as S. John's Gospel, the length of
our lord, the measure of our Lady, or other like, they shall die no sudden
death, ^ot he hanged, or if he be hanged, he shall not die. There is to many
such, though ye laugh, and believe it not, and not hard to show them with a
wet finger. Prayer than is of. ii. sorts, either in begging that that we want,
or giving thanks for that which we have received: and it is the earnest
liftinge up of a man's mind to God or a familiar and reverent talk and
complainte to our heavenly father of our miseries with a ^rauinge of his
mercies, and trusting t^ obtain of his mercy that which shall be necessary:
or else an humble thanks geuinge for his liberal benefytes so plenteouslye
bestowed on us undeserved. These stand in deep sighs and groninges, with a
full consideration of our miserable state, and Gods majesty: in the heart,
and not in ynke or paper: not in hangyng written scrolles about the neck, but
lamentinge vnfeynedlye our sins from the heart, accusinge and condemninge our
selves, and beggynge pardon for them: not in speaking a number of words with
the lips vnconsideratlye, be they never so holy, but with bitter tears
weiyng from the heart every syllable that he thinks or speaks. Thus prayed
Anna to have a son. i. kin. i. so sorowfullye pouringe out her grefes before God
in her mind, that the Priest saying her lyppes move and hearing not her
words, thought she had been dronken. Thus earnestlye called Moses on Godde,
in his sorrowful meditacion. That the Lord said to him, why cries thou so to
me? and yet we read not that he spoke any word at all. The other is
lyplabour in speaking much, or saying a great number of their own devised
prayers (or else a charminge) thinkinge that in certain words speaking they
could make things come to pass as they lust. These with such other as popery
is full (of we say be supersticious.)

Lastly be burdens us with breaking al laws, of the church, civil, canon, and
Marriage of priests,
the Realm, in that we say, marriage of Priests is lawful. This is that which
may not be borne: this is thought so han^us that Christen men should not suffer
it. If he were learned he could never have heaped so many lies together. Al
writers confess that the greek church in the east part of the world (which
is the greater part of christendom) never forbade their Priests marriage, nor
do at this day. For the west and Latin Church now will I try a little,
whether any such have been borne by law or no. Hildebrand commenlye called
Gregorye. vii. (who for his deeds might be turned and called a hell brand) was
the first that ever brought about (but with much a do,) that Priests Polid.
lib 5. ca. 4. de inuen^or.
should not marye, and the married should lose either their wives or liuinges:
but the Priests of Spane withstode him by their Bishop. Some before attemted
it, but never one could compass it. This Pope lived about the conquest. v.
C. year sins: and syns the beginning of the world unto his time, it was not
brought to pass. There is a great difference in continuance of time, than
that marriage was allowed, and a small that they were forbidden. In Moses law it
was not forbidden, two thousand year before Christ: Peter Thapostle and Philip
Theuangelist were married, and had Act. 21. Roiff. lib. 2. Ca. 9
daughters. Gregory Bishop of Na^an^um was Bishop there as his father was
before him. Polychrates Bishop of Ephesus says that vii. of his cosins and
auncetours had been Bishops before him. When Phileas Bishop of Chinn^ Eusebius.
lib 5. ca. 26
was led to martyrdom, the greatest reason they had to persuade him to
recant, was that he would have pitye on his wife. Eustathius and his scholars
are blamed because they despised married priests. These among the Grecians
Sozo lib. 3 Ca. 14.
I trust prove that the Church hais had married Priests of old time. The. l.
Canon of The Appostles says: If any Bishop, Priest, Diacon, or any of the
Clergy forbear marriage, flesh and wine, not for that his mind might be
fytter to godlynes, but for abomination, forgetting that all that God hais
made is good, and that he made both male and female: let him be correct or
deposed The third Council of Cartage says thus: Let not Pryestes children
make any plays and gammes. If any says the Popes canon law, should teach that
a Pryest for religyon sake, should despise his wife accursed be he. Distinct.
xxviii. Again the next cha. folowinge: If any make a difference of a married
Priest, as though he should not minister by occasion of his marriage, and
therefore forbear from his ministration accursed be he. When this foolysh
unlearned Papiste hais scraped these and such like sayings out of the Popes
testament (commonly called his decrees) than he may say the Popes law, hais
utterly condemned marriage of Priests in the Latin Church. But what needs ^.
Paul.
these proofs when Saint Paul says plain a Bishop must be the husband of
one wife: and Ambrose writing on Ambrose.
the same place, sais that he is not forbidden to have a second. Pope Pius
Platina.
ii. wrytes that there were great causes why Priests were forbidden wives, but
there were greater causes why they should be restored. Ierom grauntes that in
his time many Priests were Ierom.
married. co^tr. Ioui. And on the vi. cha. of the Epistle. He writes thus. Let
Bysshoppes and Priests read these, which teach their children worldly
learning, and make them to read Comedes, and singe bawdy songs of
ministrelles. etc. Nauclerus part. vii. generat. xxxvii. wri tes thus Gregorye.
vii. decreed in the Gregor^^^. ^ii.
year. M. lxxiii. that from thencefoorth Priests should not have wives: and
they that had should leave them or be deposed. He wrote to the Bishops of
France, and Germany, that they should procure it so to be with them. The hole
clergy cried out against this decree, calling Math. 19. 1. Co^. 7.
him heretic: who had forgotten the word of the Lord (who said) al receive
not this saying: and he that can not refrain let him mary: and it is better
to marye, than to burn. How violent a thing is this to compel that men
should live like Aungelles: and when he denies the accustomed course of
nature, he should give lybertye to horedome: If he continued to confirm this
decree, they had rather leave their Priesthode than marriage. Gregory not
Gregory.
withstandinge was instaunt and rebukes the Bishops of slothfulness, that
these things were not done among them. Tharchbyshop of Mentz perceyninge
how hard a thing it was, to break so long a rooted custom, and to reform
the world in his old age, appointed his Priests. vi. months to do that in
which they must necessarily do: they purposed than to lay violent hands on
the Bishop, except he changed his purpose. The year folowinge Gregorye
attempted that diuorcinge of them by his legate which he could not bring to
pass by the Bishop. The Priests were so moved against the legate, that they
had almost torn him in pieces except he had gone away, and left the matter
undone. A horrible plage he sais further did follow this contention of the west
Church, in so much that lay men did christen and minister sacraments
because the Priests had rather forsake their Priesthode than their wines, and
would not minister. etc. thus far the history. Mark when this was done, the
trouble in doing it, the plague that followed, and that marriage as he says was
long used before him.

To the Lord and father Nycholas, the Note also this notatable Epistle
concerning the same matter.
dyligent prouyder for the holy Romysh church: Huldrich Bishop of Angsburgh in
name only, wyshes love as a sun, and scare as a servant. WHere I found (O
father and lord) your decrees for the co^tinentie of clerks, which ye send me
of late, to be without discretion, a certain fear and heaviness both troubled
me, fear because the judgment of the shepeherd whither it be right or wrong,
is to be feared: for I was afraid lest the weak hearers of the scripture
which will scarce obey a righteous judgment, not regarding this of yours as
wrongful, should boldly break this so heavy a commandment of the sheperd that
it may not be borne. Sorrow or rather pity troubled me, wha^ I douted by what
means the members might escape, where their head was so sore sick. What can be
more grievous, or more to be pitied of the hole church, tha^ that you y^ bishop
of the chefest see, should swerve but a little from a holy discretion? Thou
swarued much from this, when thou would that clerks (whom thou should warn
for the continentie of marriage) should be compelled to it by a certain
imperious violence. Is not this worthily to be counted a violence, by the
common judgment of al wise men, wha^ any man is compelled to execute private
decrees, contrary to the doctrine of the gospel, and decree of the holy ghost?
Therefore where there be many examples of the old testament and new, teachinge
discretion, as ye know: I beseech your fatherhode be content y^ some few among
many may be put in this writing. Our lord appointed marriage to priests in the
old law, which is not read to be forbidden them afterward. But he sais in
the Gospel: there be Euunches which have geldet themselves for the kingdom of
heaven: but all men receive not this word, he that can take it, let him take
it. Therefore Thappostle sais: for Uirgins I have no Commandment of the
Lord, but I give counsel. Ye see that al men can not take this counsel
according to the saying of the Lord. And ye see also many flatterers of the
same counsel, willing to please men and not god, with this false show of
continentie, to do more heinous things: as to provoke their fathers wives,
not abhore to lie by beasts, and men. But least the state of the whole
church should be decayed by the great mischeues of this filthiness, he said:
For fornication let every man have his own wife. Yet these hipocrites falsy
say, that this same belonges specially to lay men: which hipocrites,
although they be in a most holy order: yet they doubt not to misuse other
men's wives. These men understood not the scripture rightlye, and because they
wrunge the pappe to soore, they souked blood instead of milk. For that
saying of Thapostle: Let euely manne have his own wife, exceptes no man in
deed, but him that professes conrotinentye, or him that determines to continue
his virginitye in the Lord. etc. And that ye may know that they which have not
made this vow, ought not to be compelled: Here Thappostle to Timothe, saying:
It becomes a Bishop to be blameles, the husband of one wife: and least any
manne should turn this saying to the Church only, he adds: he that can
not rule his own house, how can he rule the Church of God? Likewise he sais
Diacons must be the husband of one wife, which can well rule their children
and houses. I know that ye have taught by the decrees of holy Syluester Pope,
that this wife must be blessed of the Priest. The writer of the rule of clerks
lives, agreing with these, and such sentences of the scripture sais: A clerk
must be chaste, or else bound with the band of one marriage. Of all which
sayings he gethers truly that a Bishop and Diacon, are to be blamed, if
they be divided into many women: but if either Bishop, or Diacon, forsake
one woman for religion sake, the canonical sentence here condemns them
without respect of their degrees, saying. A Bishop under pretense of religion
must not put away his own wife: if he put her away let him be excommunicat:
but if he continue, let him be deposed, and postea. There be some which take S.
Gregory for a help of this opinion: whose folyshnes I laughe at, and am sorye
for their ignorance: they know not that the perilous decree of this heresy
made by S. Gregory, was purged afterward of him by worthy fruit of repentance.
For on a time when he send to his pound for fyshe and see mo than six
thousand childrens heads brought, he sight, moved with inward sorrow, and
confessinge that decree which he made for forbearinge of marriage to have been
the cause of so great a slaughter, did purge it with worthy fruit of
repentance, and condemninge his own decree, praised that counseel of the
Apostle: It is better to mary than to burn, addinge for his part this: It is
better to marye, than give occasion of murder. Thus much among many other
reasons concerning this matter, this Bishop wrote a. vii. c. year sins. Friar
Mantuan says that Hilary the learned writer and Bishop of Poiters in France
was married. The counsel Gangre^se about a iii. C. year after Christ says. If
any man think that it is not lawful for a married priest to use his ministry,
or abhor him for that cause, cursed be he. The Priests of Spane did
earnestlye defend their marriage against Pope Syricius, being angrye with
them. Thus far ye see of how late years, and how troublesome a beginning
this forbiddinge of priests marriage had in other countries, now let us see a
little how and when it began here in England, that this proud prycker and
unlearned papist, may see his own folyshnes. If I should begin at Wales, the
relics of the old Britans which have at all times suffered their Priests to
marye in all poperye, parauenture some would call them concubines for a shifte
rather then wives, as they be in deed, but surely if papists will suffer
fathers so to bestow their daughters, and their chaplains to keep unlawful
women, rather than their lawful wives, (as Pigius their great patron sais it
is better for a priest to keep a whore than have a wife) they declare whose
children they be. Marriage is of God, whoredom is of the Devil, therefore I
come to more certain things. In the time of King Henrye the first, Paschall
being Pope and Ansel. Bisshoppe of Cantorb. about. iiii. C. years sins, this
diuorcynge of Priests began chefely here with us. The Pope willed Ansel. to do
it, he attemted to do it, and the king withstode it, as appears by sundry
Epistles of Ansel concerning the same matter. Epi. lxxvii. and. iii. c. lxxvi
Ansel. to his brether and suns, the lord Prior Ernulph and other serving god
under Ernulph.
him in Christ's church in Cantorb. gretinge and his blessinge.

As concerning Priests of whom the king gave commandment that they should
have both their Churches, and their wives, as they had in the time of his
father, and of Lanfranc late archbishop: yet both because the king hais
reuested and reseased me of the whole archbishopricke, and also because so
cursed a marriage was forbidden in a counsel in the time of his father, and the
same Archbishop, boldly by that autoritye which I have by tharchbishopricke, I
command not only within tharchbishopricke: but also through out England,
that all Priests which keep their wives, shall be deprived of their churches and
ecclestasticall benefice. Mark the things contained in these few words: the
kings commandment for Priests to keep their benefices and wives both,
contrary to Pope Gregory's decree before, and yet not contrary to the custom
in his fathers time and Bishop Lanfranc. And where Ansel. demanded Ansel.
the Popes advise what was best to do, saying it was so hard to divorce
them, note the Popes answer. Epist. iii. C. xxxi. Paschal Bishop, servant
Paschall.
of Gods servants, to his reverend brother Anselme Bishop of Cantorb.
gretyng and Apostolical blessing.

We believe your brotherhode is not ignorant, what is decreed in the Romish
church concerning Priests children: but because there is so great a multitude
of such within the Realm of England, that almost the greater and better part of
the clerks are reckened to be on this side: we commit the order here into your
charge: For we grant those to be promoted to holy offices (by reason of the
need at this time, and for the profet of the church) whom learning and life
shall commend among you: and yet notwithstanding the prejudice of the
Ecclesiastical decree be taken head to hereafter. Here I note the Popes
confession that almost the greater and better part of the Clergy here in
England were married than, and that he suffers them to be promoted to
benefices, and afterward as time would suffer to execute the Popes deuorcing
decre. When the Bishops could not well bring those divorces to pass, the Pope
send Joan his Cardinal to do it: and he as Polychro. Polychro.
writes lib. vii. ca. xvi. was taken the same night in bed with a door in
the time of Henrye the first. O holy single life that the Pope went about: The
same Polychro. sais also lib. vii. ca. xxxi. that Fuico a French Priest came
to king Richard the. i. and bad him mary his. iii. daughters, the king said
he had none, yes says he: Pride, covetous, and lecherye, than the king said:
pride I give to Templers, covetous to white munkes, and lecherye to Prelates,
this marriage was so knytte than that it could not be broken sins, and this was
the kings opinion of them. But not only this hardness was in beginning of
this divorce, but after that they were separated diverse came together again,
as appears in the Epistle that Ansel. wrote to Willyam his Archdiacon in this
behalf. Ansel. Archebyshoppe to the reverend Gundulph Bish. and to Ernulph
Prior, and to Willyam Archdiacon of Cantorb. and to all in his diocese
gretinge. Epi. iii. C. lxxiii. Willyam our Archdiacon hais written to me that
some Priests which be under his custodye, taking again their Wives that
were forbidden them, have fallen into uncleanness from which they were drawn
by wholesome Counsel and commandment, when Tharchdiacon would amend this
thing, they utterly despised his warninge, and worthy Commandment with a
wicked pride. Than he calling together many religious men and obedient
Priests, excommunicated worthelye the proud and dysobedient, which beastly
despised his curse, and defiled the holy ministry as much as in them lay. etc.
Here appears how hard it was to divorce the married Priests, and how some
would not obey though they were excomunicate. I mark also how the Bishop
calls these marriages uncleanness, and sais: they defile the ministerye: but to
an indifferent judge the Priests have better reasons out of the Scriptures for
them selves, than the Bishop had. Let al them therefore that have the fear of
Godde before them, consider the great plages that God laid on this Realm at
that time. The Realm was conquered by strangers. Willyam Conqueror and his
fellows: the Popes Chaplains. Lanfranc Bis. of Cantorb. under king Willyam
the. ii. brought in transubstantiation, and Ansel. under Henry ye. i. next
king folowinge, brought in unmarried priests, and divorced the married, the
doctrine of tra^substa^tiacion is so holy y^ a married priest may not handel it,
the one can not stand without the other, and the one necessarily bringes in ye
other. The late popes were better then they, for in the time of pope Paul the.
iii. keeping his Counsel at Trident a. xvii. year since, came forth that
woorthye book Interim, wherein is entreated the marriages of Priests and
concludet that those which be married, should not be deuorced, but whither any
mo should mary, it should be referred and differred to a general counsel.
These men were more reasonable, modest, and wise than our late brutish
Papists: for in the late days of their raging madness contrary to this decree
of the Pope made not. xvi. year a fore, they deuorsed here with us al Priests
that before were married. But wha^ these old Popes see how hard it was to
drive Priests from their wives, that Helbrande Gregorye. vii. decreed that
none should hear his mass that was married: and by this polity, he brought
more to pass than by excommunication or any other way. Such practices the
Popes prelates are full of: for when the Priests perceived their ministerye was
despised, it made them some thing to relent, and at length altogether to quale.
At the same time, and straight after the conqueste were swarms of munkes,
brought almost into all the Cathedral churches of the Realm. As at Duresme in
the year. M. lxxxiii. the Priests (which than were married) were brought from
Duresme, and had the prebendes of Aucland, Duresme.
Darnton and Norton: and munkes were placed in their stedes, at Durram in the
xviii. year of Willyam the conqueror: and these prebendes were than first
founded and appointed for these secular married priests. O ge^til Papists of
old time that would not displace married priests, but provide livings for them,
where our Edomites persecute them without mercy. Marriage Gods holy
ordinance in Paradise, and blessed is punished of poperye in the world, such
is their wickedness. In other places as Winchester, Worceter and else where,
this bringinge in of Munkes, and dryuinge out married Priests, began a little
before the conquest under king Edgarus but no great differens in the years.
Dunstan and Oswalde Bishops of Worcetor first and after of Cantorband York,
were great helpers in this matter. Oswald thrast all the clerks out of
worceter Church which would not be made munkes. Ethelwoldus Bishop of
Wynchester thrast out his married priests likewise, if they would not forsake
their Wives, and become Munkes, and placed Munkes in their stead, but they so
hated the Munkish life that they were content to leave al rather than become
munks, every one of them save iii. But after y^ death of Edgarus, Aelfer king
of Mercia (which was the middle and chief part of England) and many other
nobles of the realm, drove out the munkes and brought in the married Priests
again. These and such like are written in the records of these churches, and
were done many of them about the year of our lord. ix. C. lxiii. and after.
Polychroni. also in his. vi. book touches many of these things: These things
I have spoken more large lie because he charges us with disobeying all laws,
as though these were never done in England before, and good men should not
suffer them: and also that the world may see how lewd, unlearned a
Proctour hays taken their case in hand, If he were not to far paste shame,
he would not deny the laws of the Realm to suffer Priests marriage, seeing
the. xxix. Iniunction which the Queens highness set forth, entreates of their
marriage only. But this is their obedyence, that they show to their Princes,
in deniynge their laws: and it is their old opinion that Iuiunctions be not
laws, nor Princes have that autoritye over them to make such laws. God give
them better minds, or grant the Prince better subjects.

It were to long to write all that may be said in this behalf, and it is not
my meaning: only I would let them see which would learn how wrongfullye
Priests marriage is accused. For the froward obstinate, that will not learn,
but contemn and condemn all that gain say it, before they hear them
speak, I say with our Savior Christ in a like case: let them alone,
they be blind, and guydes of Math. 15.
the blind: They are not to be passed on, do as truth, Gods word, and a
good conscience teaches, you nothing regardinge their ralynge blasphemies.
Austin in his book de bono coniug ali. Ca. xxi. comparyng the chastity of
marriage and slngle life together sais thus. The virtue of continentie must be
always in the power of the mind, but in deed if must be showed as things and
times change. For as there was not a diverse merit of sufferynge Martyrdom
in Peter that suffered cruel death, and in Joan that suffered not: So there is
not a diverse merit of Chastytye in Joan which was not married, and in Abraham
which gate children. For both his syngle life and this man's marriage, served
Christ as the time changed, but Joan had Chastytye both in power and deed,
Abraham only in power. Again. ca. xxii. evil men say to him that is
chaste: Art thou better than Abraham? but when he hears it let him not be
afraid, but say, I am not better, but the chastity of single men is better
than the chastity of marriage. Again ca. xxiii. If we compare the things them
selves together, it is sure that the chastity of continentie, is better than
the chastity of marriage, and yet both good: but when we compare the men to
gether, he is the better that hais a greater goodness and virtue in him than the
other hais. Thus far Austin. Mark the difference that he puttes betwix the
goodness of things themselves, and the goodness of the men that have them. I
am sure many will judge that I speak this to please my wife: but we read that
Paphuntius unmarried (when some in the counsel would have determined Sozo. lib.
1 Ca. 23.
that Priests should leave their wives) persuaded the contrary. Spiridion
being married as he writes also, and having children was never the worse, or
^^i. Ca. 11.
hindered to minister the sacraments. Chriso. in his homily on the marriage in
Cana Galilea writes thus. Thou repro^^s marriage that they be a let to godlynes:
but will thou know that it hurtes not to have wife and children. Had not Moses
wife and children? was not Helias a virgin? Moses brought Manna from heaven,
and Helias fire: god spoke to Moses, and was conuersaunt with Helias. Did not
Moses make Duales to come: and Helias shut up heaven from rain with a word?
Did not Moses divide the sea, and brought through the people? Was not Helias
taken into heaven in a fiery charet. Did virginitye hurt the one, or was wife
and children a hindraunce to the other? hais thou marked Helias in his charet
in the aer, and Moses going on foot in the sea? Mark Peter also a pillar of
the church that he had a wife: for it is written that Jesus went into Peter's
mother Math. 8.
in law, being sick, touched her and the fever left her. Where there is a
mother in law, there must needs be a wife, and daughter in law. Sees thou not
than that Peter had a wife? blame not marriage than. etc. thus far
Chrysostom. I could show you like examples of married ministers at these
days, which are not hindered in their duty doing thereby, nor in any part of
godlynes: but rather forthered in that household cares be taken from them
thereby: and in sikenes, they better cherished These be enough for them that will
be persuaded, or more will not serve. It is not hard to bring diverse more
autorities out ot the Popes distinc. xxviii. and xxxi. to prove this withal:
but he that is father of all filthiness is not worthy to bear witness in so
honest a matter. In Moises law where every one should marie with in his own
tribe, the priests had this privilege that they might marye with the kings
stock: but our men abhore Priests marriage, lest they should get
gentilwomen, and so possibly might enherite their lands. God was not so wise
to foresee these things as we be, and that which Gods wisdom thought good and
commendable, we with our polities think hurtful and unprofitable. God make
us wise in him. For the foolyshe writhinge and rackynge of the scriptures
folowinge, because they be so vnaptlye applied that a blind manne may sce
them, I will not stand to set out his folly: for they conteyne no matter of
weight against us.

They have invented a new way to make Bishops and Priests, and a manner of
service and ministracion that Saint Austin never knew, Saint Edmond, Lanfranc.
S. Anselme, no^ never one Bishop of Cantorb. saving only Crammer, who for soke
his professyon as Apostata, so that they must n^^es condemn all the Bishops
in Cantor. but Cra^mer and he that now 9
is: all the Bishops of york sauy^^ Holgate, and he that now is: although
Saint Wilfride, S. Willyam have been taken for Saints, and were Bishops in
york. In Couentre and Lichfyelde S. Chad was Bishop and many blessed Bishops,
and he that now to Bishop, can find not any one that ever was made as he is,
nor of his religion. Therefore he must prove all Bi^shops (...) Lichf^loe were
deceived, walked in blindness, and ignorance, or else he that now is must needs
be deceived and be in blyndnes: In Duresiue haut been many good fathers: but he
that now is Bishop can not find any one predecessor in that see that was of
his relygion and made bishop after such fort as he was: so that he that no we
is, must take in band to condemn all the Bisshops before him that they were
in ignorance and blindness, or they will come to his condemnation at the day of
indgement. And this in all Bishoprics in England, some can find one, and some
none that ever was of their religion. What arrogance may be thought in those
men that will take in hand to condemn so many blessed fathers al to be in
blindness Here this proud Papist triumphs as though nothing could be said to
the contrary. For our church service I said enough before, now mark what
weight his raginge railynge words have. He sais Saint Edmonde Lanfranc, Ansel.
never knew such an orderyng of Priests, and Bishopes, how proves he that? I
think they did: for they lived in that age when religion began to decay,
blyndnes and supersticion to crepe into the world, and therefore could not be
ignorant of such good order as had been before them, although they them
selves than began to change and bring in the contrary, whereof I declared
part before as marriage of priests, church service. etc. To grant that so many
Bisshops of Cantorb. york, Lichfield, and Duresme were in blindness, he thinks
it such an inconvenience, as no man will do it: and therefore these that now
be Bishops must needs be deceived. I am not of that oppinion to think it a
shame to grant that Bishops be deceived either in that age or other: for
there hais been no man so holy (except Christ Jesus) but he hais been deceived
and ignorant in many things, even in religion. Did not Paul rebuke Peter
for dissembling in meats with the Jews? Only Christ hais the full truth. That
is the proud principle of Popery to, think that they can not be deceived: yet
in that saying they are most fowly deceived. The Scribes and Pharases used the
same reasons against Christ our Lord, and the false Prophets against the
true, saying that they kept the old true learning, and the other brought in
a new, and deceived the people. But in grauntinge these old Bishops to be made
after another sort than these be now, what harm may follow? What auncienty
be they of? al sins the conquest, and not past v. C. year sins. Than it is but
new in comparison of of M. D. l. And if our order agree with Christ's doings
and his Apostles writings better tha^ theirs, are we to blame in forsakyng
them, and following Christ and his Apostles: or are we to be counted deuisers of
a new way, when we follow that which is M. ycre elder than theirs. Nay surely
their deuyses be new, and we restore the old religion again, practiced and
taught by Christ and his Appostles: which they have defaced with their new
devised supersticyon and Popery. Whither is it more to conte^ne or correct
these Bishops of Cantorb. York, Lichfielde, and Duresme that he names, rather
than Christ our Lord, Peter, Paul, Timothe, Titus. etc. Whether is to be
judged elder, wyser, and godlyer, these Bishops that he names which are not
v. C. year old, or Christ and his Appostles which be M. D. year old and
more? In the Acts of Thappostles where Matthias was chosen instead of Judas
the traitor. Where the. vii. Deacons were chosen, and when Paul and Barnabas
were sent forth to preach, how few ceremonies were used in comparison of that
multitude which the Papists use now? and The orde^^ng of my^^ysters.
how much does it agree with our kind of orderinge ministers better than with
theirs: When Paul taught Timothe and Titus to appointe mynisters and Bishops
in every town how far differs it from the Popes oiled shauelinges? Act. i.
Peter calls the disciples together, preaches unto them: they fall to prayer,
and those Matthias instead of Judas. In the vi. of the act. the Apostles
assemble ye people declare to them how they themselfes should follow preaching,
and wills them therefore to pike out men of honestye and godliness to serve
the poor, they pray together, lay their hands on them, and made them
Diacons to provide for the pore. In sending forth Paul and Barnabas when they
Act. 13.
were assembled to their ministry, they fasted, prayed, laid their hands on
them and send them forth. In the. viiii. Paul and Barnabas ordained in every
church ministers, requirynge the consent of the people (by holding up their
hands, as the Greek word there signifies) In ye. i. Epistle to Timoth. ca. v.
he biddes him that he lay not his hands rashlye on any manne, where before he
had taught him sufficientlye what manner of men, and with what qualities be
should call and think them me^e for the ministry. But because he finds not
so great fault with the men that be calde now a days (although other do
grudge at them, as with the order and manner of their calling. I will only
answer to that point which he touches. In these places of the scripture before
rehearsed there be these things to be noted, in sending forth ministers. First
an assemblye of the Clergy, and people to bear testimony of their honesty
and aptnes that be calde: for it must not be done in corners, least such be
admitted as be unworthy, and with whom some could or would have found faut, if
it had been known and done openly. The ministry is so godly a vocation that
none ought to be admitted to it having any notable faut in them, or if they
may not abide the trial and judgment of the multitude, yea, though they be
heathens. For Saint Paul sais they must have good testimony of their honesty,
even of them that be out of the church. Secondly I note they used
exhortacions, with fasting, prayer, and layinge on of hands. These Ceremonies
we be sure are good and godly, because Thappostles used them so often: and these
except some great cause to the contrary are to be used of al in calling of y^
ministers. Al these things the order now appointed observes and no more: all
the popish ceremonies be cut of as vain and superfluous. The time of giving
orders now is the holy day, when the people be assembled that they may see who
be called: and if they know any notable fault in any of them that are there to
be appointed ministers, or Bishops, they may declare it, that they may be
rejected as unworthy. The Popish Prelates give their orders on the Saturdaye,
when the people is not present, and commenly at home in their chappelles where
few resort to see. The Bishops now use in giuyng their orders, an
exhortacion, commen prayer, the Communion, and laying on of hands, which
Thapostles used. The Pope and his Prelates have devised of them selves,
clippinges, shauinge their crowns, an unlawful compelled vow to live
unmarried, oil for an ^intinge their fingers, and power to sacrifice for quick
and dead, their double latin matins, and Euensonge daily with such a kind of
apparel that they be more like to Aaron and Moses priests of the old law,
than a simple preacher of Christ's Gospel, or minister of his sacraments of
the new Testament. When we do that which Christ and his Apostles did and used,
we may be sure it is good lawful and necessary, when we add any thing of our
own, it may be doubted on, and if it be commanded as necessary, or as the
true worship of Godde it ought to he refused, changed, yea condemned. For
Christ sais. They worship me in vain teaching doctrines, the commandments
of men. Therefore Math. 15.
as he reasons here, that it should be to great an inconvenience to say that
these Bishops which he names were blind and ignorant in their doings, and
that they would come at the judgment to the condemnation of these new Bishops
which follow not their ways. I had rather turn his argument against him self
on his own head, and say: that it is a greater inconvenience yea blasphemy,
to say that Peter, Paul Timothe, Titus. etc. were in blindness and had not the
right order of appointinge their ministers, but that these latter Popish
Prelates have invented of late years a perfecter way to do it than they knew or
used. Let them prove that either Thapostles themselves, or any of their
scholars used clippinge, shauing their crowns, the vow of single life,
sacrificinge for the dead, oilinge their fingers or crown, their Iewysh
apparel their halowinges, crossings, blessings, or such trashe as their order
is full of, and than blame this new order: but because they can not (the
Scripture teachinge no such thing) I say they be Hypocrites, layinge heavy
loodes on men's backs and consciences, yea greater than any may bear, not
touching them with their finger, to ease them, but rather to press them
down lower in preferringe man's dreams before the simple truth of the
Gospel, Christ and his Apostles with their scholars shall come in judgment
to their condemnation: For that they have maintained their own devises before
the infallyble truth of the Scripture, the perfect rule and only example of
all our doings and religion. Than if our Bisshops now use all such order as
Thappostles theymselues used (as in comparinge them together it will easelye
appear) why should any proud Papist be so bold to correct magnificat, to
reprove them, and say that the Pope hays devised a better way than
Thappostles used? or why should any weak conscience hanginge on manne rather
than on Godde be offended to see such vain superfluous and wicked toies left
of and not used. If they left out any thing that Thapostles used they might
well be blamed: but seeing they had rather follow them as their schole masters,
and not the Pope, they were to be praised. Are Papes wiser than Thappostles^ or
shall Papists for folowinge their father of lies be preferred to Protestauntes,
which have Gods word and his truth with the doings of Thapostles for their
defense to allege for them. God forbid. But I think this good Proctour of the
Pope is offended, because the new Bisshops run not to To. theymselues, or by
their deputye to do their homage to their holy father, and swear an unlawful
and traitorous oath against their lawful and natural Prince, and bring home yt
holy relic their Palle, which many have bought so dear, that in gathering
money for it, they beggerd their bole diocese. Yet that the blind may see that
these ragged Popish cloutes which they think so holy relyques and
necessary are not of such worthiness nor to be regarded so highly, it is
easy to see even in this realm, and others that both they have been not
regarded of old time and also that they had another facion of making priests
and bishops, than our papists of these days have, and more agreing with the
order that the new bisshops use. Fabian writes. part iii. ca. ix. Palle.
that the Bishop of Saint Dauyds had no Palle from Rome at all, from the
time that Samson was Bishop there unto the time of king Henrye. i. in which
space were there. xxi. Bisshops. Polychro. writes lib. v. cap. xii. that
Northumberlande was without Bishop. xxx. year: without Palle. C. xxv year:
nor had any altar at all unto the vi. C. xxiii. year of our Lord, than these
things are neither so ancient nor so necessary as Papists would make men
believe, saying they had no altars, than they had no Popish masses: for they
may not be said but on a hallowed altar or superaltare. The Pope decreed that
all Abbotes and Bishops being chosen to their dignities should come to To. to
be confirmed and blessed: by which means, he and the Cardinals, made them
to pay such sums of money to be spedelye dispatched (as our under officers
do now for expedicion) that they impouerished many Realms by it, and enriched
themselves, by reason whereof king Edward. i. perceiving the Bisshoppe of
Elye, and Thabbot of S. Edmons berye, being than chosen to their dignities to
have spent so much money, was ashamed of it, and forbade any mo to go thither
afterward them selves. For they beggerde their Churches, or they could pay
their dettes, as Matthew Parisien writes all this at large and more speaking
against this decree of y^ popes. The Bishops of Colen and Meant pay either to
the Pope for their palle. 24000 Ducats. The same man sais also that Thurstan
archbyshoppe of york going to a counsel holden at Remis by Pope Calixtus was
forbidden of the king to be consecrate of the Pope, and sworns also: but he
notwithstanding as a wicked manne obtained of the wicked Romans by rewards,
to be consecrate there of the Pope: Which thing when the king heard tell of,
he forbade him all places of his dominion. Thomas Hatfeld Bishop of Duresme
chosen an. M. iii. C. xlv. and the. xix. year of Edward the. iii. paid to
Pope Clement. the. vi. ix. thousand florence of gold, for his commen service,
beside five accustomed services, which were. xliii. florence yearelye: which
appears by the Popes acquittance made to him. The Bishop of Lions declared in
the counsel of Basil that the Pope had. ix. Millions of Crowns yearlye out of
France of the Bishops. A million conteynes ten hundredth thousand. If these be
not his griefs perauenture because they have not the cruche and miter as the
old bisshops had, displeases him: Surely such horned beasts be fitter for the
pope than the Gospel: For as the Latin proverb. says of unruly beasts that
they were wont to be known by hanginge hay on their horns. Fenum habet in
cornu: So these unruly popish cattle, have their mark that they might be
known by, their horned miters: or else because they were of the generatyon of
the horned beast, that Daniell in the vii. cha. and S. John writes of in his
revelation. xiii. and xvii. Read the latter end of Gildas our country manne,
in his chronicle and chidinge exhortacion to the Priests, and ye shall find,
that in his time which is a M. year sins, there were diverse other parts of the
scriptures appointed to be red out of the Acts of the apostles, and Peter's
Epistle when they were appointed ministers, and made Priests, which the Popish
prelates use not in orderinge their chaplens now. Whereby it may be gathered
that the ceremonies differd also. But the barbarousnes of the time hais been
such sins, that scars any perfect memorial of their doings remain. The
rude Sarons over ran this Realm, and destroyed al learning and religion,
with help of the Pope and his creatures, the Munkes and Freers: so that unto
now of late years very little good learning ^ais been heard of. Dionisiu^
Ari^pagita as he is commenly called, and whom they say was Paul's scholar, and
of whom Saint Luke writes. Act. xvii. sais in his book (if it be his book) as
they say it is, that in making their priests and Bishops in his time, they
used no more ceremonies, than to bring him Ecclesiast. Hiera^ch.
that was to be calde a Bishop, to knele before the altar, to lay the Bible on
his head, and the Bishop his hands also, with certain prayers and
salutations. This simple facyon was used of old time, without any further
ado. The priests and Diacons had not all these ceremonies in their creatinge:
and yet ours Bishops which follow this aunciente simplicitye, are blamed that
they have devised new facions of their own, which never were heard of before.
But by these few things that I have resited, it may well be seen how malice
hais blinded their Popish hearts, falsely to accuse the Protestants of those
things which are not true. And to put aways all doubts, that may be moved for
the auncientie and autoritye of their order and facion of making Priests and
Bishops, Polychro. writes lib. v. ca. xii. that Pope Honorius sent to Honorius
bishop of Cantor. the Palle and the order how to make bishops, this was about
y^ year of our Lord. M. C. xxvii. Look how ancient it is, and they cris M. D.
years old, where it is not past. iiii. C.

And as Dyonise in this orderinge of Priests declares, how far they
differed in his time from all these Popish toys that this beast would
burden the Church and simple souls withal: so shall ye find in him also,
how much they differed in his age, in ministering ye Communion, in duriynge the
dead, and other such service and ceremonies from the Popes synagoge in our
days. In so much that it may be truly said of this our religion that Freer
mantuan said: Hec nouitas non est nouitas sed vera vetustas.

The Popes supersticion may well be called new as I have proved by many
particulars before: but this of ours is both old and true, as it may be more
fullye proved than I have yet spoken. Therefore let them set better clerks to
speak for them, and prove it by the scriptures, or else for shame hold
their peace. But a scalled horse is good inoughe for a scabbed esquier: and for
so false a doctrine, so foolyshe unlearned a dronken dotel is a mete
scholemaister. They know well enough that they be not able to stand in
defense of it, and therefore they set up such a dolt, that when he takes a
foil no man will marvel: and yet they shall think that the stout champions
are behind, which can bind bears and confute all men. But surely this rude
ass is the mouth of them all to utter what they think, and they have no
better ware, than he hais uttered, let them put their helping hands to, and
bring better stuff if they have it, but if they run to the later constitutions
of Gregory and Clemens or such like we know what auncienty and authority they be
of, and our answer is ready: for they them selves keep them not.

What religion the old Bishops have been of from the beginning in these sees
which he names, or how they were made I think no good record declares. The
rudeness of the times have been such, and such destruction of old monumentes,
both by inward and outward war, that none or few remaynes. I will note
only therefore such things as were done in our days that every man
knows, or else such as be in print. In Duresme I grant the Bishop that now is
and his predecessor were not of one religion in diverse points, nor made
Bishops after one facion. This hais neither cruche nor miter, never swear
against his Prince, his allegians to the Pope: this hais neither power to
christen belles, nor halowe chalices and superaltares. etc. as the other had,
and with gladness, praises God that kepes him from such filthiness: his
predecessor wrote, preached, and swear against the Pope, was justly deprived
afterward for disobedience to his prince: and yet being restored, submitted
himself to the Pope again. Stout Steven and bloudye Bonner with other
champions yet living, be in the like case: God defend al good people from such
religion, and bishops.

For these other holy Bishops that be reckens and calls saints, if I should
speak all that I know, and they deserve, it were to long a book, and to wise
men it would be thought a scorn, rather than a praise. There is no good
ancient history that makes mention of them, for they them selves are not
ancient, nor long it is sins they lived here. There is no better history than
y^ popes Portuis and Legenda Sanctorum, with such like that speaks of them,
and to read those Miracles would make a horse to laugh: yet some thing will I
say. In the time of that famous Prince Henry the. viii. When Gods enemy,
and the ouerthrower of all Princes, the Pope, was bannyshed this Realm, it was
decreed well, that all Doctoures, Deanes, and other heads men of the Clergy,
should declare to the people in their sermons, the usurped power of the Pope,
diverse times in the year. Among other, one D. Str. preaching at York, and
inueying against thabuses of Poperye (although in many things a Papist
himself) and namelye against his canonizinge and making of saints: among
other he fell in talk of Saint Willyam of york, and said, that Saint Willyams
horse was more woorthye to be made a Saint, than saint Willyam himself. The
reason was this: Saint Willyam on a time wha^ he was made new Bishop, riding in
his rialty over Owes S. VVyllya of York.
bridge, within York (as he was wont to do often, very gloriously, and as
stoutlye as Thomas Becket, in whose time he lived also) the bridge brake, and
many that followed were drowned. Saint Willyams horse, as full of courage as
his master, with wrastlynge and sparringe up, saved himself and his master
from drowninge. The horse did the notable deed, and deserved the praise: but
the Master wanne the reward, and was made a Saint by the pope. This and such
other, is enough with the Pope, to make his servants Saints: but this
Bishops life and doings, other ways before Godde and godly men, are in
wickedness as evil as Tho. Beckets. He was so unhappy a man that when he was
first chosen Bishop of york, the pope Eugenius would not confirm him, but
made Henrye Murda^h Bishop there in his stead. When both that Pope and Bishop
were dead, than he was chosen again, and made Bishop of york, and cominge so
gloriously into the city, as I spoke of, the bridge brake for the weight of
men that followed as Legenda no^a sanctorum sais in his life. S. Edmond was so
holy, as the same worthy history says, that when diverse women came to his
chamber to him, he would Edmond.
not touch the^. If ye believe him, he ever set great store by women, for honor
of our lady, the same writer sais also, and when one of his friends rebuked
him because he talked so often with a certain wife, he said? sees thou not how
fair she is, and often sat by me and yet I was never temted with her.
Polychronicon also tells the same tale lib. vii. Further when one of his
clerks, sitting at dinner, did eat nothing because that day was ordinarye to
have his fit of a quartan, he asked why he did not eat: because I look for my
fit sais he. I will make a cross on this lamprey in my dish sais Edmond, and
put in thy mouth in the name of the Trinitye, and thou shalt be holle. But
that such holy men may do what they lust, and have it for well, yet if poor
souls should have done it, it would have been laughed at, and counted a
charminge, for lampery is very evil for a quartaine. Lanfranc brougt Lanfranc.
Ansel.
in the heresy of transubstantiation. Anselme divorced married priests, and
sais also further that Lucus was the first Bishop of Rome writing in the
latter end of his commentaries on the. ii. Epistle to Timoth. Let the Papists
look their books, and see whether I say true, and than judge how truly they
crake that Peter was the first Pope at Rome and that all the rest have their
authority from him. If this fool had looked, he should find some Bishops of
Cantor. even Papists as Austin and Ansel, to have been of our religion in
some opinion of the greatest matters, more than Crammer: whose writings and
doings because they be in print, and so fresh memory, like a berking cur in
the night at the moon shine, he may declare his own malice rather than deface
the godly memory of that holy martyr, and therefore I will not speak of him.
But that the world may see how ^ewdlye he lies when he says that no Bishops
have been of our religion, the same Legenda sanctorum tells: that Anselme
Bishop of Cantorb. came to King Henrye the. i. to desire licens to go to
To. to Pope Urban to fetch his palle. The king said, he knew him not for
Pope, nor it was not lawful for any to name any Pope without his license. The
Prelates and noble men were called together, and Ansel. accused, and all the
Bishops there, said it was not lawefull for him to take Urbane for Pope in his
Realm, and keep his oth^ that he made to the king: and so all the Bishops
(except Rochester) forsaked him, and would not obey him as their archbyshoppe.
Judge now whether any Bishops in this Realm, have refused the Pope before
these our days. And because I have entered to entreat of these holy fathers
that he crakes so much on, I will show you what is written in the life and
historye of Tho. Becket bishop of Cantorb. their stinking martyr, and
traitor to his Prince. When the Bishop was fled out of the Realm the King
sent Ambassadors by the Tho. Becket.
consent of the nobles and Prelates to Rome after him, to declare the matter,
and accuse him of disobeying the king, troublinge the Realm and the Clergy,
and of periurye, in not kepinge the laws which he swear to first. The
Ambassadors ware, Roger Archebysshoppe of York, Gilbert Bishop of London,
Roger Bishop of Worceter, Hilary Bishop of Chichester, Ba^tholmewe Bishop
of Eretor, the earl of Arundel, with many other noble men and clerks. Their
orations wherein they accuse this holy traitor be there in print seuerallye,
and somewhat long to recite: but judge indifferently when so many Bishops and
the Earl accuse Thom. Becket before the Pope so earnestly, whither we be to
blame to accuse him now. Theffect of the Bishop of Londons oration to the Pope
and Cardinals was this: and the other bishops ^rations are like. Fathers, the
care of the Church belonges to you, that they which be wise, might be
cherished by you, and they that be unwise, might be corrected that they might
be wise: but he is not thought wise to your wisdoms that trustes in his
own wisdom, and goes about to trouble the peace of his brether, and the
king. Of late there fell a debate in England betwi^t the King and the Clergy,
for a light cause, which might have been easelye buried, if a gentle medicyne
had been ministered: but the Bishop of Eantorb. using his own will, and not
ours, was to earnest not consyderinge what harm might come by such headines.
And because he could not get our consent, he went about to cast the fault of
his rashness on our Lord the King, and the Realm: and that he might deface
our brotherlye love, he flees away no man compellinge him, as it is written in
the Psalm. The wicked flees when no man persecutes him. The other Bishop and
Earl follow with like or more vehement words. When king Egfride had married
Etheldrede, and she had rather live a virgin, than do the duty of a wife, the
king desired Saint Wilfride to counsel his wife to do her duty: the Bishop
would not but rather encoraged her, divorced her, Wilfrid.
made her a Nun, and the king married another, which counsel of Wilfride
was plain contrary to S. Paul saying. The woman hais not power of her own
body, but the manne, for egenda noa Sanctorm in his fe.
she can not depart from her husband, without licens, and but for a time. God
keep us from such holy Bishops. Polychro. lib. v. ca. xxii. declares a knot of
these his holy fathers. Aldelme first Priest, than abbot, and lastly a Bishop
when he* was tempted in the flesh, took a fair wenche into bed with him while
he might say the Psalter: and yet would not mary, lib. vii. ca. ii. Walter
Bishop of Ertford was slain by a woman which goored him in the coddes, with
her sheares, because he would have rauyshed her. Ca. xi. Walter Bishop of
Durram made women to serve him, and the munks at the table, with their hear
hanginge down, where few escaped their hands, ca. xii. Giraldus Bishop of
York, was sais he a lecherous man and a witch. O holy fathers. I trust who
so ever considers these things well, will judge the holiness of these good
bisshoppes on whom he glories so much. The rest of the Bishops which he
names be such like, and because he speaks not much of them I will let them
pass, for they be no better: and out of the same worshipful history ye shall
read of them, because no learned manne hais thought mete to loose his time in
commendinge such. They lived all sins the conquest, not. v. C. year sins: all
made Saints, and promoted by the Pope, and he by them: therefore they must
need maintain his doings, and he theirs. I would not have blotted so much
paper with so much wickedness, nor filled your ears and eyes with such
filthiness, but that he provoked me to it, and calls that good, which is evil,
and light, darkness: The rest be no better. In every Bishopric ye shall find
some bishops that were ennemies to the Pope and his doings in that blind
age. In Lincoln, Robert grosshead appealed from the Pope to Jesus Christ, and
wrote diverse good books against many his doings. Ranolde Pecocke of
Chichester was condemned in the xxvi. year of Henrye. vi. for this new
learning, and specially for saying that a general counsel and the church may
err in religion. In the late days of poperye were burned five bishops, and
five bannished: let them show so many bishops that sufferd within this
thousand year for their God the Pope, and they might have some show of
honesty for the^. It is a rare thing to see a bishop die for religion, and
specially a Papist.

Seeing they reform religion so swell as they say, it were mete* as they
forsake the religion that their predecessors used, as 10
mass, matins, ministracion of sacraments, tht they should also forsake houses,
parks, lands, and revenues, that their predecessors had, and go from place
to place for gods sake and preach. If nothing else, this one saying will prove
him a dissembinge liynge Hipocrite. All the world knows, that the greatest
fault and readiest that they have to lay against the Gospel time, is: that
Church lands and liuinges are taken from spiritual men, and bestowed on
other: and of this thing he complains himself in manifest words hereafter.
Therefore it is manifest, that he would not have the bishops to give away their
lands, seeing he complains of the taking it away: but he would so feign
find a fault in the new bysshoppes, that rather than he find none, he will
show him self a fool in blaming them wherein they deserve it not, and which be
thinks to be no faut in deed. Why they forsake their mass and mattins, is
sufficiently declared before. For their houses, parkes and lands, why some few
that have any such do not forsake them that be left, there is good reason: but
why other some have them not (that they might forsake them if they should) I
fear their popish predecessors have provided to well for them against reason.
They keep house, and such lands as they can get, because they be not
Anabaptists, nor heretyckes, thinking it not to be lawful for them so to do
(for Gods good creatures are ordained to serve Gods good ministers) and also
because they be not so supersticious as the obseruants freers, which thought
themselves so holy that they might not handle money. They remember also that
Godde commaundes them to keep hospitality to their power: and because by this
means it may the better be done, they do not refuse it although gredilye they
do not desire it. The Spiritual men's lands.
Prince also and commen wealth desires a service of them which they can not so
well perform without these: but chefely for the maintenance of learning which
is so decayed almost remediless, and so little hope to recover it, if these
helps be clean taken away, that extreme blind ignorance is like to follow
this age.

Look into the Uniuersities, and spy what ancient learned men ye find
there, either Papist or Protestant. I am ashamed to tell, and it is to be
lamented to see that there is so few, and it is earnestlye to be begged at
Gods hand that it may be amended: but I fear it is rather to be wished
than hoped for.

This plage is over our heads not regarded, and cannot be avoided how so ever
the world go. These few that now live both Papist and protestant must needs
die. Where is there than any learned number to supplye their rowmes? There be
few schools abroad to bring up youth: but so many benefices so small
that no man will take them, and so the parishes be unserved, and the people wax
without fear of God. The Uniuersites have many goodly fresh wits in them but
so young, and without a sufficyent number of aunciente guydes to teach and
rule them, that many men's days shall be spent before any number come to ripenes,
although for their young years many can do well. But fathers and mothers must
answer this question (and they) if they be asked why, they keep not their
children at schole, will say there is more profet to be had in making his son
a lawer, a Physician, or any thing except a minister: for when they have
bestowed all they can get on one child in the Uniuersitye, he shall not be
able to live him self, nor help any fryende he hais, where the lawer will
become a Gentylman, a purchaser, within few years. They will do any thing
with him, rather than make him a Priest. S. Paul biddes: he that is taught,
let him Gala. 6.
give part of all his goods to him that teaches him: and the next words
following be. God is not mocked, as though be should say: If ye deal not
lyberallye with your teachers, and thynk nothing so precious, but they should
have their part of it in their need, ye but mock God in so mockinge his
ministers, but he that dwelles in heaven will mock you again sais David. Let
them wey Psalm. 2.
these words well which in paiynge their tithes if they find one sheafe,
lamb, or flese, worse than another cast it out in scorn, and say it is good
enough for a priest or with worse words as they be full of such. If they sow
spiritual thin 1. Cor. 9:
ges, is it much if they reap your carnal things? No sure: ye have nothing
good enough to recompense their labor with all. In the primitive church it
was not unlawful to have lands, though many sold their lands for to releue
the poor Christians withal. It is no more unlawful to keep lands, than to
keep the money for which he sold the lands: Act. 5.
and Peter said to Ananias that sold his land: Did it not remain to thee,
and when thou had sold it, was it not in thine own power to do with it what
thou would. So Peter grauntes that it was lawful for him both to keep the
lands, and to keep the money to, that he received when he had sold it: and
yet I doubt not but the new Bishops if case so should require, could be
content to forgo all and live as God would, as their deeds of late well
declared, so that they might serve God or his people the better, and rather
than they defile themselves with popery. We read that diverse of the holy
fathers and bysshoppes had lands with their churchesbut it is folly to answer
so curious a fool in a matter of no doubt, but inuen ted of an idle scoffinge
brane. If ye demand why some bishops have so little lands, few houses and
parkes, the reasons also be sundry: but sure lie few or none have so much as
to keep them out of debt, or to maintain that hospitality which is looked for
at their hands. Some of their lands and parkes against their wills be
exchaunged by order of law: but the most part, the malicious Popish prelates
that were their predecessors saying their kyngedome decay, and that
professors of Gods gospel should follow in their places, would rather
give it women, children, horskepers (I say no worse) by lease, patentes,
anuites^, than any that loves god should enjoy it. This is the greatest reason
why they have not lands, and that can not be avoided, more is the pitye. How
many byshoprickes in the Realm have they impoueryshed by these means: so that
they which now succeed are not able to releue them selves nor the poor as
they would and should. The multitude ^ry out on the protesta^tes that they keep
not howses like the Papists, nor such a number of idle servants., they
consider not how barelye they came to their liuinges: what pensions they pay,
and a^^ites which their predecessors granted, how all commodites be leased
away from them. What charges they bear for first fruits, subsides and
tenthes, how they lack all household stuff and furniture at their entering:
so that for. iii. years space they be not able to live out of debt, and get
them necessaries. The popish prelates before they were Bishops had diverse fat
benefices and prebendes, which they kept still for a commendum: they were
stoored of all necessaries of householde before they entered, they paid no first
fruits, so that they may do on the first day more than the other can do in
vii. year. If ye were of the world sais our Lord, the world would love
you, but because ye Joan. 15.
be not of the world, therefore the world hates you. The world loves the
papists therefore they be worldlinges and not of god, the poor protestant
because he will not lie, not flatter, is despised of the world. The world
geues to the papist honor, castles, towers, and all that it hais: to the
protestaunt if he give any thing it is thought to much, and of those things
that it geues, it gives the worste that can be piked out, and yet thinks it
to good. Therefore surely the one hais his reward in this world: the other
must look for it at gods hand. For the proud papist there is nothing good
inoughe: for the poor protestant every thing is to good. What can the
professors of Gods truth therefore look to have here, but to follow thexample of
Thapostles whose doctrine they teach, to suffer wrongs, sclaunders, contempt,
to be counted as out casts, and sheep appointed to the slaughter. UUhan the
Popes butchers are alofte, they broile and brenne, they prison, hang and
torment the selye gospeller at their pleasure: UUhan the Protestaunt is at the
best, and the world semes to laughe on him, he is scars able to live, runs
in contempt and sclaunder of the world, and the lurking papist lookinge for
his day when he may run loose again, gapes to satisfy his bloody heart and
hands, which never will be satisfied with blood. Diverse of these holy prelates
that he crakes so much of, had so leased out their houses, lands and parkes,
that some of the new Bishops had scars a corner of a house to lie in, and
diverse not so much ground as to grese a goose or sheep. So that some were
compelled to tether their horse in their Orcharde: and yet have these holy
fathers provided that if they be restored (as they look for) as many think,
that they shall have al their commodities again. O notable charity, and mete
for the children of such a father. The Lord God for his mercy amend this at
his good will and pleasure. The people are so blind that they rather believe him
that fills their belly, than him that teaches them Christ: so rude that they
care more for y^ body than for the soul. Even as christ when he filled v. M.
with five loves they would have made him a king: but within few days after
they would have stoned him. Paul ^. thessa. 3
wrought for his own living, and would not be a burden to any congregation:
yet he sais that it was lawful for him to take all his necessaries of them
whom he taught. Chrisost. in the lxxxvi. Homil. on Matthew. writynge entreates
the like question and tells causes why he and others had lands belonging to
their Churches. He sais: the unthankfulness of the people was such, that if they
had not such provision they should go a begginge. So surely I think now,
if the Bishops and ministers had not that prouisyon, they might sterue for
hunger. Love and duty to Godde, his word, and ministers, is so decayed that
to get away from them is thought godlynes, pastime and profet. Surely God
will not have his servants so mocked: God turn from us for Christ's sake
that which we deserve and provoke him to, in these our doings. Iulianus
apostata The Emperor that forsaked his faith, hearing that the Gospel taught
the Christians to live in pouertye, and suffer persecution, took their goods
from them, and punyshed them saying, he would help them to heaven, because
their Gospel taught them to live poor and suffer: so our papists hearing
the Protestants preach poverty, and condemn their proud prelatie, have
leased, granted, and given away their lyuynges, that now the pore gospeller
hais scars whereon to live through their malice.

In Christ's Church hays ever been a succession of Bishops from the Apostles
time to this day, in every see. Tertullian says: if in any see there be a
Bishop that 1^
walks not in his fathers steps, he is to be counted a bastard. and no true
inheritour in Christ's Church. Saint Ciprian does say: they that be made
Bishops out of the order of the Church, and not by tradicion and ordinance of
the Apostles, coming by succession from time to time, are not bishops by the
will of god but thieves and murderers. A succession of Bishops or ministers ^e
grant hais been in the world, rather than in any one see or country sins
christ: which succession we say we have and follow better than they, but not
after such sort as he sais and means. God is never without his Church in the
world, although some countries fall, and his church, never wantes his
Ministers and true teachers at the lest pri^elye, although in some ages it
hais them more plenteouslye than in other some, and some times the outward
face of the Church wantes not his errors and blottes. But where he sais,
there hais been Bishops in every see sins Thapostles time, it must needs be
false: For here with us unto the time of king Lucius almost ii. C. year after
Christ, there were no Bishops in this Realm at al but Flamines as Fabian and
Polychronic. Polychro. lib. 5.
say, and heathen Priests: and sundry times sins diverse sees in this Realm
many years together had no Bishops at all, when the unchristened Saxons were
here, and diverse Bishopprickes, here are not half so old as Thapostles time.
Yet in all these ages were some that both knew, taught priuatlye and followed
the truth, though they were not horned and mitred bishop pes, nor oyled and
sworn shauelinges to the Pope. Such popish Bishops I am sure no man is
able to prove to have been in every see of this Realm continuallye sins the
Apostles time, nor else where: when he hais proved it I will say as he does. Does
the sea make the bishop and his doctrine good or badde? Does the place make him
good or bad? If his saying be true that they have such a succession, the
manne must needs be good because he is Bishop of such a place or such (for he
means to have a continual succession of good bishops every where without
interruption:) but whether they succeed in agreement of one true doctrine as
they do of one se^ or place he cares not. If succedinge in place be sufficient
to prove them good bishops, than the Jews and Turks have their good bishops
and religion still at Jerusalem, Constantinople, and else where, for there they
dwell where Thapostles did, and have their sinagoges, levites, Priests and
bishops after their sort. UUe do esteem and reverence the continual succession
of good bishops in any place if they can be found: if they can not we run
not from Godde, but rather stick fast to his word. I think there is no place
where evil bishops have not been. If Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippos,
Colossa, Thessalonica, Macedonia, where Paul preached, and to whom he wrote
his several Epistles, might fall, and have turkysh prelates: why may not Rome
fall to? the same may be sai^e of Jerusalem where S. ^a. was, and of Aphricke
where Ciprian and Austin were, and of other places where Thapostles preached,
and now be fallen away. Succession of good Bysshoppes is a great blessinge of
God: but because God and his truth henges not on manne nor place, we rather
heng on the undeceivable truth of Gods word in all doubts, than on any
Bishops place, or manne: For all men are liers, and may be deceived: only
god and his word is true, and neither deceyues, nor is deceived. In the. x.
tribes of Israel where Iereboam made him Priests against Gods law, and the
greater part of their religion was defaced with idolatry^, yet were there ever
some good Prophets among, that taught Gods people their duetye, though not
of the higher sort of Priests and in autoritye as there be some few among the
Turks at this day also. Elias complains that he was left alone: Of all the
true folowers of Gods law he knew none that feared God beside him self: but
Succession
god said he had reserved. vii. M. that never bend their knee to Baal. So
surely though the great number of priests and bishops having authority have been
these many years the Popes deriyngs, rather serving Baall than God, yet our
good God, pit^inge his people hais in all ages reserved some few that taught the
truth and feared him. God hais not promised that every Byshoprycke, no nor
any one Bishopric should have always good Bishops one after an other, no
more than one good father should have always good children borne of him, nor a
good king should have good Princes to reign after him. After wise Solomon
reigned foolyshe Roboam: after godly Ezechias reigned wicked Manasses: and
after Jesus the son of Iosede^ followed not long after Annas and Caiphas, and
many wicked ones before them. Contrary wise of sinful auncetors came the
innocent Lamb of God Christ Jesus, and after the traitor Judas followed y^
good Apostle Matthias. So that both in king doms and Priesthode, the good hais
followed the bad, and the bad the good. The Gospel sais, that in Moses cheer
the Math. 23.
Scribes and Pharisees sit: if after Moses followed the wicked scribes and
Pharisees, what privilege have our bishops or Popes more than Moises that their
successoures should continue in pureness of religyon, and not fall away as
the Pharisees did? Are they better than Moses? ^r where is this their promise
written in Gods book* the gloriynge of this succession is like the proud
bragges of the Jews for their genealogies and pety gres, saying we have
Abraham for our father, but our Savior Christ said: ye are of the devil
your father and his works will Joan. 8.
ye do. So it may be said to these which crake that they have Thappostles for
their fathers, that they have the Pope their father: for his works and doctrine
they follow and not Thapostles. As Christ our lord, therefore proved the Jews
to be of y^ devil, because they filled his desires: and therefore not the
children of Abraham: so it is easy to see whose children these be when they
follow the Pope and not Thappostles. Succession in doctrine makes them the
sons of the Prophets and Apostles, and not sittinge in the same seat, nor
being bishop of the same place. There is one of his holy bishops that he
crakes so much of, a little wiser and subtiller than he in words although in
sense they agres. He sais that in every see there hais been a succession, but
for example he takes Cantor. and sais in a little scrolle that he wrote for the
autorytye of the church, and sent it privily to his friends to comfort and
confirm them with that they should stick fast, thus. UUe can reckon all the
bishops there sins S. Austin that was the first, and from him go to Gregorye
bishop of Rome who sent Austin hither, and from Gregorye up to Peter, and so
prove that all our religion came from Rome by succession and therefore we must
heng on To. still. He sais ye like may be done in every see: and when it is
proved I will believe it. But I am content to stand with him in trial of this
If Austin was the first, as he sais, than Cantorb. hais not had a continual
succession sins Thappostles time. It is since Austin lived a vii. C lx. year,
but since Thapostles it is M. D. lx How is there than a continual succession
in Cantorb. sins Thapostles time, if they wanted bishops the space of viii. C.
year. The same reason is against other byshoprickes to: and there can not be
proved a succession of their bishops in any one place of this Realm since
Thapostles. And for a succession of agreement in one doctrine, relygion, and
other their doings: they can not find it in Rome neither before Gregory nor
after: Clemens in the book that goes in Clemens.
his name: sais that wives ought to be comen, which God forbiddes: And here of
I think the Papists are so bold with other men's wives, and will none of
their own. Alexander made holy water Alexander
as they say, to drive away devils and heal diseases, as though it were
more holy than Christ himself: for the devil temted him, and yet runs away
from their coniured water as they would make fools to believe. But what papist
was ever so mad to forsake the Phisicions help in his sickness, and say he was
healed by the Popes holy water. If that were true, phisicions might Pius.
put up their pipes. Pope Pius bade keep Ester in the full moan what day in
the weke so ever it light on: and not always to keep it on the sunday, as we
Marcellinus, Liberius, Felix, Anastasius
do now. Marcellinus in persecution sacrificed idols. Liberius, Felix, and
Anastasius Popes, were Arrians and great heretics deniynge Christ to be God
equal with his father. Pope Leo cut of his hand, because a woman kissed Leo.
it, and he felt himself some thing tempted. Joan. i. was send to The Emperor
Joan.
as Ambassador from the king of G^thes, to counsel him to restore the
Churches to Tharrians heretics. Sergius.
Sergius Pope set forth yearly a piece of a cross (which he said was
Christ's) Gregory. 3
to be worshipped and kissed. Gregorye. iii. granted license to marye his uncles
wife, plain against the scripture. Zachar. Zachary.
i. Pope absolved the French men from obeyinge their king, deposed him, and
confirmed Pipine for their king, and so did Pope Steven to. Leo. iii. allowed
Steven. Leo. 3. Joan. 8.
the blood of Christ at Mantua, such a one as was the sweet blood of Halis
here. Joan viii. a harlot wearing man's apparel, was made Pope, and got with
child, and delivered as she went in procession solemly. Nicholas. i. Nicholas
was so proud that he said it was not lawful to reprove the Popes judgments.
Syluester. ii. and Benet. ix. gave themselves to the devil, and offered
sacrifice Syluester. 2 Benet. 9.
to him, that he would make them Popes, and promised after their death wholly
to be his, they entised women to naughtines with them by witch craft. Innocent.
iii. dispensed with the Innocent 3.
Emperor Otho to mary his Nese plain contrary to Gods word. Joan. xxiii. Joan.
23.
denied the souls to live after this life, the Cardinals finding no fault
with him: but the French king compelled him to recante. This is the goodlye
succession that he would have us to follow, of doctrine in Romyshe Popes
written by Platina, and such like no Protestauntes: these be the successors
and fathers whom he would have us to be like unto. God defend all good folk
from all such doings, sayings, beleuynge, living, loving or following. Except
god dwell and be tied in cheares seats, and places he can not dwell in such
wicked men as these Popes be. God dwelles not in houses made with man's hands,
nor in the mighty Prelates of the world: but he dwelles in the pure minds and
consciences of his elect people of what Estate or degree so ever they be.
Compare the doings, preachinges, and troublesome life of Peter Thapostle from
time to time, with the wicked blasphemies of these Romyshe prelates, and with
their lordly idleness, and mark in what thing he is like to them, or they to
him. They are no more like than an apple and Oister: than can not he be
their Predecessor, nor they his successors. If they clame to be Judas
successoures I will not stick with them. In temporal enheritaunce an evil
man may succeed as right heir to a good: but in matters of pure religion an
heretycke or he that dyffers from the truth, can not be a lawful follower in
Gods Church, and defender of the same relygion, and truth, from which he is
fallen, and becomen an enemy. Therefore as the succession of good kings stands
not only in enioyinge the lands, goods, possessions, and pleasures of the
Realm, but in the painful ministrynge of justice, defendinge his subjects
from strangers, maintaining the good, and punishinge the evil, by wholesome and
godly laws: so stands the succession of the Church not in miters, palaces,
lands, or lordships, but in teachinge true doctrine, and roting out the
contrary: by sharp discipline to correct thoffendours, and godly exhortacion
to stir up the slothful, and encourage the good, to raise them that be
fallen by comfortable promises, to strengthen them that stand, and bring home
them that run astraye. He that does these is the true successor of the
Prophets and Apostles, though he live in wilderness as Elias did. Or be tied in
cheanes as Peter and Paul: He that does not, is not their successor in deed,
but in name only, though he have the Popes blessinge, cruche and miter,
lands, and palaces, halowinges and blessings, or all that the Pope hais
devised for his Prelates. To be a Bishop is to be an officer, a ruler, a guide,
a teacher of Gods flock in Gods Church: and to be a true successor in a
Bishopric, is to succeed in like pains, care, and diligent regard of Gods
people. Is he an officer that does not his office? nay surely but only in
name, for he is a thief in his office, and an vsurrer, that takes the profet
and not the pain. An office stands properlye in doing the duty of it, and
not in talkinge of it, settinge in deputies, bearinge a show, brag and face
of a Bishop. When they can bring Thapostles doctrine or life for example to be
like their life and teachinge, they may say they follow Thapostles: but
because they seek to be Lords over the flock, contrary to Peter's doctrine,
and be enemies to the Gospel, and murderers of the professors of it, they be
traitors to their lord God. What does Tertul. make for his purpose? If he
walk not in his fathers steps sais he, he is a bastard. Content, who be the
fathers? surely Thapostles, for in his time the Pope had no such authority, nor
there were any such horned cattle of the Popes made Bishops. Prove than that
the Pope walks in Thapostles steps, and we will reverence him. Surely he is
like no Apostle, except Judas: and these Popish Prelates, so as the father is,
such is the son. Judas sold and betrayed his master for. xxx. pieces of
sylu^r: and our Papists sell their purgatory for. xxx. grotes, the price of a
trental. Or ^ls for their pleasure, I will grant them some thing. The Pope
may be like to Peter in such case as christ our lord said to him: go after me
Satan, for thou understands not the things of god. Peter was ambitious, and
therefore our Lord called him devil, and bade him go back: so the Pope
desiringe to be above all, folowes the devil his father, and therefore we may
iustlye say to them with Christ*, come after me thou devil. But I put case a man should Math. 16.
grant that the fathers which Tertul. speaks of, be the popes in deed of To.
what tha^? what makes it for this man's purpose? Tertul. lived within C. lxxvii
years after christ's death: why tha^, prove that any of these popes and their
trashe which he esteames so highlye to be of that authority and auncientye,
that he would, and than let him begin to crake some thing. He is not able
to do it. XXX. of the first popes which lived almost iii. C. years after
Christ, were persecuted, sufferd death for their religion, lived in caves, and
had none of the rialtie of the world, but were subjects to princes according
to their duty: than these latter proud popes that would rule both God and
the world, by Tertullians saying, be bastardes, and follow not their ancient
fathers, the first popes. And thus he hais brought a good reason against him
self. Does Cyprian make any more for his purpose? Mark his words, and
judge. They that be made Bishops (says he) out the order of the Church,
and not by tradicion of Thappostles by succession, are not Bishops but thieves.
etc. I am content to be judged by these words. I proved before by Paul and
Timothe, by Dyonise. etc. that the order by which our Bishops and Priests
are made now, is more agreeing to the order of the church in Ciprians time
and tradition of Thapostles than that misorder whereby the Popish prelates order
their clergy. Let the^ prove by good writers that their oiling, shauing,
vowing, sacrificinge, apparel. etc. was used in the Church in Cyprians time,
and I submit my self. Ciprian was living more than. ii. C. l. year after
Christ, in which time was no such proud Pope nor Popish order used in the
Church as he requires of us, but only such a simplicitye as I spoke of
before. Thus like a tolyshe boy he hais gotten a rod to beat him self withal:
God send him more wit.

Where the said Preacher does affirm greater matters than the burning of
Paul's to have chanced in the time of supersticion and ignorance, as the
church of Paul's was brent in the first year of Steven. 12
and the steple of Paul's set on fire by lighthing in the time of king
Henrye the vi. they that count that to be the time of superstycyon and
ignorance, when god was, served devoutly night and day, the people lived in
the fear of god every one in his own vocation without reasonynge and
contention of matters of relygion, but referred all such things to learned
men in general counsels, and vnyuersyties there to be disputed: than was the
commandments of god and virtue expressed in living, now all is in talk, and
nothing in living: than was prayer, now is praytyng, than was virtue now is
vice: than was bildyng up of Churches, houses of religion and Hospitals: where
prayer was had night and day hospitalitye kept, and the poor releued, now is
pullyng down, and destroyinge such houses where god should be served,
hospitality kept, and the poor releued. By means whereof gods glory is
destroyed, and the commen wealth impoueryshed, than was plenty of all things,
now is scarcenes. Therefore Operibus credit. If I should fall into a
comparison of the plagues in the time of popecye and the Gospel, although both
were great: yet in supersticious times were the greater. Many did not believe
that these other brennynges of Paul's were true, which the Bishop declared
when he spoke it openly there, but it was either for ignorance or malice, or
both, for all these were true, as appears in records, and many mo. In the
year of our lord. M. lxxxvii. and the vii. day of July the Church of Paul's
and all that was in it, with a great part of the City were burned. Maurice than
being bishop of London, and the. xxi. year of Willyam Conqueror. In the
year M. C. xxxii. the most part of the City of London was burned by the
fire of Gilbert Beket, and in the xxxii. year of king Henrye the first. Of
this kindred came that goodlye impe Tho. Beket. In the year M. C. xxxvii. and
the first year of king Steven, began a fire at London bridge, and burned all
the City and Church of Paul's unto ye come out at Temple bar to Saint
Clementes church, which was than called the Danes church. In the year. M.
iii. lxxxii. and the More and greater plagues in popery than the Gospel.
xxi. day of May: with a great earth quake through the Realm, the cross in
Paul's Church yard was overthrown in the. vi. year of Richard the. ii. To the
bylding of that cross again, Willyam than Bishop of Cantorb. gathered
great sums of money, and enriched him self. And because men should be
more willinge and liberal to give, he and the rest of such holy Bishops,
granted many days of pardon to them that would freely give money, to the
bilding of that cross again. Cantor. granted. xl days. London, Ely, Bathe,
Chichester, Carleil, La^daff. Bangor, every one. xl. days: the sum in all
iii. C. rr. days of pardon, but not one dodkin of money came out of their
purse. All which things and more, the Deane of Paul's declared well at the
cross out of the records of their church and City. iii. year before Lanfranc
was made Bishop of Cantorb. as Legenda sanctorum writes, the hole city of
Cantor. almost, and Christ's church there was burned up with fire in the
beginning of Willyam conquerours days. Polychr. tells. lib. vii. ca. iiii that
a great piece of London, and Paul's Church with the principal Cities of
England were burned. Ca. vii. he sais a whirle wind threw down a. C. houses
in London, and many churches also lib. viii. ca. i. Basil a great City with
many towers fell with earthquake in Edward the. iii. days, and in Naples xl.
thousand were killed. Ca. x^viii. on Candelmas even in mid winter Paul's
steple was burned with lyghtninge in the time of Henrye. vi. Ca. xxii. the
church of Durra^ likewise about. xl. year sins, with many other like. But why
should I stand to prove that which every man knows to be true, if he be of any
lerning and knowledge as though it were a doubt or strange thing? What great
town or church can ye reckon within the realm or without almost, that hais not
sufferd the like? why should we tha^ meruail of this? call to remembrans ye late
dais of popery here we us (not vii. year sins) and see what horrible storms,
thunders, and lightninges, was here by Notingam, where houses, Churches,
belles, woods, and laden carts were overthrown and carried away. But he sais
these chanced some in time of Civil war, and not all with fire from heaven.
What than? what helps that his case? all were in the time of poperye, and many
mo like. And though all these were not with fire from heaven, yet it is as
great a token of Gods anger as well as the other, or more. Sais not David?
Fire, hail, snow, yse, and windy storms do Psalm. 148.
his commandment. If they do his commandment than the one is his doing
as well as the other. Does not god rule the earth as well as the heaven? These
fires from heaven, chance more seldom than the other, and therefore more
fearful, when they come: yet these on earth obey his word as well as the
other, and are not done without him. And not without a cause, it may be a
token of gods greater anger to punish us rather with those things that be
daily among us, and were ordained to serve us for our health, than to corect us
with those that fall so seldom, and are made to fear us, and declare Gods
great fearful majesty.

But this greues him to call that the time of supersticion and ignorance when
God was served night and day, so devoutly as he thinks, and every one lived
quietly without reasoning of ye scripture, and believed what so ever the pope
sent them, and served god after their own divise, and not as god himself
taught the: and so that the belly were full, al was well, though they maintained
ideli lubbers which was no more alms before god tha^ their praitinge was
praying. For their munkishe night prayer, how vain lip labor it was, and
mumbled up of an unlearned sort, I said enough before, and declared how far it
differed from true prayer, but this is that may not be borne, when the people
have the scripture in their own tongue, for than they are able to tell the
Priests their duty and correct their supersticious Idolatry. It skilles not
much though the Papists would have the people to live in blyndnesse still:
for in that the Pope and the Turk agrees well, that their people shall be
unlearned, and understand The people should learn the scriptures.
nothing but what so ever it pleases the Priests to teach them, which is
neither much nor good: but God in his word and the ancient fathers in their
writings do teach christian people otherways. Psalm. 73.
David sais: the father should declare his truth to their children. Moses
sais: Ask thy father and he will tell thee, demand of the elders, and they
will declare unto thee. Paul sais: wives if they Deuteronomy. 32.
would know any thing, let them ask their husbands at home. If fathers must
teach their children, and children learn of their fathers, and wives of their
husbands: how should either party be ignorant? Ierom. sais, men are wont,
women are wont, and Munkes are wont to strive among themselves Psalm. 133.
who should learn most scriptures, and thinks them best that learnes most, but
he learned most, that does most. Chriso. in his xxxi. Homily on S. Joan,
rebukes the people that were so unwilling to learn the scriptures, seeing the
woman of Samaria, of whom there he writes, was so desirous: and that at home in
their houses, they had Tables and Chesses, rather than books: and if they
had any books, they were not occupied. etc. In his ii. Homily on Matthew. In
declaringe how the scriptures refresh the mind, as a wholesome aer does the
body, he moves them to the readinge of it, and rebukes them that say it
belonges to munkes and Priests to read it, and study it, and not to the
people. Thus in corners these enemies of god and his word would draw the
people from their salvation, and would make them believe that it were not their
duty to learn. What blindness is this, to think ignorance better than
learning? and blindness than sight? Saint To. 1.
Paul sais, the Gospel of God, is the power of god, to save them that believe.
Saint Ia. sais, the word of god is able Ia. 1.
to save our souls. Than surely those thieves that would rob Gods people
of Gods word, would rob them of their salvation by christ and sell them
such filthye salues, as the Pope would heal his scabbed sheep withal, which
stinkes in Gods sight. Christ our lord sais: if the blind lead the blind,
both fall into the ditch: than it is not enough Math. 15.
to say, Sir John our Priest taught me thus. For surely if he be as bold
asblind baierd, to lead the wrong, and thou be so mad to follow him, thou
shall be condemned as well as he. If he alone might fall in the ditch, thou
might more boldlye follow him: but now thou art warned, learn and take heed,
for ignorance will not excuse thee.

The Hospitalitye and alms of Abbayes, is not altogether to be either allowed
or dyspraysed. The most of that which they did bestow Hospitalitye.
was on the rich, and not the poor in deed, as halt, lame, blind, sick, or
impotent, but lither lubbers that might work and would not. In so much that it
came into a commen proverb to call him an abbay lubber, that was idle, well
fed, a long lewd lither loiterer that might work, and would not. On these and
the richer sort was the most part of their liberality bestowed that I need
not to speak of any worse: the smallest portion was on them that neded most,
not according to their foundation. Poly chro. sais. lib. v. ca. xxxii. that
Abbaies wasted their goods in glotony and out rage lib. vii. ca. vi. that
munks used haukinge, bu^tinge, disinge, drinkinge, and therefore under king
Richard. i. munks were put from Couentrye, and clerks brought in. lib. vii.
ca. xxv. and Baldwin a munke, and Bishop of Cantorb. did the like with his
munkes the same time ca. xxviii. But whether y^ new munkes with their short
coats, and almost without all religion, kepinge a shepeherde and a dog, where
all this good cheer was before be worse than the munkyshe Idolatrous Popish
creatures which devised a religion of their own, showing their holiness in
their long coats, I leave it to the disputacion of the learned. Look into
London, and see what hospitals be there founded in the Gospel time, and the
poor in deed releued, youth godly brought up, and the idls set to work.
Poperye would some time feed the hungry, but seldom correct the unprofitable
drones that sucked the honye from the laboring bees, nor bring up children in
the fear of God, but to fill the bellye, and not to teach virtue is to
increase vice. Well worth Bridewell therefore, for it is a good schole.

The rest of his railyng is not worthy aunsweringe for there is as much and
more virtue and kepinge Gods commandments used now as was than and more?
though both sorts be bad enough, and the best may be amended. Ask an old
Papist of the commen sort how many commandments of god, and what they be,
and he can not tell. Ask a Protestauntes child of vii. year old that hais
learned his Catechism, and he can tell his duty to God and man, how to live
and die, what to love, and what to flee, better then all their popish Priests
Is it like that he kepes gods commandments which knows not what they be?
how many of the people were taught than would learn, or were moved to learn
their commandments? no: few such at these days are willinge to hear
them, or learn them: how much less to practice them? What a wicked opinion
is this, to think that ignorance is better than learning? or that a man shall
better serve God without knowledge of god, his duetye and his word, rather than
by knowing, feling, and understanding gods goodness, and man's frailnes, gods
mercy, and man's misery, our wretched worldly state, and Gods everlasting
blessed felicitye, God give us grace to think and thank.

The last reason that he lais for maintayning his supersticion, declares what
religion and opinion he is of. Than was plenty he sais, and now is scarsenes
of all things: which how true it is, let the world judge. Look at the late
days of poperye, and see what dearth, death, and scarsenes was than, and
compare it with these days, and the plentye of gods undeserved blessing powered
on so unthankful a people. Then akecornes were good to make Dearth.
bread of, and under Henry ^i. they made bread offerne roots, as Polychro
sais lib. viii. ca. xxi. now commenly the porer sort almost have disdained with
brown bread. Then scholars of the vniuersitys brake by their houses, went and
lived abroad with their friends, being not able to continue at their study:
than was such dearth and scarsity as the like hais not often been red of: than a
Bishop of Mentz was so pursued with rattes in a time of derth, that he was
compelled to flee to his tower standinge in the mids of the river Rhene, a mile
from any land, yet the rats followed him and devoured him there, for his
unmercifulness, and therefore is called the rats tower to this day, this Bishop
was no protestaunt. UUhether the like be now, the blind may see. UUho feles
it? God gives his blessing plentifully, if man could consider it thankfully,
and use it liberally. Who hais cause to complain, or where is it seen? I think
England had not the like plenteous time so commenlye these many years, although
this year corn be dear, and somewhat ^ars. But I put the case that there were
scarsenes and dearth of all things, plagues and war. etc. UUere this a
suffycyent cause to condemn our religion? No sure: no worldly thing good or
evil, will move gods people to judge gods truth, by any other thing than by
gods holy book.

Should we condemn Saint Austin, because the city where he was Bishop, was
besieged and wun by gods enemies, Austin himself being within it, and died a
littell before the winning of it* Should Elias and Eliseus have forsaken Gods
law because there was so great dearth and scarsenes in their times? Should
Daniel for the Lions den, or Paul for his chains have forsaken their God? In
the days of Elias it rained not the space of. iii. year and a half: under
Eliseus in the sege of Samaria, women eat their Children, and Doves dung was
good meat. Only the worldlynges judge by their bellye, their religyon. The
Godles people said to Ier^. We will not hear the word of Iere. 44.
God of thee: for while we worshipped the moon and sterres, we had plentye of all
things: but sins we hard the word of Godde of thee we have had scarsenes
of all things. This is the reason that led the Jews, and by the same is this
Iewishe Papist moved to judge of gods truth. Therefore I can not judge him to
be of another religion than those, whose belie is their God. Let us praise God
for our health, wealth, and liberty that he bestows on us undeserved so
plenteouslye, lest in not thankfullye recetuing his word, and murmuring against
his blessings, we provoke him to plage us worse than before. If wealth may
move, consider what great things the Lord hais wrought by the Queen's majesty,
and than judge. When the Realm was in danger to be given into strangers
hands, and none could tell how to deliver them selfs, god of his undeserved
goodness set up the Queen ours maistres, who quietlye contrary to all men's
expectacion avoided them all. UUhat danger was Scotland in: yet so god
blessed the Queen's majesty that she not only delivered us, but them from
their enemies hands, what relese in France, the poor oppressed have had at
her highness hands, the blind sce, all her louinge subjects reioise, though
the envious Papist murmr and grudge. God grant her highness grace to be
thankful to gods majesty, who does so past all man's expectacion prosper
her doings: that he only may have the praise. UUhat cause we have to praise
god for restoring religion through the Queen's travail, all men of god do see
and praise him for it, though blind papists be sorry therefore. UUhat ^ost her
highness hais sustained in restoringe us a fine coin from so base, wise men
reioise though this malicious fool say we be in great poverty. Look how few
taxes she hais taken to do this withal, and how many and how great were
levied before. How was this Realm pesterd with strange rulers, strange
Gods, strange languages, strange religion, strange coins, and how is it
now peaceablye rid of them all, to the great glory of God that hais
wroughte so many wonderful, strange, great things in so short a time in a
weak vessel, which he never did by any her noble progenitors which have
been so many and so worthy. Could any be so blind, but that malice hays
bewytched, to not see, or not praise Godde for these worthy deeds* I would
have wanted the suspicyon of flatterye in rehearsinge these things, but that I
would the unthankful world should see the disdainefull blind malice of popery
which can not say well by Gods good blessings.

The foolish lynking and clouting of y^ scriptures together which folowes
declares what wit he hais. They may be applied all against himself, and such
as he is, rather than against the professors of Gods truth: what blasphemye is
it to lay all kind of wickedness on Gods word? what evil so ever reigns in
the world it is to be imputed to man, and not to God, to man's frailnes, and not
to gods truth and goodness. God and his holy word punish and condemn al
false doctrine and filthiness: therefore God will confound all such filthye
mouths as blaspheme him or his holy word, to be the cause of any kind of
naughtiness.

All liberty is now used he sais, where in deed justice was not better
ministered these many years, even as the wiser and indifferenter sort of
Papists do grant. Call to remembrance how Justice.
sharplye buggerye, coniuringe, witchcraftes, sorcery. etc. were punished with
death by law, in the Gospel time of blessed king Edw. When were these laws
repealed, but in the late days of Popery, than judge whether there was greater
liberty to sin under the christian king, or under supersticious poperye. But
the sodomiticall papists, think these to be no sins, and therefore beastly
do misuse them selves, defilinge them selves both with spiritual and
Sodomitical uncleanness, whether is there more liberty given to sin when such
sins be made death by order of law, or when the laws apoint no punishment
for them? Surely thegospel is unjustly blamed in giving carnal liberty, and
popery rightfully condemned in taking away the pain, and opening a door to al
mischefe. Who lives more licentiously than the pope himself without al fear of
god, good order, and gods law, doing what he will? so be al his scholars
following their own fathers steps.

In these my sayings I go not about to prove us Angels, yet surely not such
deuilles as he would make us, but in comparison of them we be saints:
therefore let us both amend, that God may be merciful to both, and glorified
in both. And as thexamples in his beginning were good, if they had been well
applied, so is his conclusion. I will conclude with him therefore in the right
sense and meaning of it, saiynge with him. Return to the steps of the good
fathers the Prophets and Apostles, framinge your selves to follow their
doctrine: be not carried away with strange and diverse doctrine of Popes,
contrary to Gods holy word, and invented of late by men. Embrace the religion
and faith taught from the beginning, in christ's Church, from time to time
continually: Flee this new fangled Popish supersticion, which hais crept into
the Church of late years, and believe that only which Christ hais taught,
and his Appostles and Martirs have confirmed, and frame your lives accordingly,
or else Gods vengeance hanges over your heads, ready suddenly to fall
upon you: and let this token of brenninge of Paul's, be an example and token
of a greater plague to follow, except ye amend, which god grant us al to do.

Amen.
A Prayer.
Most ryghteouse and wise judge, eternal god and merciful father, which of
thy secret judgment, haste suffered false Prophets in all ages, to rise for
the trial of thine elect, that the world might know who would steadfastly
stick unto thy undoubted and infallible truth, and who would be carried away
with every vain doctrine, and yet by the might of thy holy spirit hais
confounded them all, to thy great glory, and comfort of thy people: have
mercy upon us we beseech thee, and strengthen our weakness against all
assaults of our enemies: confound all Popery, as thou did the doctrine of the
Pharisees, strengthen y^ lovers of thy truth, to the confusion of all
supersticio^ and hipocrisy: give us due love and reverence of thy holy word,
defend us from man's tradicions: increase our faith, grant us grace never
to fall from thee, but vprightlye to walk according as thou hais taught us
swaruing neither to the right hand, nor the life, neither adding nor taking any
thing away from thy written word, but submitting our selves hollye to thy
good will and pleasure may so pass this transitorye life, that through thy
goodness we may live euerlastinglye with thee in thy glory, through Christ our
lord who with thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns one god and our
Savior for ever and ever.

Have not I hated them O Lord that hate thee, and even ^ined away because of
thine ennemies. Psalm. Cxxxix. I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all
your enemies can not gainsaye and wythstande. Luke. xxi.
FINIS.
Here follow also certain questions propounded by him, which are fullye
although shortly answered.
which is the catholycke Church?
SAint Augustine and S. Hiero^ August ca^ Epist. fu^d. Hiero. con Lucifer.
do say: The Church is a visible company of people gathered of christ our
lord and the Apostles, and continued unto this day by a perpetual succession
living in one faith Apostolical under Christ the head, and his vicar in
earth, being the pastor and high Bishop. Out of this catholic and
apostolical church is no trust of salvation.

Saint Augustine sais, who so ever shall be out August. Epist. 1512.
of this church, although his life be esteamed to be very good and laudable by
this only faut, that he is disioyned and separated from the unity of Christ
and his Church, he can have no life, but the wrath of God hanges over him.

Saint Ciprian says: he seperates himself Ciprian^^ simpliei.
from Christ that does against the consent of the Bishop and clergy.

Saint Hiero. does say: we must remain Hiero. co^ Lucifer.
in that Church which is founded of the Apostles, and does endure unto this
day, by a succession of Bishops to whom the holy Ghost hais appointed the
rule and government of this Church sanctified by Christ's blood shedinge. Nor
let heretics take any comfort to them selves, if they can frame out of the
Chapters of the scripture for their purpose that which they say, seeing the
devil hais alleged some things of scripture: for the scriptures consist not
in readinge but true understanding. If we will be members of Christ's Church,
we must continue firmly in that faith and religyon, that was sent from the
Apostolical see of To. by S. Gregory into England: which faith and religion
was planted and stablyshed by Saint Angustine in this Realm. Saint Augustine
stablyshed mass and vii. sacraments to be used in the latin tongue, as G^das
does witness, and such manner of divine service as is now used.

The answer to the. i. question.
SAint Austin in the first place alleged hais no such definition, although
the most part of the words which he puttes there are true: and would to God
he considered how much he speaks against him self here in. This is that
which we defend: that the Church is gathered by Christ and Thappostles first,
and continues not in the Papisticall but in the Apostolical faith under Christ
our head, who rules his church still by his holy spirit and word, and hais
not put it into the ^andes of any one only general vicar in the earth, as he
vntruelye says: whereas their church is bylded not on christ, but on the Popes
decrees, which Thappostles never knew, and were unwritten many years after
the death of Thappostles, and are always uncertain, chaunginge ever as it
pleases the Pope for his time to determine: And their Church hais had at one
time iii. or. iiii. Popes for their heads, like a monster with many heads,
some Country folowinge one Pope, some another, as their head? We say also
that the Papists have divided them selves from this Church of Christ,
making them selves sinagoges and chappelles, Judge. 17.
gods, and religion, of their own deuysynge as Micha did contrary to Gods
word: and therefore the wrath of God hanges over them except they return,
how holy so ever they pretend to be. Ciprians words are not all together so
plain as he settes them: but if they were, he means an other sort of
Priests and Clergy than the Popes: for neither they did take than to them nor
he knew no such autoritye in them, as they now usurp unto them selves, for he
writes as sharplye and homelye unto Cornelius than bishop of Rome, as he does
to any other his fellow bishops. Surely who so ever deuydes him self from
Christ's ministers and people refusinge their doctrine and discipline,
seperates him self from Christ: even as he that flees from the filthy dregs
of Poperye, and his Chaplains is cut of from the Pope the father of such
wickedness. In Ieroms words we most rejoice, teachinge us to continue in that
Church, which is founded by Thapostles, and not Popes, and endures to this
day: The words of succession. etc. folowinge, are his own, and not Ieroms.
By this doctrine of Ierom we flee to Thapostolicall, and flee from the
Papisticall Church, which was never known of many years after Thapostles.
And we grant that the devil, papists and heretics, can allege some words
of the scriptures: and therefore we say that the Papists be deuilyshe
Heretics because they rack and writhe the scriptures to a contrary meaning
to their own damnation as the devil did. For succession and government of
Bishops: for Austins religion massinge and vii. sacraments, I said inoughe
before: but where he alleges Gildas as father of his lies, he does him much
wrong for he hais never such a word in all his writings. If he have let him
show it. This is ever the facion of liynge Papists to have the names of
doctors and ancient writers in their mouths, as though they were of the same
opinion that they be, where in deed they be nothing less: and if they get a
word or. if that seems to make for them, they will add a hole tale of their
own making as though it were a piece of the same ancient man's saying,
and by this means they deceive the simple which have no learning to judge,
or have not the books to try their sayings by: as this miser goes about in
these places before.

Who is an heretic?
HE that teaches, defendes or maintains any erronyous oppinion against the
decrees, 2
judgment, or determynatyon of Christ's Catholic Church, is an heretic.

Who is a schismaticke?
HE that is divided or separat from the unity 3
of the catholycke Church in ministration or receyuynge the sacraments or
divine service, is a schismaticke and in state of perdicion.

The answer to the. ii. and. iii. questions.
HE would gladly appear to be well seen in logi^, if he had any. If all be
heretics that defend an erronius opinion: than many disputacions shall be
condemned.

In disputing it is often seen that of ignorance or for his learning sake, many
defend an untruth: yet God forbid that they should all be heretics. Austin
says well: I may err, but I will not be an heretic. Then he is an heretic
properlye that defendes an error obstinatelye, and will not be corrected. So
teaches Saint Paul. Flee from an heretic Tit. 3.
after one or. ii. warnynges: he sais not for ones teachinge or defending of
it. Also he is not a schismaticke that differs in small points or
circumstaunces of ministringe the sacraments from other: for than should all
the Greek church be in a schism, because they differ in some ceremonies from
the Latin Church, and also one from another, as I declared before in the
ministration of Basil, Chrisost, Saint James. etc. the same may be said of the
latin church to, as for Ambrose order, Gregores. etc. And because ever under
the Catholic church he signifies Rome, we say that no country which uses
other ceremonies than they do, is in this case a schismaticke: for that their
Romish orders and ceremonies be of their own deuisinge for the most part, and
not commanded by god, nor never were used generally in the universal
Catholic church as I proved before, and therefore they be free to use or not
use as shall be thought mete to differ in the substance and doctrine of
sacraments may make a schism or heresye: but such ceremonies are free to all
countries which may edify as appeared in Ansel. Epistle before. These few
words are sufficient to let him see his own foolyshnes, more might be said
but I will not be so curious nor tedious i. Cor. 1. 11.
to note all. Saint Paul calls the Corinth. schismatickes in henginge on men's
sleues for opinions in religion, and for misusinge the communion: and not for
every diuersitye of triflinge ceremonies, as he defines it here.

Whether be Priests in schism that have 4
subscribed to the religion now used in England.
IN subcribinge to this religion now used in England, they have both refused
the power and authority which was given to them by the Bishop, when they were
made Priests (that is to say power and autoritye to consecrate and offer, and
to celebrate Mass for the quick and the dead) and also they have refused
their canonical obedience solemplye promised to the Bishops with a kiss.
And where the Byshopprs of this Realm with the Clergy assembled at time of
parliament would agree to no part of this religion (in witness whereof the
Bishops be in prison, and put from al their liuinges, and a great number of
the Clergy have lost all their livings) some be in prison, some banished from
their friends: both the Bishops and all the clergy that hais lost their
lyuynges, are al ready to suffer death before they will consent to any part of
this religion. But all they which have subscribed, have forsaken the Bishops
their true Pastors and Capitaynes, obeying and followinge wolves and Apostates:
in witness whereof they have subscribed their names so separatinge them selves
from the Bishops and clergy, they must needs be in schism.

The. iiii. answer.
UUHere he lays to the priests charge that in subscribynge to this religion,
they have refused hoth the power that was given to them to offer sacrifice and
celebrate mass for the quick and dead, and also their canonical obedience
promised to the Bishops by a Judas kiss, because the old Bisshoppes in
parliament did not agree to it: he does the Priests more honor than he knows
of, or thinks well bestowed. If he would call to remembrance thaunswere that the
pillar of their Church, stout Steven makes in his book de vera obedientia, to
the like reason where he was charged with falling from the Pope, and breaking
that oath and vow of subjection which he made unto him, when he was first made
Bishop, he might better defend the priests of our time than accuse them.
In our baptis. we all make a solemn vow to God our Lord that him only we
will serve, and believe his word: all vows folowinge which are contrary to
that, not only may and ought to be broken, but it is wicked to keep them:
for we must serve god only as he hais taught us in his holy word. But the
scripture condemns all such sacrificing now for sin, save only that
sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered ones for the sins of the hole world,
and biddes us also obey our king as chief and highest governor: therefore
the Priests forsakinge these later wicked vows and powers which are contrary
to Gods word, and their solemn profession made in baptis. (as Steven did well
than though he flatterd afterward, and turned to his old vomit) are more
worthyto be praised tha^ these obstinate prelates which now misusing the
gentilnes of the Prince, deny with mouth that which they know in conscience to
be true, and yet charge the Priests with it although they subscribed to the
same things themselfes under that good king Edw. because both they knew it to
be true, and see the rod than more sharply shaken than it is now. And though
he crake in their name that they will rather die than agree to any part of this
religion, which they them selves used, ministered, taught, and received before: I
doubt not but if they were apposed as they opposed other, they would as sone
eat the faggot, as feel it burn them. Thapostle sais: by one offeringe he hais
made perfect all them that be sanctified. If Hebr. 10.
one offeringe ones made, have made all perfect: than cursed be they that will
correct or amend Christ's death, as though it were not perfect to save all
without their often sacrificinge. We must obey Act. 5.
God rather than man, as S. Luke teaches: therefore that unlawful obedience
promised to the Pope and his Prelates contrary to their due allegians to their
Prince, commanded in the Scripture not only may, but ought with safe
conscience to be broken. At the preaching of christ our Lord and his
Apostles, many forsaked the tradycyons of the elders and Pharisees, receiuyng
and beleuinge the Gospel of christ Jesus, and forsakyng the Iewishe
ceremonies, and were not counted forsakers of God and his word: no more are
they surely to be reckened Apostates that forsake the popes draffe, the clogge
of all good consciences, and cleave to the simplicitye of Gods truth, taught
in the scripture. And where he crakes much that they have lost their lyuinges,
and be in prison, or bannyshed, let the world judge whether they ever lived
more merilye, quietlye, fared better, lay easelier, had had more plenty of al
things then they have now. They are far short from such handlyng as they
dealt with other. Some they hongerd to death, some they beat in prison, some
they cast on dunghils being so murdered at their hands, some they burned,
after they had been long bursed: but every one was so miserablye handled that
christian ears and hearts abhor to think, or hear of it, and yet like
shameless beasts they blush not, nor repent, but wish and look to be
murdering again. They are as pale in prison as a butchers bolle: they are as
lean as a fat hog, they lie at ease unto their bones ach with rising early,
they fare of ye best, they take no thought but look for a day, and think long
unto they may embrue their hands in blood again, and make all officers to
be their hangmen, and the stoutest to be afraid of a priests cappe as they
did before. They provided so well for theymselues in their somer that they need
not to sterue in this gentill winter: the world is so much their friend, that
they can lack nothing: they would feign be counted to suffer for religion if
any manne would believe it. The poor protestaunt which hais his liberty,
lives in more miserye, need, det, reproach and contempt, than these the Popes
prisoners, who he sais have lost al. It is better in the world to be the Popes
prisoner than Christ's Preacher, God amend all.

Whether be Priests in schism that minister the Communion and other
sacraments according to the book of commen prayer now set forth?
THis manner of ministration of sacraments 5
set forth in the book of commen prayers was never allowed nor agreed upon by
the universal church of Christ in any general counsel or sacrate synod:
no riot by the clergy of England at the last Perliament: but Act. 6. Act. 15.
only it was agreed upon by the laity which have nothing ado with
spiritual matters or causes of religion, but ought to stand to the decrees,
judgment and determinacion of the clergy in causes of faith and religion. For
so it was used in Thapostles time as appears in the acts of the Apostles: As
when the Apostles took then order to make vii. deacons, and when they put away
the ceremonies of the old law. Such decrees as the Apostles and clergy made
at Ierusal. without any counsel of the laity. Saint Paul and other of the
Apostles taught all Countries and Nations to obey and observe: and since the
Apostles time the clergy hais ever decreed matters of religion and faith. Nor
it can not be proved that ever the laite in any country or Nation before the
last parliament did presume to set forth a religion, against the whole consent
of the clergy. Therefore this manner of ministration of sacraments, now used
being against the consent and determinacyon of Christ's Church which ought to
be ruled and governed by Bishops, it must needs Act. 20.
be schismatic, and they that use this manner of ministration must needs be
in schism. The blessed martyr Saint Ciprian does declare what danger they do
stand in that do use this manner of ministration against the order of christ's
church, saying these words. They be ennemies of the altar, and rebels
against the sacrifice of christ contemninge the Bishops and forsakinge the
Priests of God: they are bold to set up an other Alter with unlawful
voices, to make an other manner of prayer, to profane with false sacrifices the
verity of the blessed sacrament of the Alter: nor they will not know them
that fare about to do against the ordinance of God. For their bold rashness by
the punishment of god they shall be punyshed as he punished Chore Dathan and
Abiron which would offer up Sacrifice against the consent of Moses and
Aaron: some were swalowed up of the earth, and the rest brent with fire to the
terrible example of all others. Hitherto be Saint Cyprians words.

Also almightye God by his holy Prophet Mala. 1.
Malachi, does cry out upon such Priests as minister against the ordinance
of Christ's church saying, they despise his name in offeringe up poluted
bread.

The Prophet Osee does call the sacrifyce of Osee. 9. Ezech. 22.
such Priests bread of mourninge, and all that eat thereof shall be defiled
says the Prophet. Almightye God does complain by his Prophet Ezechiel
saying: the Priests have condemned my law, and have polluted my Sanctuarye:
woe be unto you, that goo^ from the truth says our lord by Esai. Our lord
says by ^^^ac. 2.
his Prophet except such Priests will amend quicklye and give glory to his
name, they shall be brought into great necessitye and poverty and he will curse
their blessings: and because they have made void the pact of Leui, they shall
be in contempt in all people.

The. v. answer.
UUhat if this order of ministringe and commen prayer was not agreed on by the
universal church in general council? Is it not good therefore? Than is
neither their latin Portuis, nor Missall and mass book, good, for the
general church never allowed them, as I declared before. It is free for all
countries to differ in outward order of prayer and ceremonies, so that they
agree in substance of doctrine with the scripture. But the laite he sais hais
nothing ado with spiritual matters and religion, and alleges Thactes of
Apostles, how will he prove that none of the elders there were of the Act. 1^.
laite, nor none of the multitude in the choisinge of the Deacons unto it be
well proved, it may well be doubted on. As in other things so in this he shows
him self how learned he is when the law of God was neglect in the days of
Saul, David coming to be king, and moved with love of religion, calls all the
nobility and worship of the Realm together thirty thousand, and also the
levites 1. Chro (...). 2* king. ^.
and Priests to know their minds whither they would bring home the ark of God, and restore the religion decayed or no? and they answered al, yea, what a
great parliament was this, and full of the laite to determine for receyuynge of
religion. Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, good kings sent their visiters 2.
Chroni 30. 34. 17.
abroad through the Realm ioyninge in commission from the king, noble men
of the laite to go in visitacion with the Levites. Legenda sanctoru^ tells
how king Dswi called a synod at in VV^^frido.
Whithy, for taking away that diuersitye of kepinge Easter which was here in
the Realm, when some kept it in the full moan, what day of the weke so ever
it fell on, other only on the sunday folowinge: Wherein appears thautoritye
that the king justly clames to him self in religion even in that blind age
when he calls the learned men together to dispute on it, hears what they can
say, and concludes so the matter himself that all other did follow his
sentence. Joan Gerson and Panormitanus as I alleged before, no new protestants
but ancient catholics, and both being present in the last counsels at
Constance and Basil, said they would rather believe a pore simple learned lay
man that bringes and alleges the holy scripture, than all the whole counsel
having no scripture for them. Gods truth is not bound to miters, Bishops and
Priests alone, but lay men may have, and often have better the true
understanding of it, than those that look highest in the clergy: and
therefore they are to be believed and heard as well as the Priests. Did not king
David no Priest set in order, ^hro. 23.
the levites how they should resort in course to serve in ye tabernacle, made
the Psalms: appointed them, how, where and when they should be song?
Ezechias and Josias pulled down the brazen serpent and other Images. Did not
Prescilia and Aquila teach Apollo Act. 18.
the mysteries of the scripture? By these I trust it appears that lay men
may do some thing in religion. If these may not serve, look the statutes of
Queen Marie how she takes away one religion and bringes in an other: and there
is no more done now: how blind be they in their own causes, and partial to
them selfs. But it was never hard of he sais that the laite in any country
presumed to set forth a religion against the hole consent of the clergy before
the last parliament. O proud brag, was all the clergy of the realm
contained in a few horned popyshe Bishops. Was there no Clergy in the
university nor other parts of the Realm beside those few Bishops, did not
many in the university and abroad in the Realm use this service openly and
commenly in their churches before it was received or enacted by parliament?
Because the rulers, the Scribes and all the Priests. Act. iiii* forbade
Thappostles in their Parliament and counsel that they should not preach
Christ any more, were not the Apostles therefore of the clergy, or was not
their doctrine good, because it was condemned in that wicked counsel. Was
there not a disputacion for religion appointed by the Queen's majesty wherein
your Clergy was afraid to utter their foolyshnes in defendinge their
supersticion, least they had taken more shame in aunsweringe than they did in
holdinge their peace, which well they could not. I think the universities
with so many places of the Realm recayuing religion, and these other
disputinge for it, may be counted to be some part of the Clergy of the Realm,
and so it was not received without consent of the Clergy. But these were not
of the Parlyamente: What than? Is religion to be determined no where but in
parliament? he is wont to say, and did before. In universities and counsels.
To make a religion as he terms it, no man hais autoritye (for that belonges
to God alone) but to restore pure religion which hais been defaced by
supersticion, Princes in their Countries ought to do, though their prelates
be against it. Did not king Ioas command the Priests to restore the Temple,
and first ordained the poores man's chist in the Church? Did not Nabuchodo. and
Darius make proclamation through al their countries without and against the
consent of their priests that all people should worship Daniels God? though
there was not a perfect order than set forth by them to do it in, yet it
was much for heathen Princes to do so, and it teaches christen Princes, how to
do in the like case. But as Ioas, Iosaphat Ezechias, and Josias, did not make
a new religion, but restore that which before was defaced, and had long lien
buried: so our Parliament did not set forth a new religion, but restore that
which was godly, begone under good king Edw. confirmed by the Parlyament and
the clergy than, but suddenly by violence trodden under fete, by bloody papists
a littell after, yet all this satisfies not them, for nothing can be concluded
as a law by Parliament say they without consent of the clergy there present,
but this having not their consent, can not be counted a law as they think* I
had rather leave this to be answered by the lawers than otherwise, because it
is a mere temporal case to dispute on, and concerns their profession, yet
that the world may see that some thing may be said in it, we grant him not
this to be true that no law at all can be made without consent of the bishops.
Look your old statutes of parliment when bishops were highest, before Edward.
iii. and ye shall read that they passed by the consent of the Lords temporal
and commens without any mention of the Lords spiritual: which statutes many
of them stand in strength at this day. Than it may well be gathered, that the
consent of the clergy was not always so necessary as they think it. If it be
so strong a reason as he thinks it to be, to have consent of the Bysshoppes, I
will prove by the same reason that it is as necessary to have Abbots of the
Parliament: For they were present of old time, and their consent was required
as well as the Bishops, and but of late years they were put of the parliament,
and it is not long sins the convocation house was seperat from the parliament
to. The lawers, Judges and Justices put in practice, and execute these laws:
therefore their doings may be a sufficient reason to lead the unlearned what
opinion they have of these statutes for religion except Justice Rascal first
executing them, and after running away, may condemn the rest, which I trust
he may not. I think they would not execute them, except they had the strength
and nature of laws: If they do contrary to their knowledge and opinion, they
can not be able to answer their doings. But I think no wise men are of
this oppinion: only these corner crepers that dare not show their face, and
would deceive the people, go about thus to deface al good and godly order that
displeases them. In the days of blessed king Edw. they had the like fond
opinion: that a king could not make laws in his minority unto he come to full
age: But this and that was only to hinder relygion, and to make the people
disobeye their Prince: Yet God hais and I trust will confound all such wicked
devises. Ciprians words are not truly alleged, and if they were, what do
they make against us? How could Ciprian write against our order which he
never knew, being found of so late years as they say? And he does not mean
them that differed in outward order of prayer, but that swarued from the
substance and veritye taught in the scriptures. In ceremonies he him self
differd from other countries, and every country almost from others, as I
declared before: and the Bishops which he speaks of, are as like our popish
Prelates as Will Fletcher, and the sweet rode. The Prophets words may all be
turned against him and his, so wiselye he applies them.

whether be they in schism that minister no sacrameut but only instead of
divine service read chapters and Psalms. etc. before the people?
TO read before the people instead of divine 6
service, Psalms and Chapters or other such like being not appointed by the
universal consent of the Church of God, but against the decrees of the church
must needs be schismatic and they in schism that do it. For Leui^. 10.
as the. ii. sons of Aaron were stricken with sudden death, because they
offered up strange fire which was not appointed to them by Moises and
Aaron: even so do they offend that will instead of Mattins and Euensong and
other divine service appointed by the Church, read psalms and Chapters and
such like, not appointed by the Catholycke Bishops, lawfully consecrated. For
our savior says in the Gospel: he that will Math. 19.
not hear and obey the church, that is to say the Bishops take him as an
infidel^.

And Saint Clement does say in an Epistle that he writes to S. James: by the
judgment of God, they shall suffer everlasting torment in the fire of h^il,
that neglect the decrees of the Church. Therefore the holy Martyr Saint
Ciprian does say: he that hais not den^ied his hands with these wicked
sacraments, and hais polluted his conscience otherwise, let him not comfort
him self that he needs to do no penance: for he hais broken his professyon
and canonical obedience that he made to the Bishops when he was made Priest.
Also this decree was made in the canons of the Apostles. Si quis c^er^cus aut
laicus synagogam Iud^o^um au^ conuenticulum he^eticorum ingressus fuerit vt
preces cum illis co^^ungat^ deponatur, that is: If any of the clergy or laite
shall enter into the synagoge of the Jews, or the company of the heretics
to say prayers with him let him be deposed.

The. vi. answer.
THe cuckoe hais but one song, and that is unpleasant: no more hais this
cokewolde maker, but one foolyshe false principle to ground his sayings on:
that is the Romish Church. I said before (and no man is able to improve it)
that the universal Church never made any one order of service to be used
through the hole world, but every country hais and may have diverse without
affending, so they agree in one substance of true doctrine. He knows no
church but To. and yet ^o. never decreed any one general order for the hole
world: nor the hole world never obeyed nor received any. The Popes Portuis
and Missall hais been often changed, as I proved before: and every country hais
their diverse order of service. Aarons sons did plainly against gods express
commandment, and therefore were justly plaged: Ours do not so, and therefore
they be not in like case, but undeservedly blamed. Clementes words and
Ciprians when they are proved to be truly alleged, touch not us, but such as
he is, for they knew no such priests nor church as he means, nor any such
were many years after. The papists differ very little from Jews, for both of
them set their hole religion in ceremonies and old customs: We stick stiffly
to the word of God only, and bilde not on such vain foundations. Therefore he
bringes that canon against himself, and his sort, being as supersticious as
the Jews, and blinded obstinatlye in errors as heretics.

Whether is it lawefull for Priests that say the Communyon also to celebrate
mass?
THe holy Martyr Saint Ciprian says: It is not leafull by and by before
penance Ciprianus de lap.
done, to consecrate or touch with his wicked hands the body of our Lord,
and with his polluted mouth to receive the blood of our ^orde, but first let
him do penance. Does thou think says Saint Cyprian that our Lord will be so
suddenly mitigated whom thou hais refused, and hais more esteamed thy worldly
living then him? Saint Cyprian says, the blind love of their patrimonye and
wordly goods hais deceived many, and bound them as it were in stocks and
fetters, that they can not follow christ. A great number for fear of words of
such as be not good, have refused their faith, not cast down by any violence
of persecution, but by a voluntary lapse have cast down their selves, although
they have perceived the Bishops and a great number of the clergy not to be
afraid to lose all their lyuinges, not fearing loss of goods, or
imprisonment, or banyshment from their fryendes: yea all ready to suffer death
in this case. Our Savior in the gospel sais: No man can serve ii. masters:
that is to say the Communion decreed and appointed by the laite parliement
against the consent of the clergy in christ's Church, and also celebrate
mass decreed and appointed by the clergy in sacrate synodes, representinge the
whole estate of christ's church. S. Paul sais: ye can not be partakers both
of the table of our lord, and the table of the deuilles. S. Ciprian says: It
is an horrible abhomidation to fare about to serve both Ball and christ: it is
contimely and not religion, it is iniurye ^iprianus cecundum
and not devotion, if thou communicate of the cup of christ with the devils,
hitherto be S. Cyprians words. S. Paul sais, we have an altar whereof they
may not eat that serve the Tabernacie. By these examples it is evident that
the Priests may not minister the communion to one sort, and Mass to an other
sort. In tripartita Historia it appears the catholyckes and the Arrians did
not communicate one with another.

Whether it be lawful for Priests to say ^
Mass which say no communion, but only read Psalms and chapters to the
people in s^eade of service?
SAint Ciprian sais: the verity is not to be Ciprianus de lap.
dissembled: it is naught to halte upon both the parts. If God be the Lord,
follow him: If Ball, follow him. Even so, it mattens and Euensonge be the
ordinances of christ's church use them: if the Psalms and chapters, use
them. It is no less offense to allow a schism with assent, than to offer to
idolles. S. Austin sais such as be in schism: that is to say in August
ciuitate dei ^ 21. ca. 25.
sacraments or divine service separated from the unity of christ's mistical
body, and not in ^oining together of christian members, not in the band of
peace, which is expressed in the sacrament of the altar, they may consecrate
and receive this sacrament, but it is not profitable to the^, but very hurtful,
whereby they shall be judged more grievously of almighty god. S. Paul says: Not
only they that do evil be worthy death, but also they that consent to the
doers. The holy ghost does cry by his Prophet Esaias saying: get you hence, go
forth, beware that you touch no unclean thing. The scripture sais: thou shalt
love the lord god with all thy heart, with all thy strength. etc. god loves no
half service. As for example it is written in the book of kings, that king
David sent his servants to comfort Anon for the death of his father, all be
it King Anon took them as espies, and caused the haulfe of their beardes to
be shaven, and cut their clothes by their buttockes, and so sent them back
again to King David. But when King David heard of this, he would not suffer
them to come in his sight at Jerusalem, but commanded them to tarry at Hierico
until their beardes were grown out again: even so such Priests as hais gone
out of Christ's Church, and entangled them selves with any part of this
religion against the decrees of the Church, are not worthy in ministracion of
sacraments, to come in the presence of the faithful that continue still in
Christ's Church until they be reconcyled, and have done penance for their
lapse into schisine.

Whether is this to be called a wicked, time that such heresye and schism
does reign.
9
NO rather it is a blessed time for now god Ciprian de lap.
tryes his family as Saint Cyprian sais: for the long rest and peace which
hayes been in Christ's church before time, caused the clergy to be almost on
sleep: by reason whereof, devout religion was not in a great number of
Priests, in works was small mercy, no discipline in manners. Saint Paul
sais: It is mete that there be herefye, that the good may be tried: so that
such as have grace to stand this troublous time, and be not spotted with
schism shall be kyndred more fervent in the love and fear of God: and such as
be fallen in lapse, if they will seek to come back again to our mother holy
Church with penance, that is with prayer, satisfaction, and tears, she
shittes her bosom from none that will so come, for God is nere at hand to all
that call on him in virtue, and will rejoice more in them, then in other. But
some are not be gathered out of schism says Cyprian: so that such as be whole
and steadfast be thereby wounded, nor he is not a profitable and wise pastor
that gathers the sheep that be diseased, scabbed, or sick into the whole
flock, before they be whole, least they infect all the flock. Nor the Bishop
must not have a respect to the greatness of the number, for better it is to
have one good Priest that fears God, than a thousand that be evil, this
says S. Ciprian.

Answer to the vii. viii. and ix.
UUhat a fool is he that goes about to prove by so many balde reasons,
(cloutinge such patched pieces together) that which is already granted him:
we confess that no man ought to say mass at al, much less they that say the
communion should become mass mungers, his autorities are fondlye brought to
prove his purpose, and may be turned against himself all, for there is no
sort of men that use double dissembling so much as the Popes do: other things
that I proved before I will not repeat again now, but I wish or god that as
David would not suffer his men that were shaven so to come in his sig ht, so al
christian princes would banysh the Popes shauelinges: for so the reason holds
in like of both. The time for trial of gods people we do not greatly mislike:
only this greues us that so many wythstande the manifest truth, which their
conscience acknowledges to be true, and yet for fear of a change or flattery
of the world, they be cold and will not or bare not openly profess it: and
also that another sort of turnetipet^es, for lack of disciplyne occupy the
place of pastors, seruinge rather to fill their belly, than for love,
conscience, or duty, where good order would that either such should be
displaced, or else do great and worthy open penance solemnly before they
ministered, the alledginge of these sundry autorityes are untrue and foolyshe.

Whether it is lawful for the laite to receive the communion as is now used?
10
IN receyuinge the Communion as now vled, you break your profession made in
baptism, and fall into schism seperating your selves from god and his
Church, refusinge the Bishops your true pastors, so entringe into the
malignaunt church of Satan. S. Paul dies command us to obey the Bishops,
for they watch as to give an account for our soulde. The Bishops be in
prison ready to suffer death before they willeyther minister or reseyue the
communion like true pastors: they put them selves walled and a sure defense
for the people. The catholic church which we professed at our baptism to
believe and obey, teaches us to receive Christ's body consecrato at inasse
with prayers inuocations, and benediction, with the sign of the holy cross
and not bare bread and wine without consecration and benediction, as is used in
this Communion, being against the decrees and ordinance of Christ's
catholycke church. Almightye Number. 16.
God does command us to separate our selves from such as take in hand a
ministration of sa craments against the ordinance of Christ's church, and that
ye touch nothing pertaining to them, lest ye be lapped in their sin. The
Prophet O see Ciprian Epist.
boes say, that all that receive that bread of mourninge over the which, words
of blasphemye be spoken at the table shall be defiled. Therefore S. Ciprian says
foramuch as we can exhort you by our letters that you come not to the cursed
Communion with Priests that be maculat: for they be not worthy death that do
evil, but all that consent to the doing of ouill. Nor let not the people
persuade with them selves that they can be free without spot of sin,
communicating with a Priest in sin. No man can be well excused by ignorance:
be he neue so gross of wit he may perceive it is not that which we have
professed to believe, but against it: and if it were for a world lie gain,
every one would learn a long matter and keep it in memory.

The. x. answer.
IN receyuyng the communion now used the laite keep their profession made in
bapt. where they promised like good sheep to believe the Catholic Church which
hears the voice of their shepeherd only and flees from strangers: the Popish
church and prelates have devised a facion of the Communion con trarye to
Christ's and his Apostles doings: and therefore they be worthelye abhorred. Ye
lie in saying that the catholic Church teaches to receive christ's body
consecrate at mass with the sign of the holy cross, or that we give nothing
but bare bread and wine now. Prove where the Church teaches so: I proved before
how many diverse sorts of ministringe there was of old time, and all good:
therefore this your one only popish way, is not decreed by the universal
Church, nor never was generally received throughout all the world. With what
face can they say, we have no consecration, and give nothing but bare bread
and wine) If they have any in their mass, if the Evangelists have any
consecration or paul, or if Thappostles, we have it also. For if consecration
stand in words, we have all the words that their mass, the Gospel, Saint
Paul or Thapostles had. Read Matthew. Mark. Luke and the. xi. to the Corinth,
what is written of the lords supper, and see whether our Communion want any
one word that is in any of them. Than if we have al (as we have in deed) why
is there no consecration with us. Gregory says Thapostles consecrated only
with the lords Lib. 7. Ep* 63. Lib. 4. s^^ tent distin^ 8
prayer: and that we use as well as they: Joan Duns says, the words of
consecratinge the bread, be these. This is my body: and those words we have
to. Further he sais: Neither Christ nor the Church hais defined which be the
words of consecrating the cup: and therefore he will not determine them. What
are we now worse than their own doctors, and why do ye lie in saying the
Church hais defined it? Duns knew it not in his time, nor the Church, where is
one so mad except Priests, to say that consecration stands in crossinge,
or that Benedicete is to make a cross? prove it if ye can, or else hold your
tongue for shame. Deceive not the people. Al ye works of the lord, praise ye
the lord, sais the psalm. Is blessing there to make a cross, or in any other
place ye can find? I have seen and heard many foolysh unlearned papists,
but a more ass than this, I have not, he sais the people which communicate
with a Priest that is in sin, cannot be free from sin. If the Priest be a
drunkarde, art thou a dronkard to in communicatynge with him? if he be a hoar
hunter, art thou one to? I trust ye can judge how false and foolish this is.
Saint Paul says: he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation, he sais not thy damnation, or any other man's but his own.
Chrysostom notes well that he says: sibijpsi non tibi. He eats it and drinks it
damnation to himself, and not to thee. God forbid ye euilnes of the priest
should defile them that receive with him: for what Priest is so clean that he
hais no sin in him? If the sin of the Priest should defile the receiver,
who would ever receive at any priests hands, seeing all be sinners? it is a
general rule and true in their own books. The unworthiness of the Priest
hurtes not the goodness of the sacrament. God forbid that the euilnes of man
should hurt or defile Gods holy ordinance, or that the wickedness of the
Priests should be imputed to them that receive the sacrament at their hand. The
father shall not bear the sin of the son, nor the son of the father, but
the soul that sins shall die it self as the Prophet sais. Much less shall
the sin of the Priest condemn the people, but every one shall answer for
himself.

Whether the people compelled with fear II
for loss of worldly goods or temporal punishment, may receive the
Communion as bread and wine, not consentinge to it in the heart?
SAint Paul sais, it is requisite to our Roma. 1* Math. 1^*
salvation, with our mouths to confess the truth: also our Savior Christ
sais* he that denies him before men, he will deny him before his father in
heaven. And to kneie down to receive that cursed and polluted bread, ye commit
Idolatrye: nor it is not lawful to dissemble herein as we have example.
Eleazarus which rather than he would dissemble to eat swynes flesh
forbidden by the law, he was content to suffer a very cruel death. Also it is
read in tripartita historia of a good woman one Olimpyas that rather then she
would receive the communion was content to have her pappes writhen of, or any
other punishment saying: lay upon me more punishment, for it is not lawefull
for me to do that which the good Priests refuse to do. Even so at this time
the Bishops and good priests refuse to meddle with the Communion: therefore it is
evident, it is not lawful for any of the laite to receive it for any cause.
Also when Constantius the Emperor persecuted the church of god, such as would
not receive the communion with the Aarians, the bishop Macidonius put them
in prison, and caused the communion to be brought unto them in prison, and
opened their mouths with sticks and hot yrons. Yet for no punishment the
good catholic people would in any wise receive with y^ Arrians: much less
ought we to receive y^ comunion now used for any punishment For if we receive
it against our conscience, we be traitors to god: and dissemblers with the
Queen, as Ustazadis did say to the king of Persis, lamenting that he did
live, for he confessed (after the Archbishop Symeon had rebuked him) that he
was worthy to have a double death, for he was a traitor to God in forsaking
his profession in religion, and a dissembler with the king, for to please the
king, and to avoid punishment he had done against his conscience, but utterly
he did protest that he would never dissemble again, offeringe his whole body
to make a mendes: and in conclusion had his head stricken of. would to God
Math. 10.
all that by dissimulation be traitors and dissemblers with the Queen against
their conscience, would follow the example of Ustazadis in earnest
repentance. Our savior commaundes us not to fear them that can but only
kill the body, but fear him that can kill the body, and after cast the soul
into the fire of hell.

How should the people do, that can not have the sacrament ministered to them
12
according to the ordinance of Christ's Church?
IN no wise they ought to receive the Communion, but to commend their minds
and good wills to God, with devout prayer, firmly continuinge in that faith
that they were christened in: which sith the Apostles time hais ever been
taught by blessed fathers in Christ's catholic church. And so being in will
to receive ye blessed sacrament if he were in place where it is ministered
according to the ordinance of christ's church, God will accept your will, and
good intent as if you did receive it corporally: And by that will and intent ye
be partakers of the sacraments and prayers of the universal church of Christ,
in all christian countries and nations as well as if you were present bodilye.
But if you receive this Communion, ye separate and divide your selves, from the
sacraments and prayers of all the universal church of christ, and so wander
in the way of perdicion.

The answer to the.xi. and xii.
To receive the Communion dissemblingly we grant to be damnable as well as he:
and therefore we exhort all men with an earnest faith, and pure love, sorrowful
repentance, and full purpose of a new life, to resort unto the lords table
devoutly without all hipocritall dissimulation. God will confound such
blasphemers as open their filthy mouths to rail against his holy sacraments,
as this wicked Morian does here calling it cursed bread. Eleazarus did well
in obeyinge Gods law: and Papists be Gods enemies in their doings
contrary to Gods law. The Arrians were heretics and ennemies to the
truth, deniynge Christ our lord to be God equal with his father, and saying
he was but a weak simple ruanne as we be. So the Papists be, saying christ's
death is not a sufficient sacrifice for the whole world, except their
sacrifice be joined to. They do both err in the chief article of our faith and
salvation: and surely to communicate with such is to deny our faith and
salvation, therefore Olympias and other well abhorred them. He that hais not a
right faith of Jesus Christ that instituted the Sacrament, he can not have the
true use of the Sacraments, which Christ ordained. It is well that he wyshes
all dyssemblynge Papists which have turned with every world, to repent as
Ustazadis did, and God grant that they may: If they will not, if their reward
were like his, they had no wrong. And thus as all dissemblinge Papists
receiuinge the communion against their consciences are worthily condemned: so
surely are al dissemblinge protesrauntes resortinge to mass, sor fear of
worldly losses. God grant us all vprightlye to walk, not feaning a
conscience to our selves of man's devise, but folowinge the rule of scripture
without haltinge, what so ever the world say of us. If this Counsel that he
geues for not receiving the communion now used were turned and applied against
their mass, it were well and truly applied. We were never christened in any
faith of the mass, but in the name of the father and the son, and the holy
ghost, who in the holy scriptures condemn al sacrificing massers, and surely
to communicate with massemungers is to forsake gods institution, and follow the
Pope, to forsake Christ the head of his church, and join himself to
papists, and become a member of his synagoge, robbinge Christ of his glory,
and prefarringe man's dreams and doctrine devised of late years by Popes (as
was proved before) before the infallyble truth of the Gospel which Jesus Christ
himself brought from heaven, preached it, and commanded us all diligently to
follow it. To be partaker of prayers made in other Countries is true that we
may, and to be wished of God that it were diligently used: but unto he have
proved that we be partakers of sacraments, wise men will not believe it. No
man is christened one for another, nor receyues the Communion one for another.
This doctrine comes from the Pope, and fed his chaplains fat when they
taught, that it was sufficient to come and see the Pristes lift up their
sacrament, offer it for the dead and quick, and eat all up when they have
done.

whether is not every one as well the priests ^3.
as laite bound to obey the Queen and her laws?
BOth Priests and the laite be bounden to obey the Queen and her laws, as
far as Gods law will permit: but no man ought to obey the Queen and her
laws against God and his laws. For lands, goods, and body, every one is
bound to obey the Queen and her laws, and no man ought to disobey or resist
her or her laws: for God in the scripture commaundes. But for matters of faith
and relygion pertaynyng to our soul health, she has nothing ado to meddle:
for Christ himself has dearly bought our souls with his precious blood
shedinge, and committed them to the rule and government of the Bishops,
which watch as to give an account for our souls. Therefore the Scripture
commaundes us to obey the Bishops in matters of faith and religion
pertayninge to our souls health, and the Queen in temporal causes
concerning lands and goods, and body.

The. xiii. answer.
FOr obeyinge the Queens majesty and her laws or for disobeying we do not
greatly differ from him: but where he sais she hais nothing a do with matters
of faith and relygion we utterly deny it. For that is as much to say, as that
she were not a christian Prince, no nor a Prince at all, for Princes are
charged by God to maintain true religion, and suppress supersticion and
Idolatry. This is the mark that they shote at: to be exempt from all
correction of Princes, that they might do what they lust, bring in supersticion
instead of religion, and nourish the people in blood devotion: rule all
other, and be ruled of none, no not of God him self. So much obedience the
Turks subjects owe him, and yet deny him not authority in their religion. But
this matter was more fully handled in the. v. answer. King Richard the. ii.
proves well in his Epistle to pope Boniface the ix. that temporal rulers have
often from the beginnige bridled and ruled the spiritualtye, even the Popes.
Solomon says, he put down the Priest Abiather, and set up Sadoc. Otho
The Emperor deposed Pope Joan. xii. Henry the Emperor put down Gratianus. Otho
deposed pope Benet the. i. The controversy betwix Symmachus and Laurens who
should be Pope was ended before Theodoricus king of Italy. Henry Themperor
deposed. ii. striving who should be Pope, and set up a. iii. called Clement
the. ii. Frederick Themperor corrected. iiii. Popes. By these and many such
like, he proves that Princes have corrected and brought^ in order so many
Popes: therefore they have lawful power so to do. And shall not our Queen have
power to see whether the clergy here within her Realm, do their duty, in
teachinge true doctrine, pure ministringe of the sacraments, and an upright
godly life? In deed this was the beginning of the controuersye betwix Tho.
Becket and king Henrye. ii. and these like good scholars of the same schole
follow the same way. Certain priests were complained on, for their lewd
living, whom the king would have punished: But Becket withstode him, saying it
belonged not to the king to handell such holy anointed spiritual men. Austin
in his book contr. liter. petiliai^. ii. in vi. and other sundry chapters
proves that it belonges to Kings, to have care and charge for religion, both
in maintaininge the good, and pullinge down the evil. He alleages this of the
ii. psalm. Serve the lord in fear. etc. How should kings sais he, serve the
lord in fear, but in forbiddinge and punishing those things that are done
against the Lords commandment? he serves in one sort in as much as he is a
man, and in another, in so much as he is a king, he serves him as a man in
living truly, but as a king in making laws, which command just things
and forbid the contrary. So served king Ezechias in descriyng the groves and
temples of idolles: so served Josias, so the king of Niniue in compellynge the
whole city to pacify the lord. Thus served Nabucho. in forbiddinge by a
fearful law that they should not blaspheme god. Kings serve the Lord in this
point when they do those things to serve him which none can do but kings.
etc. Thus far Austin. Constantine also the good Emperor commands the
donatistes to come to To. to hear the Bishops judgment: but afterward when
he had hard the matter debated, he judged the cause himself, and made a law
against them as Austin writes Epist. ix viii. Thus Princes than calling their
clergy together, because few of them have sufficient learning of themselves
and hearing the matters of religion debated, and the truth tried, may and
ought by their law and roial power defend that truth, and punyshe the
disobedient who so ever they be. The Prophet Isai. 49.
says that God made kings and Queens to be nurces to his Church. The Nurces
duetye is to feed, guide, and chearyshe the child: yea to correct, instruct,
and reform him wha^ he does a faut. She must not be a dry nurce, but with
the. ii. Pappes of the new Testament and old feed her children: she must
teach him to go, when he is fallen, take him up again, and give him such
wholesome meat, that she may and dare taste and try it herself. God grant
Princes thus to be nurces, and not stepmothers, that Gods children may serve
their lord Godde master and father quietlye under their wings.

The conclusion.
OUr Savior Christ when they called him Samaritan a friend of Publycans and
sinners a drunkard. etc. held his tunge, and made no answer: but when they
said he had a devil, he said: I have no devil. It is written also in vitis
pru^ of Agatho^ whom certain would try whether he could pacientlie bear
sclaunders, and called him proud aduoterer, a these and bereticke. Al other he
let pass and said: I am a sinner but I am not an heretic They asked him why
he answered to that rather than to the other, he said: he learned of Christ
his master to suffer lies, but not his doctrine to be touched: for heresy
separates a man from god. So among all sclaunderous tounges that go about
to deface gods truth by raning on the ministers of it, many are borne of many
with gryefe of mind: but to be charged with false doctrine, no honest mind
can bear, nor good man should suffer. For as he teaches the good and wholesome
doctryns, so he should confound the contrary to his power: and this was
among other, a great cause why I (though not hurt by this his folish railing)
took in hand to answer this blind Papist, and because those learned fathers
whom he would seem to touch, thought it unworthy any answer. When I see
this copye cast abroad by a malicious member of Antichryst, to wythdrawe Gods
people from his truth, my spirie was stirred to the aunswerynge of the same:
but many when they see how foolyshe it was, laughed at it, and thought it to
be passed away with silence, for that foolyshnesse of it self would confound
it self to them that had wit or learning. Yet that the simple ones for
whose cause chieflye this labor is taken, should not be deceived and ouercomen
with found phantasyes of idle brains, and least Gods enemies should crake
that none could or durst answer it: I thought good, because other that can
do better, would not, thus shortly to answer the chyefe points of
Poperye, touched in this his unlearned apologye. This is the politye of
Papystes to set out a broker to utter their ware, and catch the unlearned,
but the sutteller sort hold their tongue, stand alofe to see how this
forerunner will take place, and are thought by their silence to be able to say
much more, when as they fear in deed least in being answered, they should
take the foil, to the clean ouerthrowinge of their cause. This proud Golyas
hais craked and provoked all Gods people, as though none durst medell with
him: but I trust poor David hais wyped his nose, and given him a fall with
his poor slyng and few stones. But I fear I lose my labor: for as y^
Prophet says. Can the black ^ere. 1^.
man of Jude change his color? No more can this Morian learn to say well.
If the miserable state of the people had not moved me, I would have holden my
tongue, and laughe at it as wise men do, but that with the poor simple ones
whom they deceive in corners with such lies as these, such commen balde
reasons as he hais brought, should not prevail, I thought good for pity sake
to say thus much, to stay them* whose eyes God shall open to see. My reasons
and a^torityes of purpose are commenlye taken out of their own Doctors and
writers, and such books, as are not counted protestauntes, nor made by any
of this new learning. For the nonest I forbear to allege the learneder sort,
least the unlearned should say, they could no skyll on such books, nor
knew not whether they were truly brought in: and seeing their own Doctors
and schole masters have given us this vauntage against them, I fear not to
try with them in writers of greater autoritye and auncientye. Thus much I
have spoken for my part: let the rest whom Godde hays given greater knowledge
and vtteraunce unto help, thus to stop the mouths of Gods enemies, and I
trust by the power of his holy spirit. Antichryst with his members shall
daily decay, and Gods glorious truth shall shine to the coumfort of all his
elect, though their eyes be not yet fullye opened to see, nor their hearts
lyghtned to understand it. Godde the father graunts for his Son sake Jesus
Christ crucified, that we all may be partakers of his spyryte of truth, and
his wilful obstinate ennemies confounded, his poor lambs delivered from the
wolfes, and strengthened against thassaultes of Satan, that at the length we
may be glorified with him for ever and ever.

Amen.
Behold says the Lord of Hosts to thee: I will lay thy skyrtes on thy face,
and open thy fylthynesse to the people, and thy shame to kyngedoines: and I
will cast thy abhomynations upon thee, and I will revile thee, and make thee
like dunge: and it shall come to pass that every one that sees thee, shall
fall from thee. Nau^. iii. Have mercy on us O Lord, have mercy on us, for we
are utterly despised. Our soul is filled with the mocking of the rich, and
despyte of the proud. Psalm. C. xxiii.
Commen places entreated.
The authority of Bishops. A. 8. S. Ia. Mass and others. B. 7. England
received not the faith from To. D. 3. None is universal Bishop over al. E. i.
Extreme unction is no Sacrament. E. 7. Our Church service. F. 7 Communion.
Burials. Communion table. G. 6. Altars. H. 1. Confession. H. 8. Fasting. I. 2.
Lent. I. 7. Marriage of Priests. K. i. Orderinge of Mynisters. L. 5.
Succession. N. 4. The people learn the Scriptures. O. 5. The Princes authority
in religyon. Q. 2. R. 7
Faults in pryntynge.
B 3 leaf, line 24. I mean not C 1 leaf, page. 2. line. 19. turned into
latin. D 1 leaf, page. 2. line. 26. as well as their. D 3 leaf, page 6. line.
25. it cannot be E 1 leaf, line. 31. nere them G 1 leaf, line. 23 Ausegisus
G 3 leaf, line. 1. put out, mete page. 2. line. 17. put out, not H 2 leaf,
line. 1. as Iehu page. 2. line. 20. by blind H ^ leaf, line. 16. some of Duns.
H 8 leaf, line. 17. for Joan Dominus always read Joan Duns. 25. Confession
and bow. I 5 page, line. 12. so much of page. 9. line. 11. let us eat flesh
with them. K 2 leaf, line. 17. Epistle to the Ephesians. K 7 leaf, page. 2.
line. 1. that History placed 16. leaves after M 5 leaf, line. 9. that Linus
was O 3 leaf, line. 17. 1382.
Imprynted at London by Wyllyam Seres dwellinge at the West end of Paul's, at
the sign of the Hedgebogge.

The tenth of March. Anno. 1563.


