THE TRIAL OF A CHRISTIANS SINCERE LOVE UNTO CHRIST.

By Mr WILLIAM PINKE, Mr of Arts late Fellow of Magdalen College in OXFORD.

(...).

Ignat. Ep. ad Romans THE THIRD EDITION.

AT OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, for EDWARD FOREST Anno Dom. 1636.

TO THE HONORABLE AND TRVLY Noble Lord, the Lord GEORGE DIGBY, Son and Heir
of the Right Honorable the Earl of BRISTOLL.
Right Honorable and my very Good Lord,
THAT I have presumed to present to your Lordships Patronage, these few Sermons
of a deceased worthy friend, it is not so much the acknowledgment of those
great favors and noble respects wherewith you were pleased to grace Him, and
since his death have vouchsafed to extend to me your unworthy servant as a due
consideration (if in Dedicatio^s matchablenesse be to be regarded (how properly
and peculiarly they do belong to your Lordship both in respect of the Author
and the Argument. The Author was one, whom, for his singular dexterity in the
Arts, depth of judgment, sharpness of wit, and especially his skill in
languages, Hebrew, Greek, Arabicke, you were pleased to make choice of for one
of your Readers during your abode at Magdalen College in Oxon, in which time
you so obliged him by the abundant testimonies of your good affection to him,
that He often professed to me how great and just an interest your merits claimed
in all his studies and labors. This which you here see is but an Essay to some
masterpiece which you might have expected, if he had lived to finish what he
attempted in the Greek Antiquities, and observations on the Hebrew Text. For
the matter, it being a Theme of the weightiest business in Christianity, the
groundworke of all; which if it be not first rooted in the heart, all other
our conclusions and speculations in Divinity will be but like the building a
Castle in the air, and may give the soul content perhaps, of a rare
speculation, but cannot of a powerful, experimental, soule-quickning, and
soul saving Religion: The Argument, I say, being such, as I could not harden
my self against the requests of some who desired the publishing thereof for
the good many souls might reap by it, so neither could I think any, fitter
to Patronage a Theme of piety, than one who showed himself amongst us, both a
Patron and an example of it. I would be as far from flattery as you are from
the want of it, and I would not, you should look your self in a false Glass:
ouerweening in any man is a thing that exposes to secret contempt, whenever
the weakness shall be espied, but Great men so much the more, by how much they
are the more observed, and have occasion oftener to come upon the stage. You
remember what manner of man he was, serious in his studies, devout and strict
in an holy conversation, the things you loved in him, and imitated: A singular
O men, when Noble me^ begin betimes to be countenancers of goodness and good
men: so persevere to do like a good Obadiah 1 King. 18.
the Church shall bless you and God shall honor you, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
For those that honor him, he will honor, and them that despise him he will
cover with shame, either by bringing on them some notable judgment, or by
giving them up to such headlong courses and filthy vices, whereby their honor
shall be stained, their estates wasted, themselves and their posterity ruined
(it being not unusual with God to punish men by their own devices and sins
wherein they delight.) And so does your Lordship persevere to do, I will not
load your modesty with a slender report of your own worth: What perhaps I
ought to say, your Lordship may guess by what the people do say of you, and
what I should commend unto you (if I were able or worthy) by what the world
expects from you: I know there is nothing more vain then to live by opinion,
by what men say or expect; opinion is but an ill rule and gouernesse of our
lives and actions (another man's measure being too long, or too short for me)
yet this use we may make of it; when men begin to applaud and take notice of
that which our selves have the greatest reason to study and affect, it may
serve to raise our virtues to an higher pitch, than our own priuity could
lightly bring them, the love and practice of any good increasing with the
acceptance it finds abroad: But I forget what I have in hand, I close all with
apprecatio^ of all happiness to your Lordship: the God of Joseph double upon
you the blessings of Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. 13. 6.
Blessed let him make you for the precious things of Heaven, and of the deep
that coucheth beneath, for the precious things of the Earth, and the fullness
thereof, but especially, for the good will of him, that dwelt in the Bush: Do
worthily in Ephratah; Ruth. 4. 11.
and be you famous in our Isreal: The seeds of Virtue and pious education
wherewith your tender years have been seasoned, let them budde and yield
their pleasant and wholesome fruit in their seasons. I still trespass. Moneo,
quod facis

Spondes digna tuis ingentibus omnia coeptis. Virg. Aen. 9*
Shirburn. Iul. 7. 1630. Your Lordships humble and devoted servant, WILLIAM
LYFORD.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader: I here present thee with some pieces and fragments of an
entire and just discourse intended by the Author, concerning that useful and
worthy Argument, the sincerity and trial of a Christians love to Christ: It
was the glory of the last age, that among other miracles, God blessed it with
the resurrection of Leraning, it being being a time wherein lived and
flourished men famous for learning and piety, who sent abroad into the world
many large volumes for the vindicating of Gods true Religion and worship from
Barbarism, Error, and Superstition: And it is a part of the happiness of this
our Age, that (beside the same truth still maintained) it has sent forth many
famous Treatises concerning the nature of faith, the power and practice of
Religion. Amongst which, this would not have been of the least note, if the
Author himself had lived to finish it: A continuation and perfecting whereof I
cannot hope for from others, much less dare I presume to attempt it my self,
as ever loathing that soloecisme, Hor. Art. Poet. -- vt turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne.


Take therefore these Sermons as they were delivered and left by him: What is
done in them I had rather should appear to thy judgment in the serious
reading, then from my opinion of them: only let me entreat thee to read them
with the same spirit they were written (for that is the way to profit by other
men's works) and content not thy self to trifle away some odd hour in the^,
but reserve them to some of thy most retired thoughts and seuerest meditations,
so may thou by Gods blessing find something to strengthen the assurances of
thy hopes by Christ, and to increase thy future care and love to sincerity. In
which respests, if they profit any into whose hands they come, I shall less
blame the importunity of some who for that cause earnestly desired them, and
the less regard the censure of others, who may happily mislike the publishing of
them. As his conversation was sweet, so is his memory precious, to me as to
any other: Neither can I think it any way stained by the service of love,
wherein I chose rather to give life to some things of His, than that all should
die with him. All the good be thine, and all the Glory, Gods. Farewell.

Thine in the truest Bond. W. LYFORD.

1. COR. 16. V. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha.
SAINT PAVL being now to close up his Epistle to the Corinthians, and having
thus far used the help of a Scribe is willing to give them the farewell
salutation in his own handwriting: The salutation of me Paul with my own
hand, in the verse before my Text. His salutation in this as in all the rest of
his Epistles is a solemn Apostolical benediction, wishing them the grace and
favor of God in Jesus Christ in the verse following my Text. But now knowing
too well how many false brethren there were at Corinth, who were content indeed
to profess Christ for some outward carnal respects, The misery of those that
profess Christ for outward carnal respects.
but did grossly dissemble with him in their hearts, least such should
misapply this comfortable salutation unto themselves, least such dogs should
imagine these holy things to be given them, he salutes them after another
manner, and preuents their presumption by this terrible, thundering execration:
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

This Text is somewhat obscure by reason of the strange words which are in it
which (setting aside all curiosity) I will unfold as nakedly as I can, that I
may in few words lay open a plain way to the sense and instructiue matter of
this Scripture. The interpretation of the words Anathema Maranatha.
The word Anathema is a Greek word: in English it signifies Accursed: The
words Maran-atha are Syriack, and signify in English, Our Lord comes. That
the full meaning of the holy Ghost in the use of these words may more clearly
be conceived by you; you are to be advertised that in this Text there is an
allusion unto the Jewish manner of Excommunication which was twofold. The
Jewish manner of excommunication is twofold.
1. The first kind of it called Niddui was only a separation for a time,
commonly for thirty days from all co^merce or society with any man within a
certain distance. This is thought to be that which is called in the New
Testament a a casting out of the Synagogue. 2. The second more severe and
terrible then the former was, when a scandalous offender with curses out of the
law of Moses was in the public audience of the whole Church, without any
limitation of time excluded from the communion of it. This is thought to be
that which is called in the new Testament a delivering up unto Satan. This in
Hebrew Cherem, in Greek is called (...), which word you have in the Text. A
twofold Anathema.
This Anathema was twofold. 1. Simple when what I have now mentioned was
performed. 2. With an addition, Anathema Maran-atha, when besides all other
maledictions out of the law they added this clause, Our Lord comes: By which
form the excommunicated person as desperate and quite forlorn, without all
hope of pardon or restitution, was left into the hands of the Lord to receive
from him an heavy doom at his coming. This then being applied unto my Text
the sense runs thus: The meaning of the Text.
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed and that in
the most desperate manner, expecting due vengeance from the Lord when he
comes (...), with his holy millions to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly, as it is in Enochs Prophecy recorded by S.
Jude, to which this last degree of excommunication Maran-atha (or as the
Syrians pronounce it) Moran-etho, our Lord comes, may probably seem to have
special reference. If any man etc. By any man understand any man that lives in
the light of the Gospel, that professes and thinks himself a Christian; for
to such S. Paul directs his speech; if any man thus qualified love not Christ
Jesus let him be accursed in the highest degree. It cannot be expected that
such as sit in the darkness of Gentilisme should love that Christ whom they
have not heard: and therefore albeit their case be lamentable because they
hear of no Savior, yet sure theirs is far more fearful who hear him
daily preaching in their streets, and take little notice of him, but neglect
him and trample him under foot. If any man love not: some imagine an Hebraisme
to lie couched in these words, Love not, supposing the sense to be, if any man
hate; and indeed this is the sense, but in my weak judgment the conceit of an
Hebraisme is needless, seeing that as our Savior tells us Luke 11. 23. He
that is not with him is against him, and questionless, whosoever professes his
name, and yet love him not, he hates him at the very heart. But if my
conjecture deceive me not, my Text may receive excellent light from Ephesians. 6.
v. vlt. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ (...), in purity
or sincerity. I suppose those whom Saint Paul curses in my Text to be directly
opposed to those whom he there blesses; and seeing to the Ephesians he blesses
those who loved Christ with an vncorrupt, unmixed, unfeigned love, it is likely
that in my Text he bestows his imprecations upon those who* great shows of
love unto Christ with their mouths, but undervalue and despise him in their
hearts.

The Text being thus explained (not to mangle it with an unnecessary division)
affords this material doctrine. Whosoever he be that professes himself a
Christian* and thinks himself verily to be so, and yet has not the love of
Christ Jesus kindled and settled in his heart is in a most dangerous and cursed
estate.

Great variety of reasons and proofs might be produced for the enlargement
and confirmation of this point: those which I intend to make use of, 2 General
considerations premised for the confirmation of the point.
I will reduce unto two gene^all considerations which will sufficiently
manifest both how fearfully and how justly he stands accursed, who professing
Christ Jesus with his mouth entertaineth him not with his best affections in
his heart. 1 All the curses of the Law are due unto him, that does not really
love Christ Jesus.
1. My first consideration is this, that whosoever has not embraced Christ
Jesus with the sweetest union of real love, has no part in him, and therefore
all the curses of the Law stand in full force against him. I shall not need to
insist upon the aggrauation of the woeful condition of him who is yet in
bondage to the law. Mark, I beseech you, the exquisite rigor of it comprised
in that one sentence Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one who
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do
them. O then how infinitely accursed are all of us naturally, who on the
contrary, have continued in the violation of all things which are written in
it. I am persuaded (howsoever some proud heretics of these times have prated)
that there is no man so stupid, or senseless of the misery of being tried by
the Law with out any appeal unto the Gospel but in his serious moodes when
God shall in some measure awak his conscience, he will confess it had been
better for him never to have been borne, The woeful estate of him to whom the
Law shall be a Judge.
then that God without the mediation of his Son should call him to a
punctual account for the most harmless and vnoffensiue day of his whole
life. Now what can a man have to comfort and secure his soul in these sad
meditations but this, that God is superabundantly merciful, in so much that
he sent his own Son to redeem us from the curse of the law, and to be
made a curse for us, Galat. 3. 13. These indeed are heavenly consolations and
such as never fail those who are rightly qualified for them: But now they
appertain not to such as love not Christ Jesus, to such as know not how to
value and worthily esteem the glorious purchases of his passion. It Is true;
Gods mercy excludes not his Justice.
God is merciful infinitely above all finite conceit, but so is he just too:
Magnify his mercy as long as thou will, thou can never do it enough, but
when all is done thou may say as much for his justice as S. Paul, Romans 11.
22. equally admires the goodness and severity of God. Whosoever he be then,
who looks for mercy from God without Christ, who only has satisfied his
justice, dreams not so much to find God merciful as to find him unjust. Now
to come nearer to the point, can any man be so sottish or impudently
presumptuous as to hope to fare the better for Christ who sees nothing
desirable in him? Who is so far from counting all things dung, that he may
win him, as S. Paul did, Phil. 3. 8. that he even prefers dung the basest
trash and vanities of the world before him? They can ^aue no ^enefit by Christ
who prefer plea^ure or profit before him.
Is it likely that he should have any relief from the Gospel, who is so
far from counting all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge
contained in it, as Saint Paul did, that he can taste no such excellency in it,
that he should loose one farthing, forbear one pleasure, forgo one vanity for
it. Our Savior himself, Mat. 10. 37. expressly tells us, He that loves Father
or Mother more the^ me is not worthy of me, that is, whosoever loves what he
has best reason to love in this life more the^ his Savior, is not worthy to
have any benefit by him, to have any share in his merits? What then think we,
can they expect from him, who are so coldly affected toward him, that they
prefer every trifle before him? All the promises of God (says the Apostle)
2. Cor. 1. 20. in him (in Christ Jesus) are yea, and in him Amen, that is, sure
and infallible. But still in Christ Jesus. And what is this to any man if he
himself be not in him? And how can he be in him but by loving him. The
accursed estate of the falsehearted Christian who presumes much upon CHRIST,
whom indeed he has nothing to do with, will more affright him if he would
but consider it in other men. Who is there amongst us but will much pity and
bemoane the lamentable condition of the poor Indians, The lamentable condition
of the savage Indian.
and other Savages of the unchristian world, whose souls are over clouded with
the blackest mists of irreligion that the Prince of darkness can possibly
inwrap them, who come into the world knowing not wherefore, and go out of it
dreaming not whither, but live here a while without God in the world, and then
go to the generation of their fathers, where they shall never see the light to
use the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 49. 19. A heavy case indeed beyond all
expression of a Tragedy, A formal Christian is in as bad a case in respect of
the world to come as the Silliest Indian.
and which cannot be sufficiently bewailed with an ocean of tears of blood.
But now whosoever he be within the Paradise of the Christian Church who has
nothing to distinguish him from these miscreants but his outward conformity to
the laws and customs of the place where he lives, who has nothing to prove
himself a Christian but outward formalities, the charity of other men and his
own slight imaginations whosoever he be that has not as yet espied
something in Christ. Jesus so amiable as that in earnest it may challenge his
whole heart before all the pomp and pleasure in the world, I say that man
whosoever he be may keep his moanes and tears for himself: it is his own
case: for, for the present until the spirit of grace shall startle him unto
more sense of the mercies of Christ, he is in as bad a case as the silliest
Indian. I mean in respect of the world to come, for for in this life the most
dissembling Christian is partaker of many sweer blessings which the Gospel
uses to carry about with it from country to country, by which it ciuillizeth
and pollisheth the most rude and barbarous nations. But for the joys of
eternity, what better claim can he lay unto them then the wild American? He
has no more to do with Christ then the other. He has lived indeed where he
has heard much talk of Christ, of redemption, and the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God; but what is all this to him who could never relish any of these
things, who never took them to heart, It is a pure sincere love of Christ that
distinguishes us from Infidels.
never could find any sweetness in them but passed them over like some uncouth
mystical fables? Beloved we must not think that living, within the air of
the Gospel, amongst Churches and Bibles, can distinguish us from Infidels,
exempt us from the rigor of the law, and entitle us to Christ? No such matter.
Christ came unto his own but his own received him not, says S. John^ were his
own then ever the better for him? Not a whit. Our Savior whilst he was
talking with the Jews, Ioh. 3. 40. tells them. Ye will not come unto me that
ye might have life: He was come unto them, but they would not come unto him.
Albeit then Christ visit us never so frequently, if we welcome him not with
that joy with which Zacheus once did, though he pass never so often by our
hearts, if we inuit him not in, and get him to sup and lodge with us, we
must look to get no more by him then those unhappy mis^reants who never heard
of his name. It Is considerable to this purpose which S. Paul has, Gal. 5. 6.
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but
faith which works by love, that is, outward marks or privileges advantage a
man nothing in Christ Jesus unless he be so sensibly persuaded of those
miracles of compassion which Christ has performed for his soul, that upon
this persuasion he thinks he can never love him enough and therefore submits
his whole soul unto him in a universal obedience unto his will.

To draw toward a conclusion of this point, An explanation of Psalm. 2. Kiss
the Son, etc.
let us scanne a little Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the Son least he be angry and
ye perish from the way^ and this Psalm contains a clear prophecy of our
Savior and such great ones of the world as should oppose themselves against
him, whom yet the Prophet vouchsafes to direct, v. 10. For all this they might
make their peace with God: the chief part of the direction is set down in the
words which you have now heard; Kiss the Son, that is, reverence, respect,
embrace the Son of God. Why so? Least by his anger ye perish from the way:
from what way? The Syriack interpreteter tells you m^ vrkeh from his way. He
himself is the only way unto his Father, to whom no man comes but by him,
as himself tells us in the Gospel. Whosoever therefore stands off from Christ
Jesus, and strives not to kiss, that is, to be united unto him by the choicest
twins of dearest affection must needs perish out of the way to life,
continue still in his sins expecting all the curses of the Law to fall upon
him. The law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, says the Apostle,
Gal. 3. 24. What to bring us within the sound of his name? To bring us to talk
and discourse of him? More then so, to amaze us with the horror of our sins,
and to make us ^eele what need we have of a Savior, and having one offered
us, to lay fast hold on him whatsoever it cost us, and to prize him above all
the Jewels in the world. But if the Law* cannot prevail so much with us as to
make us groan for a redeemer, to make us come crouching under our burdens unto
Christ Jesus, we must continue still under the lash, It Is true which the
Apohath, v. seq. that after faith is come we are no longer under a
Schoolmaster: But if this faith which is inseparably joined with love never
come, we are sure to smart under his heavy hand through all eternity.

You have heard the first part of his burden who in the light of the Gospel
does not really love Christ Jesus to wit, that he has no part in Christ and
therefore all the curses of the law belong unto him. One would think there
needed no more to be said to prove him accursed who loves not Christ Jesus
seeing this having no part in him includes more horrors and terrors then it is
possible for the brain of man to shape the Ideates of. But I must tell you
that as heavy a doom as this is, yet is it but light in comparison of which I
shall describe unto you in a second consideration, 2 Consideration.
to wit, Great plagues remain for those that do not sincerely love Christ but
do contemn the Gospel.
whosoever he be that is Catechized and brought up in the Christian profession
and yet does not heartily and sincerely affect Christ Jesus besides all the
curses due unto his sins against the Law, he treasures up unto himself a
far more complete vengeance for his disesteeme and contempt of the Gospel.
It were well, beloved, if when Christ Jesus comes unto a man and that man
receaues him not, if he left him in no worse case then he found him, though
that were vnconceauably miserable: But it is never so. For if he entertaynes
not Christ as a Savior, he is sure to have him hence forth his accuser, and
if he will not admit him ad salutem, he shall have him whether he will or no
ad Testimonium. It Is true which our Savior told Nicodemus Ioh. 3. 17. That God
sent not his Son into the World to condemn the world, but that the world
through him be saved: Christ does not knock at any man's heart with that intent
that he may have the more advantage against him if he let him not in, no he
comes with purpose and desire to brind in salvation with him, but if he and
his salvation be so little regarded that we entertain him only with a few
cold complements at door, as I may say, and so dismiss him. O then he goes
away in a rage, complains to his father that for such ungrateful wretches he
shed his dearest blood. And therefore though God sent not his Son into the
world to condemn it, yet it follows in the next verse, He that belieueth not
is condemned already, because he belieueth not in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. Condemned etc. he believes not. Why? the Law had
sufficiently condemned him before. True, but now God offers him a pardon by his
Son to exempt him from condemnation, which seeing he scorns, or cares not to
accept, God will now not only have the other condemnation to continue it is
force against him, but he will load him with another more heavy, which shall
never be reuersed by any pardon. This is made more plain by the verse
following, This is the condemnanation that light is come into the world and men
love darkness rather then light, that is; For this is that great and final
condemnation, which can never be remitted, as that of the Law may, that Christ
is come into the world bringing redemption with him, The contempt of the
Gospel of Christ can never be remitted.
and men are so little sensible of it, so dully affected with it, that they
care not for making any use of him, but had rather continue Satan's prisoners
still, then come forth into his maruailous light. So that the neglect of Christ
Jesus and his Gospel, is that which makes a man completely Anathema Maranatha,
because if we pass by him there remains henceforth no more sacrifice for
sin but a fearful expectations of Judgment: Hebr. 10. 26. Mistake me not
beloved, when I say there remains no more sacrifice for sin to those who
have passed by Christ Jesus, I mean such as have passed him by for good and
all, such as are not entirely incorporated into him before they are snatched
out of this life. For indeed we have a redeemer so sensible of our infirmities
that when he comes a wooing unto our souls, he will not be driven away at
the first denial. Alas, if he should be so touchy, there would hardly ever any
soul be espoused to him, seeing all of us naturally hang back, find excuses,
and make many pauses* and demurres, before we give our consent. But our
Savior is so patient toward our follies, that for all his repulse he will
vouchsafe to come again and again, wait our leisure, The woeful estate of
those that deny the gracious proffers of Christ Jesus.
take all opportunity solicit the business by his holy spirit. But here is
no ground for presumption. For whosoever denies him so often, or so
peremptorily, that he is forced as if it were to leave of his suit, during the
life of the party, or whosoever dallies so long with him, that he is called
out of this life (as who can promise himself an hour) before the match be
made up, I say whosoever shall slight his Savior, or neglect him after this
manner, it had been a thousand times better for him, that Christ had never been borne into the world, or at least that himself had been borne in such an
obscure corner of it, that he had never heard of him. For his outward
profession of and with all the prerogative, of it, with which he contented
himself without any hearty love unto him, the fair offers of salvation which
he had, and made nothing of, shall press him more heavily at the day of
Judgment, then all his sins against the law, though they were murders, and
adulteryes; when for these very reasons it shall be easier for Turks,
Americans, and Virginians then for him.

If you demand the reason of all this mischief, The reason of all this
mischief that falls upon the contemners of Christ^, is because the contempt of
the Gospel is a sin against all Persons in the Trinity.
it is because the not laying to heart of what Christ has done for us, and the
not-receiuing him being offered us with the thankful affections of love and
reverence, unmixed delight, and complete content in him is the highest
dishonor, and basest indignity (except wilful Apostasy, or malious blasphemy)
which can be offered by a sinful man to the most blessed and glorious
Trinity. Should I stand ^o recount and amplify every circumstance of it, I
think I should both weary and amaze you. Suffice it therefore only briefly to
consider how contempt offered to Christ and his Gospel reflects upon all the
Persons of the Blessed Trinity.

For the Father, 1. Against the Wisdom of the Father.
whosoever sets light by his Son does most grossly undervalue both his wisdom
and his goodness.

For his wisdom. The contriuing of man's redemption by the death of his Son
in the fullness of time is, so far as is revealed to us, the masterpiece and
chief plot (with reverence be it spoken) which has been from all eternity
thought on by that infinite boundless wisdom of God blessed for ever; God
intended to get him more glory by the redemption then the creation of mankind.
whereby he purposed to get himself far more glory then he did by the
creation of the world, when by a deliverance so superlatiuely admirable he
should both save mankind, and astonish it. This is that for which the Gospel
is so often called the wisdom of God unto salvation. This is that mystery of
Godliness which is great (...) by the confession of all without controversy 1 Timothy 3. 16. This is that illustrious mystery of salvation which the Prophets
enquired after, and searched diligently with the Angels to look into 1. Pet.
1. 10. 12. Lastly this is that (...) that wisdom of God which has such
curious variety in it Ephesians. 4. 10. Well then to come to the point when the
time is come (as it is come to us, who live in this blessed noone-tide of the
Gospel) that God reueales to any man this astonishing mystery of his infinite
wisdom, when he pleases to show any man how admirably he has contrived his
salvation for him, by sending his own son to satisfy his justice, and
therefore expects abundance of glory by it: if that man now abase varlet,
created by God that he might applaud his lesser works of creation, shall
behave himsele so stupidly, that he, forsooth, can scarce have patience to
take a full view of his Son, if he can epsy no such art in the contriuance
as may ravish him, no such wonders as may withdraw his mind from those
bawbles, about which it was before busied, O beloved, this is an indignity to
the glorious wisdom of God the Father, beyond all expression of mortal
eloquence.

2. For his goodness and mercy. 2. Against the goodness and mercy of the
Father.
God the Father from everlasting beholding mankind in the ugly mass of
corruption, through their own wilful rebellion knew he must be just, and yet
desired to be merciful. And when nothing might make these two stand together,
but satisfaction from one as infinite as himself, that he might commend his
love to us, as the Apostle speaks Romans 3. 8. he resolved not to spare (...)
the son of his Love as he is called by a significant Hebraisme, Col: 1. v.
13. but to send him in similitude of sinful flesh, to undergo that heavy
business for us, presuming as it is in the parable that howsoever his other
messengers had fared but ill in the world, yet his Son the heir should be
entertained with reverence. O then can we imagine with what hellish contempt
they even defye the love of God toward them, who look strangely upon his
Son, who behave themselves toward him, as if his Father had sent him in a
needles err and into the world, or as if there needed not to have been all
this care taken for them.

2. In the next place it would be an endless business to rehearse the
indignities which are offered to the second person in Trinity Christ himself by
such as call him Lord, 2. Against the Son because his death and passion is
vilified and contemned.
Lord, but yet deal not honestly with him in their hearts. Greater love then
this has no man, then that he lay down his life for his friend says our
Savior Ioh. 15. 13. True Lord, it is the greatest love that one friend can show
another, but yet thy love was greater unto us in that thou laydest down thy
life for thy enemies, yea in that thou vouchsafedst for our sakes to take such
a life which thou might lay down. Consider in brief I beseech you, how the
Son of God out of mere obedience unto his Father and compassion unto us
rebellious worms (...) emp^tied himself of the luster of his Deity, and in
the form of a servant humbled himself to the death ^uen the most painful,
and shameful death of the Cross Phil. 2. 8. Peruse the history of his
passion, yea of his whole life which was little better then a passion, The
bitterness of Christ's Passion.
observe how thoroughly the sad predictions of a despised life and ignominious
death Isa. 53. were fulfilled in him, how in every point he was made isch
enacc^both a man of sorrows, draw into a Catalogue the rude discourtesies,
churlish affronts, the ^euilings, bu^^etings, spittings, torments, agonies and
the contradictions of sinners all along (that is) of sinful caytifes which
he endured with patience. Lastly remember that all this befell him only
because the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all Isa. 53. 6. where the
Hebrew phrase is elegantly significant, hiphgiah, he has made the iniquity of
us all to meet, on him, as our translators have rightly expressed it in the
margent. Remember still I say that all this was but what we had deserved and
therefore we may well suppose him with pitiful moanes crying out unto us upon
the Cross in the moving language of Jerusalem Lam: 1. 12. Is it nothing to all
you that pass by; behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow.
Now beloved whosoever he be that has read or heard all these things so
punctually set down in the Gospel that he has had his savior even
crucified before his eyes, whosoever is conceited and he believes this history
and yet cannot bleed within or weep without for his sins which were the
cause of it, but can be moved to more tender passions by a Tragic fable
created by the brain of a Poet cannot sympathise with his Savior in that
passion which should have been his, Christ is more tormented by our
ingratitude then he was by his passion.
cannot by his serious co^punction share with him in those agonies which should
have been all his own, cannot take these mercies so deeply to heart as with
the earnest pangs of yerning affections to desire to be crucified with Christ
as S. Paul speaks of himself Gal. 2. 20. and to live the rest of his life in
the flesh by the faith of the Son of God; who loved him and gave himself for
him, questionless that man offers his Savior the most cutting injury, and
does him the most villainous spite that it is possible for a mortal wretch to
offer unto the Lord of Glory. That man's ingratitude is more painful unto
Christ Jesus then all the thorns were in his head, and wounds him more deeply
then the nails did his hands and feet; and therefore we cannot imagine a
lighter curse then Anathema Maranatha to be due unto him. For by his sottish
neglect of that death of which his sins as well as any man's else were a cause, he
becomes guilty of the murder of the Son of God, yea one of those (...), by
(...), I vnderstang (...) and English it, who crucify as much as in them lies
the son of God (...) and expose him like a^ malefactor to public shame.
Heb. 6. 6.

3 Lastly whosoever instructed in the Gospel does not in earnest love Christ
Jesus he vexes and grieves the third person in Trinity the Holy spirit, 3.
Against the holy Ghost because his labor for love to Christ is in vain.
whose chief business here below is to work our our hearts unto the love of
Christ, and as I said before to solicit the match between him and our souls.
And this is one reason why our savior being to leave this world, speaks so
much in Saint John of what the comforter should do for him after his
departure. He shall testify of me John 13. He shall glorify me 16. 14.
Whosoever therefore makes the Holy spirit to labor in vain not suffering his
persuasions to make any impressions upon his heart, or to get thence any glory
for him whose agent he is but thinks he does Christ Jesus kindness enough
in that he suffers himself to be called a Christian rather then a Jew or a
Mahumetan, or Protestant rather then a Papist. In what a fit of discontent, in
what a chafe (may we think) does that man send or rather drive away the spirit
of Grace. All that I have said in this second consideration is comprised in
that terrifying place Hebr. 10. 28. 29. which I know is there applied unto
Apostates, but we must note that all hypocrites, are Apostates in Gods fight,
and therefore what we may apply unto an Apostate in particular, because he
discouers the rottenness* of his heart in the sight of men, we may apply unto
hypocrites in general because there is in them the same evil heart of
unbelief though we cannot so particularly smell them out: the words are. He
that despised Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith he was sanctified (...) (as the blood of a common man, or a
malefactor not as the blood of a sacrifice) and has done despite unto the
spirit of grace.

Applic. You see the fearfully accursed estate of those professors of
Christianity who deal falsely with their Savior, and love him not at the
heart, you see upon what slippery terms we stand between the greatest
curses, and the greatest blessings. 1 The benefit of embracing Christ and his
Gospel.
If we have indeed made Christ Jesus our portion, if we have been so
feelingly affected with his favors toward us that now with the Spouse in the
Canticles we are even sick with love of him. If as the Apostle prays for the
Ephesians, We are so rooted and grounded in love that we can bring good
proofs, that with a constant resolution we prefer the intellectual
pleasures which issue from his reconciled countenance before whatsoever else is
most precious and dear unto us, O then we may hug our selves as men
over-joyed, for as sure as God is God, all his rich promises in Christ Jesus
shall be yea and Amen unto us. But on the contrary if those heavenly raptures
and glorious trances of sweetest intercourse between Christ and our souls
sound as Phantastique dreams and harsh Paradoxes unto us, 2. The danger of a
mere outward profession of Christ's Gospel.
if we stupidly content our selves with an empty profession of his name and
heartlesse conformity unto the outward garb of the Gospel, never striving
either to express or to feel the inward power of it, if we go on in a
heavy, sluggish dull manner, never retiring unto our Savior but in some
melancholy moodes which we are quickly weary of, blindly presuming of much
from him, and caring not how little he has from us: O then we most grossly
delude our selves: for the curse of curses Anathema Maran-atha does most
certainly belong unto us, I presume almost there is not any man in this
assembly but would think himself much wronged if one should seriously tell
him he did not love Christ Jesus: Not love Christ? Why we imagine we all do
it naturally, we take it as the custom of the country to say so, It is not my
purpose to dishearten any man, would to God that the least spark of love unto
Christ in any man's heart here were a glorious flame. But yet I would have no
man to deceive himself in this point then which nothing more easy, nothing
more dangerous. God is not mocked, he requires truth in the inward parts and
the exactest kind of love that can be imagined. Do you think beloved but
that the Jews in our Saviors time were confidently persuaded that they loved
God: they persecuted our Savior indeed because they could not apprehend him to
be the son of God, but for God himself they made full account that they, and
none but they loved him aright. Here was, I dare say, as strong a persuasion of
love to God, It is dangerous to be confident in a customary love to God.
if confidence would bear out the matter as in the greater part of Christians
of their love unto Christ. But behold how miserably they were deceived Joh. 5.
42. our Savior expressly tells them, But I know you that ye have not the love
of God in you. The like gross deceit of the Jews may be observed in the same
chapter about their love unto Moses, why they were (...) and nail for Moses.
The Law and name of Moses was the glory of their nation for which no doubt but
many if they had been put to it would resolutely have lost their lives in our
Saviors time as their ancestors had done before or their posterity since, so
that one would have thought he might have sworn they loved Moses, but yet
when the matter comes to scanning you shall find there was no such matter, for
indeed they were so false hearted to Moses that at the last day he shall be
their chief accuser, witness our Savior verse 45. There is one that accuses
you in whom ye trust, that is, on whom ye presume, for had you believed Moses
etc. Lastly, to rouse us out of the slumber of our presumption, let us take
notice of one example more taken out of Mat. 7. 22. Luc. 13. 26. where we
read, that many shall come at the last day unto Christ, presuming upon their
familiarity with him, some telling him they had eaten and drank in his
presence, some expostulating with him, Lord have we not prophesied in thy
name, cast out devils, and done many wonderful works. Would you imagine all
this could be without great love unto Christ: O how confident should we be if
we had such evidence of our union with him. How safe should we think our
selves, could we challenge acquaintance with him upon the same te arms when he
shall come in his glory to judgment. But yet you see all this might do us no
good, seeing our Savior will send many such packing with an angry protestation
that he knows them not, and if he will not know them, you may be sure they
were such as had not for all these florishes dealt kindly and lovingly, with
him. Wherefore beloved, you see how much it concerns us to pause a while on
this matter* We all think we love Christ Jesus: it were well if thinking would
serve the turn, but we see that many, who thought as confidently as we, and
perhaps upon better grounds, shall then perceive themselves mistaken, when it
shall be too late to remedy it. O then let us not venture our selves upon such
groundless surmises, but while we have time to make all sure. Let us make it
a business to settle the estate of our souls which hang upon such nice
points, let not our shallow presumptious conceits of our love to Christ, let
not the laziness and untowardness of our flesh hinder us from a speedy,
impartial, industrious examination of our hearts, whether they have indeed the
love of Christ in them or no.

If upon due enquiry we find in our selves the true ground of love unto our
Savior, The infallible notes of real love unto Christ.
to wit a tender affectionate apprehension of our infinite deserved miseries,
and his infinite undeserved mercies, if we feel the fruits of it a constant,
even, universal resolution to please him in all things, at all times, in all
companies, a disesteeme of whatsoever is honorable or pleasant in the world in
comparison of his favor, a continual hunger and thirst after a nearer and
more sensible communion with him, I say if upon exact trial thou find in thy
self these infallible notes of real love unto thy Savior, then I hope it
will not repent thee of thy labor. For now thou know upon what ground thou
stand, now thy joy may be full, assuring thy self that thou shall have a
confidence which shall not deceive thee before thy Savior at his appearing.
Contrariwise if when thou entrest into thy heart, thou find no sacred fire
upon the hearth but all cold and uncomfortable, if thou have not yet been
acquainted with those prickings of heart and affrightments of conscience for
thy sins, which usually put poor humbled souls into those vehement fits of
love unto our Savior, If thou can give no reason of thy supposed love unto,
Christ from any thing that thou have felt in thy self but only from what
other men say, from the Laws and customs of the place where thou art a
subject, then thou find thy self but in an unhappy case; yet thou art happy
in this that thou know the worst of thy self, and may seek out betimes
for an effectual remedy. If this be thy case consider seriously that thou art
yet under the heavy curse in my Text, and therefore impatient of this accursed
estate, recollect thy self and call a speedy assembly of thy best wits, and
then bethink thy self that Christianity is no lu^dicrous, or jesting matter,
that the profession of Christ the most serious business in the world, that
therefore questionless there is a great deal more in it, then the formalities
of coming to Church, carrying a bible, hearing a sermon, that without doubt
Christ requires a real inward disposition of the soul which should season all
these complements and make them acceptable.

3. Consider in the next place the sum and scope of Christianity which is
only to show how miserable thou art by sin* The sum and scope of Christianity.
and how happy thou may be in Christ. When thou art come thus far, set the
lookingglasse of the Law before thee and terrify thy self with the ugly
deformities and loathsome stains of thy soul through the guilt of sin, then
turn unto the Gospel and consider how Christ Jesus out of the abundance of
his love with which he loved thee being his enemy, shed his dearest blood to
wash away these stains from thy soul as very a wretch as thou art as well as
any man's else.

4. Lastly, Prayer the best armor of a Christian.
having thy soul attentively fixed upon this, betake thy self to earnest
prayer, and with strong cries and groans improtune the spirit of grace to
enlighten the eyes of thy understanding, that thou may be able to comprehend
with all Saints what is the breadth, length, and height, and depth, and to know
the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. Do this from thy
heart, and continue in it a while with an eager patience, and then I dare be
bold to say that thou shall feel a strange alteration in thy self, then shall
thou feel (...) not one simple commotion in thy soul but an assembly and
throng of passions, then shall thou be acquainted with those scalding
affections to Christ Jesus which holy men have felt in all ages and striued to
express in their soliloquies but could not, yea the greater sinner thou have
been the more will thou with MARIE Luc. 7. lay about thee with tears of
sorrow, and tears of joy, and in a holy kind of distraction strive to love
much because much is forgiven thee. Lastly thou will plainly see how
villanously hitherto thou have dissembled with thy Savior, and what a deal of
Angelical comfort thou have lost by being a stranger unto him, and having once
after some cloudy scuds of penitent sadness recovered the light, thou will
rejoice as the wise men when they recovered light of the star with exceegreat
joy and follow it through thick and thin, through all difficulties and
oppositions whatsoever til thou shall come to see him as he is in
incomprehensible splendour amongst infinite millio^s of glorified Saints and
Angels; To whom with the Father and blessed Spirit the three glorious persons
and one most infinite Deity be ascribed all honor, power, might, majesty and
dominion now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
EPHESIANS. 6. V. 24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity.
NOr to mispend any good time in a needless preface, my text is part of the
farewell close of an heavenly Epistle, wherein the composer of it in the
solemn form of a benediction wishes Grace (that is) all those precious
mercies and glorious benefits which flow from the grace and favor of God, unto
all such as love Christ Jesus in sincerity. The original has (...) in
incorruption, as our translatours have expressed it in the margent, the sense
is all one, for to love Christ in sincerity, is to embrace him entirely without
any rottenesse of heart, without any unsoundness of affections, without any
mixture of hypocrisy. The Greek Scholiast conceived the Apostle by the word
(...) to have required not so much the sincerity, as perpetuity of love unto
Christ in those whom he blesses, and therefore he expounds it by the aduerb
(...), v^derstanding it not so much of a pure vncorrupt, as of a constant
incorruptible love, which yet always presupposes the other. I confess the
word may very well sit under this interpretation, but yet I prefer the former
before it, and both a great deal before Beza's (with due reverence unto so
incomparable a man) who has turned all quite another way, referring (...) not
to love but to grace, and taking it for (...) ad immortalitatem, as if the
sense were to be, Grace be with all them which love Christ Jesus, until they
come or to bring them unto immortality. The construction of the word which our
translatours have made choice of, he reiects because he could not remember,
that (...) had any where that signification, I confess it is a very rare one,
and for that reason I have insisted upon it, being perhaps not to be found in
the new Testament, but if any man please to look in the 2. to Tit. v. 7. he
shall there find the word, and hardly capable of any other co^struction. Beza
indeed suspecting that it crept out of the margent into the text, has there
left it quite out, which I wonder at, seeing himself confesses that he found
it in the ancient Greek Copies, wherefore I suppose without any prejudice to
the discourse which I shall build upon this scripture I may proceed confidently
according to our own translation especially seeing I know some six more of
good note which all read either in, or with sincerity: In brief then, the
meaning of my text is this, Let the favor of God and al those blessings which
issue from it, rest upon those who do not by groundless presumptio^s flatter
themselves or counterfeit appearance persuade others that they love Christ
Jesus, but do in very deed and good earnest love him with all their hearts,
and with all their souls. Or thus, Let the gracious promises of God in Christ
be fulfilled upon them and them only, who embrace and obey his Gospel with
sound and honest hearts, who are true Christians in whom is no guile. For we
must note that as the whole Law of God (...) as the Apostle speaks, is
summarily comprised in the word Love, Love to our neighbor, including all the
the duties of the second table, and love to God the duties of both, though more
immediately those of the first, even so our love unto Christ compriseth all the
duties, all the respect and homage which we owe unto him and his Gospel.

It is not my purpose to dismember my text by the untoward curiosity of a
division: I have not as yet learned that piece of method. The reasons inducing
me to the choice of this Scripture arose from a serious consideration of the
spiritual estate of these times. We live in an age of most peremptory
presumption, and we may observe that our presumption of the end is vpheld by
our presumption of the means. ^n this age ^uery one ^resumes (...) shall be
^^ued only because he ^hinkes himself to ^e a Chri^tian and ^ne that ^oues
Christ.
No man but thinks he shall be saved, and why? because every man thinks
himself to be a Christian, to be one that loves Christ, which to speak more
rationally is but our presumption; for it is no presumption for a man to
believe that he shall be saved unless he be unassured of this supposition
that he is a Christian. In a word, whereas there is a twofold grace of God:
his promising and rewarding grace, and then his qualifying or sanctifying
grace, we presume upon that because we presume upon this, we make full
account of his mercies and promises, because we make no question of those holy
qualifications in our selves which dispose us to believe in him and to love
him. Now then seeing we all suppose that the everlasting favors of God do
most infallibly appertain unto all and none but such as love Christ Jesus, 2.
that our selves are all such, the first supposall being clear out of my text,
all our care must be for the second, to see that we are not mistaken in our
account of our selves. The trial of all, lies in this sincerity, whether we
are indeed those men in respect of Christ which we verily think our selves to
be. That therefore I may acquaint you both with the necessity and method of
this trial, that I might show you both what need we have to examine the
sincerity of our love unto Christ and Christianity, and after what manner we
ought to go about, that if it may please the opener and turner of hearts to
effect any thing by so contemptible an instrument, I may awake some one out of
that pleasant, but deadly slumber which possesses thousands in this land, and
cause him to look better to his standing. The division is into three most
considerable points of our love unto Christ.
I have resolved by the assistance of the spirit at several opportunities to
discourse unto you of three general heads, or most considerable points in our
love unto Christ; 1. the ground or foundation of our love unto Christ; the
reasons wherefore we are Christians. 2. the degree or intention of our love
unto Christ; how much we ought to love him, or in what pitch of resolution to
resign our selves unto him. 3. the effects and operations of our love unto
him, or the special fruits of our sincerity. In my discourse of the ground of
our love unto Christ I have proposed unto my self this method 1. I will
discover two deceiuable insufficie^t grounds which at this day betray thousands
unto perdition, causing them to fall short of those glorious hopes which were
built upon them. 2. I will lay open the true ground and proper original from
whence all sincere affection unto Christ arises. The first of those deceiuable
grounds, is custom, the discovering of which will take up as much time as your
patience will be willing to allow me at once.

The fall of man has not so far worn out of his heart the impressions of a
Deity, and the engrafted notions of religion, but that we all bring into the
world with us those restless instincts, and importunate impulsions which will
not suffer us to be at quiet until we are initiated into some Religion or
other, The Ancient Epicures though it were the scope of their damned profession
to be altogether irreligious, and the most contenting perfection they could
project unto themselves, yet as we may perceive by such writings as they have
left us they could never fully attain unto it, The very Epicures felt often
the gripes of conscience.
but in spite of their affected Atheism they were forced to betray many
shrewd grudgings and terrible gripes of natural conscience. And though in the
denial of divine providence upon the supposall of which depends all religion,
they put a good face upon it, and seem to laugh at the matter, yet we may
perceive they were still gawled with that formido oppositi and by those
engraued principles were ever and anon stung to real fear of that truth which
they would feign have mocked out of the world either as an ancient invention of
policy to keep men in awe, or as an inueterate slavery of vulgar ignorance.
The same inbred seeds of religion by which it pleases God to force a
manifestation of himself even upon those who would feign have no notice of
him, and in the most reprobate minds to make Atheism rather a wish then an
opinion, after so many successions of ages are no whit decayed, but continue
still as stirring and active in the hearts of men as ever they were since they
received that unhappy crush by the first transgression. For the Creator of all
things as the Psalmist tells us Psalm. 33. 15. fashioneth the hearts of all men
alike, the word is (...), which signifyes together at once, intimating that the
hearts of all men though separated from one another by never so vast a gulf of
time or place, The necessity of a Religion.
are as exactly alike in respect of their original inclinations, as if they
had been all molded at the same time. According to the custom of the country
so is our worship.
The worship of a God then, some kind of religion is necessary unto us, we
cannot shift it of: but now the propensions of nature being blind and confused,
and there being a various multiplicity of religions in the world, here
ordinarily step in the laws and customs of the country, into which the womb
of nature first empties us, which shape our general inclinations either to
worship the true God, or this or that Idol, and the true God after this or
that manner. Look abroad into the world and observe the swarms of diverse and
contrary religions which either fill places apart by themselves or are
promiseuously exercised amongst one another, and you shall perceive them to be
nothing but the natural instincts of religion in general, specificated into
diverse forms and fashions by birth and education. For albeit there may be
many occasions of, and difficulties in the first bringing in of a religion into
a country, yet after it has once by countenance from supreme authority and
other plausibilities insinuated it self into the acceptance and approbation of
the multitude, it thenceforth becomes (...) to use St Peter's word, and with an
easy descent runs down the stream of succession, being delivered from
Father to Son as naturally, as the proper language, manner of diet, fashion of
apparel, or any other customs of the country.

Now amongst so many religions as in several parts of the world are by custom
conveyed and passed from one to another we suppose there is but one which we
may dare to trust for our happiness, There is but one true religion by the
which true happiness is attained.
but one that can certainly do our souls that good which most of them would
seem to promise. What true Religion is.
Neither will we seem to doubt but that this one saving religion is that
which consists in the knowledge of the only true God, and whom he has sent
Jesus Christ, and therefore we will all seem to be much in love with this
heave^ly profession before any other whatsoever. If then we will be sure not
to cosen our selves in these persuasions, not to over-reckon our selves in our
love unto Christ and his Gospel, here is a maine business for us, punctually
to enquire how we came by this love and liking unto Christ, upon what motive
we have preferred this profession of Christ before such a multitude of
Religions in the world. The motives or reasons of our embracing of Christianity
before all other Religions.
You know that no art or invention can force waters to mount above their spring
head: in like manner, it is impossible that our affections unto Christ should be
more elevated, more heavenly and spiritual then the original from whence they
stream. If then being put to it by our selves or others we can think of no
better reasons for our choice of Christianity then such as these because we had
the fortune to be born in a place where Christ only was talked of, because we
have heard Turks, Jews, and Papists much spoken against, and were ever told
that this is the best religion, because the King and Laws have banished all
other Sects, and have established this profession of Christ which we have
always been brought up in, and could never see any harm in it, if such
sottish, senseless stuff be the best defense we can make for our selves, it
appears too plainly that our religion is nothing but those common relics of
natural instincts which I spoke of before* christened, as it were by humane
laws and customs, and that we are Christians upon no waightier inducements,
then we might have been Pagans or Idolaters. I tremble to speak it; if an
Indian should be demanded why he worshipped the Devil, changing only the
circumstances he might give as sufficient reasons as these for his most
fearful and horrible Idolatry. But this example though it might square but
too well to my purpose is too odious to be insisted upon. Ask a common Jew why
he blaspheames our blessed Savior, why he expects another Messiah, a Turk
why he is circumcised, why he is so devoted to Mahomet, they will both in effect
give the very same reasons of their blaspheamies and superstitions, which a
common ignorant Christian will give why he is rather a Christian then a Jew or
a Turk, justify their damned hatred and detestation of Christ, by the same
arguments, which cause him to profess special love and service unto him. Nay
you will say there is no Christian so barbarously ignorant but he may say more
for himself then any of those unbelieving misereants can, he has heard the
holy Scriptures read, been made partakers of the blessed Sacraments he hopes
to have his sins forgiven him by Christ, and though he be not able to prove
it by formal argumentation, he knows well enough that Turks and all such as
speak against Christ are accursed infidells. I think indeed there are not
many Christians but may say so much and perhaps more, by wrote, and taking it
up upon trust, but this is quite besides the purpose. For I do not now
question the Christian in the duties or opinions of his religion, but I call
upon him for his special reasons which cause him to perform those duties, or
embrace those opinions. He has been partaker of the blessed Sacraments, but
what better reason can he give why these Sacraments can do his soul good:
then a Turk may, why his circumcision should be beneficial unto him; he has
heard the Scriptures read and expounded, but what better reason can he give,
why he supposes the Scriptures to be the word of God, then the Turk will, why
he is so confident that the Alcoran came down immediately from heaven, in that
laylatto-Hanz^li, (...)
as they call it, the night of demission; Lastly, he stiffly conceits himself
to be one of the only true faith and all Turks to be abhorred infidels, but
what peculiar evidences has he that the Turks are mistaken and not himself,
seeing they are as confident on the other side that Christians are Cafirouna,
(...)
Infidels, as they term us, and that themselves are the only Moslimina or
Musulmans (that is) right believers? (...)
If then the Christians being pressed with these demands can produce nothing
from any supernatural alteration which he has felt wrought in himself, if
he be not able from spiritual self experience of that cutting convincing
power of the Scriptures, and of those admirable virtues and comfortable
influences of the Sacraments, if he be yet altogether unacquainted with those
caelestiall flashes, irradiations and inward testimonies of the spirit, which
use to put all these things out of question in souls truly Christianiz'd.
Lastly', if for want of better Apology he be forced to retire to those poor,
dishonorable, impertinent, To plead custom and law of the country is rather
an excuse then a reason of ones religion.
rather excuses then reasons of his religion, taken form the laws and customs
of his country, it is too too manifest that he adheres unto Christ upon no
better motive then others blaspheame and persecute him, and even spit at the
motion of his name.

But here some may put in; Object:
howsoever such a Christian may be out-braved, yet that which he says and
thinks is true: he is in the right though he cannot demonstrate like a
Scholar how he came to it, and therefore he is sure howsoever men may prate,
to speed well enough.

No such matter, Answer.
it is a very disputable case, whether such a one as lives and dies a Christian
upon custom, or a Turk be in the grosser error. This may seem very harsh,
Little difference betwixt a Christian and a Turk, if the former be so only
upon custom.
but you may easily epsy the truth of it if you please to remember, that both
the assent of our understandings, and choice of our wills may be misguided
into error two ways: either by assenting unto, and approving that as true and
good which in it self is false and evil, or by assenting unto, or appro^ing
that which is both true and good in it self, upon weak, incoherent,
insufficient inducementes, I cannot stand to comment upon this distinction, and
it is so trivial that I conceive it need not much to be exemplified. Applied
unto my purpose it clearly shows the ignorant Christian not to be a whit
more in the right then the Turk* The object of his assent and love is most
right absolutely in it self because it is not an object unto him for that truth
and goodness by which it is distinguished from all other objects, but for those
common corrupt grounds, which abstractly considered, equally incline the soul
to any object, as well to the grossest errors as the purest truth, to the
extremest evil, as to the chiefest good. So that this comparison is like to
light most heavily upon the Christian, seeing the goodness of the object will
not excuse or justify, but rather shame and condemn him, who professing much
love unto it, passes by that which alone was lovely in it. For the present
indeed the Christians case is infinitely the better, The Christians case is the
better, only by reason of the opportunities of correcting his error.
because he may with more ease correct his error, and has all requisite
opportunities to that purpose, but if he neglect to do it hereafter, the Turk
will get the better of him, when at the day of judgment, he that has died
such a Christian, will be glad to change places with him. In the mean time,
there is not any difference in their errors discernable to reason, for this is
certain, that diversity of objects cannot put any difference in the assents,
where the grounds are exactly the same, yea if some of the acutest modern
disputers have rightly determined, that the assent unto the premises, and the
conclusion is but one and the same assent, being originally to those, and
terminatiuely to this, I can scarce allow the difference to be so great. For
then it skills not how false or true the conclusion be absolutely in it self,
but how strongly or weakly it is inferred out of it is premises, and therefore
though one conclude an infallible truth, and another a monstrous falsehood out
of the same faulty premises, the error of both is the same, if they assent
unto their conclusions upon no other medium then this insufficie^t one, The
ignorant Christians assent unto the Gospel, and the Turks to the Alcoran,
proceed both upon the same grounds.
upon which they both agree. For example, the principle upon which the ignorant
Christians assent unto the Gospel stands, is this: That Religion which my
Parents have taught me, my Sovereign commanded me, and the common cry of my
country approved is surely the best. The Turk changing only the appropriating
circumstances, supposes likewise, that religion which his Sul^an, Parents and
Country men have commended unto him to be questionless the best. Both then
proceed upon the same medium, and therefore though by the intervention of other
casualties, the Turk be cast upon execrable blasphemies and impieties, and
the Christian upon heavenly and holy truths, their error is directly the same,
though more fortunate in one then in the other. And howsoever such a Christian
has his assent and imaginary love by lot of his birth and education, actually
fixed upon saving truths yet until he bethink himself of more proper and
solid reasons for his choice, he retains still in his breast habitually and
implicitly the seeds of all those hellish impostures, which by other men, in
other places, have been entertained and swallowed upon the same occasions.
Suppose a Christian, who can make no better defense for his profession then
such a one as I have labored to make him ashamed of, immediately after his
birth in England had been conveyed into Turkey, and there instead of Baptism
circumcised after the Turkish manner, and there so cunningly trained up in the
Turkish superstition, that he had no occasion given him to suspect himself
not to have been borne a Turk: no question but he would have been as zealous
there for the rascal Mahomet: as now being bred in England, he is for the
blessed Lord of the world. And no marvel, for the very same occurrences which
have made him a christian here, must needs have made him a Mohammedan at
Constantinople, seeing that whatsoever arguments drawn from laws, customs,
birth, educatio^, plead here for Christ would there persuade as effectually
for Mahomet, Neither speak I this as if this would argue any notorious
imperfection in the man: for doubtless this would be any man's case: Suppose any
of those renowned Champions of Christ who^ Queen Mary sent to heaven in fiery
Chariots, had been nursed and brought up amongst the Saracens, unless God had
vouchsafed them a miracle for their conversion, we cannot imagine but they
would have been Saracens. Suppose the deuoutest Saint of God at this day
breathing had been trained up at the feet of some Jewish Rabbin if we look no
higher then ordinary means, we must needs conceive that with the hellish
malice of a Jew he would have defied that blessed Savior of his, whom now he
worships day and night. I mentioned not that therefore to show the weakness
of the person, but of such reasons of his Christianity, as changing only the
scene of his nativity and education, might have made him hotter against it the^
now he is for it. So that the only fundamental reason why such a Christian is
rather a Christian then a Jew, Turk, or Idolater, is because Christianity
bespoke him as soon as he came into the world, and permitted not those mad
superstitions either to speak with him at all or not till it self had
prevented them and gotten possession. For we may observe that albeit generally
in the world error keeps truth out of the souls of men by anticipation, A
formal Christian is a Christian by educatio^ only, and the custom of his
country
damming up all the passages by which she should enter with base preconceipts
and odious prejudices, yet in some corners where divine providence has been
pleased to allow truth an authorized, settled residency, it gets the start of
error, and prevails as much by prepossession here as error does in other
places, beating that away with the same clamours and outcries by which it
self is elsewhere baffled. But this to speak more punctually is not a fight
between truth and error though by the undiscerning vulgar it be mistaken for
it, but a kind of blindfold combat between prejudice and prejudice, or of
custom against custom. For in these cases though truth block up errors way,
and so keep that from stealing into the soul, yet does not she presently
enter in her self, but stands, as it were, before the door displaying her
resplendent rarities and admirable perfections, and if for their sakes alone
she be not earnestly invited to come in and importuned to take up her lodging
there, she vouchsafes not to enter but at last flings away in disdain. Men may
imagine she is gone in because they cannot hear or see heresy or
superstition stirring with in, but for certain saving truth never presses
into any soul upon the bare adva^tage of being the first commer, but for her
own singular worth she looks to be wooed, importuned, and with some violence
haled in, as the blessedst guest that could possibly have come first or last.

But here may some demand, if the sum of all this that has been spoken be
true, to wit, The benefit of our birth and education amongst Christians.
That our love unto Christ and his Gospel be not gotten by our birth and
education amongst Christians, what benefit is it to be borne within the
visible Church? What prerogative to be bred in the light of the Gospel? I
answer, that it is an advantage of inestimable value, for which we all owe more
thanks and praises unto the Lord then our shallow brains and narrow hearts can
possibly conceive. But we must wisely consider the proper end and use for which
it has pleased the Father of lights to afford us this blessed privilege,
which is not that it should be a cause, but a means, not a ground but an
occasion of our love unto his beloved Son. In our common friendship we can
easily distinguish between the contingent occasions of our acquaintance with a
man, and the immediate reasons of our affectionate love unto him: those are
accidentally offered from without, these are some special excellencies
apprehended by us to be inherent in the person we affect, those are but means
to bring us to the knowledge of these. Even so in our spiritual love unto
Christ Jesus blessed for ever, the Lord has graciously planted us within the
sound of the Gospel, given us education in Christian rites and fashions, and
provided us the testimony of the Church to tell us that there is such a Savior
come into the world, and to bring us joyful news what invaluable treasures of
mercy and glory he has brought with him to enrich all such as shall come unto
him, pinched with the sense of their spiritual poverty; Those are the means
appointed to give us notice of these, but these only must be the grounds of
our affection unto him.

To conclude this discourse, albeit our love unto Christ be gotten by our
natural birth and education, be nothing worth in it self, yet is it the
ordinary rode which leads us to the sight and sense of those transcendent
perfections in him which will ravish us with a more transce^dent love of him:
Happy are we if that base vulgar love be in time swallowed up in a love more
celestial and divine, if that which can do our souls no good while we rest
upon it become a manuduction unto that which will certainly make us blessed.
Had not the Samaritans believed at first upon an insufficient ground, the
alarm of the woman, they had not come to believe upon the true, their own
knowledge and experience. Had not the faithful soul, which is now most sick
of a spiritual love unto her Savior, first loved him upon hearsay and
custom, she had never felt, in all probability, those heavenly trances and
unutterable ravishments with which now she is transported. All that love which
we profess unto Christ between our first birth, and the first pangs of the
second, is a love arising only from nature and custom, and is tolerable in us
while we are children, being not so properly an error as an introduction unto
truth: I say it is a hopeful preparation in children which are not yet come to
that ripeness of their natural faculties that the ordinary means of grace,
the preaching of the Gospel, may work upon on them. But after they have
attained to maturity of reason and should begin to have (...), as the Apostle
speaks, their senses exercised to discern between good and evil, if they
proceed still in such childish conceits of Christ Jesus, and drowsy affections
unto him, as they sucked from their nurses breasts, their love begins now to
be grossly sinful, and whenever it shall please the Lord to thunder them
out of that sleep of death, wherein now they enjoy some co^tenting dreams they
must penitently bewail it amongst the other sins of their unregeneracy.

I have done with my discovery of the false ground of love unto Christ, by
natural instincts of religion, restrained to Christianity by birth and
education. Before I proceed to an application of this discourse, I will insist
upon some opposite places of holy Scripture, which will add both light and
strength unto the precedent discourse, and I hope prepare your hearts to the
ensuing application. And first we have an excellent place, Cant. 5. v. 9 where
the Spouse, that is the faithful soul has this interrogatory doubled unto
her, what is thy beloved more then a beloved; (...) mahdodek middod, what is
thy beloved more then a beloved, that is, what transcendencies, what
singularities of alluring perfections, are so peculiarly remarkable in that
Savior of them, on whom thou art so strangely enamoured, as if there were
nothing lovely besides him? But what has the soul nothing now to commend in
her Savior, but what might be paraleld in some other? Yea, from that verse to
the end of the Chapter, she runs on in a description of his rarities; a
description so stuffed with the choicest delicacies of expression, that I am
persuaded it cannot be matched out of any of those Poets which have flowen
highest in amorous inventions; I cannot stand to unfold them unto you: that
which makes most to my purpose in it, is the superlatiue preeminence which she
gives him, v. 10. He is the chiefest, or as it is more elegantly in the
original, He is an ensign bearer amongst ten thousand, for so the word (...)
Dagull, properly signifies, v. 16. He is altogether lovely; (...) cullo
machamaddim, he is all entire, he is all composed of loves, wherevpo^ she
co^cludes with a triu^phant Epiphonema, This is my beloved, and this is my
friend, o ye daughters of Jerusalem. Phil. 1. v. 9. 10.
A second memorable place is Phil. 1. v. 9. 10. S. Paul speaks thus, And this
I pray that your love, (to wit, to Christ and his Gospel) may abound yet more
and more in knowledge, and in all judgment, that you may approve things that
are excellent. that ye may be sincere and without offense, till the day of
Christ. The Apostle praying for the confirmation of their love unto the
Gospel, and as an especial means of that he prays, they may abound in all
judgment, by which they may be able upon good grounds to approve the real
excellencies of truth before the plausibilities of error, that so they may be
sincere in their love unto it, to which purpose also he prays for the
Ephesians, that they may be rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3. 17. A third
cousiderable place is, 1. Cor. 12. 3.
1. Cor. 12. 3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the
spirit of God calls Jesus accursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is the
Lord but by the Holy Ghost, that is, no man can with the fiduciall assent of
his heart, acknowledge Christ to be the only Lord, which he is to worship by
the same impulsions, by which another curses and blaspheames him, but by such
peculiar motives as are suggested and revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost.

There is no man in this assembly but would think it very strange, if one
should tell him seriously, he could not say, no not so much as think, that
Jesus is the Lord. But if he think and say him to be Anathema, his saying
will do him no good, though he make it his only work to reveal it as long as
he lives. The last place shall be that eminent one in S. Peter, 1. 3. 15. But
sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, What reason?
Such a one as may be retorted by those who question us? Such a one as may
perhaps make more against us then for us? Such a general one as might be
given for any presumption in the world? No* a reason from a clear distinct
knowledge of the peculiar grounds, and experimental sense of those encouraging
foretasts of our incorruptible hopes by the Gospel: which though it cannot
convince such Heretics and Infidells as examine us, because the God of this
world has closed their eyes, yet it may strengthen us to possess our souls
in patience, and to hold fast our confidence which has such great recompenses
of reward in spite of all the terrors of Men or Devils.

Use. 1. Use 1. Is to examine your selves whether ye be come out of this
customary love unto Christ, into a spiritual, or no.
To admonish every man here present with all speed and diligence to commune
with his own heart, and to examine whether he be as yet come out of his
customary love unto Christ into a spiritual, or no. Beloved, we are all
confident that we love Christ Jesus, and if one should in earnest tell us we
did not love him, we should take it as ill, and interpret it as if he told us
we were damned. Seeing then all our glorious hopes of a better life are built
upon this supposition: that we are the true disciples of Christ, as we would
not be called to after-reckonings at that solemn day of accounts, or have a
flaw found in our evidence, which should eternally dash our expectation, even
then when we should take possession, as we would not have our hopes to vanish
in amazement, and confusion at that terrible day, when it shall be too late to
recall or rectify any thing which has been formerly amiss, as we would not
have our confident conceits of Christ's love unto us, and ours unto him give us
the s^ippe at the hour of death, when we should have most use of them, and
leave us to a fearful expectation of judgment. Let us, I say, if we have
any regard of sense of these things deal ingenuously with our own souls, and
impartially examine what better ground we have for that supposition which
vpholds all our well fare, then such as I have demonstrated to be miserably
insufficient. Christians we are all by education, by country and custom, by
conformity unto laws and fashions: but is this all? have we proceeded no
farther? why this will advantage us no more for heaven then that we are
Englishmen. All this is but the outside of Christianity. Christianity thrust
upon us by our natural birth before we were aware of it, and settled on faster
by custom, and as it were rivited in while we perhaps never thought of it.
What says the Apostle 2. Romans, 28. He is not a Jew which is one (...) in
that which appears outwardly. What not he a Jew which is borne and bred a Jew?
yea he is a Jew in all outward visible respects whatsoever. But all these will
give him no title to those everlasting promises which are made unto Abraham and
his seed according to the faith. He is no Jew in respect of them. In like
manner he is no Christian, who is but outwardly one: who slides insensibly to
himself into the visible garb of Christianity; by natural generation. He
only is a Jew, who is one (...) in the secrets of his heart, and he only is a
Christian, who has bin made one by a second birth of his soul, invisible to
others; but admirably sensible unto himself, being borne not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, as S. John fully
expresses it, c. 1. v. 13 Well the^, if thou would not be mistaken in thy
self, if thou would be ascertained whither or no thou love Christianity
upon any other motives then such as nature and custom may suggest. First of
all look back upon the estate of thy soul ever since thou have been able to
rememeber. Reflecting thus upon so much of thy life as is gone, can thou not
remember a time wherein thy self being judge, thou did but dissemble with
thy Savior, when thou thoughtst of him but very seldom, and then but
perfunctorily, without any heat of affections, when thou tookest not much to
heart any thing he has done for thee, when thou tookest no conscionable care
to live unto him, because he had died for thee. Reflecting thus upon thee time
past, can thou not discern but that thy love unto Christ has been spun out
in an even thread even from the cradle until now, but that the pulse of thy
affections unto him has always beaten much after the same manner, without any
notable variation. In a word can thou not remember but that thou have loved
him always as well, if not better, then thou have in the latter time of thy
life past. I say if the case be thus with thee, its a thousand to one but thou
love him only upon that deceivable ground which I have labored to discover.

To direct a little farther in this examination. Suppose the wind which now
sits in thy back, and kindly blows thee on toward Christ, should turn upon
a sudden and furiously bluster in thy face. Suppose those laws and customs
which hitherto have encouraged thee to proceed in Christianity, The back
sliding of others cannot seduce the sound Christian.
should command thee back again, and tell thee they were mistaken: suppose
all the men thou know or hear of, should change the fashion of their
religion, and leave thee as much alone, as Elias once thought himself to have
been: and holy Athanasius was when he held up against a world of Arrians; I
say if the (...) that special excellency of the knowledge of Christ, which
made S. Paul to count all things dung, that he might win Christ, has not
furnished thee with unanswerable reasons, why these supposalls should not pull
thee back, its a plain case, that only the opposite encouragements set thee
forward. To be brief, art thou not sure that thou have such special peculiar
reasons for thy religion as could not have suffered it, much less have caused
thee upon any supposalls to have been of any other. Have thou not with an
enlightened understanding espied in Christ Jesus those un paralel'd
transcendencies which put an insinitely vast difference between him and those
many Antichrists in the world. Lastly, have thou not at some time or other, in
some measure had thy conscience convicted of sin, revived with such gracious
influences distilling from his lovely countenance, and refreshed with such
words of eternal life from him, as thou know (go whether thou will) cannot
be expected from any one else. If thy heart answer no to these
interrogatories, assure thy self thou know not yet what this means to love
Christ, I should but flatter thee to tell thee thou art a Christian, yea I
should in some sort mock thee, by giving thee a glorious title, which if thou
continue as thou art, will no way benefit thee, yea it will not only keep thee
out of heaven, but sink thee deeper into Hell. Give glory unto God that thou
live in a time and place where thou have all encouragements, opportunities,
invitations to be more entirely acquainted with thy Savior, and to grow as
intimate with him, as any man else, but for the present be content to consider
that thy love of him hitherto has bin built upon a rotten foundation; give no
rest unto thy self, until thou have learned to love thy Savior upon such
inducements as he would have thee, even because he has loved thee. Give not
over importuning the spirit of grace to direct thy heart into the love of God,
and into the patient waiting for Christ, as the Apostle divinely prays for the
These. 2. Ep. 3. 5. Give not over I say, until thou have attained unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, as the same Apostle sweetly
prays for the Colossians 2. 2.

Use 2. Let me bespeake all such, Use 2. th^^ those that are made partakers of
the heavenly calling take two things to heart.
as by the tender mercies of God melting their hearts, have been made
partakers of the heavenly calling, and begotten again unto a lively hope, let
me I say, if there be, any consolation in Christ, 1. The infinite dishonor
that is done unto Christ by the customary profession of his glorious name and
Gospel.
if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, let me beseech
them to take two things deeply to heart. First, the infinite dishonor which
is done unto Christ, the author and finisher of our faith by the customary
profession of his glorious name and Gospel in this kingdom. It Is above three
score years since the Savior of the world has vouchsafed after a most
especial manner to reside amongst us early and late, to call and cry unto us,
to take notice what need we have of him, to bethink our selves of our infinite
wants, which none but he can suppl, counselling us as he did the Church of
Laodicea to buy of him gold tried in the fire that we may be rich, and white
raiment that our nakedness might not appear an eye salve, that now in this
our days we might see those things which belong unto our peace, and all this
without money: now that after all this there should be thousands amongst us, who
being asked a reason of the hope that is in them, cannot speak tolerable sense
why they are Christians rather then professed Infidels; that there should be
whole parishes which cannot afford one wise word toward the defense of our most
holy profession, that many who will take it very ill, if they are not accounted
as good Christians as the best, should think no otherwise of Christ, then some
do of S. Patricke, and S. David, and other of the Saints of their country.
Lastly, that those great and precious promises which Christ has purchased for
us, with the invaluable price of his own dearest blood, by those who one day
think to have their share in them, that they set as slothful, ignorant,
heartles affections upon them, as professed infidells do upon those poor
imaginary, deluding hopes which Satan is permitted to abuse them with,
questionless it becomes not any man, who has resolved the rest of his time in
the flesh, to seek the things of Christ Jesus, and has felt in his own soul
what good reason he has for it, I say it becomes not any such to think of
these things which grate so mercilesly upon his Saviors wounds, and even make
them bleed a fresh, without sighs and groans, a bleeding heart, and a great
deal of secret mourning. Between the millions of men who hate the redeemer of
the world, and the multitude which love him they know not wherefore, 2 To
commiserate the lamentable condition of their poor ignorant ^ethren.
O how few are there which love him in syncerity! The second thing which I
would entreat of those who understand what a woeful thing it is to be a
stranger unto Christ, to be yet unreconciled unto God by him, is that they
would with yerning bowels commiserate the lamentable condition of their poor
ignorant brethren which they shall meet with every where, especially in most
country Villages.

I have observed upon occasions much table merriment which has been made by
tales which pass about of such absurd, senseless answers as silly Christians
have given, being demanded a reason of their faith, perhaps upon their
deathbeds or at their coming to the Lords table. Let such unnatural mirth be
far from those who are to strive to have the same mind in them, which was in
Christ Jesus. You, who by the blessed change wrought in your souls, have
passed from death unto life, consider with a thankful reflection upon the
Father of lights, that had not he vouchsafed you a more ingenuous education,
fairer opportunities to grow acquainted with the mysteries of grace, more
distinct call of his fanctifying spirit, and more illuminated apprehensions to
discern them, you might have groped and stumbled in a thicker mist of
stupidity then now befooles your vnnurturd brethren, you might have dishonored
that blessed name by which you are called, by as wild misco^^^its and horrid
follies, as any come from them, and whatsoever is ridiculous in them might have
bin more prodigoius in you, you know what price to set upon your own souls.
You know the soul of the meanest idiot is of equal value with yours, and that
it cost the redeemer of the World as many stripes and wounds as yours, O then
pity thy brethren so likely to perish, for whom Christ died, yea the rather,
because they being stuffed with sottish conceits, will be ready to laugh at
those who shall pity them: Take all opportunities to do them some spiritual
good as occasion shall be offered, conferring with them and praying for them:
and let Christian sympathies be the least you can afford them; you know what
you mean, when you pray daily that Gods kingdom may come; remember, you pray
not in earnest, unless you do your faithful endenuour to help it forward,
as in your own hearts, so in the hearts of your brethren, with which at any
time you converse. Consider I beseech you, what, a dismal fogge of Popery does
yet darken this Island, Popery which few thinks of, I mean that blind absurd
implicit faith of believing, as the Church believes. For there is not a pin to
choose between him that believes in gross, what the Church of England
believes, and him that believes as that synagogue of Satan the Church of Rome
believes, it neither knows any thing explicitly, what either Church believes.
Meditate on this, and what zeal, what conrage, what indignation you feel in
your breasts against the Antichristian impostures of Rome, let them fly I
beseech you upon all occasions, against this Protestant Popery. But I see no
hope but that the Colliars faith will have the greatest number of professors,
whilst accurate Catechizing of all sorts of people, which did so much good in
the primitive Church, is in ours so generally neglected. But I conclude,
bespeaking you in the words of S. Jude, But ye beloved, building up your
selves on your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost. Keep your selves in
the love of God, looking for the mercies of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life. And of some have compassion making a difference. And others save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire: hating even the garment spotted by the
flesh.

O thou father of mercies and God of all consolations, look down from thy
throne of eternity, and take notice of us thy poor servants, who do now
desire to muster up all the faculties which thou have given us, and to employ
the^ in an acceptable thanksgiving unto thee. O Lord we desire to spend our
best spirits even to exhale our dearest souls in thankful ejaculations unto
thee, for that most incomprehensibly admirable contrivance of our salvation, by
the death of the son of thy love: O Lord we desire to be transported with a
holy amazement, as often as we think of this mystery of mysteries, and even
to empty our hearts of their secrets in halleluiahs, and voices of exultation.
Most holy Lord, we praise thee, for the marvelous light of thy Gospel, which
has acquainsed us with those wonders of mercy, which thy Christ has performed
for our souls, for those comfortable evidences of our justification by him,
with which our bruised consciences have been most graciously revived. We
praise thee likewise for those wounders of a new creation which thy blessed
spirit has begun in our hearts, for that it has begun to weaken and wast
the body of sin, to crucify those corruptions which heretofore has been
most insolent in us, to weane us from those vanities, which heretofore have
been our chief comforts, and to make us more willing to be kept within a
holy compass. O Lord we desire, we desire with most enlarged hearts, to
bless thy infinite goodness, for all those ravishing irradiations and
glorious Prefaces of our blessed immortality, by which thy co^forting spirit
has so often encouraged us to patient continuance in well doing. We bless
thee for all the heavenly thoughts, affections, desires, and resolutions which
thou have put into us at any time, we praise thee for that portiou of thy good
word which thou have afforded us at this time, O thou that delightest to pardon
abundantly, pardon all the errors and imperfections which have come either
from me in delivering, or any of thy people in entertaining thy message. Let it
not be a savor of death unto death, unto any man who has been within the
sound of it, but let it some way or other be beneficial unto him in respect
of thy kingdom. And now oh thou that dwell in vnapprochable splendour, quite
out of the ken of mortality, seeing thou have suffered dust and ashes to
approach so near to thee in thy ordinances, dismiss not any one of us, we
beseech thee, without a blessing, send not any one of us without a comfortable
beam of thy countenance shining into his heart; Thou art the fountain of
holiness, send us not therefore out of thy presence without some more
cleerenesse in our apprehensions of thy saving mysteries, and heavenlinesse in
our affections unto them. Send us not from thy throne of grace but with a
heavenly calm in our souls, or with such tempests of repentance as may
prepare us for an everlasting serenity, O Lord send us not away but either with
that joy which passes all understanding, or that godly sorrow which may
prepare us for it. To thee O Father with thy beloved Son and blessed Spirit,
three most glorious Persons, and one infinite Deity, be ascribed all Honor,
Power, Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, by us poor sinners here militant
on earth, and all the glorified companies triumphant in Heaven, from this time
forth for evermore. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
THE TRIAL OF our sincere love to Christ.
EPHESIANS. 6. V. 24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity.
I WILL not discourage your attentio^ with a tedious repotition of what I have
heretofore in another audience delivered upon this Scripture, something must
needs be recalled to guide your attention into the ensuing discourse and to knit
that unto a former: but I will not trouble you with a word more, then the
necessity of method shall enforce me unto. To wind up then as much as is
necessary in a breife introduction.

We live in an age of a Presumption as peremptory as universal: they are rare
men that make any question of their salvation, and which is most to be pitied,
they are for the most part such as have least reason. I am persuaded, there was
never yet any time when men were generally more confident in their hope of
heaven, or less able to give a wise reason for it; insomuch, that it may be
but too probably conjectured, that to one that perishes through despair, there
miscarry hundreds through presumption.

This general presumption stands upon these two general suppositions. 1. That
Grace, that is, all the gracious, precious promises of God concerning a better
life, do infallibly appertain to all such as love Christ Jesus in sincerity:
that is, to all such as are true, serious, resolute Christians. 2. That we our
selves are all such men, that we are all Christians good enough to serve the
turn, though we are not so forward and exemplary, though we keep not such
stir with our profession as some others do. The first suppositio^ is out of
all question, and can never be brought into disputation by those which submit
to the Scriptures, it being the scope, not only of my Text, but also of the
whole Gospel, ye a of the Law and the Prophets. So that (with reverence be it
spoken) it shall be as possible for God, that is the eternal truth it self
to lie, as for that supposition to fail any man, who observing the conditions
of it, casts himself upon it: so that in strict propriety of speech, it is not
of it self any prop of presumption, but only by accident as it is subject to
mis-application by us. Well then, presumption stands more directly, and leanes
more heavily upon the second supposition, and therefore all our care must be
every man for himself, to see that we are not mistaken in our account at
home, to be sure we are all such men as we deem our selves to be, that is,
such Christians, as may upon good sufficient grounds, lay claim unto, and
plead interest in all the glorious promises in Christ Jesus.

Upon this I observed all the conditions required on our part, and by
consequent, the whole trial of our assurance, to be comprised in this
sincerity of our love toward him; and farther, for the exact trial, and
through examination of this, I imposed upon my self the handling of three most
co^siderable points which make up it self, and evidence unto us the sincerity
of our love unto Christ. 1. The true immediate ground, or original of it. 2.
The requisite degree or intension of it. 3. The especial fruits and effects of
it.

Concerning the original of our love unto Christ, amongst many insufficient
deceauable grounds of it, I undertook the discovery of one which I found to be
most dangerous and universal: to wit, natural instincts of religion in
general restrained to Christianity by birth and education. This discovery, I
have already elsewhere at large, as God enabled me, performed. In the second
place, I promised a declaration of the true, proper, and sure ground of sincere
love unto Christ: and this by the assistance of the blessed spirit, you shall
have paid at this time.

Well then, what is the most immediate and proper ground of the sincere love of
a poor sinner unto his Savior Jesus Christ? I answer out of the question,
when in earnest he finds himself to be a miserable sinner, and apprehends
Christ Jesus to be his gracious Savior, and one of whom he stands in infinite
need. Or to to deliver it more fully, it is a clear, The ground of a
Christians love to Christ.
distinct, particular, tender apprehension of his own infinite wants and
miseries by reason of sin, and of those miracles of love and mercy which
Christ has performed to cure these and supply those, and that as freely and
purposely for him, as for any man elfe.

To clear and confirm this excellent point I will, as God has directed my
meditations.

1 First prove it to be so.

2 And then demonstrate why it is so.

That it is so, appears by sundry places of holy Scripture, out of which I
will cull some few, which seem to me most pregnant and pertinent. First, I
love the Lord, says holy David, Psalm. 116. 1. mark his reason; because he
has heard my voice and my supplications. But what kind of supplications were
these? upon what occasion were they made? you may see both, v. 3, 4. The
sorrows of death compassed me about, and the pains of hell gate hold upon me:
then called I upon the name of the Lord, O Lord I beseech thee deliver my
soul. These were my supplications, which the Lord has heard, and therefore I
love him, yea, because he has inclined his care unto me in these my spiritual
agonies, I will call upon him as long as I live. 2. we have an eminent place,
1. Ioh. ^. 19. We love him, mark his reason, because he first loved us. True,
some may say, God has loaded us with innumerable expressions of his love in
our creation and preservation, and we do reciprocally love him for them: but
what is this to the love of Christ? To omit as impertinent to this place, that
in some sort we owe both our creation and temporal preservatio^ unto Gods love
in Christ; seeing it is not probable, but the whole frame of nature should have
been dissolved presently upon the fall, had not God of his mercy intended a
Redeemer for mankind to be revealed in the fullness of time: but to let this
pass, S. John in these words, because he first loved us, understands that love
of loves, that boundless, incomprehensible love of God wherewith he has
loved us in Christ: as it plainly appears by comparing 9. and 10. veries. In
this (that is) in this infinitely more, then in any mercy of creation or
preservation, was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent
his only begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein
is love (that is) herein infinitely more then in any thing else, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the propitiation for
our sins. To recollect, and to bring it home to the point in hand, when as
the fame S. John speaks v. 16. We have known and believed the love that God
has to us, when we find our selves to have been eeven dead men, and that God
sent his Son, that we might live through him; when we perceive our selves
overloden with sins, and that Christ was sent purposely to be a propitiation
for them; O here is the true original of our love unto him, now we love him,
because he first loved us. A third place, and I Will trouble you with no more,
is Luc. 7. 37. where we have a whole parable to this purpose, delivered by our
Savior himself to make the Pharisees understand what that poor woman meant
by those strange distracted and seemingly mad expressions of her love unto
him in washing his feet with tears, and wiping them with her hair, etc. The
parable is of a Creditor and his two debtors; I need not repeat it, most of you
know it already, others may pervse it if they please. The application of it
is, that then sinners do indeed fall in love with their Savior when they
perceive themselves to be over head and ears, as we say in debt unto God,
and themselves most unable to discharge one farthing, when they feel that God
begins to put his bond in suite which they had forfeited long before they were
borne, when he sends an arrest for them by the terrors of his Law, their own
consciences, and the spirit of bondage. Lastly, when they feel themselves even
haled toward that prison from which never any man came out, which was once in,
and then most opportunely comes in Christ Jesus with his merits, satisfies his
father to the full, rescues them out of the sergeants hands, that they being
delivered out of the hands of their enemies may serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of their life. Indeed the
conclusion of the application verse. 4*7. seems to thwart and unsay all that
which I have said. Her sins which are many are forgiven her, because she
loved much. I deny not but the words as they are, admit a pious sense, neither
am I ignorant with how little ado they may be reconciled which have been
hitherto spoken.

But if I might be worthy to deliver mine own opinion, with due respect unto
the translaters, I would alter one word in the translation, which I suspect
should run thus: The ordinary translation corrected.
Her sins which are many are forgiven, therefore she has loved much. The
sense requires this construction. 1. Because the whole scope of the parable is
to show that he loves most to whom most is forgiven, and not contrarily, that
most is forgiven to him that loves most. 2. The antithesis in the same verse
requires it, the words, but to whom little is forgiven he loves little,
supposes this thesis; because many sins are forgiven her she soueth much.
Now as the sense requires this inter pretation, so the conjunction (...) admits
it: for albeit not in the pure Greek idiom, yet in the Helenisticke use of it,
answers to all the acceptions of the Hebrew (...) which has sometimes the
signification of ideo, quapropter, etc. Neither may it prejudice this
interpretation, that our Savior after all those expressions of love from the
penitent woman, and his apology for himself and her to the Pharisee, tells
her that her sins are forgiven her: this was but that sentence of absolution
for her greater comfort, and assurance outwardly pronounced, of which no doubt
but she had before some gracious inklings within, and the virtue of which she
had already tasted, though not in that comfortable measure, or distinct manner
as she desired.

But now I would not willingly be mistaken in the point as if my opinion were,
or I intended to prove out of the afore-cited places, that there is no true
love unto Christ, but what is grounded upon an actual persuasion of the
remission of our sins by him. Alas how many poor souls even languish with a
spiritual thirst after him! how many bleeding hearts both feel and express
most vehement pangs of importunate love toward him: how many broken spirits
even spend and exhale themselves in continual sallyes as it were, and
egressions of affection unto him, who have indeed heard, but not as yet tasted
how gracious he is, who have not as yet perceived in themselves those inward
whisperings of comfort, Fear not, I am thy salvation: be of good cheer thy
sins be forgiven thee: in a word, who have not as yet felt themselves sealed
to the day of redemption by that holy spirit of promise?

To rescue the truth out of these clouds, and to present it in her brightness
unto you, we must first observe that every degree of true spiritual love unto
Christ, proceeds from a proportionable act of saving faith: Secondly, that
there is a twofold love, 1. One of desire, which is an earnest longing after
that, which we believe would do us much good if we could attain unto it. 2.
Another of complacencie, when having attained that we desire, we hug, and
embrace it, and solace our selves in the fruition of it. Now as ordinarily in
the love of any other object: so likewise if we respect Christ, Jesus, the
first of these loves is the introduction to the second; and both of the^ issue
from a proportionable act of faith precedent. That affectionate longing and
thirsty love wherewith we pant and gasp after Christ having never yet been
refreshed with any comfortable testimony of the spirit since the beginning of
our humiliation, proceeds from that former act of faith whereby we assent unto
all the Gospel promises as most true and good in themselves, and infinitely
better unto us then any thing in the world could we be once assured that they
belong unto us as well as to other men. That other love of complaconcie, when
with the Psalm: we return unto our rest, because the Lord has dealt
bountifully with us, and sweetly repose our selves in the lap of our Savior,
with content unspeakable and full of glory, proceeds from that last act of
faith, whereby we are actually persuaded by those welcome whispers of the
spirit of adoption, that Christ is as certainly our Savior as any man's else,
and that our debts (as infinite as they were) are cancelled to a f^rthing, as
well as the smaller sums of others.

Lastly, it will not be amiss to observe two things of this love of
complacency arising from a persuasion of Christ's love unto us in particular. 1.
It Is subject to all variations or changes, ebbings and flowings of that
persuasion. For as often as in any violent temptation, or sensible disertion
our persuasion seems to be confuted, this love of complacencie is either for a
time quite stupefied, or else it falls back as it were into that thirsty
auxious love of desire. 2. This love of complacencie admits degrees
proportionably to the degrees of that persuasion. If that be clear and strong,
this love is more cheerful and pleasant: if that be weak and obscure, this
love is not so spright full, Faith may be sincere though mixed with Anxiety.
but somewhat lumpish being cold with many fears, and jealousies. Whence this
love of complacency may not unfitly be subdivided. 1. Into Ordinary love which
proceeds from a weaker degree of that last act of faith, and though sincere,
yet being imperfect, is mixed with anxiety in the same proportion as that is
with doubting. And 2. into Heroical love which springs from a more eminent
and transcendent pitch of persuasion concerning our own reconciliation in
particular: this is that perfect love, which S. John says, casts out all
fear (to wit) of distruste, bringing us into a more intimate familiarity with
God. I call the first Ordinary, because most Christians though effectually
called do ordinarily feel but such a timorous love in themselves. The second
which I call Heroical in that sense in which eminent virtues have their
Epithet, is constantly only in such as either beside the evidence of the word
and spirit, have had some special revelation to put them out of all doubt
concerning their estate to Godward, on such as by a constant close walking with
God, Constancy in a Christian course frequent tastes of Christ's love, and the
Testimony of the spirit assure us of our Salvation.
have been long exercised in a Christian course, have often entertained Christ
Jesus at supper in their hearts, and habituated themselves into a more familiar
acquaintance, with that holy spirit which brings all the good news from heaven
to those diligent souls which carefully wait for it.

Thus have I according to the skill that is given me, proved the original of
the sincere love of a sinner unto Christ Jesus blessed for ever, to be a
serious tender apprehension of his own extreme need of Christ, and of Christ's
superabundant love unto him: I have likewise explained this truth, and
vindicated it from such exceptions as crossed my way. I come now to discover
the demonstratiue reason of this truth, and after I have showed that it is so,
to show you now why it must be so.

We are all borne into the world (...), The second part of the text.
haters of God, and while we continue in that natural stupid condition,
wherein we were borne, we are all strangers both unto God and Christ, There is
not imprinted in our nature so much as the obscurest intimation of a Savior or
the necessity of one.
yea, enemies in our minds through wicked works, as the Apostle speaks. Col.
1. 21. We retain indeed some obscure cloudy notions of a God, but not the
darkest intimations of a Savior, or least suspicion of any need we have of
one. In a word albeit we are borne and bred within the shrillest sound of the
Gospel, yet as long as we continue (...) mere animal, natural men, it will
not sink into our heads, that we are in such miserable case as Preachers would
make us believe we are, how ill its like to go with us unless we laboriously
enquire after Christ, and get to be reconciled unto God by him. Now what more
effectual method can we imagine to beat us out of this natural antipathy
against our Creator and Redeemer, yea what other contrivance may there be to
work such peevish wretches, such froward rebels out of one extreme into
another, out of deadly hatred to sincere love of the eternal Father and his
only Son, to pull down their proud stomachs, to make them crouch and craule
unto his throne of grace, then to make them see in what a hell they are while
they stand in this distance from him to awake their consciences against them,
and to make them a terror unto themselves to let the Law thunder and lighten
into their souls until their wits and spirits begin to fail them, and then
amidst all these amazing tempests to let the glorious Gospel of Christ shine
upon them, The curses of the law drive us to Christ.
to show them Christ Jesus with his arms of mercy stretched out, and
undertaking to free them out of all these confusions, and to make their peace
with his father if they will but come unto him, and trust their selves with
him, if they will but lay to heart, and learn to esteem and admire those
wonders of redemption which he has compassed for them. Had the prodigal
sons stock held out, and he lain still afloate in the full-tide of his
sinful pleasures, he had set up his staff in that fa^^e country, and quite
forgot that he ever had a father: yea when the tide was gone and had left him
upon the sands: when the revells were ended, his bravery quite worn out into
beggary, and himself preferred to be an attendant of a company of hogs, if he
could but have got his belly full of husks, he would hardly have thought of
returning home: but when these were denied him, and he could see nothing but
death before him, O now he comes to himself, and begins to think of a father
he had, and resolves to go unto him, though he might well suspect his
entertainment. Well, whatsoever that may prove, he is sure he goes to a
father, and therefore on he goes, and when he, was yet a far off, full of
aboding fears, and disconsolate mu^ings, behold his father about his neck
before he was a ware of him, acting an over-joyned man, he hangs about him and
kisses him, trims him up with a robe and a ring, conducts him home in a kind
of triumph, and welcomes him with the solemnity of a feast and music! Here
was a change for the prodigal enough to have turned his brains as we say, but
sure it could not but turn his heart. Had that been of marble or adamant,
this could not but melt it into love. O what a swelling, a thronging, a
wrestling did he now feel in his bowels of tendrest passions, impatient for
want of expression. O how did he now lay about him with tears of sorrow and
tears of joy, being much pulled, whether it would best become to prosecute his
joy most or his sorrow: in brief how mad is he with himself that he had
been such a son to such a Father!

I have insisted the longer upon the prodigals case, because indeed it is our
own. For ordinarily; our heavenly father uses the same method to fetch us his
prodigal children home unto him, and to bring us in love with his beloved
son Jesus Christ. We are all as soon as we are born, gotten into a far
country, where we mispend, and misemploy all those faculties and endowments,
with which our Creator has furnished us, in the revels of sin and vanity,
walking on merrily and confidently (...) as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 2. 2.
according to the course of this world: professing indeed (for fashion sake)
love both unto God and Christ, but all the while denying and disclaiming them
both in our hearts and conversations. But God who is rich in mercy for his
great love wherewith he has loved us. Ephesians. 2. 4. when he has let us run
our selves even out of breath in these riotous courses, and even tired our
selves in our journey to hell, thinks it sit to stop our progress, and first
to make us understand our selves, that we may the better esteem of him and
whom he has sent Jesus Christ. First then he inspires us with so much
spiritual life, as may make us feel our spiritual burden, consisting of our
sins, and his curses due unto them; he raises up many affrightments, and
grim apparitions in our consciences, he gives Satan leave to insult over us,
whatsoever outward contentment we fasten on, to put us out of these dumpes, he
beats us off from it, he leaves us not husks to feed on, he drives us out of
one shift into another, til at last we are driven out of all, and so far,
that we see plainly, there is but one way with us, even to perish
everlastingly, unless we can get to be reconciled unto him. Now we begin to
come to our selves, and perceiving our only course which we have left, Gods
justice must be satisfied ere we can obtain his mercy.
to be, to cast our selves upon Gods mercy, but no getting near unto that,
unless his justice be first satisfied, no possibility of that on our parts,
unless we can get the satisfaction of Christ imputed unto us, finding the
Scriptures so peremptory, that there is no coming to the Father, but by the
Son, that he that has the Son has life, but he that has not the Son,
has not life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Ioh. 3. 30. O now we begin
to see it was to some purpose, that we have heard Preacher so talk so much of
Christ; now we begin to hearken better after him, to value and admire him;
now we wonder how we could endure to be without him so long, that we could
think so slightly of him heretofore, now those holy fits of love grow upon us
apace, and upon a sudden, with the Spouse in the Canticles, we are sick of
love. Now are we entered into the love of desire, and while our poor souls
are sweating in these restless passions, we hear at length Christ Jesus in a
mild still voice, inviting all such as are weary and heavy laden to come unto
him, that he may give them rest: upon this we address our selves toward
him, with our burden upon our shoulder, and when we are got within kenne of
him, he seems sometimes to go backward from us, to make us more eager after
him, and thus oft-times he lets us stand trembling and shaking, weeping and
groaning under our burdens, till we are even sinking and swovvning under them,
and then he conveyes them away, cleares up the heavens over us, speaks like a
husband unto our souls by his Spirit, he presents us unto his Father, who now
smiles upon us with a reconciled countenance, and then unto his Angels who
amongst all their Halleluiahs, receive some addition unto their triumphant
mirth by our conversion. Now no man need tell us what Christ has done for us,
we feel real experiments of all in our own hearts, There are Real tastes of
the benefits procured by Christ in the hearts of true believers.
now we have seen, and felt, and tasted how infinitely he has loved us, we
are ready to make our boast of it, and with the Psalmist, to invite all such as
fear God purposely that we may declare unto them what he has done for our
souls. Now we are in that love of complacency, now we cling unto him, and
would feign come out of our selves, to creep unto him, affecting not only a
union, but unity with him, now we bestirre our selves in all the holy
complements of heavenly love, never thinking we have done enough, frequently
bathing our selves in those delicious intimacies of our spiritual marriage.
which how much they pass all understanding, I appeal to their experiences; to
whom these things are no Paradoxes.

You see the excellent contrivance, by which our stubborn rebellious hearts
are wrought over unto the sincere love of Jesus Christ: I suppose it now
expedient to clear this discourse of the original of unfeigned love, from some
doubts and scruples which may arise from it.

1 Whether none can love Christ in sincerity, but those that are brought unto
it by this method? I answer not one ordinarily, if his conversion be wrought
by the Ministry of the Word. The sense of our own misery makes us in love
with Christ as a Savior.
The reason is plain out of what has bin delivered. We are to love Christ as
a Savior: how can we be brought to those, until we feel our selves lost, and
understand what need we have of a Savior? We are to love him as a Mediator:
what reason is there for this, unless we first plainly perceive God to be our
enemy? Lastly, we are to love him as our Physician: what sense is there for
that if we feel not our selves in some dangers, if we feel no aches or
gripings, no smart about our souls, if we find no good that Christ has done
us, or can do us? Himself tells us, the whole have no need of the Physician;
only the sick, such as feel and acknowledge themselves to be sick, will
make use of him. But here it is requisite to observe, that the several passages
of this great alteration wrought in our affections, are more or less sensible,
according to the several conditions of the persons. We are all prodigalls, yet
some more, some less: we are all gone into a far country, yet some roue a
great deal farther then others: For illustration, some have had a more
restraining education then others and been trained up in a more innocent
civility, until the time of their visitation, which oft-times overtakes them
very early, and takes them in before they are acquainted with the villains of
the world, or vices of the times: such, though commonly they take weeping
cross in their way too, as they come home unto Christ, yet they pass not
through so many pikes, so many panges, and terrors but with less stir and
diffficulty arrive safely at his bosom, and get within his embraces. On the
other side, some are stark prodigalls, mere Publicans such as have taken
their full swinge in the wildest exorbitancies, such as have served an
apprentiship, perhaps two or three to the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
such as these, when it pleases God to put his hook in their nostrils, to
turn them round, and make them look toward heaven, are brought to the love
of Christ, even step by step in that method which I have formerly
described. The other are brought unto the love of Christ, but these being once
brought unto it, love him more vehemently, for it is certain he loves most to
whom most is forgiven.

2 Doubt, Whether our love to Christ would not be more exact if we did consider
the brightness of his glory.
Whether our love unto Christ would not be more pure and acceptable unto him,
if it arose from an exact, steady contemplation of those infinitely amiable
excellencies, and transcendent beauties, which are resplendent in his person;
he being the brightness of glory, and the express image of his Father, Heb.
1. 3. or as it is ver. 7. 26. The brightness of the everlasting light, the
unspotted mirror of the power of God, and the image of his goodness.

I answer by proposing three brief considerations: Christ only considered as
a Savior moves us to love him.
1. That is the truest love of Christ, which beats us out of our natural
enmity against him, and brings us home with longing affections unto him. Now
it is most true, that the person of Christ, absolutely considered without the
relation of a Savior unto us, is invested with most attractiue excellencies,
and ravishing beauties: but if a glimpse of that orient luster should flash in
the face of an unregenerate man, or impenitent sinner, unless the sanctifying
spirit should at the same instant renew his heart, it might drive him out of
his wits but not out of his sins, it might terrify him into a desperate
transe, but not advance him to a kindly ecstasy.

Likewise if one should go about to win an enemy of grace unto the love of
Christ, by the most accurate Metaphysicall discourses of those infinitely
superlatiue beauties in the Deity absolutely considered, either they would be
phantasticke riddles unto him, or at leastwise prevail no more with him to
that purpose, then it would persuade him to love one dearly, whom he mortally
hated, to tell him that he was a comely Gentleman. 2. Suppose these mystical
contemplations were effectual this way, yet he that is yet unacquainted with
the power of converting grace, is altogether undisposed to set himself about
them. An acute, but unsanctified school man may overstraine his understanding
with a wearisome gaze upon those invisible beauties, Subtlety without the grace
of conversion will not kindle the love of Christ in our hearts.
and dazzle it into a more distempered ignorance, but not in to such a
ravishment of love, as may warm and elevate his affections whereas the
penitent soul, which by the grace of conversion, has felt those sacred
conjugal affections already kindled in it self, may advantage her self
excellently by such contemplations, by her intellectual all aspirings and
affairs, as it were to see him that is invisible, and by refreshing her self
with sweetest meditations of those inconceivable glories which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God. So that such contemplations, though they
cannot ordinarily begin sincere love unto Christ in our hearts, yet they may
keep it up, blow it into a purer flame, and advance it to a degree of
Angelical sublimity. 3. That love of Christ is most sincere and acceptable
unto him, which gives him most glory of that which he desires most to be
glorified in: that is, of his goodness, Our love to Christ must be practical.
his attributes, and works of mercy in our Salvation. He requires not an
ayrie, but a fiery love. He respects not so much that speculatiue love, which
consists in a simple amaze of the understanding, or bare admiration of those
vndiscovered perfections of his nature, which have not as yet done us any good,
though one day the sight of them shall be a part of our blessedness. Christ
requires that love of us, whereby we confess our selves beholding unto him,
that love which lays us flat before him, and whereby we acknowledge we owe our
selves unto him. I may much admire and applaud a man of excellent parts, for
his rare endowments, and yet think my self no more beholding unto him, then
he is to me, yea I may bear grudges against him in my mind, and be far from
any affectionate love toward him: Even so with some Schoolmen, and writers of
mystical theology I may busy my brain, and set my mind a staring upon that
absolute Ideaa of undefiled beauty in the Deity, and yet as long as I continue
insensible of what Christ has done for my redemption, retain a frozen and a
flinty heart.

If we love Christ only because he has loved us, it seems that in our love
unto him, we have a chief eye unto our selves, and that we love our selves
more then him, which ordinarily cannot be pleasing unto him, or any way stand
with sincerity. The occasion of our love to Chapter is our own salvation, the end
his glory.
For answer, we must distinguish between the impulsive and the final cause
of our love unto Christ, or in terms somewhat plainer, between the first
inward occasion of it, and the maine scope of it. My care of my own soul
originally drives me to harken after a Savior, and when I have found him, and
find withal, that he has bought me out of my self, that I am not my own,
as it is, 1. Cor. 6. 19. hence forth the maine scope and principal aim of my
love unto him is to do that for which chiefly I was created and redeemed, to
let go all interest the love of Christ constrains us, says St Paul: why so?
Because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: here is
that original of our love implied which I have so largely insisted upon, it
follows, and he died for all, that they which henceforth live, should not
live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again. This is
the end of Christ's love unto us, and must be the business and maine drist of
our love unto him. So that our love unto Christ, arising from a tender
apprehension of his love unto us, is not mercenary, but makes most for his
honor, seeing that if he had not prevented us, we should in some sort have
stood upon equal terms with him. Lastly, it is his good pleasure, that we
should love that most which is best for us, that in which most consists our
perfection, if therefore we love him as our perfection, conceauing our selves
to be worse then nothing without him if we remove our selves, as it were,
into him, and according to that sweet phrase of the Apostle, hide our lives
with him in God: Though all this while implicitly we love our selves, yet we
need not doubt of our sincerity, this is the very love which he requires. St
Paul's love unto him was such as this. Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but
Christ in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God: mark the reason, and first the inducement to all this,
who has loved me, and given himself for me. It Is time by your patience to
come to some application.

1 For examination, to persuade every man that would not cozen himself in his
persuasions concerning his spiritual estate, speedily, and impartially to
examine the love he supposes he bears to Christ Jesus by what we have amply
discoursed concerning the true and proper Original of it. Thou pretendst most
entyre love unto Christ Jesus, whom thou call thy Savior, thou would spit
in his face, that should make any serious question of it, thou art confident
that thou do not dissemble with him. Well the^, upon this supposall give me
leave to sound thy sincerity with these interrogatories. Do thou remember a
time when thou had not that love in thy breast which now thou reckonest upon
for sound and current, though thou can not precisely tell when thou got'st
it? Can thou tell upon what occasions, or guess at the manner how thou at
ashedst it? Were thou brought unto it by that method which I have discoured,
Interrogatories to (...) our sincerity.
or at least by one somewhat like it? If thy conscience can now answer these
proposals affirmatively, why then I hope thou may pick a great deal of
sound comfort out of the precedent discourse which will testify unto thee that
thou love Christ upon a true ground, and that therefore, that grace and
favor of God with all the blessings issuing from it, appertains unto thee,
which the Apostle wishes to all those which love Christ Jesus in sincerity. But
on the contrary, if thy conscience start at these demands, and begin to
fumble at them, making as if it did not understand them, if they drive thee to
confess, that thou know no such matter by thy self; why then my discourse
will conclude thy pretended love unto Christ, to be but a mere fancy, and thy
self for the present to be but an unhappy man. To go yet more particularly
to work in this examination according to the method above proposed. Have thou
been experimentally convinced in thy own soul in what desperate case thou
art by nature? Have thou clearly perceived to be true in thy self whatsoever
the Scriptures tell thee of the monstrous pronenesse of man's heart to any
evill^, and untowardness to any good? Have thou been made to possess the
sins of thy youth, as holy Job was? and have the terrors of God stared thy
guilty conscience in the face, and affrighted it almost into a bloody sweat,
and then has there appeared as it were an Angel comforting thee? Have thou
felt thy self a condemned man, and even going to execution, and has Christ
Jesus in the nick stepped in with thy pardon both purchased and sealed with his
own most precious blood? If thou have felt either these passages, or some
which may serve proportionably instead of them, to be the canse of that which
thou professest unto Christ, I dare not question the synceritie of it, least
with those, Ezech. 13. I wound that soul which should not dye, and make the
heart of him sad, who^ the Lord has not made sad. I should wrong thee
exceedingly not to believe that Christ is him whom thy soul loves, and that
with S. Paul's constraining love, a love as strong as death, which many waters
cannot quench neither shall the stoods drown it. Cant. 8. 7. But now on the
contrary, to conclude negatiuely from the former interrogatories, to infer
the want of sincerity in any man for his not feeling those passages as they are
verbatim proposed, would be too rigid, and perhaps raise a tumult in a well
settled conscience: Only thus much I Will say, if all of them sound as riddles and
uncouth mysteries unto thee, if thou never knew any thing like to what was
proposed by thy self, as I fear many have not. If thou know not what it
means to come heavy laden, poor in spirit, hungry and thirsty unto Christ:
why then I wonder thou should be so sottish as to conceive, or impudent as
to affirm, that thou love Christ, if thou would have us understand thee,
that thou love him in sincerity. I do suppose that thou love him upon
custom, as thou do the fashion of thy country in which thou have been borne
and bred, but so does the gretest part of the world defy him, upon as good a
ground as that so does a Turk love Mahomet, one of the bafest misereants that
ever was, upon as substantial a ground as that. But we speak of that
transcendent love of him, which cannot possibly be due unto any one else, and
which would be most due unto him, though all the laws and customs in the
world should universally conspire to cry it down, do thou profess such a
love unto him, and know not wherefore? nor upon what occasion thou were
moved unto it? It would vex a man to the soul, who knows indeed what it is
to love Christ, and how himself was brought un to it, to consider the
confident stupidity of multitudes in every place who will not be put out of
their dream, that they mean as lovingly to Christ as any man, when as indeed
they are not as yet come so far as to perceive any proper reason why they
should love him, or what reason he has to expect any love from them. I know
they will say, they love him because he died for them, and they hope to be
saved by him: Alas these are words of course and as soon spoken as any other*
they say this, because they were ever taught to say so, and never lived among
any that said the contrary* Beloved it is not the saying of this, or believing
it confusedly like some old story or tradition will melt our congealed hearts
into the love of Christ: That faith must be experimental which is the original
of sincere love.
No, it must be through distinct feeling of it in our own souls, it must be
the experience of this, which makes us enamoured on him and sets our hearts a
mounting toward him in those seraphicall flames of sanctified affection.

2 The Original of sincere love unto Christ, being discovered, and directions
given for self examination concerning it, Cautions against Cozening semblance
of Love.
a second use shall be for caution against many cozening semblances of love
unto Christ, which may make us think a great deal better of our selves then
we have reason, which may easily be discovered by trying them by this
original. To instance in some particulars: There is many a Ruffian in this
kingdom, who if he should hear a Jew blaspheaming Christ, his blood would
quickly be up; he would long to be doing with him, and be hardly kept from
hacking him in pieces. O what a friend unto Christ will such a man suppose
himself to be, he will conceit he has behaved himself like a Templer, and
done him knights service, and a hundred to one, but in this humor, he will
call his companions to come and see the zeal which he has for Christ Jesus.
But if there were any such swaggering Zelot in this assembly, I would ask him
these questions: Do thou not think a hot spirited Turk would have fallen as
foul upon the Jew, if he had taken him vilifying his Mahomet? Would thou:
not undergo as dangerous a quarrel to win the favor, or please the humor
of thy mistress? Would thou not thy self, or at least do thou not know
some who will quarrel as sternely about a pipe of Tobacco, or the pledging of
a health? Lastly, have thou not suffered thy companions to blaspheame Christ in
their oaths, perhaps a whole day together, and thy zeal all the while has
been very well contented with it? You see by these questions from what variety
of carnal unsanctified motives this seeming plausible zeal may arise: and
therefore in all such cases, it much concerns us, to have an eye to the true
original of all duties of love, to consider, not so much what we do, as what
makes us to do it, We must not so much consider the vehemence of our Affection
as the cause of it.
and in a word, to judge of our affections, not by the heat, but by the fuel.
For a second instance: Many in reading the history of our Saviors life, and
considering his sweet, debonnaire and vnoffensiue carriage, and withal the
contradictio^ of sinners, the insolency of proud and churlish miscreants which
he endured with an inimitable patience, will find their hearts ever and anon
rising in indignation against the Scribes and Pharisees, and even tenderly
sympathizing with our Savior. These men may presently imagine themselves to
be deeply in love with Christ, but they may be miserably mistaken. Let them
consult with their own experience, and observe, whether they are not moved to
as sensible passions by the reading of any other story, though profane, if it
be any way proportionable unto the Evangelicall story for occurrences: twenty
to one but they will find it so: There is not any good story, either sacred or
profane, but for the most part it draws the mind of the reader, for the time
at least, in to some factio. Wherein it is evident, that such stirrings of the
affections, may proceed from a bare historical faith, joined with that common
ingenuity of nature, Many passionate positions of our love to Christ may be
the fruits of a bare Historical faith joined with common ingenuity.
which teaches us to adore the heroical virtues of Worthies, long since
deceased, and to commiserate their undeserved disasters. Yea, which is worth
observation, they may proceed from this common ingenuity, by the mere working
of the fancy, without any historical belief at all. We find it by
experience in reading amorous stories, or histories of strange adventures,
which though we know and believe to be feigned, yet often times, it handsomely
contrived; they raise more serious tumults of passions in our minds, then the
most real stories we can meet with. Now the reason of it (if my own fancy
fail me not) is, because the imagination, which has the same command over the
passions, which the Poets have given Aeolus over the winds, is it self
stirred up to sympathize with all such representations as are exquisitely
shaped and limbed according to it is own Ideas and inward contrivances: and in
this case, the imagination poring upon the representation it self, so that
suite well with it is own images within, it regards not not much, whether it be
of an acted truth, or of a possibility, forgetting, as it were, for the
present, to distinguish what might have been from what has been. This
observation directs me to a third Instance, with which I will conclude: some
perhaps may weep devoutly at a Passion-Sermon, and presently imagine their
tears to be distillations of tender affections unto Christ; They may be so,
but they may very easily not be so. Who knows not, that the charms of
eloquence about any sad argument, may easily steal good store of tears from
an auditory of women, or of soft natured men? Solemn Music, a good Pavin will
do as much: any lively representation of a Tragical accident, whether real or
imaginary, will do as much: amongst those that can be so il busied, as to sit
three or four hours at a Tragedy, some can be so wisely, good natured too, as
to weep heartely at it. You see into what variety of mistakes, offices of love
unto Christ may put us, while we consider them loose by themselves, and
examine them not by that which ought to be the fundamental inducement unto
them in our hearts, you see how expedient it is to judge of these complementall
expressio^s of love unto our blessed Savior by our hearts, and not of our
hearts by them, and by co^sequent, you see of what excellent use this doctrine
of the ground, or original of our love unto Christ is, To God the Father, etc.

FINIS.
LVKE 14. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, Wife
and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea and his own life also, he cannot
he my Disciple.
I Proceed still in my Tract or discourse, concerning the sincerity of our love
unto our blessed Savior. My method in it I have acquainted you with
heretofore, imposing upon my self a copious and full handling of three most
co^siderable points, which both make it up in itself, and evidence it unto us.

1. The true and proper ground or original of it: the special reasons
inducing us to love him.

2. The requisite, degree and intention of it: how much we are to love him.

3. The especial effects and testimonies of it: what we are to do because we
love him.

The first of these heads I have dispatched already; having heretofore in
another audience discovered the false, and in this congregation, the true
grounds of our love unto Christ Jesus: I am now fallen upon the second point,
and therein more punctually to enquire, how much we are to love him which
querie our Savior himself clearly and thoroughly resolves in my Text. The
occasion of the words.
If any man come unto me, etc.

Our Savior was now in the progress of his humiliation* going about and doing
good. Being on his way, he observes great multitudes thronging and flocking
after him, no doubt for various ends, and upon various motives. This he well
knew: and thereupon that they might not dishonor him and deceive themselves
by gross, absurd conceits of a common easiness, for any man to get
whatsoever good was to be gotten from him by a little trotting after him, he
thought it expedient to let the^ all know before hand, what they must of
necessity resolve upon, if they would follow him to any purpose, and solemnly
to forewarne them, what they must trust unto if they made account to get any
good by running after him. If any man will come to me (that is) hoping or
desiring to be better for me in regard of a better life, The expl^^cation of
them.
and hate not his Father and Mother, etc. (that is) if he set not so high a
price upon his hopes by me, that he bring this resolution with him to part with
any thing which may hinder him from doing me constant, universal service; yea
though it be that which otherwise he may most lawfully and ought most dearly
to affect, he cannot be my Disciple, he is not qualified either to do me
that honor which I shall expect from him, or to receive those favors which
he will expect from me. If any man desirous of a more satisfying expectation
of this Scripture shall enquire yet more particularly, in what sense the
Disciple of Christ must hate his parents and children, wife and kindred, yea
and his own life.

I answer. 1. The law of God does not only permit, but also command us to love
all these, and to embrace them with the sweetest cleerest affections that
nature can possibly stir up in our breasts and bowels: Far be it from our
Savior to contradict this law by requiring that his Disciples at their very
first entrance into the school, should turn barbarous and strip themselves of
those sacred, decent affections of nature and humanity: that which he requires
is this, that seeing even during the true Church there will daily happen many
ca^es wherein we must needs either deal unkindly or dishonourably with him,
or break squares with such as are near and dear unto us, and in time of
persecution we may be so put to it that we must either be ashamed of him
before men, and in the extremity of baseness abjure him, or else part with our
temporal life and all contentments; I say* he requires, that his Disciples
should come with minds so possessed with an extraordinary overreaching esteem
of him beyond any thing else, that they might be prepared before hand for such
exigents, and resolve to run the most desperate hazard of the loss of any
man's favor, or their own lives, that nothing may interrupt their obedience
unto him, or intercept the light of his countenance from them. 2. We are to
note, that the hatred which is required, has not reference to the persons
specified in my Text, but to such favors and contentments as we may receive
from them. The love of Christ will not suffer, much less cause us, in any case
to neglect the duties, or grow weary of the relations of nature: only thus
much Christ expects from us seeing we may be often driven to that push that
we must either loose him, or the good looks of those whom we account* our best
friends, that in comparison of our hopes by the Gospel, we should so hate,
(that is) by a Hebraisme, neglect or disesteeme whatsoever comforts or favors
we could expect from them, that without any long pause or deliberation, we may
be content to let them go, and be glad we are ^o rid of them, that we may
stick close unto Christ, and be found in him enwrapped in his righteousness.
To unfold this yet more distinctly: We may part with what is dear unto us for
the love of Christ in ^ respects.
we may part from that which is dear unto us for the love of God or Christ in
two respects. 1. As a sacrifice, to wit, when God is glorified by that which
we part with: so Abraham was willing to part with Isaacke, and in this respect
might be said to hate him, though no doubt but his bowels yearned most
vehemently, even when his hand was fetching the fatal blow; so that heroical
mother 2. Macc. 7. hated her seven sons whom indeed she loved most tenderly,
being content to see them all butchered before her eyes with horrible rarity of
torments, that they may not disobey the law, and God might be glorified. 2. As
a temtation, when we our selves being severed from it may glorify God more
freely: Thus Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, hating
the treasures of Egypt in comparison of the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11. 26.
Thus Joseph parted with his Mistress and all his hopes by his Master, because
he would not do that great wickedness and sin against God. The hatred
required in Christ's disciples is passive more then active.
So that indeed the hatred in my Text is more passive then active, consisting
in an humble willingness to forgo any thing which may be either an
acceptable sacrifice unto Christ, or a dangerous temptation from him, in a well
composed dislike and disesteeme of those things, which our nature counts her
jewels, when compared to those glorious invisible rarities which they may
hinder us from. Lastly in a placide, well tempered contentedness, upon a small
warning to part with them, either one after another, or all of them at a clap,
so that we may be sure of the maine, so that by letting them go, we may take
better hold of Christ Jesus, in whom we are sure to find with an infinite
overplus whatsoever we loose for his sake.

My text being thus explained. The Doctrine of the Text.
I will contract the pith both of it and it is explication into this doctrine.
Whosoever makes account to be the better for his profession of Christ, and to
have his share in those invaluable purchases of his passion, must prize Christ
Jesus and his hopes by him far beyond whatsoever, or whomsoever he may, most
lawfully and ought most dearly to love in this world, yea far beyond life it
self, and whatsoever co^tentments may endea^e it unto him. To heap up other
testimonies or to go any farther then my text for the proof of this doctrine,
were to prejudice both our Saviors authority, he being so plain and
peremptory in the point, and your esteem of it, as if you were not by his bare
word sufficiently persuaded and convinced of a truth, so much concerning
himself and you too, if you do in earnest desire to have any thing to do
with him. My labor, I suppose will be better spent in demonstrating unto you
the equity of that which may seem rigor in this doctrine, in discovering unto
you what good reasons our Savior had to exact so great a measure and high a
pitch of love from all those who would be partakers of his redemption and
sharers of his merits: The equity of the Doctrine demonstrate^ by two reasons.
Some of those reasons I will specify and amplify in two considerations.

1. It will not stand either with the justice, or wisdom of God the Father, to
loose the glory of his everlasting mercies in his son, by conferring them
upon such as do not perceive and acknowledge some out-stripping excellency in
them beyond all his temporal blessings. Indeed it is usual with God in his
general providence to heap his temporal favors upon such as never think of
his love in dealing thus bountifully with them, but the reason of that is
because he can call them in again, and blow upon them at his pleasure, and
though he get no glory for his mercy whilst he bestows them as blessings,
^pirituall ^lessings ^re not so ^ommon ^s tempo^all.
yet he can be sure to glorify his justice by turning them into curses: But now
for his everlasting mercies, those riches of his love in Christ, he uses not
to part with them so easily: he lets not them go out of his hands: by his
Ministers he proclaims and displaies the infinite worth and value of them: if
any man be so taken with the luster of them that for joy Mat. 13. 44. he goes
and sels all that he has to buy them, God presently gives an everlasting
assurance of salvation to all who love Christ sincerely.
and thinks he has a good bargain too, God presently seals unto him an
everlasting assurance of them by the spirit of promise, and gives possession of
them at the day of his death, when all other possessions leave him. But now if
any man think so poorly of them, that either he will not vouchsafe to cheapen
them, or if he do think them worth the buying, yet will not come off
rou^dly, and buy them outright with all that he has. I say it will not stand
either with the justice, or wisdom of God the Father, to cast them away upon
such prodigious sorts. The reason may be gathered out of our Saviors words,
Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father or Mother more then me is not worthy of me:
Alas, you will say, no more is he that loves him infinitely better, then his
Father and Mother: yes such a one is worthy of him, not indeed with such a
worthiness as God may expect but with such a worthiness as he in justice may
accept: not with such a worthiness by which he may deserve Christ, ^t is an
possible to be ^ustifyed without Christ as to perform any thing which may
deserve Christ.
for then he would have no need of him, seeing that worthiness might as well
immediately answer the justice of God without Christ, but with such a
worthiness as may fit him having need of Christ, and Christ being freely given
him to receive him. What kind of worthiness is that? it is the worthiness of
faith working by love, consisting in a thorough sense of the extreme misery of
our greatest happiness without Christ, in a clear persuasion of the
incomparable worth of those things which we are promised in Christ, and in a
well advised resolution to do or suffer any^ thing that we may be assured of
our part in them.

But alas what worthiness is there in all this? seeing that whatsoever we can
possibly do or suffer for Christ in this life, is not, worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed Romans 8. 18. I answer there can be
indeed no meritorious worthiness in all this, but there is an acceptable
worthiness: for by acceptance he is worthy of whatsoever God does for him,
There is a twofold worthiness Acceptable and Meretorious.
who in some good measure understands the worth of his benefits and takes them
to heart, desiring and endeavoring to give him all the glory which he
intended for himself in bestowing them. The principal thing God intends in
doing good unto any of his creatures is the glory of his goodness, if
therefore his creature acknowledge his goodness proportionably in his
benefits* desiring to value them all single at that high price, and in
comparison one above another proportionably as the donor would have he should,
he restore unto God that which he aimed at in his benefits, and is worthy of
them with that worthiness which a Creator may expect from a creature* It is
not required by God that any creature should deserve his gifts.
seeing an infinite Creator which had need of nothing, cannot expect any thing
from a finite creature having nothing but what he first bestowed upon it, but
the glory of his benefits.

Now to draw nearer unto the point: the greatest matter containing in it
infinite variety of wonders, which God from all eternity has contrived by his
wisdom, compassed by his power, bestowed by his goodness upon mankind to get
himself as it were an infinite mass of glory which should suffice him through
all eternity, was the sending of his own son in our nature, on our behalf
to satisfy his justice. The Redemption of man is the most admirable work of
God.
This was that astonishing project, wherewith that invisible Lord blessed for
ever intended in the fullest, compleatest measure to glorify all his attributes
at once, and to make himself far more admirable then he was in the creation
and government of the world. This was that mystery which was hidden from ages
and generations, in which God would make known the riches of his glory: Col.
1. 26. which holy men for many ages together saluted a far off, and rejoiced
to see, though it were through a cloud, which the Angels themselves desire
(...)* most heedfully to pry into 1. Pet. 1. 10. out of their heavenly* places
beholding in the Church the manifold wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3. 10. This being
so, whosoever is admitted to see what i^ the fellowship of the mystery which
from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, v. 9. If he be so caught
up with admiration of it, that he grow presently into a loathing of all his
other happiness in comparison of this; if at the sight of such a concourse of
wonders, he be so ravished out of himself, that he care not what become of
what he most doted on before, so that he may get his part in that fellowship,
I say, such a one is worthy of Christ, because he gives God that glory which
Christ meant to procure him, and therefore it will stand both with his wisdom
and justice, to allot such a one his portion out of those unsearchable riches
of Christ Ep. 3. 8. But on the contrary: whosoever is admitted to the sight of
the fellowship of the same mystery, if he can espy no such extraordinary
excellency in it but that he may keep himself as he is, and hold fast what
he has, if he ca^ discern no such superlatiue worth in it as may call in his
thoughts from all other matters, and command their attendance upon it self; if
his affections continue still glued unto such trash and mucke as they were
fastened on before, in a word, if he satisfy himself with such gross
conceits as these, that sure the things which are offered us in Christ are
excellent things, but offered upon very hard terms, They who ^ill not ^^ke
Christ ^n those ^earmes he (...) offered, shall never enjoy him.
and therefore, perhaps other matters may be better for us for the present,
that those are matters of another world and would be good for us when we are
dead, but in the mean time it is* best for us to make as much of our selves as
we can, and by Gods mercy we may at length have our part in those matters as
well as those that keep most stir about them, (I say) such stupid sots are
so strangely unworthy of Christ, that God cannot do them any good: his wisdom
and his justice will not suffer him: it would infinitely less become his
wisdom to prostitute such treasures unto the trampling of such swine, then it
would become the wisdom of a man to give children Diamonds to play with, who
will be better pleased with cherrystones, or to feed hounds with the most
costly dainties, which had rather be doing upon carrion. It Is likewise
impossible for his justice to bestow his chiefest, choicest mercies upon such
brutes as will scarce take them for mercies, being not thoroughly persuaded that
they have any need of them; did I say it will not stand with the justice of God
to bestow his principal mercies where they are thus brutishly undervalued: nay
he that thus vndervalues the^ must not carry it away so: the justice of God
will not suffer him to let that man pass, without the most heavy and fearful
plagues that his omnipotency can inflict, because it is the greatest affront
and most intolerable despite, that such worms can offer his impassible
majesty, They offer ^he greatest affront to God, who scorn his love.
thus as much as in us lies, to be fool his wisdom and even scorn his love
in that where he thought to do us most good and himself most glory, we
forsooth can see no such great need of that, or extraordinary reason for this.

Nay you will say, but we may value Gods love in Christ very highly, albeit
we esteem some few things which our nature has taken special likeing unto
before it? No such matter: He that esteems the dearest things he has,
suppose his own life, but in the least degree above it, vndervalues it as much
in effect as he that makes no account of it at all: would any man say that he
esteemed a pearl who should prefer a barley-corne before it: yet there is
some proportion between a barley-corne and a pearl, but none at all between
our temporal life and that exceeding weight of glory, treasured up for us by
Gods love in Christ. O this love of God in sparing his own son for our
redemption, is so full of bottomless, fathomlesse mysteries, it is in such
transcendent excess infinite, that those multitudes of his blessings in our
creation and preservation, inestimable too in themselves where with (...) day
by day he loadeth us Psalm. 68. v. 19. (take them altogether) are not worth the
talking off in comparison of this, nor as we say to be named the same day with
it; O this sending of Christ to dye for us, when we were yet sinners, was that
special, royal present wherewith the King of heaven would commend his love
unto us, as the Apostle excellently expresses it Rom* 5. 8. In this says
Saint John 1. 4. 9. was manifested the love of God toward us that he sent his
only begotten some into the world that we might live through him manifested in
this? Why, in what not? so it is in every bit of bread we eat, in every sup of
air we take in. O but the noblest blessings of this life are such poor
courtesies in comparison of what we hope for by Christ, that Gods love though
most eminent too, does scarce appear in them, being eclipsed by that most
orient and everlasting blaze of his love in Christ.

Wherefore to conclude my first consideration: it is no wonder if the justice
of God, which is to see that his Glory receive no damage, require that our
esteem of this his greatest mercy, which himself values so far above all
his other mercies, should so far exceed our esteem of any other matters though
otherwise most excellent in themselves and dear unto us, that our very esteem
of them may be but a disesteeme and a hatred if compared to our esteem of his
love in Christ.

Consid. 2. If a man profess never so much love unto Christ, The seco^^ Reason.
if he do indeed prefer him before never so many conveniences of this life,
yet if he love but any one thing in the world never so little better then he
does Christ, he does him in effect as much dishonor as he that never looks
after him at all. Thus much I intimated before; but what I did but touch upon,
and in reference to God the father, I will now amplify with special references
unto God the son. It is all one, It is all one ^ot to esteem Christ at al
and to prefer one though but one contentment before him.
as I said before, not to esteem a pearl at all, and to esteem it less
worth then a barley-corne: in like manner, though we prefer Christ before
never so many profits and pleasures, yet if there remain behind one darling
contentment which we are resolved to keep whatsoever may become of his glory
or our interest in him: we do in the issue esteem him not at all, because
we still wittingly value him below that which is infinitely worse then dung in
comparison of him. When a saleable commodity is offered upon reasonable price,
we use to say that if it be not worth that, it is worth just nothing: Now our
part in Christ is so infinitely overworth any thing that we can possibly give
for it, that by far better reason we may say, that he that thinks it not
cheap bought with all that he has even to his last breath, indeed thinks it
worth nothing at all. Let a woman love her husband better then a million of
men, yet if she love but any one man in the world better then her husband, he
will give her but little thanks for loving him above so many others.

But to amplify this point more distinctly, let us briefly consider that
transcendent pitch of love we owe first unto the benefits of Christ; secondly
unto his person; All those inestimable benefits which we make account of by
Christ may be reduced to 2. heads 1. a ransom 2. an inheritance. The ransom
is from horrors and those torments which are infinite for smart, variety and
duration, which we have all deserved a thousand times over, Had the blessings
procured by Christ been infinitely less then they are, they had bin
inestimable.
and therefore the case being thus with us, though we looked for nothing but
such a ransom by our Savior, though he had procured us only this that after
this life we should spend eternity in a Limbus unacquainted with any pain or
pleasure, yea though he had procured us only the mortality of our souls, that
they might perish with our bodies; I say this alone had been beyond all
proportion, better for us then the whole world: seeing what would a thousand
worlds do us good if after a while we must be packed out of them all into
that place where we shall everlastingly curse the day that ever we were borne
or made reasonable creatures. But now that besides all this, we make first
account for an inheritance by him, an inheritance immortal, undefiled,
reserved in heaven for us, seeing we expected to be made heirs with Christ in
that glory which he had with his father before the beginning of the world, of
that glory, the least spark of which if visible to bodily eyes would shame all
the beauty, pomp and bravery of the world, and whatsoever the Magnifico's of
the earth are proud of, it is a stupidity worse then any madness to conceive,
we esteem sufficiently of such glorious hopes, if upon deliberate choice we
make much but of any one indearement of this life which may any way hinder our
assurance of them. 2. for our love unto the person of Christ, equity requires
that we should love him with a love yet more overtopping then either our
ransom or inheritance, and therefore it will be yet a more intolerable
extremity of madness, to imagine we love him with an acceptable degree of
affection, as long as we dare to bring the most lovely object that we can
pick out of the storehouse of nature within the compass of a comparison with
him. We sh^^ love Chr^^^ person mor^e en^^rely then^ his benef^^*
I say, reason requires that we should love his person more entirely then his
benefits, that we should prefer his glory before eternal life it self. Our
Savior is contented that our fear of misery and desire of happiness, should
first enter us into the love of him, that til we know him better we should
love him only for our own sakes and his benefits, but after that he has sent
his spirit to expound the mystery of his love unto us more clearly, to make us
lay to heart not only what he has purchased for us, but also how dear the
purchase cost him, how though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor
that we through his poverty might be made rich as the Apostle passionately
delivers it, 2. Cor. 8. 9. how being every way equal with God, Phil. 2. 7.
(...), he was feign to empty and strip himself as it were of all his royalty
that he might compass these great matters for us, for whom he had not the
least reason to do the least good: when his spirit has effectually melted our
hearts with these considerations, (...) is a mer^^nary love (...) love Christ
chie^^ly for our ^wn salvation.
we shall perceive our loving him chiefly for our own salvation to be somewhat
too gross and mercenary love, being not much different from that of a woman
who loves her jointure better then her husband, or that of a son, who loves
his Father chiefly for his patrimony. And though hitherto we have loved Christ
only because we hope to get by him, yet now that we know what the kisses of
his mouth mean, that which we principally love in him is his love, and having
before loved the giver for the gift, by a kind of regresse in our affection,
we henceforth strive to love gift for the giver. But this point though many of
Gods children know it to be most reasonable, and have found it most
comfortable, yet I know it will seem to many both too rigide and too curious,
and therefore I dismiss it.

All that has been delivered in my second consideration may be summed up in
this excellent conclusion. So muc^^ only we love Ch^^^^ as we lo^^ him be^^^
then any^^ thing else*
So much only we do love Christ as we love him more then any thing else
besides though never so lovely: 1. Because we have infinitely more reason to
love him then it is possible we should have to love any thing else: and
therefore it is not to be accounted love unto him, if we can afford as much
and more to something else: 2. Because if we love but one thing better then we
do him, that one thing may force us to despite, forsake, and betray him as
accursedly as if we preferred a hundred things before him: yea, he that
resoluedly preferres but one thing before his communion with Christ will
quickly be entreated by his own heart to prefer more. He therefore that
would certainly know how much he loves his blessed Savior, that would judge
exactly of the measure of his love unto him, must not do it by feeling the
pulse as it were, or calculating the degrees of his affection unto him; but by
comparing his affection unto Christ with his affections unto other matters, and
considering how far that has got the start of these, and what overplus it
has beyond them all in the comparison; for so much and no more does he indeed
love Christ. For it deserves observation: that we cannot judge of an affection
by its single exercises what it does alone by it self, but only when it is
brought within the lists, when it is put to wrestle for the mastery with other
affections in the same heart. Where it comes to pass that of two affections of
the same kind, the weaker may prove the stronger, if seated in a heart, where
as weak as it is, it has the sovereignty over all the other affections
proportionally weaker then it self; and the stronger may prove the weaker if
it dwell in such a heart, wherein it is overmatched with some one at least
stronger then it self. Did I love Christ Jesus with as eminent degree of love
as ever did the most resolute Martyr, yet were it possible that I should love
any endearement of this life never so little beyond that pitch, my love would
be as good as none at all; yea the same measure of love which made him a
glorious Martyr, would not keep me from being an accursed Apostate, seeing
that if I were put to it, as he was, that I must either renounce my Savior or
my other contentment, this would hold me so fast, that it would make me most
desperately let him go: and this would be not because my love unto Christ was
in it self weaker then the Martyrs: I supposed the contrary: but because my
affection unto something else was stronger then any affection in the Martyr,
and too strong to be over-mastred by my love unto Christ.

But here some may put in a foolish question; though a Disciple of Christ must
not love any thing better then his Master, yet may he not love some things as
well? I answer the conceit is impossible. First, Because it is an
impossibility, that for any continuance our affections should be settled in an
equal size upon two objects, which commonly fall cross one to the other and
may ever and anon be brought in opposition one against the other. Now
whatsoever we love besides Christ unless it be in subordination unto him,
either actually, when we particularly think of it and intend it, or
habitually, in the general constant purpuse of our minds, we love it in
opposition to him either explicit and direct, or implicit and interpretatiue,
as the Schools speak (that is) such neglect of him as he will interpret
opposition. All this we learn from himself who has pronounced it impossible
that one man should serve two masters, and his reason is, he must needs hate
the one, and love the other, Math. 6. 24. 2. We may note that love and the
rest of the affections may be considered two ways. 1. Physically, as they are
qualities in the soul. 2. Morally, in respect of their motives and other
morallizing circumstances. Now suppose it were possible that we should love
Christ and some worldy contentment which the very same degree of affection, If
we lo^^ any contentment (...) equally with Chri^^^ ^ee love Christ indeed far
less then that contentment.
although these loves would be equal considered naturally as qualities, yet
considered morally, our love of Christ would be far less the^ our love of
the other contentment: seeing our love of that upon small reasons would be as
great as our love of Christ upon the greatest reasons that ever were, or ever
can be to observe and persuade the greatest love. Thus in two considerations
have you heard explained, confirmed, and amplified this maine doctrine,
whosoever he be that makes account to be the better for his profession of
Christ.

Before I descend to application I suppose it expedient to vindicate this
fundamental point from some exceptions which it may be charged with by such as
do not or will not understand it. The point (...) vindica^ed from ^ome
exce^tions.


In the first place, it may be objected, if none can get the rich pearl in the
parable but he that will give all he has for it: if none can have his part in
Christ but he that prizeth it above his life, and is ready to buy it with
whatsoever is dear unto him, what means then that Evangelicall proclamation
Esa. 55. 1, Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money; come and buy milk without money, and without price? What means
that nuptial invitation, Rev. 22. The spirit and the bride say come, and let
him that hears say come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life
freely. What are we invited and entreated to drink on free cost of the water of
life, and yet must we venture our lives for it, and break through a whole host
of Philistines for it, as the Worthies of David did for the waters of Bethel.
2. Sam. 23. Are we made believe that Christ is given us freely, and yet must
we buy him, and buy him with all that we have? I answer, 1. That proclamation
in the Prophet, and invitation in the Apocalypse are not to be so understood, as
if God required nothing on their parts who shall partake of his promises in
Christ, but only to step forth and challenge them. The sense and scope of those
places is this, whereas worldly commodities though never so vain and
transitory cannot be gotten without price, so that he that is pennilesse must
be content to go without them, those heavenly and everlasting commodities are
attaineable to all sorts of men, as well to beggars as to Princes, poverty can
hinder no man from buying them, he that has not a penny may come and drink
as freely of the waters of life as he that has coffers full. As God expects
from us whatsoever we have, so that which we have for him shall serve the turn
though it be never so little, though we have nothing but the shirt on our
backs; but our naked, deseased carcasses, yet if we are willing to give them
for Christ, they shall be sufficient pay. God turns away no chapman because
he cannot give enough, but only because he will not give what he can. For if
there be first a willing mind, God accepts according to that a man has and
not according to that a man has not, as it is spoken in another case. 2. Cor.
8. 12. 2. When we are said to buy the pearl, to buy Christ withal that we
have, such like speeches are in no wise to be understood properly but
Parabolically; for in propriety of speech, when we forsake all to win
Christ, we do not lay down any price unto God for him, who has given him for
us all and offered him to every one of us most freely, only we rid our selves
of such things as may hinder us from receiving him being freely given. If one
should offer me handfulls of Gold* I for the present having my hands full of
clay, I should quickly be rid of the clay that I may finger the gold, yet I do
not pay him for his gold with my clay, but only prepare my self to receive it.
In like manner there being an infinitely greater disproportion between Christ
and the most precious commodities that we can forgo for him; then there is
between gold and clay when we dismember our selves of any thing that we may
make room for Christ, we do not purchase him, but prepare to entertain him
coming of his own accord unto us.

^ But is it so in earnest, will some say? must every man that will be the
better for Christ, be willing to loose his own life for him? This is worse
then all the rest, why then, upon the point, none can be saved but Martyrs. I
answer, we may safely affirm that none are saved but Martyrs; Martyrs either
actually or habitually* Whether any can be saved but Martyrs*
having faith enough to encourage and love to constrain them to be Martyrs, if
the honor of their profession should require it. If this assertion make any
man's ears to tingle, I know not why the hearing of my Text should not be as
offensive unto him, or the reading of diverse other speeches of our Savior,
requiring a resolved disesteeme and contempt of life in any man whosoever he
be that dares to set his hand to his plough, or seriously set his face toward
heaven.

There is a Popish scribler not worth the naming in a pulpit, who would
persuade us that these speeches of our Savior are not precepts of necessity
unto all that shall be saved by him, but onley counsels of perfection to such
as will not be contented to be doore-keepers in heaven, but aim at some
higher place. For my part I cannot express how injurious I conceive this
gloss, as well to our Saviors person, as to his doctrine. But if any man
present to set his own heart at quiet, be willing to be of this fellows
mind, I leave him three things to pause upon. 1. Our Savior did not speak
thus much only to some select, forward men, only to his special Disciples, but
as it is in the verse precedent, there went great multitudes after him, and he
turned and said unto them, If any man, etc. But perhaps though he address his
discourse to them altogether, yet he intended it not to each of them single.
No, what then mean the first words of my Text, If any man etc. what means the
conclusion of his discourse, verse, 33. So likewise whosoever he be of you that
forsakes not all that he has he cannot be my Disciple. 2. The considerations
which show the equity of those conditions required by our Savior, the reasons
inducing him to require so great a measure of love, as you have heard before,
equally* concern every man, and therefore there is no reason why we should
imagine that our Savior proposed these hard terms only to some few and not
to all that would have any interest in him. 3. Contempt of life in comparison
of a communion with Christ is most universally requisite in all sorts of men.
1. Because the Church never enioyes such a calm, but a terrible storm may
unexpectedly dash it away, and therefore there is no man though borne in the
most peaceable time of the Gospel, but ere the glass of his life be run
out, he may be over taken with a fiery trial. 2. Yea there is no professor
of the Gospel, though he live and dye during the public tranquillity of it,
yet he may privately be brought to that plunge, that he must either hazard his
life, or else in some fearful, horrible manner against his conscience
dishonor Christ Jesus. 3. Many may take away our lives which cannot take away
our other contentments, as Popish Assascinats have deprived Kings of their
lives when they could not of their kingdoms. It is certain that whosoever
cares not for his own life is master of another man's, and by consequent of any
man's religion that loves his life better then he does it. How easy were it
for a Ruffian that had no religion of his own* to pull such a one into a corner
and with a naked blade to make him forswear his religion, as often as he
pleased, yea if the trick were in use, such a one might be robbed of his
religion upon the high way seeing any man that were so disposed with a Pistol
at his breast might make him deliver up his faith with as much have as his purse.

3* It may be replied if every follower must love him more then his own life,
then it seems that the weakest Christian, if indeed a Christian must love him
as much as the most renowned Apostles, seeing the best of them all could love
him no more then so, for greater love then this has no man then that he lay
down his life for his friend, witness Christ Jesus himself, John. 15 13. It
seems likewise that all must have an equal portion of faith; both which
consequencies palpably contradict both Scripture and experience. I answer
first without question all that shall be saved must be saved by the same
faith, viz: by faith of the same nature, though not in the same quantity. Now
that which breeds the mistake in this objection, is a conceit* that to love
Christ more then our lives proceeds not from the nature of saving faith simply
considered, but from some eminent degree of it, which co^ceipts is erroneous.
For it is very observable, that the nature of faith, if true and saving, be
the degree of it never so small necessarily includes thus much: it being an
assent unto all Scripture revelations, especially unto the Gospel promises, as
most true and good in themselves, and far better in the choice then any
profits or pleasures in the world, yea the^ life or whatsoever may sweeten it
unto us. Whence an incomparable writer of our own who has dived profoundly
into the nature of justifying faith, has weaued the words of David, Ps. 63.
Thy loving kindness is better then life, into his complete definition of that
faith whereby the just do live. 2. Though all the Disciples of Christ must
assent to so much be their faith, and express if need be, so much by their
love, yet according as those tastes and relishes of heaven imprinted in their
soul by the spirit, upon which the assent of faith, and fervency of love are
grounded are more or less lively and pleasant, the faith and love of
Christians admit sundry degrees and measures: but not properly in regard of
their esteem of the object, (for all, as I have showed, must esteem it better
then life) but in respect of the radication and settling of this esteem in
themselves* so that howsoever all faithful Christians judge and esteem their
hopes by Christ to be better then life, yet they may be more or less in
their judgment, and those apprehensions which cause this esteem may be more
or less clear and distinct. 3. It Is true, that to dye for the profession of
Christ is the greatest possible expression of love unto him, for the matter of
it there may be great diversity* and accordingly by several degrees of faith,
and love may be expressed by it. Amongst so many thousands as have been
crowned with martyrdom in Primitive and latter times, no doubt but there was
infinite variety of degrees of faith and love, all which had but one common
expression for the matter; but for the manner of it, some laid down their lives
more cheerfully and triumphantly rejoicing that it was given to them, not only
to believe, but also to suffer: others with more deliberation, staggering, and
reluctance some with Peter denied Christ diverse times before they would dye for
him, recanted a^iured, and run through a hundred of base sights before they
would come to the stake, others behaved themselves more honorably and
heroically, and being glad of such speedy conveyance to heaven died with a
kind of Angelical Majesty.

To draw toward a conclusion: if any honest tender heart, which uses to
tremble at the word, and to mourn for its own infirmities, be brought into
dumps by this doctrine, causing it to think thus with it self; if every one
that loves Christ to any purpose must love him better then life, and be able to
dye for him, then sure al my love unto him is nothing worth*^^ When I am in my
best moodes his loving kindness is dearer unto me then thousands of gold and
silver, and I am of David's mind that it is better then life, but yet if my life
were in question for it, I know not what would become of me, sure I should
never hold out but flinch most shamefully. For comfort and direction unto such
a soul I commend these considerations. 1. This fear of flinching is a good
sign, that thou would not flinch for fear: you know what Peter's loud
protestation (though all men forsake thee yet will not I) came to not long
after, you know the story of Dr Pendleton, or you may read it in Mr Fox,
unless thy life were exceeding dear unto thee, it would be no such great
testimony of thy love unto him, to part with it for his sake; unless death
were very terrible, Martyrdom would not be either such an acceptable
sacrifice unto God, or glorious wonder amongst men. To fear martyrdom, yea
and to pray against it with submission unto Gods will, is warranted by our
Saviors own example, when he prayed so earnestly, that if it were possible
the Cup might pass away from him, but still with submission unto his fathers
pleasure. That place concerning our Savior, Heb. 5. 7. is very remarkable, who
in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears unto him, that was able to save him from death,
and was heard in that he feared. I stand not upon the words in that he feared,
for indeed the construction of the words (...), is very uncertain, that which
I especially note, is, that it is said here, our Saviouor was heard how was he
heard? Mark how, and thence will spring a second branch of comfort. His Father
heard him, not in removing the Cup from him, but in strengthening* him to drink
it with victory: so art thou sure to be heard, if thou prayest as he did:
either the Cup shall be removed from thee, or sweetened unto thee. Remember
withal, that God is never more for us, then when we are most for him, that
his glory lies at stake as well as thy life, and that he is more curious of
that, then thou can be of this. God is faithful who will no^ suffer us to
be tempted above that we are able; but will with the temptation also make away
to escape that we may be able to bear it. 1. Cor. 10. 13. Remember that thy
Savior has had experience of all the amazemets and horrors of death when he
suffered it for the^e, and therefore cannot forget, both to pity and succor
thee when thou art to suffer it* for him: for in that he himself has suffered
being tempted he is able to succor them that are tempted, as the Apostle
sweetly infers, Heb. 2. 18.

Lastly, let me commend this caution unto the trembling soul; Anxious
distrustful care for the future in matters of the soul, is more dishonorable
and displeasing unto God, then in matters of the body. Remember therefore thy
Saviors advice, care not for to morrow, let that care for it self. Afflict
not thy self with such sad supposals, what if Queen Mary's days should come
again; what if I should be brought before such a fellow as Bonner, remember
thy Saviors reason for his advice, sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof. Which as it is too true for matters of this life, so it is much more
true in business of our spiritual life. If thou art indeed entered into a
covenant with God, if thou have seriously and advisedly resolved to live the
rest of thy time in the flesh by the faith of the son of God who has loved
thee and given himself for thee, if thou art indeed one who knows what an
infinite, endless, unwearied diligence is required to a constant, close
walking with God, why then thou have every day, every hour, omission^ and
commissions to look unto, thou have continual swarms of thoughts, words, and
actions most warily, and precisely to watch over, thou must tread every step as
nicely and gingerly, as if thou wentest amongst sna^es, and walkedst upon
pinnacles, thou must ever and anon chain up thy beloved affections shorter,
and deal roughly with those lusts, which perhaps are as dear unto thee as thy
life. What have thou thus* much business every day; and have thou time to make
suppositions for the future, and to torment thy self with presages? Let to
morrow care for it self: abstain from fleshly lusts which fight against thy
soul and most dangerously in times of peace: stand upon thy guard against thy
sins of daily incursion, against such temptations as are incident to thy
present condition, in simplicity of heart resign thy self up unto him, that
has loved thee and given himself for thee, and thou be confident, that
neither life nor death, neither things present nor things to come shall ever be
able to separate thee from him: this being most certain that he that does
indeed live by faith, has that in him, which, if need should be, will enable
him to die in it and for it.

But what reason had I then at this time to trouble men's heads with such a
thorny discourse of Martyrdom? I answer. 1. The habit of Martyrdom, as I
have showed, is included in the most fundamental principle of Christianity,
love of Christ better then our selves, self resignation or denial: and
therefore they deserve no answer but silence, who shall think a discourse of
it at any time to be harsh and unseasonable. 2. As the Prophet Ezechiel
forewarned the Jews, We have had mischief upon mischief, and rumor upon
rumor, and if mischief and rumors continue and multiply upon us as fast as
they have done of late, the days may be sooner upon us then we are aware,
when there may be too much occasion to practice this point and no time to
preach it. The Lord open our eyes and change our hearts, the Lord of his mercy
order matters for us, above all that we are able to ask or think, contrary
to the cry of our sins, contrary to probabilities, that the event may prove
such discourses unseasonable. Here now should follow a large application of the
maine doctrine branched into diverse uses, but that if God give leave shall ere
long be the exercise of another hour.

FINIS.

