A NEW Interlude of Vice Conteyninge, the Historye of Horestes with the cruel
reuengment of his Fathers death, upon his one naturtll Mother. by John Pikeryng.

The players names.
The Vice, Rusticus. Hodge. Hrorestes Idumeus. Council. Clytemnestra.
Halltersycke. Hempstryng. Nestor. Menalaus. A woman. Sodyer. Nobulle. Nature.
Prouisyon. Harrauld. Sodyer. Truth. Fame. Hermione. Dewtey. Messenger.
Egestus. Commones.
The names divided for vi. to play.
The first the Vice and Nature and Dewtey. 3. 2. Rusticus. Idumeus. 2. Sodyer.
Menelauus. and Nobulles. 5. 3. Hodge. Counsel. Messenger. Nestor. and
Commones. 5. 4. Horestes. a woman. and Prologue. 3. 5. Haulltersicke. Sodyer.
Egistus. Harrauld. Fame. Truth and Idumeus. 7. 6. Hempstrynge. Clytemnestra.
Prouisyon. and Hesmione. 4.
Imprinted at London to fletestrete, at the sign of the Falcon by Wylliam
Gryffith, and are to be sold at his shope in S. Dunstons Churcheyearde. Anno.
1567.



The Vice. A Syrra nay soft, what? let me see,
God morrow to you sir, how do you fare?
Sante a men. I think it will be.
the next day in ye morning, before I com thear
Well forward I will, for to prepare,
Some weapons and armor, ye catiues to quell,
Ille teach the hurchetes, again to rebel.
Rebel? ye sir, how say you there to?
What? you had not best their parts to take:
Houlde the content fool, and do as I do,
Or else me chance, your pate for to ache.
Ye and that's more, for fear thou shall quake,
Before Horestes, when in good south he,
Shall arryue in this land, revenged to be:
Well forward I will, things to pouruaye,
In good south for the wares, as I shall think good.
Far well good man dotterell, and mark what I say,
Or eles it may chance you, to seek a new houd:
You would eat no more cakbread, I think then by ye roud,
If that, that same poulle from your shoulderes were hent,
You would think you were ill, if so you were shent.

Hear entryth Rustycus, and hodge. Rustycus. Chyll never nabore hodge, have a
glade heart,
Till Egistous the King, has for his desarte:
Received dew punnyshment, for this well I know,
Horrestes to Crete, with Idumeous did go.
When his father was slain, by his Mother most ill,
And therefore I think, that com heather he will:
And revenge the iniurey, of his mother most dyare,
wastinge our land with zworde, and with vyare.

Hodge. Jesus nabor, with vyar and zworde? zaye you ze?
By gys nabor, chyll zaue one I tro:
For iche have smaull good, by gise for to lose,
And therefore iche care not, how ever it gose.
But chyll not be zlayne, chyll love nothing worsse,
Chyll never be bournt, for the money in my pourse.
Iche have small rouddockes, and sodyers I kno,
Will rob the rich chorles, and let the poor knaves go.

Vice. A syrre, now steye, and pause their a while,
Be not to hastye, but take all the day:
Be God I am wearey, with coming this mile,
And having no money, my horse heyare to pay.
Who how, I rode on my fete, all the way,
Jesus what ground, since yesterday at none,
Have I gut through, with this pare of shoune.

Rusticus. Nabor hodge, be goge hatche none I bear,
That this little hourchet, the devayaunce does bear.
Come let us go, and of him in good south?
We woll conquear out, the verey truth.

Vice. Hurchyt, goges oundes gyppe with a wanyon,
Are your so loustey, in faith good man clound:
Oundes, heart, and nails, this is a franion,
Ille teach you to floute me, I hold you a pound.
O that it wear not, in faith for my gound?
It will I be knoc vm, yet for all that.

Hodge. Hold good master, you mare my new hat.

Fight Vice. Ha, ha, he, mar his hat quoth he? thear was all his thought
Tout tout, for the blose he set not a pyn:
That garment is dyer, that with blose is bought,
Well sieres to in treat me, sith you begin?
I am contentyd, my blade, now shaull in.
But tell me syeres tell me no whearefore of me,
The cause on this sort, your taullkynge should be.

Rusticus. By gis and iche chyll master, for all my great pain,
Of this matter to you to tell the veary plain:
My naybor hodge and I, in good south,
Mot hear in the veldes, I tell you the truth:
Now as we wear talkinge, mark what I zaye,
You came in straight, and of us crossed the way.
Which thing for zartyn, when I did espy,
This fancey vlouncht, in my head by and by:
And to hodge I zayde that, by gys I did veare,
That your masshyp, good master the devyaunce does bear,
And be cause you wear little, and of stature but smaull:
Your person a hourchet, in faith I did caull.
But by gis be contentyd, vor chyll neauer more,
Ofvend you a gains, but cham zorey thearuore.

Vice. If they wear not twain, I cared not a point,
But two is to meyney, the proverb douth tell:
Else be his oundes, I would iobard this joint,
And teach them against me, again to rebel?
O that I wear abull, the knaves vor to quell,
Then would I tryomphe, passinge all measure.

Hodge. Zentyll man zentyll man, at your own pleasure:
In faith we be, and thearuore we pray,
What they name, is to us vor to zaye.

Vice. My name would ye kno, marrey you shaull,
Hark frynde, fourst to the I will it declare:
Master patience master patience, many on does me caull?
But com heather nabor hodge, thou must have a share.
By gys unto the I will not spare,
The same for to show, whearfore my friend,
My name is patience if thou it perpend.

Hodge. Past shame? Gods gee naybor past shame?
By gods de naybor thates a tryccom name.

Vice. Tell a mare a tall, and shyell gerd out a fart
Se bow the as my words, douth mystake,
Would it not anger a saint at the heart:
To se what a scoff of my name, he douth make?
O oundes of me, as still as a stake.
He standith, naught caring what of him may be tide,
Be his wounds, I wod have a arm, or a side.
Sought let me se, it is best to be still,
Good slepinge in a hole skin, old foulkes do say,
Not withstanding I wis, ill have mine own will.
Nay I will be revenged, by his oundes and I may,
Syrra you good man Rustycus, mark what I say:
Hark in thine ear man, this did I see,
A hoge of thine wearyed to be.

Rusticus. Gods gee master patience, I pray you me tell,
What horsen chorles doge, my hog so did quell:
Iche zware by gise, and holy zaynt blyue,
Chyll be zwinge him, and ich be a live,
By gods de cham angry, and not well content,
Chould ha wear hear, chould make him repent.
Ich had rather given, vore stryke of corn,
Then to had my hog on this wise forlorn:
But if I knew whous dog chould be,
Revenged well enough iche warrent the.

Vice. Ha, ha, he, by god Rusticus, I may say in no game,
I know the person, whose dog so did flaye:
Thy hog fie fie man, it was a vearey shame,
For thy naybor hodge, to let it by this day.
Well I will go to him, and se if I may,
By aney means procure him, to make the amends;
Ille do the best I can, to make you both friends.

Rusticus. Chyll be no friends, chad rather be hanged,
Till iche have that oulde karle, well and thryfteley banged,
And tweare not your masshyppe, did me with hold,
To swing the ourchet, iche chould be boulde,

Vice. Ha, ha, he, nay, nay, spare not for me,
Go to it straight, if thear to ye gre,

Rusticus, Hodge I hard say, thou illy, have wrought,
For my hog unto death, with thy dog thou haste broughgt
Iche bid the thy vaute, to me to amend,
Or chyll zwaddell the, iche zweare in my bat end.

Hodge. Zwaddell me gods get? chyll care not a point,
Iche have a good bat, thy bones to anoynte:
Thou old carle I zaye, thy hoge hurtyd me,
And therefore I will have, a mendes now of the.
My rye and my otes, my beans and my pease,
They have eaten up quight, but small for my ease:
And therefore iche zaye, all thy hogs keep vaste,
Or iche will them wearey, as long as they last.
By gods get, I can never come in my ground,
But that zame zwyne, in my pease iche have found.

Vice. Tout tout Rusticus, these words be but wynd
To him man, to him, and swaddell him well:
Ye neauer leave him, as long as thou can find
Him whot, but teathe him, a gain to rebel,
What nededest thou to care, though his words be so fell,
Tout tout tharte unwise, and follow my mind:
And I warraunt the in end, some ease thou shall find.

Rusticus. Gods gee hourson hoge, pay me for my zwine,
Or eles larne to keep, that cockescome of thine.

Up with thy staf, and be ready to smite, but hodg smit first, and let ye vise
thwacke them both and run out. Hodge. Gods de, do thy worst, I care not a
point,
Chyll pay the none, chyll iobard a ioynte.

Vice. Nay stand I still some what, I will lend,
Take this for a reward, now a way I must wend.

Rusticus. O Gods get, cham zwinged zo zore,
Iche think chaul neauer live one hour more.

Hodge. O gods ge I think, my bewnes will in zonder,
If ich get home by gis, ittes a wounder:
Farewell Rusticus, for by gis ich chaull,
When I mete the again, bezwinge the vorall.

Rusticus. Nay letes be friends, and chyll in good part,
Of brown ale at my house, give the a whole whart:
What hodge shake hondes, mon be merey and lauffe,
By gods ge iche had not, the best end of the staff.

Hodge. Cham content naybor Rusticus, shaull be ene so,
Come to they house, I pray the let us go.
go out
Horestes. To caull to mind the crabyd rage of mothers ill attempt
Entrith. Prouokes me now all pyttie quight, from me to be exempt.
Yet lo dame nature teles me that, I must with willing mind
For give the fault and to pytie, some what to be inclynd.
But lo be hold thad vlltres dame, on hourdome morder vill
Has heaped up not contented, her sponsaule bed to fill:
With forrayne love but sought also, my fatal thread to share
As erst before my fathers fill, in sonder she did pare.
O pattern love why douste thou so, of pytey me request,
Sith thou to me wast quight denied, my mother being pressed:
When tender years this corpse of mine, did hold alas for woe
When friend my mother should have bin the^ was she chief myfo
Oh gods therefore since you be just, unto whose pour and will,
All thing in heaven, and earth also? obaye and sarue until.
Declare to me your gracious mind, shall I revenged be,
Of good King Agamemnones death, ye gods declare to me
Or shall I let the, adulltres dame, still wallow in her sin,
Oh gods of war, gide me a right, when I shall war begin.

Vice. War quoth he. I war in deed, and try it by the. sword,
God save you sir, the gods to ye: have sent this kind of word
That in the have you armor take, your fathers fose to slaye
And I as gyde with you shall go, to gyde you on the way.
By me thy mind there wrathfuldome, shall be performd in deed
Therefore Horestes mark me well, and forward do proceed.
For to reueng thy fathers death, for this they all have meant
Which thing for to demonstrat lo, to the they have sent me.

Horestes. Are your good sir, the messenger of gods as you do say
Will they in revenging this wrong, I make not long delay.

Vice. What need you dout, I was in heaven, when al ye gods did gre
That you of Agamemnons death, for south reuengid should be,
Tout tout, put of that childish love, could thou with a good will
Contentyd be? that one should so, they father seem to kill?
Why waylst you man, leave of I say, pluck corrage unto the.
This lamentation sone shall fade, if thou imbrasydest me.

Horestes What is they name may I in quear? O sacrid wight I pray
Declare to me and with this fear, do not my heart dismaye.

Vice. Among the gods celestial, I Courrage called am,
You to assyste in vearey truth, from out the heavens I came
And not without god Marsis his leave, I durst hear show my face
which thou shall feel if that there gift thou do forth with embrace

Horestes. And since it is thear gracious will, welcome thou art to me,
O holy wight for this thear gift, I thank them hartelley.
My thinks I feel all fear to fley, all sorrow grief and pain,
My thinks I feel corrage prouokes, my will for ward again
For to revenge my fathers death, and infamey so great,
Oh how my heart does boil in deed, with firey perching heat.
Corrage now welcome by the gods, I find thou art in deed,
A messenger of heavenly gostes, come let us now proceed.
And take in hand to bring to pas, reuengyd for to be,
Of those which have my father slain, but soft now let mese
Idumeus that worthy King, does com into this place,
What say you corrage: shall I now? declare to him my case?

Vice. Faull to it then and slack no time, for time once past away,
Does cause repentence, but to late to com old foulks do say.
When stead is stolen, to late it is to shyt the stable door,
Take time I say, while time does give a leisure good therefore

Idumeus. What ever he be that sceptar bears or rules in state full hie
Is sonest down through fortunes eyar, and brought to myserey,
As of late years the worthy king Agamemnon by name,
whose prass throughout ye world is blou^, by golden tru^p of fame
His well won fame in marshall stoure, does reach unto ye sky
Yet lo through fortunes blind attempt, be lo in earth does lie
He ye had past the fate of war, where chance was equal set,
Through fortunes spite is caught alack, win old Meros net
And he which sometime did delight, in clothed coat of maylle,
Is now constcaynd in Carones bote; over the brouke to saylle.
That flose upon ye fatal banks, of Plutose kingdom great
And that in shade of silent wodes, and valeys green do beat.
Where souls of kings and other wights a poyntyd are to be,
In quiet state there also is, this worthey real tree.
Of south I joy for to behold, Horestes actyue cheer,
The which in father sometime was, in son does now apear,
But where is he that all this day, I neauer saw his face,

Horestes. Kenll down. At hand O King thy faruant is, which wissheth to thy
grace
All hayl with happey fate certain, with pleasures many fould,
But yet my leege a suit I have, if I might be so bold.
To crave the same my soferayn lord, whereby I might aspyer
Unto the thing with very much, O king I do requier.

Idumeus. What thing is that if we suppose, it laufull for to be,
On princes faith without delay, at shall be given the.

Vice. Tout let him alone now, we may in good south,
I was not so lustey, my purpose to get:
But now of my honestey, I tell you of truth,
In revenging the wrong, his mind he has set?
It is not Idumeus that has pour to let.
Horestes fro sekinge his mother to kill,
Tout let him alone, hele have his own will.

Horestes. Since that your grace has willed me, this my defiar to show,
Oh gracious king this thing it is, I let your grace to know
That long I have request to view, my fathers kingley place,
And eke for to revenge the wrong done to my fathers grace,
Is mine intent wherefore o king, grant that without delay,
My earytage and honor eke, atchyue again I may.

Idumeus. Stey their a while Horestes mine, till council do decree?
The thing that shall unto your state, most honorabell be.
My counciler how do you think, let us your council have,
How think you by this thing yt which Horestes now does crave

Council. As I do think my solerayne lord, it should be nothing ill,
A Prince for to revenged be, on those which so did kill.
His fathers: grace but rather shall, it be a fear to those,
That to the like at any time, their cruel minds dispose*
And also as I think it shall, an honer be to ye,
To adiuuate and help him with, some men revenged to be.
This do I think most fyttest for, your state and his also,
Do as you list sieth that your grace, my mind herin does kno.

Idumeus. Since Council thinks it fyt in ded, revenged for to be,
That you Horestes in good south, for to revenge I gree.
And also to mayntaine your war, I grant you with good will,
A thousand men of stomach bold, your enimise to kill.
Take them forth with, and forward go, let slyp no time ne tyd.
For chance to leisure to be bound, I tell you can not bid
Go therefore straight provide your men and like a manly knight
In place of stouer put forth thy self, assay with all thy might.
To win the fame, for glorey none, it chambering does rest
Mark what I say to get thy men, I take it for they best.

Vice. Com on Horestes since thou have, obtained thy desire.
Tout tout man, seek to dystroye, as does the flaming fire?
Whose properte thou knoest does gro, as long as any thing
Is left where by the same may seem, some suckcor for to bring.

Horestes. I thank your grace I shall sequest your gratius mind herin.

Vice. Se se I pray you how he ioyse, that he must war begin. Go out.

Idumeus, Go out. My council now declare to me, how think you by this wight
Does not he seem in south to be, in time a manley knight.
By all the gods I think in south, a man may easeley kno,
Whose son he was, so right he does his fathers steps follow

Council. Undoubtedly my soferaynd lord, he seems unto me,
Not to sequest his fathers steps, in feats of cheuallrey:
But rather for to imitate, the flower of great (...) land,
I mean A chilles that same knight, by whose one only hand
The Greacia^s have obtaind at laingth ye conquest of old Troy
For which they did holl x. years space, their labor great employ

Idumeus. Sith he is gone for to puruaye, such things as shall in deed,
Suffice to sarue his tourn in wares, whereof he shall have need
Let us depart and when he shall, return heather a gain,
To see the must or of his men, we will sure take the pain.

Haltersycke. Go out. The Song. Entrithe and syngeth this song to ye tune of
have over ye water to floride or selengers round. Far well adieu, that
courtlycke life,
To war we tend to gowe:
It is good sport to se the strife,
Of sodyers on a row.
How mereley they forward march,
These enemies to slaye:
With hey trym and tryxey to,
Their banners they dysplaye.
Now shaull we have the Golden cheates,
When others want the same:
And sodyares have foull maney feats,
Their enemies to tame.
With couckinge hear, and bomynge their,
They break thear fose array:
And loustey lades amid the feldes,
Thear ensines do dysplaye.
The droum and flute play lousteley,
The troumpet blose a main?
And ventrous knights corragiousley,
Do march before thear train:
With spear in rest so lively dressed,
In armor bryghte and gaye:
With hey trym and tryxey to,
Thear banners they dysplaye.

Hempstringe. Goges oundes haultersycke, what makes thou hear,

Hempstring comes in and speaks. Haultersycke. What? Jack hempstringe
welcome, draw near?

Hempstringe. By his oundes I have sought the some newse the to tell,

Haultersycke. Gods blood what newse, is it the deuell in hell?

Hempstring. In faith thou act meatey, but this is the matter,
Doust thou hear haltersicke? each man does clatter:
Of wars, ye of wars, for Horestes will go,
His erytage to win, boy the truth is so.

Haultersycke. Nay but Jack Hempstringe sease of this prate,
If thou cauil me boy, then beware thy pate.

Hempstringe. What hold thy peace, as far as I se,
We be boyse both thearfore let us gree.

Haultersycke. Boy nay be god, though I be but smaull,
Yet Jack hempstringe, a heart is worth all.
And have not I an heart, that to wars dare go,
Yes hempstringe I warrant the, and that thou should know
If dycke haltersyckes mind, thou move unto eyar,
Colles neauer bourne, till they be set one fyare.

Hempstringe. Ye but if they bourne, so that they same,
Yet water dycke halltersycke, the bourning cane same.
But hacke thee my master will venture a joint,
And me to wait on him, he all ready does point.
But hearste thou, thou know my master loves well,
Now and then to be snappinge, at some dayntye mossell.
But by goges blood halltersycke, if thou love me,
Take some prytey wenche our laundrar to be,
And be goges blood, I am contentyd to bear,
Half of her chargis, when that she comes thear.

Haultersycke. As fyt for the war, Jack hempstringe thou art,
In faith as abe, is to draw a carte:
He is like to be manned, that has such a knight,
Under his banner, I swear for to fight.
When Horestes in fight, most busiest shall be,
Then with they gynney, we must seek the.

Hempstringe. Goges oundes, heart, and nails, you are a sea man,
Come of with a myschiefe, my gentell companion.
By your sleue fire haultersicke, I think that a be,
As good a sodyer as ever was ye,

Haultersycke. He has learned his lesson, but of fouth I fear,
He has quight forgotten, the way for to swear.
Oundes, heart, and nails, nalrey (...),
And he be not hanged, he will be stark (...).

Hempstringe. Hang me no hanginge, if ye be so quick,
Roube not to hard, lest hempstringe do kycke.

Haultersycke. flort him. Had better be still, and a sleep in his head,
If a kycke me, me chance to break his head,

Hempstringe. Goges blood good man haltersycke, begine you to flout me

Haultersycke. No not at all he douth but sout ye.
What hempstringe I say, are you angered at ieste.
flort him on ye lipes In faith goodman lobcocke, your handsomley dressed:

Hempstringe. Goges blood so to flout me, thou art much to blame?

Haultersycke. Why all that I do man, is but in game.

Hempstringe. give him a bor on ye ear Take thou that for they ieste, and
flout me no more?

Haltersicke. For that same on blow, than shault have a score:
Draw thy sword vylyne, if thou be a man,
And then do the worst, that ever thou can.

Hempstringe. Nay set sword a side, and at ^offetes well trey,
Wheather of us both, shall have the masterey.

Haultersycke. Goges oundes thou art bygger, yet I care not a point,
If to be revenged, I iobard a joint.

Fight at bofites with fystes Hempstring. I have coylyd the well, but I hold the
a grote?
If thou meddell with me. I will s^^inge thye cote.

Haultersycke. In deed I must say, I have cought the worst,
But I will be reuengyd, or eyes I shall bourste.
If time did not call me, from hence to depart
I should anger the hempstring, even at the h^^t?
Therefore farewell, till an other day,
But h^^rste thou take this, to spend by the way.

Give him a box on ye ear and go out. go out. let ye drum play and Horestes
enter with his men and then let him knele down and speak. Hempstring. Goges
dundes is he gone, nay after I will,
And of the slave by his oundes, I will have my fill.

Horestes. Oh gods be prosperous I pray, and eke preserve my band,
Show now yt ye be gods in ded, stretch out your mighty hand
And give us hearts and wills also, where by we may preuayll
And suffer not you gods I pray, our courragis to fayll.
But let our hearts addytyd be, for aye as we pretend,
And of that one adulltres dame, oh gods now make an end.
My hands do thryst her blod to have, naught can my mi^d content
Till yt on her I have performed, oh gods your just judgment

Nature. Nay stey my child from mothers blood with draw thy bloody hand stand up.

Horestes. No naught at all oh nature can, my purpose now withstand,
Shall I for give my fathers death, my heart can not agree
My father slain in such a sort, and vnreuengyd to be.

Nature. Consider first horestes mine, what pain for the she took,

Horestes. And of my fathers death again, o Nature do thou louke.

Nature. I do confess awycked fact, it was this is most plain,
Not wtstandi^g from mothers blood, thou must thy hands refrain
Can thou a lack vnhappey wight, consent revenged to be,
On her whose pappes before this time, has given foud to the
In whom I nature for myd the, as best I thought it good,
Oh now requight her for her pain, wtdraw thy hands from blood

Horestes. Who offendith ye love of god, and eke man's love with willing heart
Must by ye love have punnishment, as dutey due for his desert
For me therefore to pu^nish hear as law of gods and man does will
Is not a crime though yt I do, as thou do say my mother kill

Nature. The cruel beasts ye rau^g in feldes whose iause to blod ar whet
Do not consent their mothers paunch, in cruel wise to eat
The tiger fierce does not desiare, the ruin of his kind,
And shall dame nature now in the, such tyraney once find*
As not the cruel bestes voutsafe, to do in aney case,
Leave now I say Horestes mine, and to my words give place.
Lest that of men this fact af thine, may judged for to be:
Ne law in south, ne iustys eke, but cruel tyraney.

Horestes. Pythagoras does think it lo, no tyraney to be,
When that iustyse is mynest^yd, as law and gods decree.
If that the law does her condemn, as worthy death to have,
Oh nature woulst thou will yt I, her life should seem to save?
To save her life whom law does slay, is not iustise to do,
Therefore I say I will not yield, they hestes to com unto.

Nature. If nature cannot brydell the, remember the decay,
Of those which hereto fore in south, their parents sought to slay
oedippus fate, caull thou to mind, that slew his father so,
And eke remember now what fame, of him a broad does go.

Horestes. what fame does blow I forse not I, ne yet what fame I have
For this is true yt blood for blood, my fathers death does crave
And law of gods, and law of man, does eke request ye same.
Therefore oh nature sease to pray, I forse not of my name.

Nature. For to lament this heauey fate, I cannot other do.
A lack a lack that once my child, should now consent unto:
His mothers death wherefore farewell, I can no longer stey. Go out.

Horestes. Farwell dame Nature to my men. I straight will take my way Go out.

Idumeus. Enter. To se this monster let us go, for I suppose it time,
Where is Horestes why stease he: the truth to me define:

Council. Let ye dru^ play. Oh soferayne lord me thinks I here, him for to
be at hand
yft please your grace, he is in sight, even now withal his band.

Idumeus. Com on Horestes we have stayed, your monster for to se.

Let ye dru^ play and enter Horestis with his band march about the stage.
Horestes. And now at hand my men and I, all ready armed be.
Lo mighty king this champions here, agree with me to wend
Oh gracious king that they shall so, wylt please you co^dissend

Idumeus. I do agree and now a while, give ear your king unto,
It does behoufe corragious knights, on this wise for to do.
That is to strive for to obtain, the victorey and praise,
That lasts for aye, when death shall end, yt find of these our dais
Wherefore be bold, and fear no fate, the gods for you shall fight
For they be just and will not se, that you in case of right.
Shall be desstrest wherefore attend, and do your busey pain,
The crabyd rage of enymyse, by forse for to restrain?
And as to me your trusteynes, has here to fore be known,
So now to this Horestes here, let eke the same be shown.
Be to his heastes obaydient, be stout to take in hand,
Such enterprise which he shall think, most for his state to stand
Which if you do the same is youres, the glorey and renoune,
That shall arise of this your facts, throughout ye world shall sound
The which you may I pray the gods, your gydes here in to be
And now farewell but not that well, that I have said to ye.

Sodyeares. The gods presarue your grace for aye, and you defend from woe.
That we have don as you co^mau^d, full well your grace shall kno

Idumeus. Now hark Horestes since thou must, of men the gyder be,
And that the will of gods it is, thou must now part from me.
Take yet my last commandment, and bear it in thy mind,
Let now they men courragiousnes, in the their captain find
And as thou art courragious, so like wise let their be,
For safeguard of thy men a brain, well fraught with pollicye.
For over rash in doing ought, does often damage bring,
Therefore take council first before, thou do any thing.
For council as Plaato does tell, is sure a heavenly thing.
And Socrates a certaynte does say, council does bring.
Of things in dout for Lyuy says, no man shall him repent,
That has before he worked ought, his time in council spent
And be thou lybraull to thy men, and gentell be also,
For ye way at thy will thou may, have them through fire to go
And he that shall at any time, deserve ought well of the,
Soffer him not for to depart, till well reward he be.
Thus have you hard horestes mine, remembar well the same
In doing thus you shall pourchas, to the immortaull fame.
The which I hope you will assaye, for to atchife in deed,
The gods the blis when in ye war, thou forward shall proceed.

Horestes. I thank your grace and now of you, my leave I here do take

Idumeus. Imbrase him Farewell my son Horestes I, thy partinge ill shall take,
Yet ear thou go let me embrace, the once I the do pray,
A lack alack that now from me, thou must needs part away
Yet whyell thou art in preasent place, receive of me this kys,
Kys him. Farewell good knight for now I shall, thy sweet imbrasings mys

Horestes. The sacred gods presarue and save, thy state oh king I pray,
And send the health and after death, to rain with him for aye.
Come on my men, let us depart,

Sodyers March about and go out. As please your grace with all our heart.

Idumeus. Ah, ah, how, grievous is his parting now, my council unto me
The Gods him bles and send him health, I pray them hartele.
Woe worth the time the day and our, now may Horestes wayle
And Clytemnestra may lament, that so she did assail.
His father dear for now on blood, Horestes mind is set,
And to revenge his fathers death, sure naught their is can let.
In voyding of a mischefe small, they have wrought their decay
For now naught else in Horestes, but sore reueng bears sway

Council. For to causes my soferayne lord, reuengment ought to be,
The on least others be in fecte, with that, that they shall se.
Their princes do, the other is, that those that now be ill.
May be revoked and may be taught, for to subdew their will,
Plato a wise philosopher, did think it for to be,
A Prynceley fact when as a King, shall punnishe seriousley.
Such persons as did train their life, to follow yt was naught
yt which their prince at any time, shall by mischau^ce have wroght
Protegeus an evil king, a carrayne lykenes to,
Which all the place about the same, to stink causes to do.
Therefore O king if that her fault, should vnreuengyd be,
A thousand euylles would insu, their of your grace should se.
Her fault is great and punnyshment, it is worthy for to have,
For by that mean the good in south, from duu^gers may be saufe
For lo the vnyuersaull scoll, of all the world we know,
Is once the palace of a king, where vices chief do flow.
And as to waters from on head, and fountain often do spring,
So vice and virtue often do flo, from palace of a king.
Whereby the people seeing that, the king adycte to be,
To prosecute the like, they all do labor as we se.
Therefore the gods have wylled thus, Horestes for to take,
His journey and a recompense, for fatheres death to make.

Idumeus. Since gods have wild the same to be, good luck ye gods him send
Com on my council now from hence, we purpose for to wend Go out.

Enter Egistus and Clyte^nestra, singinge this song, to ye tune of king
Solomon. Egistus. ANd was it not a worthy sight,
Of Venus child king Priames son:
To steal from Greece a Lady bright,
For whom the wares of Troy begone.
Naught fearinge danger that might faull.
Lady lady.
From Greece to Troy, he went with all,
My dear Lady.

Clytemnestra. When Paris first arrived there,
Where as dame Venus worship is:
And bloustringe fame abroad did bear,
His lyueley fame she did not mys.
To Helena for to repair,
Her for to tell:
Of praise and shape so trym and fair,
That did exzell.

Egistus. Her beauty caused Paris pain,
And bare chief sweye with in his mind:
No thing was abell to restrain,
His will some way fourth for to find.
Where by he might have his despyare,
Lady lady:
So great in him was Cupids fyare,
My dear lady.

Clytemnestra. And eke as Paris did desyear,
Fair Helena for to possess:
Her heart inflamid with like fyear,
Of Paris love despiard no less,
And found occasion him to mete,
In Cytheron.
Where each of them the other did great,
The feast upon.

Egistus. If that in Paris Cupides shafte,
O Clytemnestra took such place:
That time ne way he never left,
Till he had got her comley grace,
I think my chance not ill to be
Lady lady.
That ventryd life to purchase ye*
My dear lady.

Clytemnestra. King Priames. son loved not so sore,
The gretian dame they brothers wife:
But she his person esteemed more,
Not for his sake sauinge her life.
Which caused her people to be slain,
With him to fly,
And he requight her love a gain,
Most faythfullye.

Egystus. And as he recompense again,
The fair queen Hellyn for the same:
So while I live I will take pain,
My will always to yours to frame.
Sith that you have voutsafe to be,
Lady lady.
A Queen and lady unto me,
My dear lady.

Clytemnestra. And as she louyd him best while life,
Did last so tend I you to do:
If that deuoyd of war and strife,
The Gods shall please to grant us to,
Syeth you voutsafest me for to take,
O my good knight:
And me thy lady for to make,
My hearts delyghte.

Egistus. As joyful as the warlyke god is Venus to behoulde,
So is my heart repleate with joy, much more a thousand fould
Oh Lady dear in that I do, posses my hearts delyghte, Let ye trumpet blow
with in.
What menes this sound for very much, it does my heart a flight

Clytemnestra. Fear naught at all Egistus mine, no hourt it does pretend,
But lo me thinks a messenger, to us heather does wend.

enter. Messenger. The Gods presarue your eaquall state and send you of their
blys

Clytemnestra. Welcome good messenger what newese, I pray the with the is

Messenger. Yft please your grace even now their is, aryued in this land
The mightey knight Horestes with, a mightey pewsau^t band
Who purposith for to invade, this Mycoene City strong,
And as he goese he leyse both tower, and castle all alonge.
It boutes no man defense to make, for if he will not yield,
By sodyeres rage he straight is slain, in mydest of the field. Go out.

Clytemnestra. Ah sir is he come in deed, he is wellcom by this day,
Egistus now in south with speed, from hence take you your way.
In to our realm and take up men, our tyghtull to defend,
Till your return this City I, to keep do sure intend.
For all his strength he shall not get, to entter once hear in,
The walls be strong and for his forse, I sure set not a pyn.

Enter a-woman, like a beger rounning before they sodier but let the sodier
speak first, but let ye woman cry first pitifulley. Egistus. Sith you be abell
to defend, this City as you say,
Farewell in south to get men, I now will take my way.
And sone again I will return, his pamprid pride to tame,

Clytemnestra. Farewell Egistus and in south, I straight will do the same.

Sodyer. Yield the I say and that by and by,
Or with this sword, in faith thou shall dye.

Woman. Oh with a good will, I yield me to the,
Good master sodier, have mercy on me.
My husband thou have slain, in most cruell-wyse,
Yet this my prayer, do now not despise.

Sodier. Go a fore her, and let her fall down upon the and al to be beat him.
Come on then in have, my pryfoner thou art,
Come follow me I say, we must needs depart.

Woman. A horson slave I will teach the in faye,
To handle a woman on, an other way.
To put me in fear, with out my dezarte
I will teach the in faye to play such a part.

Sodyer. Be contentyd good woman, and thou shall be,
Neauer hear after molysted for me.

Woman. Nay vyllyn slave, a mendes thou shall make,
In that thou be fore me as prysinor dydest take.
Now I have cought the, and my prisoner thou art,
By his oundes horson slave, this gose to they heart.

Sodyer. Nay save my life, for I will be,
Thy prisoner and lo I yield me to the

take his weapons and let him rise up and then go out both. Enter. the Vice
synginge this song to ye tune of the Paynter. Woman. Come wend thou with me,
and they wepon thou shall have,
Sith that thou voutsafyste, my life for to save.

Vice. STand back ye slepinge iackes at home,
And let me go.
You lie sir knave am I a mome,
Why say you so.
Tout tout, you dare not come in field,
For fear you should the ghost up yield.
With blose, he gose, the gunne shot fly,
It fears, it seares, and their does lie.
A houndreth in a moment be,
Disstroyed quight:
Sir sause in faith if you should se,
The gonne shot light.
To quake for fear you would not stynte,
When as by forse of gounshotes dynte:
The ranks in raye, are took away,
As pleases fortune often to play.
But in this stower who bears the fame,
But onley I:
Revenge, Revenge, will have the name,
Or he will dye.
I spare no wight, I fear none ill,
But with this blade I will them kill
For when mine eayre, is set on fyare,
I rap them, I snap them, that is my desyare.
Farewell a dew to wares I must
In all the have.
My cosen cut pursse will I trust,
Your pursse well taste,
But to it man, and fear for naught,
Me say to the it is well fraught.
With ruddockes red be at a beck,
Beware the arse, break not thy neck,

Go out. Horestes entrith with his band and marches about the stage. Horestes.
Come on my sodyers for at home, aryued their we be,
Where as we must have our desyare, or else dye manfulley.
The walls be hye yet I intend, upon them first to go,
And as I hope you sodierrs will, your captain eke follow
If I forsake to go before then fley you eke be hynde,
And as I am so eke I trust, my sodyers for to find.
Com hither harauld go proclaim this mine intent straightway
To yonder citite say that I, am come to their decay.
Unless they yield I will destroy, boch man woman and child,
And eke their towers that for the war, so strongly they do bylde
Bid them in have to yield to me, for nough I do a bide.
But for their aunswear or else fourth with for the^ and there is prouid

Let ye trumpet go toward the City and blow. Harraulde. Your gracious mind
straight shall be don, cum tro^pet let us go
That I have don your message well, your grace full well shall kno

Horestes. Hye the apase and let me have, again an aunsweare sone,
And then a non thou shall well se, what quickly shall be done.

Let ye trumpet leave soundyng and let Harrauld speak and Clitemnestra speak
over ye wall. Harraulld. How whow is their yt kepes the gate give ear my words
unto

Clytemnestra, what would thou have harald declare, what have thou her to do

Harauld. My master bydes the yield to him, this city out of hand,
Or else he will not leave on stone, on other for to stand.
And all things else within this town he will have at his will
As pleases him by any means, to save or else to spyll,
What you will now, therefore declare, and answer to him send

Clytemnestra. This City here against him, and his I will defend,

Harrauld. Then in his name I do defye, both the and all with in,

Clytemnestra. By him and his tell him in south, we do not set a pyn.

Harrauld. If it please your grace this word she sends, she will not yield to ye
But if you com unto your harm, she says that it shall be.

Let ye haraulde go out here. Horestes. Since that my grace and eke good will,
they on such sort despise,
For to destroy both man and child, I surely do deuyse,
Com on my men, bend now your forse, this City for to win,
Save no man's life, yt once should make, rysistaunce there wtin,
And when you shall posses the town, and have all things at will,
Look out my mother but to her, do ye no kind of ill.
Let her not die, though that she would, desiar the death to have
For other wise my fathers death, reuengment does crave.

Sodyer. We shall your hestes obaye with speed, oh captain we desiar,
That we were therefore to revenge, our hearts are set on fyar.

Vice. Like men by God, I swear well said, Horestes let us gow,
Now to thy men like manley heart, I pray the for to show.
And as thou seiste be first the man, that shall the City wyn,
How, how, now for to fly, all ready they begin.

Go and make your lively battle and let it be long ear you can win ye City
and when you have won it let Horestes bring out his mother by the arm and let
ye droum sease playing and the trumpet, also when she is taken let her knele
down and speak. Horestes. With lively hearts my troumpeters, exault your
tubal sound.
And now my sodyers in your hearts, let courrage eke be found.
Com let us go the gods for us, shall make an easey way,
Spare none a live for I am bent, to seek their great decay.

Clytemnestra. A lack what heaps of myschefes great, me selly wight torment.
Now is the time falune me upon, which I thought to prevent
Yet best I seek my life to save, perhaps he will me here,
A lack reuengment he does crave, for slaying his father dear.
If aney spark of mothers blood, remaynd within thy breast,
Oh gracious child let now thine ears, unto my words be pressed
Pardon I crave Horestes mine, save now my corpse from death
Let no man say that thou wast cause, I yeldyd up my breath,
I have offendyd I do confess, yet save my life I pray,
And to they mother this request, o knight do not denaye.

Horestes. For to repent this fact of thine, now that it is to late,
Can not be thought a recompense, for kylling of thy mate.
Go have her hence therefore with speed, and se her sureley kept,
And for ye fact a fore thou dydest, thou surley should have wept

go out with on of the sodiares. Vice. Nay, far you well, in faith you have an
answer, get you hence.
Oundes of me I would not be, in her cote for forty pence.
Nay nay, a way far well a dew, now now, it is to late.
When stead is stolen for you in south, to shut the stable gate.
She should have wept when first she went, ye king about to slay,
Let Horestes sith hard. It makes no matter she foull well, did bread her own
decay
Ounds of me what mean you man, begin you now to faint
Jesus god how still he syttes, I think he be a saint.
Ooooo, you care not for me, nay sone I have don I warrant ye

weep but let Horestes rise and bid him pease. Horestes. By all the gods my
heart did fail, my mother for to se,
From hye estate for to be brought, to so great myserey.
That all most I had granted life, to her had not this be,
My fathers death whose death in south, chief causer of was she.

Vice. Even as you say but hark at hand, Egistus draws nigh.
Who purposieth the chance of war, Horestes for to try.

Let Egistus enter and set his men in a raye and let the drom play till
Horestes speaks Horestes. And by the gods I purpose eke, my honor to defend,
Com on my men keep your array, for now we do pretend.
Eather to be the conqerer, or else to dye in field,
Lift up your hearts and let us se, how ye your blose can yield.

Egistus. Like manley men adresse your selves, to get immortal fame,
If ye do fly lo what does rest, behind but foull defame.
Strike up your dru^s let tru^pets sound, your baners eke display,
And I my self as captain, to you will lead the way.

Horestes. Thou traitor to my father dear, what make the here in feld,
Repent the of thy wyckednes, and to me straight do yield.

Egistus. Thou pryncoks boy and bastard slave, thinks thou me to subdew?
It lies not with in thy power, thou boy I tell the true.
But if I take thy corpse, it shall be a fode the birds to feed.
Stryke up your droums and forward now, to wars let us prosede.

stryke up your dru^, and fight a good whil and then let sum of Egistus me^
fly and the^ take him and let Horestes drau him vyolentlye and let ye dru^s
sease. Horestes. Oh vyllayne trayghtor now ye gods, ne mortal man shall save
Thy corpse from death for blud for blud my fathers death does crave
Oh tyrant fyrse could thou voutsafe, my father so to slaye?
But now no forse for thou have wrought, at last thine one decay

Egistus. A lack a lack yet spare my life, Horestes I the pray.

Horestes. Thy life? nay trayghtor vile, that chief I do denaye.
For as thou have deseruyd, so I shall thy fact requit.
That once could seem to me and mine, for to work such dispight
Therefore com forth and for thy fact, receive dew punnishme^t
Repent I say this former life, for this is my judgment.
That for my fathers death, the which we find the chief to be,
The causer of thou shall be hanged, where we thy death may se
And as thou for my fathers death, dew punnishment receive,
So shall my mother in likewise, for that she gave the leave.
Him for to slaye, and eke to it, with good will condysende,
Therefore com of and sone dyspatch, that we had made an end.

Egistus. Ah heauey fate and chance most ill, woe worth this hap of mine,
For give my fault you sacryd gods, and to my words incline
Your gracious ear for causer furst, I was this is most plain,
Of Agamemnous death, wherefore I must receive this pain.
Pardon I crave, voutsafe ye gods, the same to grant it me,
Now sodier work thy will in have, I pray the harteley.

fling him of ye lader and then let on bring in his mother Clyte^nestra but
let her look where Egistus hangs. Clytemnestra. Ah heauey fate would god I
had, in tormoyle great been slain
Sith nothing can Horestes hands, from sheding blood restrain

Vice. How chance you did not the^ lament his father when you slew?
But now when death does you prevent, to late ites for to rue.

Clytemnestra. Yet hope I that he will me grant, my life that I should have.

Vice. Even as much as thou voutsafest, his fathers life to save,
Therefore com of we must not stey, all day to wayght on the.
Lo mighty prince for whom ye sent, lo preasent here is she.

Clytemnestra. Have mercy son and quight remitte, this fault of mine I pray,
Be merciful Horestes mine, and do not me denaye.
Consider that in me thou hadest, they hewmayne shape co^posid
That thou should slay thy mother son, let it not be disclosyd,
Spare to perse her heart with sword, call eke unto thy mind,
Edyppus fate and as Nero, show not thy self unkind.

Take down Egistus and bear him out. Horestes. Like as a branch once set a
fyare, does cause ye tree to bourne
As Socrates supposes so, a wicked wight does turn.
Those that be good and cause them eke, his evil to sequest,
Wherefore the poet Iuuenal, does think it for the best:
That those that live lycentiousley, should brydlyd be with pain
And so others that else would syn, thereby they might restrain
For thus he says that Cities are, well governed in deed,
Where punnishment for wicked ones, by law is so decrede.
And not decrede but exersyesd, in punnyshinge of those,
Which law ne pain from waloing still, in vice their mind dispose,
And as thou have been chiefes cause, of yelding up they breath,
So call to mind thou wast the cause, of Agamemnons death.
For which as death is recompense, of death so eke with the,
For kyllinge of my father thou, now killed eke shault be.
This thing to se accomplyshyd, revenge with the shall go,
Now have her hence sieth yt you all, my judgment here do kno

Clytemnestra. A lack a lack with draw thy hand, my son from sheding blood.

Vice. Thou art a foul thus for to prate, this does Horestes good,
Com on a way thou doust no more, but him with words molest
A foulyshe foull that thou wart ded, he takes it for the best?

Clytemnestra. Knele down. If ever aney pytie was, of mother plant in the,
Let it apeare Horestes mine, and show it unto me.

Horestes. What pyttie thou on father mine, dydest cursedley bestow,
The same to the at this present, I purpose for to show.
Therefore Revenge have her a way, and as I judgment gave:
So se that she in order like, her punishment dew have.

Let Clytemnestra weep and go out reueng also Vice. Let me alone, com on a way,
that thou weart out of sight,
A pestelaunce on the crabyd queen, I think thou do delyght,
Him to molest, com of in have, and troubell me no more,
Come on com on, ites all in vain, and get you on a fore,

Horestes. Now syeth we have the conquest got, of all our mortal fose,
Let us provide that occasion, we do not chance to lose.
Stryke up your droumes for enter now, we will the city gate
For now resestaunce none there is, to let us in thereat.

Enter in fame and let all ye sodyers follow him in array. Fame. As each man
bendes him self, so I report his fame in deed,
If ill, the^ ill, through iarne tru^p, his fame does straigh prosede:
If good, then good, through golden tru^p, I blo his lively fame:
through heavens, through earth, and surgi^g sease I bear abrod ye same
perhaps what wind me heather drives, wtin your mid^s you muse
From Crete I com to you my friends, I bring this kind of newse
That Agamemnons brother is ariuyd in this land,
And eke with him his ladey fair, Queen Helen understand.
Whom for to se a great frequent, of people their aryue,
This newse to show at this present, me heather now did drive.

enter the Vice singing this song. Vice. A New master, a new,
No longer I may:
Abide by this day
Horestes now does rue.
A new master a new,
And was it not ill?
His mother to kill?
I pray you how say you?
A new master a new,
Now ites to late?
To shut the gate?
Horestes gines to rue.

Fame. Deniquod non paruas animo dati gloria vires:
Et foecunda facit pectora laudis amor.
As Ovid says I am in deed, the spure to each estate,
For by my troumpe I often cause the wicked man to hate,
Is fylthey life, and eke I stoure, the good more good to be:
So much the heart and will of man, is lynked unto me.

Vice. A new master a new, nay I will go,
Tout, tout, Horestes is be com a new man:
Now he sorroweth to bad that it is so,
Yet I will oresse him, by his oundes and I can.
Who Saintie amen. God morrow mystres Nan,
By his oundes I am glad to se the so trycke,
Nay may I be so bold, at your lyppes to have a lycke.
Jesus how coye, do you make the same,
You neauer knew me before I dare say:
In faith, in faith, I was to blame,
That I made no courchey to you by the way.
Who berladye Nan, thou art trym and gaye,
Wounds of me, she has wings also,
Who whother with a myschefe, doust thou think for to go?
To heaven? or to hell? to pourgatorye? or spain?
To Venys? to pourtugaull? or to the eylles Canarey?
Nay stay a while for a mile or twain.
I will go with the, I swear by saint marey,
Wylt thou have a boat Nan, over seay the to carey.
For if it chance for to rain, as the weathers not hard,
It may chance this trym gear of thine, to be marde,

Fame. Omnia si perdis, famam seruare memento,
Qua semel amissa, postia nullus eris.
Above each thing keep well thy fame, what ever yt thou lose
For fame once gone they memory, with fame a way it gose.
And it once lost thou shall in south, accomptyd like to be,
A drope of rain that faulyth in, the bosom of the sea,
Me fame therefore as Ovid thinks, no man has power to hold,
To those with whom I please to dwell, I am more rich the^ gold
What causid some for countris soil, them selves to perrell cast
But that the knew that after death, ye fame of there is shall last.
Not on, but all, do me desiare, both good and bad likewise,
As may apeare if we perpend, of Nerose enterprise.
Which first did cause his masters death, and eke whereas he lay
In mothers wound to se in south, his mother did straight slay.
With this Horestes eke takes place, whose father being slain,
through mothers gile from mothers blod, his hands could not refrai^e
But like as he reuengyd the death, of father in his eyare,
So fathers brother in like sort, Revenge has set on fyare.
For he is gone for to request, the aid of princes great,
So sore his heart is set on fyare, throught raging rigorus heat.
What to detarmayne all the kings, of Greece aryued be,
At Nestores town that Athens highte, their judgment to decre

Vice. Oundes heart and nails, nay now I am dressed,
Is the king Menalaus at Athenes aryued?
And I am be hind? to be packinges the best,
Least the matter in south, to sone be contryued.
Auxilla humilia firma, consensus facit, this always provided
That consent makes suckers most sure for to be,
Well I will be their straight, wayse you shall se.

Go out. Fame. As Publius does well declare, we ought chefest to se,
Unto our selves that naught be don, after extremite.
Abalio expectes, alteri quod feceris.
For look what mesure thou do meat, ye same again shall be,
At other time at others hand, repayde again to the.
Therefore I wyshe each wight to do, to others as he would,
That they in like occasion, unto him offer would.
Well forth I must some newse to here, for fame no where ca^ stay
But what she hears throughout ye would abrod she does display

Go out. Prouicion. Make room and give place, stand back there a fore,
For all my speakinge, you press still the more.
Give rome I say quickeley, and make no dalyaunce,
It is not now time, to make aney taryaunce:
The kings here do com, therefore give way,
Or else by the gods, I will make you I say.
Lo where my Lord King Nestor does com,
And Horestes with him Agamemnons son:
Menelaus a king likewise, of great fame,
Make rome I say, before their with shame.

Nestor. Now syeth we be here King Menalaij
Unto us we pray you, your matter to say.
For these princes here, after they have perpendyd,
If ought be amys, it shall be amendyd,
But syrra provision, go in haste and fet,
Good king Idumeus, tell him we are set. Go out.

Provision. Pause a while till he be gone out and the^ speak tretably. As your
gracis have wylled, so tend I to do,
I will fetch him straight, and bring him you to.

Horestes. If ought be amys, the same sone shall be,
If I have committed amendyd of me:
But so Idumeus the good king of Crete,
Is come to this place, us for to mete.

Enter Idumius and provision coming with his cap in his hand a fore him and
making way. Idumeus. The Gods presarue your gracis all, and send you health
for aye.

Nestor. Well com sier king the same to ye, contynewalley we pray.

Menalaus. Two things there is o kings, ye moves me thus your ayds to pray:
And these be it the which to you, I purpose for to say.
The one is this where with I find, my self agreuid to be,
That on such sort my systers slain, as all your gracis se.
The other is that so her son, without all kind of right,
Should to his mother in such case, (I say) work such dispight.
These two be they, wherefore I crave, your ayds to ioyn with me:
To the intent of such great ylles, reuengyd I may be.
That thus he did be hold the state, of all my brothers land,
And se I pray you in what place, the same does present stand.
His cruelty is such in south, as nether tower ne town,
That let once his passage, but is brought unto the ground.
The fatherles he pyttyed not, where as he ever went,
ye agyd wight whose years before, their youthly pour had spent
The maid whose parents at the sege, defending of their right
Was slain, ye same this tyrant has opressyd through his might
The wido yt through forrayne wars, was left now comfortles,
He spared not, but them and there is, he cruelly did dystres.
Wherefore since that he thus has wrought, as far as I can see,
From Mycoene land we should prouid, him exylyd to be.

Horestes, Sith that you have accusyd me, I must my answer make,
And here before these kings of Greece, this for my answer take
O ounckel that I never went, reuengment for to do,
On fathers fose till by the gods, I was comaund there to.
Whose heastes no man dare once refuse, but wyllingly obaye
That I have slain her wylfully, untruly you do say.
I did but that I could not choose, ites hard for me to kycke,
Sith gods command as on would say, in faith against ye prick
In that you say, I spared none, your grace full well may se,
That little mercy they supposyd, in south to show to me.
When as they bad me do my worst, requesting them to yield,
It is no jest when sodyares join, to fight within a field.
Thus I suppose sufficiently, I aunswerd have to end,
Your great complaynt, the which you so, mightily did defend.

Idumeus. In deed as Hermes does declare, no man can once estew,
The judgment of god most just, that for his fautes is dew.
And as god is most merciful, so is he just like wise.
And will correct most suerley those, that his heastes dispysel

Nestor. As you good King Idumeus, have said so likewise I,
Do think it true therefore as now, I do him here defye.
That one dare say yt he has wrought, ye thing yt is not right
Lo here my glove to him I give, in pledge with him to fight.
I promys here to prove there by, Horestes naught did do,
But that was just and that the gods, commaundyd him there to*
That he is king of Mycoene land, who ever do deney.
I offer here my glove with him, therefore to live and dye.
If none therebe will under take, his tyghfull to with say.
Let us be friends unto him now, my Lords I doye pray.
It was the part of such a knight, reuengyd for to be,
Should Horestes content him self, his father slain to se.
No, no, a ryghtuous fact I think, the same to be in deed,
Syeth that it was accomplysht so, as gods before decrede.

Menelaus. In deed I must confess that I, reuengyd should have be,
If that my father had been slain, with such great cruelte.
But yet I would for natures sake, have spard my mothers life
O wretched man, o cruel beast, o mortal blade and knyfe.

Idumeus. Sease of sir king leave morning lo, naught can it you auaylle
Not with standing be ruled now, we pray by our counsaylle.
Consider first your one estate, consider what may be,
A ioyefull mean to end at leyngth, this your calamytie.
Horestes he is young of years, and you are somewhat old,
And sorrow may your grace to sone, within her net in fold,
Therefore ites best you do forget, so shall you be at ease,
And I am sure Horestes will, endeavor you to please,
So far as it for him may be, with honor lefe to do,
He will not shrynke but will consent, your gracis bydding to
For assurance of your good will, Horestes here does crave,
your daughter fair Hermione, in marriage for to have.
Thereby for to contynew still, true love and amytie,
That ought in sought betwixt to such, indefferent for to be.

Menalaus. As for my frendshyp he shall have, the gods his helper be
But for my daughters marriage, I can not grant to be.
She is but young and much vnfet, such holy ryghtes to take,
Therefore sir kings at this present, no answer I can make.

Nestor. She is a dame of comley grace, therefore king Menalaye,
Grant this to us this strife to end, o king we do the pray.
For each of them a grede be the other for to have,
Good sir grant this that at thy hands, so iustley we do crave

Menalaus. O Nobell king what that it were, I could not you denaye,
I must needs grant when naught I have, against you to repley
Horestes here before these kings, my son I the do make,

Horestes. And the o king while life does last, for father I do take.

Nestor. Right joyful is this thing to us, and happey for your state,
Therefore with speed let us go hence, the marriage to seleybrate
And all the gods I pray presarue, and keep you both from woe,
Com on sir king, shall we from hence, unto our palace go.

Menalaus. As if shall please your grace in deed, so we consent to do,

Idumeus. And we likewise oh gracious Prince, do condisend there to.

go out all Vice entrith with a staff and a bottell or dyshe and wallet.
Revenge. I would I were ded, and laid in my grave,
Oundes of me, I am trymley promouted:
Ah, ah, oh, well now for my labor, these trynketes I have?
Whyse you not I pray you, how I am flouted.
A bag and a bottell, thus am I louted?
Each knave now a days, would make me his man,
But chyll master them, I be his oundes and I can.
A begginge, a begginge, nay now I must go,
Horestes is married, god send him much care:
And I Revenge, am driven him fro.
And then ites no maruayll, though I be thus bare.
But peace, who better then beggars does fare.
For all they be beggares, and have no great port,
Who is meryer, then the pooryste sort.
What shall I beg? nay thates to bad,
Is their near a man, that a saruaunt does lack:
Of mine honestye gentle woman, I would be glad?
You to sarue but for clothes, to put on my back.
A way with these rages, from me the shall pack. Put of ye beggares cote and
all thy things.
What think you scorn, me your servant to make,
A another will have me, if you me for sake.
Parhappes you all meruayll, of this sudden mutation,
How seen I was down, from so hye a degree:
To satisfye your minds, I will yuse a perswation.
This one thing you know, that on caulyd amyte,
Is unto me revenge most contrarey.
And we twain to geather, could not abide,
Which caused me so sone, from hye state to slide.
Horestes and his ounckell, King Menalaus,
Is made such sure friends, without paraduenture,
Through the pollycye, of old Idumeus?
That as, far as I can se, it is to hard to enter,
Ye and thates worsse, when I sought to venture.
I was driven with out comfort, away from their gate,
I was glad to be packinge, for fear of my pate.
Yet before I went, my fancey to please,
The marriage selebratyd, at the church I did se,
Wyllinge I was, them all to disease:
But I durst not be so bold, for master Amyte.
Sot by Menalaus, and bore him company,
On the other side Dewtey with Horestes boure swaye.
So that I could not enter, by no kind of way?
Well syeth from them both, I am bannyshyd so,
I will seek a new master, if I can him find:
Yet I am in good comfort, for this well I know,
That the most part of women, to me be full kind,
If they say near a word, yet I know their mind.
If they have not all things, when they do desiare,
They will be reuengyd, or else lie in the myare.
Nay I know their quallytes, the less is my care,
As well as they do know, Reuengys operation,
Ye faull to it good wives, and do them not spare.
Nay Ille help you forward, if you lack but perswacion.
What man a most is free, from invasion.
For as plainly Socrates declares unto us,
Women for the most part, are borne malicious.
Perhaps you will say, maney on that I lie,
And other sum I am sure, also will take my part:
Not withstandinge what I have said, they will veryfye,
ye and do it I wys, in spyght of thy heart.
If therefore thou will live quyetlye, after their desert?
Reward then so shault, thou brydell their affection,
And unto they will, shall have them in subjection.
In Athenes dwelled Socrates, the phyllosopher dyuine,
Who had a wife named Exantyp, both deuelyshe and ill:
Which twain beenge faulne out, upon a time,
Perhappe cause Exantyp, could not have her will.
He went out of doors, syttinge there still.
She cround him with a pyspot, and their he
Was wet to the skin, most pytifull to se.
I pray god that such dames, be not in this place,
For then I might chance near a mistres to get,
Nay if ye anger them, they will lay you on the face,
Or else their nails in your chekes, they will set,
Nay like a rasor, foam of their nails are whet.
That not for to pare, but to cut to the bone,
I count him most happest, that medelles with none.
Well far you well, for I must be packinge,
Remembar my words, and bear it in mind?
What suffer the myll, a while to be clackinge,
If that you intend, aney ease for to find.
Then will they be to you, both louinge and kind.
Farewell cosen cutpursse, and be ruled by me,
Or else you may chance, to end on a tree. Go out.

Enter Horestes and Hermione Nobilytye and Cominyalte truth and Dewty Horestes.
Sith yt the gods have given us grace, this realm for to posses
Which florysheth aboundauntlye, with gold and great riches.
Let us now se how much the wilds, and mind of all this land,
Is unto us and of their state, likewise to understand.

Hermione. I deem of them Horestes mine, that they contentyd be,
With humbell heart for to submyte, o king them selves to ye,
Wherefore my love inquiare, their state this preasente time,
And of their hearts good will to us, o king let them deuyne.

Horestes. As I do love the laydye bright, so eke I think in deed,
That love for love as equallye, shall be reward of mede.

Hermione. The gods never prolonge my life, that day I shall a pear, Let
Dewty and Truth take ye crown in their right hands.
To break my faith to the now plyght, my loving lord so dear.

Horestes. Com on my Lords and commons eke, let me now understand,
Of all your minds for I desiare, to know what case this land
Does now consyst voutsate the same, therefore to show to me,
And if that ought be now a myse, amendyd it shall be.

Nobelles. Most regal Prince we now are void, of mortal wars vexatio^
And through your grace we are joined, in love with every nation.
So yt your nobelles may now live, in pleasant state sartaine,
Deuoyd of wars and civil stryfes, while yt your grace does rain
The which you may I pray the god, with happy days and blys
And after death to send you there, where ioyse shall never mys.
Let truth and Dewty Crown Horestes. As syne of our obedyence, lo Dewty does
the Crowned,
And Truth also which does me bynd, they subject to be found.

Horestes. My Nobels all I give you thanks, for this now showed to me
And as you have so eke will I, the like show unto ye.
My commons how gose it with you, your state now let me know,

Commons. Where as such on as you do rain, there needs must riches gro
We are o king easyd of the yoke, which we have so desiard.
The state of this our commonwealth, need not to be inquiard.
Peace, wealth, joy, and felycitie, o king it is we have,
And what thing is their yt which, subjects ought more to crave

Horestes. Syeth all things is in so good state, my commons as you say
That it may so contynew still, the sacred gods I pray.
And as to me your trusteynes, shall any ways be found,
So still to maintain your estate, I sureley shall be bound.
And for your faithful hearts, the which you granted have to me
Both you my lords, and commons eke, I thank you hartele.
Therefore since time will have an end, and now my mind you know
Let us give place to time, and to our pallase let us go.

Nobelles. We both will weight upon your grace, yft please you to depart

Commons. Eeuen when you please to weigh you on I shall with all my heart

go out all and let truth and Duty speak. Truth. A kingdom kept in Amyte,
and void of dissension,
Ne deuydyd in him self, by aney kind of way,
Nether provoked by words, of reprehention,
Must needs long contynew, as Truth does say.
For desention and strife, is the path to decay.
And continuinge therein, must of nesecttie,
Be quight ruinate, and brought unto myserye.

Dewtey. Where I Dewtey am neclected, of aney estate.
Their strife and dyssention, my place do supplye:
Cankred mallyse pride, and debate,
Therefore to rest, all means do try.
Then ruin comes after, of their state whereby,
They are utterly extynguyshed, leuinge naught behind,
Whereof so much as their, name we may find.

Truth. He that leads his life, as his phansey does like,
Though for a while, the same he may hyde:
Ye Truth, the daughter of Time, will it seek,
And so in a time, it will be discryde.
Yet in such time as it can not, be denied?
But receive dew punnishment, as god shall se,
For the fault committed, most convenient to be.
As this storye here has, made open unto ye,
Which if it have been marked, much prophet may arise?
For as Truth says, nothinges written be,
But for our learning, in any kind of wise.
By which we may learn, the ill to dispyse,
And the truth to imitate, thus Truth does say:
The which for to do, I beseech God we may.

Dewtey. For your gentle patience, we give you thanks heartily,
And therefore our dewtey weyed, let us all pray,
For Elyzabeth our Queen, whose gracious majesty:
May rain over us, in health for aye,
Like wise for her council, that each of them may.
Have the spyryte of grace, their doings to dyrecte,
In settinge up virtue, and vice to correct.

Truth. For all the Nobylytie, and spirituality, let us pray,
For Judges, and head officers, what ever they be:
According to our boundaunt duties, espetially I say,
For my Lord Mayre, lyfetennaunt of this noble City.
And for all his brytherne, with the cominualtie.
That each of them, doing their duties a right,
May after death posses heaven, to their hearts delyght.

Finis. quod. I. P.

SAPIENS DOMINABITVR ASTRIS.


Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, at the sign of the Faucon, by Wylliam
Gryffith, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstones Church yard.
Anno. Domini. 1567.


