TO MY WORSHIPFVL and godly friend, Master JOHN BAILIFE, one of the Masters of
the Town of Marlbrough, grace, and peace from God in Jesus Christ.
SIr; your willingness to have been present at the preaching of this Sermon,
restrained only by instant, and urgent occasions, as my self well know, has
moved me to deliver unto your mind by reading, that, which otherwise you
would, but could not receive by hearing. And this reason is general, for all
of like mind, I mean, which are zealous of godly doctrine; made public by
preaching, as Christ comma^deth; but more public, Matthew. 28.19.
by printing, as Christians also desire. And if my small store in handling this
Scripture, very briefly in some points, for want of time, has yet afforded
this, a plaster for the sore of some Ministers, and people now, as I hope it
hath^ what should my desire be, but that the same may be spread as broad, and
lie on so long, as the sore requires, by this large, and lasting delivery
thereof, as you see. Only I beseech the greater Physicians to have an eye to
the sore, and to wag the plaster; and if they see it heal not, to add (as I
hope they will) some cunning of their own: and yet not their own, but that,
which they have learned, more deeply then I, of the great Physitia^ of our
souls Christ Jesus. Unto whose grace I commend you, and yours, and us all, for
the cure of all our sores, Rev. 22.20.
and come, Lord Jesus: even so, Amen.

From Wotton Basset the 20. of Oct. 1596. Yours in Christ. Charles Pinner.

Take heed unto thy self, and unto doctrine: and continue therein: for in
doing this thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. 1. Tim. 4.16.
THe Apostle in these words, instructing Timothy, sets down these two
points, a Precept, and a Promise, as a reason, the rather to induce him to the
obedience of the commandment. The precept or commandment has two parts, the
first, that he enter into a godly care, and have a serious respect, first, unto
himself; and next unto his doctrine, in these words, Take heed unto thy
self, and unto doctrine: the second, that he cease not at any time, much
less give over, to embrace this duty; wherefore he says, continue therein.
The reason, containing a promise, is in these words, For in doing this thou
shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. Thus, it brings salvation
both to him, and to his hearers, to do, as is required. But of this, in place.

First therefore of the precept and matter thereof: which being such, as we
see, namely, that Timothy must take heed to himself, and to his doctrine,
imports this much, that doubtless there is danger unto both. Else should
the Apostle bring them into a needelesse fear: which is neebles to refute,
because we daily see, and feel to well, that the devil, and the world labor
nothing more, then to remove, or reprove both the Minister, and his doctrine.
The reason may be gathered out of the words of Peter, in the fifth of the first
exhorting thus, Be sober, and watch: 1. Pet. 5.8.
for your adversary the devil as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he
may devour: whom resist steadfast in the faith. And out of these words of Paul
the Apostle in the tenth to the Romans, Romans 10.14.
How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a preacher? Look therefore how much our adversary the devil in
the rage of his desire, and diligence to destroy, prevails against the
preacher, that is, the Minister, and his doctrine, so much he prevails
against our faith: and if he prevail, as the stronger of the twain, (as we
read in the parable of the Gospel: Luke 11.22
) he takes away our armor, wherein we trusted, and devideth the spoils. And
therefore here he fights, and striveth, and here he spends shot and powder,
to make a breach, where most assuredly he may enter the fort of our souls; and
the malice which he bears unto the Church, and the whole body of the people
of God, here he vnladeth it to the full.

And the world is on his side, and worldly courses may beguile, even us my
brethren, called to be Timothies, as well as others. In the fourteenth of the
fourth to the Colossians, Coloss. 4.14.
and in Philemon the four and twentieth, Demas, saluteth, Philem. 24.
and is saluted, as a fellow-helper with the Apostles in the work of the Lord.
But in the second to Timothy the fourth, and tenth, the Apostle complains,
thus, 2. Tim. 4.10.
Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this present world.

And for the flesh, my brethren, (I speak now unto Timothies) are we more
mortified, then he, who says, I beat down my body, and bring it into
subjection, 1. Cor. 9.27.
least by some mean or other after that I have preached unto other I my self
should be rejected. And, this diligence notwithstanding, in the seventh to
the Romans (so sore is the fight of the flesh with the spirit) exclaimeth
thus: Miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! Romans 7.24.
thus, if we know our warfare, and the enemies, that are round about us, the
counsel of the Apostle is more then necessary, by taking heed to prevent the
evils, that may fall upon us, if we take not heed.

And here it may seem needeles in so plain a word, as this, to explain the
sense and meaning, I mean, of taking heed, what it should mean: save that so
little heed is taken by many of us, my brethren, pudet hou, pigetque, as if
we never knew what this duty, a brief sum of all duty, means (...),
says the Apostle, attend, as much as (...), extend, or bend thou all the power
of thy mind, and will to take care of thy self, and of thy doctrine, that
both be found such, as they ought to be. And this care is grounded in a godly
fear, which looks partly to the severity, and to the perfect and impartial
righteousness of God himself; of which Peter in the first of the first
speaking exhorts thus, 1. Pet. 1.17.
If ye call him father, which without respect of person judges according to
every man's works, pass the time of your dwelling hear in fear. And partly
to the power, and industry of our enemies, as the same Apostle warns in the
place before alleged, Be sober, (says he) and watch: (and what is this
watchfulness but an effect of this fear?) the reason: 1. Pet. 5.8.
for your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he
may devour. And partly to our own infirmity, who, having nothing of our
selves to will, or to do well, receive all of God. Upon which ground S. Paul
in the second to the Philippians exhorts thus, Philip. 2.12.13.
Finish your salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God which works in
you both to will, and to perform of his own good pleasure. And to show what
this fear is, and how it works, not only in the soul, but also in the body,
David in the hundred and 19. Plalme, Psalm. 119.120.
the hundred and 20. verse, says, it had taken his flesh* Horret pavore tui
caro mea, My flesh quaketh for fear of thee. What fear? surely not a
servile, but a filial fear, (for other fear in David there could be none) a
fear to offend, and so to provoke the justice, and judgments of God against
him. For so it follows, adeo a iudicijs tuis timeo: I stand in such awe of
thy judgments. And to this fear he also exhorts others in the second Psalm,
Psalm. 2.11.
thus, Service Iehovae cum timore: Serve the Lord with fear.

Thus, my brethren, if with reverence, and a religious fear in the whole man,
through knowledge of our selves, how weak; our adversaries, how strong they
are, we serve the Lord, and dread his judgments; if we set a watch unto our
selves, both soul, and body, that we sin not, and abstains from worldly
lusts, which fight against the soul; if in all sobriety, purity,
integrity, we walk worthy of the Gospel, which we preach unto others; if we
give no occasion of offense in any thing, that our ministry be not reprooved;
Tit. 2.9.
but rather (as the Apostle requires of servantes, much more then of us)
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things; if, when others are
weak, we are strong; when others fall, we stand upright; and being rooted in
the faith, and walking in righteousness and holiness of the spirit through
Christ, we grow at the length to that, that we may be called and reported
(as in the threeskore and first of Esaias the third verse) quercus iustitiae*
Isa. 61.3.
oaks of righteousness: not bowing at every blast, but bearing out the force of
all temptations; and so, proposing ourselves as ensamples to the flock, (not
in a show of painted holiness, but in evidence of the truth, approving our
selves unto every man's conscience in the sight of God) may say with the
Apostle, Brethren, Philip. 3.17.
be ye followers of us, and look on them which walk, so, as ye have us for
an ensample; and so our lives also may teach religion: doubtless we have
obeyed the Apostolic precept in taking heed unto our selves; and for our
selves have done sufficient; but not, for the malice of the world. For when al
is done, yet (as it is said) Nobis non licet esse bonis: We shall have no
leave to be that we be, nor none of ours, but must go for such, as men will
make us. We have paid them the things we never took, Psalm. 69.5.
God thou know our simpleness, and our faults are not hid from thee. What
this means, you know, my brethren of Marlbrough. I speak to the malicious
minds, and mouths amongst you. But what fruit had ye of that slander,
whereof ye are now ashamed? Or, if not ashamed, speak yet again, and speak
plainly, and make us ashamed. Or, if you cannot, take the sin, and shame unto
your selves. For we have ruled, not only our self, but our household well; and
the filth of fornication is among your selves. I am a fool in this my great
boasting; and I charge you far. You will say: ye have compelled me. And I see
this caution must be added to the counsel of the Apostle, for the comfort of
us Ministers, that when we have taken heed to our selves, and ours, and both
are blameless, yet we shall be blamed: as we know who says, Ioh. 15.25.
Oderunt me gratis, They hated me without a cause. Except this be a cause, as
himself in the seventh of John says unto his brethren, which were yet of the
world, and believed not in him, The world, says he, John. 7.7.
cannot hate you: but me it hates, because I testify of it that the deeds
thereof are evil. Thus, my brethren, because we testify of the world, as
needs we must, that the deeds thereof are evil, the world hates us; and
hating us, speaks evil of us, without a cause; that our deeds also unto some
at the least may seem to be evil; and so our liberty may be taken from us
to reprove those deeds whih are evil indeed. Which gives us this lesson in
this point of exhortation now in hand, namely, that we walk more warelie, then
any other, and cut of occasions from them that seek occasions; and never
think we have taken heed enough unto our selves, unless we avoid, not only
evil it self, but (if it were possible) every shadow and show of evil: as
the Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5.22.
Abstinete ab omni specie mali: Abstain ye from all appearance of evil.

And lo, my brethren, yet more, besides our selves, even our ministry,
greater then our selves. This also we must take with us, to look unto it; else
we shall do a sunder that which God has joined together; and the Proverb
will be used of us. Bonus vir, malus magistratus: A good man, but an evil
magistrate: good men, but evil Ministers; as, alas, how many? but, to the
matter.

And unto doctrine] this then is the other point, which our care respects in
the first part of the precept of the Apostle, namely, that we take heed, not
only to our selves, but also to doctrine. And how, to doctrine? first, that we
deliver it: secondly, what doctrine we deliver: and thirdly, how. For the
first, my brethren, if we consider Timothy as our selves, and our selves as
Timothy, and both, as the Ministers, not only of Christ, but also of the
salvation of the people; as Paul in this very place, to go no farther, notes
in the words following, For in doing this, says he, thou shall save thy
self, and them that hear thee: it is more then evident that no Timothy has
done sufficient in looking to his doctrine, if only he provide what, and how to
preach, and the matter, and manner be laid up at home, and he bring it not out
unto the people. For they are not saved, except they hear; and hear they
cannot, except we speak. This then is the first care in looking to doctrine,
that we always have a bent and a ready will to deliver doctrine, and as need
requires in deed deliver it. Therefore our Savior Christ in the thirteenth
of the Gospel by S. Matthew having taught his Disciples, whom he appointed
stewardes over his household, many doctrines by parables, at last he says,
Mat. 13.51.52.
Understand ye all these things? and they said unto him, yea, Lord. Then said
he unto them, therefore every Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of
heaven is like unto an householder, which brings forth out of his treasure
things both new and old. Where we see, my brethren, that look whatsoever we
understand by reading or hearing the word of God, and by study and medication
have laid up either first, or last, (as still I confess we must be laying up)
as faithful and good stewardes of the household of God, as need requires, we
must bring it out to the benefit of the household. And alas, that any Minister
which has learning and knowledge (for I speak to the ignorant, which have no
knowledge: for who can draw any thing out of an empty vessel?) that any
Minister, I say, who has learning and knowledge, should need to be remembered
of this duty, so to take heed unto doctrine, that he starve not the
householde by keeping up that, which he has laid up not only for
himself, but also for the householde. Yet these are the times, and the thing
does speak it, that many though they know this duty, and have heard the
voice of the Lord in the sixth of Jeremy, Ier. 6.17.
Also I set watchmen over you saying, take heed to the sound of the trumpet:
yet their sloth, desidia, dulce malum, their leisure, and pleasure, and those
Sirenes within, do answer, as there we read, But they said, we will not
take heed. Where the Lord by the Prophet speaks unto the Priests, as
watchmenne, which had taken the charge of sounding the trumpet unto the people:
as Saint Paul hereunto Timothy, and in him unto us, Take heed unto doctrine.
And our answer is theirs indeed, though not in words, for so we do, as if
we had said. We will not take heed. Else, what means this great silence in
many places, not only where is no trumpet, or voice to sound it; but even
there also, where is breath, and voice enough: What means it, I say, that we
take so little heed, but that a crooked will has ruled the matter; and say
the Prophet, and Apostle what they will, we say with the watchmen of the
house of Judah, We will not take heed. As if it were in our wills, to preath,
or not to preach; and no purse were broken, no danger would follow, to omit
doctrine. Amos had a greater fear, when he was sent to prophecy, Amos. 3.8.
The Lion (says he) has roared; who will not be afraid? The Lord God
has spoken: who can but prophecy? And the roaring of this Lion to feared Paul
in the ninth of the first to the Corinthians, that he cries out, 1. Cor. 9.16.
Vae mihi, nisi Evangelizem, Woe is me, the Lion will tear me in pieces, if
I preach not the Gospel, knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we
persuade men, yea Ministers; and I would to God we might persuade them for
this first point of attendance or giving heed unto doctrine, namely, that they
deliver it unto the people.

And then the next point is this, what doctrine we should deliver, which what
should it be, but that which may make unto salvation: For such doctrine the
Apostle requires of us; the matter whereof, if we look unto it, will save
both ourselves, and them that hear us. And whence have we this, but from the
most pure fountains of the word of God, which is the seed of our new birth,
as James says, Of his own will be gate he us by the word of truth: and that
to immortality; Iam. 1.18.
even as this seed it self is immortal; as Peter says, that we are borne a
new, 1. Pet. 1.23.
nor of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God, which lives and
lasts for ever. And afterward the same word he calls the sincere milk,
whereby also we grow up after that we have tasted how sweet the Lord is. 1. Pet.
^.1.2.3.
Wherefore says he laying aside all maliciousnes, and all guile, and
dissimulation, and envy, and all evil speaking, as newborn babes, desire ye
the sincere milk of the word; forasmuch as ye have tasted that the Lord is
sweet and good. And in no other knowledge doubtless the^ of this word, as strong
meats also, whereby we grow from faith to faith, from virtue to virtue, from
strength to strength, until we attain unto a perfect man in Christ Jesus, the
Apostle requires us to be of a ripe age, where he thus exhorts: Brethren, be
not children in understanding, but as concerning maliciousnes be children, 1.
Cor. 14.20.
but in understanding be of a ripe age. Only we must see to this, that this
seed of our new birth be not corrupted; this milk of our spiritual
nourishment be not mingled, this food of our fowls be not infecred, but
always preserved in all integrity; and so it will be able to save our souls.
Wherefore S. Peter (as before we heard) exhorceth not simply to desire the
milk, but, as there he calls it, the sincere milk of the word. And Paul
alluding unto this sincerity, and purity of the word, which we must preach,
calls it faithful word; wholso^e word: Tit. 1.9. Tit. 2.8. 2. Tim. 4.3 Tit.
2.7.
wholso^e doctrine; vncorrupt doctrine: and often, a earnestly come^deth it both
to Tit and Tim?

And least they might wander in seeking this word, he leads them to the
Scriptures, and to the Scriptures only, as able to make them absolute, and
perfectly to instruct them in every good duty if their ministry. Wherefore in
the 3. of the 2. to Timothy he saich, The whole scripture is given by
inspiratio^ of God, and is profitable to teach, to co^vince, to correct, and to
instruction righteousness, that the (...) of God, to wit, Tim. 1. Tim. 6.11.
so called in the 1 of Tim. the 6. and 11. and indeed every Minister: that
this man of God, may be absolute, and perfectly instructed unto every good
work, to wit, of his ministry committed to him. And in the same chap, also
noting some deceivers, which should wax worse, and worse, deceaving, and being
deceaved, 2. Tim. 3 14.
as if they had erred from the rule of the Scriptures; by and by be adds, But
continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and which are committed
unto thee, knowing of who^ thou have learned them; and that of a child thou
have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Here the church of Rome would chide, if we had time to here her, for
rejecting her unwritten verities, indeed very vanities; and all that heap of
extors, not only fathered upon the Scriptures, by false interpretations of the
Scriptures, but also brought in against the manifest light of the holy
Scriptures. And such Pharistes, and blind guides, deceiving, and being
deceived, we had to lead us. Who as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, so did
these also resist the truth. But the prophecy of the Apostle is fulfilled in
them; and they have prevailed no longer: for their madness is manifest to al
me^, 2. Tim. 3.8.9.
as theirs also was. And the whore of Babylon, with her cup of spiritual
formicati^as is departed from us; the greatest blessing that ever came to this
land.

But yet, if we take not heed my brethren, even we of the Ministry, unto
doctrine, such as even now also is allowed us to draw, and to deliver out of
the most pure fountains of the holy Scriptures, the Devil will creep in
another way; even as be has already beguiled the minds of many, by
mulciplying a generation of hearers amongst us; of whom the Apostle in the
fourth of the second to Timothy foretold, saying, The time will come, when they
will not suffer wholesome doctrine: but having their cares it ching, shall after
their own lusts get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears from
the truth, and shall be given unto fables. The skum of Atheists, so sold unto
pleasure, and whose minds are so beguiled with love of themselves, and the
lusts of their sin are so dear unto them, that rather then they will endure
wholesome doctrine, which has salt in it to season their putrified souls,
bring them what untruth, and fables, you will, a religion, I think, co^pact of
Iudaisme, Gentilisme, Panisme, and any pelf, most certain poison of the
soul, they will take it for the deliverye, if it be fine enough, and you
touch not their lusts, but leave them to them selves, to live as they list.
Provided, that they hear not one but ouce, if they may have their wills;
their ears are so itching, and their taste but so be served with new teachers,
till they have even heaped them to themselves, and in their own desire, though
not in fact always, as the Apostle says of them, having itching ears shall
heap unto the^ selves teachers according to those their peculiar desires.

And because the times will not suffer that any tables, or untruth shall now
be taught them, the truth it self must be so attempered unto the taste so
delivered in Thesi, not meddling with their manners, or matters, as they call
it; that if any have played the poet, and Orator, and philosopher well; and
for a show of divinity, has borrowed some morals of the fathers to he is a
Preacher, and the only fine fellow for ^^e or other, as the humor serves: and
so they divide us, as the sectaries in the Church at Corinth; and one says I
am Paul's; another, I am Apollos; and a third, I am Cephas; and a fourth is a
plain fellow, and will none of them all, and he is Christ's.

And shall I say it, because we see it? this kind of hearers has begotten a
kind of Preachers, which have learned their lesson of the people; touching
whom the Lord in the thirteenth of Esaie commands the Prophet thus, Now go,
and write it before them in a table, and note it in a book, Isa. 30.89. and
seq.
that it may be for the last day, for ever and ever; that it is a rebellious
people, lying children, children that would not hear the law of the Lord.
Which say unto the feers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us
right things, speak flattering things unto us, prophecy errors; depart out
of the way, go aside out of the path, muse the holy one of Israel to cease
from us. For either they preach (...) at all, and play the good-fellows, and do
as the people does: or else they speak placeut^a, pleasing things unto the
people: as if Christ had not said of us, as he said indeed, ye are the salt
of the earth, Mat. 5.13.
to season men's souls from the corruption of their sins; but, lyee are the
sugar of the world, to sooth men in their sins, to the destruction of their
souls. Whereby it is come to pass, that, though the falls both of Church,
and commonwealth are grievous, and their mounds, almost, deadly; yet the
complaint in the Prophet Jeremy is true of us my brethren, which look no
better unto our doctrine, Curant cour it i^o^^^^ filia popule me^ secu^dum
cura^^^^^^ mali levi^ul^ dicendo, Ier. 8.11.
pax, pax; et si nulla est pax: They heal the bruze of the daughter of my
people according to the cure of a light hurt, saying, peace, peace, though
their be no peace. Where a similitude, is taken from little children, which fall
often, and lightly, and take little harm; and when the nurse takes them up, and
^loweth the hand, and says peace, peace, the hurt is healed. Thus the
Prophets of that people, as some preachers now, stopped the cry of repentance
in the hearts of the people, and warranted they should take no harm, saying,
peace, peace, though there was no peace, but famine, and pestilence, and the
sword hanged over them; even as over us also this day, for the grievous falls,
and deadly ^ure which we all have taken, as Esaie deseri^e thin the 1. chapter,
Isa. 1.6.
From the sole of the foot unto the head^ her is nothing whole therein, but
wounds, and swellings, and sores fall of corruption. And this will goes on so
fast, that we cannot but, exclaim with the Proph^ Jeremy in the fifth (...)
peer, Res stupend^ and h^rr^^^la ^i^ in terra (...): Ier. 5.31.
A wonderful, and horrible thing is, done in this land: The Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests be are rule by their means, (...) (...), and my
people love it well* and what will ye do at the last? as if he should say,
wh^^er, will your sins go, if you should (...) be bridl^^ and those
plagi^^s fall upon? you which: I have threatened? Thus the outrage and
licentiousness of wickedness in the world, and this sea (almost) of sin,
which is fallen in upon us, will not be stayed, but by the heavy hand of God,
and his revenging power* and all, because the people will be flattered, and
the Preachers will not reprove, for fear of offending, and loosing their
praise, and profit.

Forturne the edge of the sword, and beade the power of that rod against the
world, which God gave unto Christ, and Christ unto us, saying. As my father
sent me, Joan. 20.21.
so send I you: and the prophecy of Esaias shall be fulfilled, He shall
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips
shall he ssaye the ungodlye. Isa. 11.4.
For the hearts of men shall melte with repentance for their sins, or their
thoughts shall accuse them, and their condemnation shall be sealed within
themselves: the lust shall be guided in the ways of righteousness, and ^he
wicked shall not make us stumble, because the shame and reproof, and the
chastisemente of their sin shall be upon them: noe mourning soul in Syon,
but shall be comforted; no Dake so strong in Basan, no Cedar so ^aule in
Libanus; noe heart so hard, and stonye; no mind so high and haughtye of any
mighty Potentate, but shall be humbled before the Lord? For what says the
Lord by the Prophet Jeremy in the three and twentieth Chapter, Ierem. 23.29.
Is not my word like fire, says the Lord* and like the hammer, that
breaks the stone? And in the same Chapter speaking of the Prophets, whom he
reproved before, he says, If they had stand in my counsel, and had declared
my words to my people, Verse. 22.
and had declared my words to my people, then they should have turned them from
their evil way, and from the wickedness of their inventions. And Paul in the
second of the second to the Corinthians speaking of the power of this pure and
sincere handling of the word of God, says: Now thanks be be unto God, which
always makes us to triumph in Christ; 2. Cor. 2.14. and seq.
and makes manifest the savor of this knowledge by us in every place. For we
are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish^^d the one we are the savor of death unto death; and to the other
the savor of life unto life: and who is sufficient for these things? For we
are not as many, which make merchandise of the word of God: but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we of Christ. And in
the fourth of the same Epistle, Therefore, faith he, seeing that we have this
Ministry, 2 Cor. 4.1. and seq.
as we have received mercy, we faint not: but have cast from us the cloakes of
vnhonesty, and walk not in craftines, neither handle we the word of God
deceitfully; but in declaration of the truth we approve our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God. From whence he gathers this conclusion:
If then our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that are lost, in whom the God
of this world has blinded the minds, to wit, of the unbelievers, that the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the image of God should not
shine unto them. As if not by a fine, or fraudulent, but by a full, and an
honest handling of the word of God, he had done sufficient to convince the
unbelievers, to reveal their reprobation, and to cast their comdemnation upon
them selves. And the same mind he also testifies in the first to the
Galathians: For now (says he) preach I mas doctrine or Gods? or go I about to
please men? for if I should yet please men, I were not the servant of Christ.

Thus the Prophets, Esaie, and Jeremy, and Paul the Apostle, for this point of
syncerity, looked to their doctrine. And what do we? Tell it not in Gath, and
publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, 2. Sam. 1.20.
least the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, least the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph. Yes, tell it to the very skorners, and to the greatest
amongst them, that never (almost) such vowing to the sins of men, by them,
that should make all the world to bend. But tell them withal what Jeremy
says, populus meus it a amant: My people love it well, they will have it so.
Thus, this disease in you my brethren of the Laity, to love your sins so
well, that they must not be reproved, has infected, and bread this weakness
in many of us Ministers, to let them alone, and not reproove them. And when the
Sermon, or cold Collation is ended, the pride, and self-loue, the tyrannies,
cruelties, and oppressions of men; their great and open adulteries in the
sight of the sun, their riot and wantonness, covetousness, briberies,
blasphemies, what shall I say? the heap of all their sins together are fast
a sleep for us, we wake them not; and they fester in the soul, and are now
so strong, that they will not obey the bridle* they say with the rebels, in the
second Psalm, Psalm. 2.3.
Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. And
according to their power so is their pride; and the power of many, yea all
(almost) so great (the staff of discipline being fallen down*) that they
said it not only, but do it in deed.

This brings me, my brethren, unto the third and last point to be regarded
mattending our doctrine; name lie, the Manner: in which first is required a
spiritual, ^^^dnesse, such, as was in the Prophets, and Apostles of Jesus
Christ; and* without the which thee shall even fear the fares of men. For so
did Jeremy at the first, until the Lord which sent him* thrust him forward,
thus, Trusse up thy lo^nes, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command
three: be not afraid of their faces, Ierem. 1.17.
least I destroy thee before them. And so did Ezechiel, until the Lord in the
third chapter made him a promise thus, Behold I have made thy face strong
against their faces, Ezech. 3.
and thy forehead hard against their foreheads. I have made thy forehead as the
adamant, and harder then the flint: fear them not therefore, neither be
afraid of their looked, because they are a (...) house. And least me may
thin^^ that this was the majesty of the Prophets only, and that the Gospel
must treepe lower to the becks of men; the Apostle in the fourth in the
Colostians prays the saithfull to pray for him, that God (says he) may
open unto us the door of utterance, Coloss. 4.3.
to speak the mystery of Christ. And then he adds, that I may (...), as it
becomes me to speak. And how that is, he shows in the si^^h to the
Ephesians; where making the same request to them to pray for him, Ephesians. 6.18.
and seq.
he says. Pray always with all manner prayer and supplication in the
sphrite: and watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all
Saints; and for me, that vtteraunce may be given me, that I may open my
mouth boldly to publish the secret of the Gospel; whereof I am the embasse
dour in bonds, that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak. As I
ought to speak, says Paul: for such speech both becomes the majesty of the
Gospel; and armeth us against their looks, which (...) are so bent against
us, (...) when we pr^^th unto them; as if we were (...) ^^rthy to look upon
them* And this (...) make as loud. and lift up our voices, as Esai^ is:
commounded in (...) eight (...) fifteth chapter, thus, Cry as the ^h^oa^e* and
cease not* lift up thy voice like a ^^umpe^^ and show my people there
transgresson; and the house of I ^^ob their sinces. Even as th^br^w (...)
hattes all ^^lleepe in their (...) this (...) half, (...) and extent of (...)
I (...) ^^^the (...) is so spiri^^^^^, and (...) all (...) which fa^^^^ unto
very trembling. Example of Paul himself, so great an Apostle, in the second
of the first to the Cor^^thians: 1. Cor. 2.3.
And I (says he) was among lion in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling. Why Paul^: even because ^^^h was (...) wea^^ (...), that ^^thing
(...) him, ((...) in ^s) (...) w^rdes should (...) in (...) minds of (...) as:
himself ^^^where confesse^^ of this effect of his Min^^ter^^, And such trust,
2. Cor. 3.4.5.
says he, have ^^ves through Christ to God. Not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think ^^^ny thing a^ of our selves, but out suff^ciencie is o^^
God. And the^^^^^ (...) reno^^^ce^h all him (...) had (...) Law, or
Philosophy; or had (...) t^ught ^^^h^ (...) I (says he^) (...) not to
^^^^^ni^^^ thing, 1. Cor. 2.2.
that is, I (...) my (...) in the (...) thing (...) you, so (...) I (...)
Christ, and him (...) effect* Ye^, and his (...) so liked him (...) he faith,
And I (...) I (...) car^^ not (...) of words or of wisdom, 1. Cor. 2.1.
she^^ing (...) the testimony (...) speaking of the things of God, which
(...) revealed unto us by the spirit^* he says, which things also we speak,
Verse. 13.
not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy ghost
teaches, matching spiritual things with spiritual things. He therefore who
in preaching must be so spiritual, to speak only the things of God only with
the words of God; and ^eelling that, which we al feel, our nature inclined
unto pride and vanity, which so far as it prevails, so far it hu^^eth and
hinders all holy doctrine; must needs he in weakness, and in fear, and
in much trembling.

Thus faithfulness and synceritie, for the matter; and boldness, with
reverence and humility, for the manner, makes up the whole harmony of a lawful
deliverie of the word of God. And here we have the rule: which if we could
follow (to say no more of this) doub^les it would fill our hearts with
rejoicing, and our mouths with the praise of God, who has given such a
treasure unto his church: it would make us leap for joy, and sing in our beds
a^ the Psalmist exhorts in the hundred forty and ninth Psalm* I (...)
Saints, Psalm. 149.5.6. and seq.
says he, be joyful for the^^ glory, let them sing in their beds: let the
praises of God be in their mouths for all where with he does exalt them; and
namely, for this, that a two edged swoorde is given to their hand to be
avenged of the heathen, and to rebuke the people; to bind their kings in
chains, and their honorables with links of iron; to exercise over them (...)
scriptum, the written Law which is the honor of all his Saints. As Moses
also says in the fourth of Deuteronomie unto the people, Deuteronomy. 4.6.
This is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the people, which
shall hear all these Ordinances, and shall say, surely this people is wise,
and of understanding, and a great nation. And what: the Prophets were not yet.
But we have Moses and the prophets; yea, Christ, and his Apostles, the whole
Scriptures of both Covenantes, this is our (...) scriptum, our written Law,
this our honor, our ornament; and let us honor it.

And thus much of the first part of the Apostolic Precept unto Timothy in
these words* Take heed unto thy self, and unto doctrine. The second
follows in these words, and continue therein. Wherein to speak a little I
may begin, but not continue, least the time take me up. Wherefore only as
Paul bids the brethren at Colosse thus, Say to Archippus, Coloss. 4.17.
take heed to the Ministry, that thou have received in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it: Even so say I unto you my brethren, and to my self, Let us take
beede unto our Ministry, which we have received in the Lord, that we
fulfill it: let us take heed unto our selves, and unto doctrine, and continue
therein. For it is a small thing to begin, except thou persevere, yea, it were
better, as Peter says, 2. Pet. 2.21.
never to have known the way of righteousness, then after we have known it
to turn from the holy commandment. And nothing more doleful, then this
inuersion, which is our subversion, ye were light in the Lord, but are now
darkness (...) yet were stars of heavens but the Dragons tail has cast you
unto the earth. Revel. 12.4. 2. Tim. 4.10.
As Demas: Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this present world. Lo,
a star fallen unto the earth. And so, as many, as once shined in life, and
learning, as heaven lie lights, Philip. 2.21.
but now are earthlye minded, seeking (as the Apostle says) their own
things, and not the things of Jesus Christ. And I would this cuntrie air,
yea the air (almost) of England all abroad, had no such Cometes; which gave a
flash at the first in the Universities, and places, to which they first went;
but, the earthly matter, whereof they consist, inflamed with the fire of I know
not what zeal at the first, consumed, to darkness, and the desolation of
their flocks, portended, as it were, before, and imported by these false, and
fatal Lights. Which if they gather not th^^^ strength again, and shine, as
they begaune, unto the end; the mist of darkness for ever, as the punishment
of their darkness, andithe darkness, (...) have brought upon others. I
fear ^^ll fall upon them. And this, of those, whose candle is quite put out,
and which veterly cease in their Ministry to do any good, I not withstanding
their good beginninges of whom we may say n^^e. Eceboliue Socrat. Hist. Eccle
siast. l. 3. c. 11.
I would them selves would say, but to repentance as he said of himself,
without repentance, Calcate^ma ^^spidum, salom: Tread upon me vnsavourie salt:
if worthy to lie any where, to be trodden upon. For salt is good: Luke.
14.34.35.
but if salt have lost hi^ savor, wherewith shall it be sea seued? it is
neither meet for the land nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it out. He
that has ears to hear le^ him hear.

There is yet one other point of contradiction unto Continuance; which is
incermission; not all, and ^veris intermission, but that, which will not stand
in any good construction with that instanes required by the Apostle in the
fourth of of the second to Timothi^. 2. Tim. 4.2.
Preach (says be) the word. There is the charge in general. But how be
instane, in season, out of season. Here is the kind and quantity: such, and so
much, as some men will think, and say, as they say too often, it is out of
season; and much preaching (as Pestus said of Paul much learning had made him
mad) so much preaching (almost) has made us mad. Act. 26.24.
But the madness is theirs indeed, being drunken with this opinion, that
Quarter Sermons are sufficient. And yet the quarter watch will not awake the
straw very Preachers, as a godly father calls them: for they come only
once a year, Latimer.
and tarry a while, and then away, this is to much intermission, and far from
continuance: much like the service of those, whom we call Retainers which see
their Masters once a year; and wear their liveries for a countenance; but do
their own work, and make their titles serve their turns. For when a fat
morsel is falling from their masters table, then they wait, and hold the
treancher; and then, if you watch the time, you may hear a sermon: But in
their parishes: where they should preach indeed from Saba^th, to Sabbath, all
the year, ^ltum silei^ium great, and continual silence. And it a continual
Preacher meat any of these (as we meet but to often, because they are
many:) as if we were the ^^^^ui^als, they squine; and hang the lip; yea,
they are so wicked (as the servant said of Nabal) that a man cannot speak to
them: no, 1. Sam. 25.17.
not their own wives: A mean, the people of the Parish, (if any have that
Zeales as many, no doubt, have) may not say ^o ^nie of them; sin, why do
you sol I pray preach ofter. For then they shall he presenced for Puricanes.
And this I hope the Court will loohe unto, and take order for it, if any be
so busy with their bus bands. But rather indeed I would they would harken;
or, (because we would some out seed in the best ground) do you harken my
brethren, which ye continue, to this counsel of continuance ing^^d life; and
Iearning, that so you may continue unto the ^^d. For he that co^tus^^^^ unto
the end shall be saved, and save other a also, (...) in the promis^^ following:
and without commi^^^ance is will not be; because our adversaries, the devil*
^he world, and the flesh, are continual in their work, to come up our
planning; to blot out our writing, to break down our building before our
eyes, so soon as we pluck our hand from the work, as too often is seen.
And the importunity of sin, is great, and rusheth in in have, so soon as
it ge^teth the least advantage: and afterward ge^teth strength, and will not
be tamed, but by that instant preaching, which the Apostle before requires;
and it is the reason, wherefore he requires it. As nothing indeene but this
assiduitie can make Archippus fulfill his Minis^^^ie. Besides that it will be
our great rebuke to ^u^ discontinuance to have i^ said, as Paul says to the
Galathiane, Gal. 5.7.
Ye did run well: who, or what did (...) you?

Yet many lets, I confess, (if we leap not over them) to break us of
^^^owne proclivitie, as he sa^^th, (...) ad libidnum, from labou^^^ ^^s^, or
leisure: the vngracefullnesse; yea, the stubb^rnesse and rebellion of our he
ar^^^. Come, le^ us conspire against Jeremy; Ierem. 18.18.
let us s^^^te him with the tongue, and let us not give heed unto any of his
words. But ^^ne (...) this* the cold comfort, that we have of those which
raig^^ over (...), and are as the Apostles in (...) and office, to see h^^
only to them selves, but also to others, as Paul (...) unto (...). These
should be called, as the prophet before says, Quercia ^^stu^a oaks of
righteousness and parternes of al diligence in their doctrine: Isa. 61.3.
that for (if need required) as children we might go by their hands, and light
our candles at their to the^^. But what are they? what do they? I need not tell*
psares (...) ^^ter* the thing does speak. Yet I must say nothing; and you must
see nothing: but we al must hear what they say; as those in Jeremy, the three
and ^^^^eth, Who has stand in the counsel of the Lord, that he has
perceived and heard his words who has marked his word, Ierem. 23.18.
and heard (...) ^s if they should say, who, but, Ierem. 18.18.
we? For the Law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the
wise, no^ the word from the prophet. But, by their leaves, I will say, as
Christ in the sixteenth of S. Luke says where having preached against
covetousness, Luke. 16.13.14.15.
and concluded thus saying. Ye cannot serve God and riches: it is added by the
Evangelist, All these things heard the Pharisees also, which were coverous, and
they mocked him. (...) he said unto them, ye are they that justify your
selves; but God knows your hearts. Yea men know your hearts, by the briberies,
open briberies; and corruptions of your hands. They eat (says the Lord by
the prophet Osea) The sin of my people, Hosea. 4.8.
that is, the sacrifices for sin; therefore everye one lifts up his mind
to their iniquity. And we now also have sacrifices for sin, and sin
offeringes. For they commute Penances; and the pain is past, when the penny
is paid; and so they eat the sin of the people: they feed, and are fat,
and in good liking, and so are theirs: for Of a prince that harkeneth, Proverb.
29 12.
unto lies, says Solomon, all his servants are wicked. Therefore (as Ose
says) every one lifts up his mind to their iniquity. For sin brings
sacrifice; and sacrifice is sweet: and hence is this wincking at, yea this
warming of sin and iniquity. And how shall we continue to beat down
sin, which they set up? yet these are the only Timothies in the world, and
who, but these? but, as our Savior adds in the place before alleged, Luke
16.15.
That which is high and loftye with men, is abomination in the sight of God.
Yea, and damnation too, if they take not heed betime. For salvation is for
them that do take heed.

For so it follweth in the second and last general part of this Text, which is
the Promise, in these words: For by doing this thou shall save thy self, and
them that hear thee. A great Promise, and a high speech of the Apostle, to
save our selves, and them that hear. But he means it passiuelie, that we
shall be saved. and it is resolved into the active, t^^s, that, because the
Gospel i^ called the Gospel of our salvation, Ephesians. 1.13.
in the first to the Ephesians; and in the first to the Romans, Romans 1.16.
the power of God which brings salvation to everye one that believes, and
the preaching of this Gospel is committed to us, 2. Co. 5.19
and so is ours, as Ministers; and so called by the Apostle in the second to
the Romans, where speaking of God he says, who shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel; Romans 2.16.
and in the fourth of the second to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4.3
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that are lost: therefore the
Ministers of the Gospel, of salvations are here said to save themselves, and
others. And so the Apostle speaks of himself in the eleventh to the Romans
and fourteenth verse, To. 11.14. 1. Cor. 9.22
and in the first to the Corinthians, the ninth chapter, and two and twentieh
verse^ which places for brevitie I n^ow omit.

But this I cannot omited: shall we in deed be saved, and save others also,
by doing this, and doing it unto the end? Then faint not thou faithful, and
painful labourer in the word of God: for lo, thy labors, as the seals of
a double salvacion, thine own, and others; and a great crown of
righteousness remains for both. And shall we noe be saved, nor none of
ours, if we do it not, or lightlye, and without continuance, as a flourish,
and no more? Then lo Hel-fire already kindled, and a double damnation
prepared already, for all ignorantes, which cannot; all ^arelesse Ministers,
will not, and do not fulfill their Ministry. For they are guilty not only
of their own sins and damnation, but of the sins and damnation of then
people also. Wherefore, to day if ye will hear his voice, my brethren,
harden not your hearts: that you and your people, and we with you, may be all
as we desire, populus salutis, the saved of the Lord.

The last point, with which I end, is this, touching the people: whom here, in
the mention of their salvation, he calls hearers. And why? For whosoever
calls upon the name of the Lord (says the Prophet Joel) shall be saved.
Joel. 1.38. Romans 10.14.
But how (says the Apostle) shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not hard? hear
therefore, good people, and so be saved harken, and your souls shall live.
But take heed, Isa. 55.3. Mark. 4.24.
as Christ warns, what you hear, that is, how you hear, and profit in that
you hear: and beware of those hearers in the three and thirteeth of Ezechiel;
whom the Lord describes to the Prophet, thus, Also thou son of man, Ezech.
33.30. et seq.
the children of thy people, that talk of thee by the walks, and in the
doors of houses; and speak one to another, every man to his brother, saying,
come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes from the Lord: they
come unto thee, as the people uses to come; and as my people sit before thee,
and hear thy words, but do them not: though with their mouth they make them
most sweet, their heart goes after their covetousness. And lo thou art unto
them as a plesaunt song of one that has a sweet voice, and can sing well: for
they hear thy words, but do them not: Such hearing is here condemned,
contemned of all men, and has no promise of blessing from God; but that, which
is joined with peace, with purity, with reverence and humility, and with true
obedience of that we hear: Iam. 1.19. et seq.
as James most amply ehorting, says, Wherefore, my dear brethren, let every
man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath. For the wrath of
^an does not accomplish the righteousness of God. Wherefore lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluitye of malitiousnesse, and receive with meekness
the word that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls. And be
ye doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For
if any hear the word, and do it not, he is like unto a man, that
beholds his natural face in a glass, for when he has considered himself,
he goes, his way and for gets immediately what manner of one he was. But
who so looks in the perfect Law of liberty, and continues therein, he not
being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his
deed. Thus, blessed are they, and saved shall they be, and only they, which
hear the word of God, Luke 11.28.
and keep it. And as many as walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.16,
peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. To god, even the
father, and to Jesus Christ, with the Holy Spirit, one, immortal, invisible,
and only wise, God, be rendered all glory, and praise, dominion, and
majesty both now, and ever. Amen.


