O Read me, for I am of great Antiquity.

I plain Piers the Ploughman
which can not flatter
A plough man men me call
My speech is fowlle, yet mark the matter
How things may hap to fall,
But now another I Will have for me, I think it is as fit say, if any my name
do crave, I am the Gran sier of Martin mareprelitte.

Compiled before yeaster day, for the behoof and overthrow of all Parsons,
Vikars, and Curats, who have learned their Cathechismes, and can not yet
understand them, although they be past their grace.

Newly corrected, you will say it was by a green head, but I Will tell thee true,
My head is neither green nor blew,
You are deceived bum fay,
My head is either white or gray.
So Beneado so:

Printed either of this side, or of that side of some of the Priests.

To the puissant paltry politanes, bounsing Lord Bishops, Popish parsons,
Fickars, and Currats, with all that Romish rabble, Piers, Grandsier of Martin
Marprelate, wishes you better then I think you wish your selves.
Right revived sirs,
may it please your woorships fullness to accept and read over this worthy
work containing in it very good matter, for that end that it was written for,
and surely how so ever some may mislike it, because it touches their gross
corruptions, yet all those that be of a sincere mind will like it well,
because old PIERS goes soundly to work, and uses no flattery, and he
says nothing but he brings good proofs for it, therefore I am the more
bold to publishe it, taking you for my Patrons, under whose wings in this
good cause I shroud my self, hoping that you will defend me, from all my
persicutors what so ever, for I know that you can keep me harmless if you
please, and therefore I make choice of you above any other, which if you do, I
shall not only show my gr^ mind, these my first labors, which I pray you
accept, but in time when I shall be more able, you shall then here oftener from
me.

Therefore hoping of your accustomed clemency and approved protectorshippe of
this book, I cease to trouble you.

Surpliced Sirs farewell, I can tell, my name full well.

O Read me for I am the anointed*
I Piers plowman following plough on field my Beasts blowing forbrake my
bod^e requiring rest, gaping for the gain my labors began me yield, upon ye
Plough beam, to sit me thought it best, [againe the hail I leaned, my face to
H^auen I cast, to that great Lord above, my buckler and my shield, who always
after labors, sends ease at the last, because I tell you plain, without
rest naught can endure, this Lord him self first the dark did frame and made:
First of all providing the comfort of his Creature, before that thing earthly
his form and shape did take, commanding the night for ever all labors to
abate, that weary workmen all their bones might salve and cure, to serve t^^t
living God without strife or hate: Then does he make the light for labors and
buisie care, the Firmament he framed betwixt the waters twain, the Seas, the
earth, the herbs, the trees, the fruits bright and fair, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars for our profit* and gain: the fishes in the floods, the
birds in the air flowing: all kind of beasts, and man as Lord and ruler, then
rayseth he eftsoons an Image to man's doo^ng, he knew full well the labors
to man more appointed, though a whils of good and bad not knowing, m^n lead a
careless life in innocence then granted, unto the time unto the time that
Eve to the old Serpent assenting brought him into bondage vile labor and
travel, which (...) night restrayneth the body sore tormented, unless the
woman's seed be ^ote unto our bale. This Seed to Noha than shadowed, relief
to no man can find, with comfort of the grape, and ship that saved some
even those that him believed, and would not still be blind, all other then
were drenched not regarding Gods doom by bringing Bull to yoke, ye brought
in mikell ease, happy therefore be ^e, a saint he might be shryned, if ever
poor ploughman of Pope might get the Keys.

In the mean season it will be little reason, goods and life to danger aye,

Let them keep from our houses, and shape us no hoodes and take this popish
play.

It is no article of my belief, though the priest hang it on his sleeue and
publish it in court an assyse.

It makes me often (...) to be (...), (...) I my self (...)*

(...) would (...) for my (...) (...) that (...)

^.

But let it go, God (...) though new beleefes they (...),

Which have all would, in blindness hold, (...),

Consider O Kings and Princes, dear for you we toil and labor, consider I
say eftsoons, now your flock ^ow that ye le^de you shall made answers, (...)
all ^e^^es, (...) and ill honor, (...) might ye ^n Christ's side, who is our
guide and head, (...) else your (...) ^^^et, and sharp to maintain p^e (...),
and how l^t^ely a thing it is a christ^^^ Prince, to be Antichrists protector:

We strive not for the name whom all men hate for shame, for his forged days,

The priests will him maintain, so long as they have possession,

Of them did he bring, to him will they bring, what so ever the hand can find,

Rather then he should perished be, in his decrees and laws cannon.

Therefore do they put down, (...) the cours^ of kind

Which would do them good, with (...) (...), if they could take it so,

To tell them ^^t off that (...), that h^^^ sinful nation

To bring them to light yt shines bright, which the Scripture leads to.

I heard a tale of late, how a Captain (...) to ma^e, and set a (...),

With many (...) him about, who his consent should ^tter out, an (...) of (...)
pride,

His unclean cage began to speak, ^^^^deth open his beak (...) I am that.
(...)


(...) knaves standing ^y, so and I, so am I, euerichone they cry.

T^ play ye priests withouten doubt al yt would throughout ye Pope to
cou^terfaite,

Mark their life, m^^ke these learning, mark their order and every thing,

And young, young Popes they ben liche, they lose, they bind,

They have both sword and keys, after the sa^e kind that old ^afe had of
late.

I thank my Lord God the living Lord for ever, that he has given me grace to
flea the Sodomi^e, I was long in her love, but I thank my God the giver, I
have escaped Sodom, and in God is my delight, I speak it of no rage, but as I
will answer make, so their own selves be not Judges, in their own cause and
matter, for then against ye dreadful day, with clear heart I will it
undertake.

All this while me thought I slept, but the boy can prick his be.

Again I take the plough in hand following mine honest labor,

Till night comes on, and sun goi^g down causes me to cease.

In mean season, I toss many things, as I were of port and hauour,

When I came home, all that night long, I could not sleep a wink,

A book therefore I took in hand, my self something to ease.

Wherein I wrote of sundry ryte, as my heart does judge and think.

About three years past when I Piers scripture might read,

And render and r^porte to my wife and to my barnes,

It seemed then a goodly life, a household then to keep and feed,

Both with broth and bacon, and bread of the Bible,

To tell forth Christ's trade, and trade of our christening,

Before we were called christen, and knew of Christ nothing

Then was I sir, then was I father, then was I shepherd and all,

Then nothing failed unto my bidding, neither in boure nor hall,

My wife for my wisdom did count me he head, my childer their father,

My servant their sire, then all did obey me in the fear of the Lord,

More then for meade or hier, this pleased the Lord.

I dare record against the popish pries, which clatter in the Kirk,

And cannot work nothing that good is, which had despite in heart,

That we to Christ did start, leaving their cumbred riddles,

And cried as their Fathers did before, out, out alas,

Therefore all the world follows him, and his,

Seeing us of the lewd fee, break into heaven so violently,

Which they were sorry for, but of ye herds they recked nothing,

Being occupied with other thing, as gentlemen and other,

For the fleshly fathers could boast that none of the promises,

Nor the Pharisees were found faulty herein, but only the rascal sort,

That knew not the law, lined sinful and cursed therefore said they plain,

We will have it in again, from these poor knaves,

That are so wood, trow these harlots pardy, that Christ would with save to
die,

For such a profane beggarly blood.

But comfort ye ye plough man, Fisshers, Tylers, and cobblers.

Christ our king was a poor man, as Zachary before prophesied, and he him
self says, that Foxes have dens, and birds of heaven neasts, and man's son
has not, where to lodge his head. And he blessed the poor men, so they be
poor in spirit, saying that theirs is all ready the Kingdom of high Heaven,
and woe be unto the rich, for they have their comfort in this world. Christ
says again in Mark, his words sown in rich men's hearts brings forth no
fruit, for the deceiptfulnes of riches, and the business of this world
cloggeth it and marketh it fruitelesse, this knew our Popish prellates full
well, when they find that gentleman, and busy occupied merchants are sober,
discreet, and wise, they will not rail, they will do no skathe.

But I will tell you a new tale, go to all ye rich of heaps,

With all your horned prellates,

Weep and howie for the mysteries that shall come upon you,

If there be no other thing to lay in your way,

This I am suer ye cannot denay,

That ye have lived in delight and pleasure, you have fed at your hearts
liking,

As against the day of slaughter,

Ye have condemned and slain the Just, and he has not resisted you.

Remember that terrible example of the rich man, and poor Lazarus. And I say
again to you poor caitiffes, there is an other world beside this, and we can
patiently abide the Lords woorking, there is no seed can bring great gain but
he be deed, this we see plain in our yearly sowing, beside this we patiently
abide vii. months long, tho we suffer at home much hunger and wrong, our
whete or we can gather why should we not than, Gods woorking ken in saving us
with them: yea hear me dear brethren hogge-herds, sheepeheads, and all your
sort despised, has not God chosen the poor of this world, to be rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to all them of whom he was
loved, that how can your bishops hate then thus poor, and be the Apostles
successors, for they did comfort the poor all with these and like words, as
they can fall against ye rich in towers, are they not the rich that
exercises their tyranny upon you, and they hail you to their judgment seats,
and the same are they that speak evil of that good name which is named upon
you. Paul calls them Idolators only because they gape so much upon goods.
And Christ him self says, no man can serve two masters, both God and riches.
And again, it is hard for a rich man to enter into heaven, as a Camill to go
through a needells eye, yet does the priests flatter them, and say that they
only may have Gods word, which is called his kingdom, that they altogether
may play the part of cut my curre, that keeps my Fother safe, which neither
will eat any Haie himself, nor suffer any cattle that breaks loose, to
eat any thing thereat: thus do they all conspire against ye Lord, and his
Christ.

The bishops gives bribes, to hold Christ down.

And up start ye knights of the sepulcar.

This shows that they have the faith of Christ in vain opinion,

Or else would they judge Christ's flock a right, without regard of person.

Alas, do ye not see that Christ will not be kept in grave,

How long do you strive against the stream and spurn against the prick,

What have you won this xxx. years, by putting to silence

The word of God, and the maintayners thereof.

It springs and spreads by persecution, like the Palm tree, that cannot
be ouercomne with burden, all though you tread it under your feet, and judge
it unworthily, at length it shall beat down you and condemn you, both great
and small to endless dampnation, and lay upon your neck all the innocent blood,
that has been spilt since Stephen the first Martyr, to this day, through your
default, and all other that shall follow after to the worlds end. Moses, by
the mouth of God commanded thus, that we take heed least yt we loose our
soul, forgetting the woonderous works that he has wrought in the days
heretofore, but yt we shall publish the^ forth still, to our children and
posterity for ever. Again he says, Note Deutro. Chapt.
the words yt I do command this day, shall be upon thy heart, thou shall
rehearse them unto thy children, and speak of them when thou sit in thy
house, when thou walk by ye way, when thou go to sleep, when thou risest
again then shall thou bind them as a sign about thy hand, and they shall be a
remembrance betwixt thine eyes, thou shall write them upon the poastes of thy
house, and in thy gates, that thy GOD be at no time forgotten, for all they
which counts it not good to know God, be they priests, be they princes, God
gives them up into a reprobate mind, to do ye things that are not comely,
filled with all vnrightiousnes, fornication, craft, covetousness, etc. But our
priests are wiser than Moses, then Christ, Note Phillip Chapt.
or his Apostles, for they were glad when by any manner of means, ye gospel
was published, were it by contention or other ways: says Paul, Philip. and
where as John was carnal, Note
mark, and says, we have found a man casting out devils in thy name, but we
have forbidden him because he follows not us, and of yt ground perchance
forbid us to name Christ in his word, Christ him self answers plain:
forbid him not, for no man yt works any thing in my name, can straight speak
evil of me: but our prelates clean contrary, to hinder Gods word will not
stick to die, because it utters their hypocrisy, and destroys their
papistrie, and the Antichristian Idolatry: Hear ye therefore, O ye Princes,
and understand ye yt judge the earth, hear I say and fear, for you being
officers of his kingdom, have not executed true judgment now of late, you
have not kept the law of rightiousnes, nor called after ye will of God:
horrible, and that right soon therefore, shall he appear unto you, for an
hard judgment shall they have that bear rule. Mercy is granted unto the
poor, but they that be in authority, shall be sore punished, wherefore set your

(...)
