THE MIRROVR OF RELIGIOUS PERFECTION Divided into four Books.

Written in Italian by the R. F. Lucas Pinelli, of the Society of JESUS.

And translated into English by a Father of the same Society.

printer's or publisher's device IHS



Psalm. 138. Verse. 15. Imperfectum meum viderunt oculi tui.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XVIII.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, AND RELIGIOUS LADY, BARBARA WISE MAN, ABBESS OF THE
ENGLISH MONASTERY OF SION IN LISBONE, OF THE HOLY ORDER OF S. BRIGIT. AND TO
THE REST OF THE RELIGIOUS SISTERS OF THAT HOLY HOUSE, AND FAMILY.
RIGHT REVEREND LADY, AND RELIGIOUS SISTERS,
DID not the abundance of my Respectfull Affection to your holy House and
Family, overcome the distance of Place, or my small Acquaintance; I should not
commend this little Treatise of RELIGIOUS PERFECTION to a Patronage so far
remote from our Native Country: but rather seek a Protector nearer home. But
seeing so much Land, as lies between, does not hinder the Fame of your
Virtuous Example and austere Life, from passing into these parts: so neither
shall the seas drown my Desires of your continual Progress, nor stay them
from aduenturing with this Present, to make them known unto you.

In this RELIGIOUS MIRROVR, you may behold rare Virtues, and accordingly draw
in your selves the form of highest Perfection. Here shall you find whatsoever
may help to the spiritual Advancement of your souls: and by reading
attentively, reap condign fruits of your devout Labors. The Method is easy,
the Style plain, the Treasure thereof infinitely rich, and the Author well
known through the world by his worthy Treatises of Piety, and Devotion: Whereof
this One may seem, by Gods special Providence, appointed for fuel to increase
the fire of Devotion in your Breasts; thereby to inflame the Hearts of many
Worthy Personages, to an holy Emulation of your Example.

I will not trouble your Ladyship, nor the rest of your virtuous Family with a
longer Epistle; but end, with many hearty wishes of spiritual Light to your
souls by this resplendent MIRROVR, and of Happiness to our afflicted Country
by your return to your Ancient SION, now forlorn and desolate by your
Absence. At least, that I may meet with you in the Heavenly SION, with all
Respectfullnes I crave your holy prayers. This feast of the Glorious Virgin
SAINT BRIGIT, resting ever,

Your La. devoted servant, I. VV.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR TO THE RELIGIOUS Servants of God.
IT is my intention Religious Reader, in a simple and perspicuous style to
write a Treatise no like unto that which is entitled. The Imitation of Christ,
composed by that learned and Religious servant of God Thomas a Kempis; but yet
very fit and profitable to the profession of Religious Persons. Wherein certain
wholesome Admonitions, and Documents are by Christ our Lord prescribed unto
every Religious person, as well for the knowledge of his own defectes, as the
attayning to that perfection of spiritual life, whereunto by obligation of his
vocation he is bound to aspire.

This little Work of mine, whatsoever it is, as I have compiled it by Gods
assisting hand: so have I thought good to dedicate the same to the servants of
God, to the end they may be the more incited and stirred up to the reading
thereof. And though I must confess, that there be already extant no small store
of Books of this kind: yet I trust this of mine will be neither unprofitable,
nor unpleasant. And as there is not one and the same gust of all, in reading
and handling such spiritual affairs; so is it convenient, that oftentimes the
same matter be handled diverse and sundry ways, that thereby every one may read,
and affect what shall best agree with his taste. Almighty God vouchsafe of his
infinite goodness to communicate unto us all so much of his Grace, as both by
this, and other spiritual Treatises we may reap that fruit, which may preserve
us from all sin in this life, and from all punishment in the next. Amen.

THE TABLE OF CHAPTERS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
OF the End which God requires of those, whom he calls to Religion Ch^p. 1.
page 1. Chap. 2. VVherin consists the Perfection of the love and serving of
God, whereunto a Religious Person is bound: and what God requires at his
hands. page 6. Chap. 3. That a Religious person ought to make great reckoning
of his vocation. page 12. Chap. 4. How greatly a Religious man offends God,
who makes light reckoning of his Vocation, and Religion. page 20. Chap. 5. Of
the tentations, and dangers of leaving ones Vocation. page 27. Chap. 6. That it
is not enough for a Religious man, to be called of God to Religion but he must
earnestly labor to the perfection of his Vocation. page 34. Chap. 7. That a
Religious man must attend, and have an eye to those things, which be proper to
his own Religion, and not of another. page 39. Chap. 8. Wherein does it
consist, to be a true and perfect Religious man. page 45. Chap. 9. Of the
inward defects, that be impediments to Religious Perfection. page 53. Chap. 10.
Of other outward defects, and imperfections, that be impediments to Perfection.
p 58. Chap. 11. How Perfection is finally to be attained. page 65. Chap. 12. Of
the spiritual joy which accompayneth a Religious man, that attends to
Perfection. page 71. Chap. 13. Of the great pains and myseries that Religious
men do suffer, who forsake, and leave the way to Perfection. page 76. Chap. 14.
That a Religious man ought with great confidence to labor to the attayning of
Perfection. page 81, Chap. 15. That nothing in the world should divert a
Religious man from pursuing after Persection, and getting thereof. page 87.
Chap. 16. That a good Religious man must not content himself with whatsoever
degree of Perfection, but must labor and aspire to a greater. p. 96. Chap. 17.
That a Religious man must conserve and keep the perfection he has gotten: and
of the manner of keeping it. page 103.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of the dignity, and excellency of the three Vows that be made by
Religious Persons. p. 109. Chap. 2. Of the vtility and profit that Vow^ bring,
and cause to Religious persons. page 114. Chap. 3. How acceptable and pleasing
to God the three Vows of Religious persons be. p. 121. Chap. 4. How convenient
it is, that Religious men bind themselves to God by three Vows. p. 127. Chap.
5. How Religious Perfection consists ^n the three Vows. page 134. Chap. 6.
Of the perfect observation of Reli^ious Vows. page 142. Chap. 7. Of the three
Vows in particular: and first of the Vow of Poverty, how agreeable and
requisite it is, that Religious be lovers thereof. p. 150 Chap. 8. Of the
dignity, and commendation ^f Religious Poverty. page 158. Chap. 9. Of the
vtility and profit, that vo^untary Poverty brings to the Religious. page 164.
Chap. 10. How God, even in this life, rewards the Religious for their Vow of
Poverty. p. 171. Chap. 11. Of the necessity of the observing ^he Vow of
Poverty. page 179. Chap. 12. Of the defects, that are committed against
Poverty. page 186. Chap. 13. Of the Vow of Chastity, and what Religious
Chastity is, and the proper office thereof. p. 194. Chap. 14. Of the Excellency
of Religious Chastity. page 200. Chap. 15. How greatly convenient it is for a
Religious man to be chaste. page 206. Chap. 16. How profitable and necessary it
is, that a Religious man be chaste. page 213. Chap. 17. Of the vtility of
Religious Chastity. page 219. Chap. 18. Of the dangers of loosing Chastity.
page 226. Chap. 19. Of the means to conserve Chastity. page 232* Chap. 20. Of
the Vow of Obedience, an^ wherein Religious Obedience consists. page 238*
Chap. 21. How acceptable to God the Obedience of a Religious man is. page 244.
Chap. 22. Of the Excellency and Dignity o^ Religious Obedience. page 251. Chap.
23. Of the profit and vtility, that Obedience brings to a Religious man. page
258. Chap. 24. How it is convenient, that a Religious man be studious of
Obedience. page 266. Chap. 25. Of the first degree of Obedience, which
consists in execution of any thing commanded. page 273. Chap. 26. Of the
second Degree of Obedience appertayning to the Will. page 281. Chap. 27. Of
the third degree of Obedience, appertayning to the Understanding. page 289.
Chap. 28. The conclusion of Religious Obedience. page 296.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of Religious Humility. page 299. Chap. 2. Of a Religious man's Love
toward God. page 312. Chap. 3. Of the Religious man's Charity to his Neighbor.
page 323. Chap. 4. Of the Religious man's gratitude toward God for the benefits
he has received. p. 331. Chap. 5. Of Patience, necessary in a Religious man.
page 339. Chap. 6. Of Meeknes, that ought to be practiced by Religious men.
page 349. Chap. 7. Of Mortification, necessary for a Religious man. page 357.
Chap. 8. Of Discretion required in a Religious man. page 367. Chap. 9. Of
Indifferency, necessary for a Religious man. page 375. Chap. 10. Of Modesty,
necessary for a Religious man. page 382. Chap. 11. Of the virtue of Prayer. p.
388. Cha. 12. Of the Virtue of Perseuera^ce. p. 399.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
Chap. 1. How a Religious man must not take it ill, though he be contemned of
others. page 407. Chap. 2. That a Religious man must not be overmuch desirous
of the co^modityes of his body. p. 416 Chap. 3. That it is not enough for a
Religious man to mortify his body, unless the mind be restrained also. page 425.
Chap. 4. That a Religious man must shake off his inordinate affection to his
parents. page 433. Chap. 5. That the Religious man ought to use great prudence,
and circumspection in the company of others. page 440. Chap. 6. That a
Religious man must fly Ease and ^dlenes. page 447. Chap. 7. That a Religious
man ought to be practiced in hearing, and talking of God, and of spiritual
matters. page 454. Chap. 8. That a Religious man ought to be diligent in all
his Actions. page 461. Chap. 9. That a Religious man must not contend with any,
but must intertaine peace with all. page 468. Chap. 10. How a Religious man
ought to carry himself in his Tribulations. page 475. Chap. 11. That a
Religious man ought to have a care of governing his tongue. page 487. Cha. 12.
That a Religious man ought to make his profit of all corrections and
admonitions. p 499. Chap. 13. How a Religious man ought to carry himself in
his scruples. page 509. Chap. 14. That a Religious man must fly Curiosity.
page 520. Chap. 15. That a Religious man ought to fly from all manner of
Ambition. page 527. Certain aduertisements to Religious men, for the leading
of a virtuous life in Religion p. 537. The Religious man's Looking-glass. page
553.
THE MIRROVR OF Religious Perfection.
THE FIRST BOOK. Wherein is treated of Vocation to Religion, and of the End
thereof, which is Perfection.
Of the End which God requires of those, whom he calls to Religion.

CHAP. I.
MY Son, I am the Author and Creator of men, and therefore have I a singular
care of them al: and to every one do I suggest such a manner of directing his
life, as by the conduct whereof, in loving and serving me his Lord and Maker, he
cannot e^re in attayning his eternal salvation. But some have I selected and
chosen out in particular, amongst which number thou art one, and called from
the world to Religion, that is, to a state far more excellent and more perfect
then the secular that thou might know, love, and serve me after a more
perfect manner, and with more facility and cafe a^taine to Heaven, enriched
with the merits of good Works. Neither have I ordained the Offices and
exercises, which thou have found in religion whereto I have called thee, to any
other end, then that by the help thereof thou should labor more or less to
the perfection of a spiritual life. For if there be just cause, that more be
exacted of them, to whom more has been given, for the like reason also a
greater love and desire of Perfection is required at the hands of the Religious
upon whom I have heaped, and with munificent hand bestowed so singular gifts
and privileges.

2. So did I before time deliver my most beloved people of Israel out of their
sore servitude of Aegipt, that being brought into the most pleasant Land of
Promise, they might there attend to the serving of me in a more quiet, and
perfect manner. Therefore did I by Moses give them a Law, and appointed them
Ceremonies to observe and keep. All were indeed exempted, and set free from the
miseries of Aegipt, but all entered not into the Land of Promise. For they who
out of an hard heart became rebellious to my precepts, were as ungrateful
persons deservedly punished and taken out of this life: for he is not worthy of
pardon, who contemns his Lord and Masters command.

3. O how much are those Religious persons deceived, who think they have
satisfied their vocation, if they charge not, nor stain their conscience with
mortal sins, and when they do any the very least good work, they think I am
contented there with, and thereupon, without further care or desire of ariuing to
Perfection, they languish and become careless in my service. But the cause
stands not so: for I have delivered the^ from out the snares of the world,
and out of the danger of more grievous faults, not for any other end, then
that they may the more readily attain to the perfection of a spiritual life,
by serving of me truly, and deserving my grace by the continual exercise of
holy actions.

4. Certes, that man who out of a certain carelesnes neglects to attain to
the perfection that I require of him, besides this going backward, and
fainting, pleases me nothing at all. For as I have said by my Prophet, it is
not enough to have declyned from evil, but he must further do what good he
can, co^formably to the state whereunto he is called. He sustayneth a great
detriment, who when he may with his commodity, by carelesnes neglects the
abundant gain of spiritual things. And therefore no marvel, though some
religious persons ^^uer come to those inestimable treasures, that I have
prepared for them in the Land of the living. And more then this, it is no
wonder, that some do leave their vocation, and return to the flesh pots of
Aegipt, that is unto the world, since I do most justly permit it for their
negligence, carelesnes, and ingratitude unto me. For he is worthily spoiled of
his goods, who either knows them not or uses them not according as he should
do.

5. If I had freed you but from the worlds calamities, miseries, and deceits, I
had done you a great good turn; but I have besides this called you to Religion,
have admitted you as it were into mine own family, and bestowed all manner of
commodities upon you, that you might the more perfectly serve me. Go to, tell
me whosoever thou be, that have not a will to labor to come to that Perfection
of loving and serving me, but think it enough, if thou offendest me not with
a mortal sin, whose is the greater hurt, mine, or thine? surely it is thine
alone, and that much greater then thou conceiuest. Again tell me, if thou
enioyedst al commodities in the world, and were freed from all dangers of
life, and were further assured of thy salvation, would thou not hold it for a
singular benefit to serve me thy Creator and Lord? doubtless thou would.

6. Now then seeing I have exempted thee from all miseries and troubles of the
world, and have delivered thee from the dangers both of body and soul, that
thou may be able the more commodiously to serve me the King of Glory, judge
thou thy self whether it be not fit and requisite for thee to shake off al
drowsines and negligence. Do thou peradventure think, that I require of thee
more pure, and more perfect love and service, then of secular persons, because
any commodity may thereby accrue unto me? It is not so: for I need not thy
service, since all the fruit thereof redoundeth not to me, but unto thy self.

7. Besides, the state of thy profession requires, that thou serve me withal
the perfection that possibly in thee lies, since Religion is nothing else, but
the School of Perfection. Neither is it any other thing to be religious, then
to enter into a course of life, wherein a man may labor to the perfection of
loving me, and embracing of virtues. Wherefore vain is the Religion of those,
who in the exercise of good works neglect this way of perfection. For this is
that, which I require of all Religious Persons; this is my will, and for this
very cause have I drawn them out of the worlds snares, and placed them in the
paradise of religion. The tree may not continue long standing in the orchard,
that shall not bring forth fruit, for which it was there planted, set, or
graffed.

Wherein consists the Perfection of the love and serving of God, whereunto a
Religious Person is bound: and what God requires at his hands.

CHAP. II.
SOME religious persons do perform great matters. If they do them not moved
out of a pure love to me, they neither please me, nor am I bound to any
remuneration for them: but if they do them for love of me, yet with a
languishing, and imperfect love, they do not satisfy their profession and
vocation. So when I called thee out of the world, thou did deliver thy self
wholly unto me, and did promise to do all for my love, and I accepted this
thy promise, received thee into my house, as one of mine, gave thee my Livery,
provided thee of all necessaries, and entreated and used thee as one most dear
unto me. And if thou now shall have a will to let some other enter into, and
possess thy heart, or to make this part common to another besides me, thou
should not indeed discharge the office and part of a perfect lover, since thou
must not give that to another, that thou have given to me already. For he who
receives and takes unto himself the thing again, that he has once given to
another, either for himself or to give to another, is a thief and worthy to
be punished.

2. Have thou a desire, my Son, to know, what religious person loves me
perfectly? Truly he does it, who in all things, as well little as great,
seeks to do what pleases me: who delayeth no time of executing my will so
soon as he shall understand it: who does not only willingly obey my
commandme^ts, but also manifests a promptitude and readiness in himself, at
the very least sign or beck of my will. A perfect lover has one and the same
heart, and the same will with the beloved, and therefore both hates, and loves
what the beloved hates or loves. A perfect lover spares no pains nor
travail, all wearines is sweet unto him, that he may accomplish, what is
pleasing to the beloved. The perfect lover is not only wary and vigilant not to
displease the beloved in the very least thing, but also is exceeding careful
to please him more and more. He that labors not to affect and love a thing
as it deserves, either knows it not, or is otherwise injurious unto it.

3. That religious man is far from perfection, who when he shall have set his
affection and care over much upon things of little regard, is much troubled, and
lamenteth if I at any time procure, or cause the same to be removed, or taken
away from him. This is a sign of an imperfect lover, who loves me more in
words then in deeds. He does indeed confess in words, that he has given
himself wholly unto me, but his heart entangled with dissembled love, holds
him so fast tied, as if I would use mine own right in wholly enjoying it, and
thrust out of it the love of the very least thing of all, it would eftsoons
be in trouble, and rise against me. Many say, and brag that they love me, but
I only regard them, who love me in works and verity. The tongue makes no true
and sincere lovers, but the works that have their sourse and spring from a
pious and devout mind.

4. It remains now, that I show unto thee, what religious person serves me
perfectly. He I say perfectly serves me, who serves me of pure love, though
he show it not by so great works: for what ever is done for love of me, I
esteem much, and will abundantly requite it. I make a greater reckoning of a
good work, though very little, proceeding from a burning love, then of a great
work, accompanied with a mean measure of love. Some weary themselves out with
taking exceeding great pains, but with very little, or no profit at all to
themselves: for that the actions, though never so good, which be not sealed up
with the seal of charity, be not grateful to me, and therefore they receive
not their hire: and if they be sealed up with a little seal, their reward is
also little. Others in serving me seek after their own commodities, whereof
when they shall see but a little hope, they pull their hand back from their
accustomed labors of serving me, and do excuse the same through weakness of
body or of mind: but indeed there is nothing that makes them afraid, but their
own will, and the absence of those commodities they had hoped for.

5. He serves amiss, who in serving seeks to profit himself: for such an
one serves not me, but himself, and therefore he does in vain expect any
reward from me. He that will not for love of me discommodate himself, neither
is my servant, neither do I hold him worthy the name of a servant. A good
servant is nothing afraid to suffer adversities for his Lord and Master, and
this is to be truly a servant. My Gospel denounces, that a servant ought to
be not only faithful, but also wise: for he is bound to accommodate himself to
the will, and manners of his Master, and he must not seek, that his Lord
accommodate himself to his will. He cannot possibly serve another, who has a
will to live at his own pleasure, and as he lists himself.

6. Many religious persons live discontended with their sot in religion, and
that they must not impute to me, but to themselves. For being blinded with the
overmuch love of themselves, they will live where they list, and exercise those
functions and offices that like them best, and not what the Rule, or Obedience
shall assign them: and if they be not pleased in their desires, they ^all into
passion, and leaving the narrow way, they enter into the broad way of this
world, and do lay the cause of their incon^tancy upon others. It is not the
part of a subject in religion to make his choice either of place, or of office,
but it is in him to obey ^he Superiors ordination, will, and commandment.

7. A wise servant only aymeth at this, that he may well and rightly conceive
his masters will, and willingly and diligently execute the thing that shall be
commanded him. And he is not so hardy, as to say, this or that office is not
for me, this or that place likes me, this exercise and not any other pleases
me: for that were to vsurp the office of the master, and not of the servant,
to seek trouble and disquiet, not peace and quietness. For how know thou,
whether this, or that exercise be for thy souls good, or the ruin of it? How
can thou tell, that in the place thou have chosen, thou shall not meet with
any tentation? Therefore a wise servant does with more consideration expect,
until he understand from his master, where, and in what it shall please him to
use his industry, pains, and service. And though sometimes he may have a
thought, that this or that office will do him good, yet he desires not, that
it should be cast upon him, because he knows not whether he be a fit man to
discharge it. For it appertains to the Superior, and not to the subject to
judge whether he be fit, or no. For it is not enough, that the office be good
and fit for thee, but there is further required, that thou be good, and fit to
exercise the same.

That a Religious person ought to make great reckoning of his vocation.

CHAP. III.
LORD, I should be ever foolish, wilful, and untoward, if I should not
esteem of my vocation, which I doubt not, but is to be numbered amongst the
heavenly gifts, proceeding from thine endless clemency. I should also be very
ungrateful, if I should not continually render thy divine majesty thanks, for
that without any desert of mine thou have vouchafed to cast thy merciful eyes
upon me, and among so many millions of men, to receive me into an holy family
of Religious persons.

2. So it is, my Son indeed, thou art to make an high esteem of thy
vocation, not only because it is my gift, but also because thou art admitted
unto it, not deserving ^t, but rather worthy of my wrath and indi^nation,
procured by the perverse conditions and manners of thy forepassed life. And if
^hou make no reckoning of so great and sin^ular a benefit of love, besides the
punishment which is due to so extreme an ingratitude, ^hou make thy self
worthy to be spoiled ^f all the gifts, and graces bestowed upon ^hee. For he is
unworthy of all benefit, who either acknowledges it not for such, ^r
altogether refuses it.

3. Besides that, since it is undoubted and ^ertaine, that among all things
which thou ^ast, nothing is more precious the^ thy soul, and that amongst thy
greatest affairs, that is ^he most important, which concerns the ^uer saving
thereof; it manifestly follows, that, that vocation is especially to be
esteemed, whereby a man comes to save his ^oule. And he makes a great account
of his vocation, who loves it, admireth it, and most inwardly affects it.
Neither is this enough (for he may not escape the note of ^n ungrateful
person, who though he makes a great reckoning of the benefit, does nevertheless
forget the benefactour) but to ^ake away, or prevent the blot of an vngrat^ul
mind, there needs both an heart, a tongue and deeds to requite the good turn,
and benefit done thee.

4. It again thou consider, whence I have called thee, thou should do thy
self an injury, if thou should little regard so great a benefit: for by
calling thee out of the world, I have delivered thee out of an intricate and
dangerous labyrinth, into the turnings and windings whereof the further a man
shall put himself, the harder makes he his own getting out. For we see the
miserable lovers of this world being puffed up but with a little smoke of
ambition, and vain glory, to hunt and range after honors and dignityes, as
though they were put forwards, and driven by the very furies of hell. And as
often as this smoke drives toward them, they please themselves, and become
proud, but when it declineth them, their courage falls, they have no heart at
all, and give themselves to sorrow and languishment. And yet all this smoke
does nothing, but fill the eyes of them who gape after it, with tears and
weeping, and their mind with bitterness.

5. Others taking the way of carnal pleasures, do precipitate themselves into
such a madness and frenzy, as they make no reckoning at al of either foregoing
life, soul yea their supreme and only good, which i^ God himself, so they may
enjoy their co^tenment of a most fliting and base pleasure. A carnal and
sensual man has neither knowledge, nor taste of matters appertaining to God,
and therefore is ready and apt to exchang them for a short and little pleasure
of the senses, in so much as no marvel it is, though a blind man be deceived.
Others not finding a way how to forsake their honors and humane reputation, if
they be once frustrated of their desires in that kind, transported with wrath
and indignation, become more fierce and raging, then the very wild beasts,
whils for revenge of the very least injury, they come to kill one another, and
overthrow both families and cittyes.

6. Whosoever is cruel toward his own soul, is also cruel to others: for
none hurts his neighbor, who first hurts not himself Others sore oppressed
with the yoke of wedlock, are so sore afflicted, as they wish rather to dye,
then to lead a life among so many and daily molestations, troubles, and cares
of children and family. An unfortunate choice has an unfortunate conclusion.
Others walk up and down in a labyrinth, but yet fettered in a golden chain,
that is, with riches and wealth of this world, which torments them, as poor
bond-slaues, both night and day, without giving them any true rest at all. To
be fast bound with a cord is a very sore punishment, whether it be of silk, or
gold. He is a fool, who casts all his affection upon things, that in his
life time cause trouble and care, and at his death sorrow and grief. Riches
that are possessed with love, be forgone and left with grief.

7. Understand further, my Son, that the world, out of which I have called
thee, is a School, wherein humane laws made by men given to passions, are more
regarded then be the laws divine. For in it is taught, that the transitory and
brittle goods, that pass away and perish unto us with death, are more to be
esteemed, them be those, that accompany us to the other life, and do never dye.
In it the more foully a man is deceived and offends, the more prone is he to
sin still, and the less acknowledges he the greeuousnes thereof. In this
school the good and virtuous are laughed at, the wicked and reprobate be
commended, and therefore it is worse then hell it self, where all the wicked are
reproved, and tormented.

8. Now if thou consider, in what place I have put thee, thou shall find many
causes of yealding me thanks for the benefit of thy vocation. I have placed
thee in a religious state, that is, in mine own house, the fo^ndations whereof
since they be laid in Humility, all those that dwell in it, for the knowledge
they have of their own weakness and vtility, do rejoice in the contempt of
themselves, and had rather live in obscurity, then be known; rather to be
reprehended then commended. They reueng not themselves of injuries done to
them, but they willingly forgive them. There they live in a most pleasing
tranquillity, and peace: there, Mine and Thine, that is the origin and
fountain of all dissentions, has no place at all. All there do labor for the
common good, al help one another: he that can do more, does more: and all serve
one another, and all again serve God. There be many together without
confusion, great variety of nations and of manners without difference of
opinions and judgments; functions and offices so distributed, as one troubles
not another, and yet all ordained for the glory of God, to the good of souls.

9. The keepers of this house be three sisters, most inwardly conjoined by
faith, fidelity, and the fast band of love; whose office is to defend, and keep
all those who dwell therein, from all calamityes of this present life, and to
secure them from the incursions of enemies, both visible and invisible. For
voluntary poverty exempteth a religious man from all trouble of procuring,
conseruing, and increasing worldly riches, which are wont so to molest, and
pain the rich men's minds and hearts, as they leave not unto them a moment of
quiet and repose. Again Chastity delivers them from infinite desires of the
flesh, whose tyranny oftentims grows so great and outrageous through the
contentments of carnal pleasures, as it makes the soul (Reason being brought
in subjection to the lust of the flesh) a mere bond-slaue.

10. Finally Obedience exempteth a Religious man from dangers, whereinto they
do cast themselves, who out of a certain secret pride, desire to do all things
by their own will and judgment, refusing to be advised or counseled by
others, and by so doing cast themselves into the Devils snares, who is the
author of all pride. He that has virtue to guard him, has security on earth,
and is not without his reward in heaven.

11. Therefore understand my Son, that the School of religion is directly
repugnant to the school of the world. For in that, is delivered the manner and
way of serving God, by the observation of his precepts and counsels: in it is
showed unto thee a most compendious and secure way of coming to the end
whereunto thou art created. In it are discovered and laid open the frauds, and
snares of Satan, set by him for the intangling of souls, and thrusting them
down into hell. Of this school I am the chief master, and governor, who do
by inward inspirations show unto all men the way of perfection. In the
instruction of the scholars of this School, I observe no difference of
persons: for I have no more regard of a Gentleman then of a Clown, of a rich
man then of a poor; though I love and affect those more, who do practically by
their works manifest, how well they have learned their lessons of humility,
meeknes, obedience, and the rest of the virtues, which I both declared by
example of my life, when I lived amongst you, and also dictated after my
departure to my Evangelists, who did faithfully write them for the use of
posterity. He is no good scholar, who endeavors not to imitate his master.

How greatly a Religious man offends God, who makes light reckoning of his
Vocation, and Religion.

CHAP. IIII.
VVHITHER soever Lord, I turn my self, I find causes of fear. For if I
examine the benefit of my vocation to Religion, I conceive it to be so noble
and excellent, as I must confess my self far unable to render thanks for it.
If I look into my self, I find so great an imbecility, and dastardy, as I am
afraid least I should be deemed most ungrateful. Again the greatness of thy
majesty confounds me, being such and so great, as no satisfaction can
possibly be made unto thee, but by a certain infinite love, and serving of
thee, which is more then I can, or am able to do. Who then would not be afraid?

2. Out of question my Son, I bestowed a great benefit upon thee, when I
took thee out of the stormy Ocean of the world, and placed thee in the quiet
harbor of Religion. It is also certain, that of this benefit there arises an
obligation, and that by so much the greater, by how much the benefit was great.
But for this thou have not any just cause to fear: since I am he, who do
communicate to all, competent grace and forces, toward the satisfying of their
obligation, so they be not slack and negligent of themselus, but do put to
their own helping hand, as much as they are able. And it is my manner of old
to be rather more frank and liberal in bestowing of benefits, then severe in
exacting obligations and debts.

3. Neither is there cause, that the greatness of my Majesty should put into
thee any fear, or confusion, so thou be not wanting on thy part in loving and
serving me; not so much as my worthiness requires, but as thine own forces be
of ability to bear, since I have never exacted more of a man, then he can well
do. That person has indeed just cause to fear, who when he is able does not
what he ought, and is required of him to do.

4. There is but one thing for thee greatly to be afraid of, and that is, that
thou offend not me thy benefactour by some greiuous sin, who of my singular
grace have raised thee up to so high an estate of holy life, and am ready to
raise thee higher, if thou be not a let thereunto thy self. That religious man
offends me most of all, who thinks that he may live a more holy life in the
world, then in religion, and that is the cause he makes so light esteem of
the benefit of his vocation. For he who affoardeth me little honor, respect,
and service in mine own house, will not doubtless yeald me greater where my
enemies have to do. This is a manifest and notable abuse and deceit, and the
very origin of all perturbation. For if a man could serve me more perfectly in
the world, I would never have invited him to religion. All good proceeds from
me: I wish and counsel true and solid perfection to all, and I know best,
what most profits and is necessary for every one toward the attayning of his
salvation.

5. A religious man must not cast his eyes upon that which best pleases him,
and highly prefer it before another thing, as more excellent; but what shall
please me. Those also offend me sorely, who when in religion they obtain not
all things as they list, or have their part in some discommodities, do easily
murmr, and as it were sorrowing and greiued that they have forsaken the
world, do think a religious life hard, and painful. So were some of the
children of Israel affected, when they were out of Aegipt. For so soon as they
began to want their former commodities, and to endure the troublesome labors
of trauayling, they murmured; and reflecting upon the fleshpots of Aegipt, they
wished themselves again in their former bondage. I did not call them out to
rest, but to take pains; neither did I appoint them recreations, and great
commodities of life, but from the very beginning diligently inculcated, that
many things were to be endured for Christ, and that the flesh is to be
mortified, together with the desires thereof: and this condition they accepted,
and undertook to perform. What cause then have they to complain? And though
none of all this had happened, yet if their Lord suffered so great matters for
them, what great thing shall they do, if they also being servants, shall suffer
somewhat for their Lord?

6. A religious man, who is afraid to suffer any thing, loses his reward, and
because a man must needs suffer many things, if the labor and affliction be
doubled, it makes the burden the more intolerable. Others make light esteem
of Religion their Mother, for that they think themselves not bound to their
religion, but their religion to them. But they are deceived. For if they
examine the matter well, they shall find that they have received very many
benefits of religion, and religion none at all by them. For to be religious and
Gods feruant, is so noble a gift of God, and of Religion, as it ought worthily
to be preferred before all the good works, that are done for religion. For
there is not any earthly dignity in the world, that may enter into comparison
with the dignity of religious life. It is an argument of a base and unthankful
mind, if a religious person busy himself rather in thinking upon the
commodityes that he has brought to religion, then those that he has received
from it.

7. Again that religious man displeases me not a little, who cares not how
he imployeth the talent he has received of me: for by that he manifests,
what small reckoning he makes of it, and has no will to satisfy his office,
when he may, and is able. How many be there, who being able to my great
pleasure, do undergo some exercise for the good and helping of souls, but
because they see they be not able to do them with so great applause, as some
others can, they give them clean over. Is not this an ambitious pride? Is not
this to hide the talent under ground, which I gave him to make his gain
therewith? I cannot be ignorant, what is good and healthful for every one, and
therefore I give five talents to some, two to others, and but one to another.
And though to negotiate with one talent, does not carry so great applause and
credit amongst men, as to negotiate and traffic with five, yet it is not so
with me. For I consider not, how much every one negotiateth, but how well and
carefully. And if to negotiate with the help of many talents, should redound to
the souls good of many, and to the greater glory of my name, it would be a
work worthy of commendation.

8. But this is that which I find fault withal, that many have a desire to
have many talents, and much negotiation, that they may be the more admired at,
and the better esteemed of men, whiles to me, the author of all good, they
leave either no place at al, or very little. My beloved servants did not so at
other times, who ascribed the imperfections and lapses to themselves, and the
fruit of their good works to me, and that they might transfer the praise and
glory of all their labors to me, they would be said to be unprofitable
servants: for the commendation of an excellent work returns not to the
instrument that wrought it, but to the craftesman himself.

9. Son, of the contempt of thy vocation, or religious profession, there
grows another evil, and that is a negligence, or carelesnes of attayning the
end of thy vocation, and a neglect of observing the rules of thy proper
Institute. And this vice offends me so highly, as I am forced even to punish
such persons in this present life. I abundantly affoard them health and
strength of body, wit, and all helps both natural and spiritual, that they
may cheerfully hold on in the course of virtue which they have begone, and at
length come to their prefixed end. And if they by neglecting and contemning all
this, reap no fruit of their good works at all; what marvel, though like
unto the accursed fig tree, that did indeed bear leaves, but yet no fruit at
al, they sometimes decay, and wither away. The trees that I have planted in a
religious garden, ought continually to yeald the fruit of good works; else as
unprofitable, they are to be accursed, and being once withered are to be
thrown into hell fire. For whosoever works not well, whiles he is able,
shall not escape unpunished, when he would.

Of the tentations, and dangers of leaving ones Vocation.

CHAP. V.
SON, the gift of thy vocation to a religious life, is a precious jewel,
which has no place on Earth, nor is it procured by friends, or obtained with
money, but comes down from Heaven from the Father of lights, and is of so
great a price and worth, as nothing in this life may be compared to it. The
property of this precious ^iewell is most worthy of admiration. For by it own
bright shining light it shows unto religious persons all the down-falles and
dangers, that be in this present life: which because secular men, who are
destitute of the light of this divine gemme, cannot see or discover, they
otherwhils stumble and fall very sore. It further lays open al impostures,
tentations, and trecheryes, that the enemy of man's salvation uses for the
intrapping and vndermying of souls.

2. Again this light is so clear, as it makes entrance even into Gods heart,
and unto Religious men lays open Gods will touching their own state: and in
the execution of this will of God, Religious Perfection consists. Who uses
not the benefit of this light in his way to salvation, walks not in security,
and though he fall not, yet he must needs many times tryp and stumble. The
virtue also of this noble Gemme is of no less reckoning, the^ is the
brightness. For it gives great courage and force to those, who labor toward
heaven (whence it also comes) against the enemy both visible and invisible,
who seeks to stop up the way thitherward. For it animateth the Religious to
overcome al difficultyes that occur in the spiritual way.

3. This gemme has yet another condition, that the longer it is worn and
used, the fayrer and perfecter it becomes. It can never be taken from a
Religious man, to whom it is once given. It cannot be lost unless he has a
meaning of himself wilfully to cast it away. If then a Religious man should
make light esteem of this jewel, should he not be worthy severely to be
punished? And should he not deal injuriously with his benefactour, if he
should forbear to use the virtue and efficacy of it? For he is accounted no
less ungrateful, who uses not the benefit bestowed upon him, then he who
acknowledges it not, or disteemeth it. This gemme as it is defended with three
vows, that guard and keep it; so is it beseeged by three cruel enemies, who
seek continually to steal and take it away. The first ^s the World, who
puts man forwards to ^eeke after riches and vanities. The second ^s the
Flesh, together with the desires, and ^he whole route of sensual pleasures.
The ^hird is the Devil with his proud suggestio^s proceeding of self love.

4. My Son, that thou may not loose so great a Treasure, thou must needs
have ^hree things. The first is Vigilance or Circumspection, for that whiles a
man sleeps ^n the field, cockle is easily sown amidst the good corn: and he
that is not considerate and wary, easily falls into the enemies ^nares. The
second is a singular affection toward the jewel of this thy Vocation, that
^hou may love it more heartily then thine own life: for the better it is
loved, the more carefully is it kept. And because it is so excellent, as it
brings thee to God, and to e^ernall felicity, nothing ought to be more dear
unto thee then the same, as there is not any thing found in heaven or in earth,
that ^s more excellent then God, or everlasting ^aluation. The third thing
necessary, is that ^hou place this Jewel so fast in thy heart that ^hou suffer
it not to be taken from thee by any adversity, or pleasure, or for the respect
of any creature whatsoever, and if any should go about to spoil thee of it,
that together with it he must take away thy heart also.

5. Besides these, there be some other things that hurt a Religious man, and
dispose and prepare him to the overthrowing of Gods calling in him. In the
first place thou must earnestly endeavor to mortify and root out the bad
habits thou have brought out of the world, before they thrust thee from the
state of religion. For like unto bad plants in the ground, they stick fast in
the most inward parts of the mind, and become to be so strong in time, and so
great, as they in conclusion choke up the good seed of thy vocation, that they
may obscure, and take away the bright shining of this heavenly margarite.
Whosoever in religion retayneth his perverse habits of the world, sufficiently
manifests, that he has not wholly abandoned the world. The horse running out
of the stable, and carrying his halter with him wherewith he was tied, by often
stumbling is easily taken, and brought back again into the stable: even so a
Religious man, running out of the stable of this world, if he draw his old
manners and customs with him, by often stumbling easily yealdeth to tentations,
and is brought back again into the stable of the world, out of which he had
run. He profits nothing by his running away, who runs away hal^^ad or
tied.

6. It also much hurts a Religious man, and in time throws him down from
the state wherein I have placed him, to make little reckoning of lighter faults
and defects, which do by little and little quite overthrow him, and bring him
into a certain loose, and hurtful liberty of life, wherewith the true spirit
of Vocation cannot have coherence, which in all things both little and great
requires observation. He can never be secure, who whiles he may, freeth not
himself from his enemies, though they be never so little. An house before it
falls gives some little signs of the future ruin, which if the owner
prevent not in time, it soon after quite falls to the ground: So a religious
man, if he do not in the very beginning provide a remedy against little faults
and defects, that are found and observed in him, will in time shake and weaken
all his vocation: and bound fast in such kind of bands, will lead a miserable
life out of Gods house. Who heals not up his wounds in good time when need
is, repents himself with his own greater hurt afterward.

7. Those also suffer great detriment in their vocation, who discover not their
tentations, nor defects to their Superior. The thief flies away as soon as he
is discovered, but whiles he is not known, he never gives over, till he has
stolen some thing: Even so a Religious man, as long as he concealeth from his
Superior, what it were fitting for him to know, gives an occasion to the
infernal thief of robbing him of the precious Jewel of his vocation. He that
discovers not unto the Physician the quality of his disease or sickness,
either understands not the greiuousnes thereof, or makes light reckoning of
any cure.

8. O how much deceyueth he himself, who over confidently thinks himself
secure in his vocation. This presumption arises of nothing but this, that he
does not sufficiently examine and consider his own imbecility, and who he is.
For the more exactly a man looks into himself, the more he fears, and the
less confident is he in his own ability. And this is an excellent remedy for
the procuring of strength and courage against all tentations. But he that is
more confident in his own industry then is meet, easily turns his back in
the very beginning of the encounter, and abandoneth the Colors of his
Religion. The more a Religious man presumes of himself, the less he does,
because presumption is the daughter of pride. But he who fears, does the
more, because holy fear is the daughter of Humility, which ever moves us to
work well.

9. Moreover a Religious man is deceived, and is not far from danger of
leaving his vocation, who thinks, that he may be able to do more good in the
world, then in Religion. For who is not good amongst the good, and amongst so
many examples of good persons, and in an holy place, how will he do good in a
bad world amongst the bad, where so many bad examples will be presented every
day unto his eyes, and where so many occasions be of living naughtily? With
these frauds the devil uses to draw the unwary Religious man into his net.
For when he shall once have persuaded him, that he may do more, and more
excellent works in the world, he forth with suggesteth that no great reckoning
is to be made of the state of Religion, and so in conclusion dryueth him from
his vocation. It is the Devils property to deceive under pretense of good, who
never casts out his hook, but that it is ever bayted to catch Religious
persons.

10. Neither be they in less danger, who by a certain careless drowsines wax
by little and little cold in spirit, and in my service, and though they well
find and perceive this in themselves, yet they neglect to put it away. When a
sick man's feet, or hands become so cold, that they cannot recover heat, it is
a sign, that he is in extremity and near unto his death: So a cold Religious
man, if he take not pains to recover his heat and warmth of spirit, is not
far from dying spritually, and from danger of loosing his religious life. Who
will not be helped, when he may and can, how can he be secure of obtaining help
at all times?

That it is not enough for a Religious man, to be called of God to Religion,
but he muct earnestly labor to the perfection of his Vocation.

CHAP. VI.
LORD, I give thee most hearty thanks for this precious stone, that thou have
vouchsafed to send me down from heaven, when as pitying me, thou calledst me
to holy Religion; and I ascribe all the joy and spiritual comfort, which I
receive heerby in consecrating my self to a Religious state, to thy goodness
and clemency.

2. My Son, if thou do this, and no more besides, thou come too short of
thy duty. For unless besides these things, thou endeavor by good and holy
actions to arrive to the perfection of thy vocation, instead of being rewarded
thou shall be punished. To be called to religion, and to wear the habit,
increases the punishment, unless not by words, but by works thou answer so
many and so great benefits of mine bestowed upon thee. He that after benefits
received of me, neglects to profit in virtue, does not only incur the note
of ingratitude, but does further, as it were, bind my hands fast, that I give
or bestow no more upon him. Men do ordinarily make a conjecture by the outward
habit and clothing, whether one be Religious or not; but I judge by the inward.

3. O how many do dwell in Monasteries, and wear a religious habit, and be not
indeed religious, as be al those who have not wholly given themselves to the
exercise of a religious life, and of solid virtues, but do partly serve God,
and partly the world. Contrariwise there be many in the world, who wear a
secular habit indeed, but yet in affection be truly Religious, and do exercise
virtue; in so much, as it is not the habit, nor the place, that make a true
Religious man, but the inward heart and mind, and the external works which do
manifest the same.

4. What does it profit a man to be notably well armed, if at the time when by
commandment of his Captain General he were to fight with his enemy, he
should not use them? The tree that yealdeth no fruit, is to no purpose suffered
to stand in an orchard, since it is for no other end planted there, then for the
bearing of fruit. I have taken up all religious persons to serve me in my
war, and have given them weapons and arms, that they may use them, as I
would have them. And therefore whosoever glories in the name of a Religious
man, and shows not by deed his love toward me, nor does conformably to the
spirit of his vocation yeald me spiritual fruit, he does not the office and
part of a Religious man.

5. O how far are they deceived, who think themselves to have discharged their
duty well, for that they have entered into the state of religion, and continued
therein, often reckoning the number of the years, which they have lived in it,
and not examining how negligent they have been in the exercise of pious works,
and how little fruit and profit they have reaped by their labors and pains.
The number of years makes not a Religious man happy, but his good works, and
the exercise of virtues. To glory of the great continuance in religion, and to
be deuoid of virtue, and the perfection thereof, is no commendation at all, but
a reproach and condemnation.

6. The scholar, that has frequented the School for many years, is not to be
therefore praised, but he that has profited in the school, and is become
excellent for his learning. If thou would consider that thou art to give an
account of all the time thou have misspent in religion before my Tribunal, thou
would not brag of thy self, but lament rather, for having, like a fruitles
tree, occupied the place of another, who might with greater profit have yealded
me much fruit.

7. In like manner he also deceyueth himself, who being entered into the gate
of religion, thinks it enough, if he transgress not Gods commaundmends, and
is not offensive, or scandalous to any. But he is wholly deceived, neither am I
content therewith alone: for he who thinks he may make a stand here, does not
a little offend me. He cease to be a true religious man, when he begins to
have a will not to be better.

8. A good religious person never thinks himself to have arrived to
perfection, nor ever says, Now it is enough. For he knows that in the
spiritual life, not to go forwards is to go backwards. It is my will, that a
religious man mortify himself conformably to his Institute, and exercise
himself manfully in all those things, that be thereby prescribed or commanded.
This if he do, he answers his vocation, and for this end have I called him to
a religious state. And who sees not that he performs very little or nothing
at all, who when he has means to do much good for his own soul, and for
Religion, does of set purpose let all alone? Who again sees not, that he is
far out of the way, who thinks himself to satisfy his vocation and
institute, if he find himself to have a will to do no evil?

9. Tell me, I pray thee, what that mariner meriteth, who being hired to help
in the time of navigations, should think that there were no more for him to do,
the^ not to be troublesome to any in the ship? or when there were occasion to
hoise up the sails, or let them down, or to fight with pirates, should sit
still and look upon others? Should not he deserve, as an unprofitable servant,
I say not, to be only thrust out of the ship, but also to be cast headlong into
the sea? Even so should it be with a religious man, who being admitted into a
religious ship, upon no other condition, then that he should exercise himself
in the functions of religion should give way, or place to idleness, which in all
Congregations has ever been a thing sca^dalous. Neither can it be said, that
an idle person does no evil, because he does evil enough, who does not what
he ought. This man then if he be not thrust out of religion, nor be cast into
the sea of this unhappy world, as he well deserves, cannot yet escape the
final sentence of Gods severity and justice. The punishment that is differred,
is not taken away, or lessened.

That a Religious man must attend, and have an eye to those things, which be
proper to his own Religion, and not of another.

CHAP. VII.
SON, I am he who have from the beginning governed my Church, and still do,
because it continually fights and stands in battle for the mayntenance,
and defense of my honor and glory. And though it consist of diverse parts, yet
have I so knit them together in one body, as they make a well ordered army,
serving happily under my Crosses standard. And in this my Churches army the
squadron of Religious men marches in the vanguard, whose charge it is with the
invincible help of spiritual arms to gain and make a conquest of the kingdom
of Heaven. This battalion according to the diversity of Religions, has
different colors, and yet all have their directions from me the General of
the whole Army. Every religious man also must serve under those Colors, and in
that Company wherein he was first enrolled, even until his death, and must
exercise himself in those arms that are proper to his order, or religion. It
helps much, if he be well affected to his own Order. For the soldier that
is well affected to his colors, does not easily chang or forsake them, but
when need is ventureth his life also for the defense thereof.

2. Though all Religions commonly aim at this, that they may make their
subjects perfect in my service, yet every one has certain proper and peculiar
exercises, whereby to become perfect in their one: and this is the specialll end
and scope, that all those who embrace the same, ought to propose unto
themselves. For example: they who embrace the religion, that professes a
solitary life, remoted and retired from conversation with men, as is that of
Ermites, ought to labor to become perfect in clothing, in diet, in
contemplation of heavenly things, and in the praising of God. And such as have
entered into a religion that professes an active life, that is, to help their
Neighbors both spiritually and corporally, ought to profit in the exercise
that is proper to an active life, that is, in exercising charity to their
neighbors, with as much pains and care as they are able, without any the
least regard of their own commodity, but merely for my glory, knowing that
whatsoever they shall do to their neighbor for love of me, they shall do it to
me, and that I will be their reward for it. The same must they also do who
embrace a religion that attends to Contemplation, that they may the more
entirely unite themselves with God their maker; and that also which mixeth
Contemplation with Action, such as be commonly Religious of the begging Orders.

3. And these particular exercises can neither be well done, nor continued
long, unless they that practice them, endeavor to that perfection of life, that
is common to all religious persons; that is, unless they seek and labor to deny
their own will, to mortify their senses, and to contemn themselves. For of
these virtues, as of foundations, the special and proper exercises of every
Religion do consist, and are by them supported. He that is good, and perfect in
himself, may easily help others to become good also, which he cannot well do,
if he shall not be good himself. For he, who has no care of his own
perfection, cannot well promote it in others. Who is naught to himself, to
whom will he be good?

4. O how ill does that Religious man understand the form of his Institute,
who pleases himself rather with the exercises of another religion, then with
those of his own. Therefore to different states of Religious I have imparted
different gifts and graces, that every one may execute his own function and
office aright. Whence it is, that he, who has not received, or has not the
true spirit or free gift of his own religion, cannot satisfy the office he
bears in it. If I would have had a religious person tied to another exercise,
I would also have called him to another religion, and would have given him the
proper gift thereof. But if I have called him to this Religion, it is nothing
fitting, that he meddle with another. For he, who leaves the functions of his
own religion, and takes upon him those of another, shall not satisfy the one
nor ^he other.

5. He that professes a solitary life, does no little matter if he attend to
himself, and he does wisely, if he leave the care of helping his neighbors to
others. Wherefore that re^igious man much pleases me, who addres^eth all his
thoughts, and all his pains to ^he scope he has proposed to himself, and ^o
the functions of his own religion, and for the compassing thereof labors to
overcome all difficulties, by avoiding those things, that may hinder him, and
by imbra^ing again those things that may help him ^o the obtaining of the same
end. He does much, who labors to do what he is bound unto, and which agrees
with his profession.

6. There is an other error also observed ^n some Religious persons, who from
the very beginning of their conversion determine and assign unto themselves
some peculiar and, but yet little conform to a Religious ^state, and that is,
that they may become great Philosophers, Deuines, or Preachers, and thereunto
directly and indirectly they ^mploy all their cogitations and studyes. It
cannot be said, how hurtful this intention ^s, seeing it brings in the
oblivion of a good and religious life, and the contempt of his own rules and
institute, and which to say in one word, is the Seminary of infinite vanities
and troubles. For if the superior command any thing to such kind of men, who
has little correspondence with their end they instantly refuse to obey, they
murmr complain, and are afflicted therefore. Again^ if the Superior, because
he would no^ contristate them, suffer them to hold on the course they have
intended, behold there forthwith follows the breaking of a most excellent
order, and therewith the ruin of themselves and their Religion together. For
nothing in a religious life is more pernicious* then to leave unto subjects the
power of doing their own will. Where there wants obedience and subordination,
there necessarily follows confusion, and disorder.

7. I have often said already, that he cannot be my scholar, who mortifieth
not himself by the abnegation of his own will. I am the way, I am the guide:
who follows not me, the further he goes, the further is he^ off from the
mark. This way held all those ancient Religious men, who do now enjoy the
supreme felicity in heaven. For they in the beginning embraced that which wa^
proper to their vocation, and in other things they suffered themselves to be be
directed and governed by their Superiors, my Substitutes and Vicegerents here
on earth. And he that does otherwise, deceives and ^uyneth himself.

8. Finally they are deceived also, who ^eeke to acco^modate the proper
institute of their religion, the end, and ministeries ther^f, to themselves and
their own will, and do ^ot, as they ought, rather acco^modate them^elues unto
it. Such be they, who will needs ^xercise these or these functions, both when
and how they shall themselves deem fitting, and bestow as much time, or as
little in the^ ^s shall best please themselves. This is not ^he direct way: for
seeing they be the mem^ers of Religion, is it fit, that they acco^mo^ate
themselves to the whole body, that is, ^o the Riligion, and not contrariwise
the Religion to them. Arrogance and Pride will in conclusion, when he least
thinks ^herof, overthrow that religious man, who ^ccommodateth not himself
to his Supe^iour.

Wherein does it consist, to be a true and perfect Religious man.

CHAP. VIII.
LORD, as often, as I consider the many good purposes, I have made of loving
thee withal my heart, and of serving thee with my whole affection all the days
of my life, I think my self to be religious, and that truly, though I am
afraid I may be deceived* For when I call to mind, what my forefathers have
done, what great things they suffered for the love of thee, what payne^ they
took for the purchasing of virtue: and and on the other side considering with
my self how little I have hitherto done, for the gayning of the same, and how
little I have endu^ed for the glory of thy name, I seem^ not to my self to be
a perfect, or true Religious man.

2. Son, there be many who in their own opinion be religious, and that tru^
and perfect also, but there be very few indeed* For perfection is a certain
universality o^ all virtues, which in truth is found in very few. Some there
be, who think they hau^ gotten the name of Perfection, if they daily say so
many Psalms, or so many pair o^ beads, if they fast some days in the week,
i^ they punish their bodies with haire-cloath or disciplines; and if they
should omit al thi^ they think themselves to come far short o^ perfection.
Good and laudable be all the said actions, but yet in them consists neither
the sum of spiritual life, nor a religious man's perfection, but in true and
solid virtue, inherent in the soul.

3. These external actions be in some, as it were the means and instruments,
apt for the attayning of spirit and true devotion, so they be used with
moderation, such as is agreeable to beginners. In some again they be the
effects and fruit of the spirit, or of spiritual perfection, as in the
Proficient and Perfect, who by that severity of penance do subdue the
rebellion of the flesh, that it may not rise against the spirit, and by
frequent prayer they stir themselves up in the love of God, that they be ever
conjoined, and united to him: though in some also those outward mortifications
of the body (if the perfection of virtue should be wholly pl^ced therein) may
give an occasion of ruin, as whiles they proceed so far in mortification of
the outward man, as they neglect the inward, that is, the restrayning of the
motions and perturbations of the mind. And at commonly happens, that such
manner of men be wilful and stiff in their own judgment, and such as would
seem to teach all men. And where humility is not, there can be neither a true
spirit of God, nor true de^otion and piety, and therefore a most rare thing it
is, for such to be amended: seeing he is hardly brought into the right way
again, who thinks himself all this time to have run in the same. And a
manifest sinner is with more facility converted, then a secret one, who hides
his indiscret actions under a cloak of virtue.

4. Know this my Son, for certain that, that Religious man is more dear to
me who restrayneth, and mortifyeth all his bad desires, then he who giving the
raynes to his inordinate appetites, continually fasteth, wears haire-cloath,
disciplineth himself to the blood. He can never recover his health who
applies not a remedy to the place where the evil resideth. Wherefore to ease
thee of the doubt, which thou have in this matter, I will give thee a most
clear looking glass, wherein the form and proportion of a true and perfect
Religious person is to be seen, wherewith if thou will compare thy self, thou
may easily guess, whether thou best like it, or no, and shall understand
withal what is wanting in thee.

5. The Poesy of a perfect Religious man is To do, and To suffer: for in these
two words is comprised all the perfection of a Religious man. To do, signifies
nothing else, but that a true religious man ought so to order his life, as he
may satisfy the charge and function he owes unto God, his Superiors, his
Religion, his Neighbors, to himself, and to other things created. And To
suffer, all the actions of a religious man do manifest, whether he exercises
them for the increase of my glory, or for the promotion of his own commodity:
whether they have their beginning from a true spirit, or rather from humane
prudence.

6. That Religious man satisfies God, who loving his Creator above all
things, diligently obeys his precepts, and Evangelical Counsels,
magnifieth him withal his heart; prayseth him in adversity as well as in
prosperity: accepts al things from Gods hands, as gifts from heaven; would
choose rather to dye a thousand deaths, then to offend his Creator in the very
least thing, or in any thing to go against the prescript of his divine will.
Finally whatsoever he does, he does it for the amplifying of my glory and
honor.

7. A perfect Religious man satisfies his Superiors, who at the very least
sign of their will, does promptly and cheerfully obey them, as if it were the
voice of God, not as men, but as Gods Vicegerents. Them he ^euerenceth and
loves as the fathers and pastors of his soul, by me appointed over him,
interprets all their ordinations and actions in good part, and modestly
defends and purges them, if he hear any murmurations against them.

8. He also satisfies his religion, if he do what a good son performs
toward a most dear Mother, who does not only honor and love her, but also as
often as he perceives her to require his pains and service, is ready at hand,
and willingly offers himself to bear the burden, whatsoever it shall please
her to lay upon him. He is glad if men report, and speak well of her, if they
report ill, he labors with modesty to defend her good name. Finally he
heartily wishes, and beseeches the divine Majesty, that she may ever proceed,
and hold on in the spirit of Humility, and Devotion.

9. Again he declares himself to be well affected toward his brethren, and
religious persons, whom he loves from his heart, and reputeth their good, or
evil to b^ his own. He thinks and speaks well o^ all: he pittyeth the
defects of every one: h^ seeks to edify them also even in the very least
things, and in what he is able helpet^ them, especially in matters appertayning
t^ spirit.

10. The obligation of a perfect religiou^ man extends it self also to the
men of the world, whom he satisfies when he truly wishes unto them, as to
his neighbors eternal felicity, and loves them as himself. And if he see
the bad example of religious men hurtful unto them, he uses all means that
no occasion or example of scandal be given unto them by himself, and in all
his conversation labors to be exemplar, and ouerslippeth not any occasion of
doing them good for their souls health.

11. A good religious man is bound to perform something toward himself also,
^s he is Religious: and this debt he satisfies ^f he diligently beat down his
own desirs ^ontradicting reason: if he mortify the wan^onnes of his flesh, if
he contemn the world ^ogeather withal the vanities thereof: if being moved out
of a love to me, he mortify himself in all things, and seek not after his own
^lory, but mine. For if he have no regard ^f his own estimation, he is then
come to perfect and absolute victory over himself. ^gaine if he keep his body
in subjection to ^e understanding, and yeald it nothing but that is necessary:
for so doing he shall leave ^e soul a free passage of mounting up to ^eauen.
To be short, being dead to himself ^d to the world, he shall live to me, his
Creator alone.

12. Lastly a perfect religious man satisfies other created things also, if he
convert them to his own use, so much only as is requisite, and no more. And
because he cannot be ignorant, that God has committed them unto us, as far as
they may be an help unto us for the attayning of our end, let him only love
those for his own use, that may further him to his said end, and reject the
rest, that may hinder him. For by so doing (...) true religious person may of
the creature^ make himself a ladder to clymbe up into heaven.

13. The other word appertayning to a religious man's poesy, was to suffer. Al
men a^ their first entrance into a religious state, d^ promise willingly to
suffer, but few there b^ that discharge the same truly, and for tha^ cause come
not to any perfection. And by thi^ word of suffering is meant, that a religiou^
man is by suffering purged, and perfected and that none can be perfect in
religion, bu^ by suffering much. Therefore in holy Wri^ perfection is compared
to an Hill, to the to^ whereof none can come, but by labor an^ difficulty.

14. A perfect religious man murmure^ not against God, if he send him sickness,
pe^secutions, or other calamities, but gives the ^ather of mercies thanks for
them, as for gifts coming from heaven. Neither complayneth he against
creatures, saying: This man has done me a great injury, that other has sued
me against all equity, right or reason, another man exercises his malice and
hatred toward me: but as one desirous to suffer when any adversity happens, he
accepts it for a singular favor of Gods benignity toward him. And this is
the way of drawing ^orth and getting good out of every evil. Whiles a
religious man takes any thing in ^ll part for me, it is a sign, that he
caryeth (...) greater respect of love toward himself, ^hen to me.

Of the inward defects, that be impediments to Religious Perfection.

CHAP. IX.
SON, after the wound given to thy first parent Adam long since in the
terrestrial ^aradise by Satan, all the powers and fa^ulties of the soul
became so languishing, ^aint, weak and decayed in his posterity, as that ever
since they have disposed man ^ather to lapses and vices, then to the love of
^ertue. Hence have proceeded all the diffi^ulties, imperfections, and
impediments, which we daily find in the spiritual life, which does so molest
and trouble us in the way of perfection, as they either disturb and hinder it
quite, or at least lay a bar against it, that it succeed not so well.

2. Wherefore that we proceed more slowly to mount up to the perfection of
virtues, whereon is placed the seat of Religious Perfection, in the first place
this is the cause, that we do not seriously resolve with our selves to have a
will to use all our forces to get up to the top of this mountain: and this
proceeds of nothing else, then that we do not effectually labor to get
perfection. He that effectually desires health, cares not what medicine be
given unto him: This defect is such, as it cutteth off clean all hope of
arryuing to perfection. For he that has not made a firm purpose to hold on in
the way to perfection, will hardly begin to pace toward it: and he who
begins not, how is it possible for him to come to his prefixed end? And he
that is so affected in mind, when he neglects the occasion of doing well,
will either do no good at all, or will fall to what is worse.

3. O how great a loss of spiritual gain sustayneth that religious man, who
prolongeth his journey in the way of perfection! He will no doubt at the hour
of death better understand this error then now he does: for in that exact and
last examen of his conscience, he shall more clearly see, that he had no just
cause of differring the exercise of virtues, but that it was pretermitted of
him through his own mere carelesnes and negligence. And his grief and
confusion will at that time be the greater, the more he had his part in my
inspirations, whereby I did so often inuit him, stir him up, and solicited him
to perfection.

4. There is another impediment also to a Religious man, that makes him with
the more difficulty to labor to perfection, because he apprehends it for an
over great difficulty to obtain victory over himself, and to overcome the bad
affections of his mind. But as delay made without cause, deiecteth the mind,
and very much hurts a man: so an effectual, and cheerful resolution of
undergoing a thing, greatly helps toward the ouercomming of any difficulty.

5. Son, if thou were the first of those who should enter into the way of this
warfare, thou might have some cause and excuse, but since there have been so
many, who though sometimes overcome, did yet in the end victoriously get up to
the top of the hill, thou can pretend no cause of excuse at all, or of pardon.
For the obtaining of a victory and Crown it is not enough to fight, but a man
must go away also with the victory.

6. There is yet another vice, that hinders us from getting up to the mount of
perfection, for that we are fettered in fast bands at the foot of the hill. And
whosoever is so tied, he may indeed move himself a little, but mount up he
well cannot. That Religious man is much deceived. who preposterously affected
to some humane thing, thinks that he may ariue to perfection. For whereas he
holds his heart, fast tied with the cord of affection to some thing created,
he must needs either mount up the hill without an heart, which is not possible,
and would not be pleasing to God; or else without life with the thing created,
to which he cleaves fast, which God would never indeed tolerate, who has
never suffered any thing to be beloved together with himself. For since he is
of himself, and of his own nature good, his will is also to be beloved alone
by himself. The Creator cannot love him, who against his will transferreth his
love to a creature.

7. An impediment also to the same ascending, is the over sore burden, that a
man lays upon his own shoulders. For whereas he must go an hard and painful
way, the more he is surcharged and laden, the lesser and shorter iourneyes
makes he, and otherwhiles he is stayed in the midde way, and cannot go any
further. Wherefore a religious man, who intangleth himself in many affairs and
employments that nothing concern his vocation, will either travail slowly
toward the mount of perfection, or will be forced to stay in his way
thitherward, because the strength of his spirit is weak, the way painful and
uneven, and the dispositions of his mind estranged from such a journey, or
rather inclined to the contrary. A Religious man has enough to carry his one
burden, which if he shall increase with other men's cares, no marvel though he
yeald and fall under the burden, and oftentimes come to that misery, that he is
not able to bear his own, and much less another.

8. Finally it is not the least impediment of getting up to the top of the
hill, for a Religious man to be moved with too much co^miseration of himself.
If one have a dull horse, and out of pity dares not give him the spur,
probably he will not come to the end of his journey. I like not of a religious
man, that is over nice and delicate, who least he should put his body to some
pains, labors not to perfection, as he should do. The soldier, who has
over much care of saving his life, and an horror of the dangers of war, does
ordinarily but make up the number, and gives no increase to the strength of
the army at all: for when there is occasion presented him of showing his valor
and courage, he runs away for fear.

9. The Religious, who are now crowned in heaven, did not so. For though they
were of a weak body by nature, and had accustomed it to all manner of ease and
delicacy, yet after they once became Religious, for the attayning of
perfection, they punished it with fasting, penance and mortification, and so
with commendation and merit arrived to that which they sought for. That
religious man, who favors his body more, then meet is, loves it too much,
because he knows not how to love it truly, like unto an over mild Physician,
who by his curing increases the sickness.

Of other outward defects, and imperfections, that be impediments to Perfection.

CHAP. X.
SON, in some Religious persons there be found other imperfections and
defects, which as they do no less hinder Perfection, then the former, so be
they no less displeasing unto me. The first is, that they will not labor to
perfection by the common and ordinary way, but do bethink and devise another
new way, unknown to their forefathers. But they err very sore in the matter:
for where it is of it self very hard and painful to get up to the mount of
perfection, the pain would be doubled, if a new way besides the ordinary be to
be taken: neither does the crafty enemy seek any other thing, then to hinder a
man's endeavor of climing up, by adding a new labor and pain in doing it. Who
goes on in the beaten way, trauayleth securely: for that they who went before,
by their example showed the security of it, and of this security he has no
sign at al, who goes and seeks out a new way.

2. O in how great an error be those Religious persons, who rejecting and
neglecting the ordinary spirit of their own Religion, do follow and embrace
another particular, and strange spirit. This is to go a new way, both with more
labor, and less profit. For it commonly happens, that such men whiles they
find not an end of their way, being ashamed of themselves, are forced to go
back again, or else do fall headlong into some pittfall or other. That
religious man cannot be guided by Gods spirit, who refuses to keep the way,
which all those that went before him held. I have appointed to every religion a
certain and determinate way, ordayning to that end peculiar laws and
constitutions, declaring the manner and means, how every man may come to his
iourneys end. He therefore, who shall neglect his way, and go another, does
plainly give to understand, that I have not instituted every religion wisely
enough to content him. And here is to be seen a notable deceit, and trick of
the Prince of darkness, who leads the negligent and unwary religious persons
out of the common way of their own institut, that when they are once wearyed
in it, he may cast them down headlong to their further ruin.

3. A second defect is, that they will not use the guide, whom I have given to
direct them in the way without error. For that trauaylour is not without cause
deemed temerarious and rash, who goes his journey without a guide, which he
knows, by reason of the many turnings and by-ways, to be subject to many
dangers and strayings out of the way. I am the guide, who to al religious men
do show the right way to perfection. And I do it by Superiors, and spiritual
Fathers, whom I have appointed in every religion. Wherefore it is no marvel
though they, who will not suffer themselves to be governed and directed by
their Superiors and ghostly fathers, but follow their own judgment, stray out
of the way, be spoiled by thieves, or fall into misery and ruin. So happens it
unto those, who before they be scholars, do profess themselves to be
masters, and so by a secret pride, whereby they contemn their superior whom
I have designed for their directour and master, become scholars of the
Devil, who is the captain and chief leader of all the proud.

4. A third defect there is, arising of humane respect; namely, that some be
over sollitous to gain the good will and favor of all. Is the care of a
religious person to please men, and not to displease the world? Upon what true
ground, or reason can he seek after the worlds favor, who has once so
earnestly abandoned and given over the world? I called him therefore out of the
world to religion, that he might not ^^eke any thing, but to please me alone,
and in that way to hold on toward perfection. If by the help of this world a
man might be brought to a perfect state, a religious man might also use the
benefit and help thereof: but it is not so. For the world follows a far other
profession, and intertayneth other manner of cogitations, then those of
attayning spiritual perfection. Who studyeth, and has a care to please men, is
no disciple of mine, neither pleases he me, nor do I intertaine him for my
servant.

5. A man can serve but one master, with true love. And if he would divide his
heart into two parts, let him not determine to offer me the one of them: for I
will in no sort accept it. If thou have so great a desire to please men,
wherefore did thou leave them? O miserable religious man, who when thou
liuedst still in the world, did not only not hunt after the favors of men,
but also did not any thing that might obscure thy good name and estimation;
but after the time thou have embraced a religious estate, thou burnst with a
desire of pleasing men, in so much as thou art not ashamed to do many things,
unworthy thy vocation and condition, and which is worst of all, grievously also
to offend me, least ^ou should perhaps offend men. Wherefore then, my Son,
do thou vaunt, that thou have ^rodden the world under foot, if thou have so
earnest and longing a desire to please it? See thou not, that by the care of
gayning the grace of other men, thou loosest the peace and quiet of thy mind?
This is not, I must tell thee, the way to the mount of perfection, but to the
downe-fall, and pit of eternal damnation.

6. There is yet another impediment in attayning to the perfection of virtues,
to wit when a religious man observes no order or good proceeding in his
spiritual actions. An army, though never so great, complete, and provided of
all necessaryes, if it be not well ordered, either when it marches, or when it
joins in battle with the enemy, shall never get the victory: So a religious
man, who must contend and fight for the getting of Perfection, that is seated
upon an high hill, and compassed with all complete armor of virtues, if he
observe no order in all his spiritual exercises and actions, which be as it
were so many soldiers, shall never go away with the victory.

7. There be some, who before they have laid the foundation of humility, begin
to raise their spiritual building. Others again before they be past the
Purgative way, think they may be most inwardly conjoined, and united with me.
But this is not the way and course of coming to perfection. Humility must be
procured in the first place, and from it a passage must be made to penance,
and by it the mind and conscience is thoroughly to be cleansed. It is not enough
for him, who falls into the mire, to rise out of it, unless he also wash away
all the dirt: even so it is not enough, that a religious man has renou^ced,
and forsaken the world, and to have gotten out of the sink of sin, but he
needs further to extirpate his bad inclinatio^s, and hurtful affections and
propensions, which remain as staynes behind in the soul, and in place of them
by the help of my illuminating grace to plant most beautiful virtues: so doing
he may adventure to become most in ward, and most familiar with me.

8. Lastly, an Inconstancy in spiritual life stops up, and debarreth the
entrance not only to perfection, but also the means of compassing any virtue
at all. For there be those, who endeavor often to get up to the mount of
perfection, but they still fall down again into the valley that lies under
it, because they are more prone to abandon and give over the thing they have
once begone, then they be manfull to go through with it. O how much shall they
be afflicted for this their inconstancy, when the hour of their death shall be
at hand, when the Devil shall vpbraid them with this, that they did indeed
with great fervor wrest from their Superiors, frequent exercise and use of
prayer, fasting, disciplines, and other mortifications for their profit of
spirit, and for their helps to perfection; but afterward they did none of them
at all, or very little.

9. If a Religious man had as great love to perfection, as he should have, he
would ever aspire and labor to it, neither should there occur any difficulty,
that might terrify him from compassing it. But because his love languisheth in
the thing it self, whence that inconstancy grows, he easily relenteth, and
recoyleth. A Religious man, does not only suffer the loss of time by tryfling
thus, but also becomes worse every day, then other.

How Perfection is finally to be attained.

CHAP. XI.
LORD, if it be so hard and painful a matter to arrive to perfection, by
occasion of so many defects and impediments, that stop up the way; I see not
how I, that am most weak, can come thither, or overcome so many difficultyes
with my most slender forces. Son, he that resolves seriously and heartily to
labor to perfection, does most certainly arrive unto it. So many Religious men
in former times most perfect, who now enjoy their everlasting felicity in
heaven, were me^ like unto thee, and had the same difficultyes that thou have,
and much greater, and yet they manfully and constantly overcame them, and thou
may do as much, if thou will. Neither shall thou want my grace and help, as
they neither wanted, so thou resolve upon some thing, as they did. Neither must
thou be discouraged and recoyle for fear of the difficultyes ^^at will
encounter thee, especially seeing there be as many and more means, ways, and
remedies for the removing and taking away of those difficultyes, and procuring
of perfection.

2. The first remedy is, with an inward affection to embrace perfection, and
earnestly to labor therein, since for the ouercoming of all the rocks of this
mountain there is nothing better, or more effectual then the affection of
love. Neither is there any thing that inciteth a Religious man more to continue
on his way, and to labor to perfection, then the same. Of love there then
follows a desire, and care of using and frequenting those means, that be
necessary or profitable toward the attayning of perfection. And study, care,
and diligence do help very much toward the more speedy compassing of what is
desired or loved. Of the same love grows constancy and perseverance, whereby
spirit, life, and heart is given a religious man to hold on, and to prosecute
his labors, and of this next follows the victory, and crown. To him who
loves nothing is hard, no not the ouercoming and gayning of heaven; and the
getting up to the top of the mount of perfection

3. A second remedy, and means to the attayning of perfection is, to have a
consideration and regard even of our very least imperfections. Some are wont,
when they fall into such manner of imperfections, to break forth into these, or
the like words: It makes no matter, it is a thing of little moment, it is
nothing: and these men be the very bane of religion. For of this contempt they
become in time bold, temerarious, rash, and by their own bad example they draw
others to a certain pernicious and dissolute liberty. That must not be held in
light esteem, that displeases me: neither ought it to be thought a small
matter, which I command, or forbid, though it be not great indeed in it self.
And know thou, my Son, that the very least imperfections please me not, and
for that cause I have forbidden them. Know thou further, that the religious man
who makes a conscience to transgress or offend in the very least things, is
delivered from greater imperfections. For all the great ruin, and breaches of
good order and discipline, that are found in religion, have received their
beginning of smaller faults. Who shuts his eyes at a light fall, will also
shut them at a greater, because that prepares the way thereto, that is, a
smaller to a greater.

4. A Third, and very good means also is, for a man to mortify himself in the
very least things. For religious perfection comprehends all virtues; all
which a man cannot be possessed off, unless he get a full and absolute command
over his passions and senses. And a man commands his passions, if he
restrain them so soon, as they raise themselves against the reason, or
against the laws of religion: neither must he also yeald unto the senses even
in the least matters, more then is fitting to his religious estate. For he who
condescendeth to his senses, beyond the mediocrity of virtue, soon finds
them rebellious; and he who does not resist his inordinate passions in the
beginning, becomes a slave unto them in the end.

5. A fourth means and way to perfection, not only auaylable, but also
necessary, is, that a religious man's mind ever conspire, and accord with his
Superiors will and desire in all things. For all helps have their origin from
me, which are needful toward the attayning of perfection, and them I
ordinarily communicate by the Superiors, by whom I do enlighten and govern my
subjects. Whereupon such a one as is separated from his Superiors, wants
such kind of gifts, and helps. And more then that, he is separated from me; and
therefore no marvel though he fall often, be trodden under other men's feet, be
contemned, and pyne way and languish, because he is a dead member cut off from
the head. It little avails the scholar to go unto the school, if he be not
one with his master, by whom he may be directed in his course of learning and
studyes.

6. Finally, it helps not a little to perfection, if these ways be
practiced, not with a tediousnes, and heaviness of mind, but with promptitude
and alacrity. For this alacrity profits much to the ouercoming of
difficultyes, which the body apprehends and feels in the attayning of
virtues: it confounds the enemies that oppose themselves ^n the way of
perfection; and makes the pains of the journey the lighter, and more ^asie to
be endured. And which is more, this ^romptitude and alacrity, wherewith a
religious man serves me, pleases me much, because it has the beginning of
love also. And to conserve this spiritual joy and cheerfullnes in mounting up
to this hill of virtues, a man must have companions in his journey. It cannot
be said, how much vtility and profit a religious man receives by the company
and conversation of the good, by whose speech, and example he may be excited
and stirred up to devotion, since nothing there is, that in humane life has
more force to move a man to perfection, then the example of good virtuous
companions.

7. Will thou, my Son, be wise? Converse with the wise. Will thou be perfect?
Live with them, who love and seek after perfection. Therefore I have provided,
that in every state of my Church there should ever be some holy and exemplar
men, who by their examples, as by lights set on high in a candelsticke, might
give light unto others. Whereupon a religious man, whiles he compares their
life with his own, easily perceyueth, how little he has profited in the
spiritual life, and by a certain holy emulation stirs up himself, to use
more diligence for the time to come in the exercise of virtues. If good
examples have more effect to move then words, whosoever profits not by them,
does manifestly declare that he has a will overmuch propense, prone, and
addicted to evil.

Of the spiritual joy which accompanies a religious man, that attends to
perfection.

CHAP. XII.
SON, the spiritual joy, and contentment, that a good Religious man has
after he is entered into the narrow way of perfection, is no doubt great, and
singular, as on the contrary, the grief and heaviness of heart that oppresses a
bad religious man, holding on in the broad way of imperfections, is hard,
disgustfull, and bitter. Whereupon the one and the other begins in this
life, to have a taste of that which is prepared for them in the other, either
punishment, or reward. Lord, I know not, what I may answer to this: for I see
many Religious men to embrace the broad way, and not to labor greatly to come
to perfection, and yet to be very iocand, cheerful, and merry.

2. Son, thou art deceived. For in the way of liberty, and where no observation
of discipline is in practice, there is not any true or solid joy, though it may
seem to be such. A Religious man who lives at his own will and as he
pleases, displeases others, and he oftentimes is cast down with grief, and
pensiuenes, because he cannot have what contenteth him. True joy has the seat
in the mind, and arises of the peace and tranquillity of conscience, which is
felt within; which cannot be in the religious man, who leads a free and
dissolute life, because his mind is day by day, as a sea, tossed and tumbled
with the surges and waves of perturbations and passions. Woe be to a religious
man, rejoicing in his imperfections.

3. There be others in religion, who run the way to perfection after their
own will; neither use that moderation in mortifying themselves, that were to be
required. These men do often stumble in their way, because they prejudice, and
hurt their health, and yet they ariue not to that holiness of life, whereunto
they labor. And whereas they be destitute of joy and comfort, both from within
and without, all the fault is ascribed to overmuch devotion, which is no such
matter. For it is not devotion, that causes either infirmity, or anguish of
mind, but indiscretion, and that more is done and undertaken, then reason
dictateth, or I require. None can be either his own guide, or judge.

4. But true peace and joy, is to be found in those religious men, who do with
due moderation attend to perfection, and practice the means of coming unto it,
by the advice, direction, and prescripts of Superiors, and spiritual Fathers.
For what way soever they turn themselves, they ever find occasions of being
glad, and of reioicing spiritually. If they convert themselves to me, they have
no want of consolation, because they know well enough, how much it pleases me
to see a religious man, laboring earnestly toward perfection. And if there
were not any thing else in this life, it were and ought alone to be enough for a
religious man, to pass over his life in an exceeding joy. For a servant cannot
have any greater pleasure and contentment, then to understand, that all his
offices, and services be pleasing unto his Lord. And if they turn their eyes
to their Superiors, they experience the same by tranquillity of mind. For
seeing they be studious and desirous perfection, they must needs be quiet,
peaceable, obedient, most obseruant of Religious discipline, and consequently
in high esteem and beloved of their Superiors; which if they once get
knowledge off, they cannot but rejoice greatly.

5. Now if we look upon others, with whom they live and keep company, they
have no cause of grief at al. For seeing they attend to the exercise of virtue,
they hinder or hurt none, but have a care to do good to all, as to themselves,
and therefore they intertayne peace with all: and where peace is, there is true
joy. And more then that, virtue makes them amiable, not only to their friends,
but to their enemies also. For the virtuous are beloved, honored, and
respected of all, in so much that a religious man can never want internal
consolation and comfort. Again if they consider themselves, they cannot be
without consolation also. For it is proper to virtue, wherein they exercise
themselves, to work with pleasure and taste, and therefore needs it must be,
that true Religious persons rejoice in all their actions: yea they find
consolation in their tribulations, and persecutions, when they be ready for
love of me, even to suffer and endure the pains of hell, if it could be
without their own fault and would be for my glory; and not only that, but all
the adversities and miseries of this world besides.

6. Finally the meditation of death, which stricketh a fear and horror into
others, to good religious men is an occasion and matter of joy, not only for
the reward, that they expect, but because they shall then have their part of
that exceeding and surpassing consolation, which they attend for at the hour
of death, for the care and desire, they had in arriving to perfection. For the
soul will at that time be exceedingly glad, neither shall she be able to find
an end of rendering thanks for received benefits.

7. There is but one thing, that can make a good Religious man sad, and that
is, if he fall into some imperfection. But this sorrow cannot be of continuance,
because it is instantly taken away by the virtue of penna^ce, and the fault
cancelled by contrition, and upon this the mind is put again in possession of
the former tranquillity. Tell me now my Son, who peradventure makst but little
esteem of perfection, in what other thing may thou find so great and
universal a contentment of mind? What thing can secure thy mind more, or
better, then the desire of of perfection? Considerest thou not, that to labor
and attend to perfection, is nothing else, then beforehand to take an essay, and
that of eternal felicity? Thou must needs be unwise if thou rob and spoil
thy self of so great a good, that thou need not take any pains in restrayning
and conquering the desires of thy flesh, and senses. And this madness will
appear the more evident unto thee, when there will not be opportunity for thee
to do that, which now thou should do. Happy is he, who shall in that last
agony be able to say: Whatsoever good I could, or ought to do, that, by the
favor of Gods grace, I have done in my life time.

Of the great pains, and myseries, that Religious men do suffer, who forsake
and leave the way to Perfection.

CHAP. XIII.
LORD, if the discomending of a bad religious man be in the same measure, that
is the commending of a good one, I make no doubt, but he lives in very great
affliction of mind, for abandoning and giving over the way to perfection. So it
is, my Son, and so much the worse, because they acknowledge not their own
infelicity. Every evil is wont to be the more dangerous, the less it is
known: for if it be by carelesnes neglected in the beginning, it increases,
and by little and little gathers so great force and strength, as in the end
it exercises a command over all. O how much does a bad religious man hurt
himself! who transported, and carried away by an over great liberty of living,
looks not into himself, that he may understand, whence so sore perturbations
and afflictions which he endures in religion, have their beginning.

2. If he turn himself to me, he is ashamed: for he knows, that he was
called out of the world, to lead a separated, retired, and perfect life: and he
knows how many benefits I have bestowed upon him; and how great co^modityes I
have given him toward the prosecution and practice of virtue. And that by
neglecting them, he has left off all cogitation of laboring to perfection,
and seeks always to line at more liberty, and to satisfy the allureme^ts of
the senses. He offends me as much, as his ingratitude is hateful unto me,
whence such a life proceeds. These be not those pious and good purposes, that
he made, and gave testimony of, at his first entrance into religion: neither is
this the way that I taught him, and wherein I walked my self. Neither can he
but know in his own conscience, that this his life (which is far from that of a
religious man) disco^tenteth me greatly. And therefore he is against his will,
inwardly tormented with most bitter stings of conscience, though outwardly he
show it not; and when time comes, shall receive his deserved punishment. The
servant, who is privy to his masters will, and does it not whiles he is able,
if he be not a very fool, meriteth severely to be punished for it.

3. If he has to deal with his Superiors, he is much afflicted, and
troubled. For since he is neither obedient, nor loves religious discipline, it
is not in him to keep common peace with them, and therefore it must needs be,
that many things be in like manner done, that be one while discontenting to
himself, and otherwhiles to the Superiors. Besides that, the poor and
compassionate Superiors be grieved, not knowing how they may deal with him,
that he may be helped. For if they deal favorably and after an indulgent
manner with him, he being accustomed to liberty, abuses their gentleness, and
becomes the more proud. If they handle him with more severity, by forcing him
to do his duty; then as one impatient of so hard discipline, he shakes off the
yoke thereof, and troubles the Religion. If any thing be commanded him, he
refuses to do it: if penance be enjoined him, he complains and murmureth.
That he live so still amongst the rest after his own will, is nothing
expedient: for the longer the custom of doing ill is continued, the worse it
makes the man, and by his bad example he hurts and misleadeth the more.
Whence it follows, that a Religious man, who contemning the desire of
perfection, lives disorderly, and makes no reckoning of intertayning peace
with Superiors, must needs be troubled with a continual heaviness, and
bitterness of mind. Certes, he cannot but be bad, and become every day worse
then other, who contradicts and resists his Superiors and betters.

4. Again, if he turn himself to other Religious persons, amongst whom he
lives, he finds no comfort at all. For if he perceive, that the wise and
spiritual brethren make very little reckoning of him, and shun his
conversation and company in what they can, he cannot but be much troubled and
moved in mind, and therefore is forced to keep company with his like, who be
desirous of a more free and disordered life. Neither can he yet receive any
solid comfort from them, for that where the spirit of devotion is not, there
neither peace nor joy can be of continuance. The friendship of the bad is not
long lasting, and is ever suspected: and where suspicion reigns, the mind is
ever in suspense and doubtful, and therefore he cannot possibly be truly merry.

5. Finally, if a bad religious man turn his eyes upon himself, he has no
cause of reioicing, but of lamenting. For since he has no part in true virtues
at all, he has none to direct him in his actions, nor who may defend and help
him in his temptations, and so he becomes prone to fall, yea and to apostasy
also. Again, what joy can he have, who must take great pains without hope of
spiritual profit? As long as he is in religion, he must needs exercise
himself in the ordinary offices of the same; which because he does
unwillingly, or with loathing, murmuring, and other imperfections, he loses
all his merit. Besides that, what comfort can he have, who receives a torment
in wholesome and meritorious actions? Who wants spirit, and cannot be helped?
if he be to pray, he is in pain; if to hear a sermon, or some pious, and
spiritual talk, he loatheth it; if discourse about the purchasing of virtue,
he may not endure to hear it. O miserable religious man who drinks gal, when
others taste of most sweet honey! It is a sign of death, when the sick person
becomes the weaker by receiving a medicine.

6. Moreover in enduring tribulations, he is so much the more afflicted, by how
much less he was armed, and prepared against them; like unto a little boat,
when a sore tempest arises, wanting both oars and stern. By one thing alone
he may seem he may be eased of all his troubles and miseries, and take some
poor refreshment and quiet, and that is by death. But death, unless he want the
use of reason, will rather increase his fear, and terror. For the sooner it
shall come, the sooner shall he be presented to my Tribunal, to give an account
of every moment spent in religion without spiritual profit. For death is to
the bad and wicked the beginning of more heavy punishments.

That a Religious man ought with great confidence to labor to the attayning of
Perfection.

CHAP. XIIII.
LORD, if I should mount up to the tree of virtue, to gather of the sweet fruit
of Perfection, I find not where I may stay my self. For the tree is very high,
and my forces very weak, my nature is afraid, my body conceyueth an horror of
it, and if it be pressed forwards, it kicketh and refuses, and therefore I am
forced to stay upon the ground beneath, because it is impossible for me to get
up higher. But tell me, Son, how I pray thee, can it be said to be impossible,
when as all religious, as many as be now in heaven, and many more, who be still
living on earth, have not without their exceeding great commendation, mounted
up to it, and gathered of the wished fruit of perfection. Yet I must confess,
that some came to the height of it more speedily, and some more slowly, some
with more merit, and some with less. And therefore for every one that has a
will; it is neither impossible to follow them, nor very hard: if thy forces be
not sufficient, thou have my help at hand: if thy industry and cooperation be
not wanting, my grace shall not fail thee.

2. To get up to the height of this tree, and to gather the fruit of
perfection, is to get the victory: and to obtain the victory, a man must needs
carry himself manfully. To statuaes and pictures may a scepter and crown be
given, though they never come to the battle, but not to a reasonable
creature, and free, to whom the crown of virtue is his reward, and the reward
is not given without merit, nor merit without encounter precedent and gone
before. If then thou aspirest to the crown of virtue and the perfection of it,
thou must needs prepare thy self to the pains* and to the fight as others have
done before thee. He knows not what a reward is, who expects it without
labor and pains. Seeing then the hope and confidence of obtaining perfection,
relyeth not only on the help of my grace, but on thine own cooperation also,
thou must of necessity on thy part perform the conditions, that I am now to
set down.

3. First, necessary it is, that thou have a true and sincere desire of
laboring to perfection: for this desire is not only the foundation of the
aforesaid confidence, but also helps to the furthering of thy progress and
going forwards, to the ouercoming of difficultyes that ever and anon occur upon
the way, and to the mitigating and easing of all the pains. Son, experience
sufficiently teaches, that he who has not a desire, seeks not, and that he
who has a great desire of a thing, seeks it earnestly. Again putting thy
confidence in me, begin thou with courage to exercise the actions, now of this
virtue, now of that; for by so doing thou shall extirpate all thy bad
inclinations, and in place of them plant in thy mind all the most beautiful
slyps of virtues. And though I am accustomed to lend my helping hand in this
business; yet know thou, that I otherwhiles try a Religious man by the
withdrawing of my help, that so his constancy may appear, and how great a
confidence he has in me.

4. O how much is a Religious man deceived, who if he peradventure stumble in
the midst of his course, intended to the attaining of perfection, by falling
into some imperfection, or finding himself not to profit so much in virtue as
he desires, faints, and is quite discouraged: and diffident of being able to
arrive to perfection, neglects to hold on, or to proceed any further: and of
this it comes to pass, that after that he gives himself far more free scope
to run a disordered course of life, then ever before. This is not the way to
get the victory, neither is it an argument and sign of a valiant and noble
mind, but of a faint and cowardly heart.

5. Certes, that wayfaring man should be deemed mad who would not hold on the
journey he had begone, or should go back again, because he trypped and
stumbled once upon a stone, or had had a fall: for that were nothing else then
of a small evil to cause a greater. But the wise and wary trauayler does not
so, but if peradventure he slip, or have a fall, he presently rises again,
and continues his journey forwards: and of this fall he learneth to be more
wary and heedfull for the time to come, that he fall no more. The very like
happens amongst religious men. For when one unwary and improvident falls into
any imperfection, he neither has a care or desire to rise again, neither is
he vigilant to prevent a fall against another time. But when a prudent and
spiritual man falls, he suddenly gets up upon his feet again, and if he
should fall an hundred tims a day, he would rise up again an hundred times,
and would be sorry for his falls. Whence it is, that he is not only not dismayed
but he also does with greater earnestnes, care and endeavor by the exercise of
virtues, hold on his way to perfection. And this is of evil to draw out good.

6. Those Religious men be also deceived, who think the exercise of virtues to
be laborious, painful and hard, and therefore for fear of preiudicing and
hurting their health of body, they let courage fall, become pusillanimous, or
like unto skittish horses will not go forwards with spurring, but do resist,
and kick. These men would (forsooth) run on to the reward of virtues without
any their own pains taking, and with the enjoying of their accustomed
recreations: but truly the nature of man is not so fruitful a ground, as to
yeald forth fruit of it self without husbanding and manuring: neither is the
condition of virtues so comtemptible, as a religious man ought not worthily to
renounce his own commodityes, and the pleasure of his senses, that he may
attain to the perfection of them. It is self love, that thrusts a man into
this deceitful conceit, that he have a greater regard of the temporal
commodities of his body, then of the spiritual ornaments of his mind. Who
favors his body over much, thrusts virtue headlong out of his own soul.

7. There be found other Religious persons, who forbear to profit in the study
of perfection, because they have a conceit, that I will not affoard them so
much help and assistance, as is to be required to this study: and this opinion
is worse then the former. What is this else, then for them to offend me, and to
deceive themselves? For not to put their confidence in me, is to do me an
apparent injury, as if I knew not how to help them, or could not, or would not.
It is nothing so, I desire nothing more then to help, neither do I ever
withdraw my internal inspirations, or other means, for the stirring up of
them to perfection, and for this end I have taken and drawn them out of the
world. How then can any be destitute of my help? How can he be diffident of my
grace, since I continually stand and knock at the door, that I may be let in,
and help every ones necessity? If they will with this cloak cover their
cowardice and slouthfullnes, they are deceived, because they lay it much the
more open. He that lays his own fault upon others, sins double.

8. So it is, Lord, it is not thine, but out fault, that we go not on to
perfection. For since thou art most wise, thou know the ways of helping us,
because thou art omnipote^t, thou art able also to do it, neither art thou
unwilling, because thy will is goodness it self, and therefore all the fault is
entirely and absolutely ours.

That nothing in the world should divert a Religious man from pursuing after
Perfection, and getting thereof.

CHAP. XV.
SON, a faint hearted and fearful soldier will never set his flagge upon
the enemies walls, for that over much fear causes him either to keep himself
aloof off, or if he be near, to turn his back, and therefore he deserves not
any reward, neither is held in any esteem with his General; and more then
that, is contemned for a coward, and one without heart, of his fellow soldiers.
I would not have my servant over bold or temerarious, and rash, nor yet over
fearful. I desire he should be magnanimous, and constant, and not be afraid
where no cause of fear is. Let a religious man, who says that he will not
hold on in the course of perfection, tell me, what it is, that causes him to
make a stand, and to give over: not for that his pains and endeauours be to no
purpose, since we have said already, that many have arrived to perfection, and I
am ready at hand to help all with the assistance of my grace. Truly if
Religious persons were as ready to embrace and lay hold on the help, that I
offer them, and by their own industry to cooperate with my grace, as there is
desire in me to affoard it, there would be a far greater number of perfect
persons, then now there be.

2. Neither is the power of the enemy so great, as it may hinder, or draw a
Religious man from the way of perfection. For though the enemy be powerful,
yet if the Religious man have a will, he may not only be not overcome or
hindered by him, but it is in his power also easily to overcome him, since his
power and might consists only in tempting, and not in ouercoming and
hindering, unless a man would willingly of himself be hindered or overcome by
him. The enemy is weak enough, who has no power given him of ouercoming, but
of such as be willing to be overcome, and therefore it argues a base mind in a
man, who suffers such a one to prevail against him. And he who tempted by
the enemy, falling not, makes a great gain in spirit, for that by such
exercise he becomes the more courageous, stout, and the more constant; and
trusting to the help of greater strength, he proceeds on to perfection, which
is nothing, but to gain perfection it self. For the more often a soldier
has tried his manhood in handling his weapons, and in the more wars he has
served, the better soldier is he reputed, and the more experimented.

3. Neither must a good Religious man, for the mockings, and taunts of the
imperfect or negligent, cease to hold on, and continue in the way to
perfection: for that were to regard more the speeches of the bad, then my
inspirations, that are intended for his souls good. O how much do they
displease and offend me, who with their pestilent tongues do bite, and detract
those Religious persons who take exceeding great pains about the attayning of
perfection, and say, that they make over much have to the height of sanctity,
or aim at over high matters that they may have the greater fall after. And
there want not those, who be not afraid to say, that for a man to give himself
to devotion, is nothing else, then to hurt his health, to surcharge his head
with melancholy, and to make himself quite unable for the serving of God.
Marvel it is, that such men do not consider and see, how much hurt they do by
these their poisoned speeches, though the same may seem to be uttered in jest.
And whiles they do not well themselves, nor suffer others to do well, they do
seem to perform the office of the Devil. These be truly enemies, false
brethren, the ministers and instruments of hell, whose help Satan uses about
either the hindering, or quite overthrowing of the pious endeauours of other
religious men.

4. He that has a desire to kill his enemy by poison, uses the help of one of
the same house, or familiar with him. O unhappy and miserable seducers, who do
neither discharge their own office, nor yet suffer others to satisfy theirs.
O how unlike be they unto those, who first served me in religion: for they
exhorted and encouraged one another to the study and practice of virtue; and by
example of life, and pious talk stirred up to the love of God, and animated
one another to the mortification of their passions, and to the contempt of
themselves, that so they might come to that perfection, which they proposed
unto themselves, and sought for.

5. But suppose, that a religious man, after counsel, by the judgment of his
Superior, or of his ghostly Father, given about exercising virtue with
discretion, become sick thereby, how great an hurt is this? What hurt should
thereof come unto him? I, that am his Lord, will have it so: and what if I by
this way think to deliver him from a far more soar sickness of soul? Do these
men think, that if a pious and good religious man fall sick, I am forthwith
displeased with him? None do displease me but the imperfect, who the more
healthful they be in body, the more grievously do they oftentims offend me. A
sick Religious man, so be be devout, is more grateful to me, then one in
health if he want devotion, for as much as he gives good example in sickness,
and exercises virtue, neither whereof is to be found in the whole undevout
person: and therefore a religious man desirous of perfection, when he is sick,
before me sustayneth no loss of any thing, because I pay my soldiers their
ordinary wages alike, both in time of sickness and of health.

5. A spiritual disease, growing of imperfections, brings great hurt, and
not that sickness of the body, of which good religious persons oftentimes make a
singular profit to themselves. If when the body were ill and sick, the will
should be infirm and sick also, so as the sick man could not merit any more,
his hurt should be somewhat, and none could but have just cause of flying from
such a sickness. But it is rather the contrary, and therefore my Apostle said,
That when he was infirm, he was the stronger: and that virtue was perfected in
infirmity. My Son, will thou do a thing that may do thy soul good, and be
pleasing to me? Avoid these ill meaning detractours, as thou would do
venomous serpents: and know thou, that if thou contemn what they maliciously
calumniate, and attend to the love of perfection, thou shall increase thine
own glory; because I, for love of whom thou do this, will in most liberal
manner reward thee.

6. Some again will not follow the way of perfection, because they see but few
to walk therein: but this is no just cause, that a busynes so fruitful, and
laudable, should be omitted. What skilleth it, whether thou have many or few
companions in so most pleasant a journey? Ought it not be enough for thee, that
the way is good, secure, and brings to a most happy end? Not to have many
companions in walking the way of perfection, does rather increase thy
comme^dations and merit, then diminish it: yea thou ought to reckon it for a
singular benefit in that it has happened to few. There be also few elected,
though many be called: and many run in the race, and but one wynneth the
prize. If thou can be one of the number of those few, and merit a precious
crown, why forbearest thou to run?

7. He that labors out of love, is not sollicitous about the company of
others, but it is enough, that he be not wanting unto him, for whose sake he
takes the pains. I am he, for whose sake all religious persons run the race
of perfection. I am their guide captain, and companion. I help, ease, and
defend them, and this alone should be enough for them, to continue their
journey with a stout, able, and willing mind. Neither must thou marvel, that
this way is traced of few, because they be few, who mortify themselus in
earnest, who restrain their desires, and contemn the flattery of the senses,
and many there be, who suffer themselves by delightful allurements of this
world to be carried away into the spacious and broad way, which no man, but
knows how repugnant it is to a Religious estate.

8. Moreover there be some, who permit themselves to be withheld from the
commendation of this perfection for human respects, and tho commodities of
fortune, which is nothing else then to be notably injurious to virtue, whose
property is to be an ornament to a religious man: whereas contrariwise human
respects, and all temporal commodities are to be trodden under his feet, and
contemned. He then who leaves those for these, does necessarily put virtue
under a religious man's feet, and raises humane respect upon his head.

9. Again he that more regards the worlds estimation, and riches thereof then
perfection, whereunto I daily exhort all religious persons, does me an injury,
and himself hurt. For all know, that he who shall be ashamed of me before men,
I will also be ashamed of him before the Angels of God. But what absurdity,
and folly is this? They, when they lived in the world, out of a desire of
following perfection, did forsake the world, the temporal commodities thereof,
and all humane things besides: but now having embraced religion, they will give
over perfection, to follow the world. Is not this a manifest folly? And since
humane respect is nothing else then a certain vain fear, least a man be
disco^mended in some one or other of his actions; how is it possible, that a
religious man, desirous of perfection can be discommended? Can there any
greater glory befall him in this life, then if this may be affirmed and said of
him? And what new thing can happen to a religious man, if he be contemned of
the world? Does he expect any reward or recompense from it? Or is he afraid,
least it would censure him by a condemnation? It makes no matter, whether a
religious man be loved or hated of the world; but it avails much, if he be
dear to me.

10. To conclude, others forbear to tread this way of perfection, by reason of
the repugnance that man's nature finds in practicing the means, and for the
difficulties that the body makes trial of, in tracing the same way. But these
men miss the mark: for to be a true Religious man, or to walk on to
perfection, is nothing else but to mortify the desires of the flesh, and the
perturbations of the mind. And therefore, if thou forbear the exercise of
virtue, least thou incommodate or hurt thy body, thou love thy self too
sensually: neither do I see, what difference there is between thee, and a
delicate secular person. Remember Son, that these be not the promises thou
made at thy entrance to religion; for then thou did purpose with thy self
to suffer many things for me, to chastise thy body, to serve me, and for love
of religious perfection to deprive and spoil thy self of all humane
consolation.

That a good Religious man must not content himself with whatsoever degree of
Perfection; but must labor, and aspire to a greater.

CHAP. XVI.
SON, those religious men do not satisfy me, that aspire to a mean degree of
religious perfection, unless they also aim at the highest. For so I declared
unto my disciples, when I exhorted them to be perfect, not as the Patriarcks,
and Prophets were, nor as the Seraphims, and other the Angels, but as my
Father in heaven. O how does that Religious person please me, who like the
covetous man is desirous of true virtue, and perfection. The covetous man has
never his fill: for the more he has, the more he desires. And I would have
religious men such followers of spiritual covetousness. For it is a sign of a
base mind, if a man, when he has means to attain to greater perfection, do
propose unto himself, and think upon lesser. But I desire to have my servants
valiant, and generously minded, who aspire to great and hard matters. For if I
have created them to an end, the most excellent in the world, and have raised
them up to so high a state, that is, to be Religious; why should they not with
all their possible forces labor to perfection, that would be most contenting
to us both? Who cooperateth not conformably to the benefit received, is
injurious to the Benefactour.

2. Let him tell me, whosoever has no care to arrive to any great perfection,
but thinks it enough to have had a taste thereof, whether he would so deal
with his body? Is he contented it should enjoy a mediocrity of health, when he
may have it perfectly strong, sound, and lusty? Would he wish but a poor
means of living, and not the best? If then of all earthly things, which serve
the body we choose the best, most perfect, and all in great quantity, number,
and quality the most excellent, why should we not also for the souls good,
which is the mistress of the body, wish and make choice of the most perfect,
and most absolute virtues? That family is nothing well governed, where the
handmayd is better treated, then the mistress of the house.

3. Who would deny, that it is a foul and shameful thing for a Religious man,
to stay in the lowest degree of virtue, when he sees secular men never to make
a stay in their degree of state of life, which they have once embraced, but
ever to aspire to an higher, until they come to the highest? Hence it is, that
a vulgar person first seeks to raise himself to be a Gentleman, then a
Baron, next an Earl, a Marquis, a Duke, until in conclusion he lay hold on
the Scepter and Crown: and when he is come to this, he is not contented with
an ordinary Crown, but he seeks a more rich, more potent, and a more noble
Crown, and consequently the greatest that can be had in this life. And shall a
Religious man be of so dastardly a mind, as not to labor to obtain a most
noble spiritual Crown? Should he stand in the first degree of perfection,
when he may with his great commendation, and no less profit mount up to the
highest? Is not this a strange kind of sottishnes, and folly? Is not this to
make a light esteem of my will, and to refuse the help of my grace, by the
benefit whereof he might compass an higher degree of perfection?

4. Understand my Son, that a Religious man is more dear unto me, who
endeavors for my greater glory, to arrive to the highest degree of
perfection: and this ought not without cause to be enough unto him, not to stay
in his course, but still to hold on. Go to tell me, what servant is so
conte^ptible and vile, who is contented to be in little grace and favor with
his Lord, when he may be in very great? Why then, thou Religious man, who art
for so many respects bound unto me, as my servant, why I say, when by laboring
to perfection thou may deserve my extraordinary favor, thou delayest to do
it? What pains does the poor servant take to gain his masters grace? and
how much is he afflicted, when he sees, notwithstanding all the diligence he
uses, he cannot get into his masters favor? wherefore then do thou make a
stand in the very entrance to perfection, when thou may easily get into the
innermost parts of it, and gain thy Lord unto thee? To please me, is not my
gain, but thine.

5. O of what worth is but one degree of glory in heaven, and how glorious is
he in heaven, who has deserved it! The Religious, who now triumph in heaven,
do make so great an esteem even of the least increase of glory, which they had
merited, whiles they labored to perfection here on earth, as they do not only
yield their Creator immortal thanks, but had rather also, if there were
need, spend their blood a thousand times, then not to have obtained that glory.
Will thou therefore, who may without spilling of thy blood, or loss of life,
increase thy glory and crown in heaven from day to day by profiting toward
perfection, stand still in the door, contented with a very small measure of
perfection?

6. Take heed, my Son, least that befall unto thee, which I told my disciple
of: That to him who has, shall be given; and from him who has not, shall also
be taken away that he has. Neither is that wont to be done only for a
punishment of ingratitude, but ordinarily also it happens to all things more or
less affected with some quality. For example: Wood not much kindled, easily
forgoeth the little hear that it has, not so if it had been well kindled. So a
Religious man, who has gotten but little perfection, does very easily loose
it; but he, who has got many degrees of it, does not easily forsake it, but is
like a tree that has taken deep root, and strongly resists both winds, and
tempests.

7. There be also some, who affected to a more free life, do for purging of
themselus say, that the study of perfection is only proper to Nouices. But they
be miserably deceived; for as much as all religious persons be bound to labor
to perfection, and the more ancient a man is in religion, the more diligent
should he be in furnishing himself with virtues, as he, who ought to have both
a greater understanding and knowledge of his own obligation, and has a longer
trial and experience of the sweetness of perfection. He that is not hungry, is
soon filled: and it is an ill sign in a religious man, if he receive no
pleasure in the study of virtues.

8. Others contrariwise have an over hasty desire to get up to the highest
degree of perfection, and if they happen peradventure to fall into some defect,
they be eftsoons discouraged, and loose their courage. But this is not my will,
neither is it the way of laboring to perfection. For the greatest perfection
is in the victory and ouercoming of all vices, and in the purchasing of all
virtues, and for the effecting of this, there must be some continuance of time.
Wherefore to seek eueryday more perfection then other (which we speak of
here) is nothing else but to overcome the passions, or to restrain the
perturbations of the mind, and the inordinate desires thereof. And to be
absolutely perfect, is nothing else, then after the victory over our selves to be
dead to the world, and to live to god alone.

9. He that has enemies and adversaries, can never be secure, unless he cut
them off clean, and destroy them: but necessary it is not, that he take them a
way at one time, and all together. So a Religious man's enemies be the
passions, which daily rebel against him, and though he cannot overcome the^
all at once at one and the same time; yet let him labor to extirpate one after
anther, and so doing, he shall hold on to greater perfection. In like manner an
whole Kingdom is not set upon all at once, but now one castle is taken from
the enemy, and then another, or some City brought in subjection, and so one
after another, until he be come possessed of the whole Kingdom: Even so does
a religious man, who has a desire to invade and set upon the kingdom of
perfection, whiles he must now gain one virtue, and then another: and this is
every day to labor to greater perfection. And therefore he must not in any
sort be discouraged, though he become not very perfect by one or two actions,
He goes well onward in his journey, who stays no where upon his way.

That a Religious man must conserve and keep the perfection he has gotten: and
of the manner of keeping it.

CHAP. XVII.
SON, little profits the good health of body to be recovered, if it be
after hurt again by any intemperance of eating, or other carelesnes, since the
relapse into sickness is more dangerous, then the sickness it self. The same is
the consideration of spiritual Perfection, which once being had, profits
little, if we forgo it again, through default of our own vigilance and wary
keeping of the same. And if the relapse into corporal sickness be a matter of
so great consideration for the danger toward the body; much more is to be
feared a relapse into the old imperfections, that endanger the spiritual life.

2. Son, desire thou to be freed from the danger of dying spiritually?
Then shun those things, that be dispositions to that death. For we learn by
daily experience, that they, who once languish in the study of perfection, do
fall into a thousand defects, and into so great leuity and inconstancy of
manners, liberty of conversation, and imprudency of mind, as not only all shame
laid aside, they do nothing worthy of praise, but do furthermore glory, and
rejoice in their own errors and defects. And in this they be not unlike to
those Angels, who fell from heaven, and together with their most greiuous
ruin, lost also all their spiritual gifts, and procured to themselves most
extreme evils. For look how much more excellent they were in dignity then all
creatures, so much more by their fall from heaven they became worse, and more
contemptible then them all. My Apostle also, who betrayed me, from his dignity
of Apostleship fell into the downfall of desperation. The same happens to the
Religious men, who from the higher degree of perfection they fall, be the more
sorely bruized and crushed by their fall, and become worse. And as he is called
happy, who declineth from evil, and imbraceth good: so contrariwise miserable
and unhappy is that man, who forsaking the way of perfection, traceth and
holds on the way of licenciousnes and liberty.

3. But to conserve the degree of perfection thou have gotten, there be two
virtues that may help thee, and those be Love, and Humility. Love will make
thee vigilant to avoid the dangers growing from thieves, and robbers. Humility
will conceal and hide thee, that thou come not within their view or sight. And
how profitable and auailable Love is for this purpose, it is no hard matter to
demonstrate. A rich and wealthy man, who is not in love with his riches, soon
loses them. For he that loves not any thing, esteems it not: and he that
esteems it not, has no care of keeping it: and every one knows, that a
thing neglige^tly kept, is easily lost. Even so as necessary it is for a
Religious man to be greatly affected to the perfection he has once got: for of
love there is caused a fear of loosing it: of fear a solicitude and
diligence in keeping it: and solicitude again causes him to find, and search
out means and ways, necessary and profitable for attayning to the end.

4. Whosoever has a care to keep his corporal health, asks advise of expert
and learned Physicians, eats good and wholesome meats, keeps his set times
of eating, neglects not requisite exercises of body, chooses an habitation
in a healthful place, and air approved of the Physicians, keeps himself
out of the rain, winds, and from other outward incommodities; and in few
words, is very careful not to exceed in any thing, that may peradventure any
way hurt him. The same causes solicitude in a Religious man, if he have a
desire to conserve Perfection, and seek his souls health. For first his care
is not to order his own life according to his own will, or by the counsel
of more loose and free companions, but rather by the direction of Superiors,
and spiritual Fathers. Secondly, to eat of good meats, namely those that I
used my self, when I lived on earth, that is, to do the will of my Father, who
is in heaven, whose will is our souls sanctification. And therefore whatsoever
God gives us for the sanctifying of the soul, is the best meat, as
contrariwise whatsoever makes to the defiling thereof, such as be sins, is
the worst poison of all. Thirdly, he neglects not the use and exercise of
virtues. For since perfection is founded in Charity, which is like unto fire,
whereunto if wood be cast, it increases, if it be removed and taken away, it
goes out: Even so, the more, Religious men, who have their part in Charity, do
exercise themselves in virtue, the more they profit in perfection: and the
less they be exercised in them, the less they get of perfection: And therefore
all exercise of virtue ceasing, perfection cease also.

5. And as touching an healthful place, where the soul is to dwell, I know
none comparable to Religion, where I have placed the religious man: but if we
consider particular places, the best is that, that his spiritual Physicians or
Fathers assign him. And if he would fly all occasions of falling into any
imperfections, he shall so very well arm and defend himself against all
outward difficulties. Finally he commits no excess, because in all
doubtful matters, he repaireth to his spiritual Father, and seasoneth all
pennances and mortifications with the salt of moderation and discretion.

6. The other way that conserueth perfection, is by humility. He that is become
possessed of a rich and precious jewel, is very wary three ways, that he loose
it not at any time. First he lays it up in a secret place, that it may not
easily be seen, discovered, or found of others. Secondly, he lets not every
own see it, neither does he openly brag, that he has such a Jewel. Thirdly,
he takes it not from the thing, whereat it hangs. For example, the heat of
water depends of the fire, and if you remove it from the fire, it loses the
heat. Humility in a Religious man, whose precious stone is the study of
perfection, remedyeth all these three dangers. First it causes him to
conceal, and hide his virtues, and perfections from the sight or knowledge of
others. Secondly, not only not to vaunt and brag of his spiritual riches, but
also to think himself unworthy of them, and withal to acknowledge and
confess himself poor, a beggar, and an unprofitable servant. Thirdly, to
acknowledge, that the Jewel of perfection depends of my grace, knowing that
it is lost, if it be separated from it. For as I resist the proud, so give I
grace to the humble. And therefore if thou have a desire to have thy perfection
not only conserved, but to increase also, attend thou diligently to the
exercise of true humility.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK of Religious Perfection. Wherein is treated of the three
Vows of Religion, and the perfect observation thereof. And first of the three
Vows in general.
Of the dignity, and excellency of the three Vows, that be made by Religious
persons.

CHAP. I.
SON, when any thing, though otherwise of great worth is not known, it is not
much esteemed, because the excellency and worth thereof is obscured by the
darkness of ignorance, and thereby the due estimation is taken away. And this is
the cause, wherefore the three Vows, that be made in Religion, be not so
esteemed of some, even Religious men themselves, because they understand not
the worth, excellency, and profit thereof. He cannot be free from fault, who
understands not what in regard of his state he both may, and ought to know.
Wherefore know thou (my Son) that the excellency of these vows is greater then
many conceive, neither are they of little consequence. And under the name of
Vow, is understood an obligation of a Religious man made to God his Creator,
of performing and doing some better good. And since this obligation is very
noble, spiritual, and divine, every religious man ought not without cause,
diligently to ponder, reverently to esteem, and exactly to observe the same.

2. That it is most noble, it clearly appears by this; for that the will
binds it self, which amongst the faculties of the soul holds the
principality, and first place, and has a command over all the rest of the
powers. Again, it is most noble, because it is made to God, whose majesty is
infinite, and who is the author of all true excellency. Moreover because it is
made for a most noble end, namely the glory of Gods Name, which is the more
amplified, the more exactly that obligation is kept. There is added further,
that the virtue of Religion among all moral virtues excels for noblenes and
dignity. Seeing therefore a Vow is an action of that most noble virtue that
gives light to all other virtues, it manifestly follows, that a Vow is a
most noble virtue. For what the tree is, the same be the fruits thereof.

3. And that this obligation is spiritual and holy, is out of controversy; both
because it is directed to a spiritual good, namely to holiness of life, and
because it is the very entrance and beginning of the spiritual life of
Religious men. Whereupon as the life of the body depends on the heart as the
beginning: so the religious life, and to be a religious man has the dependence
of this holy obligation. And as by the least hurt of the heart, the life of body
receives great hurt also, and the heart being taken away, the life is taken
away together: even so by the very least default in the observation of this
obligation, the Religious life is much prejudiced, and that again ceasing, or
taken away, a man cease to be Religious. The nearer the evil comes to the
heart, the more dangerous it is.

4. That this obligation is divine, is also certain, because it is of the holy
Ghost, who by his divine inspiration moves a man's mind to the making of such
an obligation. Secondly, because the person, to whom it is made, is divine,
that is, God himself. Now let a Religious man consider and see, how much he
ought to love it, with what regard to keep it, and with what devotion, and care
to observe it in all things that he is able, because it is made to him, who
penetrateth and enters into the most inward secret of the heart, and well
knows, who has just cause to observe it, and who not.

5. But now I would desire to know of those to whom it causes some trouble
and difficulty, that they be tied in so noble and holy a band, what the cause
is, that secular men have them in so great regard, and veneration? They will
say perhaps, because they be religious and my servants. And what made them
religious and my servants, but these three Vows? Many secular persons live at
this day in the world, far more learned, more holy, and more perfect then many
Religious, and yet be they nothing so much honored, as religious men be; and
the cause is, because they be not tied to me by these holy bands of Vows.
Secular men, when they behold Religious persons, do consider them, as wholly
mine, by three Vows consecrated to me, and what honor they do them, they
think they give to me. But this they do not to men of the world, though
otherwise eminent for their virtue: and therefore to be tied in these bands, is
no contemptible matter, but most honorable, and most noble, even to the world,
since the Religious be in so great veneration with the great men of the world.

6. These three Vows again be of very great regard, for that they cause the
Religious to triumph victoriously, and to go away with victory over their three
deadly enemies. For whils they exercise Poverty against the vanity of the
world, Chastity against the tentation of the flesh, and Obedience against the
frauds of the crafty devil, they go easily away with victory. But those
Religious, who use not these kind of arms, are oftentimes shamefully overcome.
Let not him be a soldier, who will not take a weapon in hand, neither let him
go to the battle, who refuses to fight.

7. And now tell me, my Son, what those Religious men deserve, who make but
light esteem of so holy, and godly an obligation, and what they also deserve,
who keep it not, when they may, and ought to keep it? What punishment attends
them, who do not only break it, but further contemn it also? O how strait an
account are they to make, not only of their own transgressions, but also of
those of others, that is, of those, who by their bad example were induced to
violate and break their Vows they had before made unto me. For promise by
Vow is not made to men, but to the divine majesty: it is not made unwillingly,
but voluntarily. Neither is the obligation thereof concerning any light or
temporal matter, but touching a great and spiritual matter, that is, the
salvation of the Soul. He that lightly regards what he has once promised to
God, shall again be as little regarded of God.

Of the vtility and profit that Vows bring, and cause to Religious persons.

CHAP. II.
LORD, our Nature is so sore depressed and surcharged with the weight of our
own miseries, as I know not, whether it were good and profitable for a man to
bind himself by Vows, since to me it seems nothing else, but to add one
burden to another, and consequently much to be feared, least in conclusion,
seeing it is very weak, it fall under the burden. And more then this there be
so many obligations, and bands of precepts imposed partly by thee, partly by
thy Church laid upon us, as it is almost impossible for us to satisfy them;
therefore it seems not good to surcharge our selves with new bands of Vows.
Neither does there appear so great vtility likely to redound unto us by the
benefit of Vows, but that there is presented a greater danger by
transgressing, and breaking them. I add further, Lord, that fre and voluntary
offices of devotion are more accepted off by thee, then be the forced. But
whosoever shall make a Vow, is forced to stand to his promise, and therefore I
see not, how great a vtility there is of Vows.

2. Thou art deceived, my Son. For Vows be burdens that load not, but rather
ease, and help nature it self to the exercising of all more noble works. The
feathers and wings of birds carry a show of a burden, and yet they help to
raise them aloft, and without which they cannot fly. Besides, experience
teaches, that they be religious, who do most promptly and most exactly observe
the commaundments of God: whence it appears, that by the benefit of Vows
they are helped to observe the precepts of God, and of the Church, after a more
exact, and perfect manner.

3. Thou art wide, if thou think that any profit returns to me by thy
Vows. It is not so. There is no sowing, nor mowing for me here. Promises made
to men, redound to the profit of them to whom they be made, but the merit of
the Vows that are made to me, remains to the vtility of him who voweth: yea
the honor and glory that of Vows arise to me and my service, appertains
also to the good of them that vow. For I do abundantly reward them, as I do
severely chastise the bad works, that be dishonorable to piety, and to the
service of God.

4. And where thou say, that by Vows all liberty is taken away, in so much as
the Religious do all things of necessity, and therefore have no merit of their
works at all, thou art deceived. For there be two necessities; one natural,
and this takes away all liberty, merit, and commendation of all good works,
such as is the falling of a stone downwards. The other is voluntary, or
proceeding of the will, or of a promise voluntarily made, and this does not
only not take away the merit of the good work, but also much increases it:
for that both the work, and the promise be voluntary and free. And this is the
necessity so highly commended of the blessed in heaven, because it did drive
them to the exercising of the more noble, and more excellent works. Happy is
that necessity, which compels to what is better.

5. Moreover thou must know, my Son, that the grief, and difficulty, which we
otherwhiles find and feel in executing our promise of Vows, does not take
away nor diminish in the Religious their merit, but rather increase it: for in
fullfilling our Vows, there is not only done a good work, but that heaviness,
repugnance, and difficulty is further overcome, which indeed is a matter of no
little consequence. Howbeit to fulfill a good work promised by Vow, though
there occur no difficulty in doing it, is more meritorious, then to fulfill
it without any precedent Vow. For as I will declare after, the Vow it self is
meritorious, which merit he has not who does a good work, which he before
promised to do without making a Vow.

6. There be other vtilityes, which vows do bring to the Religious. For first
undoubted it is, that the tree, the deceper root it shall take within the
earth, brings forth the better fruit: Even so man's will, the more stable it
shall be in good, produces the more noble works. And among the effects of Vows
one is, that it makes the will more firm in good works. Who knows not, how
various, and mutable man's will is: now it is willing, and within a while it is
unwilling, and what pleases to day, displeases to morrow. And doubtless it
would be better, if the will were constant and stable in embracing good, and
that it may be stable and immutable, is effected by the benefit of Vows. For
so soon as a man shall have made a Vow, he must perform it, neither may he
revoke it without sin: and that he may not go back, is both profitable and
good, and derived from the very nature of a Vow. And of this it follows, that
a good work proceeding from a will grounded in good, is better then other good
works, and deserves a more ample reward. As contrariwise a bad and hurtful
work, coming from a perverse and obdurate will, is more detestable then other
ill works, and meriteth a more sore punishment. Would you have a Lunatike
person to do no hurt? Then bind him fast upon the first occasion.

7. Another vtility nothing inferior to the former, is this. Every man will
confess, that it most profits a man, if he be most inwardly united to God
Almighty. And this is effected by Vows: for whiles a man by Vows binds
himself to me, I am in like manner tied again fast unto him; and therefore if
the Religious do by these sacred bands bind themselves fast unto me, and so
become mine, how is it possible, that I should not deliver my self unto them
also? That I should not help them, not defend them, not conserve, and keep
them, as a thing most dear unto me? I should not be what I am, if my creature
should go beyond me in liberality. Wherefore it is very agreeable to reason, that
seeing they have most firmly conjoined themselves to me the fountain of
Grace, I should also communicate unto them the flowing streams of my grace,
and my heavenly gifts, and take so great care of them, as neither the Devil,
nor any other creature may do them harm. The Religious live so much the more
secure, the more potent, and powerful is their Lord, and Master to whom they
have conjoined themselves.

8. There is yet another vtility, that al good works done by Vow, do merit
more with God, then those that are not done by Vow. He that keeps chastity
for love of me, does well, and meriteth: but he that for love of me makes a
Vow of chastity and keeps it, does better and meriteth more. For the former
exercises but one virtue, that is, Continency: but the later exercises two,
namely Continency and Religion, the noblest of all moral virtues. Moreover to
promise a good work, is a good thing: and to perform a promise is also good,
and therefore for them both a man is held worthy of commendations and thanks.
Let him then be more dear unto thee, who bestows more spiritual good upon
thee.

9. Seeing so many benefits redound unto us by Vows, as the stability of the
will, the conjunction with God, and the merit of works, I would be now glad to
understand why some, when they should most of all rejoice, be sorry that they
have tied themselves by Vows? What cause of grief should they have? For if
these sacred bands should deprive them of some great commodity, they might have
just cause of sorrowing. But indeed they loose none by it. For as a vine
fastened to a tree, or to a post, and therefore less obnoxious and exposed to
the injury of the winds, brings forth better and more abundant fruit, then
if it were loose and untied: Even so be Religious persons, by the benefit of
these Vows, are more strong, and stable, and more free from tentations, and do
yield greater increase of good works, and therefore why should they afflict
themselves with grief?

10. Evil must needs please him, who is sorry for good, or complains thereof.
When good meat is hurtful to a man, it is a sign that his stomach is
infected and surcharged with bad humors, and therefore it is to be purged with
some antitode, if he mean to prevent the hazard of his life. In like manner if
the making of Vows, which is good and holy, be to some Religious person
troublesome, it is a sign, that his mind is infected with some bad
disposition, which must be taken away and removed by the spiritual Physician,
that the hazard of his spiritual death may be avoided.

How acceptable and pleasing to God the three Vows of Religious persons be.

CHAP. III.
SON, how should not the Vows of the Religious be accepted by me, when as
they be made for my honor and glory? How is it, that they should not be dear
to me, when as they be the means of attaining perfection, which I do so
earnestly desire at their hands? O how much should some earthly Lord glory, if
his servants should make him any such promise, he would no doubt exult for joy,
though he should not be assured, whether they had done it in earnest, and from
their heart, for the love of him their Lord, or in regard of their own
commodity. And should not I, who am assured, that the Religious do from their
heart make these Vows, and only for love of me bind themselves to the
performing of good and holy works, rejoice, and be glad? Should not I make a
demonstration, how much they please me?

2. For there be three things, that do in particular please me in Vows. First
the devotion, wherewith the Vows be made. Secondly the diligence, wherewith
they are observed. Thirdly the joy, that the Religious conceive by occasion of
the making of their Vows. Devotion grows of the consideration of the
excellency of the oblation, that is made in the Vows. For the Religious man by
a benefit of his three Vows offers himself wholly in sacrifice, without
reservation of any part to himself. And if the sacrifices of the old law,
which were of bulls and calves, were so pleasing unto me; how much shall these
content me, which Religious men do voluntarily offer unto me? And if I made so
high esteem of Abraham's only will, when he was ready to sacrifice his only
Son unto me, what a reckoning should I make of the sacrifice, that a
Religious man makes of himself, by offering me his will, soul, body and all?
Again, Diligence arises of the love they carry toward me. He that loves,
cannot expect, or of sloth put of till another time, or prolonge that which he
knows to be very pleasing to the beloved. And in Religious life nothing
pleases me more, then the observation of Vows. Finally joy for the Vows
made, grows of this, that the Religious man considers, how pleasing this
his oblation was unto me. O how sorely should a Religious man offend me, if he
should be troubled, and grieved for a thing very well done, and most acceptable
to me. It is no less a sin to be sorry for a good work, then to be glad of a
bad one.

3. There be also other things, that make this Religious oblation most pleasing
to me, and cause me to make an high estimation thereof, and that is, because it
has the beginning of sincere love toward me. For first the Religious do by
these three Vows, as with three nails, voluntarily nail themselves to the
Cross for love of me, not for three days alone, but for all their life. They
do not only crucify their body with the nail of Poverty, and the senses with
the nail of Chastity, but their understanding also, and their own judgment
with the nail of Obedience, by obeying their Superiors will rather, then
their own. The thief that confessed me on the Cross whereon he did hang a
very short time, where he spoke unto his companion but one word in favor of
me, tasted so abundantly of my best love toward him, as I made him that very
day an inheritour of paradise. And why should I not love a Religious man
heartily, who in regard of his Vows made for love of me, is bound to continue
upon the Cross all his life long? Why should not his oblation be most pleasing
to me, who for the amplificatio^ of my glory exposes himself to all dangers,
that he may preach my Gospel, not by word alone, but, which is more, by
example of life also?

4. Another cause, why I hold the oblation of a Religious person amongst the
things that be most dear unto me, is, because by these three Vows he does
wittingly and willingly give me whatsoever he can give. For whereas he does by
Vow yeald himself wholly to my service, he gives me not only the works, but
also the worker of them. Certes, a secular man never gives me so much: for by
doing well, he gives me nothing but the fruit, and not the tree, whiles a
Religious person gives me the one and the other. This further pleases me that
the Religious in making their Vows, make protestation, that they will not love
any other besides me, nor serve any but me, and this not for a certain time,
but for all eternity. Moreover the Religious consecrate unto me all their own
right and power of doing anything contrary to their Vow once made, and this
pleases me very much. A secular person, for example, who does without making
any Vow for love of me renounce all his riches, does indeed well, yet he
reserueth to himself an interest and right of gathering riches together
again when he shall please: But a Religious man by making the Vow of Poverty,
depriueth himself not only of riches, but also of power of heaping or gathering
of riches for the time to come, and of all propriety thereunto forever.

5. The third thing that in the obligation of Vows pleases me, is, that the
Religious do by it not only give all, but do it after the best and most perfect
manner, that is, that I should have such a comaund, power, and right over them,
as I may use their service in whatsoever thing, where, when, and as much as
shall please me. And hence it is, that the Religious ought not to use himself,
as a thing of his own, but as mine, and consecrated to me. Neither must he use
his own judgment, where and when he lists, but at my pleasure, because I am
his Lord, and not himself. Wherefore know thou my Religious child, that he
shall commit a grievous sacrilege, who would either take from me that which had
been formerly consecrated and delivered unto me by Vows, or usurp and use it
at his own pleasure. The less thou have, and the less thou do after thine
own will, the less will thy error be, and the less account thou shall yield
to God.

6. The fourth and last cause is, why I most of all approve and allow of the
Vows of Religious persons, is, for whereas the world which is a decevuer of
souls, is hateful to me, I am very glad, if the iuglings, frauds, and
vanities of it be discovered and laid open. And seeing the Vows of the
Religious be clean opposite to the world (for by virtue of them all the
riches, pleasures, honors, and other the worlds vanities be contemned) they
cannot but be most acceptable. But consider, my Child, that this contempt of
the world is not to be manifested by an external show, or by words alone, but
by facts and works, and therefore it is not enough to have made Vows, but
thou must further of necessity observe, and keep them. It is good to proclayme
a defiance to thine enemy, but better it is to overcome him. While, a Religious
person performs his Vows, he declares himself an enemy to the world, but
when he discharges his promise made by Vow, he overcomes and vanquisheth it
quite.

How convenient it is, that Religious men bind themselves to God by three Vows.

CHAP. IIII.
SON, it is very agreeable, that the Religious be furnished and provided of
the arms of three Virtues, which he has promised by Vows, to wit, Poverty,
Chastity and Obedience. When the soldier desires to imitate his Captain, and
to arm himself with those weapons which he does, that he may manfully,
according to his Captains pleasure, fight with his enemy, he is worthy both of
praise and reward. I am the Captain and General of all the religious warfare
who have marched in the vanguard with these three Virtues, and have showed all
my followers, how they should fight with these arms I overcame mine enemies,
and triumphed over them; and therefore meet it is, that the Religious, who serve
under my colors, and be to fight with the same enemies, should use and handle
the same weapons, which if they do as they ought, they cannot but go out of the
field victorious. The soldier, who endeavors to imitate his General, though
he arrive not to his great strength and courage, is nevertheless worthy of his
reward.

2. It is further requisite, that the Religious man cast of all things, that
may be of power to hinder his profit of spirit. A scholar is to do three
things, that may make to his profit in humane literature. First, he must remove
all the obstacles and impediments of his studyes, such as be the pleasures of
the flesh. Secondly such things, as may hinder his true progress in his
studyes, and those be the cares of temporal goods, and helps. Thirdly, he must
make choice of the most effectual and best means for the taking of his
masters lessons, and that is, diligently to obey his master, and the law of
the School. These three obstacles the Religious also remove and take away by
the benefit, and help of their Vows. For by the Vow of Chastity they cut off
all carnal delights: by that of Poverty, the solicitude of temporal things:
and by that of Obedience they fulfill the laws of their institute and their
Superiors precepts. To remove the impediments of this spiritual way, is to
walk on, and profit in spirit.

3. Son, since thou art absolutely resolved to renounce the world, and all the
vanities thereof, meet it is, thou give it over, and forsake it in the
perfectest manner that is possible. Some leave it in affection, as do those
that have no desire of vanities at all, and they do well. Some forsake it
indeed, as do they who embrace a Religious state, and these do better. Some
again leave it both ways, and they renounce it after a most perfect manner,
and this do my Religious, when they vow Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience. The
further thine enemy is from thee, the less can he hurt thee.

4. The world uses three sorts of nets, wherein many be caught. The first net
is of gold and silver, that is, of terrene riches, which because it delights
the eye, is loved of them who are within it, and is desired of them who are out
of it. This net the Religious escape by Vow of Poverty. For poverty, the veyle
of concupiscence being taken out of sight, causes, that though the net be made
of gold and silver, it seem nothing but a net, and a sore prison to be in.

5. Another net is knit of the birdlime of pleasures of the flesh, wherein
those that be caught, the more they stir, the more be they entangled and
woone in it. From out of this net the Religious be delivered by the Vow of
Chastity, by the pure and milk white wings whereof they be raised aloft; and
freed from the cleaning glue of carnal contentments, they become like unto
Angels.

6. The third net is rather an imaginary and phantasticke one, then a solid
and true net, wherein they be caught who presume of themselves, and seek after
the vain honors and estimation of this world. The Religious avoid this net by
the Vow of Obedience, who as they subject themselves unto others, so think
they not of embracing any other thing, then humility and contempt of
themselves. To live in the world, and to have been caught in one of these
nets, is no great matter; but to live in in Religion, and to have fallen into
the worlds snares and nets, is a case to be exceedingly lamented.

7. There is yet another cause of congruity, that the Religious make the
aforesaid three Vows, because I have chosen, and called them out of the world
for the doing of some noble, great, and generous actions, and therefore they
need a great, and stout courage, which they must declare and manifest by their
worthy deeds: and the height and excellency of the Religious state, wherein I
have placed them, exacteth no less. For a man to be affected to these
transitory and passing goods, argues an abject and base mind: in like manner
to take a contentment in the pleasures of the flesh, is rather of beasts then
of men. Therefore agreeable it is, that Religious be most far from both, and this
they effect by their Vows, whiles they give demonstration of their generous
mind, and by exercise of virtue avoiding that whereunto both nature and all the
senses do incline.

8. But Lord, I see not, what generosity is manifested by the Vow of Obedience,
by which the Religious do wholly subject themselves unto others. Neither do I
well conceive, how contemptible a matter it is to be affected to riches, and
pleasures of this life, and is not a base thing also to obey, and serve another
in the very least, and most abject things.

9. Son, thou easily discouerest thy self neither to understand, nor
indifferently to examine matters. For if thou think, that the Religious by the
Vow of Obedience be subject to others then to me, thou art greatly deceived.
And if thou think, that to serve in base things for love of me, or to be
subject to others by ordination from me, is an abject thing, thou art much more
deceived. There is a far different manner of living in my Court, from that of
the World, where the dignity is taken of the office that is exercised, and not
of the end or scope that is aimed at, and therefore all seek rather to have a
power and command over others, then to be commanded, and in subjection; and
all aspi^e to dignityes and honors. And because these be of greatest regard
with me^, therefore they also who be possessed of these honors, are in greatest
estimation, and be held for great men.

10. But the case is far different. For if the end for which any thing is done,
be vile and abject, the actions must needs also be abject, and of the same
nature. And where the lovers of the world do all for an abject end, as for the
gain of money, the estimation and opinion of a good name, vain glory,
revenge, and the like, it consequently follows, that all their trauayles and
actions must also be held most base. But in my court the eye and intention is
especially bent to the end, which am I, and from me all humane actions receive
and borrow their worth, and dignity. And where I reward all the actions, that
my Religious friends, and children do for love of me with everlasting glory,
none of them ought to be reputed either little or abject, but great and noble.
And he who for love of me subiecteth himself to another, gives an evident
sign of a generous and great mind, because he omitteth nothing, that may be
pleasing to me his Lord.

11. Wherefore thou must not my child, account that base and vile, which is done
for love of me, and for my glory, because a consideration is to be had not so
much of the thing, as of the affection, and end for which it is done. It is not
vile and abject, that makes an entrance into heaven, and is recompensed with
an heavenly reward: but that is truly vile, which creeps upon the earth,
cleaves fast unto it, and receives what is terrene and earthly, for a
compensation and reward.

How Religious Perfection consists in the three Vows.

CHAP. V.
LORD, if Religious Perfection consist in perfect charity, and the conjunction
with the supreme Good, which thou art; what need we to busy our selves in other
virtues, and leave that which is our end. Thou know Lord, that charity is
the Queen and Lady of all virtues, and of it depends all the law of grace,
and therefore if we convert all our cares, studyes, and cogitatio^s to the
purchasing thereof, we should not labor much about the procuring of other
virtues: for if we have but that one virtue, we can want nothing.

2. It is true my Child, that the end and scope of Religious perfection is
perfect charity, and union with me thy Creator, but how can thou be able to
attain the end without the due means unto it? How will thou be united with
me, unless thou remove all the things that hinder thee? Wherefore understand
thou, that, to that most inward union with thy Creator, that is, with me, in
which perfect charity consists, thou must come by internal affections of
mind, conspiring with the spirit of Religion, whereunto thou art called by me.
And three things there be, that may hinder the humane affection, that it be not
conjoined with me.

3. The first is the desire of riches, and of other goods of Fortune, which
when it shall once have seized upon a part of a man's hearts, suffers not the
whole man to come unto me. Whereupon that young man to whom I said, that if he
would be perfect, he should sell all that he had, and give it to the poor, and
then come and follow me, went his way sad, because he was over much devoted to
his possessions, which he had, many and great. This affection is taken away by
the Vow of poverty, whereby the Religious renounceth all that be possesses in
the world, that he may with all his affection, and love unite himself with his
Lord.

4. Another impediment and bar, is the love of carnal and sensual pleasures,
that he cannot see to unite himself with me, which consists in spiritual
love. Whereupon in a parable of the Gospel a certain man being invited to a
wedding, answered, that he could not come, because he had married a wife: and
this carnal love is quite taken away by the Vow of Chastity.

5. The third thing that hinders, and is less acknowledged, is the
inordination of man's will, which as it is propense to comaund others, so does
it with much ado subject it self to the will of another. And this inordination
is such, as it separateth a man from me, and therefore I said in the Ghospel: He
that will come after me, let him deny himself, that is, his own will, and
renounce as it were himself. Neither is it any other thing to be united to me,
then to forsake himself, and to yeald himself wholly to me; but he labors
in vain to unite himself to me, who does not first of all depart from
himself. This third let is taken away by the Vow of Obedience, by benefit
whereof the Religious by subiecting himself to others, suffers himself to
be governed by the will of others. Seeing then Religious perfection consists
in perfect charity, and an inward conjunction with me, and these Vows be the
means of obtaining it, and ordained for removing the impediments thereof, it is
not without cause affirmed, that in these three Vows Religious perfection
consists.

6. Moreover, since these three Vows be the very foundations of a Religious
life, it is not without congruity also said, that the perfection thereof has it
dependence of the^, even as the perfection of a material edifice depends of
the foundations. And there be three things in the foundations necessary. The
one is, that in laying them, there be a special care and consideration had: for
the surer the foundations be, the more stable will be the building. A second
thing is, that they be kept whole and sound, and be not removed. For by the
very least moving of them, there follow great cracks and ruins in the walls.
The third is, that the edifice retayneth not the name of a building, or of an
house, if the foundation be wanting, but is called a poor cot, wherinto the
ordure and filth is wont to be cast.

7. Seeing then the three Vows be the foundations of Religion, these three
things also ought to be observed in them. And first that a Religious man's
principal care be of his Vows, for that of them depends the life and
essence of his vocation: and if the Vows be sure and stable, all the frame of
a Religious man's spiritual building will stand sure and immovable also.
Secondly, that the Vows be conserved and kept unstained: for the very least
default in the Vows, causes a notable hurt in Religious discipline. Finally,
as when the houses foundation being taken away, the house forgoeth and loses
it name: even so the Vows being away, the Religious is said no more to be
Religious, but an Apostata, who being once fallen from his state, is easily
stained with the filth and dirt of this world. When the roots of the tree,
which are the foundations thereof, be hurt, the tree does easily either wither
away, or is little worth.

8. Besides, certain it is, that Religion is a state, and a place of rest for
the mind, where a man freed from dangerous storms and tempests of this world,
reposeth as in a quiet and secure harbor, and leads a spiritual and
peaceable life. And Religion most of all compasses this by the help of the
Vows, which intertaine and defend the Religiou^ tranquillity and quiet, by
delivering a Religious man from the sollicicitude, care, and trouble of this
world: and for this cause also it is said, that Religious perfection is
comprehended in the three Vows.

9. Wherefore the Vow of Poverty first is in cause, that a Religious man is
exempt from the care of keeping, or increasing, or also of dispensing temporal
goods. Next, the Vow of Chastity freeth him from the care of house, of wife, of
children and family, which is otherwhiles so combersome and tedious, as it
brings many to desperation. Finally, by the Vow of obedience there is taken
from the Religious the anxiety, and care, where with most men are wont to be
vexed, whiles they be not able to determine and resolve by themselves, whether
they should do this, or that, whether it would more profit to lead this manner
of life, or that. But the Religious, who has by Vow of Obedience left himself
in all things wholly to the direction of Superiors, is most free from such kind
of superfluous anxietyes, perplexityes, tentations, and doubts.

10. Son, thou must have a special regard to thy tranquillity and peace of
mind, for that of it depends thy souls weal. Where trouble and disquiet is,
there can be neither spirit nor devotion. And know thou, that as long as in
Religion thou keep thy Vows, they will in like manner keep thee in peace
and quiet.

11. To conclude, Religious perfection is attributed to the Vows, because it
perfecteth the holocaust, that the Religious offer of themselves to God. In the
old law the holocaust was all consumed with fire for an odor of sweetness, and
the oblation of it was soon ended. But the holocaust of the Religious
continues for life, and the nearer it is to the end, sweeter is the sent
thereof, and therefore is to me made a Vow of perpepetuall Poverty, perpetual
Chastity, and Obedience forever. In the holocaust of Poverty are offered me all
the external and temporal goods: in that of Chastity, the goods of the body:
and in that of Obedience, the goods of the mind. For in that the will is
offered to me, all the faculties and powers that be in subjection to it, be
offered withal, and because nothing more remains behind to be offered, by the
Vows a whole, entire, and perfect holocaust is not without cause offered.

12. The state of Virgins is perfect in it self, and very acceptable to me,
but the Religious state is much more perfect, and more pleasing to me, because
the Virgins do for love of me only deprive themselves of the pleasures of the
flesh, but Religious further spoil themselves of their own will, and give me
what soever they have. He gives not little, who gives all he has; neither
shall he receive little in heaven, who shall for his remuneration and reward
receive me myself.

13. Now I would have all to be themselves judges in this matter, of how great
reckoning the Vows of Religious ought to be, since they be the foundations and
groundwork of Religious life, the conseruers of the minds tranquillity and
quiet, so much desired and sought for of men, and the most effectual means
toward the attayning of perfection, and the offering of a perfect sacrifice to
the Creator. A soldier makes a great reckoning of his horse and arms, by
the benefit whereof he may be able to maintain his temporal life, and triumph
over his enemies. And shall not a Religious man esteem of his Vows, by help
whereof he conserueth his spiritual life, and goes away with victory, not
only over his enemies, but over himself also?

14. O how great will the splendor of these three Vows be in Heaven, when
like unto three most precious stones they shall be set in a crown of glory? For
if the same now covered, concealed, and hidden as it were, do nevertheless give
out so great a light on earth, as the very great and mighty ones of this world
admire them; how great will the brightness thereof be in heaven, where all things
shall be seen, and appear? doubtless their joy and peace of mind will be
exceeding great, who shall transport these jewels with them into heaven: as
contrariwise great will be their grief and confusion, who whiles they live, had
them not in the esteem that they ought to have had. If thou contemnest those
precious stones, which have a virtue to raise thee up to greatest honor, what
is it that thou make any great reckoning of?

Of the perfect observation of Religious Vows.

CHAP. VI.
SON, in the world a great regard is had by every man of his own honor, and
renown of his family, and therefore there reign so many hatreds, and
enimities so many slaughters committed, families brought to extreme poverty and
ouerthrown, and which is worst of all, many souls run to utter perdition. And
all this evil and mischief arises of this, that they labor only to fulfill
the worlds foolish laws, and yet to the performance thereof Christians be
neither bound, nor tied by any Vow, but be rather by my contrary laws
forbidden to do them, under pain of eternal damnation. And if the men of this
world do with so great an hazard of their fortunes, life, soul, and all, so
diligently observe so pernicious Laws: certes, a Religious man has much more
reason to be very studious diligent, and exact in observing the laws of his
vows, which be the statutes and laws of the Holy Ghost, that concern the good
of souls, and my glory. And in truth he who prefers the decrees of the
world, his enemy, before the laws of God, his Creator, fights against
himself.

2. Son, it is true, that a man is by the world reputed vile and dastardly,
who uses not the law of revenging an injury: but if for love of me he remit
and forgive an injury, he is with me, and withal virtuous persons censured for
magnanimous and wise, because he ouercometh himself, and regards more the
laws of God, then of the world. But he who in Religion transgresses his
Vows, is contemned of the world, is held infamous to the Religious, is of all
other men condemned for ingrate, for that by benefit of Vows he was raised up
unto so high an estate, namely of Religion, and by the the same enriched with
so many gifts and spiritual graces. And who sees not, that to violate his
Vows, is nothing else then not to stand to his promise, nor satisfy his band?
Who perceives it not, that it is as much as to contemn his benefactour and
setter up? And therefore the saying of the Ghospel ought not to seem harsh unto
thee, which I pronounced against them, when I said, That he is not apt for the
kingdom of heaven, who after putting his hand to the plough, looks back
again.

3. The beginners are not crowned in heaven, but the perseuerers in good even
till death. It is also said in my Scripture. That an unfaithful promise does
greatly displease God: and not without cause. For he that discharges not his
word in keeping promises made by Vow, goes on next to this, that he contemn
Religion, and consequently the same is contemned also, if it keeps in it such
as discharge not their duty. For it is no little scandal unto men of the
world, if they see the Religious to be defective in every principal point, in
which consists the essence of Religion it self. And the least reproach does
not redound to me also: for since I have accepted their promises made by Vow, if
they be not performed as is requisite, I am unworthily injured by them, whom I
have so tenderly loved, and whom I so inwardly affected. Besides the greatest
hurt of all lights upon the transgressors themselves, because they cast
themselves into manifest hazard of Apostasy, and into the enemies snares, never
likely to get out again. And what marvel it sometimes in this life also I
bend the bow of my indignation against them. He that can satisfy the debt that
he owes, and uses cousenage that he may not pay it, is worthy neither of
remission or pardon, nor of commiseration. It is a lesser evil to vow, then to
revoke the vow a man has once made.

4. The Devil the capital enemy of Religious perfection is not ignorant, how
much good comes to a Religious man by the exact observation of his Vows. For
nothing brings him sooner, and with more security to the height of
perfection, then the mortification of carnal desires. And what is it else, in a
perfect manner, to perform the Vows, then for a man to mortify himself? The
Vow of Poverty mortifyeth the desire of heaping up riches: The Vow of Chastity
the tentation and contentments of the flesh; and the Vow of Obedience the
facultyes of the mind, the will, and proper judgment. And this is the cause,
why the Devil labors so much to persuade the Religious to make no
conscience, or scruple in transgression of their Vows, not only that he may so
divert them from the seeking of perfection, but also for this, that when the
foundations be once shaken and weakened, it is no hard matter for him to
overthrow the whole house. And an evil sign it is, when the beginning of the
evil is given and occasioned by the principal part.

5. O how dear be those Religious to me, who seek out diverse means, and
helps for the attayning of the perfect observation of their Vows, both for the
better strengthening of the foundation of their spiritual edifice, and for the
making of more sharp war upon the Devil, by manfully resisting him. Some
there be, who do every day to themselves renew the Vow they have once made to
me, and do humbly crave my grace for the perfect observing of them. And this
much pleases me? for they easily declare and make known, how great an inward
desire they have to avoid all defects, and to perform their Vows exactly. By
this double desire of perfect observation of the Vows, and of craving grace,
the soul makes as it were the first step to the obtaining of what it
desires. Often to renew the Vows once made, is nothing else, then often to
drive in the nails faster, wherewith the Religious be nailed upon the Cross
with me, in so much as if they begin peradventure to be loose, they may be made
more fast. And by this help the Religious be made more strong, able, and more
constant in observing their Vows.

6. There be others also, whom I love as well, as the former, who when any
tentation arises against their Vows, do not dispute with themselves, whether
it were a great fault or a little to do that which the tentation suggesteth,
whether it could be done without mortal sin, or no; but so soon as they
perceive it to be contrary to their Vows, they eftsoons reject it: no
otherwise then he, upon whom when peradventure a spark of fire falls,
examineth not, whether it would burn him little or much, but he instantly
shakes if off, and puts it out with his hand, or foot. He that contemns a
little imperfection, which he might easily avoid, does in time dissemble great
ones. Give ear my Son. Did not thou make thy Vows for love of me, and
that thereby thou mighst do me service? Do not thou keep the same, that thou
may gain the greater favor at my hands? Since then thou art assured, that
the very least defects, committted against thy Vows, do displease me, wherefore
do thou not forbear to commit them? If in things appertayning to the body,
thou do not luster any fault, neither great nor small, why permittest thou any
defect in observation of thy Vows, then which nothing in Religion is more
excellent? To do any thing that displeases me, though it be very little, is
not of a zealous lover, such as I desire every Religious man should be.

7. There is yet another means, by help whereof the Religious man may come to
an exact observation of his Vows: and this commonly does he use who is fervent
in spirit, imitating the use and manner of such as be very hungry. For they
most carefully seek what to eat, and they do without any difference eat
whatsoever they find, whether hoate or cold, well or ill prepared, roasted or
sodden. Even so the fervent Religious be lead with a great desire to exercise
those virtues which they have promised by Vows, and this both in great matters
and in little, as well in hard and painful, as in easy and pleasant. And for
one to exercise himself often in his Vows, and in the often actions of
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, makes the observation of the Vows very
easy. For the frequentatio^ of such acts prepares a Religious man to the
getting of an habit. And habit of it own nature makes a man agile, prompt,
and ready to the exercising of Virtue, and consequently to the observing of his
Vows perfectly. We have a plain example in the skill of music, for the more
a man frequenteth the exercise thereof, the more readily, and the more cunningly
is he accustomed to sing, or play.

8. By this it may be understood, how greatly and daungerously they be
deceived, who care not for light transgressions in the observation of their
Vows, not considering or marking, that the essence of a Religious man is in his
Vows, that they make or mar, to the good or hurt of their souls, that of
the same depends all the good or evil of religion, scandal or edification, and
my glory also, because the promise be made to me; and finally the merit it
self of the three principal virtues, that be comprehended in the Vows.
Wherefore if there be not need of great care, and vigilance that we fail not in
our duty, I know not in what there will be need. And if a man will not show a
fervor and zeal in this thing. I see not wherein he should declare and
manifest the same.

Of the three Vows in particular and first of the Vow of Poverty, how agreeable
and requisite it is, that the Religious be lovers thereof.

CHAP. VII.
SON, meet it is not, that the servant should refuse what his Lord and
Master has embraced, neither beseems it the scholar to learn another
lesson, then that which his master has appointed him. Whiles I lived on
earth, I chose, and willingly embraced Poverty. The same I taught and proposed
to all that followed me, and now again I earnestly recommend it to all, who
aspire to the perfection of spiritual life. For I was borne so poor, as there
was not a corner found in any house, that would intertaine and receive me, when
I was to come into the world. And therefore my poor Mother was forced to
retire her self into a stable, wherein I was both borne, and laid in a
maunger. I was borne of a poor Mother, brought up as poorly, conuersed
amongst the poor, and lived poor till my dying day; and at my death I was
much more poor, because I had not whereupon to rest my pierced head, and gave
up my life at last upon the hard bed of the Cross.

2. Let the Religious now consider, whether it be not agreeable, that they
should be well affected to Poverty by the^ voluntarily promised, and so highly
esteemed and beloved by me. Let them ponder, whether it be meet, that members
so richly adorned and set forth, lie hid under so needy an head. The servant
deserves not to stay in the house, who is not contented to use the same meat,
drink, and clothing that his Lord uses. Neither was I a lover of Poverty
alone, my Apostles embraced the same, who besides that they were poor
fisherme^, when I called them out of the world, did further leave that little
which they had and possessed for love of me, most affectuously embracing
Poverty, as a true and faithful companion. O how much did it please me, when
being called by me, they did without further lingering, or delay forsake
parents, ship, nets, and whatsoever they had, or might have in this life. And
though this action of Poverty were great and heroical in them, because they
forsook all; yet I stayed not here, but would further have the^ exercised in
the same Poverty, by living with with me of the alms of other men, and
therefore I sent them to preach abroad from one place to another, without purse
or scrip, provided of nothing which was necessary, that they might repose all
their hope in Gods providence.

3. The Religious man the less he has, and the less desire he has of
temporal things, is the more apt for the helping of souls. And when I did
after send them forth to preach the Gospel all the world over, did they go
laden with baggage, or attended upon by great traynes of servants, or did they
advertise the cities, whither they went, of their coming, that they might
find all manner of things provided and made ready for them? No such matter.
But they went full of the holy Ghost, laden with the weight of my doctrine,
and incensed with a burning desire of converting countries to the faith: they
did like poor men enter into the Cities and Towns, where whiles they made
their stay, by preaching me poor, and naked, dead upon the Cross, they caused
exceeding motions in their hearers minds. Whom when they saw, neither to
seek, nor to accept of gold or silver, meruailed much. And when they further
saw them to take so long iournyes all the world over in extreme penury, and want
of things, only for the gayning of the souls of others, and also to love want
and poverty; they were almost astonished with very admiration, and for that
cause they were more ready, and more easily induced to put their necks under
the yoke of the Gospel. These two things do not well suite, to gain souls,
and to attend withal to our private commodityes and pleasures.

4. If again, my Son, thou turn thy self to the founders of Religion, thou
shall find that they were so great lovers of Poverty, as they would not suffer
the words Mine and Thine to have any place amongst them, thinking that by these
two words, is destroyed all the force of Poverty: and if they found any
Proprietary amongst them, they instantly banished and thrust him out, as an
infectious person from their Company. Let them now speak, who be so much
afraid of the name of Poverty, whose disciples, and followers they be: What
rule permitted them to have goods and provision of their own? Wherefore do they
take pains to get money together, whether to convert it to their own use, or
to leave it to others; howsoever they do it, even secular men have not care to
gather riches for any other cause. What difference then is there between the
Religious men, and those of the world? This is not for a man to bear heaven
away by violence, but to afflict and vex himself for the gathering of earthly
trash together. The doctrine that I have delivered is not so, neither be they
the followers of their founders and forefathers; and seeing they trace not the
same steps with them, they will never come to the same degree of perfection
that they did.

5. Lord, if thou give us not some spur to put us forwards to love Poverty,
it will easily be abandoned and forsaken: for since it carries an outward
representation of ignobility, contempt, and baseness, and of being next unto
misery, no esteem is made thereof. Son, thou art very much deceived, because
thou use not a distinction. In forced Poverty, and that which comes of
necessity, is contemptible, and hated of the world: but voluntary Poverty, since
it is a noble and heroical virtue, how can it be ignoble and base? If it
treads under foot, and contemns all precious stones, and the worlds
treasure, how can it be miserable? To the love of it what may move us more,
then to understand, that I the Son of God, and Lord of Majesty, when I lived
on earth, betroathed Poverty unto my self, and loved and intertayned it till
my dying day. And should not this alone worthily induce every Religious person
to love and honor it? For in all Courts, he is in greatest honor and regard,
whom the Prince loves most.

6. But will thou understand my Son, who is a true lover of Poverty? He it is,
who most delights and rejoices in it, who commends, and desires it more
then other, who thinks not to offend it either by work, word, or by any
sign; who finally imbraceth and loves it, as an heavenly margarite, that
makes the soul most fair, and beautiful in the sight of the creator. O how
much did the Religious before time to please me, who were so affected to
Poverty, as they held all the riches of this world for toys and ordure, if
they were compared with it. And for a declaration of their exceeding great
affection unto it, they called Poverty their Lady and Queen, and for such they
esteemed and used it. Neither did they this in the first fervor of their
conversion only, but the elder they waxed in the serving of God, the more they
loved, and reverenced it, and for that cause they were very earnest and
desirous, that they might give up their last breath to God upon the bare ground.

7. On the contrary side, I am not a little displeased to see some Religious so
little devoted to Poverty, as those, who discommend it, have an horror to it,
as a thing to be detested, and by deeds also go against it. Hence it is, that
in their meat and drink, in their clothing and habitation they will be
entreated commodiously and daintly, yea and that better and more commodiously
then they entreated themselves in the world; and if they have not every thing
as they list, they be troubled, and can take no rest at all. And what an
infelicity is this? They give over the world to serve me, they leave all their
riches, neglect their commodityes, and of themselus vow Poverty, that they may
ever lead a quiet life, and after they be once entered into Religion, they
suffer themselves to be disquieted and troubled for the things that they
forsook in the world. This is nothing but to sing a song of recantation, and
to revoke their Vow of perpetual Poverty. For what difference is there,
whether thou desire earthly riches, or superfluous commodities and recreations,
when as the one and the other be repugnant to Religious Poverty?

8. But it displeases me more, that there be some, who not finding in Religion
all abundance of things, as they had in the world, do look back, and crave
their commodities first of one secular man, and then of another, and make
themselves their vassalls and slaves. And ^f so to do for their own use and
commodity, be bad; how much worse it is then, to exact such things of secular
men, that they may be given to others? Is it possible, that any Religious man
should be found, who should bind himself to secular men, for the doing of good
turns to others? O infamous madness of such a Religious person, who for so base
a thing makes himself a vassal to so many! Of this bad fountain does spring
for the most part all that looseness, dissolution, and breach of good order,
and Religious discipline, which we see (a thing to be lamented) in many
Religious with our own eyes. Woe be to that Religion, the Religious whereof be
no lovers of Poverty, for that by their overmuch liberty of manners and life
they become the ruin and overthrow of Religion.

Of the dignity, and commendation of Religious Poverty.

CHAP. VIII.
SON, I have not without cause in my Gospel amongst the Beatituds given the
first place to Poverty, and bequeathed the Kingdom of heaven to the poor, for
without Evangelical perfection it is impossible to come to bliss. Seeing then
Poverty is the first foundation of Evangelical Perfection, of good right it
meriteth the pre-eminence of the first place. For which cause I have sent all
those, whom I have invited to follow me, or have been desirous of perfection,
if they did not of their own accord renounce the riches of the world, or did
not voluntarily become poor, to the first foundation, that they should first
forsake all, and then follow me. Perfection would not have men bound, but free
and loose.

2. Lord, if the kingdom of heaven be for the poor, very great will the
number of the blessed be, because there be more poor in the world, then rich.
True it is, my Son, that the Kingdom of heaven is for the poor, yet all the
poor be not for heaven, but only those, who make an election to be poor, and
such be very few. Some there be, who indeed be not possessed of any thing in
this life, yet they have it in desire, and this poverty is not only no virtue
nor worthy of praise, but also spoyleth many of their eternal felicity, both
for that it takes not away the exceeding desire of having, which is the root
of all evils; and also for that it sets it on fire so fare, as it makes a
man's mind deuoyd of all manner of peace and quiet: Whence it is, that many
become robbers, thieves, and do not admit any cogitation of heaven at all.

3. Some be possessed of great store of riches, but they tie not their
affection unto them, yea they be ready, when it shall please me, and when I
shall think good, to leave them: and of such poor in spirit there be found
very few in the world. Finally some there be, who that they may be the more
free in the exercise of true virtue, do contemn and forsake all earthly
riches, not only out of an affection of mind, but by effect of works also. So
did my Apostles, and many other Religious, who be now in present possession of
the riches of heaven. And this is Religious Poverty, whereunto I have promised
the kingdom of heaven, where all the Religious shall be crowned with the most
noble crown of glory: but the number of these is very small.

4. If the kingdom of heaven could be bought with money, or exchanged with
kingdoms and riches of the world, great would be the excellency and dignity of
the goods of fortune, and every one might love them, as his own soul. This
excellency I have imparted to Religious Poverty, which of terrene riches makes
a ladder, whereby it may mount up to heaven. Contrariwise the rich of the world
dig the earth for the getting of gold and silver out of her bowels, and therein
they place and fix their heart, and bury it with the renouncing of heaven
together with the true felicity thereof. But the poor Religious man, because
he directs his heart to heaven, makes himself worthy of an heavenly reward.
What manner of way a man shall enter into, such shall he find the end of it.

5. Besides, a Religious man by the Vow of Poverty becomes superior to the
whole world, and above it. For whereas he desires not to possess any thing in
this life as his own, he has no dependence on the world, or the things
thereof, but as one above it, he contemns all, that is within the compass, or
power of it. The contrary happens to such as be addicted to the world, who be
at the command of so many masters, as be the things that they desire to have
and possess.

6. Moreover Religious Poverty manifests a certain power and might against
the nature of man it self. For nature desires and inclines a man to desire
riches, and the commodities of the body, as the delicacies of meats, niceness
of apparel, sports pastimes, and recreations; but Religious Poverty withdraws
all these from it self for my sake, and therefore ouercometh Nature. And how
then should not I highly esteem them, who wittingly and willingly, moved out
of love of me alone, do deprive themselves of al these lawful commodities, and
whereunto Nature of it self inuiteth them?

7. Hear also, my Son, another excellency of Religious Poverty. If any needy
or poor man become rich by his own industry, or by any other occasion, the
world meruayleth not: but it wondreth much, if a rich man become voluntarily
poor, and such a one indeed, as does not only make away his riches, but also
depriueth himself of the power and ability of possessing them fore ever after!
And at this the world is astonished the more, for that it self has nothing in
more esteem then riches of the world, and shunneth nothing with a greater
care, then Poverty. All this proceeds of nothing else, then that it
understands not the dignity and excellency of Religious Poverty. Let the
world tell me: Can it with all it own riches, and pleasures satiate and fill a
man's heart, so as it may be at quiet? Nothing less: for that as many as be
lovers of the world, the more they have, the more desire they to have, and
whiles they cannot be satisfied with what they have got, they never arrive to
any true peace and quiet of mind. But the Religious, who neither have any thing
proper, of their own, nor desire to have, live content with very little. Is not
this a certain participation of everlasting felicity, that a man, as he shall
one day live content in heaven with the glory thereof, so lives now on earth
content, and quiet with his Religious Poverty?

8. Neither is it the least commendation of Religious Poverty, that it not only
conserueth, and keeps the Religious, but has further been the foundresse of
all Religions, as many as have been, and still be in Gods Church. The
monasteries indeed, and the Cloisters be erected and built with money, and the
goods of fortune; but the Religious be not founded by them. For the first
founders, who had store of riches, for the consecrating of themselves to my
service did give away their riches, as impediments to a better course of life.
And after a good foundation laid of the spirit of Poverty, and of
mortification, I used them as directors and guids for the drawing of others,
and by this means Religions were founded. Stones, and timber be laid and raised
by riches, but virtues are built and raised by Poverty of spirit.

9. But suppose, that there were not any thing worthy of commendation, or
excellent in Poverty; is it not a great dignity, that it is loved of me, and
esteemed of me? That it was to me an inseparable and fast companion during the
whole course of my life? That I used the help of it in the worlds conversion,
not by sending the rich, mighty, and wise, but the poor ignorant and rude for
the ouercoming of the wise and mighty of the world? That I wrought so great
miracles by men poor and abject for the good of souls? Do not these seem
unto thee any commendations and renown of Religious poverty? And if they be
great praises; have not I, my Son, most just cause to complain of the^, who
do not only not love Poverty, but do also without cause contemn it? That it is
contemned of the world, is no marvel, because the profession and scope thereof
night and day is to attend to the heaping up of riches, and increasing of
honors: but that there should be any religious found, who by deeds refuse the
same, and under hand practice it, is a thing that highly displeases me, whiles
I behold that Lady and Queen promised me by Religious and solemn Vow, which
should have a commanding hand with them, so impudently and shamefully thrust
out. Spiritual things cannot be loved without a spirit.

Of the vtility and profit, that voluntary Poverty brings to the Religious.

CHAP. IX.
LORD, what good and profit can Religious Poverty bring, since it has nothing,
whereby it may ease man's necessities? And more then that, in regard of the
inco^modityes that be adjoined thereto, it seems prejudicial, not to the body
alone, but to the soul also. For the body being ill handled thereby, easily
falls into sickness, and being ill disposed, cannot serve and attend to the
spiritual actions of the soul, neither can the mind it self use the ordinary
exercise of prayer, and meditation. Besides it is no little impediment to the
Religious, who toward the helping of their neighbors, do profess an active
life. For if they want things necessary, they are not able to go through with
their labors, in helping their neighbors. Therefore it seems to me that
Poverty is an impediment to much good, and contrariwise promoteth what is ill,
as is sickness and other infirmities, yea and hasteneth death it self.

2. Son, thou art far wide of thy mark: for thou think that Religious
Poverty is a severe and cruel Mistress that withdraws from the Religious
things necessary toward their meat, drink and clothing, according to a
requisite proportion required in their institute. It is not so. Poverty by
frugality is good, both for the soul and body, and profits a man more, then
do the riches and pleasures of the world. For in the first place the desire of
transitory honors does so torment a man's mind, as it depriueth him of all
quiet, pricketh him forward to suck up the blood of the poor, and brings
him to so great a blindness, as it bereaueth him of all fear of God and men,
without any regard had of his own souls good. Neither do men desirous of
getting more, make a stand here.

3. He that is once become rich, eftsoons raises up his head, becomes
arrogant and proud, undertakes to patronize the wicked, and out of a madness
runs headlong into all naughtines. From these evils, and many more,
voluntary Poverty freeth the mind, whiles it does take from him not only the
riches that he has, but also the hope and desire of having, which is the
beginning of ruin both of body and soul, and procures such tranquillity and
peace, as it makes the mind fit and disposed to the contemplation of heavenly
things, and to all manner of spiritual actions. Whence it is, that a Religious
man, so soon as he is become poor, consequently becomes humble, modest,
meek, a friend of the good, and of virtue, and an enemy of the bad, and a
contemner of vices.

4. That Poverty also profits the body, is out of question. We do not desire
any thing more earnestly for the body, then good health: and we have an horror
of nothing more then of sickness: for there is not any who would not be rather
poor and whole, then rich and sick. And daily experience manifestly teaches,
that the frugality of poverty conserueth the good health of body, prolongeth
and continues man's life more years, then does all the store of riches and
pleasures. Who sees not, that the poor be more healthful, and go through
with more labors, then do the rich? A poor man is as well content with a
simple, ordinary, and mean diet, as be the rich with dainty and delicate fare.
The poor man comes ever hungry to his meat: the little that he has he
eats with a good appetite: when he is a thirst he refuses not a draught of
watter: after labor he seeks not for a soft bed, but he sleeps, lies
down, and takes his rest where it happens at adventures: and in the morning
he rises early with meat disgested, sound, and healthful and without
loathing.

5. On the contrary, the rich man, serving the time ordinarily, sits down
to the table with a full stomach, takes very little taste or pleasure in his
meat, scarce sleeps by night, but turns himself ever and anon, now to
one side of the bed now to another: and therefore the Physician must ever be at
hand, and drugs prepared in his chamber ready to take upon every occasion. Lo
thus be they turmoiled, who live in delicacies: they live badly, and dye soon.
My servants did not in times past live so in the wilderness, who professed so
great Poverty, as some when they besprinckled their herbs with a little salt,
or oil, thought they had made a feast; and yet these men never using the
benefit of Physician, or of physic, lived to very old age, and therefore
Religious Poverty is not (as thou think) the cause either of infirmities or
of hastening thy death. Nothing hurts ones health so much, as the variety and
abundance of the meat.

6. Religious Poverty brings another commodity with it, and that is security,
void of all suspicion, and sinister thoughts. He, that abounds in wealth, is
afraid of thieves, not only from abroad, but of his own house also. And not
without cause: for many, whiles they see they cannot come to the riches they
desire, do first spoil them of life, and then of their riches. How many sons
have killed or poisoned their Parents that they might the sooner come to enjoy
their inheritance? How many treasons, and treacheries have there been wrought
against most dear friends, for the spoiling them of their treasures? But the
poor sleep in security, they travail night and day out of all fear, they are
troubled with no suspicions, because they have nothing to loose. Add to this
also, that Poverty hinders none in his travail, nor brings in, or causes
any forgetfulness of the Kingdom of heaven, which is occasioned by riches, but
rather urges and forces us to think more often upon the beauty of our
heavenly country, and upon the great treasures there prepared for us.

7. Lord, at the day of judgment thou will make them only partaker of the
Kingdom of heaven, who for love of thee shall have afforded meat and drink to
the needy and shall have helped them in all their other necessities: and what
soever shall be done unto them, thou will have reputed to be done to thy self.
If it be so, what reward shall come to the poor Religious, who when in their
entrance to Religion, they have renounced all their possessions, have not
wherewith to relieve them? Wherefore it seems they might have done more
wisely, if they had reserved some part of their goods to give afterward to the
poor.

8. Son to give alms to the poor, is a good work, and meritorious of life
everlasting: but it is a far more excellent work for a man to forsake both all
his possessions and the world also, and to follow me. Hence it is, that I did
not counsel that rich young man in the Gospel, who asked me, what was
needful for him to do to attain to a perfect life, to stay in the world, and
to give much alms to the poor, but that himself after distribution of all
his goods upon the poor, should become also poor, and so follow me in my
Poverty. And therefore the Religious need not to fear in the day of judgment:
For seeing they have for the love of me forsaken not only all that they had,
but all they might have had in the world also, they exercise a most noble, and
perfect work, which in that day shall be recompensed and paid with a most
abundant reward of everlasting felicity. He is not bound to give alms, who
has distributed all that he had to the poor at once, and has nothing left
him to give.

9. Seeing then by the so great commendations, and vtilityes of Religious
Poverty it may evidently appear, that secular men be greatly deceived, who
seek with so great a desire to heap up riches; how great an error, think
we, does a Religious man commit, if he should in like manner study to get money
together, who by Vow of Poverty has renounced it for ever? What folly and
madness would it be for him, whiles he forsakes the world, to have a will to go
out naked, that when he were to fight with the Devil, he might not have
wherewith his enemy should take hold by, to throw him to the ground, and now to
have a will to be clad in Religion, that he may be with the more ease laid hand
on, and overthrown by the enemy? The Devil, when he finds not whereon to
fasten, or to lay any hold, goes his way overcome, and vanquished, or leaves
of to molest and trouble.

How God, even in this life, rewards the Religious for their Vow of Poverty.

CHAP. X.
SON, I am he, who affoard necessaryes to the whole world: I command the
Sun to shine as well upon the good, as the bad: I send down rain in times
and seasons: I cause the earth to bring forth fruits, plants, and all living
things, and the Sea to abound in fish, to the end every kind according to the
condition of their nature may have helps agreeable thereunto. Neither does it
beseem me, the Creator of all, to be overcome of man, that he should give me
more, then I give him. And therefore since the Religious do by Vow of Poverty
give themselves, and whatsoever they have in the world, and to the end they may
serve me the more readily, and the more at ease, they renounce all their
possessions, honors, commodities and recreations otherwise lawful, and further
bind themselves by band of perpetual Vow, that they may not at any time be
able to go back from the profession of Poverty; meet it is, that I in like
manner promise to affoard them all necessaries for their sustenance.

2. First then I requite this their so fervent love and liberality toward me
in such sort, as I consecrate my self wholly unto them, as I did undertake long
since in the person of Aaron to do, to whom I said, That I would be his
inheritance, understanding and meaning in this figure all the Religious. Thus I
make my self their procuratour and dispenser. Neither do I hold it enough for
my self to sustain the person of a good Lord toward his faithful servants,
but I further reckon them, as does a most loving Father of his dearest
children. And if the birds and fowls of the air be so careful to seek and
provide for necessaryes for the feeding of their young ones; will thou have me
to forget my Religious children, who do in their Monasteryes, as in their
neasts, expect their sustenance? Will thou not have them clad with necessary
clothing, who have for my sake spoiled themselves of all their commodityes of
body, retayning nothing as their own? He stands in need of nothing, of whom
God takes a care.

3. Wherefore know thou, that I have provided, and still daily do, necessary
helps for all, because neither there be the same functions of all, neither do
all follow the same manner of living. For I have caused those, who live
seperatly, and, as touching their own person, deprived of al dominion of their
possessions, that they may serve me in this degree of Poverty, to be provided
of possessions in common, whereof every one may have the means to entertain
life. Again, I help others, who have embraced the laws of a more strict
Poverty, in so much as they will not even in common enjoy any stable or
certain rents, by moving the hearts of the faithful, now one, then another to
be willing and ready to provide for every one conformably to his rule, and
vocation. Be not thou on thy part wanting unto God, and God will not be wanting
unto thee.

4. And that we may come nearer to the remuneration, that I make to the
Religious in this life also, for the recompense of the Vow of Poverty, tell me,
my Son, wherefore when any one of thy order comes from some foraine part to
thy monastery for his lodging, all come running to give him all things
necessary? For what cause is this done? In very deed for no other, then for the
Vow of Poverty, and that is a part of the compensation, that is due to
Religious Poverty. If that guest should have any provision of his own, whereof
he might live, every one would forbear to help him, neither would, there want
murmurers, who would say, this man is rich enough at home, no doubt but he
comes hither to spend what is ours, that he might spare his own. But it is
nothing so. For seeing none can be ignorant, that he by reason of his Vow of
Poverty, neither has, nor can have any thing of his own, therefore al
necessaries be with charity and good will affoarded him.

5. Again, with what a company of cars is a secular man troubled and turmoyled
for the providing of his family with such things, as peradventure as
appertain to meat, drink, and clothes: how often passes he whole nights
without sleep, taking care and solicitude, where, how, and what way he may
remedy his present want? how often lame^teth he and weepeth, while he finds
not the means to help himself, or others? Does not he seem, my Son, unto
thee happy, who is exempted from all such solicitude? Hold not thou him
much privileged, who deuoyd of cares, has others to procure him all
necessaryes? And whence have the Religious this privilege but by me, in regard
of the Vow of Poverty.

6. Consider also, my Son, that a Religious man, if it be his hap to
travail through other countries, and to come to the houses of his order, is
very kindly and lovingly intertayned, and welcomed with much Charity, allthough
they never saw the man before; offer themselves to do him service, for this
respect alone, that they understand him to be their brother, and a child of the
same mother, that is Religion, with them. When he comes thither, all things
be there as common unto him, as they be unto those, who make their habitatio^
there, and therefore for one house that he left in the world for the love of
me, he finds a thousand other better then his own. And this is to have
nothing, and yet to possess all.

7. There is not a Prince so commodiously treated as he is when he is out of
the territoryes and lymits of his own government. For in his inn he is
courteously wellcomed, and intertayned by the host of the house for no other
cause the^ or the gain he hops from him; and whosoever brings not
necessary provision with him, is wont to make great expenses, and to bear with
many incommodityes, because he takes not up his lodging in his own house as
the Religious does, and whatsoever service is done him, it is done for his
money, and not for love, as is done in Religion. Thou now see, how much
better in this kind the condition of a poor Religious man is, then is that of
the mighty and rich, and this for nothing else, but for the Vow of Poverty,
through the benefit whereof he enjoys many privileges, and commodities
whereof he was not the author or cause himself.

8. It is indeed true, that the manner of a Religious man's living and
intertayning is mean and slender, but if thou diligently consider the
conditions of it, thou will not doubt to prefer it before the tables and diet
of great Princes. For first, all that a Religious man eats, is bestowed upon
him for the love of me: all is prepared and dressed of love: and all out of the
same love of my servants brought to the table afterward: and whatsoever is set
before him, he eats and drinks without any suspicion at all. But what
Prince is there in the world, who is served merely, and purely for the love of
God? In what Princes court be things served in so great peace, as in Religion?
Whence come so many foretasts in Princes tables, but of the suspicion of
poison? And who sees not, that a greater esteem is to be made of love and
security wherewith the Religious are served, then of all the magnificall
ministeryes and services of Princes?

9. The Religious also be not deprived of their wonted attendance, even in
their old age. But he that has done service to temporal Lords, when he once
comes to be old, when he is scarce of ability to do his wonted offices of
service, though he be not thrust out of the house, is nevertheless hardly
endured in the sight of others, neither is used according to his deseruings,
though he have spent his whole life in his Lords service, but is held for an
unprofitable person, not fit for any service. Contrariwise a poor Religious
man, the more he is advanced in years, the more respect is had of him, and the
more commodiously is he treated: neither is there considered in him, what he
does for the present, but what he did before time, and all cast their eyes upon
him, as upon my servant, and a man consecrated to me. Not old age, but an
untoward and perverse will causes the Religious to fall from my grace and
favor. A spiritual Religious man, and aged, who can take no longer pains,
serves me more profitably, then many strong and able young men, and those void
of spirit. I in my servants consider not so much their forces and strength of
body, as their will, and spirit, which waxes old, and dies not through the
fault of age, but of a perverse custom.

10. Finally, a Religious poor man is tended more carefully, more faithfully,
and more lovingly in sickness, then be secular Lords. For they observe the
Physicians prescriptions most exactly, and there be ever both day and night at
hand those who attend them in their sickness. If there be any danger of life,
they be admonished and put in mind in good time to prepare themselves to their
death. At his dying many of my servants are about him, with their prayers, and
good exhortations, assisting him in his happy passage to another life. Certes,
if a Religious man were to have none other reward in this life, this alone
ought to seem unto him enough, being so singular and excellent a thing, as
many Princes, and great men of the world have much desired it, and yet could
not obtain it. For how many of them have ended their lives without any
preparation going before, for that they were not put in mind of their danger?
And how many again, together with their temporal life have lost the
eternal? And if the reward of my Religious be such in this life, what will that
be, that is prepared for them in the next? What manner of crown shall be given
them in my Court for the Vow of Poverty? How many great Lords astonished at
their excess of glory, will say: We esteemed their Poverty nothing but madness,
but we were mad, and they wise indeed?

Of the necessity of the observing the Vow of Poverty.

CHAP. XI.
IN my Gospel I resembled riches unto thorns, and worthily. For thorns
hinder and let trauaylers in their way, that they cannot go on with expedition,
because they are afraid of the pricking of the thorns. In like manner the
thorns taken in hand do prick, and being pressed, they draw the blood, and
put a man to pain. Therefore great is the privilege of them, who have left
them beind, and whiles they are upon their way, have them no more in sight. For
to handle the pricks of the thorns, and not to be pricked, if it be not
impossible, at least it is very hard, and it profits little whether the
pricks be great or small, many or few, because all do prick, and ever prick:
Even so riches do greatly hinder such as travail toward heaven, and do weary
a man much with the bearing of them.

2. To have any thing proper, and not to be affected unto it, is not granted
to many, much less to all. The affection is that, which brings forth the
thorns of cogitations, suspicions, and cares of gathering riches together,
whereunto the more a man shall give his mind, the more shall he be pricked and
be bloody himself. Wherefore not to abound in riches, or to be bound to leave
them, is an exceeding great benefit, and in it consists the Vow of Religious
Poverty.

3. But it is not enough, Son, to make Vows, if they be not performed; for
that the end of a Vow is to observe it by deeds and actions. Remember therefore,
that thou art bound of thine own accord to perpetual Poverty (which amongst
the moral and religious virtues is the principal) and that the obligation was
made in my sight. But by contrary works to exempt thy self from thy Vow, is
nothing else, then to denounce war against the chiefest virtue of al, which thou
have chosen for thy Lady, and Patroness, and thereby so to incur the
punishment of violating thy obligation, that is, everlasting damnation, and to
offend me thy Creator and Benefactour, who accepted thy Vow. And now judge
thou, how necessary it is for thee to stand to thy promises once made to me,
which as they profit to salvation when they be well kept, so being broken they
damn eternally.

4. Lord, seeing riches be so troublesome and dangerous, and yet a man needs
meat, drink, and clothing necessary to the sustentation of life, it should
be enough for thee, if we should at least be in the number of those poor,
whom holy writ commends in these words: Blessed is the man, who has not
gone after gold, nor has put his hope in the treasures of money: For so we
might be possessed of some necessary things, the affection being removed from
the money, without prejudice or breach of the Vow of Poverty. It is true,
Son, that Blessed is he who is not gone after gold: but the Scripture adds
by and by after: Who is he, and we will praise him? Who is he that desires
not gold? Who is he that desires not to keep it, after he has got it, and
also to increase it? If thou go not after gold, gold will come after thee, and
will like unto thorns cleave fast to thy clothing, and though it prick thee
not, yet will it hinder thy going. Wherefore the Vow of Poverty quite debarreth
all possession of ones own, whether it be much or little. Neither must thou be
sollicitous about thy meat, drink, and clothing: leave that care to me, let
thine endeavor only be to satisfy thy Vow of Poverty, and I will provide other
necessaries. Who puts his hope in any other then God, he does God an injury,
and shall find himself deceived.

5. Remember that Poverty is called the wall of Religion, and the mother of the
Religious. As long as a Cities wall is sound and whole, it is easily defended
and kept from the incursion of thieves, and enemies, but if it be broken down,
or be decayed, the enemy easily breaks in, and spoyleth it. Even so Poverty,
which is the wall of Religious discipline, if it be either contemned or
neglected, so as some propriety be admitted, becomes obnoxious and subject to
the enemies spoil. And therefore need there is, thou keep and defend the wall,
if thou desire to keep and guard thy self.

6. Who in time of war watches upon the walls, must have two conditions. One
that he watch, the other that he suffer not himself to be won with bribes.
These two conditions be in a Religious man, that voluntarily imbraceth Poverty,
who living sparingly, is not molested, or ouerpressed with troubles in his
sleep, and because he is not a proprietary, his enemies do not easily corrupt
him with brybes. Wherefore there is not a more vigilant keeper, nor a more stout
defender of the wall of Religion, then a truly Religious poor man. Besides,
necessary it is, that the City walls be often looked upon, that where and when
need is, they may be repaired, and strengthened. For if they shall begin once
either to decay, or to bend and incline to one part, a remedy will hardly be
found. So the Poverty of Religion must often be examined, and looked into, that
it be not in any part loosened, and if it happen to be, that it be repaired
again. For so Religion will be more strongly fortified, and the state thereof
the more secured. For as the first drift of the enemy is to undermine and
overthrow the walls of some bulwark; so the greatest care of them, who defend
it, must be, that the walls be conserved and kept.

7. It is also called the mother of the Religious, because Poverty is that
which first communicates to a Religious man his very essence and nature, and
nourishes and brings him up. True it is, that she is somewhat severe in the
educatio^ of her children, not for that she withdraws from them some
commodityes necessary, but rather superfluous: yet she does it for a good end,
namely, that her children may become valiant soldiers; and fight manfully
against all kind of vices. For she well knows, that a man brought up in
delicacy, and nothing accustomed to the enduring of labors, cannot be a good
soldier Amongst the conditions of this mother one is, that to her children
that love her, she is dear and grateful, and to them that love her not,
severe and stern; and whosoever is bound to be under the government of such a
Mother, if he shall refuse to accommodate himself unto her, he shall not be
without a continual affliction all his life long.

8. If it displease thee, Son, to have such a Mother, remember that Poverty
has not chosen thee for her Son, but contrariwise, that thou have chosen her
for thy Mother, and she accepted thee for her Son. Thou also in regard of thy
Vow ar^ bound perpetually to lead thy life with such a Mother, and therefore it
is not any longer in thy power to leave her off, thou being bound to love,
honor, and defend her. Tell me, should not that Son sin grievously, who
should handle his Mother ill and rudely, or should thrust her out of her house?
And what other thing is it for thee to enjoy and use some little things for
the satisfying of thine own desire, but wickedly to handle thy Mother,
Poverty? And nothing to regard her, what is it else, then to drive her out of
thy heart, which is her habitation, and house to dwell in? Take heed, my Son,
what thou do, because all the hurt returns upon thine own head, since it is
certain, that she needs not thy service, but thou need her help; neither
can thou lead a Religious life without her: she is not bound to thee, but
thou to her. The Kingdom of heaven belongs to the poor, but he that will
not know Poverty for his Mother, shall neither have part in that inheritance
which is the kingdom of heaven.

9. Lord, I know and understand well, that to make the Vow of Poverty, is
nothing else, then to promise to thy majesty, that I neither will have, nor have
a will to have any thing proper, and will lead my life in Poverty. But I long
to know, whether I can satisfy my Vow of Poverty, if I possess nothing of mine
own, and yet all things are pleasing unto me, and agreeable to my manner of
doing.

10. Son, as it pleases me, that every one be provided of things necessary:
so it displeases me, if a Religious man either have, or procures to have
superfluityes. But what is necessary, or profitable, it is not for thee to
judge (for we be easily beguiled by our senses, or our own affection) but thy
Superior. It is for the Superior to judge, what is convenient for Poverty. He
is not poor who wants nothing, neither lives he after the manner of the
poor, who has all things, as he lists.

Of the defects, that are committed against Poverty.

CHAP. XII.
SON, he that is provided of rents after the manner of poor, and yet will,
like unto the rich, make great expenses, goes greatly awry: for he shall
within a while find himself so sorely engaged, as he must be forced to lie in
prison, and there be punished, until he shall have paid the very last
farthing. Whatsoever thou have in Religion, is given thee by me, and for me,
and I have given it thee, as to a poor man for thy use, and necessary for thy
Religion. But if thou will use, and spend the things of Religion, after the
manner of the rich, at thine own will, as though thou were an absolute owner
thereof, it will fall out ill with thee, because thou art one day to give a
strait account of all. Thou have forsaken all that thou have in the world, and
that thou might not use them at thine own will, thou art spoiled of them:
Why then do thou in Religion think to usurp a dominion upon another man's
goods, and to dispose of them at thy list? This, certes, is neither convenient,
nor pleasing to me. Wherefore thou must needs resolve to use the things of
Religion, as my things, and consecrated to me, and what is transferred to thy
own use, thou art to handle not as thine, but as mine, allowed of me to thee
by thy Superior, and that to serve thy use as long as it shall please me, so
as it is in my will to take it from thee, when it shall to me seem good.

2. It does displease me much, when a Religious man is transported with so
great a desire to something that is permitted him to use, as he can hardly
forgo it again, when reason requires. For what manner of beast should that
be, who being hired to bear burdens, would not have the instruments afterward
taken from him, that were fit to bear the burden with ease? Whatsoever
Religion assigns to every one, it does it for my service, and whether I would
take something away from any, or permit him to use it still, he must not be
therefore grieved, or troubled. An over great affection to things lent, makes
them to become another.

3. O how much do those Religious offend me, who be ashamed to be poor, and to
wear a poor garment, or to use a slender diet. For how can it be they should
be ashamed for that, which is to them a glory, by the benefit whereof they are
raised to so high a state, and makes them like their Lord and Master? Could
they be forgetful of their promise made of Poverty? If they have not forgotten
it, wherefore do they so lightly esteem it? What man is there in the world,
who would be ashamed of his profession? And since the Religious man has made a
profession of Poverty, and that publicly, what is the cause, that he is
ashamed of it? Some servants of mine did not so who now enjoy eternal felicity
in heaven, who were rather confounded, if they found any more poor then
themselves. Who is ashamed of virtue, plainly declares that he loves it not.
An evil sign it is to hate Poverty, which is a principal virtue, and proper
to Religious life.

4. There be others, who are ashamed of their parents poverty; and some again
who brag and boast of their riches, and both of these be affections of a
Religious man ill mortified. That the Parents be rich, is not a virtue,
wherefore then should a Religious man glory of them? Yea the richer they be, in
the greater danger be the Religious, least they one day look back, and for
that cause they have greater matter of fear, then of glorying. And that thy
parents be poor, was it through any fault of thine? and if not, wherefore
should thou be ashamed, or afflicted for it? If to be poor in the world
should be a crime, thou should have a just cause of confusion: but it is
not. Or if Poverty should make the way to heaven more hard, thou might
worthily be sorry, and complain: but it is more then certain, that the coming
to it is made hard, not by Poverty and want, but by riches. Will thou have thy
Patents rich? Procure then that they may be virtuous, and content with their
estate: for so they shall be in Gods grace and friendship, which by many
degrees surpasses all the riches and honors of this life. The Religious man
that has a desire his Parents should be great and honorable in the world, and
labors not that they be provided of spiritual riches, shows himself to
have very little charity, and no spirit at all.

5. It is also a sore defect in the Vow of Poverty, if a man think he has
done enough, when he possesses nothing as his own, and in the mean time is
sollicitous, that he may want nothing. Certes, I see not how there can be any
coherence between these two. To make a Vow of Poverty, and not to have a will
to make a trial of Poverty: To be poor, and not to be willing to try the
effect of it: To love Poverty, and yet to have a will to be far off from it. I
was my self poor, for that in the whole course of my life I experienced the
effects of Poverty, by suffering hunger, thirst, heat, cold, wearines,
nakedness, and a thousand incommodityes. I loved Poverty, and therefore I would
have it to accompany me to my Cross, where I was nailed naked unto it. My
Apostles also, and some of my disciples and followers suffered many
incommodities of Poverty, even until their dying day. But thou not only
seek no occasion of suffering any thing, after the manner of poor persons,
in thy meat, drink, and clothing, but further most carefully, and
importunely thou seek for what is best, and more commodious, and if thou
have it not, thou art troubled, and murmurest for it, and which is worse, thou
oftentimes pretendest necessity and health, when it is thy mere sensuality. He
is not poor, who shunneth the incommodityes of the poor. O how did those
Religious please me, who notwithstanding they were destitute of ordinary
things, and of necessary sometimes also, yet complained not, nor were sorry for
it, but with joy said: This is to be a poor one of Christ, his name be ever
blessed for it.

6. Those also, who are not content with the common entertainment of Religion,
but without just cause desire either some particularityes, or not necessaryes,
do sorely weaken, yea and overthrow their Vow of Poverty. For in the one there
is mere superfluity; in the other there be made expenses without necessity,
and both of them be repugnant to Poverty, whereof it is commonly said, As much
as is enough, and no more. To use parsimony in the things of Religion, and to
spend them but when necessity requires, is not misery (as the haters of
Poverty will have it) but an act of virtue, because Poverty exacteth it.

7. It is also a vice and fault, repugnant to Religious Poverty, both to take
things without the Superiors leave, and to give them unto others. For
whatsoever is given to a Religious man, is the Religious, not the man's, who
cannot have any thing proper, and therefore if he accepts of gifts, he shows
himself a proprietary: so if he gives any thing to another, he makes a show
that himself is the owner thereof, and both the one and the other, that is,
propriety, and dominion be repugnant to Religious Poverty. Neither is that
Religious man altogether free from fault, who accepts, or gives things of
very little value, since in the Vow of Poverty there is not any exception made
of things little or great, but he has absolutely promised, that he will not
usurp any propriety in any thing, either little or great, nor take any
dominion to himself therein. An error in little and light things, does not
for go the name of an error.

8. Finally Poverty is an hurt, when the expenses be superfluous, and the
things that be bought, be rather curious and fair, then profitable and
necessary. He that is truly poor, and imbraceth Poverty with sincerity,
labors to do what it required and no more. For what difference is it for a
religious man to have a fair gilded book or a garment sowed with silk; when
as a book not gilded might serve him as well as gilded, and a garment sown
with common third, would be as good for him, as sown with silk? And if the
one consorteth more with Poverty, then the other, why will he not conform
himself to Poverty? In like manner tell me, I pray thee, what is the cause,
that a Religious man retayneth and keeps other men's things in his chamber,
that do him no good, and yet might profit others? Is not that superfluous, that
hinders another good?

9. Son, thou have a desire to be received into the number of the poor,
either in earth or in heaven. If in earth, it is enough that thou have made a
Vow of Poverty, and be reckoned amongst the poor, and if in heaven, it is not
enough, but further there is required thou be poor in deed, that is, that thou
cut off all superfluityes, and exercise thy self continually even till death
in the acts of Poverty, and this is to be a true Religious man. He is not to be
numbered in the company of my poor, who will abou^d in superfluityes, neither
shall he come to the reward of the poor, who shall not have made a trial of
the effects of Poverty.

Of the Vow of Chastity, and what Religious Chastity is, and the proper office
thereof.

CHAP. XIII.
SON, if the virtue of Chastity were not, it would be greatly amiss with man
since the concupiscence of the flesh is of that nature and condition, that if it
were not restrained in time, it would make a man (otherwise endued with reason
and understanding) in a short time like a brute beast. For the pleasure and
itching of the senses do so obscure and blind a man's mind, as they draw it into
all manner of filth and uncleanness: whence it comes to pass, that when the
will is abandoned of judgment and advise, a man runs in a miserable manner
headlong into all wickedness. Hence it is, that a man given to the pleasures of
the flesh is spoiled of all courage and power of doing well, speaks and
thinks not of any other thing, then of lasciuiousnes and carnality, nor
wishes any other thing, then that he may al his life long have his fill of
such kind of delights and pleasures, and for this cause he also hates the
other life. Neither does a carnal man's madness stay here, but his hatred
further extends it self to his Creator, who has by his law prohibited
those foul pleasures of the flesh, and condemned them. In a sensual man the
sense fails, and the fault increases.

2. Another condition of concupiscence is, that there is no good which a
sensual man contemns not, nor any evil that he commits not, so he may
enjoy and compass what he unlawfully desires. He has no regard or
consideration of riches, which for the satisfying of his lust and sensuality,
he wastes not: he exposes his life to a thousand dangers: he has no care of
his health at all: he respects not the doing against his conscience, and to
hurt his own soul, so he may enjoy his desires. Finally he prefers his
carnalityes before all that is both in earth and heaven. He becomes sensual
and beastly, who exercises beastly actions.

3. A third condition of concupiscence is, that it is never satisfied, but
increases more and more by sensual pleasures, and sets the body so on
fire, as no fever though never so burning and hoate, so sore tormenteth a man,
as does the concupiscence; nor any fury of hell is so turmoyled, or in so great
torments, as is a luxurious man, whose burning and raging heat is so great, as
it may seem not possible to be extinguished, but by death. The flesh first
tyeth a man fast, next it blinds him, and lastly it tormenteth him. Who has
no will to be thus handled, let him not put himself into the fleshes tormenting
hands.

4. With this pestiferous, and unruly wild beast the virtue of Chastity is to
make war, who being called on for her aid, willingly presents her self,
and greatly represseth the fury of this beast, and abateth the concupiscences
heat. Wherefore it is the general office and charge of Chastity to moderate and
direct all the desires of the senses according to the rule of reason, by
yealding unto every degree of Continency what is convenient and no more. And
because there be diverse degrees of Continency, there be also diverse permissions
and prohibitions thereof which she prescribes. In the first and lowest degree
is the continency of the married, who are only forbidden unlawful pleasures.
In the second is that of widows; in the third that of the single and
unmarried, who do not only renounce unlawful pleasures of the flesh, but also
the lawful which they might enjoy without sin, if they had a will to marry.
In the fourth degree is Continency of Virgins, which as it is more perfect then
the aforesaid, so deserves it a greater reward, the perfection whereof
consists not only in a firm purpose of containing from all manner of
venereous pleasures, but also in the perpetual conservation of virginal
Chastity. In the fifth and highest degree is placed the co^tinency of
religious, which though it be not sometimes Virginal, is yet in perfection
more excellent then the rest, for that it is by Vow consecrated unto me, which
because it is an act of excellent Charity, and of the greatest of all the
moral virtue, namely of Religion, causes greatest perfection, and excellency
to Religious Continency.

5. Now the law of Chastity commands Religious Continency to exercise three
offices worthy of it self. The first is, to conserve the purity of the flesh,
whereunto is required a great courage. For since the flesh of it self is prone
to incontinency, and impurity, a great alacrity and courage of mind is
necessary toward the keeping of it under, that a man, who naturally loves and
fauourech his own flesh, nor easily suffers it to be afflicted, give it not
the bridle over much, nor plunge himself into the mire and puddle of carnal
pleasures. A second office is to keep a guard over the senses, and thereunto
needs vigilance, and diligence. For seeing the senses be wandering and slipery,
and present a thousand occasions of such pleasures, unless a Religious man shall
be very diligent in keeping them, they will easily break out beyond their
bands. The third office is to conserve the purity of the mind unstained,
wherein circumspection is very necessary for the considering and examining of
what is admitted thereunto. And if there be any thing that may stayne or
infect, it must be kept out, for that it is more easy to keep it from entering,
then to thrust it out, after it be entered.

6. Son, this is the law of Religious Chastity, and these be the offices
thereof. If thou desire to be helped thereby, seeing for that end thou
requirest the aid of it, thou must also needs favor it, and not deny it thine
help, that it may discharge it own office. If thou should deny this thou
should do, as if thou calledst a Physician home unto thee, but would not
have him to touch the sick man's wound for fear of the pain, or loathing that
would follow. This is not the way of curing the sick body, but of increasing
his sickness rather. The body inured to pleasure, is wont to complain, that
Chastity is ever exact and severe in execution of the precepts of her laws,
which forbids many things and permits few. But these be the complaints of the
nyce, delicate and sensual sick, who ordinarily desire and long for the
things that be most hurtful unto them, which if they be yealded unto, do hurt
them, and therefore such things be more discretly denied them. Suffer the
Physician my Son, to put his hand to the iron; for the loathsome sore of
carnal concupiscence, unless it be launced in time, will easily grow to a
festred, and pestiferous impostume. He that will not with a very little pain
be cured as he ought, shall be else where eternally tormented, as he deserves.

Of the Excellency of Religious Chastity.

CHAP. XIIII.
SON, man consists of two parts, the own called the inferior and
sensual, appertayning to the body; the other the superior and reasonable,
appertayning to the soul. When he was created in the terrestrial Paradise, as
long as he continued in his state of innocence, he enjoyed great peace also,
because the inferior part was in perfect subjection, and obeyed the superior
part, neither was it so hardy as to resist. But after that man did by sin
make resistance against his Creatours will, he fell from that happy and
peacable state of innocence, and the inferior part began to rebel against the
superior, that is Reason: and having also, out of a pride, a will to usurp
her authority, it fell also shamefully; for that rejecting the counsel of
Reason, it began to attend wholly to pleasures. Hence arose the war, that is
now made between the Sense, and Reason. By this, man became spoiled of his
former peace and tranquillity and for that cause he was driven to guard himself
with the help of virtues for the bringing of sensuality under the subjection of
Reason. And amongst these virtues Chastity has a principal place, which if it
once find an entrance into Reasons kingdom, and into the superior part of the
soul, like a prudent and wise Lady she commands the sensual part to hold it
self within it own bounds, and to yeald soueraignity to reason. Hence it is,
that the first excellency of Chastity is to restore man, as much as may be,
into his former state and possession of innocence wherein he was created, and
to honor him with that ornament of purity, which he did wear before in the
terrestrial Paradise.

2. Chastity is also called an Angelical virtue, because it makes man like
unto an Angel, while it causes him to lead an Angels life. For though man of
his own nature be in the midst between Angels and beasts, for that the
conditions of both have place in him; though he be superior to these, and
inferior to those, yet is he somtymes beast-like, sometimes again Angel-like.
Beast-like, when the sensuality in the encounter with the superior part, goes
away with victory, and has a commanding hand over Reason, and causes a man
to plunge himself so deep in the boggs of terrene pleasures, as he makes
himself incapable of the heavenly, and as a brute beast, reciueth no taste of
spiritual matter at all. But when Chastity is once got into the kingdom of
the mind, the war comes to a far different conclusion. For Chastity in the
first place lays hand upon sensuality, imprisoneth her, and sets Reason in
her own place and authority of government and command. Next it provides that
the spirit hold the flesh under, and in subjection, and this is to be
Angell-like. And though a man be agreably to his nature fast tied to his flesh,
and whiles he is in this banishment, trauayleth up and down in flesh, yet
because through benefit of Chastity he lives not according to the flesh, he is
said to lead an Angels life. And he that on earth lives as an Angel, shall
in heaven shine also as the Angels do.

3. Again, Chastity raises a man up to the performing of great and wonderful
things: contrariwise the intemperance of the flesh abuses him to abject and
most contemptible things. Experience teaches, that such as pursue the fleshes
pleasures, do not aspire to the effecting of noble and heroical matters, and
more then that, whiles they see themselves fast tied and caught in the fleshs
snares, they drown themselves over head and cares in the puddle of lusts. This
vice also so dulleth man's wit, as it does not only lay a bar and impediment to
his progress and profiting in discipline and arts, but also brings in a
forgetfullnes of those things that were learned before. On the contrary side,
Chastity as it is an Angelical and celestial virtue, so does it raise a man
to the execution of generous and most noble works.

4. The founders of Religions, if they had not lead chaste lives, had never gone
about so great, and hard matters, as the foundations of new Religions be:
neither could the Apostles, when they preached the Gospel, have moved the
world, or have done other great matters, which they did, if they had been
cumbred with wives and children. Those therefore who embrace purity both of mind
and body, be more apt to receive the clear light of my grace, to contemplate
matters of heaven, the mysteries of the Divinity, the blessed Spirits, the
greatness and excellency of the eternal felicity, and of the goods prepared for
the virtuous in heaven. Whence it is, that man also, though still living in a
mortal body, if he conserve his integrity of body and mind, does even now in
part begin to enjoy the pleasures of Paradise.

5. Neither is this the least of Chastities excellencyes, that it so
beautifieth and sets forth a man's soul, as it makes it most grateful to
mine eyes. For though all virtues adorn the soul, and every one give it a
particular ornament, yet Chastity, because it conserueth it from all stayne of
the flesh, makes it most pure and most beautiful: as contrary wise the vice
of the flesh makes it so foul and ugly, as though it be provided of all other
moral virtues, yet may it hardly be endured. The external beauty of times is
an occasion of the souls perdition: but Chastity, which is the souls beauty,
besides that, that it is most acceptable to God, procures both the souls and
bodies good together.

6. Finally Religious Chastity, though it be of it self noble and excellent,
receives yet greater splendor and perfection from many other things. For
first it is greatly ennobled by Vow, by virtue whereof a Religious man has
renounced all kind of pleasures, whether the same appertain to the body and
senses, or to the mind and internal facultyes thereof. Again it boroweth no
small excellency from the very fountain and origin thereof, which is a sincere
and perfect love of me. For a Religious man moved not of any necessity, or hope
of commodity, nor for any other human respect is induced to forsake all
pleasures of the flesh, but only for the pleasing of me. And therefore
Religious Chastity is the more commendable for this, because it is endued with
most perfect Charity, which is the nurse and mother thereof. No little
splendor and perfection also is added unto it by the end and scope that
Religious Chastity has proposed: and this end is nothing else, then my honor
and glory, and therefore the Religious bind themselves to perpetual Chastity,
for that by it Gods service is in a wonderful sort amplified, and so it is no
marvel, though Religious Chastity challenges the first place amongst all the
degrees of Chastity. The more excellent and perfect Chastity is, the more it
communicates to them that love it.

7. Wherefore, Son, seeing Chastity is so noble and excellent, I do not hold
it enough if thou embrace it after a mean manner, or have an earnest desire
unto it, as to a most precious Jewel; but I could rather wish, thou would
also consecrate thy self thereunto, as to a thing, that did most of al please
me. And know thou, that I do above all things love a pure and chaste heart, and
love it so affectuously, as I not only with a singular joy repose therein, and
enrich it with sundry gifts, but also nothing can be required of me, that I do
not graciously impart unto it. And this alone should set every Religious man's
mind on fire to desire this heavenly gemme, wonderfully shining, not only in
the company of virtues on earth, but also in heaven amongst the company of the
blessed. The more tenderly thou shall love Chastity, the more thou shall be
loved of God, and if thou can not love it, as much as it deserves, at least
love it in what thou art able.

How greatly convenient it is for a Religious man to be chaste.

CHAP. XV.
LORD, I well understand, that it is very convenient, that he be chaste, who
attends to thy service, considering by the benefit of his Vow he is
consecrated and bound to thee, the fountain of all purity. It is nothing
agreeable, that under a clean and pure head the members should be filthy and
foul. But I know not how I may long defend my Chastity, since I have at home a
capital enemy, who trusting to both inward and outward helps, becomes so
stout and hardy, as I almost despair of the victory. Now thou know, o Lord,
how sore this insolent and proud flesh persecuteth the purity of my soul. Thou
art not ignorant, how many assaults it makes night and day upon it. And yet
this does not make me afraid. Another thing perplexeth and troubles me much
more, that is, that both the wantonness and rebellion of the senses within, and
the most cruel enemy Satan without, do minister helps unto it.

2. Son, what thou say is most true, but thou must not be dismayed for it:
for the greater that the enemies boldness and poweris, the more glorious will the
victory and crown be that follows after. Neither shall thou want my help,
only play thou the man, and use all thy forces for the maintayning of Chastity,
and no enemy from within or without shall get the victory from thee. And seeing
thou acknowledgest, and confessest also, that it is convenient, that my
Religious servants be chaste, as I their Lord am; know thou that I was ever so
hearty a lover of purity, as mine adversaries, who calumniated me in very many
things, durst not accuse or condemn me of the very least defect against
Chastity. And that the Religious ought to be such their state exacteth, since
they make a profession to be my followers, and imitators of my life. Wherefore
seeing I was exceedingly affected to this virtue of Chastity, and regarded it as
the guide of a spiritual life, requisite it is, that they also embrace and take
it for their Lady and Mistress.

3. And because I make so high an esteem of purity, and am in the highest
degree auerted from the vice of concupiscence, why would thou have me to
entertayne a dishonest servant within my house? or that I should endure him in
the same? How should I suffer, that any service should be done me by him, whom
I know to have an unclean mind? The servant that accommodateth not himself to
his Lord and Master, or neglects to procure his love and good will, either
will not be long stable in his office, or if he continue in it, will make very
little profit thereby, and will put himself in danger of being thrust out, to
his own great hurt, and no little shame and confusion. Do I require at my
servants hands any thing unfitting, unseemly, or impossible? I require purity,
which is a principal virtue: I require of him, that he suffer not himself to
be suppla^ted or overcome by his sensuality, and this is honorable. I exact of
him, that which he has promised, and that is to live chastely, which is a point
of justice.

4. Further, I long to know, wherein consists to leave and forsake the world?
Not that a man give over to live under heaven, or to dwell on earth, or to draw
this air (for all these be necessary, and as common to secular men, as to
Religious) but that he lead a life far different from that of the world.
Amongst the evils of this world one is, to neglect spiritual things, and to
seek after the pleasures, and contentments of the flesh. The Religious
therefore, who forsake the world in sincerity, must lead a life in conversation
and manners contrary to the world, by mortification of their desires, by a
renunciatio^ of the senses delights, and by a contemning of whatsoever this
blind world loves and imbraceth: and in brief, their conversation must be in
heaven. But nothing so much contradicts the desire of heavenly things, and
nothing is so prejudicial to the taste of spiritual matters, as is
incontinency: whiles on the contrary, nothing promoteth a Religious man so to
the leading of an heavenly life, as does Chastity alone, which as it conserueth
the mind pure so does it raise a Religious man to the contemplation of heavenly
things. The further thy life is off from that of the world, the more secure
shall thy Chastity be, and upon earth will sooner further thee to the leading
of a celestial life.

5. Son, do thou conceive the cause why any unchaste man, even amongst the
heathens, never came to so great impudency as he durst publicly in the
presence of others commit any lascivious act, but rather confounded in
himself, would seek about for corners, and hidden places, whereby to hide and
cover his fault. Natural light has taught him, that all acts of uncleanness be
unworthy the sight of men, and therefore he seeks corners, and hides
himself, fearing least he should attempt, or do any thing against his honor,
and the rule of reason. Wherefore if an act repugnant to Chastity be unworthy
an heathen, how much more unworthy a Christian, in whose law the vice of
concupiscence is condemned. And much more unworthy be they in a Religious man,
who has professed Chastity, and bound himself by solemnity of Vow also to
live chastely. And though a man in committing any foul act of carnality
auoydeth to be seen of men, yet shall he not escape the sight of God, who is
every where, and beholds all things.

6. That one man subiecteth himself for love of me to another, his inferior,
depending upon his will, and obeying him in all things, is both honorable, and
very meritorious, for that whatsoever is done for the love of me, is done to
me, and it is my part to remunerate and reward it. But that a man placed in a
high estate, should to his own great hurt and reproach subject himself to a
vile thing, and inferior to himself, is repugnant to my will, who am Lord
also of man. Go too now, tell me my Son, whether it be more convenient, that a
Religious man subject himself to the sensual part, namely to the hand-mayd,
or to permit, that reason, as the mistress command him. And if this be more
convenient, and not that, it is more meet also, that a Religious man make an
esteem of Chastity, by help whereof he may bring the hand-mayd Concupiscence in
subjection to Reason, her lawful mistress. He that puts himself under him
that he should not, is also handled in the manner that he would not.

7. Son, he that has enemies, has need of a guard for his person. And as
he, who has them within and without his hold, is in the greater danger, so
needs he greater help, especially if both sorts of enemies, both within and
without, shall conspire together. But what should he deserve, who by putting
his enemies into prison, had delivered his castle from danger? He should
deserve, no doubt, to obtain of the Governor of the Castle whatsoever he
would.

8. Son, thou have one domestical and troublesome enemy within, namely thy
flesh, and two without, to wit, the world and the devil, who are joined in a
confederacy together, and seek to invade and break into the fortress of thy
heart. How much then may Chastity deserve at thy hands, which, by the overthrow
of thy flesh, and beastly desires, thy domestical enemies, exempteth thee out
of so great a danger? Judge thou, how great esteem thou oughst to make of
Chastity, which is both thy faithful friend, and a capital enemy of thine
enemies? Consider if it were not thy part to favor her, since she so greatly
favors and helps thee. Thou must needs be ingrate, if thou forbear to
choose her for the gouernesse of thy heart, that she may conserve it free from
all impurity, and defend it from the guiles of crafty concupiscence. Who
acknowledges not his own misery and danger, is nothing sollicitous about any
to help him.

How profitable and necessary it is, that a Religious man be chaste.

CHAP. XVII.
IN every white and pure thing, the very least stayne appears, and the whiter
it is, the more plainly does the spot discover it self. Even so in a Religious
life, because it is most white and pure, the very least defect of purity is
objected to the eyes, and offends them that see it. Secular men have
Religious for certain spectacles of virtues: but a looking-glass displeases,
unless it be all clear and shining. In other virtues a light default never
offends so much, or does so great hurt in a Religious man, as does a defect
in Chastity. A Religious man does not easily incur the loss of his good
name, if either he transgress somewhat against meeknes, because he is by
nature cholerike, or be not very frank and liberal, or seeks after a little
vain glory, or be not perfectly humble ^r fall into some like defect. But if
he commit but some very little matter against Chastity, he forthwith obscureth
the opinion of his good name. For every wise man judges that a Religious man,
though he be never so hard, and fast handed, may yet be an holy man. In like
manner one by nature cholerike, or somewhat curious, may yet be pious and
devout: but when they come to Chastity, the contrary is conceived, namely, that
there cannot be any holiness, where incontinency is, nor that the devotion can
be sincere, where the perturbations of mind bear sway: neither can there be
spirit, where the flesh commands. Besides, the defects of other virtues be
easily excused, either for that they grow of a natural complexion, as choler,
or for that they proceed of a good end and intention, as is sparing and
frugality: but a defect of carnal concupiscence is condemned of all, and
excused of none.

2. All think Religious men to be as it were the Salt of the Earth, and the
Light of the World, as my Scripture speaks, and therefore they need to take
pains, that the true propertyes of salt and light may concur in them. Salt
with the sharpnes dries up the humors, and preserves from putrefaction, but
^it be not pure, or be mixed with earth, it not only not preserves, but also
causes putrefaction the sooner. So if a Religious man be pure, and sincere in
his words, and counsels, he will easily conserve others, but if he be
unclean and stained with a little stayne of carnal desires, he will by his bad
example easily mar them. Light also serves to give light, and to show where
the dangers and downfalls be, but if the candles week be either foul, or
moist, it yealdeth more of smoke then of light. So a Religious man, if he have
not a pure and clean heart, will not only not enlighte^, but also obscure, and
darken the way, that both himself, and all that do accompany him, may
shamefully stumble, and so give a greater stincke and smell, then light. He
shall have much a do to conserve and enlighten others, who neglects to keep
and give light to himself.

3. Moreover the Religious life is so tender and delicate, as not only the
defect of purity, but the very least suspicion of incontinency also hurts a
Religious man much. Who would esteem that matrone for wise, who should for
help and counsels sake go to a Religious man, suspected of incontinency? Is
it not an extreme misery, that a Religious man consecrated to me, should be ill
reported of? Certes, the Religious person, that should make no reckoning of his
good name with his neighbor, receives no good by him neither. O how
grievously do those Religious men sin, who do not beware of falling into the
occasions of being infamed by such a vice, but persuade themselves, that it is
enough, if they commit nothing that is evil by deed, whatsoever men say and
report of them. They are not without fault, if they give but the occasions of
such obloquies and detractions: for they are bound not only to fly from the
vice it self, but also to take away all suspicion thereof. He that hates the
Devil, will not easily endure to see him painted.

4. It is nothing convenient to thrust a man against reason out of his own
house, neither can it be done in conscience. Remember, Son, that thy heart is
my Temple and my house. I have laid the foundations of it, raised and perfected
the building, and whatsoever is fair and precious in it, has come from me.
And that this house might be ever beautiful, and that I might still make my
abode and habitation therein, I delivered it to the keeping of Chastity, a
trusty and vigilant keeper. But if thou would now thrust me against all
reason out of it, thou can not do it without most grievous sacrilege. And if
thou have a will to drive Chastity out of the house of thy heart, that
concupiscence may command in it, thou may not do that also without a great
crime. He that thrusts out him, of whom he is helped and honored, will
easily fall into the hands of some one, who will handle him according to his
deserts.

5. Tell me, I pray thee, when thou vowedst perpetual Chastity, what did
thou promise to God? Did thou not promise, that thou would from thenceforth
make war against all carnal pleasures both of body and mind? Did thou not
promise to persevere chaste to thy lives end? Do thou not therefore think,
that thou art bound necessarily to perform thy promise, since thou can not
look any more back? Know thou not, what my Apostle says: Who shall
violate, or defile Gods Temple, God will destroy him? And if thou for some
little carnal pleasure driuest me out of thy heart, with what right can thou
challeng of me to be received into the kingdom of heaven? And if for a little
pleasure of the senses, by defyling thy heart, thou abusest Chastity, wherefore
should thou exact her to bring thee to the vision of God, promised to the
clean of heart alone? Understand therefore that it is no way good for thee in
the very least thing to offend against Chastity, because thou have by Vow of
Chastity promised no way to prejudice her purity, neither in great matters, nor
in little.

6. It is further necessary that a Religious man aspire to the perfection of
Chastity for this, for that he has made a profession of leading a spiritual
life, which since it has not a more sworn enemy, then the concupiscence of the
flesh, cannot possibly live a spirital life, unless the flesh be first brought
in subjection to the spirit. For the Religious who is truly spiritual, must
not only be a stranger to the vice of the flesh, but also be auerted from all
those, that have their origin from the flesh, or have any dealing with it at
all. And therefore he must diligently, and carefully exclude and keep out all
bad cogitations, and impure suggestions. In his talk he must be circumspect,
that any words fall not from his mouth, that may seem against honesty. He must
not cast his eyes upon Iasciuious acts, though they should be done without
sin. And these be helps for the mortification of the flesh. But I would have
thee, Son, to consider and observe, that the flesh sometyms faigneth it self
dead, when it is not, and pretends it self to be in most great subjection to
the spirit. But then a wise and spiritual Religious man must be most of all
upon his guard: for it is accustomed to dissemble the matter upon hope of
^ommodityes, and of greater liberty, and in ^yme it persuades the Religious
man to withdraw somewhat of his former rigor, ^th it was ready to yeald most
prompt ser^ice to the spirit. But he that will not be ^eceiued, or beguyled by
the crafty flesh, must use the counsel of his spiritual father. There is no
trust to be had to a dissembling ^nemy, because by his faigning he disco^ereth
himself.

Of the vtility of Religious Chastity.

CHAP. XVII.
SON, when I did in my Ghospel under the name of Eunuchs commend them who do
for the love of me voluntarily make the Vow of perpetual Chastity (for ^his is
to make himself an Eunuch, and ^o geld himself for the kingdom of heaven) I
did intend that very thing, because a man by such a Vow, as it were with one
sharp cut of a knife, cutteth off all power, and occasions of using carnal
pleasures. For what is not any longer lawful, is truly said to be impossible.
And having commended these my chaste Eunuchs, I added, He that can take, let
him take. For I knew, that all would not understand the most great vtilityes,
that p^petuall continency brings to the Religious. I omit to mention here,
how by the benefit of it they are freed from infinite molestations and troubles,
and the reproachfu^ insolencyes of the flesh, which if it get one but the least
command, casts headlong even wise men into the bottomless gulf a vices. And
if the care of outward riches b^ troublesome for the solicitude they brin^
with them, much more cumbersome is the concupiscence, which because it is
homebred, wounds more sorely, and therefore the wounds thereof be the more
deadly.

2. I say nothing that they be eased of many afflictions, and carking cares of
governing their house, which be otherwhile^ so troublesome, as they bring men
to desperation. It appertains to the master of the family to provide for his
wife, for the good bringing up of his children, for the placing of his
daughters in marriage, to take care that no necessary thing be wanting, that
the servants of both sexes do their duty. And if all in that family be good and
modest and well ordered, and yet there is no want of troubles; what will there
then be, if many of them be perverse, untoward, and unruly? I pretermit, that
the Religious by the benefit of the said Vow be delivered from the ^^spitions
of wife and children, which are ^ont otherwhiles so to torment the hus^ands, as
thereby they become almost mad, and out of their wits. Finally I forbear to
^emember other infinite incommodityes, and ^nluckly events, which happen
vnexpe^ed in families, and are wont wonderfully (...) vex and trouble the
masters of the fami^y. Woe be to those Religious men, who free ^om so many
impediments and snares, do ^ot labor to the perfection of their state.

3. Religious Chastity then cutteth off ^ll these troubles, and unquiet
thoughts, and ^useth the Religious man, as a Citizen of ^eauen, content with
his vocation, to at^end only to the co^templation of heavenly things, and to
the procuring of his own ^oules good. And how healthful and pro^^table this
is, those Religious know well, who far removed from the said business ^f
employment, do live a single life. The ^fflicted men of the world also are not
igno^ant thereof, who to their great hurt, and grief have a daily experience of
those trou^les and miseries. And if there were nothing else, then to think how
to please their wives, how to appear the before world, ^ow to content their
kins-folks and friends, this were a cross heavy enough to beare^ long as they
live. But the chaste Religion need not to think upon any other thing, then how
to please me. O how much mo^^ easy it is to please me, then the world, an^ how
much sooner the Creator is satisfied then the Creature. Whosoever in this lif^
pleases God most, shall have the highe^ place of honor in his court of Heaven.

4. Again the secular man, tied in marryage, has no power of his own body,
b^^ the wife has a command over it. For s^^ writteth my Apostle, and it is
most true, that the law of Matrimony requires it. And i^ not this a kind of
servitude to be at the command of a Woman? and seeing it is not for one year,
nor for ten, but for the whole life, is it not a continual servitude. It is
indeed to be confessed, that the tribulation is the less, if the man happen
upon a virtuous wife, and yet it loses not the name of servitude. But when he
lights upon a vayn^ impudent, quareling, or scolding wife, wha^ is it but an
hell? How great is the husband^ misery? What boundslaue is worse handle^ then
he? But a chaste Religious man has t^ do with Chastity, that is, a benign
virtue* he has to deal with me, who though hi^ Lord and Master, yet a most
loving and kin^ Father. And to serve me by Vow of Chastity, is nothing else,
then to heap up store of merits, and to increase them. Unhappy is the man, who
by his serving others profits himself nothing: but more unhappy is ^he, who
sustayneth detriment also, and loss of the things he has.

5. Moreover, he that is forced to keep company both night and day with a
cruel and enuenimed wild beast, is in a manifest hazard of his life, either by
his biting or impoysoning him. But if a man could be able to stop up the beasts
mouth, that he could neither bite him, nor spit out the poison at him, he could
not but profit and do himself good. Son, no wild beast is more cruel, nor
more full of venime, then is our flesh, the biting and venime whereof destroys
and kills the soul. And seeing we be forced to have the continual company
thereof with us, no doubt our soul must needs be in great peril, from which
Chastity delivers it. For whiles by the band of Vow it binds the
co^cupisce^ce, which is the beasts mouth, it so provides that it can neither
byte, not cast forth it poison. He is not worthy of commiseration and pity,
who suffers himself to be bitten of a beast chayned and ^yed up: neither
deserves that man pardon, who contemns the helps presented unto him.

6. When any tumult or styr arises in a common wealth, for the quietting
thereof necessary it is, that he who first caused it, be forthwith laid hold
on: for when the vulgar and common sort want their Captain on whom to rely,
they eftsoons disperse themselves, and the tumult ends. In a religious man,
who is like a Commonwealth well ordered, there is a tumult raised, when the
inferior part of the mind stirs and rebelleth against the superior, and
therefore for the appeasing of the stir, and bringing of the common wealth to
quiet, it must imprison the flesh, which is the Captain of the common people,
and rayseth up the passions against the soul, and the desires of the senses
against reason. And Chastity is that, which by help of the Vows, puts the
flesh in prison, and by well guarding and manning the heart, which is a
Religious man's castle, preserves and maintayneth the common wealth,
tranquillity and peace. And this vtility, caused by Religious Chastity, is so
important, as a Religious man without it, differs nothing from a certain
Babylonian confusion.

7. Of this there arises another vtility, nothing inferior to the aforesaid;
that a Religious man, because by the help of Chastity he has procured peace
and quiet of mind within, may also go away with victory over them that be
enemies without. The general of an army, who has his soldiers, though few,
agreeing and conspiring together, and obedient unto him, has not any
difficulty in obtaining the victory. So the Religious, if he can keep the
inferior or sensual facultyes subject and obedient to the superior, may
securely join battle with the adverse part, and go away with an undoubted
victory. A united small number in an army is far better then a disagre^ng or
iarring multitude, and therefore the General of the war must make much of
those in the army, who be the authors of peace and concord in others: Even so
in the spiritual war, the Religious who is as the General, must make an high
esteem of Chastity, which promoteth and furthereth the peace of the soldiers.
He is easily overcome, who before he comes to encoun^er with the enemy, has
not drawn his ^ouldiers into a firm peace amongst themselves.

Of the dangers of loosing Chastity.

CHAP. XVIII.
SON, thou know well, that Chastity is a gemme of great price and worth,
no less pleasing to me, then profitable to thy self. But thou must further
know, there be many thieves and enemies, who seek to spoil thee of it, or at
least to destroy and mar it, out of malice they bear unto thee, and therefore
thou need to be very vigilant, and well armed against their assaults.
Neither must thou be over confident, though thy flesh be tied by Vow, since it
is so crafty and insolent, that though it cannot break out by breaking the
bands, which it ever labors to do, yet after her old manner, though she be
never so fast bound, she makes stirs and tumults, hoping thereby either to
work her own liberty, or to give some deadly wound to Chastity her enemy.
Neither be thou so confident, that Chastity, because it has for a time seated
it self within the castle of thy heart, is therefore secure, and out of danger:
for most strong fortifications many times are surprised and taken on a suddane,
and overmuch security it commonly hurtful, because it is the mother of sloth,
and carelesnes.

2. The first danger imminent is of treason: for seeing Chastity is round beset
with enemies, born domestical and forayne, it may easily be betrayed, and
therefore the religious must stand upon his guard, that his domestical enemy,
namely his flesh, be not seconded, and backed by enemies from abroad. Son, if
thou will be intertayned delicately with meat and drink, and sleep at thy
pleasure, and yet think thou may preserve thy Chastity unstained against the
assaults of the flesh, thou art greatly deceived, because by that thou
effectest nothing but this, that thou give weapons and arms unto the flesh.
And what marvel, if it after rise against the spirit? What marvel if it go
about to break the bands of Vow, and to thrust Chastity out of her possession,
though she has long stayed therein? Will thou have thy flesh not to be wanton?
Chastize it then with hard diet. Will thou not have Chastity betrayed, nor to
be thrust out of her house? Put a guard upon her: fasting and watching be two
good keepers, who do not only keep and defend her, but do also spoil the
enemies of their weapons, that they may not rise against her. The more thou
flatter, and favor thy flesh, the more strongly it fortifieth it self against
Chastity.

3. Lord, for the sustayning of life, and for the serving of thy divine
majesty, a man needs meat, drink, and sleep, and if the flesh wax thereby
proud, and rise against the spirit, or Chastity, it is not our fault, because
it is not the end proposed by us. Son, I find no fault with those things that
be necessary for the intertayning of life, and the sustayning of trauayles and
labors for my sake (for whatsoever is directed to my service and glory, is
blessed, good, and laudable) but I only improve what is superfluous. Meat and
drink not necessary, but immoderate, sets the fleshes concupiscence on
fire, and brings the Chastity in danger. Who eats over much, serves not
me, but his own appetite and desire. Those please me, who eat that they may
live and serve me, and contrariwise they discontent me much, who seem to live
th^^ they may eat. Many of my most dear servants, did not so, to whom it was
a pain to eat, and a loathing to sleep: and in these men Chastity reigned, as
in her own kingdom. Moderate diet profits body and soul, and contrariwise
excess hurts them both.

4. Another danger grows from the senses, which because they be the gates o^
the heart, where Chastity resideth, need a strong guard, because both good and
evil make their entrance thereby into the heart. He that bath not a diligent
and careful eye to the keeping of the gate of his house, shall oftentimes find
something missing, and taken away, or within it shall find something that ^he
would not, and would wish away. For doors are made, that they may be shut and
opened: they are shut against men unknown and that may do hurt: they are opened
to men known, and to friends who may help. A Religious man must not permit any
one to enter into his house of Chastity, without examining him first.

5. So do they in Frontiere places and towns of kingdoms, and there most of
all where there is fear, or suspicion of treason from enemies, where not only
be examined those that desire to enter, but their packes also, letters, and
weapons are viewed and searched that nothing hurtful be brought into the
City. And this vigilance is not discommended, but commended. And yet this care
and diligence oftentimes does not remedy all inconveniences, since experience
^eacheth that, notwithstanding the watching and warding at the gates, there be
many treasons committed. Wherefore then should not a Religious man stand upon
his guard in keeping the gates of his heart, wherein he has all his good, and
whereon depends both his salvation, and his eternal damnation. Who will say,
that the vigilance and diligence is overmuch, where there be so many enemies?
Who keeps the gates of his senses negligently, shall find death entered into
his house.

6. Moreover to converse and keep company with lascivious persons, or such as
be not chaste, is to cast ones self into a manifest danger of loosing his
Chastity. For as experience has taught, more chaste persons have been by the
lascivious drawn to intemperance, then have lascivious been by the chaste
induced to Chastity. For such is the nature of the condition of man, as after
the loss of his integrity of life, he is more prone to evil then to good, and
as the sick, rather desiteth those things that delight the taste, then profit
the health. But if the conversation with such kind of men arise peradventure of
an inordinate affection, there is greater danger imminent. For if the only
company with unchaste persons be dangerous, of how great danger will it be to
keep company with carnal affection? He that is provoked by the object from
without, and put forwards by an affection from within soon falls, though he
be spiritual. And therefore my servants, who were in love with Chastity, so
soon as they perceived themselves to be by any inordinate affection drawn to
dangerous company, forthwith left it, as an enemy to Chastity. For he easily
learneth to halt, who often conuerseth, and keeps company with the halting.

7. The same is the danger of reading of wanton books, which be repugnant to
Chastity. I know not, how that Religious man can be excused, who keeps such
an infectio^ within his chamber. Poison, though it be put into good and
wholesome meats, cease not to be poison, or to kill them who take it: even so
unchaste matters, whether expressed in pictures, or interlaced in the books of
sound doctrine, do neither forgo the name of dishonesty, nor cease to hurt the
beholders, readers, or hearers. And if unto secular men the reading of such
books cannot in good conscience be permitted, how should it be permitted to
the Religious, that profess Chastity? What is read in books, is reflected upon
in heart, and what is ruminated in mind, is easily retained in the affection.

8. There is another enemy of Chastity the more to be feared, the more hardly
he is known and discovered, and that is an over great security and confidence
of a Religious man in his own continency. For this has drawn many into their
ruin: and what marvel, since it is prides daughter. Who has a will to be
chaste, and shuneth not the dangers, presumes overmuch of himself. My lowly
and chaste servants did not so, but diffident of their own forces, they ran
diligently from whatsoever might set the desires and appetites of the flesh on
fire. And though security makes not a Religious man rash, and over bold, yet
it makes him negligent and careless, and both the one and the other does
enda^ger Chastity not a little. Who trusts overmuch to himself, easily
exposes himself to perils, and therefore is often beguiled, and sustayneth a
greater loss then he would have thought.

Of the means to conserve Chastity.

CHAP. XIX.
SON, in the battayles that are fought amongst men, it profits sometimes to
come before the face of the enemy, and sometimes to skirmish with him, for as
much as boldness is wont to abate the enemies courage, and to cause him to fly.
But in this spiritual war, where we are to fight with the flesh, the victory
is obtained rather by flying from the enemy, then encountering him. For he, who
seeks to set upon his enemy, puts himself into very great danger to be
overcome, and ordinarily his loss is greater then is the gain. Neither ought
this to seem strange unto thee, for that in the conflicts of this world, whiles
an assault is made upon the enemy, the soldiers courage is set the more on
fire, and the enemies hearts begin to faint; but in this encounter the contrary
happens. For the more manfully thou shall resist thy concupiscence, the more
it rages, and the fire of it increases; in so much as it either strikes and
wounds, or pricketh, and therefore more wisdom is showed in flying from it.

2. Thou art not wiser then Solomon, who because he flying not from the
occasions, fell so shamefully, as he did. S. John Baptist my precursour, though
he were sanctified in his mothers womb, did notwithstanding for the avoiding
of all occasions of sinning, hide himself being but a child in the desert: and
will thou, who neither art sanctified, nor so virtuous, thrust thy self into
the midst of occasions, and make head against thine enemy to fight with him?
This is a manifest sign, that either thou have not got any knowledge of thy
self, or thou make little reckoning of Chastities gift.

3. Another means is, most speedily to repel and shake off the foul
suggestions that the Devil presents to the mind. For they be like little
plants, which if they be not fortwith pulled up out of the souls garden, do
soon take root, grow, and bring forth thorns, that prick the mind, and
choke up Chastity. A Religious man, who puts not away unclean thoughts
after he has once perceived them, does declare his liking of them: and if they
please him, how can he love the purity of mind, that is stained with such
manner of thoughts? Again if foul cogitations hurt; as soon as ever they put
out their heads; how much more will they hurt, if they shall by delay gather
more strength? Little coals, though they lie but a little time under clothes,
do notwithstanding both cause a bad smell, and burn the cloth. If the
Religious would consider, from how great incommodityes and troubles they should
free themselves, if they should in the very beginning shake of the foul
cogitations of carnality, there is none, who would suffer the little ones of
Babylon to grow to any bigness within his heart, but would instantly dash them
against the rock. Our cowardice, and dastardy in putting away impure
cogitations, makes the Devil diligent and bold in tempting us against
Chastity.

4. It helps also to chastityes conservation, to be otherwhiles blind, deaf,
and mute. For if it be true, that it is not lawful to see, or hear what it is
not lawful to desire, what cause has a Religious man, when he goes abroad,
to cast his eyes upon the countenances of all that he meets? Let him leave
that office to the Painters, who for the true expressing of men's countenances,
must needs have their eyes fixed upon them. A good and chaste Religious man
rather takes upon him to conte^plate the countenaunces, such as they shall one
day be after death, then as they be in life. For what profits it to behold
those things that be nothing good, but be rather impediments to the meditation
of heavenly things? The less thou shall see, or hear of things of this
world, the more securely shall thou enjoy the comfort of Chastity.

5. Another sovereign help for the conseruing of the minds purity, is the
avoiding of ydlenes, which as it is mo^^ combersome to Chastity, so it is most
contenting to the flesh, which is accustomed to grow wanton by ydlenes, and
consequently to become more fierce against Chastity every day then other. To
live idly, is to set open the door for thieves and robbers to enter into the
house. For he, who cares not for the loosing of his own goods, does nothing
but give unto thieves opportunity of robbing him of what he has. Who is well
busyed, is not wont to lend his hearing to any one, but in necessary matters:
but one that is idle, and given to his recreations, is ready to hear all,
whether the talk be secular, or spiritual: if it be spiritual, it instantly
passes away, if it be secular and carnal, it takes increase by ydlenes.

6. Consider thou now, whether it be convenient that thou be idle, who art come
to Religion for no other end, then to suffer many labors, and much pains for
Christ. And whether it be meet by ydlenes and ease to patronize the flesh
against Chastity, when as thou have by Vow promised thy Chastity to God? Some
cast the fault upon the Devil, that they be over sore troubled with impure
cogitations, who are rather culpable themselves. For he by tempting ^eeketh to
put occupations upon them who ^aue none, that they may satisfy their du^y: and
therefore if they should be ever busy ^n some pious action or other, the Devil
should not have any place, and the Chastity might be the more safely kept. To
have a desire and will to be idle, and not to have a will to be tempted, cannot
agree together, for that nothing inuiteth the Devil sooner ^o throw his darts
of tentations, then ydlenes, and ease.

7. My servants, who now reign happily in heaven, for the mantayning of their
Chastity on earth, exercised themselves in two virtues above the rest, to wit,
humility and penance. Humility of heart, like a pious mother, seeks most
carefully to conserve Chastity, as her dear daughter. For those my servants
understood very well, that it was a very hard matter for a proud, and arrogant
person to keep and preserve his flower of Chastity. Again Penance is the
conseruer of Chastity as touching the body, and therefore they were much given
to the mortifying of their flesh, some to fastings, others to disciplines,
watchings, and to other afflictions of that kind, knowing that they were the
preservative antidots of purity. And when these remedies will not help, let
them use more effectual. Whence it is, that some for the extinguishing, and
putting out the heat of lust did cast themselves into most freezing cold
waters, some into snow, others cast themselves naked into nettles and thorns,
some did burn off their own fingers. By which acts they declared themselves
to be great enemies to their flesh and faithful conseruers of their Chastity.
The body cannot be brought under subjection, but by using some severity and
rigor to it: and a body untamed and unruly can not away with Chastity, and in
conclusion either clean abandoneth it, or preserves it not long unstained.

Of the Vow of Obedience, and wherein Religious Obedience consists.

CHAP. XX.
LORD, though I desire much to embrace this course of life without falling and
erring, yet I fall and err so often, as I am ashamed of it. In somethinges I
make overmuch have, in others I am over slow, neither can I well resolve, what
I should do. I do further attempt many things, but yet with an unfortunate
event.

2. Son, in this life none is sufficient of himself, that he may live as he
ought, because none has ever come to that perfection of knowledge, that he
should be free from all error. Thou know not, what will be to morrow: the
hearts of men be to thee unknown and inscrutable, neither do thou well know
thy self. How then can thou without falling or error either converse with
others, or govern thy self? Who trauayleth by night and in darkness, though he
fall not, yet he stumbleth at least or goes out of his way. And though thou
may be provided of knowledge and of light, yet where be thy forces, and helps
necessary for the ouercoming of the difficultyes that often occur? For so
violent be the perturbations of the mind, as they carry away even those who
seem to have gone beyond the condition of man's nature, neither be the forces
of nature of ability to keep them in. And if in the natural life, wherein the
light of reason shines to all, there be so many errors, how many will there be
in the spiritual, wherein there is both less light and understanding, and
greater difficultyes do occur?

3. So it is Lord, but shall we continue in this darkness, deprived of all helps
and remedies? Son, in this necessity the virtue of Obedience is able to give
thee both an help and a remedy, of which it is a common saying: Suffer thy
self to be ruled. He that takes a journey, and cannot well see his way before
him, stands in need of a guide, and of one well sighted, and that knows the
way. The virtue of Obedience is that which delivers a Religious man into my
hands, that I may guide and direct him. And seeing I am skillfull of the way,
and know the windings, turnings, and difficultyes, let every Religious man be
secure and assured, that I will faithfully direct him in the way that shall
bring him to life everlasting, so he suffer himself to be for his own part
governed, and brought to his iourneys end.

4. All Religious, whiles they renounce the world, begin to follow me, but many
thinking themselves not to stand in any need of my conduct, leave and forsake
me, not to any hurt of mine, but their own. It is not enough to have begone. If
there should be no difficultyes, but in the entrance into the way, they might
have some cause of excusing themselves, but seeing the same to be dangerous all
the way, and in the whole course of their journey, they must not leave their
conductour. He, that not knowing the way contemns a guide, manifests that
he makes little reckoning of his going astray.

5. In the world I administer, and govern all: by me Kings reign, and
Princes command: by me the Lawmakers determine what is just, and the Judges
do justice. And where I have commanded obedience to be given to temporal
Lords, whosoever resists their command, resists me, and my ordination. The
same is done in the ship of Religion, wherein I am the chief Master, and
Pilot: I direct it, and bring it safe into the harbor: I assign every
martyner his office and charge, and to whom they and others must be obedient.
And whereas I am in every one of them, and determine what every subject is to
do, to obey them is nothing else, then to obey me, and to contemn them, is to
contemn me.

6. All Religious be indeed in a ship, but all have not good speed and success
in their navigations. He that suffers himself to be governed, sayleth on
without danger, and has not any cause to be troubled or afraid, and therefore,
as the common saying is, goes his journey sleeping. But he, who suffers not
himself willingly to be governed, stays not within the ship, one while
grieved that he entered into the ship, an otherwhile wishing to leap a shore,
and out of a discontent and pusill animity of mind he takes no pleasure of any
thing at all. And whence comes this? because his desire is, that the ship
should be directed, as himself likes best. And this is to have a will to
govern, and not to be governed. Woe to that Religion which accomodateth it
self to the propension, and will of every subject. Who passes in a ship from
one place to another, must accommodate himself thereto, and not contrary wise.
It were no good trauayling, neither would the ship ever get into the haven, if
the navigations should be directed as every one listed. That Religious man
cannot live in peace, who refuses to do the will and command of another.

7. Do thou long to know what Obedience is? It is nothing else, then a
Burying. Will thou understand, wherein it consists to obey? It consists in
the buryall of the own will. O happy is that Religious person, who can truly
say, and affirm: Now I have buried mine own will, and unwillingness: Now have
I satisfied the liberty of mine own will, because he has cast off whatsoever
might have hindered his entrance into heaven. None can take up his cross and
follow me, unless he shall first have buried his own will, and denied himself.
A Religious man, retayning his own will, and doing as he list, is not dead to
the world, and therefore appertains not to Religion, which is but one, and
ought to be governed by one will, namely of the Superior, and all the rest of
the wills of the subjects must be buried: if they be not, as a body, that lies
unburied, they will yield forth an intolerable bad sent.

8. Tell me, I pray thee, my Son, if a man should without any cause, induced
by his own will and pleasure alone, take up a body, that had been some
months ago buried, would it not strike an exceeding great horror into all
that should see it, and cause them to laugh at his folly, and madness? And what
other thing is it, not to obey the Constitutions of the Order, or the
Superiors command, then to take up again thine own will, and nill, that
were before buried, both which bodies thou buriedst at thy entering into
Religion, with a firm purpose never to vnbury them, or to take them out of the
ground again? Think thou to be excused before me, while, thou now call
them, I can, and I cannot? That I cannot, which thou have said to thy
Superior, thou did not say to me. I know, what every one is able to do, or
not able. I see also what a Religious man has in his mouth, and what he
carries in his heart. And I know again, when not to be able, is not to have a
will for the shunning of some inco^modity, or pains taking. And though the
Superior accepts of his subjects false excuse, neither examineth, whether he
be truly able to do the thing, or no, that is commanded, yet he has no cause
to be therefore glad. For the whole matter consists not in that alone, it
will at some other time be examined at my tribunal, where the last sentence
shall be pronounced, that will admit no hope of any future appeal. For men in
censuring and distinguishing the truth of the thing, may be deceived, but God
cannot, who has a perfect knowledge of all things, both within, and without.

How acceptable to God the Obedience of a Religious man is.

CHAP. XXI.
SON, thou can not be ignorant, what was the end of thy first father Adam
and of his disobedience, namely, that not only himself was exiled and banished
out of the terrestrial Paradise, but he was further together with his whole
posterity made thrall and subject to malediction. The labors on earth, the
sweating in procuring bread to eat, the pains of women trauayling with child,
and all other miseryes, wherewith man kind is afflicted, be the punishments and
maledictions of disobedience, which because it is the daughter of Pride, can
yeald forth no other fruit, then it does. Thou know also what followed of
the Obedience of Abraham, that not only himself, and all his family, but all the nations of the world also be blessed in his seed, of which was to be borne
one, who by his obedience should set open the gates of heaven, that were by
disobedience shut up before: in so much as it may be truly said, that all
celestial gifts, and all graces and virtues be the effects, and benedictions
of Obedience.

2. Again, if Obedience, accompayned with my express commaundment, which
seems in a manner to force man to do what I command, be so grateful and
pleasing to me, as I abundantly reward it; how much more acceptable ought
Religious Obedience to be, in regard whereof a man of himself moved not by the
command of any, but for the sincere love of God, though the contrary
propension of his nature repugne, binds himself to perform my cou^sayles?
And where I know right well, that man is borne to high matters, and is propense
to design and undergo heroical actions, yet when I see him for love of me to
abase himself, according to the judgment of the world, to vile and
contemptible functions (though in my sight they be honorable and excellent)
when again I see him not to seek glory and applause of men, but rather the
contempt of himself: when I see, that he spoyleth himself of his own will,
which is the fountain and beginning of all generous works, by which a man may
merit greatest honors before the world: and when I see, that to please me, he
subiecteth himself to another man, his equal by nature, and oftentimes in
Religion also to them, over whom he had authority and a command in the world;
how, I say, can it possibly be, that I should not be most inwardly affected to
the Obedient? And that such Obedience should not be most pleasing to me, that
exciteth the Religious to do so great matters for the love of me? How should I
not raise them to greatest dignityes, who that they might obey for love of me,
abased themselves so far, even against the inclination of nature? He can
never receive any loss, who does much for God.

3. Obedience also pleases me, because it makes the subjects tractable,
prompt, and ready at every beck of the Superior: and nothing comfort and
helps the Superiors so much, as to have tractable subjects. O how do I like
that Religious man, who does with joy and alacrity go about the doing of
whatsoever his Superior shall have commanded him, and if he should be again
by his Superior willed to cease from the work he had begone, he leaves it as
gladly, and executes as readily any new work, that shall be commanded him.
On the contrary nothing troubles, and afflicts the Superior more, and
causes him more to groan under the weight of his government and office, then
to have subjects stubborn, slack, and hard to obey. An intractable beast does
not easily suffer burdens to be laid upon his back, and after they have been
with much pain laid upon him, he either throws them down, or carries them
with so ill a will, as a great care must be used, least he cast them down at
length. A Superior, that has hard, froward and stubborn subjects, cannot be
confident in them, and therefore if any thing though never so little, be to be
commanded them, there needs more circumspection, then if a man were to deal
with an unruly beast.

4. Hence it is, that where the subject should other wise respect, reverence
and fear his Superior, through the default of disobience the quite contrary
is done, that is, the Superior fears the subject, whom, least he should
give him an occasion of leaving his order, with the offense and scandal of
others, he leaves to his own will, neither commanding him any thing, nor
reproving him. O misery to be lamented! In the world he lived as he listed, not
at another charge, but at his own: but in Religion he has a will to live at
his own pleasure, and with my cost, and my blood, which as it cannot be done
without injustice, so neither can it go unpunished. Wherefore should I not hate
disobedience, which is so injurious to Religion? Why should not the disobedient
displease me, who be the ruin of their Religion? This is not the state of the
obedient. For the Superior lives with the obedient securely, without
distrust, without ceremonies, he is confident in the^, and if he command the^
any thing, though very hard, they most readily do it. He obeys without
difficulty, who imbraceth all commands without any excuse: but he, who forced,
yealdeth to the Superiors co^maundment, either does it not at all, or does it
ill. He indeed retayneth the rynd, that is, the external act of his labor,
but he loses the kernel, that is, the fruit of the merit of obedience.

5. Moreover I add, that Religious Obedience pleases me also for this, that
it comprehends many other virtues in it self, and exercises their actions.
For when the Religious man for obedience sake subiecteth himself to others his
equals, or inferiors, he exercises the virtue of Humility. If the Superiors
commandment that he does be hard, he exercises the virtue of Fortitude,
because he ouercometh the difficulty. If it be repugnant to the sense, or to
his own nature, he exercises Patience, because be exercises what he is
auerted from. If he obey for love of me, he exercises Charity: and so
Obedience makes the Religious man like unto me, because my obedience had the
company of these virtues. And seeing similitude is the cause of love and
benevolence, it manifestly follows, that all obedient persons be most
inwardly conjoined with me: and the more virtues go in company with odedience,
the more does the obedient merit.

6. Son, the gift is the more accepted to him, to whom it is given: the more
noble the thing is, in like manner it is the more pleasing, when excluding all
the vtility of the giver, it is only an argument and testimony of the giuers
inward benevolence and good will. Wherefore seeing Obedience is the gift of a
man's liberty, then which a religious man has nothing more noble, or more
excellent; it cannot but be to me most dear, and so much the more, for that to
the offering of this gift he was not moved upon any human respect, nor for the
vanity of the world, but for the only love of me. Though this also makes the
giver acceptable to me, that for such a gift bestowed upon me, he remains not
poor or imperfect, for that the more a man gives to God, the richer, and the
perfecter he becomes.

7. Son, Religion is a dear and beloved vineyard to me, and the rules and
constitutions of it be the branches of the vine, and as it were trees planted
therein by me, not without my pain. The worke-men be those, whom I call out
of the world, and do ^urnish with sundry tools, and talents for he good
husbanding of my vineyard. The ^eeper of it is Obedience, which apointeth unto
every worke-man what he is to do. All do indeed enter into the vineyard, but
^ll be not profitable unto it. The Religious who take pains in husbanding the
trees and vines, that is, obey my laws and ordinations, be most pleasing unto
me, and I have appointed them a singular hire, because they on their part do
maintain and defend Religion. But the disobedient, who spoil my vineyard,
cannot have a merry or pleasing look from me. For what is it else to forgo and
transgress the rule, but to cut off some vine, or to transplant it to some
other place? And what is this, but to dissolve and overthrow Religion?
Wherefore as much as disobedience displeases me, which overthrows Religion,
so much Obedience contenteth me, which sets it forth, preserves, and
increases it.

Of the Excellency and Dignity of Relgious Obedience.

CHAP. XXII.
SON, have thou at any time considered this saying of my scripture: A man
obedient speaks of victories. Know thou that there cannot either a greater,
or mo^^ wonderful victory be in this world obtained, then that of ones self.
Enemies man be overcome by stratagems, and frauds, an^ though they be overcome
by might and for^ of arms, yet they are overcome who (...) inferiors, or be at
least in fight become inferiors. But in the victory of ones self, the victory
is not obtained by art, or fraud, b^ by virtue, and he is overcome who is equa^
and ever remains equal. In other victoryes the higher the vanquisher is
raised, the more is the vanquished and overcome depressed and humbled, but in
the victory of ones self the vanquished has as high a place, as has the
ouerco^mer. In other encounters and fights enemies are overcome, and therein
passes hatred, ire, and indignation, but he that ouercometh himself,
ouercometh one, to whom he is most conjoined in love and freindship. And this
difficulty makes the victory the more glorious. Such is the victory of the
obedient, for that while he does voluntarily subject himself to another
command, he ouercometh himself. And this victory is so much the more noble
and glorious, with how much the more difficulty, namely against nature, it is
obtained. And in this victory there are to be ^ene many other victoryes. For an
obedi^nt Religious man makes the senses, appe^tes, add passions to be at
reasons command, and reason it self again together with her ^wne judgment
to be subject to the will and ^udgment of the Superior. And this also is ^ot
the least victory to yield and deliver up ^he honor of the triumph to another.
He that in battle turns his back and run^eth away, loses the victory;
but in obe^ience he turns his back, who refuses to ^ubmit himself to
another.

3. Again, Obedience is so stout a war^iour, as it also fights for other
virtues against all those, that oppose themselves against the Religious state,
and perfection. ^f the concupiscence make war against Chastity, Obedience
comes forth, and causes the will to deny consent, and to remember the Vow
that was formerly made of leading a chaste life. If the desire of temporal
things insult upon Religious poverty, Obedience rises up against it, and
persuades poverty to keep the promise of using no propriety in any thing. When
the Devil inciteth any to transgression of the rules of Religion, Obedience, as
a faithful defender of Religion, is in arms and stoutly stands against him.
As often as the perturbation of mind impugn reason, Obedience composeth them,
and causes every particula^ faculty of the mind to show obedience where it
should. By all these most nobl^ victoryes a conjecture may be made, ho^ great
an efficacy and glory is that of Obedience; and that a Religious man, as long
a^ he shall have so noble a champion to defen^ his quarrel, must needs fight
with goo^ success, and go away with many victoryes* The General of the war,
if he desire to have good soldiers, and to overcome hi^ enemies, must have a
special consideration and regard of them, who fight manfully with the enemy.

4. After that the Devil had by the sin of disobedience supplanted Adam, he
began to make great reckoning of disobedience, and upon his flag, which he did
set up, and display in sign of victory, framed this word, o^ poesy:
Inobedience the daughter of Pride, the mother of death, the worlds ruin, and
Religious bane and infection. By these he triumphed long. But I again raised
up and displayed the Crosses banner, whereon ending my life by obedience, I
overcame death and repaired the hurts by Adams disobedience done to mankind.
And therefore the ^otte or poesy of my banner is this: Obe^ience Humilityes
daughter, Spiritual life's another, the worlds Redress, and Reli^ious
Gouernesse. Of these commenda^ions, which be most true, thou may vn^erstand
the excellency of Obedience. For ^eeing it is humilityes daughter, whose pro^er
office is to exalt the humble, it cannot ^ut have a part in the same property,
as (...) to be seen in me, to whom it gained a ^ost happy victory over all
mine enemies, ^ccompanyed also with a most glorious tri^mph. Son, none can
continue stable and ^erseuere in Religion, unless he fight. He that fights not
under obediences colors, ^ust needs fight under disobedience, which (...)
Satan's banner.

5. It is out of question, that the excel^ency of the will, which is by a
Religious ^an offered and sacrified to me by the Vow ^f Obedience, adds great
force to the sa^rifice, since the will is not only the noblest ^art of man, but
also the queen of all the fa^ultyes of the mind. And the dignity and worth of
this sacrifice increases the more, ^he more I esteem of it. And how could I
^ot but highly esteem of Religious Obedi^nce, in which a Religious man
offers me ^is liberty, which all the world makes so great reckoning of? Is
not this gift such, (...) it should be held for great? For if I esteem^ greatly
of Poverty and Chastity, I am bound to make much more of Obedience. For Poverty
offers me the external goods only. Chastity for love of me only depriueth
the body of corporal pleasures, which be the goods thereof. But Obedience
offers me the internal goods of mind, which by how much they excel the
goods of fortune and of body, by so much the oblation of them is more
excellent, and more acceptable to me.

6. It cannot be denied, but that Abraham's obedience was most excellent, when
at the first word I spoke, he resolved to sacrifice unto me his only and most
loving son Isaac. Neither was Isaac his obedience less memorable, who to
obey me in the person of his Father, suffered himself to be bound, and out of
a most noble courage and heart, in the flower of his youth offered his head to be
cut from his shoulders. But I make no less^ reckoning of a good religious man's
obedience, which comprehends in it the perfection of the obedience of them
both. O^ Abraham indeed, because a Religious man does love himself as well, as
did Abraham his son: and of his son, because a Religious man out of as
great a fortitude of mind binds himself by Vow of Obedience, as did Isaac
suffer himself to be fast bound by his father. Neither does he with less
promptitude offer his own will to be cut off by the sword of spiritual Vow,
then did Isaac his neck by the material sword. Moreover by the difference
between Abraham's and a Religious man's obedience, it appears, that this is to
be preferred before that. For in that, a co^maundment was laid upon Abraham, in
this it was but counsel: that was only in will, this both in will and fact:
his act endured but for a short space, this man's fact for his whole life.

7. Son, will thou go beyond Abraham's obedience? Seek prompt obedience ^in
all things, for that God is no less pleased with Obedience in little matters,
then in great. Further certain it is, that no work though by the judgment of
the world it be thought honorable, is of any account with me, if it has not a
conformity with the divine will. Let a man dispose all his goods for the behoof
of the poor: Let him suffer persecutions, and be contemned: Let him die for the
faith; if these and the like works be not done according to my will, they are
neither pleasing to me, nor meritorious at all. But the virtue of Obedience, as
also of Charity her sister, causes a Religious man to conform his works to
Gods will, and consequently makes them meritorious. Add, that a creature
indewed with reason, is then said to be perfect, when it reposeth in the divine
will, neither has a will to any thing, but what the Creator has a will to. And
by what other virtue is the Religious man made prompt to obey Gods will, then
by Obedience? Who forces a Religious man to have a will neither less, nor
more then his Creator in whom consists true perfection, but Obedience? O if
all Religious men were so hearty lovers of Obedience, as the excellency threof
deserves, it would be much more reckoned of in Religions then now it is, and
there would be great store of perfect Religious persons.

Of the profit and vtility, that Obedience brings to a Religious man.

CHAP. XXIII.
LORD, though a Religious man receives many, and very excellent vtilitie^ by
Obedience, yet I would think it much better, if thou thy self without the
help of other Superiors, would command, and ordain all: for we would in a
most pro^p^ manner obey thee, neither would there be any place left for
murmurations, neither would thou ever give any occasion of ^omplaints; and in
few words, thy gouer^ing would be most sweet. And if that ^ay seem not to
have been convenient, ^et thou might have done well, if thou ^houldest
govern us by an Angel, who as ^e should be of more credit, and authority with
us, so would we more reverence him, ^hen men.

2. Son, all this that thou say, springs out of the fountain of self
love. If Religious men were spirits, it would be ^onuenient that they should be
governed ^ither by me, or by some Angel, but because they be composed of a
body, and a spirit, it is very agreeable that they be governed ^y a man, their
like; and the same requires ^he sweet providence, whereby the whole frame of
this world is governed. When I ^rought the world to the true faith, I sent ^ot
Angels, but men, and for men I govern ^t. I did also found Religions, not by
Angels, but by men, and therefore fitting it is, ^hey should be governed by
them. If here ^n Angel were a Superior, how often ^ould these, or the like
words proceed from men's mouths? If this Angel our Superior, had experience
of the troubles o^ the flesh, the burdens of body, and the miseryes of this
life, as we have, he would take more compassion on us, then he does How many
excuses would not take plac^ with an Angel, which now have plac^ with a man,
Superior? How many scruples would Religious men have, if they should be
governed by an invisible Superior? And more then this, every Superiou^ ought
to help his subjects rather by example of life, then by word of mouth; but if
the Superior should be invisible, he could not give any such example for
imitation: and therefore better it is, that the Superior be an Angel rather
in conditions and manners, then by nature. And where it is said, the the
Superior, if he should be an Angel should be more loved and respected by hi^
subjects, then if he were a mortal man, i^ not true. For whereas I am in the
Superior, he that loves not me, nor obeys m^ in a man, my Vicegerent, would
love an^ obey me less in an Angel.

3. Call to thy remembrance, wh^ my beloved disciple John wrote: If the love
not thy neighbor (quoth he) who^^ thou see, how can thou love God, who^
thou see not? If thou obeyest not the Superior whom thou see, how will thou obey thy Superior whom thou see not? But how great humility would it
be to be subject to an Angel? For whiles the Religious do for love of me
subject the^selus to a man, as to my substitute, and obey him, as they do me,
it is an act not only of great Humility, but also of Fortitude, Magnanimity,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, so much the more pleasing unto me, the more virtues
it goes accompanied with. He that ^ubmitteth himself to a man for my sake,
will less submit himself to an Angel. It is my will, that a Religions man
must do: And it little skilleth, whether it be declared by a man, or an Angel.
A regard is not so much to be had of him who speaks, or commands, as of
him, in whose name he speaks, or commands. Necessary it is that water
run into the garden, but ^it skilleth not, whether it be brought in by
conducts of lead, or of silver.

4. Son, do thou now desire to understand the vtilityes of Obedience? Te^l
me, if one should ride through dangerous rocks, and downfall places upon a
wild, and unruly horse, and one should be ready to offer his help and pains to
lead his horse by hand, through all those so many dangers, would he not think
that a special benefit were offered to him? No doubt, he would esteem it a
most great one. And if he should refuse to use so great a benefit, should he
not show himself a very mad man? Our body, untamed in regard of the disordred
passions, that reign in it, is this unruly horse. The errors that are wont in
the spiritituall life to be committed, be those downefalls and cragged ockes.
Our Superior is he, who is read ^o guide and lead our horses, that we fall not
(...) ^^ke then how great the madness of that Religious man should be, who
should refuse in so great dangers to be governed by his Superior? For them,
that want the skill of swymming, it is good to rest upon others men's arms. A
Religious man, who obeys, and permits himself to be governed of another,
swimmeth in his Superiors arms, and swimmeth securely in the waves of
spiritual dangers.

5. Another vtility is, that Obedience freeth a religious man from an infinite
number of molestations and troubles. Nothing tormenteth a man so much, as do
the anxious cogitations of mind, of which the miserable man, who lives in the
world, is meruaylously rent and gnawne, as is the viper by her young ones, which
she carries in her belly. And though he has not care of family, or of the
administration of the goods of Fortune, yet the very thinking upon his own
affairs and actions is too combersome. For he must not only consider, what is
to be done, but also when, how, and by what means. And this loathing, and
cross is again increased by the overmuch solicitude about the good ending
and success of the things that are to be done.

But all this is nothing, and nothing worth, if it be compared with the
cogitations of spiritual actions. For those, that they may be pleasing, must
be conform to my will, and if they be not done with Charity, and discretion, I
make no reckoning of them. And Obedience exempteth a Religious man from those
and all other cares, and cogitations, commending this one thing alone, that he
obey, and lay all the rest upon his Superiors shoulders, whose charg it is to
see, what, when, how, and by what ways every thing is to be done. It is in him
to procure all things necessary both for the spiritual, and temporal: for he
is the Father, the mother, master, prouider, directour, guide, and all. What
other thing then is it to live under obedience, then to cast his burden upon
another back? If you were entered into a wide wood, that almost had no way
out, and dangerous for the cruel wild beasts therein, and were further very
sore laden, should not he do you a singular pleasure, who should not only
bring you safe out of the wood, but also ease you of your burden, by taking it
upon his own shoulders? And what other thing is it to obey, the^ to travail
the more securely with a guide in the way, and without any burden to bear? He
that acknowledges not a benefit, neither regards, nor makes reckoning
whence it comes, or who is the author thereof.

7. There is added another vtility of Obedience, that the things which be good
of themselves, it makes more excellent; and what is of very little worth, it
causes to be had in greater esteem. He that moved by Gods grace, does of a
free will exercise a good work, does well, and meriteth a reward according to
the greatness of the work and his pious affection withal: but he that does of
Obedience exercise the same works, out of the same disposition of mind that
the other did, meriteth much more by occasion of the virtue, and efficacy,
which the virtue of Obedience adds to that work. And more then that,
Obedience is so fruitful, and of such power, as it makes the works that are
of necessity, more noble also, and those that of themselves are not praise
worthy, as be the actions of eating, drinking, sleeping, walking etc. if the
Religious do them by obedience, pleasing unto me, which I also reward according
to the measure of the pious affection and Charity they be done withal. And it
sometimes happens, that the Obedient without doing any work, makes more
spiritual gain, then he who does the work.

8. The Religious, who has a desire to fast for the punishing of his flesh,
for his sins, and yet for Obedience sake forbeareth to fast, meriteth more
before God by not fasting, then does another fasting of devotion. For this man
has the only merit of his fasting: but that man has merited not only the good
of fasting, because he was of his part ready to do it, but also the merit of
Obedience. Judge thou now, whether that be not a priuiledg, both profitable and
healthful, which I have conferred and bestowed upon the Religious, by the
benefit of Obedience. And how am I affected, think thou, unto them, who are
so little devoted to obedience? O what a detriment and loss sustayneth that
man in his spiritual goods, who does all of his own will that he might do by
obedience. Every good work, great or little, if it be signed with the seal of
Obedience, is of great esteem and price, as well in heaven, as in earth.

How it is convenient, that a Religious man be studious of Obedience.

CHAP. XXIIII.
SON, if thou be resolved with thy else to imitate me, necessary it is, that
thou have an earnest desire to embrace the virtue of Obedience, and make thy
self fit for the performing of perfect obedience. Remember that I assumed, and
took upon me the form of a servant, that I might subject my self to men, and
obey them for thy souls good. Neither did I propose alone, and openly
profess, that I was come not to do mine own will, but the will of my Father
who sent me; but I began also very tymely to obey the precepts of his law,
whereunto I was not yet bound, neither might I be drawn from the observation of
the^ either by shame or confusion, or for any danger of life. And as my
disciple and Evangelist John wrote, I called Obedience, my Meat. And not
without cause, since there was not any thing in this life, wherein I took so
great a pleasure, as in doing of my heavenly Fathers will, in so much as
whatsoever happened bitter or sower, became to me sweet thereby. For this cause
the Chalice of my passion, which was to my humanity most bitter, was most
readily accepted of my spirit, as a most sweet cup, because it was offered me
with the band of Obedience by my Father. What Religious man then can with
reason refuse obedience which was meat to me? It is an ill sign when the
Lords and Masters meat cannot content the servant.

2. But what can it be, Son, that pleases thee not in Obedience? It is,
because thou see thy self in subjection to a man? or that thou art ashamed
to be commanded by another? I am the Lord of this universe, I am the wisdom
of my heavenly father, and yet was I in subjection to men; neither that, by the
way alone, or for a few times, but even from the time of my coming into the
world, until my most ignominious death upon the Cross. Neither obayed I the
good and just alone, as my Mother, and Joseph my fosterfather, but the unjust
and wicked Judges also, as Annas, Caiphas, Herod, and Pilate, who though they
knew me to be unjustly accused, nor that any thing of that which they wickedly
objected, could be proved against me, did nevertheless condemn me to be
crowned with thorns, to be whipped, and to the Cross it self; all which I
tolerated with patience, without making of any appeal, or using any Apology
for my self: and more then that without speaking any word at al. I also obeyed
their perverse servants, who did without cause buffet me, spit upon my face,
and most ignominiously dragged me up and down through the public streets. And
of all this I complained not, and though I might have revenged my self, and
might most justly have punished the^ for the most extreme injury that was done
unto me, yet I did forbear, and did readily do all that they commanded me.
Tell me now, whether it be yet any hard and painful matter for thee to obey?
Thou art not for Obedience bound fast to a pillar, and there whipped as I was.
Thou stand not with thy hands bound at thy back, and with a rope put about
thy neck, drawn and haled through the streets of the City, as I did, and was.

3. Can it be possible, that thou should be ashamed to obey in good things,
that redound to thy glory and merit, when as thy Lord obeyed in ill things,
that made to his reproach, torments, and ignominy? Reason now, and consider
with thy self, whether it be more convenient promptly to obey the commaund^ of
Superiors, or to refuse, if any thing be commanded little pleasing thine own
appetite. And though it be an easy matter to do, yet the enemy will cause it to
seem hard and paynefull, that thou may either not obey at all, or that thou
loose the merit of Obedience. Thy parents Adam and Eve may be produced for an
example, to whom when as God had given a co^maundme^t to abstain from the
fruit but of one tree only in paradise, which was not any sore or hard
commaundment, since there were many other fruite-bearing trees in place, the
crafty enemy of mankind wrought so in their minds, as it might seem an over
hard commandment, and thereby the more easily draw them to transgress it. It
ought not to seem hard unto the servant to go on that way, which his Lord and
Master went before him with much more difficulty and danger: and though the
way should be dangerous, so it be not impossible to pass, yet meet it is, that
he go through.

4. Son, as long as the bird is loose, and upon her wings in the fields, she
does what she list, but when she is caught, and put in a cage, she does as it
pleases the owner. When thou were in the world, thou liuedst, as thou
listedst, thou did eat at pleasure, thou did whatsoever pleased thee,
because thou were thine own superior, which was then convenient for thee,
since in the world all make profession to do and govern themselves as they
please, and after their own manner. But when thou renouncedst the world, thou
did choose to thy self another Superior, who might supply my place, and
thou made profession of directing thy life, not after thine own will and
judgment, but after another. He therefore, who being in religion continues
to live after his own manner, as he did in the world, declares that he is not
yet gone out of the world to religion, or shows himself to be a Religious
man indeed in outward habit, who inwardly is a man of the world, or rather
neither the one nor the other. Where Obedience is not, there neither Religion
can use it own name, because they cannot long continue subjects, since they be
not conjoined with the head.

5. The chiefest bulwark and defense of a City, is the concord, and union of
the citizens: so the union and conjunction of the subjects with the Superior
their head, which obedience causes, is the safety of religion. Where Obedience
is, there is consent, and consent conserueth and strengthens every
congregation, though there be many in it. My Apostles were in number few,
abject, and contemptible in sight of the world, yet did they great matters,
because they were concordant, and so obsequious to me their Superior, as that
they might not forgo their Obedience, they chose to loose their lives.
Therefore he that neglects to obey even in small matters, knows not the
worth of obiedience, as the Apostles, and their Master did, who were more
ready to loose life, then to leave Obedienc^.

6. In the warfare of the world, the Obedience of the soldiers toward their
Generals and Captains is so strict, and so straitely observed, as they be
hanged for the very least disobedience; and yet those that serve in the wars,
make no Vow of Obedience at al, but only promise upon their oath to fight
against the enemy, and to defend, and maintain the City, or strong hold
against him. If then the temporal warrefare requires so exact Obedience,
neither permits any the least disobedience in tryfling matters to pass
unpunished; how great, upon just cause, should the spiritual and Religious
warfare exact, whereinto none is admitted, unless he bind himself unto
Obedience by a sollemne Vow? And how may any disobedience be tolerated in it,
since it is so proper in this warfare to obey the Superiors, as if obedience be
wanting, the spiritual warrefare must needs come to decay.

7. There be some who indeed refuse not a Superior, but they would not have
any thing commanded them by him, especially if it be hard, and troublesome.
This is not the desire of a good, and true Religious man, laboring to
perfection; but only to be willing to seem Religious in name, and not indeed,
and to wish that the Superior were a Statua or Image, and not a living man.
Others would have a Superior industrious and diligent in procuring
necessaryes, appertayning to meat, drink, clothing, and like commodityes,
and in all events to take a special care in patronizing defending, and helping
them: but they wis^ him not to be so vigilant in observation o^ Religious
discipline, which depends o^ Obedience. And this desire is much worse then
the former: for to wish this, is nothing else then to have a will and desire,
tha^ the Superior make his subjects, not good Religious, but idle and
slothful, who may have care of their bodies, and neglect to direct their
souls in the way of spirit; who may be a good companion, and a bad Superior.
The subject who has a desire, that his Superior should not perform the
office of a good Superior, does manifestly declare, that he carries himself
not for a good subject under him.

Of the first degree of Obedience, which consists in execution of any thing
commanded.

CHAP. XXV.
SON, thou must not think, thou have done much, if thou shall at any time
have done what thy Superior has commanded thee: for this is the very lowest
degree of Obedience, and common to all kind of subjects, whether servants or
bond-slaues: yea it is found in the very brute beasts, which go whither soever
their keeper drives them, and do whatsoever he pleases who has care of the^.
He is a poor and miserable religious man, who whiles he obeys not his
Superiors will, does less then the brute beasts. And though this first degree
of Obedience, which consists in the execution of that which is commanded, be
of it self the lowest, yet if it be kept as it should be, it is very pleasing
unto me. Four conditions and qualityes made my Obedience, that I performed to
my Heavenly Father, the more grateful, and these be, Promptitude, Entirenesse
in all points, Fortitude, and Perseverance. These make a Religious man's
Obedience acceptable, and the more easy be they, the greater the will is of
imitating me.

2. Not to obey with promptitude and speed, is a defect, and nothing pleases
me. If it grow of a cold and languishing will it is the more displeasing unto
me, because the effect is bad, and the cause worse. He that has time to do
what Obedience commands and puts it off, suffers the loss of time, and
puts himself in danger of not doing what he should. And if the Religious
differs to obey, because he is busied in some particular matter of his own,
he displeases me more, because he prefers himself, and his own business
before the business of his Superior. The truly obedient, that he may obey
perfectly, leaves his business begone, and imperfect. O how much do those
Religious please me, who if but a sign be given to do any thing that the holy
Rule, or Superior shall appoint, do leave off even pious works, they have in
hand, and come running to what is commanded. And they gain my singular
favor, who to do any act of Obedience interrupt the talk they have begone with
me in prayer.

3. Consider thou now, how little those are in my grace, who blinded with
self-love, least they should be deprived of any their least commodityes or
recreations, be dull and slow in accomplishing the work that is appointed them
by the Superior. And I am offended more, if they v^e the same delay, when t e
b^ll g^^ t^ a ^e to prayer, or other spiritual exercises. O now much do such
manner of men (...) themselves, and the Commaun t^ also, espec^^lly seeing that
when they are called to things commodious for their body, as to meat, drink,
recreations etc. they use no delay at all, but be diligent, prompt and ready.
Certs, it were better for them never to show themselves abroad: for where there
occurreth not any just cause of purging them, there is a manifest offense and
scandal given. Those that be condemned as slaves to the Gallyes for their
crimes, be so ready to obey, as that a sign is no sooner given, then the thing
is done and dispatched: and they are so quick and speedy in execution thereof
as whiles the thing is yet in doing they cry alowd, That it is dispatched. And
though they be so diligent and quick for fear of blows, yet the love of God
should make the Religious more prompt in this kind, since love is more strong,
and more effectual then fear.

4. Neither is this to be seen in the Gallyes alone, where a man shall see the
chains, and the mariners with whips in their hands, but also in the Courts of
great Lords. For I ask of thee, what is it that makes the servants so ready
and quick at the very voice, and call of their Lords? Is it the hope of
reward? But that is more liberal with me. Is it the love they bear toward
their Lord? But much greater love is due to me: for goodness and bounty, which
is the cause of love, is far more excellent in me, and the reward which is
expected from me, is without comparison greater. Indeed the slownesse of the
Religious proceeds of the want of love. If the subjects were better affected
to their Superior they would also be more diligent in fullfilling of
Obedience. In which kind the children of this world be more wise, and more
ready, then the children of light.

5. Another condition is, that Obedience be intiere: for such was my own
Obedience. It shall be enough for Religious men to love this entiernesse, if
they thoroughly understand, that this is my will, and such the Superiors
intention, that what is commanded be entierly done. There be those, who be
only ready to obey in matters of great moment, but not in little. To others it
seems enough, if they do part of the things by the Superior commanded, and
leave the rest undone. I know not who has made them Judges, or Interpreters of
Obedience. Neither do I know, whence they have learned, that it is not
necessary to obey to all that the Superior decrees or commands.

6. Let them say, when they vowed Obedience, whether they thought they were to
obey in all things, or but in some? Whether they understood, that they were
always to obey, or only for a time? And if they understood, that they were to
obey not in all things, but for a certain time only, who will accept of such
a vow? Surely I accepted not the vow of half, and mayned Obedience, but of that
which is entiere and whole. If some servant should do but part of those things
that were commanded him by his master. when he could have done the whole, he
should not be kept long in the house, and though he were still kept, yet in
giving up his accounts it would soon appear, whether one did owe any thing to
the other, the servant to the master, or the master to the servant. He is not
worthy of reward, but of punishment, who serves not at the will of his
master. Many live in Religion, with whom an account shall in the end be
taken, and then it will be understood, whether they merit reward or punishment,
who have not performed the whole and entier Obedience.

7. The third condition is, that obedience be done with Fortitude. The
Religious man pleases me not, who manifests a fortitude of mind in obeying,
when easy matters are commanded, or obeys willingly whiles matters go well
with him, and the Superior commands those things that be contenting unto
him. This is not true Fortitude, nor can a stout obedient person be well by
this way tried. Whiles a fair gale of wind blows, every ship sayleth away
merrily: and an infirm and weak man walks in a plain way. The Fortitude of
an obedient person is found and discovered in painful and hard things, as
when incommodityes, labors and pains be to be endured; when present
afflictions of body keep him not from doing the acts of Obedience; when the
courage gets strength in ouercoming of difficultyes.

8. O how imprudently do thou, my Son, whiles to the end nothing may be
often commanded thee, thou she^est thy self untoward in performing Obedience,
deceived with this opinion, that he is wont to be surcharged with many labors,
and offices, who manifests his own promptitude, and facility in obeying. For
what other thing is this, then to condemn the Superior of indiscretion, and
imprudency? Then to put away a most rich crown from himself? If I give thee
health and strength of body for the taking of pains, wherefore art thou so
afraid of labors? Art thou ignorant, that the more thy pains be increased,
the more is increased thy merit? Wherefore then suffer thou thy self to be
overcome of sloth and lazines? This is not Fortitude, but malicious
carelesnes. I did not so, who, when I could have brought thee to thy salvation
by easy means, did nevertheless choose the most difficult and hard for thy
greater good, as was death in the flower of my youth: neither chose I any
manner of death, but that which was most ignominious and bitter, before which
there went so many and so great torments, not only contumelious and
disgraceful, but also cruel.

9. The fourth condition is Perseverance, which if it be wanting, there is
obtained no Crown at all, nor is there any merit of Obedience. I did run the
way of Obedience till death, contemning and removing all difficultyes and
impediments that encountered me on the way. My Apostles also perseuered in the
observation of my precepts to the very end: and therefore he who by his
inconstancy either for some commodity of his own, or for other humane respect,
neglects to perform Obedience, is not a disciple of mine. To begin
Obedience, and after without just cause not to execute it, is a property of
children, not of Religious persons.

Of the second Degree of Obedience, appertayning to the Will.

CHAP. XXVI.
SON, thy will is a blind faculty and power, and thou art further blinded by
thine own passions, and so thou can not be a good guide thereto, least both
of you fall into the ditch. It must therefore needs rely upon me, and upon him
who supplyeth my place in governing. And this requires the second degree of
Obedience, namely, that thou not only subject thine own will to that of thy
Superior, and conform thine unto his, but that thou make his will thine,
which thou shall effect, if thou imprint thy Superiors will within thy soul.
Two slips sprouting out of this graffe, to wit, the Will, and the Nill of the
Superior, are diligently to be conserved, and if any other bud should
peradventure begin to peep forth, it is presently to be cut off, least it take
away the vigor and strength from the young graffe.

2. Obedience, which appertains to this second degree, requires three
propertyes, which make it pleasing unto me. One is, that it be voluntary; a
second, that it be merry; the third, that it be fervent. These three propertyes
have one common enemy which troubles them very much, and is named Repugnancy.
The Religious that ouercometh not this Repugnancy, is easily overcome, beccause
he knows not to obey cherefully and fervently: and if the Repugnancy proceed
from the superior part, what is voluntary, is taken away also. But tell me, my
Son, whence grows the Repugnancy, that makes thee so froward and backward
in the performance of Obedience? Is it peradventure of this, that thou
think, by subiecting thy self to a Superior, thou preiudicest thine own
liberty and honor? If thou be therefore sorry, and thy grief causes a
Repugnancy, thou have no occasion of being grieved, but of being glad rather,
seeing (as I said else where) he who for love of me submits himself to a
Superior, submits himself to me, the Lord of all; and in this he does not
a little increase his own estimation and honor, because he does a matter
worthy a generous and magnanimous mind. And whiles he does tread self love, as
it were under foot (which neither all, nor many do) he plainly declares, what
a regard he has of me, and of the love of me. If I the Lord of Majesty did for
the love of thee ^ut my self into subjection of men, and obeyed them withal
respective manner, why should thou be sorry, whiles thou subiectest thy self
to thy Superior my substitute?

3. Consider Son, that this is to be a subject: consider that thou art come
to Religion, not to command, but to obey. If thou would in thy Superiors
voice acknowledge mine, and if thou would consider, that to obey thy
Superior, is to obey me, thou would rejoice to have any thing commanded
thee, and thou would obey both fervently, and most willingly. To think
further, that in obeying thou forgoest thy liberty, is a notable error, when
as it is not only not lost, but also perfected: for as much as by the benefit
of Obedience it is conformed and conjoined to the divine will, which is an
infallible rule of working well, and therefore as long as man's will is
conjoined with it, it cannot but work well. Neither is it to be doubted but
that, that liberty which relyeth upon good, is more perfect then that which is
otherwhiles accompanied with evil. That is not lost, that is given to God, but
it is made more secure, that it may not be lost.

4. Wherefore the Obedience of thi^ second degree, that it may be pleasing vnt^
me, must be voluntary, and not forced* Some there be, who are afraid to be
employed by their Superior, and therefore they seek sundry pretenses, and
euasions to avoid it, one while by hiding themselue^ out of the way, another
while by excusing themselves, and sometimes by pretending themselves to be
busied in other matters; and if they be at any time sent any whither by their
Superiors commaundment, they go with a very ill will. Others had rather obey
one then another, as though I were not in all Superiors. But they plainly
discover, that they obey not for love of me. He that in Obedience given to
Superiors regards me, makes no difference between Superiors, but equally
obeys all alike. O how much be they deceived also, who make it no matter of
conscience, if they contradict their Superiors will in spiritual matters, as in
fastings, prayers, mortifications, and other things of that kind: for
disobedience forgoeth not the name of disobedience in spiritual and good
matters also.

5. Others again there be, who obey promptly in any business pleasing to their
^wne inclination and nature, and in other things that please them not, they
find a ^reat auersion, disgust, and repugnancy. and this is imperfect and
miserable Obedi^nce, because it is certain, that it has it ^ource from the
sping of self love. The mi^ery is the greater for this, that where such ^bey
unwillingly, they do not only loose their merit, but also by occasion of their
^isgust, and repugnancy they make the act of obeying the more difficult, and
hard: and the detriment and hurt which follows, and should be unto them most
sweet refection, is through their own default turned into bitter poison. For
he that obeys with a regreet. and unwillingly, ordinarily murmureth, is
angry, and gives an offense to others; and in place of a reward that he might
have deserved, if he had obeyed willingly, he does voluntarily procure his own
punishment.

6. Son, have thou a desire to be freed from these miseryes? Stir up in thy
self an effectual desire of obeying me promptly and sincerely for the time to
come, and crave this gift of him who is able to give it thee. Next, exercise
thy self manfully in all kind of Obedience, both great and little, and think,
that he susteyneth a great loss of spiritual gain, who obeys with an ill
will. He that is near to death, and dies not willingly, makes his passage
the more painful: even so he who does Obedience but yet with a repugnancy of
the will, is a more torment to himself, and therefore better it is of
necessity to make a virtue. He that is able to carry his cross upon his
shoulders, let him not trayle it upon the ground.

7. Some will indeed enter into the way of Obedience, but with this condition
that they may go before their Superior, not follow him. And these be they, who
when they have proposed in their mind any exercise, or business to do, they
seek by sundry ways to draw the Superior to their own mind, and therein
they be so anxious, and sollicitous, as if they compass not their own desire,
they are much troubled. Neither does their imperfection stay here, but they
further will do that exercise after their own way, and not after the manner
that is appointed by their Superior; and so their will goes before the will of
the Superior. He walks not in security, who carries his light behind him.

8. The Superior is he, who carries the light wherewith he must show thee thy
way, not thou him, and therefore thou must follow him, and not go before him.
Who draws his Superior to his own manner of doing, seeks not to obey his
Superior, but that his Superior obey him: and he that endeavors to draw
his Superior to have a will to that, which is in his own will, does prefer
his own will before his Superiors, and therefore his fruits shall not be the
fruits of Obedience, but of his own will, which he tastes of himself, and not
I.

9. Another property of this second degree is, that Obedience be merry and
cheerful, which arises of the former. For he that obeys willingly, obeys
also merrily: and he again, who obeys with an ill will, obeys with
heaviness and grief. A little Obedience done for love of me with joy, pleases
me more, then great Obedience done with an heauynes. He that obeys not
merrily, declares that he loves me not, because sad Obedience displeases me.
Moreover he increases his own burden, even as he who obeyth merrily makes
his burden of Obedience the lighter. O in how great an error is he, who
accustometh himself to a sad, and delaying Obedience, because he satisfyeth
neither me, nor his Superior, nor his own conscience; and within a while
there creeps upon such an one, a loathing and disgust of Religious
discipline, and after loathing there follows a most unhappy life. For he is
miserable and unhappy, who is not content with his own estate.

10. The third property is, that Obedience be fervent. Fervor arises of love,
and if thou love Obedience, nothing will be commanded thee that thou may not
execute both with joy and fervor. I know well enough, who serve and obey me
fervently, and who coldly, and I know again who they be, who can obey me with
more fervor, then others. O if Religious men would consider me present in all
their actions, and examine withal, how pleasing it is to me, and what a
pleasure to see the subjects manfully, cheerfully, and fervently to satisfy the
precepts of their Superiors. If they would also consider the blessings
wherewith I prevent such obedient persons, no doubt but they would be most
forward in performing the actions of Obedience.

11. Son, where is that fervor and heat, that thou had in the beginning
of thy conversion? Where is now that exceeding great love that moved thee to
desire, that many difficult and hard matters might be commanded thee? Can it
possibly be, that the greater knowledge thou have had of this very thing, the
less thou should do? The scholar, that is found more ignorant at the end of
the year, then he was in the beginning, deserves to be thrust out of the
school, and to be put to a more base and contemptible manner of life.

Of the third degree of Obedience, appertayning to the Vnderstand^ng.

CHAP. XXVII.
SON, this third and highest degree of Obedience, appertayning to the
Understanding requires that a Religious man think and judge that to be the
best, which is determined and appointed by his Superior: yea, and it requires
that the subject have neither a contrary, not diff^rent judgment from the
Superiors judgment. For the diversity of judgments is the cause of disquiet
and trouble. The subject, who in will only conspireth with the Superior, upon
the very least occasi n that may cause a difference of iudgmen s, may differ in
judgment from him; but he that is once conjoined b^th by will, and
understanding unto him, i^ not so easily separated in the one, or the other
from him. For the understanding teaches the will, that division is not
convenient, though sometimes in the execution of Obedience all be not pleasing
to the subjects mind. But whiles by reason he approves that to be well done,
whatsoever is ordained by the Superior, he puts the will in a quiet state.
This conjunction and conformity of judgments also profits to the perfect
execution of that which is commanded. He that not only wills that which the
Superior wills, but also judges that to be done, which the Superior shall
commau^d, obeys far more perfectly, then does he, who in will alone imbraceth
the Superiors commaundment. He that needs spurrs, is more helped with two
then with one, and two cords do more strongly bind then one.

2. Lord, I do not well conceive, how the subject may conform his judgment to
his Superiors judgment in all things, as he may conform his will. For since
the will is free, it may be bowed both ways: but the understanding, that is
drawn from the known truth, and is not free, cannot bend it se f, but that
way where the truth is: and therefore if the subjects understanding, convinced by
some reason, that represents a thing as true, consent unto it, and the
Superiors understanding, convinced by another different reason, inclyne
another way in the same thing, how can the subject in this matter conform his
own judgment to the judgment of his Superior, when it is not in his power to
revoke his understanding from the truth formerly known?

3. Son, what thou say, is true, when the truth is known; for then it so
conuinceth the understanding, as it cannot be induced, or inclined to the
contrary. But when euidency and certainty is wanting, the understanding, helped
by the will, may rather be inclined to one part, then to the other, and then
the Obedient, that he err not, ought to submit his judgment to the judgment of
his Superior, so as that he may not err in will, he submits it also to the
Superiors will. Neither yet, because many subjects be of more sharp wit, and
of a more mature judgment, then the Superior is, be they therefore exempted
from this subjection: for so long as they be members, they must be subject to
the head. But suppose, that those subjects be more intelligent for knowledge of
learning, yet in matter and manner of government, God ever gives greater
light to the Superior, then to the subjects, and therefore his judgment must be
preferred and take place before the judgments of others, and greatly to be
reckoned of, since I use him in the governing and conseruing of Religious.

4. But admit, that the Superior has not commanded something aright, which
yet is not accompanied with sin, whether does the subject therefore err
therein, if he obey? In no case. Is he deprived of the merit of Obedience?
Neither. Why the^ should he not submit his judgment in all things to the
Superior? When I was in subjection to my Mother, and to my foster-father
Joseph, I obeyed them both readily, even in those things, which I knew would
fall out better, if they had been done otherwise. It is not for the subject to
procure that, that may be best which is commanded by the Superior, but only
to attend to this, that he execute in the best manner whatsoever shall be
commanded, and suffer the Superior to appoint that which he himself shall
judge and think to be best. Neither must the subject forbear the executing of
the Superiors commaundment, though he be certain, that he should do better if
he did not. For the subject is not judge, but only the putter of that in
practice which is commanded, so there be no sin in doing it. This indeed is a
defect of them who would that the Superior should ordain what were best, but
yet they will not do it, though themselves be otherwise bound thereto.

5. That the Obedience of the Understanding is most pleasing unto me, is a
matter out of all question, since it gives the last perfection to the sacrifice
that the Religious offers, whiles together with the will he offers both
his Understanding and his own judgment, which is the noblest faculty of man.
Moreover it is known to all how vehement a propension nature it self has put
into man to the following of his own judgment, and yet a Religious man
restrayneth this propension so far, as for love of me he voluntarily subiecteth
his own judgment to another, which I esteem highly of, and is very profitable
to himself: for so he leads a quiet life, and most agreeable to a true
Religious man: and on the contrary, he that relyeth upon his own judgment, is
never at repose in any thing, and lives unquietly.

6. This third degree of Obedience has three propertyes. The first is called
Simplicity, which considering me in the Superior, causes the Religious man to
put his Ordinations in execution, without any examination, whether he should
allow them or not. O how displeasing unto me is the disputing Obedience, which
in whatsoever thing that is ordained by the Superior, ever asks wherefore,
for what intent, for what end this or that is appointed? I have not called thee
out of the world to dispute, or to examine those things that be by the
Superior determined and commanded, but to do them. And that they be done, it
is nothing necessary to know for what cause, how, and for what end they be
done. Wherefore let it be thy care to do so much of Obedience, as thou art
bound unto, and know thou, that it appertains not to the subject to enquire,
what end the Superiors have proposed unto themselves in their offices. If the
Patriarch Abraham had demanded of God, for what cause he would have him
sacrifice his Son Isaac, upon whom relied the benedictions of Nations, and
many other promises formerly made, his Obedience had not been so commendable,
neither had he merited so much as he did by simply obeying.

7. The truly Obedient seeks nothing, but to do the commaundment. O how
greatly did I favor those Religious, who in the command of Superiors would
not discuss and examine, whether they were profitable or otherwise, convenient
or not, or the contrary. Whence it happened, that commanded by their Superior,
they laid hand upon most cruel and fierce beasts, as Lions, leapt into rivers,
watered dry stocks for a long space together, and did many the like things, as
strange as these. And these left behind them on earth noble examples of
Obedience, and for them they have, for their simplicity in obeying, obtained
most glorious Crowns in Heaven. Son, desire thou, tha^ God should have a
particular care of protecting thee, as he had of those holy Fathers? Obey then
with simplicity.

8. The other property is Humility, without which neither Obedience, nor
Chastity, nor Poverty please me. For Humility is Obediences mother, and the one
may not consist, and stand without the other. The Proud will not subject
himself to any, and therefore cannot be Obedient, Pride, because it calls
the subject back from the execution of the Superiors command, both depriueth
of all merit, and increases the trouble.

The conclusion, of Religious obedience.

CHAP. XXVIII.
SON, perfect Obedience requires an abnegation of the own judgment, an
entier resignation of the will, and an exact execution and performance of what
is commanded. The true obedient regards not the person of him who
commands, and whom he obeys, but in him he casts his eye upon God, for
love of whom he obeyth. The truly Obedient cease not to obey, though he
knows that an error is committed in the manner of commanding: neither
relenteth he in Obedience, though the Superior be imprudent, or subject to any
other imperfection. He is deceived, who obeys, that his Superior may esteem
much of him, or that he may obtain something at his hands, because he is to
obey for the love of me.

2. The truly Obedient, at what time any thing is commanded, runs not away,
nor withdraws himself into corners, but rather offers himself readily to
what is commanded, or to be commanded. The true Obedient regards not,
whether it be from his chief Superior or from a subordinate, but he does with
a like promptitude embrace the commau^dments of both. He that had rather obey
in one thing, then in another, deserves not the name of a truly Obedient man.
He that more willingly obeys one Superior, then another, is not perfectly
Obedient. He that procures that to be commanded him which he desires,
loses rather then gayneth.

3. The truly Obedient searches not out, wherefore, or how this, or that is
enjoined him, but it is enough to him to know, that it is commanded. The truly
Obedient, to make Obedience perfect, leaves not his works at halfes, and
imperfect. He that obeys the Superior for that he is wise, loving, kind,
spiritual, dexterous, or liberal, is deceived, because he is to obey him
only, in that he is my Substitute, and holds my place. Reverence is not
exhibited to my Image and picture for the gold, or silver whereof it is made,
but because it represents me: whence it is, that the like honor is done
thereto, if it be made of paper, or wood, as there is when it is of silver, or
gold. In like manner al^ ^spect, reverence, and Obedience ought to be given,
and used to the Superior, not for the virtues wherein he excels, but
because he supplyeth my place, and represents my person.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of Religious Perfection. Wherein is handled the principal
Virtues of a Religious man: and wherein perfection most of all consists.
Of Religious Humility.

CHAP. I.
SON, it is good to speak of Humility, but better it is to exercise it by
deeds. What profits it by speaking, to deliver many notable sayings, touching
Humility, if in all that discourse thou seek after vain glory, and fondly
brag of thy self? The Humble, who thinks lowely of himself, busieth not
himself in his own commendable matters* but rather in remembering the praises
of others. He that seeks to seem Humble* and hunteth after the glory of men,
grows in pride, and the more humble he would seem, the more does his pride
increase within. An humble man, as he acknowledges all his spiritual goods,
and gifts to prooceed from God, so does he conceal them as much as he can, and
locketh them up with the key of modesty in some secret place. He does not only
repute himself in all his works unprofitable, but the more he labors, the
more he thinks himself bound unto me. For seeing he holds whatsoever good
he does, to be nothing worth, he attributes all his good works unto me: yea
he is ashamed before me, that I disdain not to use his service, that is, so
vile and contemptible an instrument, as he thinks himself to be.

2. O happy Religious men, who do within their breasts intertaine so pious
cogitations of Humility: for by this they show themselves the more precious in
my sight, and the more dear unto me, the more abject and contemptible they
make themselves for the love of me. These be those, who have found a fixed
seat in my heart, whom I most tenderly love, and with whom I ^reate and
converse familiarily. These be ^hey, whom I raise up and honor in my court of
heaven, in the sight of my eternal Father, and in the presence of my holy
Angels. In the Kingdom of heaven he has not the more honorable place who was
most honored on earth, but he who was ^he more humble: and therefore my spirit
does not without cause repose upon the humble, because he is diffident of his
own forces, and relyeth altogether upon my grace. I have reason to
communicate my grace to the humble, because they do for the love of me renounce
their own honor, and estimation, so greatly esteemed of in the world. I do
upon good cause bestow a most noble Crown upon the humble in heaven, for that
whiles they lived on earth, they took the crown from their own head, and
laid it at my feet.

3. Before I came down from heaven into the earth, I was most particularly
affected to Humility, and therefore I chose an humble Mother: and I was no
sooner borne, then that I began to exercise Humility by deeds. For when as I
was the Lord of glory, I became a servant, and subjected my self to men: and
in process of time I did set up a school of Humility, and such as resorted
unto it, I informed by deeds and by words to Humility until my dying day. In
like manner my Disciples made a profession of Humility. And this is the cause,
wherefore I had a perpetual war with Pride, for so much as I ever hated
Pride, the capital and sworn enemy to Humility, which I so tenderly loved.
And since the matter stands thus, let every one that is wise, judge whether it
be convenient, that there should in Religion, that is in my Family, any proud
Religious man have place, or that it were fitting that a proud scholar should
be admitted and received into the school of Humility. Hence it is, that some
Religious do not go forwards in spirit, because they be not exercised in the
book of Humility, which is the foundation of spiritual life, neither do study
to imitate me, who am their Master. It little profits the scholar to
frequent the schools, if he follow not his book, nor exercise himself in
those things that be taught in the school.

4. There be many amongst the Religious, who of themselves confess, that they
be sinners, careless, dull, slothful, and nothing at al: but if any other
should say so much of them, they are eftsoons troubled, moved, and murmr for
the matter, and seek to defend their own estimation and honor: and these men
are far from Humility. For a man in words to confess himself to be nothing,
and yet in heart to hold himself for something, is false and counterfeit
Humility. And to have a desire to be esteemed of others, is notable arrogance.
But the greater gifts an humble man has, the more does he abase himself
before others.

5. Desire thou to know, my Son, what Humility works in a Religious man?
First it inclyneth his mind to think submissiuely of himself: secondly, when
need is, it moves him to manifest his own vtility and baseness, even by outward
action. He that is lowly in his talk, going, conversation, and other his
actions, declares himself to be a contemner of himself. Moreover, true
Humility causes a Religious man to endure with patience and joy to be
contemned of others, and causes further that he be not only not troubled
thereby or murmr, but also that he most heartily give his Creator thanks
therefore, for as much as he knows, that by so doing he is the more likned to
me his Lord and master. True Humility also inclines to the shunning of humane
praises, and to the attributing of all that is good, unto God. Moreover the
Religious, who labors to the height of perfect Humility, must needs desire,
that he be contemned of all, and further wish, that all may be througly
persuaded, that himself is truly worthy to be contemned of all.

6. Son, if in Religion thou art ashamed of an old, or patcht garment, or
do not with any willingness exercise thy self in abject offices, it is a
sign, that thou do not serve under Humilityes Colors, but art addicted to
thy own judgment, and wishest to be much esteemed of others. If thou hold on
this way, thou will soon repent thy self. He that deuoyd of virtue, seeks
to be reckoned off, for that alone shows himself blame worthy. The religious
man, who hunteth after credit and reputation with the world, lives in
miserable state. Moreover thou love Humility, or love it not. If thou
love it not, thou shall never be a citizen of H aue^. the gate whereof,
because it is narrow and strait, receives not men proud minded. And if thou
love Humility truly, wherefore contemnest thou an old garment, and to be
contemned of others? What other thing is it to be contemned, then for a man to
exercise himself in Humility, to co^uerse with it, and by the benefit thereof to
make a spiritual gain? If thou love it, as thou bear me in hand to do,
thou should be glad when any such occasion presents it self. No merchant
is discontented, when any occasion offers it self of traffic to his gain.

7. Who art thou, which would not be contemned? Art thou greater then I who
am the son of God? Thou art not: and yet I was contemned of a most vile and
base people, and most injuriously handled by them. Art thou not borne in sin?
Art thou not a sack of earth, full of infinite miseryes? Wherefore then art
thou moved and angry, if any one lay thy baseness before thine eyes, and who
thou art, which thou should confess thy self? What does it, wretch, avail
thee to have left the world if in Religion thou continuest to be proud? O
blindness! when thou were in the darcknes of the world, thou thoughst pride of
life to be mere and damnable vanity, and thou conceyuedst honor and estimation
with men to be a childish thing: and now in the light of Religion thou
apprehendest the same for things of great worth, and of sing^lar regard. Is it
not a sign of a good sight, when a man sees better in darcknes, then in the
clear light.

8. Know thou for certain, that he cannot be a good Religious man, who hunteth
after commendations from men. Neither is any Religious man humble, who
acknowledges not himself contemptible, and wishes not to be so held and
reputed of others. And this is so certain, as if any think otherwise, he
beguileth himself: yea I say more, if it should be for the good of peace, and
for Gods glory, whether a religious man were contemned, or praised and
esteemed, he should conformably to the law of perfect Humility, wish contempt
rather then honor, to be deemed rather a fool then wise, because by that
means he is made more like to me. And this Humility greatly pleases me.

9. All do not rightly examine the mome^ts of things, or make an upright
esteem of them, and therefore my Prophet said to good purpose: The children of
men are liars in balances. Many there be, who for their Humility be of no
weight at all or very little in the balances of the world, because they be
held for base and counterfeit metal, and those very men be of just and
perfect weight in my balance. For men measure all things by the outward show,
but I cast mine eyes upon the inward, and upon that which lies hid in the
mind. And therefore many are of men contemned as vile, and rejected as little
profitable, who notwithstanding be for many respects in my sight to be
preferred before others, and so their Humility do, as precious stones, shine
beautiful in mine eyes.

10. The world only esteems the rich and mighty, who having received their
stipend of pride, are eftsoons puffed up beyond themselves, and do fill all
things with their insolences, and loftynes of mind. And these, though
disturbers of peace, do meruailously please the world. But the humble and
peaceable please me, whom I so much esteem, that I have a particular care of
them. And worthily, because there is not a virtue of more regard with me, then
is that of Humility: and more then that, no virtue is pleasing to me, that is
not founded in Humility. Heaven gates had not been opened to my Mother, who
was ever most dear unto me, if (notwithstanding her virginity and excellent
purity) she had appeared without Humility. One may get into heaven without
virginity, but without Humility none at all. And because, when she lived upon
earth, she most of all practiced Humility; and though she were the Mother of
God, and the Queen of heaven, yet she called and reputed her self an
handmayd, she merited not only to have a place in heaven, but also to be
exalted above all the quires of Angels.

11. There be some Religious, who complain that they find not that tranquillity
and peace of mind, which they had in their first entering into Religion: but if
they search out the cause, they will impute the fault to themselves. The cause
of their disquiet is the defect and want of Humility. The humble has peace
with God, he has peace with men, he has peace with himself, and which is
more commendable, he has peace with his adversary. For none may without breach
of peace deal with a proud person, but the humble. Yea the proud himself
esteems highly of Humility, because, least he may otherwhiles be contemned,
or ill dealt withal, he covers his pride and loftynes of mind with the cloak
of Humility. Son, have thou a wi^ to live a quiet life? Shake off pride: for
if i^ troubled the peace of Angels in Heaven* how much more will it disquiet
men o^ earth?

12. Lord seeing thou have created man for the obtaining the glory of heaven
which thou art thy self, and have bound him to seek so noble an end, whither
nature also inclines him; it seems nothing convenient, that he should not
humble himself, yea and abase himself so far, as he should contemn himself,
and repute himself for nothing. True it is, Son, that man was created to a
most excellent end, but we are to see and consider, by what means we must come
thereto: and therefore they who have raised up their throne too near heaven,
have been miserably thrown down into hell. For as the Wiseman says: Who makes
of another man's house his own, seeks ruin. Wherefore if thou desire to be
raised to glory, whereunto thou art created, thou shall not use any either more
secure, or more commodious way and means for the attayning thereof, then if
thou practice Humility This way held I, this way followed the Apostles, in this
walked all the blessed in heaven. He that shall take another way, shall surely
miss of his mark.

13. Son, suffer not thy self to be beguiled: attend now to the exercise of
Humility, which of humble persons makes Angels; as contrarise, Pride of men
makes Devils. Other virtues take away particular vices, that be the cause of
some sins only, but Humility takes away Pride, which is the root and head
of all sins. Humility causes, that the humble are dearly beloved, and
acceptable to all. True it is that I make no great reckoning, when the
Religious man does humble himself to those who yeald him honor and respect,
for that is easy and done of all But I hold it for a great matter, if he also
submit himself to them, who afflict and persecute him. It is not a thing worthy
of great praise, if a man humble himself to others in his aduersityes, or
whiles he is in great necessity and distress, but that he be humble whiles all
matters succeed, and prosper well with him.

14. There was never any Religious man yet, who has not wished the virtue of
humility, but al do not possess the same, because all do not labor for it as
it deserves. nor use the best means for the compassing thereof. How is it
possible for thee to get Humility, if thou never, or seldom use the company of
the Humble, when thou well know, that examples work greater effects, then
do words? How can thou be humble, if thou seldom humble thy self, since the
habits of virtues cannot be had withou frequented acts? Son, have thou a
desire of true Humility? Then lay before thine eyes thy own defects, and busy
thy mind rather in examining those things that be wanting unto thee, then in
those that be in thee; for an humble person concealeth his own good to
himself. It helps also often to call to remembrance, that thou art to dye. O
how many have there been more noble and more honorable then thou art, who be
now nothing but dust and ashes, which thou shall also be ere long. It profits
to contemn the dignity and honors of the world, and to hold them for mere
vanities, as they be indeed. It is good for them who be in place of dignity,
not to glory or be puffed up, but to fear a fall, for that it is not so great
a pleasure to climb high, as it is doleful, and hurtful to fall down again.

15. Son, have thou a desire to make an experiment of thine own Humility?
Thou shall know it thus. It is proper to the humble to shun their own
praises, as it is a manifest sign of pride to seek them. The humble is sorry
to hear himself praised, and the proud rejoices at it. The more excellent
gifts the humble has, the more carefully he concealeth them, thinking himself
unworthy of them: and he earnestly desires that they should be attributed to
God, and that himself be reputed vile, and contemptible. The humble gives
place to all, and serves all, as well his inferiors and Superiors. The
humble conuerseth willingly with persons of the meanest condition.

16. Son, wishest thou for the time to come to know, how much thou have
profited in Humility? Consider the crowns that Humility presents her
followers: for she is wont to give three crowns to the humble. The first, and
that which is of the lowest price is, when a man truly, and in his heart
thinks himself worthy to be contemned. The second is of greater price, when
he bears the contemning of himself with patience. The third, and richest
crown is, when he is glad he is contemned and loves him who contemns him.
And now consider, which of these three crowns thou have deserved.

Of a Religious man's Love toward God.

CHAP. II.
SON, Charity is a fruit-bearing plant, which the deeper root it takes in
the Religious man's heart, the sweeter fruit it brings forth. Two branches do
spring therout; the one mounteth upwards, and imbraceth God, the other boweth
downwards, and imbraceth the neighbor: it imbraceth thee with both for the
saving of thy soul. For thou by loving God and thy neighbor, love and
gaynest thy self, even as by hating God and thy neighbor thou hate and
vndoest thy self: Of loving ones self much, there is a special commaundment,
as there is of loving God and our neighbor: for he who loves God and his
neighbor, loves himself. Of these two branches depends the whole Law, yea
they be a short summary of all that is written, either by the Prophets, or
Evangelists. Charity is said to be a celestial virtue, and that not without
cause, because amongst the Theological virtues, that only mounteth up to
heaven, whereas other virtues only enjoy the fruits, but Charity enjoys both
the fruit and tree together. Charity has a different effect from Humi^ For
this being founded in the knowledge of man's baseness and misery, so far
depresseth and humbles a man, as it causes him to esteem himself for
nothing at all: but charity relying upon the majesty of the increated goodness,
raises a man up to heaven, and makes him to enter into the very bosom of his
Creator, the Ocean of infinite goodness.

2. My Scripture mentions many praises of Charity, thereby to induce all to
love it. One while it is called the Band of Perfection, because it so strongly
binds man's will with me, as we become as it were one, for that is proper to
love, to transform him who loves, into the beloved, and this is the greatest
perfection that a man can have in this life. Another while it calls it the
life of faith, the form of all virtues, the prime fruit of the holy Ghost, and
(to comprehend all the praises of it together in a word) it says, that God
himself is Charity, and he that is in Charity, is in God, and God in him. And
what excellency is to be compared with God? What more security is there, then
to be in God? and what greater pleasure can a man have, then to have God with
him. Charity works great matters in a man that is possessed of it, as
contrariwise, when a man is without it, he sustaineth great detriments and
hurts, and occasion is given him of many and sore falls. When the soul is by
death separated from the body, life instantly leaves a man, and all the beauty
of the body ^s gone: even so charity is no sooner dead in (...) man, then that
the spiritual life cease, the actions of life everlasting fail, and the
spiritual seemelynes so pleasing unto me, perishes clean away. Without
Charity I acknowledge none for my friend, neither be any virtues pleasing to
me, if Charity has not ordered them. If a man speak the language of all
nations, and should have the knowledge of all sciences, and yet be without
Charity, it does him no good. And though he should give all that he has to the
poor, and yet shall not have Charity, it profits nothing. And if a man
should deliver his body so as it may burn, if Charity be wanting, it is
nothing.

3. Go to, tell me thou, who in Religion have no regard or esteem of Charity,
what will it profit thee to have renounced the world, and to have left all that
thou did possess therein, to have given over all pleasures of the flesh, and
to live in subjection and command of another, if thou be without Charity? Do
thou peradventure think, that all this is said of secular persons, and not of
Religious? Thou art deceived: yea thy pain and punishment shall be so much the
greater, since for this end I have called thee to religion, that disrobed of the
worlds clothing, thou might clad thy self all over with charity. But if
thou now have so little regard to attend upon my table in thy wedding garment,
know thou, that to thine own hurt, thou art one day to be thrust down into
utter darkness for the same. If the fire that I brought down with me from
heaven, be not conserved in Religion, where will it be kept? If Religious be
not amongst the first who warm themselves with it, who will be? To stand
nearest to the fire, and not to receive the heat thereof, is a bad sign. It
does not a little displease me, to see a secular man set on fire with the love
of God, and a Religious man to freeze for cold. If a secular man exceed a
Religious in store of merits, because he shall have exercised more acts of
Charity, it manifests that a Religious man is worthy of great reprehension.

4. Son, thou have an obligation of loving me much, not in regard I have made
and framed the world for thee, or for that I have given thee thy being, and
whatsoever thou have in this life, or else for that I have delivered thee from
the servitude of the Devil, and from the perils and miseryes of the world;
but for that I have tendered thee with so great love until this present hour.
Love is the first and greatest benefit of all, that has been conferred upon
thee. For that I made the world for thee and thy sake, proceeded from the
fountain of love: that I suffered and dyed to save thee, love was the cause:
that I drew thee out of the storms and miseryes of this world, love alone
effected it. And will thou not deem it for a singular favor, that I the Lord
of glory, and King of majesty, have prevented thee, a poor worm of the earth,
with my love, without any one desert of thine? What necessity moved me, or what
vtility and profit drew me to cast my love upon thee? And therefore needs must
thou be more hard then the flint, if by me prevented with so loving a gift,
thou love me not again.

5. Lord, if I were to repay thee any thing, that by right ought first of all
to be mine: for it is impossible, that I should render thee any thing
correspondent to thy love. When thou createdst me, thou gave me to my self:
when thou redemedst me, thou gave thy self for me, and gave me to my self
again. If then, because thou createdst me, I owe my self all unto thee, what
shall I give thee for repayring and restoring me lost and undone? What shall I
give for thee, for having been offered up for me: and if I were able to give my
self every moment a thousand tyms for thee, what am I compared with thee? And
therefore I sincerely confess and acknowledge, that I am indebted unto thee so
much the mo e, the more noble, and more deserving thou art, then I.

6. Lord, if it be true, as it is most true, that my soul, body, life, works,
and whatsoever good I have in this would, be al thine, and that I am for a
thousand respects bound unto thee; I ought to confess, that I acknowledge
nothing in me to be mine own but imperfections, defects, and sins. But I
should be most injurious unto thee, if in requital of my love to thee for thy
love, I should offer them unto thee, which be not only nothing pleasing unto
thee, but thou also extremely hate, as contrary to thy holy will, and desire.

7. So it is, Son, but yet something there is in thee, that is thine, and to
me most acceptable, and that is thy love, which thou can and may use at thy
pleasure, since thou art Lord and owner thereof. For this is not only pleasing
unto me, but also makes all thy actions acceptable to me, and more then that,
nothing can content me, that goes not accompanied with it. And meet it is,
that since I first have loved thee, ^hou again love me, seeing love cannot be
^equited but with love again. And though (...) had done no more for thee, the^
that I made ^hee worthy of my love, this one benefit ^lone should have been
enough to have set ^uen a frozen heart on fire with the love of ^e.

8. It is true, Lord. O my soul, if thou ^houldest not be set on fire with
Charity in ^his glowing-hoate, and divine furnace of ^he love of my Savior, I
know not who will deliver thee from the everlasting free^ing cold? What father,
or friend has ever ^o loved me, as has my Redeemer? He has ^ot loved me with
the love of seeking his ^wne commodity, but with a sincere love because he had
ever a regard to my salvation, and not to any profit of his own. For when he
was blessed in himself, and was ^dored of the Angels in heaven, he came ^owne
into the world for me, and became my brother and friend, and drank up the
^itter cup of his passion, that he might deli^er me from death everlasting:
wherefore ^et me love him, and though I cannot love ^im with an infinite love,
as he deserves, since he is infinitely good, yea and goodness i^ self, yet let
me at least love him withal^ my heart. He is to be loved of me, as my father,
and a most clement father, as a mo^ munificent giver of all that I have, as my
most compassionate comforter in all my distresses, as a most diligent steward
and procuratour in all my necessityes, as a most abundant and liberal rewarder
of all my good works, since neither eye has see^, nor understanding of man can
conceive, what God has prepared in heaven for the^ that love him. If he at any
time chastiz^ us, we must love him the more affectuously for it: for
punishments inflicted of love, hurt not. Every one who chastizeth is not an
enemy, as neither every one is a friend that forgiueth. Wherefore seeing, even
when he punishes, he is an amiable Father and a Father of mercies, it is to be
thought that, if he do it, he does it for our good.

9. O my soul, not to love God, as h^ is to be loved, is not to love him at
all. H^ ought to be loved respectfully, not for the good or evil he can or may
do us in this o^ the other life, but for himself: and all other things are to
be loved in him, and for him. He must be loved strongly, for Charity puts
away all vain fear, and ministers ability, and courage to overcome all
difficultyes, and to bear all aduersityes patiently. He is to be loved with
all the heart, with all the soul, with all the mind, and with all the forces.
And to love with all the actions inward and outward, is to love wisely,
sweetly, fervently, and continually. He is to be loved above all things, and
so we shall love him, if we prefer him before all creatures, if we would choose
rather to dye a thousand deaths, then to offend him by one mortal sin.

10. Son, not all that think they love me, do so: neither all who think
they intertaine Charity at home, do it. Charity being the queen of all
virtues, enters into no man's house, unless be she intertayned as a Queen,
neither stays she therein, unless he receive her as a Queen, and honor her
for such. Moreover I am to be loved, not by words, but in deeds, and my will is
that love be manifested by works, and not by the tongue alone. How do thou
love me, if thou seldom think of me, and when thou think of me, thou
do it only by the way passing, and in a languishing manner? This is not to
love with all thy heart, not with all thy mind. How do thou love me, when
whole days, weeks, and months pass, that thou speak neither of me, nor of
any thing appertayning to me, nor do not willingly hear them who treat of
good matters?

11. Love, shut up within the breast, can neither forbear to speak of me, nor
stop the ears from hearing men talk of me: and how can thou with truth
affirm that thou love me, if thou attend not to those things, that I speak
unto thee in thy heart? Or if thou be attentive, wherefore do thou not regard
them? Who loves truly, suffers not any word of the beloved to fall in vain
out of his mouth, but lays them up within his heart in store, and there
diligently examineth them and reflecteth upon them. How do thou love me, if
when thou art able, thou do it not, or give not with a ready mind, when any
thing is asked or demanded of thee for the love of me? It is not hard for a
true lover to repay less love to the beloved, who has given him his heart
before, and more then that himself also. How love thou me, if thou will not
suffer any incommodity for my sake, not expose thy self to any danger? Who
loves from the heart, will not stick to dye for his beloved.

12. How can thou say, thou love me, if in observing my commandments thou
find so great difficulty, and art so negligent, as thou may seem not to
keep them, but forced, and against thy will? Love may not endure delay, neither
is it disgusted at all, but does with great alacrity the will of the beloved.
How can it be, that thou love me with all thy soul, when thou art so greatly
devoted to thine own estimation, and to other tryfling things, that agree
very little with my will? He that loves another besides me, and not for me,
either loves me not at all, or loves me not as he should. How can thou
affirm, that thou love me, if thou neither ^oue, nor respect thy Superiors,
as they deserve, who supply my place, when as I have plainly declared, that the
honor, or contempt, that is done to them, is done to me? He loves not truly,
who conformeth not himself to his beloved.

Of the Religious man's Charity to his Neighbor.

CHAP. III.
SON, thou shall find some in the world, who desire not, that any honor ^e
given them: thou shall find those, who refuse dignityes, and honors, thou
shall find also those, who receive not the gifts, favors, or presents that
others give unto them, but thou shall not find him, who dereth not to be loved
of others, especially with due and respective love, which for that it causes
unto the beloved neither suspicion, nor disgust, is wont naturally to please.
Many love their neighbor, but they know not how to love, and therefore their
love is otherwhiles fruiteles, as also hurtful. I gave a commandment of loving
thy Neighbor, and declared the manner of loving him. If thou love thy
Neighbor, because he is thy kinsman, or friend, or because he is thy
Countryman, thou do nothing, this is not Charity tending to Heaven, but
natural love, creeping upon the earth, and common to Infidells, and
Barbarians. If thou love him for any commodity or gain that thou receyuest of
him* or hopest from him, thou love thy self (...) not thy Neighbor, and
this is calle^ Love of Concupiscence, neither is it of an^ longer continuance,
then is the profit hoped for thereby. To love our Neighbou^ for our own
commodity, is not Charity but rather merchandise.

2. Charity truly effects, that the Neighbor be loved, because he is created
to my likeness, and is capable of everlasting bliss. True Charity disposes,
that our Neighbor be loved for God, and in God, and he that loves after this
manner, loves all, the poor equally with the rich, the nobly borne, and the
ignoble, he imbraceth all, and wishes them life everlasting. He loves them as
well in time of adversity, as of prosperity: for he who cease to love his
Neighbor, in time of necessity, manifests plainly, that he loves him not
for me. All this I understood, when I commanded a man to love his Neighbor as
himself, that is, that thou should wish unto him, what thou wishest to thy
self. And as thou must love thy self ^n God, and for God by obeying his law
on earth, that thou may afterward have thy reward in heaven: so ought
thou to love thy Neighbor, as capable of the same beatitude with thee. O if
the Religious would observe this manner of loving their Neighbor, there would
not be seen so many partialityes in Religions and Churches.

3. Some be loved most of all, because they are learned, and kind, others
because they be rich, and in grace, others because they are gentlemen, or of
noble blood, and those that be not such, they regard not. O fraud, and deceit!
What has Charity common with learning and riches? as if a man that is not
rich, or learned, or well apparelled were not to be loved? Charity has in the
first place an eye to me, and for that cause loves all in me. But there is
another misery more to be pitied, that some do therefore love others, because
they have the same complexion of nature, and of blood with them. This is not
Charity, but a carnal affection, an enemy to true Charity. Charity dilateth it
self far more wide: for it extends it self to all, because all be created
to eternal glory, and all be ransomed with my blood.

4. Son do not put thy self in danger, both of hurting thee, and of
offending me, and therefore regard not the complexion and inclination of blood:
if thou do, under the pretense of Charity, thou will foster sensuality, which
will soon deceive thee, and will draw thee, and not thou it, into a place, out
of which thou shall not find means of getting out again. Though the whole
Evangelical law be mine, because I made it, yet did I particulerly name that;
of loving the Neighbor, my commaundment, to give thee to understand, how
pleasing to me was the sincere love of the Neighbor. I would also that Charity
should be the badge and cognizance, whereby my Disciples were to be known, in
so much as there should not be any of my school, or of my sheep, who loves not
his Neighbor, as himself. Charity also is a sign of love, that a man
carries toward me.

5. Thou art deceived, my Son, if by not loving thy Neighbor, thou think
thou may love me. He that loves not him whom he sees (said my beloved
Disciple) how shall he love him, whom he sees not? It is true indeed, that
the love toward God the creator, must go in the first place, out of which the
love to the Neighbor may rise; but it is true with all, that the love of the
Creator is conserved by the love of the Neighbor, and therefore if this
languish, that must needs faint with all. Many think they are my friends, and
yet are not, for the malice and little good will they carry to their
Neighbors. I am not a friend of an hard and perverse heart. Not to love, is a
sign of a fierce mind, but to hate is an argument of a wicked and cruel heart.
Love if thou will be loved, and love all, if thou desire to have me for thy
companion; for that if thou except but one from thy Charity, thou shall also
thrust me out of thy heart with him. If thou being Religious, wilt not love one,
because he has offended thee in some thing, what difference will there be
between thee, and a secular man, who follows the vanity of the world? My
disciples did not so, who neither hated, nor hurt, by the least word those who
had injured them, but were very glad, if they had at any time occasion of
suffering any thing for the glory of my name.

6. By what example can thou be more stirred up to love thy Neighbor, then
by that of my heavenly Father, who notwithstanding he had received most
frequent and grievous injuries at the worlds hands, did nevertheless carry so
tender affection toward it, as he gave his only begotten son for it. And
what did not I, being made Man, for my Neighbors, whiles I spent my whole life
to do them good? Whiles I lived, I was their guide, and companion, and I spared
no travail or pains at all, that I might show them the right way to heaven.
And more then that, I laid upon mine own shoulders all their debts, that were
obnoxious to the divine Justice, for which dying upon the Cross, I satisfied
for all. Neither was there here an end of my singular love to my Neighbor. For
at what time I was to depart out of this life to my Father of heaven, I left my
self in the Sacrament of the Altar, both that I might be man's meat, and that I
might unite my self unto him, and be ever with him: and also, that he being
strengthened by the virtue thereof, might one day mount up on high, where he
might forever enjoy those heavenly goods whereto he was created.

7. By this every one may judge, whether the Religious, who be invited to be
perfect, as my father of heaven is, and who make profession of imitating me
their master, ought by their very works to love their Neighbors, and to help
them in all they be able. Let it be considered and weighed, whether those
Religious be worthy of my love, who take no care of loving their Neighbor, or
else in regard of some very little incommodityes, which they fear, neglect to
help them, who crave their assistance. Let it be examined, whether the
injuries, hurts, and trespasses done them be any fit cause of not loving, or
not helping them, when as I suffered many far greater injuries, and yet did not
for that withdraw my love, but spent my life and blood to do them good. All a
Religious man's spiritual gain (who cannot patiently put up iniuryes, and
therefore will not do his Neighbor good) is converted into his own hurt. For
the injury is domageable to him, who does another hurt, and auaylable to him to
whom it is done, if he bear it with patience. If then the injury gives a
Religious man occasion of meriting, he has in truth no cause to be greatly
moved against him, who offers the injury. I never delivered such kind of
doctrine, I never gave my self an example in that kind, but always taught,
that good was to be rendered for evil.

8. Son, remember that thy self and all thy forefathers do take their
beginning from one, that is from Adam, and for that cause be bound to love one
another, as brethren, Call to memory my Apostle his words, when he says: You
are my members, and therefore there ought to reign that love amongst us, that
is amongst the members of one body. And by this thou may manifestly
understand, whether thou love thy Neighbor truly or no. He that either
little regards his Neighbor, or contemns him, though in degree never so
far inferior to himself, has not true Charity. Neither the head, nor the
eyes, which be the more noble members of man, do ever contemn the feet, though
they be inferior members, and less noble. He that is sorry for his Neighbors
good, or is glad of his hurt, shows that he loves him not, for that one
member either suffers, or rejoices in company with another. Charity deemeth
the Neighbors either good, or ill, as proper to it self. He that out of envy
and malice either extenuateth, or traduceth the actions of his Neighbor,
loves not me. It was never seen, that the hands would hurt the feet. He that
assisteth not his Neighbor, in what he is able, has not Charity. The e^es
never refuse to yeald unto the other members the office of seeing. True Charity
though it be prejudiced and hurt, is not moved to indignation, neither
practices it reueng, but helps the Neighbor, and excuses his fault.

Of the Religious man's gratitude toward God, for the benefits he has received.

CHAP. IIII.
TELL me, Son, what Father or Mother ever did as much to their children as I
have done to the Religious? And what Son has ever received so much from his
Progenitor, as have the Religious from me their Creator and Lord? Benefits
loose not the name of benefits, for that they be common to many, neither does
their obligation cease, because many have their shar^ and parts therein. I have
created thee, and made thee to mine own image. And if, as meet it is, thou
would consider and weigh this, it would be enough to bind thee infinitely unto
me. For by creating thee of nothing, I gave thee not whatsoever nature and
being, but a nature very noble, indewed with reason, free, and a commander of
al creatures under heaven: yea I have made thee chief and Lord on earth, and
have subjected to thy command the fowls of the air, the beasts of the earth,
and all other things created. And though all this be a very great benefit, yet
if it be compared with the end wheru^to I have created thee, it is none at all.
Wherefore know thou, that I have created thee to a most noble, and a most
excellent end, then which there is not any greater, nor can be in the world,
which is for all eternity to enjoy the sight of the divine majesty in heaven.

2. Do thou desire to see, my Son, how exceeding great the benefit of
Creation is, which is the foundation of all the other? Go to, tell me, if thou
were destitute of both hands and feet, what would thou not give to have them?
and if thou were dumb or blind, what would thou not bestow for the
recovering of both those facultyes again? Thou would questionles give the
whole world, if it were thine, and thou would rather lead a most poor life
with the use of those members and senses, then to be a king on earth without
them. And here hence thou may conceive the greatness of the benefit of thy
creation, by which thou have received a body, together with all the members and
senses thereof, a soul also together with all the facultyes, and life, with
all things necessary thereunto. Thou can not be ignorant, that by the greatness
of the benefit, an estimate, or guess must be made of the greatness of the
obligation.

3. Consider thou now, how much thou art bound unto thy Creator for this
benefit alone, imparted unto thee without any deserving on thy part at all.
Consider, how thou should show thy self very ungrateful, if thou should
not employ thy life, thy health, the forces of thy body, and whatsoever thou
have, toward the service of thy benefactour. Consider, how grievous a sin it
is to abuse the senses, and other the facultyes of the mind, to the offense and
contempt of him, who has graciously bestowed all those things upon thee. And
if the crime of ingratitude be so odiou^ and great in secular men, how great w^
it be in Religious persons, who have received greater light from me, and are
obliged unto me for many more respects? O how exact an account be the
unthankful Religious to make, who not reflecting upon the greatness of this
benefit, do either quite forget, or little regard it. And what marvel that
the ungrateful do not in this life receive new benefits, but be sometimes
bereaved of those they have already received? Ingratitude drives away the
Benefactour, even as gratitude inuiteth him to bestow greater benefits.

4. What I did after this for the conseruing of thee, is not inferior to the
aforsayd, neither bind thee less unto me. I ordained. that all creatures
should serve thee, some whereof serve for necessity, some for recreation, some
also for exercising both of body and mind. The heavens go their circle for
thee, whatsoever the sea and earth bring forth, it is for thy use. I have
ordained the Angels, so excellent creatures, to guard thee. Neither does any
cogitation seem to press me more, then of doing thee good in all things, in
so much as it may be truly said, that thou art the end and scope of all this
universe, since all is created for ^hee, and prepared for thy use and service.
If thou ask me now, for what cause I have prolonged thy life till this very
hour, when as I have dealt otherwise with many both younger and stronger then
thou art; certain it is, that I have not delayed it, that thou should hold
on to offend me by persisting in thine own ingratitude, but that thou
should rather amend thy manners, and indeed show thy self grateful to me,
thy Benefactour?

5. And all this I did for thee without any thy labor, pains, or trouble. But
for the redeeming of thee, and for the delivering of thee out of the miserable
captivity of sin, what did I not? When I was the son of God, and in supreme
veneration of all the court of heaven, for the saving of thy soul I came down
from heaven into earth, became man, and subiecting my self to the infirmityes
of man, I began to endure exceeding great pains, and trauayles for thy sake.
How many miseryes did I sustain, how many calumniations did I suffer, what
abundance of tears, and blood did I shed for thee? And more then that, I dyed,
that I might deliver thee from death everlasting, and free thee from the cruel
tyranny of the Devil. See, Son, how dear a price I paid for thee. See, how
by all right thou art not thine own, but mine. And know thou, that the benefit
of thy redemption, though it be common to al men, is not yet communicated to
all, neither do all enjoy the fruits thereof, because all have not received
the light of faith, by help whereof they may acknowledge and know the way how to
come unto me. And because thou art one of those, who have received very great
benefits at my hands, as having been borne within the bosom of holy Church,
and illuminated with my grace, and light from heaven, see thou be not ingate,
but use thy received gifts, least thou be deprived of thy felicity. He that
sees snares, and when he may avoid them, puts himself rashely into them,
meriteth to be punished: even as he, who sees not the snare, is worthy of
compassion, if he be upon the sudden caught therein.

6. I have again gone further with others in bestowing benefits upon them, as
with those, whom I have called to a more high and more perfect state, and
received into the number of my most dear friends, with whom I converse far
more familiarly then with others: and these be the Religious; whose obligation
is greater, then thou conceyuest, since there is not a moment of their life,
that receives not a new increase of one benefit or other. And if thou will
consider the matter well, they began to enjoy a benefit, before they were borne
into the world. Does it not seem a benefit unto thee, that I from all eternity
have without any their merit, out of my fatherly love cast mine eyes upon them,
to enrich them with my heavenly gifts? And have not I, since the time they were
borne, had again a peculiar solicitude and care of them? With how much
patience have I borne with their imperfections? What means and ways have I
used to draw them out of this deceiving world, and to bring them into the best
way? From how many sins have I preserved them, one while by taking away the
occasion of sinning, another while by giving them heart and courage to shake off
tentations, at another time by auerting their desires from hurtful things. And
now, what Law commands, or permits, that evil should be rendered for
good? What wild beast is so cruel, that would go about to hurt his
Benefactour? If ingratitude alone be worse then a wild beast, because it
repayeth the Benefactour with ill; if the forgetting of benefits be a thing
infamous, and worthy of reprehension, what will it be to offend the
Benefactour? There have been seen many Religious, who at the time of their
death have much lamented their own ingratitude, and have made a firm purpose,
that, if it should be their hap to recover, they would be most thankful, and
would be most diligent in serving of God here after. But these men became
wise, when it was too late.

7. Son, have thou a desire to avoid the detestable crime of Ingratitude?
Then differ not thy good purpose, but begin even now to answer thy received
benefits: for this is to be grateful. He is grateful, who is as much afraid to
offend his benefactour in the least thing, as he is of death it self. He is
grateful, who imployeth his life, hea^th, strength, body, and whatsoever
besi^s to his benef^ctours honor and glory. He is grateful, who is diligent
in his devotions, and in all his actions seeks to accomodate and conform
himself to the divine will. Contrariwise, that Religious man is ungrateful,
who carries not himself toward his Religion, as toward his mother and
mistress. The Religious that respects not his Superiors, neither yealdeth
them fit honor and reverence, as unto my substituts, is ungrateful. And no
less is he, who prays not devoutly for his benefactours, by whose help,
means, and industry I provide necessaryes for the intertaynement of the
Religious. Finally grateful is he, who desires to show himself grateful in
all things.

Of Patience, necessary in a Religious man.

CHAP. V.
SON, since this life is the unhappy banishment of Adams children, a man
cannot pass it over without much trouble and many afflictions: and therefore my
Church calls it the Vale of Tears, because there is not any state therein,
nor any place in which there is not occasion of lamentation. Let a man make an
election of whatsoever state he likes best, and let him have al temporal goods
and contentments at will, yet he shall not want troubles, miseryes, and
disgusts, and whence he least expects, thence will molestations, and
afflictions come upon him. For to excel in (...) a^ng, to abound in riches, to
have the favor of all, to command others, do not exempt and free a man from
this banishment, and vale of tears: and therefore as long as a man lives,
there is not wanting matter of sorrowing. All have a will to fly from the
Cross, but it hides not it self from any, neither is there one only Cross
in this life, but they are infinite. No place, no time, no state is without
aduersityes, and therefore better it is to seek a remedy against them, then to
fly from them. Some, whiles they put one Cross by, do fall into another greater
then the former, and where they thought to have found quiet of mind, they find
perturbations and troubles both of mind and body. The only, and present remedy
of all these calamityes is Patience, which preuayleth not by flying away, but
by resisting.

2. And for the understanding of the offi^e of Patience, thou must know, that
of the contrary accidents that befall men in the banishment of this life, there
arises in a man's mind so great an heaviness and grief, as it obscureth reason,
and troubles the mind. And as a fever in the sick hinders the actions of the
body, so does sorrow disturb and hinder not only the good actions of the mind,
but further opens the gate to many inordinate desires and sins. And for
this cause it is written of the Wiseman: Sorrow has kill^ many, not only by a
corporal death, but by a spiritual also. And Patience is a virtue, that
tempering and moderating the grief and heauynes, that is occasioned by
tribulations, conserueth and armeth Reason that she be not put from her
standing, and ouerthrown by the inordinate desires and passions of the mind.
And this is nothing else, then to stop the entrance against many errors and
defaults, that befall whils the mind is unquiet, and the Reason troubled. And
therefore in my Scripture it is said, that Patience has a perpetual work, for
that when the sorrow, and grief of mind is once moderated, all the hatred,
indignation, revenge, and other the evils which are wont to rise of those
perturbations, are the more easily diuerted, and put by. And when the Reason is
once free from all perturbations, it happens, that a man executes the works
of virtue after an entiere and perfect manner. Hence it is, that some call
Patience the keeper and conseruer of virtues, and not without cause. For virtue
cannot exercise their power, when Reason is troubled, and the mind disquieted,
and therefore they need the help of Patience, that keeps the reason free from
perturbation, and the mind from disquiet, and consequently the virtues be
conserved also. The house that has not one within to keep it, is easily
spoiled.

3. For to cure the deseases of this present life, there be used three kinds of
Antidots. The first is that which the Physicians prescribe, and this does not
always cure or help, yea sometimes it hurts. For the Physicians often find
not the cause of the sickness, and therefore they cannot well apply any cure unto
it. The second is prayer, whereby recourse is made to the heavenly Physician,
who as most wise, has a perfect knowledge of all diseases, and being
omnipotent, is of power to take them away in an instant. And this medicine,
though it does ever good, does not for all that restore the health at all
times. For the heavenly Physician ever prescribes a remedy, that is expedient
for the sick person, but corporal health is not ever good for the sick, and
therefore God does not at all times give it him. The third Antidote is Patience,
which always cures, being healthful both to body and soul, and helps not
the sick alone, but the standers by also for the good example that is given
them. And this third Antidote is so proper to Religion, as the Religious, who
either make little esteem thereof, or use it not, be always sore sick. The
sickness and infirmity is evil enough, when the mind is disquieted by
impatience.

4. Son, what is the cause, when any thing befalls troublesome unto thee in
Religion, when some great labor is to be undertaken, or adversity to be borne,
thou do not use Patience, but art troubled, murmurest, and afflicted? Have
thou not given over the world to suffer aduersityes for the love of me? Have
thou not resolved with thy self to endure all things, though sore and
painful, for the good of thy soul? Whence is it then, that when any occasion
offers it self of accomplishing thy so pious desires, thou resistest the
same, and art troubled? Cast thine eye a while upon me, and tell me, what sin
I did commit in the world? Whom I offended all my life long? and yet from the
time that I came into the world, I ever suffered something, and swallowed down
many a bitter morsel for thy sake. How many contumelies were forged against
me, how many iniuryes were done to me? which yet I endured patiently, to give
thee an example of living conformably to thy vocation. And that thou have now a
will to practice Patience in bearing reproaches with a contented mind, is a
thing, that beseems not a man of the world, much less a Religious man, who
has made profession of virtue, and of imitating me, who did ever embrace
Patience in so affectuous a manner.

5. Lord, I would very willingly endure all things, for love of thee: but when
I see some to persecute me unjustly and wrongfully, I cannot a way with it, and
therefore am troubled and grieved. Thou art deceived, Son, if thou think,
thou have any just occasion of being troubled. Tell me, was not I wrongfully
persecuted? Did not I put up and digest false accusations, and testimonies
against my self? Was I therefore troubled? Or did I make my complaint? And how
many Religious be there already crowned in heaven, who suffered sore
persecutions whiles they lived on earth? If the bad and wicked should not
iniure and persecute any, the good should not have so exceeding store of
merits. To suffer wrongfully, is the crown of Patience. But if thou suffer
justly, that is, for thine own sins, it is rather a just, punishment, then
any virtue of Patience since Patience bears and puts up iniuryes for the
love of me. And therefore my Scripture pronounces them for blessed, that
suffer persecution, but yet for Justice. Injury to him, who puts it up
patiently, is a gain, and to him, that does it, a sin and loss.

6. There be some Religious, that punish themselves diverse ways, some by
fastings, others by wearing of haire-cloth, and by disciplining themselves,
which they suffer both willingly and patiently. But when the same are imposed
upon them by Superiors, they fall to murmuring, and are troubled, and if they
perform them, they do it against their wills, with a repugnance of mind, and
so they loose all their merit. And are they not manifestly, besides the offense
it self, deceived herein? Tell me, I pray thee for what end thou should
punish thy body so cruelly, and with so great patience? Is it not to please me?
If it be so, thou should with a greater readiness, and more patience receive
and perform the penance enjoined thee by thy Superiors, for then thou
should do a work far more pleasing unto me: for thou should exercise
three most excellent virtues at once, namely, Humility, Patience, and
Obedience. He that punishes himself only out of his own will, seldom
becomes perfect.

7. O how much do the men of this world confound the Religious, who are the
children of light? For most of them carried away, either by ambition,
covetousness, or some other bad desire, spare not to take any pains, suffer
molestations, and put themselves into whatsoever perils for the satisfying of
their vain desires: and should not a Religious man patiently suffer some
tribulation for love of me, and for the good of his own soul? He that loves
not, is afraid to suffer. And more then this, the ambitious and covetous man if
he suffer any incommodity at any time, is very careful, that grief and
heaviness oppress him not, or discourage him in the continuing of his
negotiation, that he has begone, but with a stout courage seeks diverse and
sundry ways, and means, for the repayring of his losses again. But some
Religious upon the very least cross, and trouble, suffer themselves to be much
disquieted in mind, and are so sore moved upon the very least word, as they
loose from thenceforth all the fruit of the rest of their works. My Apostles
did not so, who went their ways rejoicing, that they were held worthy to
suffer contumely for the glory of my name. And the Martyrs endured most cruel
torments with so great cheerfulnes of mind, as some, who were by Tyrants
commanded to go barefooted into the fire, did think themselves in doing it,
to walk upon roses.

8. That a secular man suffers iniuryes and adversities with an impatient
mind is nothing to be meruayled, since he thinks himself to be the master of
his own honor and estimation, because he did never renounce them, as do the
Religious: and therefore no marvel, though being injured, he be moved. Again,
a secular man, because he has never put himself under the command of a
Superior, thinks himself to be wholly his own man, and to rely upon
himself, and therefore he cannot be much offensive unto others, if he cannot
with Patience put up a disgrace, or digest a contumely. But that a Religious
man, who has openly made profession of renouncing all his own honor and
estimation, should take the injury, that were done him impatiently, is a thing
unworthy his estate. And more then this, the Religious being delivered over to
me, is no mo^ his own, but mine, and depends wholly and all in all of me, and
therefore it may no^ seem hard to any, if he be sometimes r^proached, or be
tried by sickness, or any other calamity. My servant must only have (...) care
to serve me: but how he ought to seru^ me, either this way or that, that care
h^ must leave to me. I can use his service, even when he lies fast tied to his
bed, or when any other persecution is raised against him. For some serve me
more perfectly, whiles they are sick in their beds, or otherwise punished,
then when they be in best health, and free from all adversity. The Religious
man is never a whit less regarded of me for his defects of body, but for his
impatience, and other indispositions of his mind.

9. There be many Religious, who while they pray, think themselves of ability,
patiently and consta^tly for love of me to suffer all kind of torments, and to
spend their blood for me, and to dye martyrs: but within a while after, if they
be but touched with a little word, or something be commanded them that is
accompanied with some trouble and pain, they knit their brows, and can hardly
forbear (which (...) worse) even in the presence of others to ^reake forth
into words, and gestures of im^atience. He that accustometh not himself ^o
bear with little things, will never with ^atience away with great and hard
mat^ers. Son, have thou a will and desire to ^ecome a Martyr without the
sword, and without shedding of thy blood for it? Con^erue and keep thy mind in
patience.

Of Meeknes, that ought to be practiced by Religious men.

CHAP. VI.
SON, learn of me, for that I am meek and humble of heart. Meeknes was ^he
first virtue, that I taught in my School, and thereunto I exhorted my
Disciples: for it is both an easy and healthful means for ^he purchasing of
the rest of the virtues. For whereas it is the office of Meeknes to maintain
the peace of mind against the force of ^nger, it causes that the mind
exercises virtue, without any difficulty. And whils it also defends the body
against the innordinate passions, it makes the body a fit instrument for the
obeying of the soul in the purchasing of virtues. And therefore the Religious,
who takes no great pains in attayning Meeknes, is not truly one of my
School, and more then that, stops up the entrance against virtue, and
Religious perfection.

2. There is not any so uncivil and barbarous, who if he do but consider the
beauty, excellency, and propertyes of the virtue of Meeknes, would not extol,
and be in love with it. Son, have thou a desire to understand, how noble a
virtue Meeknes is? Compare it with the contrary vice, namely with the
intemperance of anger, which is bound to obey the reason of man, as to her
Mistress whose handmayd she is. For if it obey not reason, but go before it
(as it ordinarily happens) it so distracteth the facultyes of the mind, and
troubles the angered person, as he may seem to differ nothing from a fool
and mad man, and from a beast possessed by the Devil.

3. Anger, when it once gets possession, and command of the mind, first of
al it effects, that the angered person remembers neither God, nor his own
conscience. It depriueth the mind of all judgment, that is, of the eye of the
mind, whence blinded it is driven into sundry errors and falls. In the body it
takes away the equal temper and good proportion of humors, and gives cause
to sundry diseases. Moreover it hurts our Neighbors for the bad example. To
be short an angry man's life is most unhappy, not only because none willingly
^reateth with him, but also for that he will have al things done after his own
manner, a thing that cannot be endured. Whereupon when a thing is not done
according to his mind, or he has sustained hurt in some thing, or has
received some injury, he eftsoons breaks forth into flat railing and
reuiling speeches, threatens reueng, and sometimes also by his intemperance of
mind turns his fury and rage upon himself.

4. Meeknes remedieth all these evils, whose nature, and first office is to
moderate and stay the intemperance of anger, and to restrain all other
perturbations, arising of it. First of all therefore it represseth, and
mittigateth the violence and fury of anger: next it draws the appetite of
reueng to the rule of right reason, for as much as in the angry it is wont to
transgress and go beyond the bounds of moderation. Meeknes in like manner
conserueth all the facultyes of the mind, every one in his order, and causes
them to do their own functions. Finally it reduces the whole man to quiet and
makes him fit, not only to acknowledge his Creator, but also to converse i^
familiar manner with him. And this gif^ was peculiar to Moses for his singula^
Meeknes.

5. Neither does the force and efficacy of Meeknes stay here, but it extends
i^ self further to the qualification and moderating of the anger of the
Neighbors, for that one benign and gentle answer, or one meek action is
enough to appease the fury of any enraged beast, to say nothing of a man
incensed to anger. But (a thing much more to be regarded) Meeknes is of so
great excellency and authority, as it mounteth up to heaven, auerreth the anger
of Gods justice and obtayneth the pardon of most grievous sins. Woe to him,
who resists an angry man, more mighty then himself.

6. Moreover the life of the Meek is most happy, because it is most acceptable
not only to me his Lord, but also to all his Neighbors. Hence it is, that
every one willingly uses the company of the Meek, and all desire to gratify
him. Consider therefore, Son, how profitable and pleasing the virtue of
Meeknes is, and consider thou, whether it be not convenient, that thou
should love it, and labor with all diligence to make thy self possessed of
it. Neither let it seem any painful matter unto thee to strive against the
inclination of nature, prone and propense to choler: for it is proper to a
Religious man to restrain his passions, to mortify his senses, and to
intertaine his inward peace of mind. But admit, that Meeknes had nothing of all this, yet this one thing should move thee to use all diligence for the
obtaining of meeknes, for that it makes a Religious man like unto me, his Lord
and Master. Again, is not all pain well taken in procuring that virtue, that
is no less pleasing to me, then it is profitable to the Religious himself?
Not for him to be Religious, but to be indewed with virtue, makes him like to
his Lord, and Master. And for the leading of a quiet and peaceable life, it is
not enough to have forsaken the world, but a man needs further to bridle
anger, and the passions thereof.

7. Son, think not, because thou art Religious, that thou art free from the
darts of thine enemies, because the Devil takes more pains in overthrowing
of one servant of mine, the^ of many secular persons. The same enemies also,
that is, the passions and perturbations of the mind, when they be not
mortified, do give the Religious very sore wounds, and therefore they need a
strong and sure buckler, for the receiving of so many of the enemies blows. And
this shield is Meeknes, which no enemies force can possibly break, but goes
away with the victory by receiving their blows thereon. It causes the Meek
also in all his aduersityes and crosses to place great confidence in me, and
therefore while he continues with a stout and undaunted courage, he does not
easily give way, nor in prosperity please himself overmuch: and this is, to
hold the place of a shield not only in the time of war, but of peace also. A
Target profits him, who holds it fast, but he that easily suffers it to
be stricken out of his hands, is presently wounded. And so is it with Meeknes,
that defends him, who holds it fast, and will not let it go.

8. Son, remember, that thou have bidden a farewell to the world, that thou
might rid thy self of the dangers of the sna es of it, and consecrate thy
self wholly to a spiritual life, and to my service: but if thou be not Meek,
thou can obtain neither. For if thou shall in Religion be subject to anger
and wrath, thou will easily therein contend also with others, and so thou can
not but be troubled and disquieted. But if thou shall be Meek, thou will not
have contention with any, and with thy gentle and mild answers, thou shall
appease those, that have a will to conte^d. Meeknes also helps, that thou
may be affected to spiritual and heavenly matters, which do then set a man
on fire with the desire of them, when they are well considered and looked into.
But anger, when it troubles the mind, leaves no place for reason: but
Meeknes, when it has quieted the mind, thrusts out darkness, and brings
light in place for the understanding of spiritual things, which being entered,
the understanding presents unto the will the embracing of that, which it
knows?

9. Amongst the Evangelical beatitudes I have assigned the second place next
after. Poverty of spirit, to Meeknes, and for the reward I added the Land of
the living, which is the heavenly country, where the Meek shall enjoy my
presence for all eternity: and as I was here in this life their Master, and
an example of Meeknes, so will I be their hire and reward in heaven. I showed my
self a meek lamb for the love of men, and a lamb is a figure of me, and
therefore meet it is, that all those, who have served under this sign or
banner, namely of Meeknes, and become lambs for my sake, should rejoice with
me in heaven for ever.

10. How it beseems a Religious man to be Meek and mild, and how
unbeseeming it is for him to be angry, is no hard thing to be understood. The
Religious state is peaceable and quiet, quite ^^a^g^ from the spirit of
indignation and co^^^tion. In all things it conformeth it self to the Divine
will, it never complains nor murmureth for any thing, it lives e^^ented with
it own, and takes all that happens in good part. These and other
conditions, seeing they be the fruits of Meeknes, cannot stand without it.
Contrariwise, where the excess of anger reigns, nothing is heard but
threatenings. iniuryes, clamours, and loud outcryes, revenge, and blasphemies
against God, his Saints in heaven, and all his creatures, which are not at the
commaundment of the wr^thfull person, whose actions, because they have their
origin not of reason, but of fury, are neither good, nor can possibly have any
good end. How then is it possible, that wrath can have any community with
religion, which is a certain quiet School of perfection, governed by the
spirit of Meeknes? How can a Religious man attend to prayer, molested with the
passion of anger? How can he be an help and example to his Neighbor, who
because of his impotency of anger, cannot have any power over himself? Son,
thy nature is not the nature of a serpent, but of a man: but if it accustom it
self to anger, it will become so furious, as like a venomed serpent, it will
wound thee with the sting.

Of Mortification, necessary for a Religious man.

CHAP. VII.
SON, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent only carry
it away. If thou think, that heaven may be won by giving thy self to idleness
and ease, by pampering thy body, and by yiedling unto thy senses their
pleasures in every kind, thou art greatly deceived. For this is not the ladder,
whereby thou must mount up to heaven, neither be these the arms, and weapons,
wherewith thou must fight, and overcome, but thou must offer violence to thy
self, by mortif^ing the desires of the senses, and by resisting the flesh, as
often as it seeks and desires after those things, that have no coherence,
or correspondence with the constitutions of thy religious Institute. This is
the way, that brings to heaven. And though thou might come to heaven
without any contention with thy flesh going before, and without suffering of
any tribulations, yet thou must neither desire, nor wish it. For I the son of
God, did not ascend into heaven, before I had suffered much, neither would I go
thither, but by the way of tribulation.

2. A Religious man therefore, if he resolve to win the kingdom of heaven,
must needs take upon him so much strength, as he may seem to fight for three:
for he, that shall not fight for three, shall not go away with the victory.
First he must fight as a man: for seeing he ought to lead a life, correspondent
to his nature, that is participant of reason, he is also bound to live
according to reason, which he cannot be able to do, unless he make war
against his senses, which oftentimes resist their masters reason, and seek to
free themselves from the government thereof. And Mortification is that, which
subiecting the sense to reason, causes that a Religious man contain himself,
and live within the bounds of upright reason.

3. Secondly, he must fight, as a Christian, by the sword of Mortification,
cutting off all that is forbidden by the Christian law. And therefore he must
not only abstain from rapine, from killing of men, from fornication, and the
like, but also from a will of doing them, because the one and the other is
prohibited by my law. And herein thou must needs exercise a certain violence,
and mortification. For seeing man in regard of concupiscence and his depraved
nature, is prone to the evil, by me forbidden, if he take not into his hand
the sword of my law, and with it cut off, or put to flight, whatsoever is
contrary or repugnant to the law, it will neither be possible for him to
triumph in heaven, nor on earth defend and maintain the honor of a true
Christian. Thirdly, he must fight, as a Religious man, who as he is bound to
many more things, then a Christian secular man, so has he more and greater
difficultyes, and therefore must he the more bestir himself, and fortify
himself with the arms of Mortification, and fight more manfully with the
enemy.

4. That a Religious man may mortify his senses to live conformably to reason,
it is good, but for the avoiding of falling into sin, it is better to the
accomplishing of the precepts of my law. But if he further binds himself to
follow perfection together with observation of the counsels of poverty,
chastity, and obedience, it is best of all: for that so doing he does not only
abstain from all things unlawful, but for love of me he also depriueth
himself of many lawful and good things, as of the dominion of temporal
goods, of marriage, of the government of himself, and all that is his, and
the like. Herehence it follows, that a Religious man ought to be so
mortified, as he must be separated clean from all creatures, yea and from
himself also, and must have his dependence on me alone. And this is to bear
away heaven by main force. Son, he that conuerteth his eyes upon the
labors, and pains that be in this combat, will think them to be many and
great: but he that casts his eyes up to heaven, easily perceives, that they
are not worthy of the future glory, that is there prepared for us.

5. Mortification is nothing else, then a spiritual death, that depriueth a
Religious man of all the life of his senses, and effeminate defirs, and cutteth
the^ clean off, with all the bad acts arising of the sensual life: even as the
death of body takes away all the forces of the natural life, and the actions
thereof. Wherefore that Religious man is truly mortifyed, who is dead to his
own love. He that is dead to himself, is dead to the desires of the senses,
and leads a life conform to the state of his Religion, that makes him
Religious, and spiritual. The spirit may not continue life, if the sensuality
be not first dead.

6. There be some Religious, who mortify themselves in some one thing, and not
in another. Mortification, if it be not whole, and universal in all things,
nothing pleases me, because there is no being, nor entrance for the spirit,
where all sensuality is not taken away. The bird, that is tied with many bands,
is not free, and at liberty, nor can fly her way, if there be but one third,
that holds her fast by the leg. One defect may hinder a Religious man from
ariuing to the height of perfection. Neither do those Religious less displease
me, who begin indeed to mortify themselves, but upon the very least inducement
of the senses, or terrified by their own slouthfulnes, continue it not.
Mortificatio^ that continues not to the very end of lif^ loses the reward.
The victory is no^ gotten at the beginning of the fight, but i^ the end thereof.

7. Others there be, who think the^ discharge their duty, when they mortify^
their passions, and bad inclinations so far as publicly, and in the sight of
others, they do nothing, that may not beseem^ them. But this is not Religious
mortification, for that such perturbations and motions of the mind be not truly
mortified but are only covered over, that their branches may not come to light
and be seen. He that draws not out the root of the imperfections clean, if
it spring not forth to day, it will to morrow: and the Religious man will
sooner give over to cut off the perverse branches, then will the root to put
them forth. Those Religious are very acceptable unto me, who do not only cut
off all outward bad works, but do further endeavor by contrary acts to root
out the bad habits, and their inordinate affections, which be the roots, and
fountains of imperfection. And this is true Mortification, which takes away
the bad actions together with their beginnings. Desire thou to take away all
the water? ^hen stop up the spring head.

8. Son, I know right well, that this ^ontinuall war between the flesh and
spirit, and between the sense and reason, (...) very sore and troublesome unto
thee, but ^hou must know, that a man was not crea^ed with this discord. Neither
was there ^his state in the terrestrial paradise, where when as the sense was
obedient to reason, and man to his Creator, there was excee^ing great peace
and concord; and sin after ^t had stirred up the inferior part against ^he
superior, brake this peace. And if ^hou desire to be reduced, and to return
to ^his first peacable state, Mortification is to ^hee necessary, the office
whereof is again ^o bring the body in subjection to the service of the spirit,
the lawful Sovereign, and the senses under the command of reason: for this
is the way of renewing the peace. For the reducing of two soldiers, that be at
variance, and do in hostile manner presecute the one the other, necessary it is
to peace and amity, that the one yeald to the other, the inferior to the
superior: and therefore it is necessary, that the body yield to the spirit,
since it is a subject to the spirit.

9. O how ill does that Religious man understand the manner of his own
vocation, who practices no true mortification, sit^ experience plainly
teaches, that where Mortification is not, there sensuality bears sway. And
what profitable fruit ca^ grow from such a root? What good can (...) Religious
man do, that abaseth himself to the desires of men of the world? Of the many
evils, that Sensuality produces, thi^ is one, that it is never quiet, until
it has drawn a Religious man into extreme misery both of body and soul.
Contrariwise Mortification, forcing the passions to keep themselves within
their own bands, greatly helps the Religious man toward the attayning of the
perfection of virtues. For as it is impossible to come to perfection without
virtues, so is it as impossible to compass true virtues, without Mortification.

10. Lord, all that thou have hitherto said, is most true, but since there is in
man so great a multitude and variety of inordinate desires, so many unruly
passions, so great a company of bad inclinations, how is it possible for a
poor Religious man to resist so many contraryes? When shall he ever be able to
tame so many wild and unruly beasts? A man needs to stand both day and night
armed with a two-edged sword in his hand. And for this cause no ^aruell, though
some Religious be found not to mortify themselves in all things, and others
again not to preseuer in the care and study of Mortification.

11. Son, thou peradventure think thy self the first of them, who have
given themselus to exercise mortification. Many indeed have gone before thee,
who have labored manfully and gloriously in mortifying themselves in this
life, who now ^nioy the fruit of mortificatio^ in heaven. And there live many
in Religion at this day given to mortification, wherein they persist not
without their own merit, and with great joy to me. Neither must it seem
strange, or hard unto thee to be continually in arms. For if this life, as my
servant Job well said, be a certain continual warfare on earth, what other
thing is it to live, the^ to be ever in wars, and to fight without ceasing?
When a City is besieged, if the enemy give continual assault day and night
for the taking of it, necessary it is for the besieged to be continually also
in arms for the resisting of him. If then thou mean to defend and keep the
City of thy soul, which is day and night molested by passions that be the
enemies thereof, it greatly imports thee day and night to be at defianc^ with
them, and to fight against them. An^ it for the gayning of some fortificatio^
me^ adventure with the hazarding of their lives, wherefore should thy pains of
Mortification seem hard unto thee, for the gayning and winning of the castle
of heaven wherein thou shall triumph for eternity. Thou show thy self over
delicate. The soldier, that is afraid of pains, soon faints and loses
courage.

12. Neither must thou be terrifyed with the multitude and variety of thy
contrary passions: for though thou have not forces enough in thy self to bear
the violent impression of them, yet by the help of Gods grace, thou shall be
able not only to mayntaine thy self safe from their incursions, but also to
put them to flight, and to take away the memory of them within thy self. All
Religious have a desire at the hour of their death to be found mortifyed, and
yet but few have a will to mortify themselves. If thou shunnest mortificatio^
living, how will thou be mortifyed at the end of thy life, when thou co^mest do
dye? Finaly the reward of Mortification is so excellent, as a man for the
purchasing of it, should not forbear to take any manner of pains, ^^ough it
were never so great. A good soul^^ar, to encourage himself to the pains, that
are to be taken in the fight, and to ^he victory, thinks ever and anon upon
^ereward.

^f Discretion required in a Religious man.

CHAP. VIII.
SON, he that uses not an eauen pair of balance, is easily deceived in
weighing: even so he, who uses not dis^retion and prudence in his actions,
often^ymes commits so great error, as no remedy, or redress is to be
found, in either helping them, or taking them away. If thou ^xceed in
chastening thy body, it will be weakened, lay down his burden, and refuse ^o
discharge the service it owes to the ^oule: again if thou be over remiss in
mortifying it, it will eftsoons rebel, and turn the heels against thee and
kick. For this cause Discretion is necessary, which teaches how to use the
balance, and how to keep them eauen, that the one rise not overmuch nor the
other be let down too much. And this is the salt, that must season man's
actions, that they may retain the commendation of virtues, and may be pleasing
unto me. They oftentimes come sooner to the a^pointed races end, who hold on
with a moderate pace, then they who run in have* For he that hastes with a
moderation* does neither easily fall, nor is soon wearyed, but he that makes
overmuch have* though he fall not, is yet soon wearied, and so either comes
not at all, or with much a do to the place, whither he intended.

2. O how great hurt, especially in Religion, works Indiscretion to the
Religious, who use neither direction, nor counsel in doing of pennances, and
in continuing a more severe course of life. They think they please me, when
they mortify their bodies over much by fastings, disciplines, wearing of hair,
and watchings: but they are deceived. For the good that is done with
Discretion, has the commendation of virtue, and pleases me: but what is done
without Discretion, is a vice, and defective, and pleases me nothing at all.
This their spirit meriteth not the name of fervor, but rather of indiscreet
fury: for as much as within a while they become so weak in body, as they
neither profit themselves nor others. He that spurreth his horse over much upon
the way, is forced to stay in it, and this I justly permit for a punishment of
their pride of indiscretion. For if they would submit themselves to the
judgment of their Ghostly Fathers, or Superiors, that they might go the more
securely on in the way of spirit, they should never precipitate themselves into
these inconveniences. Penance and austerity ought to be such, as they may not
overthrow, and destroy nature, but the vices thereof.

3. O how much better might they do, and more pleasingly unto me, if their
pennances and mortification were ever accompanied with two noble virtues: with
Humility, I say, whereby they should submit themselves to the judgment of their
spiritual Fathers: and Obedience, whereby they might do, what they command
them. For by the direction of these two virtues, they might the more securely
enter into the rough and vneauen way of Penance, and might merit much more
before God. None has ever been a good guide, and judge for himself.

4. Many of them commit another error, who do in the spiritual way rely upon
their own judgment, and that is, that while they observe not the mean in
mortification of their body, they ordinarily are not solicitous about the
extirpating of the vices of mind. And though they should not transgress in any
thingels, then that in the way of spirit they would not be directed by them,
whom I have appointed to govern in my place, should not this defect, arising
of Pride, be a most dangerous vice and fault of the will? Tell me, what good
will it do a Religious man to chastize and punish his body, and in mind to
intertaine his own will, and inordinate affections? I omit to say, that such
be oftentimes moved of vain glory to do those outward mortifications, that
others may see them, though the same be moderate, more then to the inward, that
are not seen to men, which yet are not hidden from mine eyes, and which I
greatly esteem, because the austerity of life is not in so great a regard with
me, as is the mortification of the vices of the mind.

5. Moreover the hurt, that the indiscreet do unto others, is not little; for
as much as they who follow their example, do also imitate their indiscretion,
which is vicious, and cause of many evils. Others again, observing the
inconveniences, and the infirmityes, that those men fall into, who were
overmuch given to their pennances and mortifications of body, are clean and
wholly auerted from those pious and holy actions, fearing least themselves ^lso
by exercising them, might prejudice and hurt their own health. Neither is it
^n all, certainly to judge, that those incommodityes will not follow of
pennances, out of the indiscretion, and pride of them, who have refused to be
advised by others. He that seeks not to auert the mischief and hurt, that is
prejudicial to himself and others, shall be punished both for himself and
for others.

6. Lord, seeing our flesh is one of our three capital enemies, and so
troublesome, as it molesteth us, both night and day, wherefore is it, that thou will not have it afflicted and punished? I have heard it said, that he who
makes overmuch of his flesh, does nourish and intertaine an enemy within his
own house, and gives him occasion of raising war against him. Were it not
therefore a point of wisdom, and better to make war upon it, then that it
should first of all assail us? Neither seems there any danger in punishing
it overmuch, or in using of excess, since the Scripture says, that none ever
hated his own flesh.

7. Son, my Scripture also says, that the service done to me, must be
reasonable and discreet, that may not exceed or go beyond the appointed bounds.
It is indeed my will, that the flesh be mortified and punished, but yet with
moderation. And though thy flesh be an enemy unto thee, yet thou must remember
with all, that it is the souls instrument, and therefore it must be in such
sort handled, as it may not rebel against her spirit, and yet may serve the
soul in her own functions. But if thou exceed in punishing it, it will
languish, and pyne away, and so it will not be able not only not to serve thee,
but it will stand in need of the service of others it self. He that is to
walk well, must shun the extremes.

8. Some are openly tempted of the Devil to multiply one sin upon another,
and they be those, over whom he usurps a full and absolute command. Others
again, because they be not yet caught in his snares, under pretense of good he
induces to sin, as when he proposes unto them, that it is good for a
Religious man, if he bring his flesh in subjection by long watchings, and other
asperityes of body, as did the holy Fathers in the wilderness, who be now Saints
in heaven, and are honored in this militant Church for lights of the world.
But the crafty enemy proposes not, that those actions should be profitable to
the soul, or pleasing to God, or exercised by the rule of Discretion: neither
does he also declare, when the forces of men be not equal, that it is not
convenient for all to use the same severity toward themselves: for what is
mediocrity to one, is overmuch to another. Neither does he give to understand,
that there needs the counsel of spiritual Fathers, without which none may
with security walk on in the way of spirit. Son, seeing the Devil deceyueth
thee by himself, if thou will not be deceived by him in thy pennances and
devotions, follow not thine own head, nor trust thy self.

9. Finally, that a Religious man may be discreet in all his actions, it is
therefore also convenient, because he is regular, and reason requires, that he
direct all his actions to a certain square and rule, and this is to be
discreet. And more then all this, a Religious man's actions must be addressed to
my glory: but what glory of mine can it be, if the same be vicious and
indiscreet? What pleases me not, procures not either honor, or glory.
Consider now, Son, if indiscretion in fasting, disciplines, and in other good
works of that kind displeases me so greatly, how much think thou will it
discontent me, if a Religious man be indiscreet in eating and drinking, in
sleeping, and in the like actions, which be not of themselves holy, but
indifferent? How much shall he displease me, if he exceed and be indiscreet in
actions that be bad in themselves? If indiscretion be ill of it self,
co^ioyned to a bad thing it will doubtless be worse, and will displease me more.

10. Discretion is necessary as well for Superiors, who govern others, as for
subjects, who are governed. Discretion, which is the child of benevolence,
teaches them to be loving, and benign Fathers, to be compassionate to their
subjects, nor to impose heauyer burdens upon them, then they are able to bear.
And it teaches the subject to reverence, honor, respect, and obey their
Superiors. O how displeasing a thing is it to me to see a subject indiscreet
toward his Superior. Indiscretion, because it is crueltyes daughter, and
hardness sister, causes the subject to afflict his Superior, by showing
himself froward in obeying, and dissolute in discipline. I know very well, how
many sighs and deep groans of the poor and afflicted Superiors for their
subjects hardness of heart, ascend up to heaven. But woe to them, who shall have
given the occasion. The contempt that is done to Superiors, is done to me, and
it appertains to me to examine and punish it.

Of Indifferency, necessary for a Religious man.

CHAP. IX.
SON, thou have many a time and often heard, that Religion is the school of
perfection, and so it is: and therefore they that enter into Religion, be not
perfect, but have a desire to labor to the perfection of Religious discipline.
The scholar, that has begone to follow his book, has no thing else proposed
to him, but to learn to speak and write Latin first, and after to pass over
to the higher Sciences. As touching the means, whereby he may come to his said
end, he says not, I will imprint these rules in my mind, I must be conversant
in this book, and read it over and over, I must hear such a lesson: but he is
indifferent, and submits himself wholly to the judgment of his master, to
read, or hear whatsoever shall to him seem good. If a Religious man does not
the same in the school of Religion, he shall never write or read well, but
shall commit many errors in Religious discipline. His only care must now be to
aspire to perfection, but about the means proper to Religion, let him be
indifferent, and leave all to the judgment of his Superior, whatsoever is in
that kind to be don, And that Religious man is truly indifferent, whose will,
put as it were in to a pair of scals, weigh not more to one part, or thing,
then to another, but is ready to do, what the Superior commands.

2. Indifferency is Resignations daughter, and this cannot be without that.
Therefore the Religious man, who is not, touching his own person, and those
things that appertain unto him, resigned to my will, and to that of his
Superiors who supply my place, neither is, nor can be said to be indifferent.
O how little is that Religious in grace and favor with me, who when any thing
shall be by his Superior commanded him, answers, that he is ready indeed to
obey, yet he had rather do this, or that, and if that be not yealded unto him,
he complains, or murmureth, and sometimes also neglects to do what is
commanded him. This is no indifferency nor resignation, but is a kind of
contract. He that in accepting of obedience uses this But, has a meaning that
his work should be but very slenderly rewarded. Who says, I will do it, but I
would, or will, declares that he is not yet dead to himself, nor has
renounced his own will. In the world, when thou were thine own master, in
dealing with me, did thou not say, I will, or I would? and therefore thou have
not yet either left the world, or it has not left thee. This is no other
thing, then to put one foot into two stirrops, and to have a will to serve two
masters. The world does not leave them, who do not first forsake it.

3. Lord, if I be indifferent, and ready to perform all things that shall be
commanded me, who shall prove that to me to be better for my soul, and my
quiet? Son if thou seek to do that whereunto thine own affection swayeth
thee, who may secure thee, that it is more expedient for thy soul, and for thy
quiet? The good of souls proceeds from me, and that I communicate to them
who are conjoined with the Superior, whom I have assigned to govern: from
whom, if thou, because thou art not indifferent, shall separate thy self,
thou shall deprive thy self of all the gifts and graces, which I am accustomed
to bestow upon the subjects, by help of the Superiors. Besides, if thou be a
true child of obedience, thou oughtst to judge and think that to be best, that
thy Superior, where no sin is, shall ordain: and if thou be indifferent,
thou art bound promptly to put it in execution. For if any error hap to be
committed, it shall neither be thine, nor imputed unto thee, neither shall thou
loose any part of thy merit. A good Religious man examineth not, whether it be
better, or worse that is commanded, but it is enough to him, if it seem better
to the Superior.

4. Some there be, who can hardly be induced to make their habitation in that
place, where Obedience would appoint them, or to do the business, that the
Superior judges most convenient for my glory, and therefore they are troubled,
and cannot find any quiet or peace of mind, and they ascribe this their
disquiet either to the place, wherein they dwell, or to the company with whom
they converse, or to the office that they execute, until they obtain some
change in them. But that evil is hardly cured, the cause whereof is not
understood. This is no fit way of cure, and of remedying it: the origin of the
evil is to be sought into, which is an unmortified passion, proceeding of
self love. And of this it is, that a Religious man is not indifferent, nor
resigned in all things to the Superiors will. Think thou, the place will
effect, that thine inordinate passion, or proper love may be removed, and taken
away? The change of bed does not ease the sick man of his fever, but does
oftentimes increase it. And though the change somewhat te^pereth the hot
burning of it for the time, yet within a while it torme^teth him more sore. So
happens it to a Religious man, who carries with him the cause of his
unquietness, and that is his inordinate passion: and unless the axe of
mortification be used to the cutting away of this bad root, whatsoever change
of place be made, it will ever be worse with him: for the longer the evil
hangs upon him, the more strength it gets, and the less indifferent it
makes him.

5. But tell me, if after the change of place, or of office, thou find thy
self as unquiet, or more then before, as commonly it is wont, what will thou
do? Will thou wish to remove to another place? In no case: for that were to
play the pilgrim without a staff, with thyn own detriment, and the bad
example of others. Or would thou rather resolve to mortify thy self there,
and to pull the cause of thy disquiet up by the root? But that might be done
as well in the place, to which obedience had sent thee, and had been done with
edification of them, who knew thee to be unquiet, little mortified, and less
indifferent. He that has not the spirit of God, though he should find a place
even among Angels, will not cease to be unquiet.

6. Others again are so tied to one place, as when they understand that the
Superior thinks on some change, they are tempted, and much troubled: and
which is worse, because they think themselves in that place, where they then
are, to abide with the fruit, and increase of Gods honor and service, they
censure their Superiors for imprudent, and destitute of zeal. Hence it is,
that if they be against their will removed, and sent away to some other place,
they do not well accommodate themselves to any function or office, but do
trouble others, and live very unquietly and discontentedly themselves. Can it
possibly be, that so little a regard should be had of Indifferency, which is a
Religious man's crown? When I called thee to Religion, did I then promise, and
undertake to place thee there, where thou would, or where I would? Certes
thou do manifest, that in serving me thou relyest rather upon thine own
sense, then my judgment. O misery! There is not a Religious man, that would not
think, and also affirm, that it is good, yea and necessary, that my servants
be indifferent and resigned, but when he comes to action, he finds a
repugnancy. What avails it an Horseman to have a generous and goodly horse,
if he be not tractable? What helps it to have a servant, though he be never
so excellent, if he suffer not himself to be governed, neither has a will to
do my will.

7. Tell me, Son, is it not good for a Christian to be indifferent in
things, neither commanded, nor forbidden, and to be ready to do what I shall
command him? as to have children, or not have any? to be of an healthful body,
or of a sickly? Even so, for seeing it is unknown unto him, what is best for
the good of his soul, there is good reason he should stand to my judgment. And
this is to be indifferent. And if this be true, as it is most true, wherefore
do thou, that art Religious, choose out of thyn own will to execute this
ministry and office rather then that, to dwell in this place rather then in
another? How know thou, whether this or that be more for thy souls good,
quiet, or perfection? He that is not indifferent, makes the government the
more hard, laborious and paynefull. He that is not indifferent, seldom
yealdeth to the judgment of the Superior, but ordinarily is inclined to
perform those ministeryes, to the exercising whereof he is less fit, since none
is a good and impartial judge in his own cause, in regard of an inordinate
affection that deceives him. He that is not indifferent, peruerteth the order
of right government, for that, whiles he accommodateth not himself to his
Superior, as he ought, the Superior is forced to accommodate himself unto
him. He that is not indifferent, can neither be spiritual, nor devout, and is
ordinarily selfe-willd and heady.

Of Modesty, necessary for a Religious man.

CHAP. X.
SON, Religious Modesty is a silent Sermon, but such as penetrateth, and is
efficacious, which like unto a sharppointed arrow, enters into a man's heart,
wounds it, and works wonders therein, and the more deep wound it gives,
the more plenteous fruit it brings forth: and it profits not only them, who
hear the sermon, but him also who makes it. For Modesty intertayneth a
Religious man's spirit, and makes him so collected in mind, and present to
himself, as all his actions breath forth a most sweet sent of devotion, and is
so excellent an ornament to a Religious man, as it makes him amiable, and most
dear to all who shall behold him. Again inward Modesty, whereof the outward
proceeds, is so pleasing unto me, as it is a pleasure to me to use the
company thereof. And more then this, a Modest Religious person is of so great
authority with others, as there is nothing, that he may not persuade them unto.
And if they do so many things in regard of a Religious man's Modesty, what is
it convenient for me to do, for whose love he practiced that Modesty? What
should he not obtain at my hands, who is most dear unto me, and most
acceptable?

2. It produces also wonderful effects in others. There is not any so
incomposed, so dissolute, and disordered, who would not at the very sight of a
modest Religious man presently collect, and compose himself also to an
external Modesty, thinking he should transgress the bounds of Modesty, if
before a modest Religious man he should not demean himself with the like
Modesty also. Moreover Modesty wounds the heart with a certain other wou^d,
and that a more healthful one, and this is: it sweetly draws others to
devotion, and to an imitation of good manners; neither gives over, until it
shall have drawn them to a composition of the inward man, wherein consists
the true quiet and peace of mind, then which nothing is more excellent, or more
to be wished in this life. For Modesty produces more plenteous fruit, and
profit, preaches more effectualy then does the tongue. The Religious man is
not blameless, who shall not by his Modesty preach unto others.

3. Contrariwise the immodesty of a Religious man wounds the heart, but the
wounding thereof does great hurt, both to him, in whom the immodesty is, and to
him, who observes it. Who ever saw an immodest, and wandering Religious man
spiritual, and devout? Immodesty goes ever accompanied with impudency,
insolency, and dissolution of manners. And what spirit can there be of
devotion, where there be found vices, so contrary to devotion? The immodest not
only wants all authority with others, but also is further a scorn to all:
and which is more, obscureth, and (not to say) takes away the fame and good
name of his Religion, that had formerly been won by the virtue and modesty of
others. Moreover the immodest not only offends and scandalizeth others, but
also inuiteth them to dissolution, especially the men of the world, who are
easily induced to think that to be very lawful for them to do, which they see
done of Religious men. Now then consider thou, what punishment that Religious
man is worthy of, who when he was chosen out to be salt, and the light of the
world, for the conseruing of secular men by his example, does by his loose
manners put them forwards, and set them on fire toward all disorder and
impudency of life. An immodest Religious person is displeasing to all wise, and
spiritual men, who by his bad example be so sore offended, as they are
confounded for very shame thereat. And how can such a man be pleasing to me,
who serves me, and dwells in my house? It is the glory of a Prince of this
world, if he have a modest, civil, and well ordered family: and contrariwise it
redoundeth to his ignominy and shame, if it be loose in manners, and given over
to lasciuiousnes. Even so, if the Religious, who be of my family, be modest, it
redoundeth to my honor and glory: contrariwise it is my reproach and
dishonor, if they be immodest.

4. Lord, I have ever heard, that thou art contented with a man's inward virtue,
and with an upright heart. And if that be true, it cannot be altogether
displeasing unto thee, if a Religious man be not at all times outwardly
composed in manners, and modest, so his mind be aright and collected. Son, if
thou think me to be so delighted with the goodness of the heart, as I regard
not the outward conversation and manners, thou art deceived, because I require
both. Though the Religious, who is of a good, and upright mind, be ordinarily
composed also in external manners, and contrariwise, who is not well composed
within, is commonly also dissolute and incomposed without: In like manner a
Religious man is bound to give edification to his neighbor. If he be only
composed in mind, he cannot give edification, because God alone is a beholder
of the heart, and not the neighbor: and therefore necessary it is, that he edify
with his outward modesty, whereby a guess and conjecture is made of the inward
modesty, and composition of manners. If then the Religious man's outward manners
be not rightly composed, a man shall easily judge, that the inward man is ill
composed also, and so in place of edification he should give offense, and
scandal.

5. There be some Religious men, who indeed make a show of outward Modesty, but
are withal little sollicitous about the mortifying of the desires of the mind:
but this is not the modesty, that I require at a Religious man's hands. For if
he desires to seem humble and modest, that others may commend him for it, he
takes upon him the Pharisaicall modesty, which is sold at a good rate to men,
but for the baseness of the price, has no reward at all in heaven. But if he
would seem modest, that he may edify, or at least not scandalize his
neighbor, he uses affected and an enforced modesty, which has not any long
continuance. The modesty contenting me, is that outward composition, and
decency of manners, that grows of the inward composition, by benefit whereof
all the desires, and affections of the mind, be subject to reason, and at the
commau^d of it. And this Modesty procures to a Religious man a certain
venerable seemlynes and authority. This is agreeing to the Religious state, and
makes it worthy the reverence, and respect of secular persons. This Modesty
accompanies a Religious man, both day and night, whether he be in the Church,
or at home in his chamber, whether he sleeps, or speaks, is in journey, or
does any thing else.

6. Son, desire thou an easy, but yet an effectual means for the getting
of Modesty? Converse in my presence and sight, that is, in all thy actions,
either secret, or manifest, whether they be done by day, or by night, think me
to be present, and a beholder of all, as I am indeed; and I doubt not, but thou will be ashamed to do any thing unbeseeming, and unworthy thy Religious state
in my sight, and presence.

Of the Virtue of Prayer.

CHAP. XI.
SON, most true is that, which some affirm, that Prayer is to me a
sacrifice, to the Devil a scorge, and to him who prays a singular help. And
that a sacrifice may be offered up for an odor of sweetness, necessary it is,
that it be pleasing not so much to him who offers it, as to him unto whom it
is offered, and therefore that which may stir thee up to the desire of prayer,
must be a pure desire of pleasing me, and not others, nor thy self. And
doubtless, that prayer will be most acceptable to me, if it answer my desire,
though thou should not take any comfort thereof at all. The old sacrifices
were made, as I had appointed in my Law, and they that offered them, did not
require of the ministers any other thing, then that their sacrifices might be
done conformably to the divine will. The Devil does not so, but he endeavors
by diverse and sundry ways to hinder this pleasing sacrifice of Prayer. For one
while he exaggerateth the difficulty thereof, that thou may give it over:
another time he pretends that the time is not commodious to do it, that thou
may put it of: now he feigneth that it would hurt thy health, that thou may
make light of it etc. And no marvel, because, as I said, Prayer is his
scorge, and therefore he is most of all afraid of it. And the more he hates it,
the more reckoning ought a Religious man to make thereof, since it is the
spiritual food, wherewith his soul is refreshed, and strengthened.

2. The virtue of Prayer is so pleasing to my Father of heaven, as he
commanded me, to come down from thence, to deliver unto my Disciples a manner
and form of Prayer, wherein he would be named Father, that all might in their
necessityes with a great confidence repair unto him, and both praise, and
reverence the divine Goodness in this holy exercise of Prayer, which is so
pleasing unto him, as he sometimes differs to impart the grace that is
required, and craved therein, that the Prayer may be repeated, and said over
again. Prayer was also no less pleasing unto me, then it was familiar unto
me, and therefore I recommended it in the Gospel, and commended it unto
others, not by words only, but by examples and deeds. And when I had no leisure
to attend to Prayer by day, by occasion of the pains of my preaching, and of
other works, done for the good of my Neighbors, I spent the night in it.

3. O how sore that Religious man sins, and how strait an account is he to
yield up one day unto God, who either does not bestow the time, that is by his
Religion allowed him for prayer, in that holy exercise, or bestows it not in
manner as he ought, and might, if he would. And how great a shame is it to see,
that when a sign is given to some recreation appertaining to the body, they
come running in all have, and diligence: and when the sign is given to Prayer,
they come slowly unto it? If thou do not perform, or very negligently
perform the task of thy wonted Prayers, do thou not consider, that thou
do it with the prejudice of other Religious that have a participation with
thy Religion? He that makes no conscience to deprive his own soul of the
fruit of Prayer, will make less conscience to defraud others. If the servant
be not affected to that, which pleases his Lord, much less will the Lord be
affected to that which is pleasing to the servant.

4. Prayer is nothing else, then a talk, and commerce of a reasonable creature
with his Creator, to whom he confidently proposes both his own necessityes,
and those of others, that as a Father of mercyes he would vouchsafe to assist,
and help his children. But those please me much, who being to deal in prayer
with their heavenly Father, do invoke some one of the Saints, to whom they
are devoted, that they would please also to assist them with their prayers and
petitions to God. They also please me, who do not begin to pray, until they
shall have craved grace of praying well: as do those also, who crave pardon for
their imperfections and sins; for as much as this is, wont not a little to
help and promote the fruit, and progress of Prayer. They also do well, who to
pray with fruit, do not only exclude the cogitations of all other affairs,
that are wont to distract the mind, but also seek to be well composed, and to
use such a situation of body, as helps toward the saying of their prayers
both attentively, and devoutly. For seeing Prayer is a sacrifice to God, it is
not lawful to pretermit any thing in it, for the best performing thereof.

5. Some obtain not at Gods hands what they have craved in prayer, because
they craved not what was convenient. He that asks what is hurtful, or
unprofitable to the soul, asks not that is convenient for it, for as much as
in prayer are to be craved things good, and profitable for the soul. Things
indifferent, which may be used well or ill, such as be honors, riches, health
of body, must be asked with a condition, if they be good for the soul. Better
knows the Physician, the^ the sick, what is more necessary for his health,
and therefore he does never give unto the sick what he demands, but what may
do him good. I did not take from my Apostle the sting of the flesh, though by
his prayer he had more then once craved it of me, because it profited him more
to have it still. It is best for the Religious, if his soul be filled with
merits, rather then that his will should be satisfied. He that is not humble in
his prayer, and acknowledges not his own misery, obtayneth not what he
craves, because he asks not well. Who prays not with confidence, so as he
firmly believe, that I am able to satisfy his petitions, obtayneth not grace,
because he prays not, as he should. He that perseuereth not in prayer, or
gives over his petition once begone, or else goes forwards after a languishing
and cold manner therein, obtayneth nothing, because he asks not well.

6. There are some others, who so soon as they obtain not the grace they
crave, give over their prayer to their own loss, for as much as I had
determined to bestow greater graces upon them, then they asked of me, but
because they might not endure to be delayed, they lost all. Whiles I differ the
bestowing of my grace, and they yet persist and hold on in prayer, their desire
of praying waxes hoater, and having obtaytained it, they embrace it, and
conserve it with a greater fervor for the time to come. Moreover they continue
their prayer, which is a good action, and meritorious, and they make themselves
the more apt for the receiving of the desired grace. For whiles they are
betwixt hope and fear of receiving the grace they crave, they examine
themselves, whether some secret sin, or imperfection of theirs may
peradventure be an impediment to the receiving of such grace; and if they find
any such, they become penitent for it, and thereby they make themselves the more
apt for the receiving of grace. Be not these diverse and different privileges
of graces, that I give, whiles I do not yeald unto the petitions at the very
first? Why then do they give over their prayer? Many things are obtained of God
by occasion of a vehement and continued desire of the thing, which if it should
not be, they should not obtain at all. Therefore as my Scripture says: Better
is the end of Prayer, then is the beginning. For no work is finished, being
but begone, but when it is brought to an end. To one well disposed God knows
how, and when to give more then he is able to ask.

7. Others give over their prayer, because they are dry, and find no devotion
in their prayer at all, but this is no good remedy for the matter. If that
aridity grows through thine own default, as because thou come to prayer
without any preparation going before, and with an head distracted with many
impertinent cogitations, wherefore should thou give over thy prayer for it?
Let the cause of thy aridity and distraction be rather removed and taken away.
He that of his own carelesnes stumbleth upon a stone, does not therefore cut
off his own foot, because he stumbled without any his own fault, neither
omitteth he for that, to prosecute his journey, but is more vigilant, that he
may stu^ble no more. Neither is prayer to be given over, when the aridity
comes upon thee without any thy fault, for as much as I do sometimes of
purpose withdraw the grace of consolation, that acknowledging thine own
insufficiency in thy self, thou may for the obtaining of feeling, and
devotion in prayer, humble thy self, and confess that it is one of the gifts,
which (...) distribute to whom I will, and when (...) please. Besides, tell
me, wherefore tho^ prayest? If it be to please thy self, there i^ no cause,
why thou should expect any other reward, because thy pain of praying is
acquitted, and that abundantly, with tha^ pleasure, that thou feel in thy
prayer: bu^ if thou prayest to please me, it ought to content thee, that I
accept of it at thy hands. He that inuyteth to good cheer, must be contented,
if his guests like of it, though^ himself taste not of it at all.

8. There are others, who neglect their prayer, because they be therein
molested and troubled with diverse, and importune cogitations, and scruples. He
is no good soldier, who turns his back and runs away at the first sound
of the Trumpet, or so soon as he comes in sight of the enemy. What do bad
thoughts hurt thee, if they come upon thee against thy will, neither have any
desire to intertaine them? I am satisfied, if when thou perceiuest and feel
them, thou shakest them off, and if they come again, thou do the same, and
though thou should do nothing else all thy prayer time, thou should please
me as much, as if thou had made thy prayer with greatest attention, and thou
should merit more at my hands, then if thou had ^eceiued great consolation,
and spiritual ^ontentment in thy prayer. A good ser^ant takes more pleasure
of his Lords ^omfort, then of his own, though he thinks that of his Lords to
be his. A very good remedy for scruples is, not to weigh them, at all but to
have a purpose only in prayer to praise and extol the divine goodness. He that
regards scruples, loses the fruit of many good works.

9. Some, because they see not the fruit of their prayer, do make a light
reckoning of it, and therefore they contemn the exercising thereof, as nothing
profiting them: Son, it is no good consequence: I make no profit of my
prayer, and therefore I do well, not to make any. For if thou do not profit by
it, the fault is thine own, and not of prayer. For thou might, if thou
would, make most great profit thereof, since Prayer is a most profitable
thing. He that makes a fire to warm himself, and goes far from it,
receives no heat at all from it. Prayer is a fire, whereunto if thou shall
forbear to approach, thou shall never be warm, or get any heat.

10. O how do the Religious men please me, who after they have praised me, and
done me all honor in their prayers tha^ they can, do by the benefit of it lead
a Religious and virtuous life, by abstayning from vice, and embracing virtue,
whereo^ they meditated in their prayer. Neither though thou should find no
profit in thy self at all, must thou therefore leave of thy custom of prayer,
since that has another fruit and commodity, that inseparably accompanyeth it,
and this is, for that by is great honor, and glory is given to me thy
Creator. Yet a good Religious man must not stay here, but must proceed on to
works: for so doing he shall honor, and content me the more. Therefore he
pleases me not, who though he crave in his prayer Virtue, does not afterward
take any pains in purchasing it, namely, by exercising some acts thereof, for
this is to tempt God. For thou must not expect all that from me, which thou art
with my help to do and perform thy self.

11. Lord, it is ordained and decreed by thy Law, that we pray always, and
without intermission. And can that be possible, when we must needs sometimes
sleep, sometimes eat and drink, sometimes deal and traffic with others
etc. with which actions it is impossible for us ^o pray. Son, that Law is not
so to be vnder^^ood, as though it were necessary every moment to attend
actually to prayer. For that Religious person always prays, and ^rayeth
truly without ceasing, who ma^eth his prayer at set times and hours: he is
^lso said always to pray, who refers al that he does to Gods glory. Also to
lead a ^ood, and virtuous life, is to pray always. For he, who ever lives in
all things ac^ording to his vocation, obeying my will, ^lwayes prays. And
this is not impos^ible, nor very hard, that my Law commands.

Of the Virtue of Perseverance.

CHAP. XII.
SON, all the Angels were created in heaven, but all stayed not there. All
received many great gifts and benefits together with grace, but all conserved
it not. For some not perseuering in that most happy state, fell miserably, and
lost all the favor of God. But those that stood, were confirmed in grace, and
enjoyed the privilege of everlasting felicity. Who is not content with his
own state and condition, lives unquietly, and easily offends. Thy first
Parents were formed of earth, but yo^ in the terrestrial Paradise, where they
were enriched with sundry gifts, and especially with that of innocence: but
after that, no^ content with their own state, they ha^ a desire to be as Gods,
knowing both good and ill, and they were not only spoiled o^ their innocence,
but also with their extreme ignominy and hurt thrust out of Paradise, in so
much as thereby they brough^ themselves, and all their posterity into infinite
miseryes. He that aspireth higher, and to more then his state permits,
forgoeth that justly, which he had received before* O how many Religious perish
for want of perseverance! for they persevere not, who are not content with
their state, and condition, that they have in Religion, whereunto I called
them. And how many of them be for a punishment of their inco^stancy and
ingratitude found to lead a life in the world, unworthy of a man? And that
worthily befalls them, because they contented not themselves with their
Angelical life in Religion.

2. Perseverance has the dependence of constancy, as has the daughter of the
mother. For he that is constant in tolerating the troubles and trauayles, that
be presented in the exercise of virtues, is said to persevere in good, and
where constancy relenteth, there perseverance fails also. O how much is
inco^nstancy in good works unbeseeming to a Religious man, who should worthily
be ashamed, even of the only thought of inconstancy. And no marvel, since it
is also dishonorable to a man of the world, who yet makes no profession of
practicing virtue, if he once leave off the good work be had formerly begone,
since it is not good to begin a good work, and to intermit it, and leave it
unperfected without just cause. And that Religious gives it over to his
greater shame, who leaves his vocation though an inconstancy, when as he is
tied unto it by the law of vows, when he made a profession of virtue, and from
the very instant of his first conversion, began to labor to perfection. If a
blind man, or one who knows not the way, should go out of the same, he were
worthy of excuse: but if one illuminated, and by long instruction intelligent
of the spiritual way, as the Religious be, should stray out of the right way,
and by inconstancy forsake his former state, what excuse can he pretend for
himself? For it cannot be any just excuse, that he complains, that he cannot
be at quiet in Religion, and in conclusion is afraid of the perdition of his
soul: for as much as by this pretext he seeks to cover and conceal his own
inconstancy. But he labors in vain, since he is unquiet for none other
reason, then for that he has a will to be unquiet.

3. O how much is this poor man deceived, thinking that he should find more
quiet in the world, then he has in Religion, as though in the world there were
no troubles, and crosses, nor greiuous sins committed, or that in the world
there were more excellent remedies and means for procuring of quiet, and of
the souls good, then there be in Religion. It is nothing so, my son: but
these be mere fansyes of thy, and own ianglings and decyets of the enemy. He
that aspireth to quiet, and constancy in his vocation, which is as it were a
certain pledge of salvation, must be humble. An humble man, if any thing
happen hard, or heavy unto him, says: This it is to be a Religious man,
neither is he troubled, because he thinks himself worthy to suffer more
incommodityes, then he does. Perseverance also depends on patience, which is
the elder sister, without which Perseverance cannot stand. For if there be not
patience in suffering adversities, Perseverance eftsoons falls to the
ground, since it consists in enduring troubles, pains, trauells, and miseries
until the lives end. Hence it is said, that Perseverance crowns the works,
because it co^municateth unto them their last perfection: for that without it
they should be imperfect. For he is not happy who does good, but he who
perseuereth in good, neither is a reward granted to him who works well, but
to him who persisteth in doing good until the very end. Many begin well, but
all do not end well.

4. Some forbear to persevere in the exercise of virtue, because they are
afraid of the pain. For when they consider that the pain is a sore thing, and
very hard, and which they are scarce able to a way with, they cast down their
burden, who when they might and were of power to overcome, are nevertheless
overcome, and ouerthrown by their inconstancy. But Perseverance te^preth this
fear, and animateth a man to persist manfully in the exercise of good works,
as much as is requisite. Son, if thou desire to wear the crown of Perseu
rance, thou must shun two extremes thereunto contrary. The one is called
Nicenes and ease, which easily yealdeth and turns the back for some
difficultyes, that occure and present themselves in the exercise of virtue. The
other is a pertinacy, and will, that adhereth over much to it own judgment.
But Perseverance, that keeps the mean, neither permits the good work
once begone, to be hindered by any difficulty, nor to be put off, or differred
longer, then reason requires.

5. Lord, I have often heard, that Perseverance in good is thy work and gift,
and that it cannot be had, but by thy benefit, and that thou give it where,
and to whom it best pleases thee. And if it be so, they seem free from all
fault, as many as persevere not in a good work begone, since they may for excuse
of themselves say, that they have not received the gift of Perseverance. Son,
it is true, that Perseverance in good works is my gift, but yet thou art bound
to have a firm purpose of perseuering in good, as in a thing necessary for thy
souls health, and it is in thine own power to go against that purpose of
thine, or also, with the help of my grace, to keep and continue it. Neither,
though the gift of Perseverance comes from me, ought thou therefore to be
dismayed: do thou thine own part manfully, and I will discharge mine in
assisting thee with my grace, where need is.

6. Tell me now, my son, what there is in Religion, that may make thee afraid
of not perseuering? Be they perhaps, the pains, and troubles that be in
Religion? or because all necessaryes of body be not competently affoarded thee?
But neither these, nor all things else can give a Religious man just cause of
giving over his good purpose. I did my self from the first day of my coming
into the world, till my going out of it again, suffer many and great
incommodityes: and my labors and pains still increased with my years. And if
I moved out of my love to thee, persisted in carrying my cross of pains, and
toyling till my death, why should not thou for the love of me persevere in
good, which by my special inspiration thou have chosen? Why should thou
without cause abandon that, whereunto thou have voluntarily tied thy self?

7. Consider, son, what sentence is pronounced touching this: That salvation
is promised not to the beginners, but to the perseuerant till death. Consider
also that it is already defined, that he is not apt for the Kingdom of heaven,
who after his hand once put to the plow, looks behind him. Consider, that the
Devil enters together with thy will, that he may afterward bring thee out
with his own. He pretends the yoke of Religion to be heavy, that he may make
thee to become an Apostata, and a fugitive of his camp. It is not greiuous,
that is endured for the love of me: and though thou mighst pass over this life
without pains, and crosses, yet that manner of life should not content thee,
because I thy Lord did ever live in trauails and carrying of my Cross.

8. He that perseuereth not in good works, iniureth me, because I have
inspired those good works. He that without just cause neglects to persevere
in the state that I have assigned him, does a work pleasing to the Devil,
because he resembles himself to him, who from an Angels state fell down to
that of the Devil. He that by inconstancy gives over the good begone,
overthrows his own deed, and knows not, whether he shall do any thing
better.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK of Religious Perfection.
Wherein is treated, touching the Spiritual Actions of a Religious man: whereby
may be understood, what progress, and profit he has made in the purchase of
Perfection.
How a Religious man must not take it ill, though he be contemned of others.

CHAP. I.
SON, why art thou so much afflicted and troubled, when thou perceiuest
others to have little regard of thee? Wherefore do thou so earnestly seek
after honor, and the opinion of a great name? Art thou entered into Religion,
that thou may be esteemed of others, or rather that thou mighst with more
security come to life eueerlasting? Have thou renounced the world for the
pleasing of men, or that thou mighst serve and please me? If thou have left it
to please me, what skilleth it, though thou be nothing regarded of others?
Think thou, that by this conceit and opinion, either the good of thy soul
is hindered, or the service divine which thou had a desire to yeald unto me?
Truly no such matter. If any thing were to be feared, it should be this, least
humane estimation might work thy ruin, when as the Apostle says: If he
should still please men, he should not be Gods servant. Son, if thou examine
the matter well, he that esteems thee not, profits thee much, because he
helps and furthereth thy separation from the world, and to the making of thy
recourse to me, who am to give life everlasting. He that makes much of thee,
and recommendeth thee, stops up the way of salvation against thee, and
therefore my servants of old, who flourished in former times in their Religion,
rejoiced if they were at any time contemned of others, and were on the other
side sorry and grieved, if any excess were used in their commendations: and no
less do all those Religious men at this day, who have their part in the true
spirit of God. He who lives in banishment, must little regard others, so he be
in the grace and favor of him, of whom he may be helped.

2. The first rudiments to be learned of a Religious man, be these, to contemn
himself, to wish not to be esteemed of others, to abnegate and deny himself,
to deem and hold himself unworthy of any praise whatsoever, to do well, and
to be ill entreated and handled. Without the practice of these rudiments and
principles no Religious man can profit in the spiritual discipline. Wherefore
if after some years spent in Religion, thou still hunt after honors, and the
estimation of a great name, it is a sign, that thou have not yet learned the
first principles, that be delivered in Religious School, and how then will thou proceed and go forwards in spirit? What marvel, though thou be troubled,
when honor is not done thee? If thou desire to put all grief out of thy
mind, begin in earnest to make a little esteem of thy self, for that he, who
shall once contemn himself, shall not find any disgust by others contemning
of him. The greater opinion thou have of thy self, the more shall thou be
grieved, when others yeald thee not the honor, that is due unto thee, and thou
expectest.

3. Tell me, is it not worse to be contemned, then not to be esteemed of? and
is not he more confounded, who is shamefully handled, then is he, who is
spoiled of the honor due unto him? It is so indeed. Admit thou art not perhaps
much esteemed: but I was of others despised, and laughed to scorn. Let the
honor due unto thee, be taken from thee: but I thy head was most ignominiously
handled. Thou peradventure art not courteously dealt with by thine enemies: but
I was ill used even by them to whom I had been most beneficial. And if I thy
Lord, Head, and Master, did with patience suffer so great iniuryes, unjustly
done me, wherefore art thou dismayed, if at any time so much honor be not
yealded unto thee, as thou would wish? Will thou be preferred before thy
Lord, and Master? Does it seem unto thee fitting, that under a thorny head and
ignominiously treated, there should ly members hid, both delicate, and
honorably regarded? The more a man resists ^o be contemned, the more unlike
is he to ^is Lord: and he that takes not pains to ^esemble him on earth,
shall not have any part with him in heaven.

4. Honor is the reward of virtue. If ^hou desire to be honored, thou must of
necessity be virtuous, else thou would wish ^o have that given thee, that is
not thy due, and he that should yeald it unto thee, should ^ather flatter thee,
then praise thee. And what virtue is there in thee, for which ^hou deemest thy
self worthy of commen^ation, and veneration? True virtue ever g^eth in company
with Humility, that is ^he foundation of all Religious virtues. If therefore
there be not Humility in thee, ^rue virtue must needs be absent also. But ^f
there be Humility in thee, and thou be ^ruly humble, how can it be thou
should desire honor, since it is the property of Humility to fly from
honors, and commendations of men? He that practices Humi^ity, desires to be
despised of all, and is glad that he is nothing reckoned of. Moreover, what
memorable, or noble act have ^hou done, wherefore should thou desire or seek
after such applause of men? Or what have thou suffered for the love of me, that
thou should receive a reward at my hands in this life? Certainly thou have
no^ yet shead thy blood for me, neither ha^ been in bands, nor most
ignominiousl^ haled and drawn through the streets, no^ nailed to the cross,
as I was for thy sake* And though thou had suffered all this an^ more for me,
yet thou should have nee^ the help of my grace, without which n^ good can be
done, and so all the praise ha^ rather redounded unto me, and not vnt^ thee.
Admit it were true, that thou ha^ done many works worth the rewarding
think thou it best to do such things that they may be rewarded with an
humane honor in this life, that is, with ^ most contemptible price, if it be
compare^ with the divine honor, prepared in heaven? He that seeks for praise
of the good works that he does in this life, mus^ not expect any other reward
in the nex^ life.

5. Son, thou shall never be remedied or cured of this evil, if thou find n^
out the cause thereof. The chief cause is the magnificall and great opinion,
thou have of thy self, whereby thou persuadest thy self, that thou art worthy
of honor, and that he does thee a great injury, who shall not have the same
conceit of thee. And ^er hence is the grief, thou feel, when ^^hers make no
great esteem of thee. But ^^t us examine, I pray thee, what there is in ^^ee,
whereby thou should deserve ho^ours, and dignityes? For first whatso^^er
thou have received of me, I do con^^rue the same, and if I should withdraw ^^y
hand but a little from thee, thou ^ouldest be brought to nothing. If all the
^^od in thee be mine, certainsy al honor ^^so is due to me, and not to thee.
The mi^^ries, imperfections, and sins be thine, ^or which whether thou be
worthy of ^ommendation, or rather of confusion, ^onsider well. O how many
Religious men ^e deceived with the estimation, that ^hey have of themselves,
and will be the ^udges, and arbiters thereof themselves. For whiles they deem
themselves worthy of honor, and yet see that they have not got the opinion of
any good name, either with their Superiors, or any other, they are greatly
troubled, and afflicted in mind. He that lays a bad foundation, makes a
worse building upon it.

6. Son, thou do not yet know thy self well, and therefore thou can not
be a good judge, nor judge well of thy self. If thou did know thy self
well, thou would not raise so magnificall and stately a building upon so
weak and frail a foundation. That a man be highly recommended, and held in
great veneration, needs it must be, that there is an opinion, and estimation
before in the mind, not of him who is to be honored, but of them who are to
give the honor, touching his excellency and worthiness. But if they see no
virtue in thee at all, but imperfections rather, and leuityes, how can they
have a good opinion of thee, or speak and report of thy praises? The good
works do cause a good opinion, and not the desire of him, who seeks his own
praises.

7. Desire thou to see, how far thou art in this matter from the truth?
Consider what I am now to say unto thee. Thou art either dead to the world, or
not. If thou be not, thou art nothing worth for Religion, nor Religion for
thee, since it receives and approves none, but such as have from their heart
renounced the vanities of the world, and this is to be dead to the world. And
amongst the vanities of the world one is, to seek after honor, and to desire
to be esteemed for great. But if thou be dead to the world, why desire thou
to be honored of it? A dead body cares not, whether it be placed on the right
hand, or on the left, in an honorable place, or whether cappes and knees be
given it, or not. But if thou seek for a more honorable place, or a greater
office, if thou desire that others should give thee place, how art thou dead
to the world? Neither does it satisfy me, if thou say, thou desire honor,
for my glory and honor, that thou may have greater authority with men, and
by help thereof may be able to do more good with others. For if it were so,
that appertained to me, and not to thee to provide; and if there shall be any
need, I will not be wanting to my duty. In the mean time it is my honor, and
my glory, if thou be humble, and not greiued, if thou be at any time contemned:
for so thou shall be like unto me, thou shall live quiet in Religion, and shall
receive thy reward in heaven. And know thou, that to be desirous of praise, is
not the way to help others, but to be a follower of Humility, Charity, and
other virtues, and most of all if thou be wholly estranged from all ambition,
and avarice, and give good example to others.

That a Religious man must not be overmuch desirous of the commodityes of his
body.

CHAP. II.
SON, to speak fair to a friend, to please him, and to give an occasion of
well doing, is very convenient and commendable: but to fawn upon an enemy, who
seeks thine eternal ruin, and to give him opportunity of ill doing, is very
absurd and detestable. Thou art not ignorant, that of three capital enemies
thou have, one is thine own body: thou know also, that thy flesh, if it be
not chasttised and kept under, becomes so fierce and insolent, as it will
cause thy souls ruin. Tell me, what law has appointed, that a Religious man
should fawn upon his body, who is bound to restrain and kurbe it with the
bridle, and to mortify it? Wherefore should the Religious attend to the care of
the bodies commodityes, who is assured, that the more he favors and che
sheth it, the prouder it will become. My Apostle by chastising his body, and
entreat ng it hardly, brought it to the duty it did owe to the spirit. He
therefore, who yealdeth unto it over much, gives an occasion unto it of
revolt, and of rebelling against the spirit.

2. Lord, thou have not made us lords of our body, that we may take life from
it, or mayme and mangle it, but thou have given us a charge to preserve the
health of it, as much as we can, and therefore we may procure those commodityes
thereof, that make to the conservation of health, and so much the more, for that
we use not only the soul, but the body also for the doing of thee divine
honor, and service.

3. Son, it pleases me much, that a Religious man conserve and maintain his
good health by fit means, for the doing of my service, but this displeases
me, that under pretense of preserving the health of body he makes over much of
it. I like not that Religious man, who will usurp and take upon him a
Physicians office, and judge himself what is for, and what is against his
health. For of this it happens that whatsoever pleases his appetite, that is
good for him, and what agrees not with his taste, that is hurtful for his
health. Neither does he offend me less, because he says, he does it for my
greater and better service. And indeed it is not to serve me, but to serve his
own gust, and sensuality. It is my service, when every one mortifyeth his own
flesh, as much as is requisite, and it needs. O how many Religious be there,
who under a pretext of conseruing their health, become the slaves of their own
desires? The health is better kept by parsimony, and moderation, then by the
procuring of things appertayning to the taste. Yea by this the health is
impaired, for that there is excess in all things commonly that have pleasure
with them. Moreover it is an obligation, proper to a Religious person, to yeald
no more to the body, then what is needful for intertayning of life, and not
what is for the stirring up of the flesh.

4. If the Religious man would examine, whence arises that so great a care he
has of himself, and of his body, he would not be so anxious, and importune in
seeking after the commodityes thereof. In some it grows of a superfluous
co^miseration and pity toward themselves, because they could wish to yeald
their body some pleasure. In others it proceeds of a magnificall opinion they
conceive of their own estimation: for whereas they are persuaded, that it
greatly imports the common wealth, if they live long, their care is all in
all about the preservation of their health. Both these, namely commiseration,
and estimation, be selfe-loues daughters. And what good fruit can come of so
dangerous a root? These men peradventure think, that if they were gone, my
Church would come to decay, or their Religion would come to ruin. They are
greatly deceived. Many other pillars have fallen, and yet both my Church, and
Religion hold their own: that care appertains to me as well to conserve both,
as to provide them of good workmen and laborers. And I under take, that the
Religion, when such men are gone, shall not only not come to ruin, but shall
further receive an increase, because those commonly who have taken less pains
in Religion, and have most troubled it, be those who have been most of all
given to their pleasures, and commodityes of body. And these be they, who do by
their example overthrow Religious houses.

5. When thou becamest Religious, did thou it not with a mind of suffering
much for the saving of thy soul, and for the love o me? Did thou not purpose
to live a poor life, and to bear with all incommodityes, that be incident to
poor persons? Whence then is it, that now, when thou should have greater
light of mind, and more charity, thou do not put those thy first cogitatio^s
in effect by works? O extreme bad iugling and deceit. Religion is instituted
for the mortifying of the body, and for the enriching of the soul with
spiritual riches, and thou think that a great care is to be used and had
about the cherishing of the body with the neglect of the souls health? Tell
me, I pray thee: In the world had thou thy commodityes of body at will, or
not? If not, wherefore desire thou them in Religion, wherinto thou did
enter to suffer incommodityes for Christ's sake? And if thou had thy
commodityes, and did thereof voluntarily deprive thy self for the love of me,
that thou might please me the more, wherefore do thou now in Religion seek
them, by thee abandoned before, with an offense to me, and bad example to
others? Moreover, if thou have renounced the co^modityes of thy body for the
love of me, and now returnest unto them again, thou manifestly declarest, that
thou will not have any thing to do with the love of me. And what an esteem
should I make of him, who is so fickle, and inconstant in loving me? And if
peradventure thou think, that thou may both love me, and seek thy temporal
commodityes withal, and that against my will, thou art greatly deceived: for as
much as he cannot love truly, who does not conform himself to the will of the
beloved.

6. Son, if thou desire to understand, how I handled mine own body, run
over my life from the day of my nativity til my death, and thou shall easily
see, how few commodityes I used. For so soon as I came into the world, a
stable was my bedchamber, and the manger my bed. Within a while after Herod
persecuting me, I was forced to fly into Aegipt. Consider thou here, what
commodityes I found both in my way thither, and in a country so far off and
barbarous, when as I had a poor Mother, who also was to take her journey and
to pack in all have away in the night time, so soon as she had news of the
matter. After that being returned from Aegipt, I passed over the remainder of
my life in poverty. In the thirtith year of my age I retired my self into the
desert, where I punished my poor body with hungar, thirst, watching, lying
upon the ground, and the fast of forty days and nights. After my leaving the
desert, I travailed on foot from one town and castle to another, and preached
the kingdom of heaven in all places where I came, and lived continually by
alms that others gave me. In time of my passion, I did not only want all
commodityes, but also one affliction succeeded in place of another. Finally,
when I came to die, a cross was my bed to lie on, and a crown of thorns my
pillow.

7. Now judge thou, who art Religious, whether it be convenient for thee my
servant, who have made profession of imitating me, to handle thy body so nicely
and delicately, since I thy Lord have dealt with mine own so roughly and
hardly. And though my body were ever subject to the soul, and most obedient to
reason, yet I did never entreat it delicately, nor ever yealded unto it any
commodityes, or recreations at al. And will thou now affoard unto thy body,
that has so often in a most insolent manner insulted against the spirit and
reason, all kinds of contentements and pleasures? I the Lord of majesty ever
contented my self with a poor and mean diet, and as mean clothing, and
other intertaynement: and will thou in Religion, not contented with the common,
affect and desire superfluityes? This is not to be, or to lead the life of a
Religious person, but rather to cover and conceal a secular life by the habit
of Religion.

8. An over great solicitude of temporal commodityes, is a thorn that
pricketh over sore, and greatly hurts a Religious man. For first it makes
him a procuratour for the body, yea and a bondslaue unto it. And who sees not,
how great an indignity it is for a Religious man of a punisher of his body to
become a Purueyour for it, and instead of whipping it, to yeald it all manner
of contentements? Again, it holds and keeps him so distracted in mind as
he takes no gust, or pleasure at all in matters of spirit. And what other
thing is this, then to make him sensual, that he may neither taste, nor mind
those things that be of God? Moreover it makes him churlish and harsh to
those with whom he lives: for as much as he ever will in all things have what
is best, and most commodious for himself, neglecting the commodityes of
others: yea he prefers his private commodityes before the common, not
regarding what hurt may redound to the Religion thereby, so he may have what he
desires himself. And what is this, but to spoil a Religious man of charity,
discretion, and all?

9. Neither is there here an end of this importune and preposterous care of the
body, but it further makes the Religious querulous, idle, froward, surly, a
murmurer, and of a perverse and bad example. He would have all moved to
commiserate and pity his case, all to show benevolence and good will unto him,
and therefore he attributes every least distemper of body, and indisposition of
his health to the sore travails and pains, he has taken in Religion. And how
can it be possible, that there should be either spirit, or Religious discipline
in such me^? O unhappy subjects, and as unhappy Superiors, who permit such
things in Religion, wherein they are pastors, and have a charge, seeing this
is nothing else, then to bring a certain infection into it, and to show a way
unto young men for the quite ruining and overthrowing thereof.

That it is not enough for a Religious man to mortify his body, unless the mind
be restrained also.

CHAP. III.
SON, that the Religious man so mortify his body, and the senses thereof, as
it become not proud, and rise against the soul, it is good and healthful, but
yet Religious perfection consists not therein, but rather in the inward
virtues of the mind, of which follows the reformation of the passions, and
senses. Neither can the body be directed by the soul, unless the soul it
self, together with all it own facultyes and powers, be first of all drawn
out, and fashioned to the right and straight rule. A crooked rule is not for the
making of a thing straight. The soul is then ruled straight, when it is
conformed to the divine will, which is the first, and an infallible rule. Let a
man mortify his flesh, as much as he will, and keep it in subjection as much as
possibly may be, if the affections be not reduced to a certain rule, he shall
never come to that peace of mind, that is necessary for the attayning of
perfection. Again, the affections cannot be brought to a moderation, unless the
grounds of them, of which they have their beginnings, that is the understanding
and will, be brought in order also.

2. Thou know, that the understanding is the principal power or faculty, on
which all the harmony, consent, and government of the rest of the facultyes
depend. The will understands not, and therefore it cannot work, unless the
light and knowledge of the understanding put to the assisting hand. The rest of
the inferior faculcultyes, that execute the commands and directions of the
Superior powers, depend also on the understanding, which shows unto them,
what every one is to do. But if the understanding should chance to be out of
order, the whole frame and state of the both inward and outward man must needs
be in trouble, and confounded. Self judgment does indeed most of all prevent
and go before the understanding, by which it is so sore blinded, as it makes
no good deliberation, and thereof also frames a worse conclusion. Whence it is,
that if thou desire to bring the understanding to an upright and true
government, thou must needs spoil it of it own judgment.

3. Proper judgment I call that, which is thine own conceit, thine own
purpose, and thine own opinion, that has not any correspondence either with
my judgment, or with that of thy Superiors, and therefore is properly thine,
and peculiar to thee, dissenting from the common judgment of thy forefathers,
of the wise and virtuous. Wherefore when this thy judgment is not agreeable to
mine, that is, to the first rule that never deceives, it cannot be either
right or good. For what rectitude, and straightnes, or goodness can there be of
that, which has the origin of proud presumption? Whiles thou cleauest to thine
own judgment, thou do not only prefer it before the judgment of others, but
also think it better then the judgment of others, that all be deceived
besides thy self, that none understands the matter but thy self, and
hereupon thou also becommest proud in mind, contemning all others, as fools,
and less intelligent. And is not this a notable presumption, and pride? What
can be worse, then for one man presumptuously to prefer himself before all?
Hence it comes, that being over devoted to thine own judgment, in
deliberations thou give no place at all to other men's counsels, which is
nothing else, then to become obstinate, wilful, stiff, an^ stubborn.

4. Who would now marvel, if tho^ be exposed to be beguyled and deceived b^
the Devil? If thou fall into most gross and palpable errors? For whence have
grown the Heresies, Schisms, sects, discords, an^ other stirs not to be
numbered, that were in times past, and be now in the world* but from men over
much addicted to the conceit of their own judgment, and wit* The dearer thine
own judgment is unto thee, the more it hurts thee: for it separateth thee
from thy Superiors: it makes thee to seem wise in thine own eyes to trust
thy self over much, that it may the^ sooner bring thee to the height of pride,
and in conclusion precipitate thee into that pit of cogitations, that thou will
think thy self not to need any guide, or directour in the spiritual way. O
how much more understanding, and more wise is that Religious man, who uses his
Superiors judgment for his own, nor seeks any other thing: for by so doing
he satisfyeth me, he heapeth up his merit in heaven, and leads a quiet life
on earth, then which nothing is more contenting, and pleasant.

5. Another thing, that troubles, and ^eruerteth the understanding, is a
certain ^uriosity of understanding matters apper^^ining to God. For seeing the
vnderstan^ing is addicted to learn and understand ^hinges, if curiosity also
put it forwards, it will wander up and down over so many ^ountreys, as it does
in the end quite loose ^t self. Matters of God do far exceed the ^nderstanding
of man, and therefore im^ossible it is for his shallow capacity to co^^rehend
or conceive them: and therefore, ^e who would curiously search into their
mysteries, easily loses his sight, and is ^linded with that infinite light.
For if the ^orporall eyes cannot without prejudice of the sight behold the
light of the Sun, ^ow will thou have, that human understanding, by nature
limited, should be able to comprehend that in accessible light of God which is
infinite, and admits no circumscription, or limitation at all.

6. He that loadeth himself with a burden that he is not able to bear,
deserves to be oppressed, and borne down by the weight thereof. God should not
be God, if he should be conceived of any created understanding. Desire thou
to handle matters concerning God wisely? Accomodate thy self to the virtue of
Faith, and seek no more: for it will in a very short time most certainly teach
thee all, which is n^cessary for everlasting salvation. Take the^ also a way
the curiosity of vnderstandin^ such matters, as belong to Superiors, an^
others that nothing concern thee, becau^^ they greatly disquiet and trouble
the^, and further hinder thee from coming to the just moderation and temper of
understanding, and knowing of others defects since it is enough for thee to know
thyn^ own, which if thou know well, and diligently amend, thy pain is not ill
employed. It is a vice of Curiosity to stir up and put a man forwards to fish
out, and t^ learn other men's matters, and to be forgetful of his own.

7. There is yet another defect of the understanding, which is, to judge
rashly* and if it be not taken away, the understanding cannot be said to be
squared straight* And this default happneth, when without any cause at all, no
censure going before, an^ undoubted judgment is pronounced and given, touching
others actions. And if a man also interpret the intention of another in ill
part, when he may interpret i^ in good part, or excuse it, such a judgment is
very pernicious unto him, because ^t is against both Charity and Justice. If
^hou be not a judge of the inward man, ^or yet know him, how dare thou
judge and censure him? I am the searcher ^f men's hearts alone: every man's
intention (...) manifest alone to me, and therefore the ^ffice of judging is
due to me alone.

8. Moreover for the directing of the will, needful it is to remedy three
defects most of all, no less troublesome, then dan^erous. The first is, that
the will is of it ^wne nature blind, and obnoxious to a ^housand falls. The
second is, since the will ^s free, it can wander whither it list, whether it keep
the good and right way, or the bad, and by-way. As it is blind, that it stray
not and fall, it needs a guide: and as it is ^ree, that it may not exceed,
and go beyond ^easons bounds, it needs a bridle. The guide shall be the
divine will, declared and explained by them, who exercise my place in
governing. The bridle shall be the fear and dread of Gods justice, which will
di^ect it in the right way, and in security. O happy is that Religious, who
guided with such a bridle, follows so trusty and faithful a directour in his
way. The third defect is, that the will is went to seek a propriety in it
self, from which unless it be delivered, it will never be brought i^^^ order.
To be Religious, and to retain (...) own will, can in no case stand
togeath^^* For he is said to be a true Religious m^^ who follows me with his
cross. A^^ it is already decreed in my Scripture, (...) none can follow me
unless he deny him and forsake his own will.

9. Lord, is then a man's own will (...) be left, if it be carried toward
pious a^^ good things? Son, thou must abando^^ whatsoever thou desire of
thine own w^^ whether it be temporal, or spirituall^ call that the proper
will, that conspir^^ not with mine, or with that of thy Su^^riour, and is
properly thine: and because (...) is discordant from mine it cannot be go^^
Proper will is that, which proclaym^^ war against me: it I abhor, it I ha^^
have laid the foundation thereof in h^^ Hell intertaineth it, and it alone is
n^^ severely punished therein. O mad Reli^^ous man, who makes more account of
(...) own will, then of Gods! I did not (...) self so. When my Humanity had
an au^^sion from drinking the bitter chalice of (...) passion, I said to my
heavenly Father: N^^ mine, but thy will be done. If I th^^ would not in this
life do mine own wi^^ ^oth it seem fitting, and convenient, that ^hou
should do thine? Think thou it ^eet, that thou should prefer thine
^wn will before the will of thy Creator, and of thy Superiors? He that
extolleth ^imselfe by making a great esteem of his ^wne will, must needs
expect a sore fall to ^is utter perdition for ever.

that a Religious man must shake off his inordinate affection to his parents.

CHAP. IIII.
SON, unless thou shall forget thy people, and the house of thy Father, I ^ill
not love and embrace thee, nor deal (...) any familiar manner with thee. It is
^ot enough once to have renounced the ^orld, and thy parents, as thou did in
the ^eginning of thy conversion: but that thou ^aist arrive to the height of
perfection, ^roposed thee, thou must needs persist and ^ontinue in the same
renunciation till the ^ery end of thy life. It little or nothing ^^ofiteth the
prisoner to be out of the prison ^ores, unless his yrons be also taken away,
which he had on his legs, when he was in ^^e prison. Even so it will do thee
little ^ood to have left thy Fathers house, unless thou shall also cut off thine
inordinate affection to thy parents, since this affection binds thee so
strongly, as thou can not forget them.

2. It is true, that in holy Writ I have promised to the Religious an hundred
fold together with life everlasting, but yet to them who out of a love of
serving me, have left father and mother, and whatsoever they possessed in the
world. True it is, that I am the master, and do teach, and have also from the
very beginning protested, that none can be my disciple, who shall not hate
father and mother, his own life, and what ever befids, that may keep him from
profiting in spirit. He is not a good scholar, neither can profit, who is not
attentive to what is read in the school. The lesson that I deliver to my
hearers is, that they dye to the world, that they master and subdue their
perturbations of mind that make a man unquiet, that they spoil themselves of
all carnal affection to parents, least they be excluded and shut out of the
way to perfection. Do not thou by thine own experience find, that the
overmuch affection thou carryest to thy parents, makes thee unquiet? See
thou not also, that the same molesteth and troubles others? Do thou not
observe, that whiles thy mine and care is on them, thou come to forget thy
self? And this in truth is not to resort to my school, but to run rather
out of it. If thou be dead to the world, why does the care of parents trouble
thee? If thou only live to me, as thou ought, why art thou not conjoined
with me, and hold me in place of Father and mother, and of all things else? O
how well did my beloved, and Religious servant S. Francis understand this, when
he said from his heart: Deus meus and omnia, and other my Religious Saints, who
to avoid all occasions of dealing with their parents, retired themselves into
far remote deserts, and as men dead to the world, hid themselves in caves under
ground, as in their sepulchers and graves.

3. Lord, have thou not commanded in thy holy Law, that our neighbors should
be loved, yea and our enenyes to, and that they are to be helped in their
necessityes, and wa^ts. How the^ is it thou now exactest, that we should leave,
and hate our parents, who hold the first place amongst our neighbors? Son, I
deny not, that the parents and friends should be loved, whom thou have left
behind in the world, but I say they are to be loved with a spiritual
affection, and with that love, which perfect Charity requires. And thou art
not ignorant, I know, that thou art more near unto thy self, then thou art to
parents, or friends: and Charity requires that thou love them so, as thou do
not thy self any spiritual hurt for them. If then they trouble thee in
Religion, and be a disquiet unto thee in my service, and any impediment and let
also to thy spiritual profit, why should thou not forsake them? why should
thou not get thy self far from them? Again, art thou not to hate those
parents, who oppose themselves against thee, and had rather have thee to live
out of Religion? and more then that, labor also to draw thee out of it, and to
fly from them, as from the Devils instruments, and works? Thou must not hold
him for father or friend, who seeks to put thy soul in ieopardy of
damnation. They are not thy neighbors, nor yet of the number of those
corporal enemies, whom the Christian law would have loved: but they be the
enemies of thy spiritual good, they are the enemies of my honor and glory,
and to say in one word, they be the baits of hell it self.

4. But when need is to relieve them in their necessity, as well corporal, as
spi^ituall, how, and how far, that thou art ^o understand from thy
Superiors. And ^now thou, that the Devil has by a feig^ed and counterfaite
show of Charity and ^iety toward parents, thrust many out of their happy state
of Religion. No Religi^us man, unless he be more then mortified, and more then
dead to the world, and to self love, may ever with security deal with his
parents. O how displeasing is it unto me, whiles I see some Religious to have a
most earnest desire to understand ^omething touching the state of their
pa^ents, and to receive letters from them? For what is it else, but to seek an
occasion of ^rouble, and of distraction in their prayers? ^t is not much to
have forsaken parents in body, unless thou also abandon them in mind and
cogitation. O how wisely did some servants of mine, who having received letters
of their friends from far countries, for the conseruing of their quiet and
peace of mind, threw them unread into the fire. O lamentable folly of some
Religious persons! Their parents by them left in the world, have laid a side
all care and memory of them, whiles they again be day and night sollicitous
and anxious about them.

5. Neither do those Religious less offend me, who do not only wish, but also
by all manner of diligence on their part seek to raise their parents or kyn to
great dignityes, and therefore they subject themselves to the men of the world,
that they may gain and wyn their favor: and these men do greatly prejudice
both their own^ authority, and their Religion. Son, do thou not see, that
is not to serve me, but thy friends? See thou not, that is not to furnish and
enrich thy soul, but to make others rich by many temporal commodityes? What
rule perscribeth, that thou should play thy parents Procuratour? Have an eye
to thy self, for I assure thee, that in the latter judgment I will not demand
of thee, whether thy parents were great in this life, nor whether thou shewdst
thy self diligent in procuring them dignityes and honors, but will rather
exact an account of thee, whether thou have busyed and entangled thy self in
such affairs. This is not the way of Religious perfection, but the way of
loosing all spirit, and all piety together.

6. Is it not an exceeding great madness for a Religious man to be most cowardly
and negligent in running the way of perfection, whereto he was bound: and to be
most cunning, and to show a great wit about the raising of his friends up to
great dignityes in the world? And what is worse then it? It more displeases
me, that there be Religious, who take more care that their parents and friends
abound in temporal commodityes, then in spiritual. Whence it is, that they
very seldom, and withal coldly, advise them to the exercise of virtues, but
they often, and in very earnest manner excite them to the procuring of earthly
riches. Son, what will the dignityes and titles of thy friends do thee good,
if thou be imperfect? What reward expectest thou from me, if thou trauailest
and take pains only for flesh and blood? Certes thou should provide better
for thy self, and for their souls good, if thou would direct them in the
way of virtue, and by so doing thy merit would be the greater, and their souls
good should be the more securely promoted.

That the Religious man ought to use great prudence, and circumspection in the
company of others.

CHAP. V.
SON, all the Religious with whom thou live, be my beloved children, and my
charity wherewith I tender them, i^ not partial, but general: for I love all,
and I wish unto all the true good. And I desire that thou also by my example
would love all indifferently, and wish unto all perfection in this life, and
everlasting glory in the next: for so perfect Religious Charity requires. O
how much do the particular familiarityes of some Religious persons displease
me, who contract the charity that they should extend to all, to two or three,
with whom they continually keep company, and by their bad example do greatly
offend others. And how is it possible, I should not hate such conversation? The
amity and friendship that hurts the co^munity, was never good, neither had
ever a good ending, but ever brought forth some evil, as murmurations,
obloquies, complaints, dissentions, whereby though no other great mischief
should follow, these conuersations would be dangerous and pernicious enough to
Religion.

2. Since thou art a member of a Religious community, thou art every way and by
all means bound not only to love it, but also for the love of it to suffer
something not pleasing to thy liking. For we see that a man to be conserved in
health, some member thereof is oftentimes either tormented with cutting and
searing, or quite cut off from the body, for that the members be naturally
ordained for the conservation of the wholly body. If therefore thou love thy
Religion, whereof thou art a member, thou must have a care, that it be preserved
whole and entire, and to remove all things from it, that may any way hurt it,
among which not without cause, is an overmuch familiarity with some particular
persons. He that loves truly, is most circumspect and careful not to offend
the beloved in any thing. But we see, that Communityes be not a little offended
and hurt by private friendship, especially if the same be between persons
desirous of a more free life, who be held neither in the number of the very
spiritual, nor of the well mortifyed. Wherefore it follows, that he, who
forbeareth not from such like conversation, that offends the rest of the
company, is not a lover of the community nor of his Religion. I know well that
some Religious person is otherwhiles found who takes very little or no care at
all o^ love his Religion, and little regarde^ whether it goes on well or ill,
so he may not himself want his own commodityes* But every Religious person
must know that Religion is his mother, and if he lou^ it not, and uses it not
as his mother, h^ shall not himself be dealt with, as with a son, but as
ungrateful shall be one day punished, as he deserves.

3. Neither am I ignorant, that ther^ be not wanting of those, who excuse
themselves, that they are of their own nature and complexion very melancholy,
and for that cause do use only the company o^ few. And whence have thou
learned, tha^ the Religious must use the direction and conduct of nature and
complexion? If nature should incline thee to ease and ydlenes, or to pride,
might thou give thy self to ease and pride? But remember son, tha^ thou art
now become Religious, that thou mighst overcome nature, and mortify the
inordinate desires of blood, or of complexion. Now then it appears, that the
affection of particular familiarity, since it is not conform to a Religious
spirit, must needs be inordinate. Neither is it good, if thou say: That in
this particular conversation there is no evil, nor any perverse end intended:
for it carries a show of an evil great enough, when others are thereby
offended, and that the Superiors reprehend and find fault with it.

4. Lord, it is thy will, that all should profit in spirit, and use those
means, which may help to spiritual profit: I then find by experience, that I
profit more in spirit by often conuersing with one, then by the talk of many,
why will thou deprive me of such an help? Son, to converse, as it is meet
with them, who may be able to promote thee in spirit, cannot be offensive to
the community: for this help thou may have, all overmuch familiarity being
set aside, of which we here speak. But if the community be offended, it is a
sign, that thy conversation goes beyond the appointed bounds, neither is it
so divine and spiritual, as thou bear thy self in hand. And though thou
sometimes receiuest some spiritual fruit and good by that private familiarity
and conversation, yet this thine own commodity should not be preferred before
the common offense of thy Religion, but perfect charity requires, that thou
would use another way in procuring that spiritual fruit to thy self,
without the offending of others.

5. And if over much familiarity among the Religious, and my servants offends
others, and therefore is worthy of reprehension, how much would it offend, if a
Religious man should use so often conversation with a secular man, whereby an
occasion might be given of bad suspicions? The conversation of a Religious man
with one of the world, ought not only to give edification to them with whom he
keeps company, but to them also who see it, for as much as he is bound to be
a good example to all. And if the wise and spiritual men censure so frequent
conversation with particular persons not to be good, they ought to forbear it.
Neither is it enough, if he say, That he treats of good and pious matters,
that he labors about the man's conversion, and that they do ill who censure
him otherwise. I do not deny, but that thy neighbor should be helped, but I
affirm that it must be done by due and fit means: but overmuch conversation
with some one is no due means, neither ordered ^y Charity. The Religious man,
who in ^^lping others has no care of his own ^ood name, does ill, but he that
gives an ^ccasion unto others of thinking il of him, ^oth worse, for so much
as not only an evil (...) self, but also the very show of evil is (...) be
taken heed of.

6. Neither does he satisfy who an^wereth, That he has a good intention in ^t,
since all our works must of necessity be ^oth good, and removed of all
suspicion. Others do not judge by thy good intention which they see not, but by
thy conuersati^n which they behold. And though they should see thine intention,
yet they would ^ot excuse it, for that by thy overmuch ^^miliarity thou
bring it in danger also? O how many conferences have amongst Religious
persons begone with the spirit, and ended afterward with the flesh and ^loud.
The overmuch confidence of our ^^lus has caused many to fall. If many have
^eene caught but with one casting of the ^ye, how many will be caught with long
^onuersation, and often talking togea^her? Our sensuality is very crafty, and
^east her iugling should be found out and discovered, otherwhils she concealeth
her self under pretense of helping some person, and it begins indeed with
spiritual talk* but afterward the speech full of affection does easily
manifest whereto it aimed* Son, beware of the Devil, and that mos^ of all,
when he transfigureth himself into an Angel of light, and as death fly his
company to whom thou find thy self sensually affected. A little fire,
unless it be removed far from straw, breaks first into a smoke, and afterward
into a flame.

7. There be other Religious, who contrary to their Superiors will, do seek
the familiarity of great persons in the world not so much to promote and
further their souls good, as to gain unto themselue^ their good will and
favor. And is no^ this a thing most sorely to be lamented* Can it be possible,
that a Religious man who has renounced the world, should seek after the
patronage of a Lord of the world? Tell me, I pray thee, for wha^ cause do
thou seek their favor and help* Is it to satisfy Religious discipline? or is
i^ to mortify thy self, as thou should do? o^ also the more easily to come
to perfection But certes for this thou need not the favor or assistance of
men of the world: bu^ if thou seek help, thou have many in Religion that can
do it. Yet others be not s^ simple, but that they easily smell out, that ^hou
do for none other cause seek their good will and protection, then that thou
may withdraw thy self from Religious ^iscipline, and that thy Superior may
not ^^mmaund thee at his pleasure, that which ^^ndeth not with thine own good
li^ing. And what other thing is this, then ^o put a Religious habit upon
secular li^erty? What is it, but under hand to live ^n the world, and to
entertain friendship ^herwith, and in the clear light to be at de^iance with
it? But I see as well, and as clearly by night, as by day, and I expect them
at a time, when they shall be abandoned of all favor, and help of others. Then
an accoumpt shall be taken of their ^ernicious wiliness, and they shall know
how much it hurts, from my defense and protection to degenerate and fall to
the patronage of earthly Lords, and shall to their hurt cry aloud: Accursed is
the man, who trusts in man.

That a Religious man must fly Ease and Idleness.

CHAP. VI.
SON, Idleness has been condemned even from the time of the worlds creation,
as the origin of very many euil^ and that was in such sort done, as no^
received it. Wherefore thy first Fath^^ Adam was placed in the terrestrial
paradis^ in a place of pleasure, not to live at ease, an^ to be idle therein, or
to tryfle the time in r^creating himself, but as the Scripture spe^keth, to
work in it. And being thru^^ out of Paradise, that he might not be idle the
earth was delivered him to manure an^ husband, that he might eat his bread i^
the sweat of his brows. And do thou who art made the heir of this thy first
parents labors, think to eat thy brea^ without sweating? Thy Father Adam had
also labored in the terrestrial paradise, i^ he had continued therein, and
will thou b^ idle in thine exile, that is a place of pains taking? Will thou
attend to thy pleasure^ in the vale of tears? Consider my son, that thou art
not yet come to thy country* but art still a stranger and pilgrim, as all thy
forefathers were. And if a pilgrim^ have a desire to arrive at last home to his
country, he must not give himself to ydlenes, or stay upon the way, but go
continually forwards, least the darkness of the night come upon him.

2. My servant Job says, That man is borne to labor and therefore he that
lo^eth his ease, and takes not pains accor^ing to his state, seems not to
answer ^he condition of man. And therefore some have not without cause called
Idleness the buryall of a living man. O unhappy Religious, whose buryall is in
his pleasures, the ^ench whereof, by reason of an inueterate custom he
smells not, but he shall feel it (alas) in his death, when he shall also
have a feeling of the hurt. For he must of necessity go deprived, and destitute
of good works, to another life, where the fewer good works a man shall bring,
the less he shall have of happynes, and he that might have brought more, shall
be greatly sorry that he brought the^ not. O how true is that which the Wiseman
says, That a living dog is better then a dead lion. There be some Religious
men excellently learned, generous of nature, and enriched with many ^alents by
God, but so given over to ease and idleness, as where they are able wonderfully
to promote the Christian cause by their pains and travail, yet they do
nothing, and what be they else, then dead lions? Certes a living dog, that is,
that Religious man does much more, who though but meanly and slenderly provided
of learning, does yet what he can, and is able, for the love of me. And indeed
he th^^ does little, when he can no more, pleases me more then does he, who is
of ability to perform much, and yet does it not.

3. I was ever a capital enemy of idleness, and therefore meet is it, that
thou, who make a profession of imitating me* should also be auerted from
idleness. Thou know well, that I began to take pain from my very childhood,
in helping on^ while my poor mother, another while my foster-father Joseph in
his trade; and will not thou, who art come out of the worl^ to Religion to
travail and take pains help the Religion thy mother in her l^bours, and thy
Superiors who intertain^ and govern thee? Remember, what my Apostle says,
That an idle man is no^ worthy of his meat. To desire to eat, and not to have
a will to labor, is nothing el^ but to have a will to consume and spen^ what
is got by others: a thing vnworthyman, not to say, a Religious man. Neithe^
does it satisfy, that thou say, I am read^ to take great pains, but my
Superiou^ will not put me to those labors wherunt^ I have an inclination, and
which I am abl^ to do with commodity and ease. This i^ no just excuse, since it
is not for thee to choose the office, or thing that is to be exercised or done.
The servant in serving must not follow his own inclination, but his Masters,
and therefor the Superior supplyeth my place, to appoint unto his subjects,
what is to be done to my greater glory. Moreover, whence art thou sure, that
thou can perform that charge and office well, whereunto thou have an
inclination? Thou can not in this matter be an upright and indifferent judge
by reason of the passion that deceives thee. Every one pleases himself in
his own, but the pain and difficulty is, that the same may also be pleasing
to others: and though thou should content all, and yet should displease me,
what good would it do thee? And therefore thou shall never free thy self from
the fault of idleness, unless thy trauayles be conform to my will, declared unto
thee by thy Superior.

4. O how pernicious a thing is idleness to a Religious person. For where
idleness reigns, there is no charity, which cannot be idle, as my Apostle
says very well. If therefore thou be idle, it follows, that thou want
charity. And what will it profit thee, poor and miserable man, if thou have
received the gifts, and talents of all creatures, and be without charity? What
merits can thou heap up for thy self, if thou labourest not according to
charity? Idleness is no more repugnant to pains taking and Charity, then it is
pleasing to the Devil, to whose tentations and assaults he gives place,
opportunity, and occasion. Where idleness is, there the Devil ever finds ready
entrance, for as much as idleness is to him like a city, unprovided of the
defense of walls. Hence it is, that those ancient holy Fathers, who made the
desert famous, did ever and anon admoni^^ their scholars, for freeing
themselves from the impugnations and assaults of the Devil* to have a care to
be ever in some employment or business, since by so doing an occasion is taken
from the Devil of working hi^ bad designs.

5. Idleness further works another mischief and hurt to a Religious man* and
that is, that he falls into many defects for as much as it makes him
curious, a breaker of silence, and detractour: it causes him to disturb and
hinder others in their good exercises; to go often abroad, and t^ wander up and
down the City, and to seek sundry recreations and pastimes for the
contenting of himself. This is not ^he way of purchasing virtue, nor of
la^ouring to perfection, whereunto thy fore^^thers arrived, and now do in a most
plea^ant and contenting manner enjoy the ^ruit of their good works and labors.

6. Finally idleness is cause of another ^urt, that it spoileth the Religious
man of ^wo most precious things, namely time, and life, and is not this a most
manifest madness? I have given thee life, and do still ^onserue it, that thou
may enrich it by meriting, and have thou no regard of thine own good, and
commodity? What pro^itor help can thy neighbor expect from ^hee, if thou have
not any consideration of ^hyne own weal? I have granted thee ^yme, and
opportunity of manuring and cultiuating thine own vineyard, that is ^hy soul,
and thou suffer it, through ^hyne idleness, to grow wild. What good will thou do to thy Religion, who have ^o little care of thine own soul?

That a Religious man ought to be practiced in hearing, and talking of God, and
of spiritual matters.

CHAP. VII.
SON, many be by Sermons drawn to the faith, and to a better course of life,
and many by spiritual talk, and discourse be stirred up in the love of God,
and of virtues: whence it is, that to hear, or to speak of matters of spirit,
helps very much to the attayning of perfection, for that the one and the
other finds entrance into the innermost receipts of the heart. Spiritual
talk, whiles ear is given unto it, i^ received into the hearers heart, as a
good and holy seed, that cannot but bring forth good and answerable fruit. And
because the same comes from out of the heart of the deliverer of spiritual
matters, it must need^ also set his heart on fire, from whose mouth such speech
comes. Conference therefore of pious matters profits both the hearer, and
the speaker.

2. All this is true, but yet if there want love in the heart, neither the
tongue, not the ears will busy themselves much in spiritual matters. Whence
think thou does it come, that some speak so seldom, ^^d so coldly of
spiritual matters, but of a ^efect and want of fervent love? Whence ^inkest
thou, grows the loathing and ^isgust, when speech is had of pious things ^^d
heavenly, but of a defect of the same ^^ue? If the fire of the love of God, and
of ^ertues should burn within our hearts, ^^ey would upon the very least talk
of spi^^tuall matters be so set on fire, as the very ^^me would break forth,
and discover it ^^fe without: neither would there be talk ^f any other matter,
and nothing with ^^y greater desire heard, then of spirit, of ^euotion, of the
love of virtues: for not ^^ly the tongue, but the very ears also do ^oft
readily follow the desires of the heart.

3. O how great a confusion is it of some ^eligious men, who though they make
^^e profession of Religious life, do yet ei^^er never, or very unwillingly
treat of ^^irituall matters: whereas notwithstan^ing there is no man, that
does not willin^^y speak of the matters, that belong to his ^wne function or
office, and also willingly ^eare others, if they bring into their dis^urse
matters, that appertain to their pro^^ssion. Son, do thou long, and
earne^^ly desire to speak of God often and with pleasure? Love him, and the
greater the love shall be in thy heart toward him, an^ the more deeply
imprinted in it, the mo^^ facility and pleasure shall thou find in talking of
matters concerning God. Have tho^ a desire to be often in company with the^ who
treat of spiritual matters? Be tho^ earnestly affected to such talk: for to
hi^ that loves, nothing can happen more co^tenting, then to hear others talk
an^ speak of the thing which he loves.

4. The better the goodness of euer^ thing is known, the more it is esteemed
and the more earnestly desired. That spiritual matters be not so well
regarded, no^ so heartily desired, as they deserve, the fau^^ grows of nothing
else, then that the^^ goodness, excellency, and worth is no^ known. And among the
vtilityes of spir^tuall talk this is one, that by the benef^^ thereof the
dignity and excellency of spir^tuall things is discovered. An odifero^ thing,
the more it is handled, the better (...) stronger sweet smell it yealdeth: even
i^ the more often spiritual matters be brough^ into discourse, the more do the
hearers r^ceiue of the sweet smell of them, and for the known and proved
goodness of them the^ become the more heartily affected unto the But it happens
much otherwise in corporal and worldly things, which the more they be examined,
weighed, and proved, the more do they discover and bewray their imperfections
and faults, and therefore also less beloved of the wise.

5. The Devil extremely hates spiritual conferences, and therefore he
labors by all means to hinder it. For first, that they may not be brought
in, he pretends they are troublesome, hard, and nothing convenient for the
time: and if they be once brought in, that they may not be continued, he
suggesteth that they seem disgustfull, nothing pleasing, and to be as it were
without life, and pleasure in them. And if the crafty enemy find any, who may
trouble, and disgust the spiritual talk by laughter, or out of some leuity
scoff at it, it cannot be conceived, how he rejoices thereat. For he knows
well, that there is no more effectual way to the overthrowing and taking away
of the good custom of talking of spiritual matters, then that. The hellish
serpent is not ignorant, how great a detriment, and hurt he is forced to suffer
by spiritual conferences, wherein his snares, impostures, iuglings, and frauds
are laid open and discovered, least any may through incircumspection and
vnwarynes suffer himself to be caught and beguiled by them; and therefore as a
thief shunneth the light, so does he fly from, and detest spiritual talk. But
the more they be displeasing unto him, the more do they please me, and the more
profitable be they to the Religious. And should not this, ascertaine spurs, put
them forwards to love and serve me thy Lord and Savior? Moreover if talk be
had of virtue, and other spiritual things, their beauty, and splendor is laid
open, which is such and so great, as it must needs procure the wonderful love
of them, who cast but their eyes upon it. And what can a Religious man require
or desire in this life to do well, then that he be set on fire with the love of
virtues? What thing can befall more doleful unto the Devil, then to see
Virtue esteemed, and Vice to be contemned?

6. Tell me now, son, what just cause may thou pretend, why thou art not
more often delighted with spiritual talk? For if thou be cold, thereby thou
may get thee an heat: if thou want devotion, there is not a more
compendious or shorter way for the procuring of it, then by conference had with
a pious affection. Further, what is the cause, why thou do not lend a wil^ing
ear to spiritual exhortations? Whence ^t is, that when there is discourse
about the news of the world, or matters done by others that nothing belong to
thee, thou art so attentive thereunto: and when speech is ^ad of pious and good
matters, thou art either sleepy, or give ear with a certain disgust and
loathing? Some again there be, who vouchsafe not to be present at a spiritual
exhortation, unless some subtle, and high conceit be therein proposed: and
others there be, who in their familiar talk think, they should discourse and
treat of matters far removed from the common understanding of men. But they
are much deceived: for I require no such matter in pious and familiar
conferences. But I desire this especially, that whatsoever is in them said of
devotion, and other spiritual matters, it be easy, and accommodate to
practice, and applied unto it, and therefore all must rather be directed to the
affection, and to the promoting and putting forwards of the will, then to the
feeding and delighting of the understanding. Neither is there ^heere either
time, or place of showing wit, but of declaration of the desire, that every
Religious man ought to burn with, of purchasing virtue, and of attayning
perfection.

7. O how much hurt has bad custom done, and still does to Religion. This
has caused a Religious man to b^ prone and faeil to hear vain and light
matters, and to speak idle and frivolous things and on the other side slow and
difficile t^ hear and speak of pious and good, an^ of such as agree with his
vocation best* And of this those abuses, and defects for a great part have
their beginning, that are to be found in some Religious. It is an har^ matter
to temper the tongue, and vnle^ thou accustom thy self to speak of good
things, it will hardly contain it self from treating of vain and idle
matters. Tru^ indeed it is, that the fault heerof is not i^ the tongue, but al
is in the heart, that should restrain it, and keep it in. For the tongu^
vttreth no more, then what is first written in the heart, and as the hearts
trumpet, sounds aloud whatsoever is in it. If there b^ virtue, devotion,
charity, and spirit in it the tongue speaks of them: if vanity, secular
conversation, wantones, and other the like, it resoundeth them also, and makes
them known unto others.

That a Religious man ought to be diligent in all his Actions.

CHAP. VIII.
SON, a servant, that is diligent not only in his ministry and service, but
^lso in all things, that are appertayning ^o his charge, cannot but be dear to
his Lord and master. And though he trespass and offend otherwhiles, yet
because he has ^ot forgotten his former diligence, his master dissembleth the
matter and pardo^eth him for it. That which causes the master to love his
diligent servant, ^roceedeth not so much of this, that he sa^isfyeth his office
and duty, as that he sees ^im affected to his wonted service and does ^ll, not
out of a servile fear, but of love toward him: for love is that, which makes
^im diligent. Contrariwise a negligent ^eruant is displeasing to the whole
family where he lives: if any thing be commit^ed unto him, uncertain it is,
whether he will do it, or not, and if he does, whether he will do it in time,
and in good sort: whence it is, that his master cries out every hour, and
calls upon him, is troubled and moved with anger against him, in so much, as
the negligent man is bo^^ afflicted himself, and further gives occasion of
affliction to others. It happenet^ otherwise with a diligent and industrio^^
servant: for he enjoys exceeding gre^^ peace and quiet, and because he does
(...) office stoutly, he is cause, that all the family have their part in the
same peace an^ quiet.

2. A diligent Religious man grea^ly pleases me also, as contrariwise an idle
negligent and slothful man as much di^pleaseth me. Yet all those are not to
be say^ diligent, who make a ready dispatch co^ those things, that are
committed to th ^ to do, but those, who seek after a perfe^^ manner to
perform those things commanded them, neither forbear any labor i^ doing
them. He is diligent, who studieth to do all things in their time, and as my
will is, they should be. He is diligent^ who what he has to do, performs
wit^ a promptitude of will, and endeauouret^ rather to expect others, then to
be expecte^ of them. But the negligent takes a far other manner of way. For
first his study i^ to do what is commanded in the speedies^ manner, so he may
have it out of hand, least a disgust grow thereon, little caring how well or
ill the same be done. He is negli^ent, who without any just cause differreth
that from one hour to another that he is ^o do. Again, he is negligent and
malici^us also, who does of purpose busy himself ^n something, or feigneth
himself to be ^usied, least some other thing be imposed upon him, of which he
is afraid. Finally, that subject is negligent, who when he is ^ble and may,
does not for all that so exa^tly and diligently discharge what is commanded
him, as the Superior expected, ^r would have wished.

3. Son, it pleases me nothing, that some Religious be diligent there, where
there is no need, and out of negligence to pretermit that which was necessary
to be done. It is no great matter, if a man be sometimes slow and negligent in
outward things appertayning to the body which is one day to be meat for
worms, but if he show a neglect in matters which concern the mind, and the
good state and discipline of Religion, whereby accustomed service and honor is
yealded me, no little damage and hurt comes thereof. And yet those Religious
men offend me much more grievously, who spare no pains and labors in
procuring their commodityes of body, and their recreations, and be drous^ and
cold in promoting, and putting forwards the works of spirit. Thou know^ what
my servant Jeremy says, That accursed is the man, that does Gods work^
negligently, and fraudulently. If thou can^^ dispatch thine own affairs with
expedition and diligence that make to thy profit wherefore do thou it not? If
the Angell^ heavens, elements, and the rest of the creatures be diligent in thy
service, wherefor^ art thou slothful and negligent in yealdin^ me thy
Creator, service and honor? (...) for the favor of men, whose good will and
love thou seek, thou art forward and diligent in doing them some service,
wher^fore art thou so slack in my affairs, for the gayning of my good will
and favor, who am thy Father and Lord? Judge tho^ now, whether that Religious
man deserves to be accursed, who does my work^ after a remiss, languishing,
and negligen^ manner.

4. If the Master be diligent in procuring the commodityes of his servant,
ever with the hazard of his life and goods, an^ the servant on the other side
be backewar^ and negligent in requiting him, will i^ not be an unworthy thing,
and intollerabl^ withal? I suffered nothing on my part to ^e wanting in the
procuring of thy souls good, and in increasing of thy merits, though I were to
endure many greiuous and ^hamefull things, to which nevertheless I was not
bound: and do thou in working well for love of me, carry thy self slowly, who
art by thy vocation bound to serve me? and whatsoever good thou do, may
convert to thine own good? Thou shall prejudice thy self very much, and
greatly ^niure me thy Lord besides, if thou shall neglect to be diligent in
Religion, wherein ^he honor of my Name, and Service is ^n handling. Tell me,
if thy Superiors were negligent in procuring necessaryes ^or thy meat,
drink, and clothing, what would thou do? and if further they should ^e
slack in seeking thy spiritual profit, whereof thou had a great desire,
what would thou not do? And if thou should with patience endure the one and
the other, (...) should appertain to me to chasten both ^egligences. And if it
b^ so, what should ^xempt thee from the like orr^ct o^, if thou (...) careless,
remiss, and sl^c^e in o^seruation ^f the statutes of Religion?

5. More pleasing unto me is one good work done with di^^gence, then many
negligently performed: for that Religiou^ diligence proceeds of love, and
ever accompaineth it, and negligence is a defect, growing of the imperfection
of love. And now none can but know, that no work is acceptable to me, that is
not proceeding from love, and accomplished by it. Again a work done with joy
is much more pleasing unto me, then a work vnaccompanyed with joy. He that in
Religion is diligent in the exercise of good works, does them commonly also
with joy, and for this respect the diligent is also more dear to me, then is
the negligent. O how am I offended at the conditions of that Religious man, who
only uses a diligence and chearfullnes in doing those things, whereunto he is
affected, and other things he does and dispatcheth both drowsily, remissely,
and imperfectly. For who sees not, that in that former work, though he loose
nothing of his spiritual profit, yet he makes no gain thereof at all: for as
much as he received the hire and reward of his good work by the taste and
pleasure he reaped thereby? And who again observes not, that he loses in
his latter work, f^th certain it is, that it is not enough to do a good
work, unless it be well done withal* And that Religious man does it not well,
who goes about it negligently, and as it were with an ill will, and an
unwilling mind.

6. Son, I have seen many, who though they passed over their life very well
in Religion, were nevertheless at the hour of their death very much troubled
with the reflecting on their own negligence: yea and great Saints and holy men
have for the same scruple been greatly afraid in that their last passage to
another life. And what will thou do, who art neither ^n holy man, nor yet sure
that thou shall ^eade a life conform to thy vocation, till ^he end? And
therefore it should be wis^ome for thee, if thou often renew a diligence, and
much more thy love to God, ^f which that diligence proceeds, if thou ^esire
at thy death to be free from the fore^ayd affliction of mind, and after death
to ^scape the punishments and pains of the ^ther life.

That a Religious man must not contend with any, but must intertaine peace with
all.

CHAP. IX.
SON, if thou longest in this banishment to have a taste of the quiet of the
heavenly country, have a care to conserve peace with three, with thy Creator,
with thy neighbors, and with thy self. Thou shall intertaine peace with thy
Creator, if thou obey his precepts, and conserve thy soul free from sin.
Woe be to thee, if thou take arms against God: for he that makes war upon
hope of victory, kills himself. It is sin, that moves war betwixt God
and man, because it induces a man to repugne, and do against the will of his
Creator. Take away sin, and thou shall have peace with God.

2. Thou shall intertayne peace with thy neighbors, if thou be humble: for
Humility is Peaces mother, as pride is the mother of discord. The humble lives
peacebly with all, and conserueth peace amongst the proud. And though he should
otherwhiles be forced to contend, yea and to come to blows, yet he shall not
loose the opinion, and name of a peaceable man, because his will would aim at
peace, and ^ecessity should cause the quarrel, conten^ion, and fighting.
Therefore be thou possessed of humility, and thou shall be lo^ed of all, and
not held peaceable alone. Thou shall keep peace with thy self, if ^hou be
mortifyed, and in what measure ^hy mortification shall be, in the same will ^hy
peace be also. Many peaces are wont to be made between enemies, but none goes
beyond that which grows of the victory obtained by war. The unruly passions
and desires be the enemies that molest and trouble thee, and therefore for the
obtaining and compassing of a stable and continued peace, thou must needs weary
them out by making a restles war upon them, and so get the victory: for if
thou should give over the fight, they will not permit thee to enjoy any peace
or quiet.

3. I am in holy Writ called the prince of peace, and worthily, because I was
ever a lover of peace, and therefore, when I came first into this world, the
Angels did sing, Glory in the highest to God, and in earth peace to men of
good will. Again, when I was to go out of this world to my Father, to my
Disciples and their successors I left none other testament, and inheritance,
the Peace and Charity. Wherefore I acknowledge not that Religious person, who
intertayneth not peace in his heart, for my disciple and heir, but I thrust him
out, and exclude him from having any part in myn^ inheritance. Now tell me, who
hat^ taught thee to contend in Religion, which is my house, and the house of
peace an^ concord? Does it seem unto thee reasonable, that thou, who have
forsaken the world, that thou might lead a quiet lif^ in Religion, should
not only not live i^ peace, but should further disturb the peace of others?
Contentions, and discord be most sore and bad Evils, and ther^ cannot be
greater in the world. And if tho^ think it a great matter, that thou ha^^
left the world, thy friends, and all that tho^ had, and bring contentions,
debates, and dissentions into Religion, thou art greatly deceived. For the
Religion cannot do him good, who lives not in peace, and he cannot possibly
have peace, who in Religion frames and orders not his life according to the
institute and spirit thereof.

4. Lord, I sincerely acknowledge, that contentions do in no sort beseem a
Religious person, but in this life there be so many toys and controversies,
and men be ^o contentious, as that he who will no^ ^ontend with them again,
often loses ^is right, and is contemned and trodden under foot by others.
Son, it is better without contending to be borne down by men, then by
contending to be trodden v^on by the Devils. And though all others should
contend, yet none can compel thee ^o contend: and if any would peradventure
^uarrell with thee, tell him with the Apo^tle: We have no such custom. Neither
will there want means, whereby thou maysthold, and recover what is thy due,
and right.

5. O how much is that Religiousman ^eceiued, who because he sees equity to
^tand for him, thinks it lawful for him ^o contend and go to suite and Law
with another. It is nothing so. For though it were lawful, yet it should not
beseem them, who make profession of perfection of life, since I have taught in
my Law, that a man must rather, for the conseruing of peace, yeald so, as to
him, who should seek to spoil him of his coat, for the avoiding of
contention, he should leave his cloak also. Yet there may be disputations, so
they be for defense of the truth, and for the exercise of wits. A man may also
co^mence Civil and Ecclesiastical suites against others, so it be done by the
prescrip^ of just and upright laws. Those contentions be only forbidden, that
have repugnance with Justice, which cause discord and give an occasion of
hatred: for if tho^ use them, thou plainly declarest thy self to serve as a
miserable soldier under the colors of the infernal enemy, who is the grand
Captain of all dissentions, and sworn enemy to peace and concord.

6. Of a bad root there cannot grow but a bad tree, and of a bad tree, as ba^
fruits. The root of contention is pride for if one should yeald to another,
the^ would ensue no contention and fighting and not to have a will to give
place and yeal^ to another, is an argument and sign of pride But if envy and
m^lice be added to prid^ which is contentio^s daughter, there grows a more
sore and more dangerous war For it often happens in the heat of
contention, that though a man see himself deprived of all reason, yet Envy
transportet^ him so far, as because he will not yeald the victory to the other,
he makes no end o^ contending at all. And if it hpppen, th^^ both of them be
peradventure more head strong, and of a more impotent nature, or have patrons
of their own opinion present, or else stand upon their honor and reputation,
the flame and hear of contention goes sometimes on so far, as no help may
quench and put it out, but with the ruin of them both.

7. The fruits of this tree be very pernicious to Religion, in gathering
whereof, if there be no vigilance and diligence used, it is to be feared least
within a while it become full of much infectious fruit, as of hatred,
dissentions, murmurations, treacheryes, underminings, reuenges, and other vices
of that kind: neither shall Religion be any longer the School of virtue, but
the sink of vice, and a receptacle of Devils, yea and for the scandal given
to men of the world, more bad then hell it self. And whereas hell is the place
of torments, and full of miseryes, wherein sinners receive their punishments, it
induces no man to sin, but rather terrifyeth him from committing sin: but
that Religion in the bowels whereof reigns discord and hatred, for the
scandal given induces secular men to sin the more grievously. For if a
secular man observe the Religious to be at contention and iars amongst
themselves, he will think, tha^ it is much more lawful for him to ente^ into
such kind of contentions, and to continue them. But if it chance that secula^
men do intermeddle themselves, and tak^ part in the contentions and debates o^
Religious men, then the Religion becomes nothing else, then a house and
habitation of diabolical confusion. My Apostles had also contentions amongst
them, which of them should be greater, and though their error were not great,
nor would have done much hurt to the College o^ my Apostles, yet I gave them
to understand, that such contention did not a little displease me, and by using
correction I took^ away the seed of that discord, and taught them to practice
Humility, which is Concords mother. And I further added this fearful saying:
Unless you become as little ones, you shall never enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

8. Son, if there be any found a lover of peace, and of union among Religious
men, I am he: and if the contentions, and debates of them again be displeasing
unto any, I am he most of all. And therefore that a quiet, and peaceable life
might be led in Religion, besides that which I took from them, Mine and Thine,
the beginning of all discords, I caused further, that all their constitutiont
and rules should be directed to the intertayning of peace and concord. But the
Devil has sown in them the cockle of self estimation, which if it be not
trodden under foot, is the seminary of all contentions, suits, debates,
quarrels, and wars.

How a Religious man ought to carry himself in his Tribulations.

CHAP. X.
SON, if thou could go to heaven without tribulation, or without the
suffering of aduersityes in this life, according to the laws of love, thou
should not with or desire it, considering I thy Lord entered into it by the
way of the cross, and of tribulation. All the blessed also, who do now enjoy
most perfect peace and rest, and joy in heaven, held the same way. Wherefore if
thou have a desire to go any other way, then that of tribulation, thou shall
never come to that place of quiet and joy thou seek, but of pains and
miseryes, since assured it is, that none can have his joy both in heaven and in
earth together. If thou will in this life be an imitatour of t^^ rich Glutton,
thou can not live in the ^ther, in the company of Lazarus. My sel^ proved by
many tribulations, carried m^ own heavy Cross upon my shoulders, and thereby
gave thee sufficiently to vnderstan^ what way is to be kept to thy country. M^
Apostle also declared it plainly enough that there is no getting into heaven,
but b^ many tribulations. And therefore to the sons of Zebedaeus my most
dear disciple^ when they wished to sit one on the righ^ hand, and the other on
my left in my kingdom, I said, That they knew not wha^ they asked, for that
they were first to think^ of their suffering of tribulations, and the^
afterward to speak of the reward the^of.

2. Thou art therefore deceived if tho^ think, that there is access for thee
to he^ue^ without thy cross and tribulatio^s: Tho^ art deceived, if thou
think thou mays^ live without the enduring of aduersityes* thou art deceived
(I say) if thou thinkes^ that thou can be in Religion free and exempt from
all affliction. If outward tribulations be wanting, the inward will assail
thee, for as much as the bad inclination^ passions and inordinate desires
suffer not a man to be at quiet, and free from his cross. and though they were
away, yet I will ^pt omit my self to send thee for thy souls ^ood and profit
some affliction or other. therefore seeing it is certain, and vn^oubted, that
in this exile the life cannot ^ossibly be passed over without crosses and
^ribulations, seeing the life it self is a con^^nuall tribulation, every
Religious man should in earnest do very well, and best ^or himself, if he
would make a virtue of ^ecessity, and accommodate himself to bear ^he cross
patiently, and with a stout cou^age. All labor, the more patiently it is
^ndured, the better and the more lightly is ^t borne. Whosoever refuses to
follow me with his cross, his cross will follow him.

3. Son, what do thou, that thou ^omplaynest in thy afflictions, and art
discouraged? Do thou not see, that thou make them the more bitter unto
thee, and that they torment thee the more? Do thou think, that for the
afflictions that thou bear, as thou art able, thou art the less beloved of
me? I am not like unto the men of the world, who abandone their friends, when
it is their hap to fall into any calamity, yea I send sometyms tribulations
unto some, that I may be present with them, when they are in their troubles. I
do i^ truth reprove and chastise my servants the more, the better I love them,
that they may the more perfectly be purged from all the filth of their sins,
their virtue may be the more strengthened, and being so corroborated may be
manifested, and made known unto others. If thou did but see, in how great an
esteem a good and perfect Religious man is with me, when he is in affliction
and misery, thou would wonder, that I do not multiply more and greater
afflictions upon him. For he in that state loses nothing of his spiritual
gain, and more then that he profits himself exceedingly, and by his own
example inciteth others wonderfully with a willing mind to embrace
tribulations, and to hold them, as a most singular gift, sent him from heaven.
And therefore it often happens, that some pious, and Religious man, exercised
by such tribulations, is able to effect more, and do more good, then many
preachers. Patience manifested by work, profits much more then when it is
recommended and preached out of a pulpit.

4. O how much is that Religious man in my favor, who when any affliction
befalls him, does at the very first accept it, as a particular favor of
mine, and yealdeth me most hearty thanks therefore, and secondly seeks to
reap some profit thereby for his soul, by craving of my help that he may for
the love of me bear it both manfully and willingly. And can it be possible,
that I should not help such a Re^igious person? Why should I not lend him my
assisting hand in tribulation? Why should I not free him, and glorify him?
Contrariwise, how much does it displease ^e to see a Religious man sighing
deeply, murmuring, and discontented in the very ^east tribulation, as though he
had proclaimed war against me? Is not this a ^alpable arrogance? Is not this
to take the ^words point in his own hand? True it is that tribulation is a
sword, but it is to be ^^ken by the hilt: for he that shall lay hand upon the
point, wounds himself. A good religious man, who takes the sword by the
hilt, uses and handles it with pro^it in cutting off the imperfections and
superfluous desires, and also in driving all enemies away from his soul.

5. It is to be confessed that tribulation is bitter, but it is such bitterness,
as is not il: neither can it be properly ill, because it comes from my
heavenly Father, whose goodness is infinite, and leads to the supreme good, as
it has already brought all the blessed, that dwell now in heaven. And seeing
I, the Son of God, was never without tribulation, it nothing beseems a
Religious man to refuse it for the bitterness that is therein. He, that has for
the love of me once spoiled himself of the pleasures of this world, must in
Religion seek not the pleasure of the senses, but to please the taste of his
soul. For if I had refused the bitter cup of my passion, what a state would
that have been of thine, and of mankind besides? There are some, who think
the affliction that they suffer, is overmuch, yea and to exceed all the
tribulations and crosses of the world. But it is nothing so, and more then
that, by that conceit and opinion they greatly offend me, because they imagine
and feign me to be a cruel tyrant, who lays more heavy burdens upon men,
then their forces may bear. I am not ignorant, how much every one is able to
bear: I know also, what may pr^fit or hurt the^: but it so happens, that to
him who has not been exercised in bearing ^ffliction, the very least misery
becomes great, yea and intolerable also: and he, who has not proved, or
knows not others calamityes or miseryes, thinks his own greater then
theirs.

6. When a man has not in this life his part in affliction, and all things
succeed unto him as he would desire, it is no good sign: for that whether he
be just, or be a sinner, it is to be feared, that he is reserved for some
greater punishment, and that the prosperity of this life is granted him for a
reward only of the good he has done here. When the sick persons life is
despaired of, there is given him to taste whatsoever he shall desire. But when
a man has his part in tribulations, it is a good sign. For if he be good, by
tribulations he is made better, and as gold, the more it is purged, the more it
shines, and the more perfect it becomes. If he be in the state of sin, by
tribulations he is awaked out of it, that he may remember himself, and by
sight of his own misery look about him, and repent. The Prodigal son, when
he was in his flourishing state and in his prosperity, left his father, and
when fortune after turned her whele, and want and misery oppressed him, seeing
the calamitous state wherein himself lived, he returned home to his father.
Tribulation oftentimes causes understanding, when prosperity bereaueth a man
of it. How many be there, who because they be not pressed with any thing
adverse, have either laid aside all remembrance of me, or show themselves like
unto those, in whose affection and love I have very little interrest? But when
I shall but once send them the very least ague, or any dangerous infirmity or
sickness, they forthwith come running unto me, and cry aloud, Save us we perish.

7. The necessity, that compels men to come unto me, is healthful, but yet
desired of few, because it is unknown. Many be infirm, but they acknowledge
not their infirmity, and though they know it, yet they know not what medicine
is to be used for the remedying thereof. I am the domestical Physician to
Religious persons, and know exactly the complexions of all, as also the causes
of their sickness, and make a medicine fitting for the removing and taking of
them all away. Tribulation is a medicine, which with the more patience it is
received, the more effectual and sovereign is it to cure. This medicine by me
prescribed and willingly taken, no^ only purges and takes away the bad
effects of the disease, but also, if it be proportionably received, purges
clean the relics of all the antedent indispositions and sickness. It is a
property of this antid e to search to the root of the evil, and to take it
quite away, which is pride: in so much as by humblyng it cures, and makes the
froward, angry, and terrible, as meek as lambs. This medicine teaches every
Religious man, how much he has profited in Religion, how solid he is in
virtue, and how conjoined he is with me, his Creator and Redeemer. Finally
tribulation works so, as whatsoever lies hid in the soul, whether it be
virtue or vice, it lays it open to the eye.

8. There is another property of tribulation, that it preserves a man from
future mischiefs. Many have been very near to most grievous falls, but by
occasion of some calamity or other sent them, they have been preserved from
them. I like not of that Religious man, who is grieved, when any sickness, or
cross befalls him. For he should think, that infirmity is no ^esse my gift,
then is health: and how ^noweth he, that he could serve me better ^n good
health then in infirmity? Whence ^noweth he, whether it would profit him ^ore
to keep his bed, or to wander up and down? How knows he, whether by his
sickness he be to be delivered from greater mischiefs and dangers, or not? And
therefore every one should permit himself to my will, and gratefully to accept
whatsoeur I shall prescribe unto him, and not to seek for any other thing then
to make some profit of his tribulations.

9. Son, resolve something, since so long as thy peregrination shall be of
continuance in this mortal flesh, thou shall be subject to tribulations. Be
thou affected to any place thou desire, and to whatsoever state of life that
may most content thee, thou shall never want adversity, till thou come to thy
country in heaven. Thou mus^ further understand, that seeing tribulation is a
medicine, it works according to the disposition it finds, and therefore it
may sometimes do good, and sometimes again^ hurt. If thou take it with humility
and patience, and thanksgiving, it will profit if on the other side thou take
it with an unwilling mind, with indignation, and complaining against him who
sends it t^ thee, it will greatly hurt thee, and redoubl^ the affliction
besides. For to that which happens and is felt from without, will come another
within, that is, that which the inordinate desires cause and produce in the
mind, whiles a man becomes inwardly moved, and angry for the tribulation,
that has a repugnance with his will. The tribulation, that is taken with an
ill will, is not diminished, but rather increased.

10. There be some, who when as they cannot complain of tribulation, as of an
ill thing, do transfer and lay all their complaint upon the creatures whence
it comes, and say: I make no great reckoning of the tribulation, but I take
it in ill part, that this man or that was the occasion thereof, as though one
might without my will, and permission, receive tribulation ^t another hands.
It is nothing so: for as much as all tribulations happen by my order, and I use
creatures one while for the punishing of some, another while for the giving
unto others an occasion of meriting, and of exercising some virtue. And their
complaint grows of none other thing, then that they may not endure
aduersityes. For where they are ashamed sincerely to confess it, least they
may seem deuoid of the virtue of patience and fortitude, they turn themselves
against the creatures, and complain that they be over sore oppressed therewith,
not knowing what way to turn themselves. And such men make it known, that they
want both patience and Charity.

11. Tell me, my Son, why, when thou lightest upon a very afflicted friend of
thine, thou do at the first give him so much good counsel, and remedies for
his evil, and yet if thou be thy self plunged in the same, or like
affliction, thou use it not thy self? Thou know how to tell others that
they bear all with patience, that they conform themselves to Gods will, that
after tribulation they are to expect consolation, since the Father of heaven
does not send his any affliction, but for their greater good: And when
tribulation visits thy own house, wherefore do thou not welcome and
receive it with patience? Why do thou not conform thy self to the divine
will? Why do thou not reap some spiritual profit by it? He is no good
Physician, who applies not to himself, what he thinks good for others. But
this is worst of all, that in tribulation thou art moved with indignation, and
say; what have I done? what, I say, have I done? Put thy hand to thy breast,
and thou shall find, that thou art a son of Adam, and conceived in sin, and
nothing so innocent, as thou think. Thou shall therefore do better, if thou
say; Lord increase my sorrow and pain, increase also my patience. Burn me
^eere, cut me here, that thou may spare me for ever.

That a Religious man ought to have a care of governing his tongue.

CHAP. XI.
MY son, the tongue is a little part of man, but yet of very great power ^o
do much, either good or ill. I have given ^ tongue to men, not only to converse
and ^reate one with another, but also, and that most of all for this, that by
it they may ^rayse me, celebrate and extol my greatness, and teach others the
way to heaven. And ^herfore when a Religious man abuses it ^n discoursing
unprofitably, in murmuring against his Superior, in censuring the life ^f
another, in lying, in ambiguous spea^ing, or with dissimulation, it is a
procee^ing much unbeseeming Religious profesion, and no less displeasing unto
me. And ^t may be said of such a one, that he car^ieth not himself like a
Religious person, and that, that is true, which my Apostle S. James says: If
any man think himself to be Religious, not bridling his tongue, bu^ seducing
his heart, this man's Religion i^ vain.

2. But against this, o Lord, the same Apostle has written, that none could
eue^ tame the tongue, and that worse it is the^ a savage and wild beast: whence
it is, tha^ the Scripture says els-where, that to rule and moderate the tongue
is a gift, that depends of thee. And if it be so, what fault is there on our
part, when we permi^ it to break forth into unprofitable talk* It is indeed
most true, my Son, that the tongue is worse the^ a raging beast, because the
hurt that such a beast does, goes n^ further then to the body, but the domag^
that the tongue does, extends it self both to soul and body. The beast
ordinarily does no mischief to the master who has the handling and tending
of him: but ^ bad tongue hurts him whose it is first of all, and then others.
It has never been^ heard, that one beast has destroyed a^ whole province, but
the tongue has ruyned cittyes, and whole kingdoms: and a^ my scriptures say:
More have dyed by the tongue, then by the sword. True it is, tha^ none can tame
another tongue, but every one may rule his own with the help of my grace: and
further it is true, that the Religious man, who is of power so to govern his
tongue, as by it he offend not, meriteth at my hands great praise, and no less
reward. But this perfection, besides that it is hard, is almost impossible. It
is only required, and necessary on thy part, that thou endeavor to bridle and
govern thy tongue in the best manner thou can, and so doing thou may be
assured, that thou shall never want the assistance of my grace. But if thou
give it liberty and the raynes of thy own will, and permit it to utter upon
every occasion, what comes in thy mind, who should endure the blame of these
thy tongues faults but thy self, and thine own neglect in restrayning it?

3. And if thou desire in particular to know, touching what care a Religious
man should have of his tongue, I say first, that he must keep it from speaking
much: for so much as certain it is, that there cannot want sin, where speech
is used. He that speaks much, considers not what he says, and by that
occasion he speaks and utters many things to small purpose, and therewith
unprofitable also. And this is that, which the Sage meant to give us to
understand, when he says, That fool have their heart in their mouth: because
they speak whatsoever comes in their mind, in so much as their heart seems
to depend on their mouth. But on the contrary, the wise and circumspect has
hi^ mouth in his heart, because he considers, and premeditateth what he has
to say, and by that occasion makes the tongue to have dependence on the heart,
and not the heart on the tongue.

4. In the second place the Religious man must forbear to speak ambiguously
and doubtfully, or in a dissembling manner. For since the life of a Religious
man ought to be simple, and without fraud: even so must his speech in like
manner be round, open and without any dissimulation at al. It should be a
matter reprehensible even in a Pagan, much more in a secular Christian man to
use a doubtful speech or Equivocation to deceive another, and to have one
thing in heart, and another thing in mouth: how much greater fault then should
it be in a Religious man, upon whom is imposed an obligation to labor to
perfection. And more then this, he that uses such manner of speaking, makes
himself ordinarily odious, if we believe the Wise man, who ^ayth: He that
speaks sophistically, makes himself hateful to every one. If then ^hou
offendest me by this dissimulation or Equivocation of speaking, how is it
possible that I should love thee, or give thee any countenance? Or that I
should yeald thee ^he assistance of my grace? And if this makes thee hateful
to thy neighbor, how ^s it possible, that thou should help him, or do him
good? For none trusts him with whom he has lost his credit.

5. In the third place a Religious man must beware he speaks not what is
vn^rue. Neither must thou think it enough ^o forbear lying that hurts
another, or that which is asseuered or confirmed by ^ath, which be mortal
sins, and where^nto not only many secular persons, but al^o many heathens
would have a care not to fall: But a man must further abstain from ^ll manner
of lying that is spoken in jest, or ^or pleasure, to another, for that God is
offended therewith: and even the very least offense of God is to be avoided with
all possible diligence, though there should o^herwise follow some great good,
as is to ^aue the neighbors life or soul. We must ^euer choose a bad means,
whereby to come ^o a good end, and therefore every Religious man should rather
endure whatsoever d^mage and hurt, even death it self, the^ that a lie should
come from his mouth. H^ is no good Religious man, who is not ^ friend of truth,
neither is he a frien^ to truth, who makes no scruple to ly^ even in a light
matter. Amongst secula^ persons to tell a lie, is an act so base, and in
famous, as for a lie they chaleng one another into the field. And liars are
commonl^ held for vile, base and contemptible, an^ for such, as are denied
unworthy to be believed. What then may be thought touching a Religious man,
that is a liar* To whom may we resemble him? It cannot be said, that he
resembles me, who an^ the truth it self: it remains then, tha^ he be said
to be like unto Satan, who i^ in my Scriptures called a liar, and the father
of lies.

6. Moreover tell me, my son, is i^ not a great infamy to one, that credit is
no^ given him, though he speaks the truth* And yet this is the pain and
punishment o^ a liar. For if he should lie but once, though he loose not all
his credit, yet he makes himself at least suspected, that every one may stand
in doubt, and that with reason, whether he speaks what is true, or whe^^er he
may believe him, or not. And if (...) be a thing reprehensible to lie, treating
^^out temporal matters with men, what ^ill it be to utter what is false in
things ^^irituall? What will it be to lie to his Su^eriour, or to his ghostly
Father, who ^o hold my place?

7. O how much do those Religious ^^en displease me, who hearing another
^raysed, seek to stayne such his commen^ation some way or other, or to obscure
it ^y putting some (But) in the way, or by ^emembring some one or other
imperfe^tion of his. And if such persons would ^iligently search out the root
of this fault, and understand whence it has the origin, ^hey would endeavor,
I am sure, to bridle their tongue, and amend their fault. For ^n some this
fault arises of a bad inclination they have, and of a certain pleasure and
contentment they take in censuring the life and actions of another. In others
it proceeds of envy, by which they are sorry of their neighbors good renown,
and therefore they seek to obscure it, or to diminish ^it by their bad reports
of him. In some again it has the source of pride, and of a persuasion they
have, that by obscuring another praises, they shall increase their own, and
make themselves to appear greater, and better then those, who be praised. To
abase others, is not the way for a man to ra se himself: for it is no vice,
bu^ virtue that rayseth a man, in so much a^ where the roots be so bad, and so
venomous it is an easy matter to think, that the speech which proceeds
thence, cannon be but bad, and venomous also. And therefore, my Son, thou
must have a vigilan^ care never to diminish the commendations or actions of
another, as also not to exaggerate, and commend the same with to much
amplification, for as much as the one and the other is a vice of the tongue,
that displeases me.

8. Those also are displeasing unto me, who in their speech take a contentment
to bite and sting another, and to say in one word, have no scruple to vex, and
molest their brethren. Neither charity, nor the rules of Religious modesty
teach, that any should take his pleasure with the displeasur^ and molestation
of another. This is a thing worthy of blame even in a secular person, and
therefore much more in a Religious man. A man may sometimes be merry and
pleasant in his conversation, and use some witty discourses, which yet must be
in time and place, without the offense or discontent of any.

9. And the tongue, which is without ^he bridle of virtue, stays not it self
^here, but it passes easily further to murmr, and to report ill of another:
and it seems unto it self oftentimes to have found a sufficient and good
excuse to say, that it is in a light matter, and that the sins be not gross,
that be spoken of. As though it were not any sin to murmr of light matters,
and that it were not an offense as well to God, as to the neighbor. O perverse
tongue, and worthy of double punishment! the one for speaking ill of another,
the other for excusing thy fault, in ^aying, that it is no great matter. It is
not any light matter, or such as imports not much for a man to persevere and
continue in what is ill, though it be little. He that ^xcuseth his sin, has
not any care to amend himself. I have not any where said, that a man might
murmr in light matters, but I have on the contrary forbidden it, when I
command, That every one should love his neighbor, as himself. When another
murmureth of thee, is it not true, that thou bear it with an ill will?
Think thou also, that others take it in ill part, when thou murmurest of them,
besides that thou offendest me, and therei^ do against my will.

10. Moreover the good opinion, th^^ is had of the persons, and especially of
the Religious man, profits much to the he^ping of the neighbor: but the
murm^ring, and detracting tongue obscureth th^^ good opinion, and consequently
hindre^ the fruit of good example, and the ligh^ of good edification, that
might be given unto others. And more then that, by suc^ discovery of the
defects and imperfection even of them, who have the reputation o^ good and
virtuous persons, is an occasion^ scandal, being a thing undoubted, th^^
those, who are yet feeble and weak, he^ring mention made of the imperfection
of the good, come easily to contemn then and which is more, are animated to
commit greater faults themselves. And if the tongue that murmureth of secular
person^ be not excusable, and greatly displease^^ me, how may that tongue be
excused, the murmureth of my servants? What will be to murmr of Superiors,
who o^cupy my place? What will it be to impu^^ unto one an imperfection, which
he ha^ not, thereby taking an occasion to murmu^ and speak ill of him?

11. The good Religious man does restrain not only his tongue from all
detraction and murmuring, but also stops his ears, when he hears the like
from another, and if it happen, that he hears any murmuring against his
Superior, he defends him in what he can, seeking to hide, and excuse the
imperfectio^s that might be in him. For thou must, my son, persuade thy
self, that both the honor, and the injury thou do to thy Superior,
redoundeth to me, and that I will be the judge either for thy punishment, or
for thy reward. O how much are those deceived, who having received some
discontent at ^he hands of their Superior, do complain and murmr at him,
affirming, that he has wronged them. Who has made such men their Superiors
Judges? What law commands them to revenge themselus? If the Superior has
done amiss, in what book have they found, that they may therefore murmr at
him, and repay one evil with another? Certes they have not learned this lesson
of me: for I do teach the quite contrary, to render good for ill, and to
overcome the bad turn with a good one.

12. There is another vice of the tongue, no less pernicious, then be the
precedent, and that is, to disclose some secret that a man should not, and
which should be concealed. And what is worst of all in this kind, is, that
there be some, who by a curious importunity, and wily craft seek to draw some
secrets from another, that they may afterward communicate the same with some
other very familyar friend of their own. And in this the faults be many they
commit. For first there is in it curiosity, secondly a sin to induce another
to discover that which he should keep secret, thirdly another sin in
revealing that which he has received as a depositum, to be kept secret.
Finally, of it there grows many debates, quarrels, hatreds, discontents,
many ill and hard words, and other the like inconveniences. See thou now* my
son, of how many evils a naughty tongue is the cause, and that it is not
without ground, that my Apostle S. James calls it an unquiet and turbulent
evil, ful^ of deadly poison, and a fire that consumes all that it lays hold
on? But tell me wherefore think thou, that the tongu^ was shut up within the
mouth, as it were in a close chamber, and kept in with the teet^ and lyps, as
with a double rampire, if it b^ not to give thee to understand, that when thou
should have a will and desire to move thy tongue to speak, reason must first
open the gate, as one that has the charge and command over it: and that when
it should be expected, that it be retired and silent, the same reason must shut
up the ports again to keep it in: for else the tongue will disperse the poison,
and do more hurt then thou can think, or imagine.

That a Religious man ought to make his profit of all corrections and
admonitions.

CHAP. XII.
MY son, what may be expected from him, who being sore sick, should for want
of understanding his own will, refuse the medicine that might cure him, or
though he should take it, should not keep it any long time, but cast it up
presently again? Such a one questionles should be in great danger of his life.
Correction is an healthful medicine, though few there be that know it, and
very few have practice of it: but because it is somewhat bitter and troublesome,
thereof it comes, that it is displeasant to them, who have no desire to
perfect themselves, though it be to cure them, and to promote them much in
spirit and in perfection. This medicine, as all others, must be proportioned to
the complexion of the infirmed person, and is to be given in time, when the
humors be prepared, and when the sick person shall be either at quiet, or
less troubled. And to the end the sick person may take it with a better will,
he must first of all make himself capable of his evil, of the danger he
finds himself in, and of the great ease he may receive by the medicine.

2. The Religion, that makes no use of this sort of remedy, cannot long
conserve it self, and it is an exceeding great fault in the Superior to
forbear to correct his subjects, and to permit them to live at their own
will, for fear of displeasing them. The sick, that lives after his own
manner, becomes rather worse then amendeth. Since the corruption by sin,
human nature is so inclined to evil, as if there be not an eye had to help and
repair it by admonition and correction, it will soon fall into some ruin, or
other. O what an account shall Superiors have to make, for fear of making
themselves hated, or for fear of discontenting, or for some other human
respects, omit to correct their inferiors. They should persuade themselves,
that the defects of their subjects, which should have been amended by their
correction, shall be imputed unto them. But much worse shall be the condition of
the inferiors, who being admonished by their Superiors, become troubled and
discontented, and do take the correction, which is so profitable and sovereign
a medicine, for an injury done them: whence it comes, that being unworthy
thereof, they cease not murmuring against their Superiors: which is nothing
else, but to murmr against me, whose will it was, that such correction should
light upon them. But what hope is there of amendment in such persons, when
they become worse, and add one fault to another? What good may be expected from
them, when they will not acknowledge their fault, and either refus^ correction,
or if they receive it, they presently reject it with a disdain? Unhappy is he,
who hides his wounds, and much more unhappy he, who has no desire to procure
the cure of them.

3. Tell me, my son, whence is it, that thou art so troubled, and so sore
moved, when thy Superior blames thee? See thou not, that so to do, is to
take the knife by the edge, and therewith to give thy self a wound? See thou
not, that by so doing thou conuertest the medicine into poison, which I had
ordained for thy good, and for the healing up of thy wounds, and thy evil
disposition? Is not this to say in plain terms to thy Superior, that he
advise thee no more, nor give thee any correction, because thou will not bear
it? And what other thing is this, then to favor thine own evil, and to
refuse cure? Not to have a will to be reprehended, to speak properly, is to
have a will to go from ill to worse: which is neither thine own good, nor the
good of Religion, nor that which thy Superior may in conscience do, or suffer*

4. But let us consider a little, wherefore thou art so much troubled for being
reprehended. Is it because thy Superior blames thee for a fault thou have not
done? or that it is nothing so great a one, as thy Superior has made it? or
if for that thou think thy self to have been wronged by them, who have made
report of the matte^ unto him, and thou would peraduentur^ have the same
examined, and proved by witness, and that finding it false and untrue thou
would have him punished, and to make thee satisfaction, who has made the
report to thy Superior? My son, this is not the way to perfection, neither
is it the proceeding of Religious persons to examine or to confront witnesses,
nor to debate matters by process of Law. For so to proceed, were to multiply
debates and contentions, to trouble and disturb peace, to open a gate to much
hatred and discords: and when I did in my Gospel deliver the manner of
fraternall correction, I did not give precepts or instructions of any such
manner of proceeding. It is a course both better, and more beseeming the
Religious man, to overcome by way of Humility, then by way of debate, and
contention. O how much have some of my servants gained and profited, who being
reprehended by their Superiors, even for some fault they had not done,
received the reprehension as coming from me, and persuaded that I was he who
blamed them by the mouth of their Superior, humbled themselves, without
further debating the matter wherewith they were charged, and committing all to
Gods providence craved pardon, yea by so doing much edified their Superior.
And of this it came, that the good opinion that was before had of them was so
far of from receiving diminution, as it was thereby much increased, and the^
did continue withal much more enriche^ with merits. And notwithstanding this,
i^ appertained to me to cause the truth to b^ after discovered, and to come to
light for the manifestation of their virtue.

5. My son, it is in thy will to convert correction much to thine own profit
whether thou have committed the fault whereof thy Superior advises or blamet^
thee, or have not done it. For if thou has^ done the fault, this correction
will seru^ thee for a purgation, and help to cancel^ and raze out the fault
thou have committed* If thou have not done the thing, thou mays^ use it for a
preservative medicine, and it wi^^ put thee in mind to stand upon thy guard
more, and better then before time, giving thee an occasion of conseruing thy
virtue* and innocence. And this is the true means o^ making profit of
correction, namely if thou receive it as a medicine coming from me, and such
as I have ordained for thy good.

6. There be others who complain no^ so much of the correction, as of the
manner wherewith it is used toward them* saying that the Superior is over
harsh in his reprehensions, and that he exaggerateth another fault overmuch.
He that would have every thing after his own fancy, has many discontentments,
and lives in much disquiet of mind. So the medicine may do thee good, to what
end should thou trouble thy self, whether the potion be sweet, or sower? My
son, have thou a desire to live in peace? Leave that, which concerns thy
Superior, and think of that alone, which touches thy self. To have an eye
to this, that the correction be founded in Charity, that it be done without
choler, and without disdain, that it be proportioned to the fault, that it be
done in time, that the inferior conceive that which is done, be done out of a
desire of his good, all this appertains to the Superior, and not to the
inferior: but to have a care, that the correction be received humbly with
patience, and a will to make his profit thereof, that touches the inferior.
But if the inferior will pervert this order, and have his eye rather upon the
manner wherewith correction is to be done, then how he ought to admit it, it
will not be well with him, no more then it would be with the Superior, if he
would have an eye rather to the manner of taking correction well, then to give
it, in a manner fitting, and for the good of his subjects. He easily commits
an error, who thinks not often, and seriously on that, which concerns and
imports him to do.

7. My son, if thou have a desire to amend, love correction, for so much as
it is a good and assured means thereunto. Thou know not thine own faults,
or if thou do, thou know them not, as thou should. Thou perceiuest not
how offenssiue they be to another eye, how is it then possible, thou should
amend them? And correction is that, which gives thee understanding, and
knowledge both of the one, and the other. The Devil hates correction, and in
the Religious labors to work an auersion from it, for that he well knows
the great good which they may receive thereby toward their advancement and
progress in perfection. O how do those Religious men please me, who do not
only willingly receive correction, and seek to make their profit thereof, but
do also desire some one or other of their friends to put them very often in
remembrance of their faults, and imperfections, whereinto they may hap to fall.
He that desires not correction, nor that he be told of his faults, gives to
understand, that he has not any forward disposition to amend himself.

8. Others there be, who may not endure to be admonished, or reprehended by him
who is not their Superior, and they do not only not take it in good part, but
do further conceive an indignation against him, and deem him for a man
troublesome and importune. Consider I pray thee, my Son, how far Pride
leads a man, when it causes him to be discontented, and angry with them who
exercise toward him an office of Charity, in putting him in mind of his
faults, for which he has just cause to render him thanks. But it may be, that
such persons think themselves irreprehensible, and be so conceited of
themselves, that all they do, is well done, or that they are discontented to be
reprehended by their equals, though in the mean while they know well enough,
that themselves are faulty. The one and the other cannot proceed of any thing
but pride, and to say truly, he is such a one, and of the number of those
Religious me^, who have no will to practice either Humility or Mortification.
The poor man, who knows his own need and necessity, takes willingly the
alms of any one, whosoever it be, that gives it, be he master or servant,
and humbly thanketh him for it: the very same does every Religious man, who
heartily desires perfection, and loves every one, who helps him to the
attayning thereof.

9. Correction and reprehension is an act of Charity: and as Charity is common
to all, so may every one use a modest reprehension, and he who omitteth to do
it, when he ought, and has an hope of doing good by it, though he be not a
Superior, does not well, and displeases me also. How much then shall I be
displeased, and how much greater shall that man's sin be, who knowing an
imperfection of his brother, does not only not admonish him touching it, but
also commend^^h him for it, saying that he has done very well, and that he did
as he should do, thereby inducing an imperfect Religious man to become more
bold, and to confirm himself the more in his imperfection. And this we may
affirm to be the pestilent oil of sinners, whereof the Prophet speaks: and
unhappy is that Religious man, who has his head anointed therewith. I do my
self the correction otherwhiles, and send inspirations, to the end my servants
may by that occasion find out and discover their own imperfections, and amend
them: sometimes again I admonish them by some affliction or other, that they
may enter into themselves, and correct what is amiss: sometimes I permit one
whole order of Religion to be afflicted and persecuted, that the negligent and
bad Religious men, that are or may be in it, may become good, and the good
better: but the end indeed is, that they have a desire to be helped. They want
not the helps, and means of doing well so much, as a firm resolution to put
themselves into a course of doing well, and to hold on the same, as they ought.
My son to differ and put that off till the morrow, that may profit thee to
day, is not an argument or sign of a man well advised. And the more thou shall
neglect to amend thy self, and to differ this happy resolution, the more, and
the greater will thy loss be.

How a Religious man ought to carry himself in his scruples.

CHAP. XIII.
MY son, thou know well, that to please me, and to receive a recompense
from my hands, it is not enough to do a good work, but it must be done well.
That one, for fear of offending me, stands upon his guard, and endeauoreth to
do all the best he can, this is to do prudently: neither must he think this to
be a scruple but a filial fear, a just fear, and an holy and meritorious
fear. They be scruples* when one is in his actions perplexed, and full of
anxiety, without having any lawful cause thereof, but only by light
conjectures and suspicions ill founded, and tha^ he fears that he sins in
the thing tha^ he does, or that he has done, or that he ought to do: whence it
comes, that he afflicts himself, and continues altogether troubled in
mind. These scruples* which be no other (to say truly) then vain and
fearful imagi ations, displease me very much, and be in the soul of him who
is seized and taken therewith, as it were with an hoate and burning fever,
which tormenteth him both night and day.

2. Will thou understand, my Son, in few words, what is the nature of
scruples? when he, who is molested with them, retayneth them in mind, and
stays upon them, when he should contemn them, they are unto him as many
ropes, by which the Devil binds him, and draws him which way he lists:
but when he con^emneth them, he stands firm and stable, and the enemy has
no power over him at all.

3. Lord, these scruples displease me: I desire nothing more, then to be rid of
them, but it is not in my power. I know right well, my Son, that it exceeds
thy power to shake of the scruples that arise of a melancholy complexion, and
which continue as long, as continues the cause whereof they proceed, and that
is the melancholy humor it self. Again thou art as little able to free thy
self from those scruples, that I send thee, or permit thee to fall into, to
the end thou may enter into a true knowledge of thy self, or for the
hu^bling of thee, or for the better purging of thy soul, or for thy greater
merit: for as I send these scruples, so it is in me to remove them, and I take
them away, when it best pleases me. But thou may well (assisted with my
grace) ease thy self of those scruples, that have their beginning of proper
love, when by occasion of the over great affection to thy self thou becomest
over anxious, and art more afraid, then thou should, least some
inconvenience, impediment may befall thee, for the d^ing of what thou have, or
oughtst to do The good Religious man ought to be ci^cumspect, and have an eye
to himself, y^^ rather by a desire to please me, then for fea^ of any trouble,
or pain to himself. In li^^ manner it is in thine own power to di^charge thy
self of these scruples, that a^ occasioned by the suggestio^ of the enemy, the
end thou may be there afraid, when no cause is of fear at all: and these
scrupl^ be nothing else, but a vain apprehensio^ proceeding from mere fancy.

4. O how much damage do scrupl^ cause, and how much good do they hinde^ For
first they deprive the person, who molested with them, of that inward peac^
which every one ought so much to desir^ seeing without it a man can neither
hau^ any true devotion, no do any meritorio^^ act. And more then this, they
mar, an^ overthrow the complexion of nature, an^ trouble the humors of the
body: whence has happened, that many by such scruples have broken their brains,
and some hau^ made themselves unprofitable both for themselves, and for
Religion. Scruple cause a man to loose his time, that might otherwise be
employed in profitable things and in good works. For how much time does a
scrupulous man loose in saying one prayer, or in reading of a psalm? He
begins again and again, he repeateth what he has formerly said, and never
makes an end, and which is worse, when he has all done, he remains less
satisfied, then he was at the very first: and if it happen, that
notwithstanding all this, he makes no more repetitions, it is rather in regard
of a certain yrksomenes, and loathing he finds, then out of any persuasion
to himself, that he has satisfied what he should do. Again the scrupulous
does not only loose his time himself, but he further causes the loss thereof
to his Superior, or to his Ghostly-father, with whom he conferreth touching
his scruples, and if they yeald him the hearing, it will be long before he make
an end, and the more a man condescendeth to a scrupulous person, the more and
greater will be his hurt.

5. Scruples make the scrupulous man stiff and obstinate: for where a vain
fear of offending, and of not satisfying predominateth and bears overmuch
sway in him, thence it comes, that he yealdeth not, nor obayeth very easily,
and that he will not condescende to his Ghostly Father, or Superior, and so he
becomes headstrong, and ever retayneth these his scruples. Scruples cause the
scrupulous man not to consider his Creator, as a good and loving Father, as he
should do, but as a severe exactour, and a rigorous judge of his actions: and
this consideration of his fills him with so many vain fears, and so great,
as he seems to himself to be already in the very torments of hell. My son,
thou do very injuriously to deal with me in this sort: I have not created
thee for thy damnation, but for the glory of heaven, and I desire nothing else,
but thy good, and thy salvation. I have for the saving of thee endured a
thousand pains and miseryes all my life long, and therefore my will is, that
thou bid adieu to this vain fear, and that thou from henceforth conceive of
me, as of a good, and merciful Father, desirous of thy souls good.

6. And if thou have a desire to rid thy self of this malady, and not be
scrupulous, there be three things for thee necessary. The first is, that thou
be not thine own physician, and be resolved to give credit to thine own
advise and judgment. A Physician, be he never so learned, and experienced, is
nothing fit to ordain a medicine for himsefe, when he has any sickness, and
much less shall the scrupulous man be fit: whose passion and imagination being
stronger, and more vehement then any fever, or pain or body, troubles him in
such sort, as it robs him of all his judgment, and causes him to see and
take one thing for another.

7. The second thing necessary, is, that thou follow the advice of thy
spiritual father, or of thy Superior, though thou be otherwise of a contrary
opinion. And to the end thou may accommodate thy self with the more facility
thereunto, thou must persuade thy self, that I am he who govern the Religious
in their scruples, and that I govern them by the mediation of their
Superiors, and therefore thou must be persuaded and hold for assured, that the
counsel, which they shall give thee in thy scruples, comes from me. And
indeed I could not well deal with them in any other manner. For if the
Religious man have, out of a desire to serve me, forsaken both parents and
friends, very reasonable it is, that I serve them also for father and mother,
for kin and friends. If flying from the world, they have cast themselves into
my arms, reason it is, that I embrace and receive them, and serve them for
their refuge. If they have made their election to depend of me for the
confirming of themselves all in all to my will, meet it is, that I assist them
with my direction, and counsel, and that they admit it, as coming from me,
what they shall advise them in that behalf.

8. The third thing that thou must observe, is, to obey thy said spiritual
Fathers; and to execute and do with a promptitude what they shall say, and this
is so necessary; as if it be not kept, all the rest will not profit thee a
whit. For what would it help to ordain a medicine, and further to be
persuaded, that it is prescribed by an excellent Physician, if the patient and
infirm person will not use it? My son, take heed of Satan, who for the
hindering of many of thy good works seeks to trouble thee with many scruples,
and to fill thy head with infinite anxietyes, and unstayed and running
thoughts. I know that he makes thee anon to say, or think in thy mind, who
knows whether my spiritual Father be not deceived in commanding me to do
this, or leave that? It may be, he has not understood me, or that I have not
sufficiently explicated my self. I am in doubt, whether this counsel which
he gives me, be not rather to comfort me: and which is more, that in himself
he thinks not, that I have offended God, and that I shall be damned. All such
thoughts arise of a vain and false fear caused by the enemy, who troubles
the water, for fear thou should see the truth. But see thou not, that
though thy spiritual Father should deceive thee, thou art not for all deceived
in obaying him, for that thou oughtst to obey him in all things, where there
is not appearance of any manifest sin. And more then that, to think that he
has not well understood thee, ought not to trouble thee, since it ought to be
enough for thy satisfaction, if he say, that he has understood thee well: for
thou art bound to believe him. In like sort, to think, that thou have offended
me by thy scruples, and that I will damn thee for them, is a thing, that must
be far removed from thy imagination. He that has so many pledges and
testimonies of my love and benignity, as thou have, has a good occasion to put
his trust in me. If thou have a firm purpose not to offend me, and rather to
dye, then to commit a mortal sin, this being a true sign of thy salvation,
and of my amity, wherefore feares^ thou? And he who fears this, is not afraid
to offend me.

9. Neither must the desire that tho^ feel in thy self, of making a
general confession, for fear, or doubt, that thou ha^ not made it well,
trouble thee. If thy spiritual Father judge it neither necessary no^
profitable, but rather domageable, thou must content thy self with that, which
h^ tells thee, and obey him: for if ther^ should be any fault, it should not
be imputed unto thee. For a man to repeat hi^ confession without necessity, is
to multiply his scruples. The Confessor who yealdet^ unto the scrupulous, by
his importunity what he should not, does not well discharge his office, and
hurts the scrupulous, a^ being an occasion by that means unto him of more
scropulosity then before. For the more, doubtless, is taken away in so doing the
more do they still entertain and increas^ the scruples: So to move and turn
the eart^ without sowing seed thereon, is to caus^ that bad weeds spring up in
the place. Tel^ me, when thou madst thy last general confession, did thou
not then satisfy thy conscience? If thou say thou did, and tha^ ^he Priest
gave thee Absolution of thy ^innes, wherefore make thou any doubt ^ow, if
thou did then confess all? If ^hou madst thine examine as thou oughst? ^f
thou had a sufficient sorrow for thy ^innes? For a man may judge better of
his confession then when he made it, then he can a long time after. If there
had been any default in it, thou should rather have perceived and found it
out then, then now.

10. My son, remember that it is long that thou have been troubled with
scruples and that because thou had a will to govern thy self by thine own
fancy, thou art not yet cured and eased of them, but find thy self more
disquieted and troubled then ever before, and therefore even human prudence
would require, that thou should change the remedy, and that since thou art
sick, thou be not a Physician to thy self. And therefore thou must resolve,
that for the curing of thy scruples, the best remedy is to believe and obey thy
spiritual Father. And in that thou must diligently take heed thou come not unto
him with a certain artificial skill, and an intention to draw him to thine
own will by importunity, or otherwise: for that were ever to return to the
same, and to have a will to be thine own physician in thy scruples, and to
procure to be governed by thy spiritual Father conformably to thine own
fancy, wherein there should be a double fault: for that besides thine, thou
should cause thy spiritual Father, or Superior to fail in the discharge of
his office. Thy spiritual Father is a means whereof I serve my self, and he is
mine instrument, not thine, and therefore he must be moved by me, and not by
thee. The thing which appertains unto thee to do, is to leave him in his
liberty, and considering him, as one who holds my place, to have an hope,
that by means of him I will not fail to direct thee for thy greatest good.

That a Religious man must fly Curiosity.

CHAP. XIIII.
MY son, I see thee over diligent and curious in searching out the knowledge
of noueltyes and strange things of the world, wherein thou give to understand,
that thou have not yet given over thy affection and love to it, in so much as
thou art not yet wholly dead unto it. If thou have so abandoned it, as thou
should not have any thing to do with it, whence is it that curiosity makes
thee to inquire after what is therein done, and what is said and passes? What
have thou to know and understand that, which concerns thee not, and that
brings not any good to thy soul, but damage rather? Thou have more then
often tried, that the news of the world which thou have heard, occurreth to thy
mind in thy prayer, in the time of Mass, and other good exercises. How much
better course did those good Hermites take, who because they might not
understand, or know what passed in the world, withdrew themselves into the
wilderness, and there hid themselves in holes under the ground?

2. Curiosity, since it is an inordinate desire to know, is reprehensible, and
repugnant to the rule of right reason, but much worse is the root whence it
comes. If a Religious person were well affected to matters divine and
spiritual, he would not be curious to search into things humane, that touch
him not at all. Curiosity ordinarily arises of the little affection, that men
have to the works of virtue, and therefore it greatly imports the Religious
man at all times to have imployement in some profitable and commendable thing
or other, though the same be not enough to withdraw him wholly from curiosity.
For as it is attractiue, it causes a man oftentimes to leave even profitable
occupations, and therefore the Religious must not only busy himself in things
of profit, and such as agree with his profession, but also apply his mind and
affection thereunto, and so doing he shall shut up? he door against a^
curiosity, and therewithal free himself from many disquiets and troubles of
mind. But when curiosity is in the Religious man accompanied with idleness, or
light employments, then she keeps holy day, because she well knows how to
find entrance, when she lists, being the property of idleness to set open both
his doors and windows: and she no sooner gets in, but that she forthwith
sets the senses at liberty, which be her messengers, and sends them forth
to search out noueltyes, o^ which she afterward causes the inward powers of
the soul to reflect, and to buyld their judgments, and castles in the air
whereby it appears, how much curiosity is repugnant to the Religious state,
which requires that all the senses be brought in subjection and mortifyed, and
that they have not the liberty to wander where they should not, and when it
appertains unto reason to guide, and direct them, and not curiosity.

3. Mark my son, the craft and policy of Satan, whereby he induces the
Religious man to open the gate of curiosity. First he puts in his thoughts,
that it is good for him to understand the disasters and te^pests of the world,
to the end he may render unto me the more condign thanks for having a brought
him into the quiet and safe harbor of Religion: and to the end, that having a
better and more perfect knowledge of the sinister, and miserable events of the
world, he may the better understand the felicity of the state whereunto he is
called, and from how many troubles and dangers he is delivered: finally to the
end, says he, he may have a compassion, and be moved to pray for the poor of
the world, who are so sore oppressed, and afflicted in the world, as every good
Religious man is bound to do. But to take all this at the best, it is nothing
else, but to deceive under the appearance of good: and what is of it self
vicious and bad, cannot be a means to the producing and doing of good works.
Therefore curiosity being a sin, it is nothing convenient to make use of it
for t^ doing of good. And my Apostle has pla^nely and expressly said, that no
evil is eu^^ to be done under the hope and pretense (...) any good. But that
which the Diue^^ pretends, is to induce the Religious man to affect and give
himself to curiosity knowing right well (as he is wily, an^ crafty) that
having once drawn him t^ curiosity, he will never compose himself neither to
the exercise of the said goo^ works, nor of any other. And in this lyet^ his
deceit, to make show to have a will t^ induce thee to the doing of good, to the
end he may go away with the victory t^ thy damage and loss.

4. A just man must ever hold the lou^ and benevolence of an enemy suspected: ^
for the rendering of thanks unto God for the happy state of Religion, and
prayin^ for those of the world, is it not necessary t^ enquire curiously about
that which pas^seth in the world. For without it a man knows enough touching
the storms, and miseryes that the poor secular persons endure: for as much as
such miseryes began not to day, but have been heretofore, an^ shall always be.
And more then this, Religion has so many gifts, privileges an^ ^^^ces, as of
it self it gives a sufficient ^^owledge thereof, without necessity, for ^e
attayning and getting of such knowledge enquire curiously about the news, and
^iseryes of the world.

5. Harken my son, now to another ^^ceite, whereof Satan serves himself by
^eanes of curiosity. In the beginning he contented, that the curious loose his
time (...) reading, or hearing read vain and cu^^ous books, in understanding
the news ^^at pass in foreign countries that touch ^im nothing at all, in
having I know not that fair and curious thing, and the like, ^ut he stays
not there. For passing fur^her, he labors to induce and draw him (...) know,
and see what is not lawful, and even ^^at wherein there is danger, be it a
thing that provoke to the sins of hatred, re^enge, or impurity, and in fine
he seeks (...) move him to do all openly without any ^hadow or pretense at
all. And this is ^hen, when the curious person, for the vn^erstanding of secret
and hidden things demands and enquireth them of the Di^ell, or of some other
who has commerce with him. And what good doctrine can ^ne learn of the Father
of lies? Or what ^ruite or learning can be drawn or gotten out of so unhappy a
school?

6. Curiosity is a vice, which cannot s^ be easily shaken off, as a man would
think The elder a man is, the more increases hi^ curiosity, and thence it is,
that a man is never weary in hearing of news. Curiosity^ that moves a man to
enquire of another^ affairs, causes him to forget his owne^ and himself
also: and he who runs to the houses of others, and leaves his own, i^ in
danger at his return not to find all that he left at his going forth. The
curiosity, that provoke the senses to fasten themselves upon curious and
impertinent things, makes the curious to stumble and fall, and that oftentimes
very fowly. Who is apt to fall of himself, he will fall much more easily,
being thrust by another. And since man^ nature is so debilitated by sin, as we
see, and experience in our selus, the very least occasion, as may be this of
curiosity, is enough to precipitate it. My son, have thou a desire, that
curiosity should not give thee any occasion of ruin by thy senses? Let there
not on thy part any occasion be given of abusing them. For if thou seruest thee
of thy senses for thy pleasure only, and not for necessity, or for profit, it
will be an inuitation to curiosity, and an occasion unto it of abusing them in
vanities. If thou lend thy ^^aring to all, and look upon all that ^^mmeth in
thy mind, who sees not, that ^o ^o do is to put the bridle of thy senses in^o
curiosityes hands, that it may turn and wind them which way it pleases? Have
^ care to thy senses if thou desire, that they should be sollicitous to
preserve and keep ^hy heart from all vanity.

That a Religious man ought to fly from all manner of Ambition.

CHAP. XV.
MY son, a good Religious man, and prudent, does ever and anon lay before
his eyes the end, for which he has ^eft the world, and entered into Religion,
which is to serve me, who am his Lord, in a more perfect manner, then he did in
the world, and thereby the better to assure the saving of his soul. And more
then that, he thinks upon the means of attai^ing this end, which be virtues,
mortification of the passions, abnegation of himself, contempt and hatred of
all, which the world loves and imbraceth. Besides this, he thinks on that,
which is an impediment of coming to this end, and such be vices, of the number
wherof^ ambition Prids daughter, which does n^^ only divert the Religious man
from m^^ service, but also makes him to entertai^^ an opposition against me.
And therefore where ambition is an inordinate appeti^^ and desire of wordly
honor, necessary is, that it be quite banished out of Religion because
Religion is a school opposite (...) that of the world. And if the Religiou^
man be come out of the world, and hat^ already been at defiance with it, is it
be seeming unto him to seek worldly hono^^ in Religion? None can be a scholar
i^ two contrary schools.

2. Hear my son, what ambition teaches in the school of the world. I
teaches the scholars to seek after honor and reputation, to desire
preheminences ^ dignites, to procure great charges, office^ and titles of
greatest honor. But in the school of religion the custom is to teac^ the
contrary, and I am the master thereof as willingly and patiently to put up
wrong to bear reproaches, dishonours, infam^tions, ignominyes, to shun
prehemine^^ and dignityes. This is my livery, this ^ the doctrine, that I have
always bot^ taught, and practiced. When the Iewe^ came with scepter and crown
unto me to make me their King, I ran away: but when they came into the garden
to apprehend me, and to bind me as a thief, to conduct me before an earthly
Judge, I did not only not run away, but I also went forth unto them, and
willingly delivered my self into their hands. The servant is known by his
Masters livery, and the scholar by that which he learneth.

3. O my soul, what shall we do here! Thou see that thy Savior is wholly
contrary to the world, as the world is contrary to him. Thou see that their
schools be altogether opposite, their livery, and the way which they trace and
hold, most different, and therefore either the world must needs be deceived in
seeking after honors, or our Savior in flying and contemning them. And
because our Savior, who is the wisdom of the eternal Father, cannot be
deceived, it follows, that it is the world that deceyueth it self in it own
ambition, and all those who take pleasure in the vain^ty of such smoakes. And
the^^fore if we have not a will to be of the number of them, and not to be
deceived with them, we must tread all vain, and worldly honor under foot, and
with the ignominy of the Cross follow our sweet Savior, who is our conductour
and guide to true glory.

4. But tell me, my Savior, if thou have created me for glory everlasting,
that is accompanyned with the greatest glory and honor that can possibly be,
wherefore do thou forbid me to seek after honor, and glory in this world?
If thy Apostle has left written, that he who desires a Bishoprike, desires a
good work, wherefore should it not be lawful for me to desire titles of honor?

5. My son, remember, that thou were not created for an earthly glory, but
for a celestial, and none can hinder thee from purchasing this. On the
contrary, I am displeased to see, that any should busy is mind with the glory
of the world, for that of heaven. As touching that saying of my Apostle that
thou alleadgest, thou must know, that to desire a Bishopric, to travail and
take pains for the saving of souls, is a commendable thing, and an act of
charity: but to desire it for the honor and dignity that is annexed unto it,
or for the temporal commodity which a man may receive thereby, is neither
good, nor expedient. In the primitive Church the Bishoprikes were without
honor, and riches and were accompanied with much pain and travail, in so
much as he who desired a Bishoprike at that time, desired by that occasion to
travail and take pains in the Churches behalf, and to become a martyr for my
sake: and therefore then to desire to be a Bishop, was a good and holy desire.
But since the time, that the Bishoprics began to have preheminences, honors,
and riches annexed unto them, such a desire cannot be without many dangers: and
thereof it comes that my Apostle, to give to understand, that it was not
lawful for every one to aspire to such dignityes, added presently after, that
a Bishop must be irreprehensible, not contentious, but sober, chaste, and
charitable. Thus thou see, my son, that these dignities have more burden,
then honor, and thou shall do a great matter, if thou can guide thine own
soul without meddling with the governing of another. For if there should not
be any other thing besides this consideration to say, that a Bishop must be
irreprehensible, it would be enough for the instruction of any man of mean
judgment.

6. Moreover the difference, that is between him who becomes Religious, and
him who takes the charge of a Bishoprik, manifests the same. For he who
enters into Religion, enters in for the attaining of virtue and perfection,
but a Bishop enters into his charge to exercise perfection, and to teach
virtue unto others, not only by words, but much more by example of good life,
and therefore he must even then be perfect, and he must have virtues not only
in expectation and hope, but in effect also. My son, suffer not thy self to
be misled, and abused by the enemy, when he puts into thy head, that when
thou should be promoted to any dignity or prelacy, or when thou should be a
Superior, thou would serve me better, and would do many more and better
good works: for as much as in such dignityes both the obligation binds more,
and the occasions of falling be much greater in those conditions, then in
other. And if thou may not acquire thy self in lesser obligations, how will thou discharge thy band in greater? If one little and light occasion makes
thee to fall easily, what will it be in a greater? Remember, that it is a less
evil to fall from a low place, and that he must not presume to take upon his
shoulders a great and heavy burden, who sees himself apt to fall under a
light one. But if thou have a will not to be deceived in this case, observe
what I shall tell thee. First never intrude, or present thy self to any
dignity or prelacy: secondly never desire nor seek them, but rather shun
them, unless thou be commanded by him who may bind thee to accept them, or that
the necessity were such, as in the judgment of thy spiritual Father, charity
should bind thee to admit them for the common good, and my greater service.

7. A man may easily know by the propertyes of Ambition, how repugnant it is to
a Religious state. There is not a vice that dissembleth, or disgusteth, as does
Ambition, and thereof it proceadeth, that it is worthily called hipocrisies and
adulations mother. Ambition, for the attayning of any office or dignity, makes
a semblance and show, that it is possessed of many virtues, whereof it has not
the very least part, or any thing at all. With how many colors sets it
forth her own actions, to make them to be esteemed worthy of that it desires?
To whom does it not crouch, and bow the knee, that it may have audience, and
treat with him, at whose hands it stands in hope of favor? It ever lives
between fear and hope or compassing that, which it pretends, and therefore
needs must it be always unquiet: the sleep is every hour interrupted and
broken with cares: the repose is by peece-meales, it still eats with anxiety,
it is in despair, when he at whose hands i^ expects favor, show it a bad
countenance, or look awry upon it: it is puffed up and swells with pride,
when he looks merrily upon it, or gives it a good countenance, in so much as
there is not a sea so troubled and tossed, as is the heart of an ambitious
person. He honors all the world, he makes a thousand promises to every one,
he makes semblance of loving all. And what have these, and the like
ceremonies, which be nothing but vanity, to do with the Religious state, which
exacteth true Humility, sincerity, and entiere Charity, which be capital
enemies to ambition? What has the Religions man, who retyreth himself from
the world, for the leading of a quiet life, to meddle with ambition, that is
accompanied with so many troubles, and disquiets, and puts the soul into so
great danger? O how much better understanding have some of my Religious had
thereof, who that they might not be constrained to accept of dignityes and
prelacyes, that were ^resented them, got them out of the cit^es into some
desert or wilderness, yea and ^ome of them bid themselves in sepulchers, that
they might not be found. And if they ^ame thither to seek them out, and that
they ^orced them to take and accept of such di^nityes, they gave to understand
by the a^undance of tears, that fell from their ^ye^, with how ill a will they
amitted the^.

8. But Ambition stays not here: for ^eing come to one dignity, is must
aspire and mount up to a greater, until it get up to ^he last, and highest of
all. And this is that, whereof I reprehended the Pharisyes, who ^or the glory
of the world desired the first ^eats in the Synagogues and feasts, and all
honorable salutations in the streets. This is not the way that leads to
Religious Perfection, but rather to blind a man with ^he smoke of the world,
and that in such ^ort, as he become stark blind, that he neither see any more
the end of the journey which he intends, nor the way how to come to it. So
the Religious man must be attentive to that, which their Superior shall
command them, and they must persuade themselves, that he who preaches, or
teaches in chaires of more note, be not those, who do what pleases me best,
neither profit their neighbors most, or meri^ the most for them, but he who
labors well with most humility, and greatest charity. He that takes pains
for love of me, seeks nothing else, but what may content me, but he who takes
pains to get himself fame, and reputation among men, has self-love the
proper motive unto himself for the getting of the highest seat, and the
places of most honor. And when it happens, that matters succeed not with so
much honor to them, and applause as they desired and expected (as it often
falls out) a man may see such manner of men afflict themselves, to be vexed,
and to cast the fault I know not upon whom, and they consider not, that it is
a punishment of God, sent unto them for their ambition and pride. The sin of
Ambition does not consist in enjoying the pre-eminence of places but in
desiring to have them, and afterward to live very proudly therein.

FINIS.
CERTAIN ADVERTISEMENTS to Religious men, For the leading of a virtuous life
in Religion, and for the better observation of their Rules.
GOD says by the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy: What is it, that my Beloved has
in my house done much wickedness? As though he meant to say more expressly: I
have good occasion to complain, in seeing that my creatures have so sore
offended me, but that those whom I love most, and whom I nourish in Religion,
as my household servants, and familiar friends have so highly offended me, and
make no reckoning neither of their institute they have embraced, nor of the
Vows whereunto they be bound, nor of the observation of their Rules, nor of
profiting and g^^^^g forwards in the way of perfection, is a thing
intolerable, and not to be borne withal And if God may not endure to see this
abuse, meet is it that we be sorry also, and therewith also endeavor to find out
a way and means for the remedying of so great an evil by all possible
industry. And to this purpose it will profit us to meditate and often to reuiew
these points following.

1. Consider first, my son, how rigorously God did punish the sins, that
were committed in the holy places: as in the person of Lucifer, who was for his
pride thrust out of heaven and cast down into hell: in the person of Adam and
Eve, whom he banished out of the terrestrial paradise for their disobedience:
in that of Dathan and Abyron, whom the earth swallowed up alive: in that of
Ananias and Saphyra, who fell down dead at S. Peter's feet for lying unto him.
Consider these examples, and fear thou also, least he punish thee in body or
soul, or at least for the sins thou have committed in Religion, he abandon
thee clean. Therefore make thou from hence forth this resolution, and firm
purpose, that thou will keep all thy rules and laws of Religion, for fear
least God lay his heavy and rigorous hand upon thee.

2. Secondly consider, what our Savior says of the tree, that did not bear
any fruit: Cut it down, to what end occupies it place in the ground? He
commanded it to be cut down being against reason it should take the place of
another tree that would bear fruit. If our Savior would give so rigorous a
sentence upon an unfruitful tree, what would he have done, if it had borne
fruit infectious, impoysoning, and deadly? Thou art that barren tree, that in
Religion do in vain occupy the place of another that would serve God truly,
and as it should best beseem a Religious man. Thou art the unfruitful tree,
that bear none, but the fruits of death, and of many sins: and for this
thou have cause to fear, that God will with the axe cut thee down, and remove
thee from the place, where he has so mercifully set thee, and plant another
for thee, who shall serve him Religiously, and shall bear fruit to life
everlasting. Therefore my son, read thy Rules often, observe them exactly, be
fervent in thy vocation, and endeavor to go forwards from one virtue to
another, to the end our Lord may gather the fruit, that he desires, of thee,
whom he has by so singular a privilege planted in the vineyard of holy
Religion.

3. Thirdly consider, that all the holy inspirations, spiritual helps, and all
the ordinances and rules of Religion be given by God for this, that the
Religious seek to perfect themselves in his service: and therefore thou must
think, that doing the contrary, thou wrongest God, and iniurest thy self very
much, and have just occasion to fear, least he will pronounce this dreadful
saying, mentioned in his Prophet Esaias, against thee: In the Land of the Holy he
has done wicked things, and he shall not see the glory of our Lord. As though
he should say: I have given thee a place, in an holy place, amongst Holy ones,
to the end thou should become like unto them. I have for the same end
provided thee of all possible commodityes, and so many good inspirations,
laws, ordinances, and rules for thy better help, and the more perfecting of
thee in my service, and all these helps thou have abused, and have been so far
from profiting and going forwards in my service, as thou art become worse. And
what will be the end of all this? Because thou have abused al these helps that
I have given thee toward thy increase in virtue, thou shall not have any part
in my eternal glory.

4. Fourthly consider, that the sin which is committed against any Vow is
much greater, and displeases God more then do other sins. A Vow imposes a
greater and straiter obligation of serving God, and therefore when the fault is
made in that behalf, the sin is the greater against God. And more then this,
thou must persuade thy self, that al which thou use for thy meat and
drink, clothing or otherwise, whether thou have it of the Religion whereof
thou art an unworthy member, or otherwise by way of alms of well disposed
persons, turns to the sin of fraud, because thou defraudest and deceauest
thy Religion on the one side, in not observing the rules thereof, and on the
other side thou art unworthy, and incapable to pray for them, who bestow such
alms upon thee. For our Lord vouchsafes not to hear thy prayers, so long as
thou shall omit to observe what thou have promised him.

5. Lastly consider, how fervent and earnest a desire thou had to serve God,
when he did first call thee unto Religion. And if even now notwithstanding thou
be entangled in so many sins, and affections of the world, thou yet feel
in thy self so h^rty and earnest a desire to aspire to perfection, whence is
it, that being in so holy a place, amidst so many and excellent help^ and
means of profiting to perfection, thou art so miserable, cold, and negligent?
And if thou answer me, that thou art indeed a grievous sinner, but thou
entredst into Religion to be good, whence comes it, that after so long time
of thy being, and of trayning up in this school of virtue, thou seem to be
so far of from thy first desires, and from that which appertains to thy
profession? And therefore my son, be ashamed that thou art so imperfect, and
make a firm resolution to return to thy first fervor, and to an exact
observation of thy rules, and of thine Institute, that thou may from this
time forwards serve God in all love, and holiness, as meet is thou should do.

Certain Considerations, that may help to the observing of the Rules in
Religion.
THE first is, to read them often, and to meditate the forementioned points
every month once, or more often, to the end by such meditation thou may stir
up in thy self a desire of observing them And to conceive a firm purpose
never to infring or break any Rule whatsoever, under pretense that it
imports little, or is not of any consequence, will help much thereunto.

2. The second is, to desire thy Superior, and all the other Religious persons
of the house to reprehend and admonish thee freely, as often as they shall see
thee to tra^sg^esse against the Rules, or to commit any other fault, which thou
see nor thy self.

3. The third is every, month to do some voluntary pe^nance, either in secret,
or in public by the permission of thy Superior, for the faults that month
committed against the Rules, and good desires and purposes that God has
inspired thee with, accompayning it with a good desire and firm resolution to
observe them better for the time to come.

4. The fourth is, that thou have a particular affection to the observation of
thy four vows of Poverty, Chastity, Obedience, and Enclosure, keeping them
with more care, then thou would most prec^ous stones. And to the end thou
may the better affect them, read or meditate the aduertisements following.

Of the vows, which the Religious make and first of Obedience.
Thou must obey thy Superior perfectly for the love of God, and consider that
having the virtue of Obedience, thou shall together with it have the other
also: and especially for this, that by it our Savior did redeem the world,
that was ruined by the contrary vice of disobedience. And therefore cease not to
make petition to his divine Majesty, that he please to grant thee, to know and
understand the importance, merit, efficacy, and perfection of this virtue, that
knowing it thou may be the more stirred up to plant it, and procure it to
increase in thy soul.

The Religious man that desires to be perfect in the virtue of Obedience, must
be persuaded, that the voice of the Superior, when he or she commands any
thing, is nothing else, but the very voice of God, and when he understands the
sign of doing any thing, he must think that it is God who calls him. And
then he must leave off all other busynes, and instantly go about that whereunto
he is called: namely when he is called to the Quire, to Mass, to prayer, and
to other the like spiritual exercises. The good and obedient Religious
examineth not whether that which is commanded him, be well or ill commanded,
but obeys promptly, readily, and without any murmuration in all things where
there is not any manifest sin.

Of the Vow of Chastity.
I Need not to tell thee of the vow of Chastity, since it is clear and manifest,
how perfectly it ought to be kept, and since it has two companions and sisters,
that never depart from her side. The former is a certain holy Bashfulnes,
which may worthily be called the keeper and intertayner of Chastity, as that
which defends and preserves it against all stayne of dishonesty. The office
of this Bashfulnes is to cause that the eyes be kept down, and cast upon the
ground, and to cause the Religious person to conceive an horror of seeing, and
of being seen. And if peradventure she should be fo^ced to speak, or to suffer
her self to be seen, she eftsoons covers her face with an honest blush,
the testimony of the care which she has of the purity of her soul. To be
short, this Bashfullnes causes her to be modest in her gestures, in her going,
and in all that she does, and by that occasion conserueth the virtue of
Chastity in her perfection.

The other sister of Chastity is a Purity of heart, by means whereof the soul
becomes so exceedingly affected to ^his virtue, as it conceiueth not only an
horror at the very least dishonest thought, but also at every inordinate
affection to whatsoever creature, ever carrying a chaste heart to her Spouse, and
holding it for spiritual adultery never so little to separate her affection
from him.

Of the Vow of Poverty.
AS touching the Vow of Poverty, I would have thee to be careful to content
thy self with the only usage of things that shall be unto thee necessary, and
to make a conscience of using them as thine own, for fear least under the
color of necessity thou become in time a Proprietary. Therefore thou must not
give any thing unto another without license of thy Superior, nor in like
manner take any thing without leave, though it should be otherwise necessary.
Thou must never have any money at thine own disposition, whether it be in thine
own hands, or in another, least the Devil deceive thee, and under the
pretense of necessity induce thee to violate thy vow of Poverty, and by so
doing cause thee to incur the danger of eternal damnation for not keeping
thy promise made unto God. And because this vice of propriety is wont to reign
in the negligent, and careless Religious, thou must mark certain points,
which may serve as antidots for the dryuing of this affection far from thine
heart.

Consider first, that this is a greater sin, then it is to cast off the
habit, or to go from one Covent to another, which yet is held for a very
scandalous thing. It more imports the Religious to keep the three essential
Vows thereof, and in particular the vow of Poverty, which is as the wall and
rampire thereof, then to wear such an habit, or to live in such a monastery. If
then it be so great a sin to return to the habit of the world, and to cast
off that of Religion, or to run from one monastery to another: what then
think we, shall it be to use any thing as our own, and to break the vow of
Poverty, which conserueth Religion in her integrity.

Consider secondly, how great a sca^dall thou give thy Religious sisters, yea
and sec^lar persons, and how thou de^amest thy Rel gion in as much as is in
thee, besides that, in so doing, is to rob and steal, by keeping, or g^uing
that which is not thine. For that which the Religious may gain by her industry
and pains, or that which is given her, whatsoever it be, is not hers, but the
communityes. And this theft is so much the greater, because it is committed in
that which appertains to the Church, to an holy place, to the poor, and to
Gods servants: and of this it comes that the sin of propriety is called
sacrilege, and consequently worthy most grievously to be punished.

Consider thirdly, that the precious stone, whereof our Savior makes mention
in the Ghospel, is nothing but Poverty, and that thou have bought it with the
price of all thy goods, in forsaking Father and Mother, brethren and sisters,
and all thine other friends, all thy pleasures and commodityes, and more then
all this, thy own self also. And draw out of this an holy confusion, that
thou give all again for a thing of nothing, which thou do when thou use
the things, that are given thee as though they were thy own. Acknowledge thy
own fault herein, and remember, that thou can not have any greater treasure,
then holy Poverty, for that in it is found the Creator, and Lord of all
things.

Consider fourthly, how foolish and ill advised that man should be, who being
escaped out of the dangers of the sea, by the help of a good ship wherinto he
had got himself, he should fill it with water by little and little: for so
doing he should in conclusion sink the ship, and drown himself withal.
Think then thou do the same. For being escaped out of the sea of this world,
and got into the ship of holy Religion, and resuming the things which thou
had formerly forsaken, for the satisfying and fulfilling of thy own will, is
nothing else, but more shamefully to ruin thy self, then thou would have
done in the world. And therefore acknowledge thine own blindness herein, and
have nothing to do with this so dangerous a vice of propriety: lay hold upon
thy most sweet Savior, dying naked upon the Cross, and to that purpose renew
thy vow of Poverty, which thou have formerly presented unto him, with all
possible fervor and affection, as thou did when thou first made it.

Of the Vow of Enclosure.
THAT thy Enclosure which thou keep may be pleasing to God, and profitable
to thy self, thou must keep it of a pure and free will, for that the Religious
person who keeps it not but in body, and in will runs all the world over,
besides that, that she never inioyeth true repose, loses all the fruit and
benefit of her Enclosure. Consider my child, how many graces thou have received
by the means thereof: how many occasi^ns thou have avoided of offending God:
yea and into how many sins thou would have fallen, if it had been in thy
liberty to go forth at thy pleasure: and it may be, that if thou had not been
debarred of thy liberty in this behalf, thou had been peradventure even now
tormented in hell fire for all eternity. God has delivered thee from these,
and other like dangers not to be numbered, by the means of this thy Enclosure:
and for this thou have most just cause to love it. And seeing thou have made a
promise of it to God, thou must keep it exactly, to the end thou may merit,
and make thy profit thereof.

Of the Joy, which the Religious ought to make upon the day of their
Conversion, and what joy it ought to be unto them.
IT would be good to have a particular devotion of thy Vows, that is to say,
that every year thou make a festiuity of the Day that thou did enter into
Religion, and made thy vows. For as we every year celebrate the day of the
dedication of a material Church: so ought we in like manner, and with more
just reason keep solemn the day of the dedication of our Soul, which is the
living Temple of the Majesty divine. And for the well effecting thereof, thou
may practice, and do these three things.

1. In the first place, thou must make a general Confession of all the year
past.

2. In the second, thou must offer thy self anew to God, to serve him in
perpetual Poverty, Chastity, Obedience, and Enclosure, being sorry for not
having, for the time past, perfectly kept that which thou have promised him,
and for having profited so meanly in virtue, and in his holy service.

3. Lastly thou must take new heart, and new forces, renewing thy holy purposes,
and thy first desires and feruours, returning to thy exercises intermitted, and
endeavoring to perfect thy self in them. Further, thou must see if thou can
by the grace of God, find out any other means, more proper, and easy for
helping of thee to put in execution all that which thou art to do, and in
particular thou must have at al tyms this desire to renew thy self in the
virtue of prayer, and in the exercise of all other virtues. O how would this
festiuity, and celebration of this thy Conversion, and day of entering into
Religion, have profited thee, if thou had done it as thou should. But thy
own sloth and negligence has been an occasion, that thou have omitted to use
the means, and helps, that God has affoarded thee. And therefore pray thou
instantly, that he would please to pardon thy passed faults, and to give thee
grace to do thy endeavor better for the time to come.

FINIS.
THE RELIGIOUS MAN'S LOOKING-GLASS, Or a short way of attayning to Perfection
in Religion.
I The principal study of a Religious man.
1. TO deny himself. 2. To root out Vices. 3. To plant Virtues. 4. To dye to
himself, and to the world. 5. To love God.
II. What is necessary to obtain peace of the mind.
1. To desire and seek what is most humble and abject. 2. To keep silence. 3.
Not to contradict. 4. Not to intrude himself. 5. With indifferency to accept
all things at Gods hand.
III. A Religious man must exercise himself continually.
1. In Humility, and Charity. 2. In Patience, and Mortification. 3. In Reading,
and Praying. 4. In Meditation of the life of Christ. 5. In Communication with
God.
IIII. Things specially to be avoided by a Religious man.
1. The familiarity of Women. 2. Singularity and proper judgment. 3.
Self-will, and self-love. 4. Idleness, and the care of the belly. 5. Pride,
and Vainglory.
V. What a Religious man must do at home, and in his Cell, or Chamber.
1. To think God to be present, and to see all things. 2. To withstand the
suggestions of the Devil. 3. To read, and study how to do, and live well. 4.
To stir up himself to Prayer and Meditation. 5. To arm himself, that he may
go forth with safety, and profit.
VI. The office of a Superior toward his subjects.
1: To love all alike. 2. To be watchful that Religious discipline be observed.
3. To be exemplar himself unto al. 4. To instruct, and correct in spirit of
lenity and mildenes. 5. To pray to God for all.
VII. The office of a subject toward his Superior.
1. To love him, as his Father. 2. To honor him, as his Lord. 3. To hear him,
as a Doctor or Teacher. 4. To obey him, as Christ himself. 5. To pray to God
for him.
VIII. A Religious man's offi^e and duty toward his brethren.
1. To love them all in our Lord. 2. To hold them all f^r his betters. 3. To
admonish them in Charity. 4. To support them with Patience. 5. To edify them by
good Example.
IX. What is to be done in the morning early.
1. To arise speedily at the time appointed. 2. Forthwith to present himself
in Gods sight, and service. 3. To give him thanks for that nights preservation.
4. To conceive good purposes. 5. To crave help and grace for the due execution
thereof.
X. What is to be observed about Prayer, and Meditation.
1. To prepare the mind, and the matter. 2. To expel Thoughts which divert, or
hinder us. 3. To persevere therein with Constancy. 4. With an humble heart to
follow the inspirations of the Holy Ghost. 5. To be sorry for the defects
committed therein, and to give thanks for the good success, if any has
been.
XI. What things are often to be handled, and thought upon in Prayer.
1. The Knowledge of our selves, and sorrow for our sins. 2. The four last
things of man. 3. The benefits of God. 4. The life, and passion of Christ. 5.
Conversation with God, and his Saints.
XII. What is to be observed about Confession.
1. To examine our Conscience well. 2. To be heartily sorry for our sins. 3.
To confess our sins entierly. 4. Earnestly to purpose amendment of our life.
5. Forthwith to fulfill the penance enjoined us.
XIII. What is to be observed about the Sacrifice of the Mass.
1. To cleanse the Conscience first by Confession. 2. To come unto it with an
humble, and contrite heart. 3. With reverence and devotion to offer it up to the
glory of God, for himself, and for the Church. 4. To communicate with a
spiritual hungar, and Charity. 5. To go away with thanksgiving.
XIIII. What is to be done after Mass.
1. In heart to hide himself with Christ. 2. To offer himself all that he is,
or can t^ Christ. 3. To lay open his own, and others nece^sityes unto Christ.
4. To ask of Christ many things for himself, and for others. 5. To desire
and long after eternal Happine^^
XV. What is to be observed in saying Office.
1. To purge the heart from whatsoever other thoughts. 2. To procure devotion.
3. To attend to the sense of the words, an^ to God. 4. To speak the words
distinctly, and perfectly. 5. Not to make have to come to an end.
XVI. What is to be done about the Examen of the Conscience.
1. To ask light of God. 2. To give thanks for his benefits. 3. To discuss
and examine well the Conscience. 4. To be sorry for our sins. 5. To purpose
amendment.
XVII. What is to be pondered in the examination of the Conscience.
1. The transgression of thy Vows. 2. Thy tepidity and coldness in Gods
service. 3. The distraction of thy mind. 4. The bad motions of thy mind. 5.
Detractions, and Murmurations.
XVIII. What is to be observed in the Refectory.
1. To be silent. 2. To seek mortification. 3. To eat and drink soberly. 4.
To be attent to that which is read. 5. To feed the soul spiritually.
XIX. How to behave thy self abroad without doors.
1. Diligently to guard and keep the gates of thy senses. 2. To observe and
keep Gravity, and Religious Modesty. 3. Not to give ear to Vanities or
Noueltyes. 4. To speak and treat of spiritual matters. 5. To dispatch quickly,
and soon return home.
XX. To be observed in thy bad.
1. To commend thy self to God, to thy Angel Guardian, and other thy holy
Patrons. 2. To think of Death, and of thy grave. 3. To arm thy self against
temptations and suggestions of the Devil. 4. To call upon God, as often as
thou awakest. 5. Not to lie longer the^ thou must needs.
FINIS.

